Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms
Adam Smith (Edwin Cannan, ed.) (1896)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Adam Smith's 'Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms', delivered at Glasgow and reported by a student in 1763, edited with introduction and notes by Edwin Cannan (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1896). Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Binding and library card matter trimmed from the front; ends with the edition's index and 'THE END'. The Clarendon Press catalogue at the back is trimmed. This 1896 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

LECTURES

ON

JUSTICE, POLICE, REVENUE
AND ARMS

DKLIVERKD IN THE UNIVERSITY OF  GLASGOW

BY

ADAM SMITH

REPORTED  BY  A STUDENT  IN  J7M


AND
EDITED WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES

BY

EDWIN CANNAN


AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1896


Otforfc

MUNTEl) AT THE CLARENDON

BY HORACE  HART
PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY


PREFACE


THE  history  of  the  manuscript  now  made  public  and
the  principles  which  I  have  followed  in  editing  it  are
full)'  dealt  with  in  the  Introduction.

I  have  here  only  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Mr.
Thomas  Raleigh,  who,  when  I  first  took  the  work  in
hand,  was  Reader  in  English  Law  at  Oxford  and
a  Delegate  of  the  University  Press,  and  is  now  Regis
trar  to  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council.
Besides  reading  through  the  text,  and  making  observa
tions  on  passages  which  he  thought  corrupt  or  in
need  of  explanation,  he  has  since  answered  from  time
to  time,  with  unwearied  patience,  the  inquiries  I  have
addressed  to  him  on  legal  points,  many  of  which
must  have  appeared  trivial  to  any  one  except  an  editor
desirous  of  believing  himself  to  be  conscientious.  It
must  be  understood,  however,  that,  as  he  has  had
no  opportunity  of  seeing  what  use  I  have  made  of
the  information  derived  from  him,  he  is  no  more
responsible  for  anything  which  actually  occurs  in
the  notes  than  Mr.  Serjeant  Hawkins  or  any  other
legal  authority  whom  I  have  consulted.

EDWIN CANNAN.

OXFORD,

August  1896.


CONTENTS


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION.

CHAPTER  I. HISTORY  OF  THE  REPORT xi

CHAPTER  IL VALUE  OF  THE  REPORT xxi

TABLE  OF  PARALLEL  PASSAGES  IN  THE  WEALTH  OF  NATIONS  xxxv

INTRODUCTION.

§ i.  Of  Works  on  Natural  Jurisprudence  i

§ 2.  Of  the  Division  of  the  Subject 3

PART I  : OF  JUSTICE.

INTRODUCTION 5

DIVISION  I. OF  PUBLIC  JURISPRUDENCE.

§ i.  Of  the  Original  Principles  of  Government ...  9
§ 2.  Of  the  Nature  of  Government  and  its  Progress  in  the

first  Ages  of  Society .......  14

§ 3.  How  Republican  Governments  were  introduced . .  21

§ 4.  How  Liberty  was  lost .......  26

§ 5.  Of  Military  Monarchy ... ....  30

§ 6.  How  Military  Monarchy  was  dissolved ....  32

§ 7.  Of  the  Allodial  Government ......  34

§ 8.  Of  the  Feudal  System 36

§ 9.  Of  the  English  Parliament 40

§  10.  How  the  Government  of  England  became  Absolute .  42

§  n.  How  Liberty  was  restored ......  43

§  12.  Of  the  English  Courts  of  Justice .....  46

§  13.  Of  the  little  Republics  in  Europe .....  53

§  14.  Of  the  Rights  of  Sovereigns ......  55

§  15.  Of  Citizenship .........  62

§  16.  Of  the  Rights  of  Subjects 66


viii  CONTENTS

DIVISION  II. DOMESTIC  LAW.  PAGK

§ i.  Husband  and  Wife 73

§ 2.  Parent  and  Child ........  91

§ 3.  Master  and  Servant ........  94

§ 4.  Guardian  and  Ward  ........  104

§ 5.  Domestic  Offences  and  their  Punishments . . .  105

DIVISION  III. PRIVATE  LAW.

§ i.  First  Way  of  acquiring  Property :  Occupation . .  107
§ 2.  Second  Way  of  acquiring  Property  :  Accession . .no
§ 3.  Third  Way  of  acquiring  Property  :  Prescription . .in
§ 4.  Fourth  Way  of  acquiring  Property  :  Succession . .113
§ 5.  Fifth  Way  of  acquiring  Property: Voluntary  Trans
ference ..........  125

§ 6.  Of  Servitudes .........  127

§ 7.  Of  Pledges  and  Mortgages ......  128

§ 8.  Of  Exclusive  Privileges .......  129

§ 9.  Of  Contract .........  130

§  10.  Of  Quasi-Contract . 134

§  n.  Of  Delinquency  . ........  135

PART II: OF POLICE.

DIVISION  I. CLEANLINESS  AND  SECURITY 154

DIVISION  II. CHEAPNESS  OR  PLENTY.

§ i.  Of  the  Natural  Wants  of  Mankind 157

§ 2.  That  all  the  Arts  are  subservient  to  the  Natural  Wants

of  Mankind .........  159

§ 3.  That  Opulence  arises  from  the  Division  of  Labour .  161

§ 4.  How  the  Division  of  Labour  multiplies  the  Product .  163

§ 5.  What  gives  Occasion  to  the  Division  of  Labour . .  168
§ 6.  That  the  Division  of  Labour  must  be  proportioned  to

the  Extent  of  Commerce 172

§ 7.  What  Circumstances  regulate  the  Price  of  Commodities  173
§ 8.  Of  Money  as  the  Measure  of  Value and Medium of

Exchange jg2

§ 9.  That  National  Opulence  does  not  consist  in  Money .  190

§  10.  Of  Prohibiting  the  Exportation  of  Coin ....  200

§  II.  Of  the  Balance  of  Trade 204

§  12.  Of  the  Opinion  that no Expense  at Home can be

hurtful 207

§  13.  Of  the  Scheme  of  Mr.  Law 211

§  14.  Of  Interest 219

§  15.  Of  Exchange 221

§  16.  Of  the  Causes  of  the  Slow  Progress  of  Opulence . .  222


CONTENTS  ix
PART III: OF REVENUE.

PAGE

Introduction 237

§  i. Of  Taxes  on  Possessions 238

§  2. Of  Taxes  on  Consumptions 242

§  3. Of  Stocks 247

§  4. Of  Stock-jobbing 251

PART II: OF POLICE

(RESUMED).
§  17.  Of  the  Influence  of  Commerce  on  Manners . . .253

PART IV: OF  ARMS.

§  i. Of  Militias 260

§  2. Of  Discipline 262

§  3. Of  Standing  Armies 263

PART  V: OF  THE LAWS OF NATIONS.

Introduction 265

§  i. When  is  War  Lawful  ? 266

§  2. Wrhat  is  Lawful  in  War  ? 267

§  3. Of  the  Rights  of  Neutral  Nations 274

§  4. Of  the  Rights  of  Ambassadors 276


ORIGINAL  INDEX 281

EDITOR'S  INDEX 287


EDITOR'S INTRODUCTION


CHAPTER  I. HISTORY  OF  THE  REPORT.

'Or  Mr.  Smith's  lectures  while  a  professor  at  Glasgow,  no
part  has  been  preserved,  excepting  what  he  himself  published
in  the  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  and  in  the  Wealth  of
Nations.'  This  statement  was  made  by  Dugald  Stewart  in  the
'Account  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Adam  Smith,'  which  he
read  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  early  in  1793.
He  allowed  it  to  be  printed  in  the  Transactions  of  the  society  in
1794  *,  and  to  be  reprinted  both  in  I7952  and  in  1811 3  without
alteration.  For  a  little  more  than  a  century  it  has  remained
unquestioned,  and,  so  far  as  Adam  Smith's  own  lecture-notes  are
concerned,  it  is  doubtless  correct.

When  setting  out  for  London  in  April,  1773,  Adam  Smith
wrote  a  letter  to  Hume,  whom  he  had  made  his  literary
executor,  giving  instructions  as  to  the  disposal  of  his  papers  in
case  of  his  death.  Except  those  which  he  carried  along  with
him,  that  is  to  say,  the  manuscript  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,
there  were  none,  he  said,  worth  publication,  unless  perhaps  the
fragment  on  the  history  of  astronomical  systems,  to  be  found  in
a  certain  desk,  might  be  printed  as  a  portion  '  of  an  intended
juvenile  work.'  'All  the  other  loose  papers  which  you  will  find
in  that  desk,'  the  letter  continues,  'or  within  the  glass  folding-
doors  of  a  bureau  which  stands  in  my  bedroom,  together  with

1  Vol.  iii.  pt.  i.  p.  6r.  :i  Biographical Memoirs of  Adam

2  Essays  on  Philosophical  Subjects  by  Smith,  LL  D. ,  of  William  Robertson,
the  late  Adam  Smith,  LL.D.,  to  which  D.D.,  and  of  Thomas  Reid,  D.D.,  read
is  prefixed  an  Account  of  the  Life  and  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.
Writings of the Author by Dugald  Now  collected  into One Volume, ivith
Stewart,  F.R.S.E.  p.  xv.  some  Additional  Notes,  p.  12.


xii  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

about  eighteen  thin  folio  paper  books  which  you  will  likewise  find
within  the  same  glass  folding  doors,  I  desire  may  be  destroyed
without  any  examination.'  Fourteen  years  later,  when  again
contemplating  a  visit  to  London,  Adam  Smith  '  enjoined  his
friends  to  whom  he  had  entrusted  the  disposal  of  his  manu
scripts,  that  in  the  event  of  his  death,  they  should  destroy
all  the  volumes  of  his  lectures,  doing  with  the  rest  of  his
manuscripts  what  they  pleased.'  In  July,  1790,  ten  days  or  a
fortnight  before  he  died,  'he  spoke  to  his  friends  again  upon
the  same  subject.  They  entreated  him  to  make  his  mind  easy,
as  he  might  depend  upon  their  fulfilling  his  desire.  He  was
then  satisfied.  But  some  days  afterwards,  finding  his  anxiety
not  entirely  removed,  he  begged  one  of  them  to  destroy  the
volumes  immediately.  This  accordingly  was  done,  and  his  mind
was  so  much  relieved  that  he  was  able  to  receive  his  friends  in
the  evening  with  his  usual  complacency.'  He  was  unable,  how
ever,  to  sit  up  with  them  as  usual,  and  retired  to  bed  before
supper,  taking  leave  with  the  words,  '  I  believe  we  must  adjourn
this  meeting  to  some  other  place  ' 1.

Dr.  James  Hutton,  the  narrator  of  this  story,  was  one  of  the
two  friends  to  whom  Adam  Smith  had  entrusted  the  disposal
of  his  manuscripts,  Dr.  Joseph  Black  being  the  other2.  From
his  cautious  use  of  the  phrase  'one  of  them,'  and  the  imper
sonal  'this  was  done/  most  readers  would  infer  that  Hutton
himself  was  the  destroyer  of  the  manuscripts,  but  Mackenzie,
who  was  present  at  the  supper,  is  reported  to  have  told  Samuel
Rogers  that  Black  did  the  deed 3.  No  one  who  has  tried  to  burn
some  hundreds  of  leaves  of  folio  manuscript  will  feel  any
surprise  that  Adam  Smith,  in  his  feeble  state,  should  have
shrunk  from  attempting  the  task  with  his  own  hands,  even
if  he  was  sitting  up  and  had  a  fire  on  that  July  morning.  What
is  suggested,  however,  by  the  wording  of  the  narrative,  taken
in  conjunction  with  the  letter  to  Hume  already  quoted,  is  that
Smith  was  in  bed  in  the  morning  when  his  friend  called  on  him,
and  that  the  '  thin  folio  paper  books '  were  still,  as  they  had
been  seventeen  years  before  at  Kirkcaldy,  'within  the  glass

1  Dugald  Stewart,  in  Transactions  of  2  See  Essays,  pp.  iii.  iv.,  and  Adam

the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  iii.  Smith's will in Bonar, Catalogue  of

pt.  i.  p.  131  ;  in  Adam  Smith's  Essays,  Adam  Smith's  Library,  pp.  xvi,  xvii.

p.  Ixxxviii ; in  Biographical  Memoirs,  3  P. W. Clayden, Early Life of

p.  109,  note.  Samuel  Rogers,  p.  167.


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xiii

folding  doors  of  a  bureau'  in  his  bedroom,  and  thus  in  his  sight,
but,  while  he  was  so  ill,  before  his  revival  in  the  evening,
altogether  out  of  his  reach.  Nothing  could  be  more  natural
in  these  circumstances  than  that  he  should  ask  his  visitor
to  take  the  manuscripts  out  of  the  bureau  and  destroy  them
at  once,  whether  before  his  eyes  in  the  bedroom  or  elsewhere.

The  manuscripts  having  thus  perished,  three  generations
have  been  obliged  to  content  themselves  with  the  account  of
the  lectures  which  Dugald  Stewart  obtained  from  John  Millar,
who  seems  to  have  heard  all  or  most  of  the  lectures  himself1 : —

'  In  the  professorship  of  Logic,  to  which  Mr.  Smith  was  appointed
on  his  first  introduction  into  this  University,  he  soon  saw  the  necessity
of  departing  widely  from  the  plan  that  had  been  followed  by  his  pre
decessors,  and  of  directing  the  attention  of  his  pupils  to  studies  of
a  more  interesting  and  useful  nature  than  the  logic  and  metaphysics
of  the  schools.  Accordingly,  after  exhibiting  a  general  view  of  the
powers  of  the  mind,  and  explaining  so  much  of  the  ancient  logic  as
was  requisite  to  gratify  curiosity  with  respect  to  an  artificial  method
of  reasoning  which  had  once  occupied  the  universal  attention  of  the
learned,  he  dedicated  all  the  rest  of  his  time  to  the  delivery  of  a  system
of  rhetoric  and  belles  lettres.  .  .  .

'About  a  year  after  his  appointment  to  the  professorship  of  Logic,
Mr.  Smith  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  Moral  Philosophy.  His  course
of  lectures  on  this  subject  was  divided  into  four  parts.  The  first
contained  Natural  Theology,  in  which  he  considered  the  proofs  of  the
being  and  the  attributes  of  God,  and  those  principles  of  the  human
mind  upon  which  religion  is  founded.  The  second  comprehended
Ethics  strictly  so  called,  and  consisted  chiefly  of  the  doctrines  which
he  afterwards  published  in  his  "Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments."  In
the  third  part  he  treated  at  more  length  of  that  branch  of  morality
which  relates  to  justice,  and  which,  being  susceptible  of  precise  and
accurate  rules,  is  for  that  reason  capable  of  a  full  and  particular
explanation.

'  Upon  this  subject  he  followed  the  plan  that  seems  to  be  suggested
by  Montesquieu  ;  endeavouring  to  trace  the  gradual  progress  of  juris
prudence,  both  public  and  private,  from  the  rudest  to  the  most  refined
ages,  and  to  point  out  the  effects  of  those  arts  which  contribute  to
subsistence  and  to  the  accumulation  of  property,  in  producing  corre
sponding  improvements  or  alterations  in  law  and  government.  This
important  branch  of  his  labours  he  also  intended  to  give  to  the  public  ;
but  this  intention,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  conclusion  of  the  "Theory
of  Moral  Sentiments  "  he  did  not  live  to  fulfil.

1  See  his  Historical  View  of  the  English  Government,  p.  528,  and  Rae,  Life
of  Adam  Smith,  pp.  43,  53.


xiv  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

'  In  the  last  part  of  his  lectures,  he  examined  those  political  regula
tions  which  are  founded  not  upon  the  principle  of  justice,  but  that  of
expediency,  and  which  are  calculated  to  increase  the  riches,  the  power
and  the  prosperity  of  a  state.  Under  this  view,  he  considered  the
political  institutions  relating  to  commerce,  to  finances,  to  ecclesiastical
and  military  establishments.  What  he  delivered  on  these  subjects
contained  the  substance  of  the  work  he  afterwards,  published  under
the  title  of  "  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations  " ;1.

From  a  purely  biographical  point  of  view  it  would  doubtless
be  extremely  interesting  to  have  before  us  the  text  or  a  full
report  of  Adam  Smith's  lectures  on  rhetoric,  belles  lettres
and  natural  theology.  But  these  are  not  of  historical  im
portance.  However  excellent  any  of  them  may  have  been,
they  had  not  the  opportunity  of  exercising  a  very  wide  in
fluence  in  their  own  time,  and  it  is  of  course  idle  to  expect
that  anything  first  printed  a  century  and  a  half  after  it  was
written  will  ever  have  much  influence  on  human  thought
or  action.  Each  generation  requires  to  be  addressed  from
a  particular  standpoint,  and  arguments  which  would  have
been  convincing  in  1763  will  fall  perfectly  flat  in  1896.  There
are  indeed  some  classics  which  have  been  lost  or  have
suffered  total  eclipse  for  a  time  and  yet  seem  to  have  ex
ercised  an  influence  after  their  reappearance,  but  it  will
always  be  found  on  examination  that  the  influence  is  really
that  of  their  commentators  and  critics,  or  even  in  some  cases
of  their  translators.

To  the  second  part  of  Adam  Smith's  Moral  Philosophy
course,  his  lectures  on  '  Ethics  strictly  so  called,'  very  little
interest  attaches,  either  for  the  historian  or  the  biographer.
There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  Millar's  statement  that  it  con
sisted  chiefly  of  the  doctrines  contained  in  the  Theory  of
Moral  Sentiments,  and  as  that  work  was  published  in  1759,
while  Smith  still  occupied  the  professorial  chair,  and  only
seven  years  after  his  appointment,  it  is  scarcely  possible  that
the  publication  of  the  lectures  could  add  anything  of  much
value  to  the  history  either  of  the  lecturer  or  of  his  subject.

But  the  third  and  fourth  parts  of  the  Moral  Philosophy  course
occupy  an  entirely  different  position.  The  influence  of  the

1  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  ii.  pt.  i.  pp.  61-63;
Essays,  pp.  xvi  xviii  ;  Biographical  Memoirs,  pp.  12-15.


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xv

Wealth  of  Nations  in  politics  has  been  so  great  that  every
inquirer  into  the  history  of  political  science  must  have  regretted
that  he  had  no  access  to  the  third  part,  in  which  Adam  Smith
'endeavoured  to  trace  the  gradual  progress  of  jurisprudence,
both  public  and  private,  from  the  rudest  to  the  most  refined
ages,  and  to  point  out  the  effects  of  those  arts  which  contribute
to  subsistence  and  to  the  accumulation  of  property,  in  producing
corresponding  improvements  or  alterations  in  law  and  govern
ment/  The  fourth  part  of  the  course  resembles  the  second  in
being  said  to  have  served  as  the  foundation  for  a  published
book.  But  that  book— the  Wealth  of  Nations— was  of  incom-'
parably  greater  importance  than  the  Mora!  Sentiments,  and  it
was  not  published  till  more  than  twelve  years  after  Smith  had
ceased  lecturing.  Of  this  period  a  portion  is  known  to  have
been  spent  in  communion  with  the  French  Economises,  and  nearly
all  the  rest  in  research.  There  has  consequently  been  good
reason  to  believe  that  the  lectures,  if  they  could  be  obtained,
would  show  exactly  how  certain  economic  ideas  which  were
eventually  received  into  public  favour,  grew  up  in  the  mind
of  the  man  who  did  most  to  commend  them  to  the  world.

No  one  could  have  been  more  sensible  of  the  historical
value  of  the  last  two  parts  of  the  lectures  than  I,  but  I  can
not  claim  any  credit  for  having  discovered  the  manuscript
which  is  now  published.  On  April  21,  1895,  Mr.  Charles  C.
Maconochie,  Advocate,  whom  I  then  met  for  the  first  time,
happened  to  be  present  when,  in  course  of  conversation  with
the  literary  editor  of  the  Oxford  Magazine,  I  had  occasion
to  make  some  remark  about  Adam  Smith.  Mr.  Maconochie
thereupon  immediately  said  that  he  possessed  a  manuscript
report  of  Adam  Smith's  lectures  on  jurisprudence,  which  he
regarded  as  of  considerable  interest.

This  manuscript,  which  is  copied  in  the  present  volume,
forms  an  octavo  book  9  in.  high,  7^  in.  broad  and  i^  in.
thick.  It  has  a  substantial  calf  binding,  the  sides  of  which,
however,  have  completely  parted  company  with  the  back,
apparently,  as  often  happens  in  the  case  of  calf-bound  books
a  century  old,  from  age  rather  than  from  use.  On  the  back
there  is  some  gilt-cross-hatching  and  the  word  JURIS  PRUDENCE
(thus  divided  between  two  lines)  in  gilt  letters  on  a  red  label.
There  are  in  all  192  leaves.  Two  of  these  are  fly-leaves  of
dissimilar  paper  and  have  their  fellows  pasted  on  the  insides

b


xvi  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

of  the  cover,  front  and  back.  The  rest  all  consist  of  paper  of
homogeneous  character,  water-marked  '  L.  V.  Gerrevink.'

The  manuscript  is  written  on  both  sides  of  the  paper  in
a  rectangular  space  formed  by  four  red  ink  lines  previously
ruled,  which  leave  a  margin  of  about  three-quarters  of  an
inch.  Besides  the  fly-leaves  there  are  three  blank  leaves  at  the
end  and  two  at  the  beginning.

There  is  nothing  to  show  conclusively  whether  the  writing
was  first  executed  on  separate  sheets  subsequently  bound  up,
or  in  a  blank  note-book  afterwards  rebound,  or  in  the  book  as  it
appears  at  present.

No  characteristic  of  the  orthography,  handwriting  or  paper
affords  any  reason  for  suspecting  that  the  manuscript  is  of
a  later  date  than  that  whuh  it  bears  on  its  title-page,  namely,
1:766.  Mr.  Falconer  Madan  of  the  Bodleian  Library,  before
seeing  that  date,  conjectured  the  handwriting  to  be  as  early
as  the  second  quarter  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Paper  water
marked  '  L.  V.  Gerrevink '  was  in  use  fifteen  years  before,  as
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  there  is  in  the  Glasgow  University
Library  a  letter  from  Dr.  Pearce,  Bishop  of  Bangor,  to
Professor  Rosse,  written  on  such  paper  under  the  date  June
20,  1751.

Inside  the  front  cover,  written  large  with  a  very  thick  pen,
is  the  inscription  'J.  A.  Maconochie  i8n/  near  the  top,  and
in  the  middle  the  same  signature,  without  the  date,  is  written
small  with  a  very  fine  pen  over  the  remains  of  a  book  plate
which  has  been  unfortunately  so  ruthlessly  cut  away  with
a  knife  that  nothing  except  the  discovery  of  another  copy
would  make  identification  possible.  There  is' also  Mr.  C.  C.
Maconochie's  signature  with  the  date  1876.  On  the  inside  of
the  first  blank-leaf  '  1/2 '  is  marked  in  the  top  left-hand  corner  in
ink  as  faded  as  that  of  the  manuscript.

Mr.  Maconochie  gives  the  following  account  of  the  way  in
which  the  manuscript  came  into  his  possession  :  —

65  NORTHUMBERLAND  STREET,

EDINBURGH,

June  12,  1896.
MY  DEAR  CANNAN,

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have  entirely  failed  to  trace  the  source
from  which  the  MS.  of  Adam  Smith's  lectures  passed  into  the  hands
of  my  grand-uncle,  James  Allan  Maconochie.  It  is  not  possible,
looking  to  dates  and  other  facts,  that  either  he,  his  father,  the  first


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xvii

Lord  Meadowbank1,  or  his  brother,  the  second  judge  of  that  name2,
took  the  notes  which  were  subsequently  copied  out,  and  I  am  inclined
to  think  that  the  book  must  have  been  bought  at  a  sale  or  elsewhere,
as  I  cannot  find  at  Meadowbank  House  any  copy  of  a  bookplate  the
scroll  work  of  which  at  all  resembles  that  of  the  obliterated  plate  on
the  cover  of  the  MS.

James  Allan  Maconochie,  who  was  an  advocate  and  Sheriff  of
Orkney,  died  in  1845  unmarried.  Many  of  his  books  are  still  at
Meadowbank,  where  law  books  naturally  accumulated  in  large
numbers,  as  two  judges  and  a  Professor  in  the  Faculty  of  Law  in
Glasgow  University3  have  been  among  the  proprietors  of  the  estate
during  the  last  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  several  other  members
of  the  family,  as  well  as  J.  A.  Maconochie,  have  been  in  the  legal
profession.  A  large  number  of  these  books,  some  of  which  were
very  bulky,  had  from  time  to  time  been  stacked  in  heaps  on  the  floor
of  a  garret  room,  and  in  1876,  immediately  before  I  was  called  to  the
Bar,  I  was  given  permission  to  take  away  such  of  them  as  I  thought
would  be  useful  to  me.  Amongst  others  I  took  the  MS.  in  question,
and  it  has  been  in  my  possession  since  that  date.
Believe  me,

Yours  very  truly,

CHARLES  C.  MACONOCHIE.

That  the  manuscript  is  a  fair  copy  and  not  the  original  notes
taken  at  the  lectures  is  shown,  first,  by  the  fact  that  the  date
on  the  title-page  is  '  MDCCLXVI,'  whereas  Adam  Smith
relinquished  his  professorial  chair  in  January,  1764;  secondly,
by  its  clean  and  well-written  character  and  the  almost  entire
absence  of  abbreviations,  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  report
is  often  obviously  verbatim,  and,  thirdly,  by  the  circumstance
that  some  of  the  mistakes  are  evidently  caused  by  misreading
and  not  by  mishearing.

That  the  fair  copy  was  not  made  by  the  person  who  took
the  original  notes  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  though  the  original
note-taker  must  have  been  able  and  intelligent,  the  transcrip-

1  Allan Maconochie, born 1748,  the bench with the title of Lord

called to  the  bar 1770,  Professor of  Meadowbank 1819,  assumed the  ad-

Public Law in the University of  ditional surname of  Welwood  1854,

Edinburgh 1779, appointed to the  died  1861.

bench  with  the  title  of  Lord  Meadow-  3  Allan Alexander Maconochie-

bank  1796,  died  1816.  Welwood,  eldest son of the above,

3  Alexander  Maconochie,  eldest  son  born 1806, called to the bar 1829,

of the above, born 1777, called to  Professor of  Civil Law  in the  Uni-

the  bar  1799,  Solicitor-General  1813,  versity  of  Glasgow  1842,  died  1885.
Lord Advocate 1816, appointed to

b2


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

tion  is  evidently  the  work  of  a  person  who  often  did  not
understand  what  he  was  writing.  For  example,  at  a  place
where  the  context  obviously  requires  'one'  he  writes  'me,'1
simply  because  the  initial  letter  of  '  one/  written  narrow  or
blind,  resembles  the  first  part  of  the  initial  letter  of  'me/
carelessly  written  with  a  loop.  In  other  places  he  substitutes
'shop'  for  'ship'2  and  'corn'  for  'coin/3  regardless  of  the
sense.  He  habitually  makes  nonsense  of  the  argument  by
dividing  sentences  and  paragraphs  at  the  wrong  place.  More
over,  his  somewhat  elaborate  and  characterless  handwriting
suggests  the  professional  copyist  of  mature  years  rather  than
the  young  man  who  has  just  completed  his  academical  course.

It  does  not  seem  possible  to  give  a  decided  answer  to  the
question  whether  the  copyist  copied  directly  from  the  original
notes  or  from  a  fair  copy  made  by  the  original  note-taker.  It
is  evident  throughout  the  manuscript  that  he  takes  pains  to
make  his  pages  correspond  with  the  pages  from  which  he
was  copying.  He  constantly  spreads  out  or  compresses  his
handwriting  as  he  approaches  the  end  of  a  page,  and  when
unsuccessful  in  filling  the  page  exactly,  he  does  not  scruple
to  leave  the  last  line  partially  blank.  For  example,  the  last
two  lines  on  p.  134  and  the  first  on  p.  135  of  the  manuscript
are  written  thus  :

'  a  better  chance  for  its  being  abolished,  Because

One  Single  Person  is  Lawgiver

And  the  Law  will  not  extend  to  him  nor  diminish —

and  the  last  two  lines  on  p.  223  and  the  first  on  p.  224  appear
as  follows :

'  progress  of  Opulence  both  in  Ancient  and

Modern  Times,

Which  Causes  shall  be  shown  either  to  Affect  —

The  amounts  contained  in  a  page  are  very  unequal.  Page
104,  for  instance,  contains  twenty-six  lines  of  manuscript  which
occupy  twenty-five  of  print4,  while  page  106  contains  only
twenty  lines  of  manuscript,  equal  to  nineteen  lines  of  print r>,
two  of  which,  owing  to  the  chances  of  paragraphing,  are  more

1  Below,  p.  181,  note  4.  4  P.  75,  lines  8  to  32.

*  P.  12,  note  i.  5  P.  76,  line  19, 'The  reason,' top.  77,

'•'  P.  200.  line  5,  '  her  husband.'


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xix

nearly  empty  than  any  in  the  manuscript.  Such  great
inequality  makes  it  appear  probable  that  the  pagination  of
the  original  notes  is  followed,  and  this  would  scarcely  have
been  the  case  unless  an  index  existed  to  the  original  notes.
Now  it  seems  improbable  that  a  student  who  was  likely  to
make  a  fair  copy  of  his  notes  would  have  made  the  index
before  instead  of  after  making  the  fair  copy,  so  that  we
might  infer  that  the  copyist  copied  directly  from  the  original
notes.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  improbable  that  any
rough  notes,  almost  necessarily  full  of  abbreviations,  could  have
been  clear  enough  for  a  not  very  intelligent  copyist  to  reproduce
without  many  more  obvious  blunders  than  are  to  be  found  in
the  manuscript.

The  original  notes  were  probably  destroyed  after  the  fair
copy  was  made,  and  if  the  manuscript  was  copied  from  them
direct,  it  may  have  been  always  unique,  but  in  any  case  it  is
quite  possible,  and  even  probable,  that  there  were  at  one  time
several  copies  in  existence.  '  In  those  days  manuscript  copies
of  a  popular  professor's  lectures,  transcribed  from  his  students'
note-books,  were  often  kept  for  sale  in  the  booksellers'  shops.
Blair's  lectures  on  rhetoric,  for  example,  were  for  years
in  general  circulation  in  this  intermediate  state '  \  There  can,
however,  scarcely  have  been  many  copies,  or  Adam  Smith
himself  and  his  literary  executors  would  have  become  aware
of  the  fact.  The  description  of  the  burning  of  the  manuscripts
before  Adam  Smith's  death  makes  it  certain  that  none  of  the
three  parties  concerned  suspected  such  a  thing.

Adam  Smith  lectured  at  Glasgow  as  Professor  of  Moral
Philosophy  from  1752  to  the  end  of  December,  1763,  and
perhaps  for  a  few  days  at  the  beginning  of  January,  1764 2.
Internal  evidence  enables  us  to  attribute  the  report  of  the
lectures  to  the  end  of  this  period.  Frequent  references  to
the  Seven  Years'  War  as  'the  late'  or  'the  last*  war3  indicate
a  date  certainly  not  earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the  academical
session  of  1762-3,  when  negotiations  were  proceeding,  and
almost  certainly  not  earlier  than  the  signature  of  the  treaty  of
Fontainebleau  on  November  3,  1762.  If  this  indication  of  date
be  rejected  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be  natural  after  the

1  Rae,  Life  of  Adam  Smith,  p.  64.  2  Rae, Life of  Adam Smith, pp.

See Blair's preface to Lectures on 46,  169.
Rhetoric  and  Belles  Lettres,  1783.  3  Pp.  27,  32,  268,  cf.  p.  271.


xx  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

conclusion  of  peace  for  the  reporter  or  the  transcriber  to  alter
'  the  war '  or  '  the  present  war '  into  '  the  late  war/  and  if  the  corre
spondence  of  the  price  of  wheat,  mentioned  on  p.  182,  with  the
price  quoted  in  the  newspapers  for  February,  1763',  be  rejected
for  the  very  good  reason  that  it  is  too  slender  a  foundation  on
which  to  build,  we  are  driven  back  upon  the  reference  to  1760
or  1761  contained  in  the  statement  that  'a  late  minister  of  state
raised  twenty-three  millions  in  one  year,'2  and  upon  the  account
of  the  ransom  of  the  Litchfield  prisoners,  which  was  not  settled
till  April,  i76o3.  It  is  accordingly  probable  that  the  actual
lectures  from  which  the  notes  were  taken  were  delivered  either
in  the  portion  of  the  academical  session  of  1763-4  which
preceded  Adam  Smith's  departure,  or  in  the  session  of  1762-3,
almost  certain  that  they  were  not  delivered  before  1761-2,  and
absolutely  certain  that  they  were  not  delivered  before  1760-1.

In  the  present  edition  the  punctuation  of  the  manuscript
has  been  entirely  disregarded,  the  spelling  has  been  modern
ized  and  sectional  headings  have  been  added.  To  have
followed  the  punctuation  of  the  manuscript  would  have  been
simply  ridiculous,  and  would  have  made  the  work  almost
unreadable.  If  the  spelling  had  been  merely  archaic,  it  would
of  course  have  been  right  to  retain  it,  but  in  fact  it  is  not
so  much  archaic  as  outrageously  erratic  and  inconsistent,  even
when  judged  by  the  easy  standard  prevailing  in  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  century4;  to  spell  as  Adam  Smith  himself
would  have  spelled  in  1763  was  a  counsel  of  perfection  which
soon  in  practice  proved  impossible  to  carry  out  with  sufficient
success  to  make  the  laborious  task  worth  attempting.  Without
the  addition  of  new  headings  and  divisions,  the  work  would
have  been  in  tediously  long  blocks,  and  the  reader  would
have  found  it  difficult  to  find  his  way,  owing  to  the  abrupt
changes  of  subject  not  indicated  by  any  outward  marks.  So
far  as  possible,  the  new  headings  have  been  adapted  from

1  P.  182,  note  i.  rect  or  archaic spelling  of  the  manu-

P.  207.  script has  been retained for special

3  PP-  63-4-  reasons. To alter '  Puffendorf ' or

4  The  MS.  usually  spells  '  naturally,'  '  Wittenagemot,'  for  example,  seemed
'generally,'  and similar  words, with  obviously  undesirable. The  Index  too
only one 1, but occasionally they  has  been  left  unaltered  except  for  the
appear  with  two. '  Woemen,'  'cannon  necessary  adaptation  of  the  numbers
law,'  'seperate,'  'arsine' (arson) all  of  the  pages.

occur. In  a  very  few  cases  the  incor-


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxi

words  used  in  the  text  and  modelled  on  the  headings  in  the
Moral  Sentiments  and  the  Wealth  of  Nations.  The  added
headings  are  distinguished  from  those  which  occur  in  the
manuscript  by  being  enclosed  in  square  brackets.

No  attempt  has  been  made  to  amend  the  report  itself,  much
less  the  lectures,  but  mere  clerical  errors  of  the  copyist  have
been  amended  wherever  there  appeared  to  be  no  reasonable
doubt  as  to  the  correct  reading.  In  every  such  case,  however
trivial,  the  reading  of  the  manuscript  is  placed  on  record,
words  left  out  or  altered  being  printed  in  the  notes,  and  words
added  being  enclosed  in  square  brackets1.

The  notes  are  purely  explanatory  and  historical.  They  are
intended  to  help  the  reader  to  understand  the  text,  to  judge
of  the  accuracy  of  the  report,  and  to  compare  it  with  the
authorities  open  to  Adam  Smith  and  with  the  subsequent
development  of  his  thought  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations.  The
most  conscientious  effort  has  been  made  to  resist  the  tempta
tion  to  which  commentators  on  the  Wealth  of  Nations  have
generally  succumbed,  of  using  the  text  as  a  mere  clothes
line  on  which  to  hang  editorial  opinions  on  economic  theory.

To  estimate  in  every  case  the  degree  of  the  probability  that
Adam  Smith  used  a  particular  work  would  have  occupied
too  much  space.  Consequently,  as  a  rule,  the  passages  in
earlier  authors  which  he  may  possibly  have  used,  and  those
which  he  almost  certainly  did  use,  are  alike  simply  quoted  or
referred  to  without  comment.

Except  in  a  few  cases  where  practical  difficulties  stood  in
the  way,  the  references  to  earlier  authors  have  been  made
to  that  edition  of  each  work  which  Adam  Smith  is  most
likely  to  have  used  in  1763.  The  volume  and  page  refer
ences  to  the  Wealth  of  Nations  (abbreviated  to  '  W.  of  N.')  are
to  Thorold  Rogers'  edition  published  by  the  Oxford  University
Press  (2nd  ed.  1880).

CHAPTER II. VALUE  OF  THE  REPORT.

Doubts  may  well  be  felt  as  to  whether  it  is  right  to  publish
a  report  of  lectures  which  has  been  made  by  a  University
student.  A  lecturer  generally  finds  that  his  apparently  most

1  The  manuscript  of  course  has  no  head-lines  at  the  top  of  the  pages.  It  is
always  legible,  except  that  '  those '  is  usually  indistinguishable  from  '  these.'


xxii  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

incorruptible  ideas  have  considerably  deteriorated  when  they
have  passed  through  the  minds  and  note-books  of  his  pupils.
But,  after  all,  the  doctrines  of  more  than  one  of  the  greatest
teachers  of  antiquity  have  come  down  to  us  in  no  other  way
than  by  means  of  the  records  left  by  disciples  who  had  listened
to  their  oral  instruction.  If  we  were  to  reject  all  that  has
been  transmitted  to  us  in  this  way,  we  should  be  left  with
some  very  considerable  gaps  both  in  philosophy  and  religion.
In  the  present  case  we  know  that  the  disciple  was  both  faithful
and  intelligent.  We  have  most  unusual  means  for  judging  of
the  accuracy  of  his  work,  and  we  find  that  it  stands  the  severest
tests  in  a  manner  which  might  be  envied  by  a  modern  reporter
with  the  advantage  of  shorthand.  It  is  unnecessary  to  give
examples  here.  A  reader  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  look  out
a  few  of  the  hundred  references  to  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and
of  the  four  hundred  other  references  given  in  the  notes,  may
easily  satisfy  himself  on  the  point.

Granting  that  the  report  is  satisfactory  in  itself,  the  further
objection  to  its  publication  may  be  made  that  it  is  an  act  of
impiety  towards  Adam  Smith's  memory.  It  is  an  evasion  of  his
last  wishes,  and  if  Black  and  Mutton  had  not  honestly  complied
with  those  wishes,  we  should  be  inclined  to  condemn  their  action,
even  if  we  could  not  profess  to  regret  it.  Adam  Smith  himself,
however,  would  not  have  judged  harshly  of  disregard  of  wishes
more  than  a  century  old.  He  did  not  trust  even  his  good
friends  Black  and  Hutton  to  fulfil  their  solemn  promise  to
destroy  his  manuscripts  immediately  after  his  death,  and  thirty
years  before  he  had  taught  the  Glasgow  students  that  'piety
to  the  dead  can  only  take  place  when  their  memory  is  fresh
in  the  minds  of  men  :  a  power  to  dispose  of  estates  for  ever
is  manifestly  absurd.'  *

Moreover  it  is  probable  that  if  he  had  been  acquainted  with
.the  criticisms  which  were  to  be  passed  upon  his  work,  he  would
have  withdrawn  all  objection  to  the  publication  of  his  lectures.

Du  Pont  de  Nemours  said,  in  his  haste,  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations,  'everything  that  is  true  in  this  respectable  but
tedious  work  in  two  fat  quarto  volumes  is  to  be  found  in
Turgot's  Reflexions  on  the  Formation  and  Distribution  of
Riches;  everything  added  by  Adam  Smith  is  inaccurate,  not

1  Below,  p.  124.


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxiii

to  say  incorrect.' '  At  a  later  period  he  repented  of  this  out
break,  and  confessed  to  a  certain  want  of  knowledge  of  the
English  tongue  which  had  prevented  him  from  appreciating
Smith's  work  as  he  ought  to  have  done.  But  down  to  quite
recent  times,  if  not  to  the  present  day,  writers  of  authority
have  often  expressed  belief  that  the  Wealth  of  Nations  owes
much  to  Turgot's  Reflexions.  Du  Font's  learned  and  able
biographer,  as  lately  as  1888,  permitted  himself  to  speak  of
'  the  care  with  which '  Adam  Smith  '  omits  to  quote '  the
principal  works  of  the  physiocrats  and  'especially  that  of
Turgot.' 2

For  the  particular  accusation,  indeed,  that  Adam  Smith  does
not  acknowledge  his  obligations  to  Turgot,  there  never  was
much  foundation.  He  certainly  does  not  acknowledge  obliga
tions  ;  but  had  he  any  to  acknowledge?  Turgot's  book,  though
written  in  1766,  was  only  published  six  years  before  the
Wealth  of  Nations,  and  then  only  in  the  periodical  Epheme'rides
du  Citoyen 3.  As  this  was  not  in  the  Advocates'  Library  at
Edinburgh  in  1776 4,  and  is  not  among  the  collections  of
Adam  Smith's  books  which  Dr.  James  Bonar  has  catalogued  •',
we  are  not  justified  in  assuming  that  Adam  Smith  had  so  much
as  seen  the  work.  The  internal  evidence  is  of  the  weakest
possible  character.  To  rely  on  general  similarities  of  doctrine
in  such  a  case  is  childish.  Such  similarities  are  constantly
found  in  the  writings  of  contemporary  authors  who  cannot
possibly  have  been  acquainted  with  each  other's  works.  The
coincidence  is  to  be  explained  simply  by  the  fact  that  in  literature,
as  in  everything  else,  the  same  effects  produce  the  same  causes.
There  is  surely  nothing  surprising  in  the  fact  that  two  men  who
have  read  the  same  books  and  observed  the  same  events,  should
occasionally  use  the  same  arguments  and  arrive  at  the  same
conclusions.  Something  much  more  definite  is  needed,  and

1 'Tout  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  vrai  dans  ce  a  Ibid.,  loc.  cit.

livre  estimable,  mais  penible  a  lire,  en  3  Schelle,  Pourquoi  les  '•Reflexions'1

deux  gros  volumes  in-4°,  se  trouve  dans  de Turgot  ne  sont-elles  pas  exactement

les  Reflexions  de  Turgot  sur  la  forma-  connues  '{ in the  Journal des Econo-

tion  et  la  distribution  des richesses  ;  tnistes  for  July,  1888,  pp.  3-5.

tout ce qu'Adam Smith y a  ajoute  4  Catalogue of the Library of  the

manque  d'exactitude  et  meme  de  fonde-  Faculty  of  Advocates,  Edinburgh,  pt.  ii.

ment.' Quoted  in  Schelle,  Du  Pont  de  1776.

Nemours  et  T Ecole  physiocratique,  1888,  *  Catalogue  of  Adam  Smith's  Library,

P-  159-  1894.


XXIV


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION


no  serious  attempt  has  ever  been  made  to  supply  it  by  pointing
out  particular  passages  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations  which  appear
to  owe  anything  to  the  Reflexions  \

Myths  of  this  kind,  however,  die  hard,  and  if  the  lectures
had  remained  unknown,  the  statement  that  Adam  Smith  made
much  use  of  the  Reflexions  would  probably  have  been  repeated
from  text-book  to  text-book  for  at  least  another  half-century.
But  as  it  now  appears  that  the  resemblance  between  the
Reflexions  and  the  lectures  is  just  as  close  as  that  between
the  Reflexions  and  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and  as  the  Reflexions
were  not  even  written  till  after  Adam  Smith  had  ceased  lectur
ing  and  had  seen  and  conversed  with  Turgot,  it  may  be  supposed
that  the  enthusiasts  of  plagiarism  will  now  seek  to  show  that
instead  of  Smith  stealing  from  Turgot,  the  truth  was  that  Turgot
stole  from  Smith.

But  the  report  of  the  lectures  does  much  more  in  regard
to  the  Wealth  of  Nations  than  merely  dispose  finally  of  the
Turgot  myth.  It  enables  us  to  follow  the  gradual  construction
of  the  work  almost  from  its  very  foundation,  and  to  distinguish
positively  between  what  the  original  genius  of  its  author  created
out  of  British  materials  on  the  one  hand  and  French  materials
on  the  other.

In  the  work  of  professors,  as  in  many  other  things,  a  kind
of  atavism  is  often  observable.  A  professor  has  rarely  been
a  student  under  his  immediate  predecessor  in  the  chair.
While  he  has  been  obtaining  experience  in  a  less  dignified
post,  or  has  been  absent  acquiring  the  honour  which  it  is
proverbially  difficult  for  a  prophet  to  obtain  in  his  own
country,  his  master  has  died  or  retired  and  been  succeeded
by  a  man  of  an  intermediate  generation,  and  probably  of
intermediate  views,  whom  he  very  likely  regards  with  that
slight  dash  of  contempt  which  men  are  apt  to  feel  for  those
who  are  older  than  themselves,  but  yet  not  old  enough  to

1  Professor  Thorold  Rogers,  indeed,  remote resemblance to the passage

after stating in the preface to his  quoted  from  Turgot,  but  an  infinitely

edition  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  that  'in  closer resemblance to passages in

the  First  Book,  particularly,  passages  earlier  English  writers  quoted  below,

will  be  found  which  are  almost  tran-  p.  162,  note  i. In  the  other  six  cases

scripts from Turgot's divisions and  there  is  not  the  smallest  resemblance

arguments'  (p.  xxiii),  quotes  Turgot  between the text and the passage

seven  times  in  the  notes  to  Book  I.  quoted.
In  one  case  (p. 14)  the  text  bears  a


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxv

obtain  from  them  the  respect  universally  and  fortunately
accorded  to  the  surviving  lights  of  a  past  age  and  an  '  old
school/  whose  virtues  have  become  uncommon,  and  whose
weaknesses  and  eccentricities,  instead  of  annoying  or  dis
gusting,  afford  kindly  amusement.  We  should  do  well  there
fore  to  look  in  Adam  Smith's  work  for  important  traces  of
the  influence  of  Francis  Hutcheson,  who  was  Professor
of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Glasgow  from  1729  to  1746,  even
if  Hutcheson  had  been  but  an  undistinguished  member  of
the  series  of  professors,  instead  of  a  teacher  of  unusual  ability
and  originality,  to  whom  Adam  Smith  acknowledged  obligations,
and  of  whom  he  used  warm  words  of  praise1.

In  1745  Hutcheson  published  in  Latin  a  little  volume  entitled
Philosophiae  moralis  institutio  compcndiaria  libris  III.  ethices  ct
inrispnidcntiae  naturalis  elementa  continens.  Of  this  he
authorised  a  translation,  published  in  1747  as  A  Short  In
troduction  to  Moral  Philosophy  in  three  books,  containing  the
Elements  of  Ethicks  and  the  Law  of  Nature.  From  it  we  may
gather  with  sufficient  accuracy  what  Smith,  was  taught  as
a  boy  in  the  class-room  at  Glasgow  before  he  left,  at  the  age
of  barely  seventeen,  for  his  long  stay  at  Oxford.

The  address  'to  the  students  in  Universities,'  which  forms
the  preface  to  the  work,  opens  thus  :  —

'  The  celebrated  division  of  philosophy  among  the  ancients  was  into
the  rational  or  logical,  the  natural,  and  the  moral.  Their  moral
philosophy  contained  these  parts,  ethicks  taken  more  strictly,  teaching
the  nature  of  virtue  and  regulating  the  internal  dispositions  ;  and  the
knowledge  of  the  law  of  nature.  This  latter  contained,  i.  the
doctrine  of  private  rights,  or  the  laws  obtaining  in  natural  liberty.  2.
Oeconomicks,  or  the  laws  and  rights  of  the  several  members  of  a
family  ;  and  3.  Politicks,  shewing  the  various  plans  of  civil  government,
and  the  rights  of  states  with  respect  to  each  other.'

The  three  Books  are  accordingly  headed  :  '  The  Elements
of  Ethicks,'  '  Elements  of  the  Law  of  Nature  '  (in  the  Latin
1  lurisprudentia  privata ')  and  the  '  Principles  of  Oeconomicks  and
Politicks.'  The  part  of  Smith's  course  which  eventually  grew
into  the  Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments  obviously  corresponds
with  Book  I ;  '  Private  Law/  the  third  division  of  his  'Justice/
corresponds  with  Book  II ;  while  '  Domestic  Law'  and  '  Public

1  Rae,  Life  of  A  Jam  Smith,  pp.  13,  14.  411.


xxvi  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

Jurisprudence/  the  first  two  divisions  of  his  'Justice/  cor
respond  with  Book  III.  The  mode  of  treatment  is  very
different,  as  Adam  Smith  goes  into  leg-al  particularities  in
a  way  quite  foreign  to  Hutcheson,  but  the  main  subjects  treated
are,  roughly  speaking,  the  same.  The  Law  of  Nations  is  divided
in  Hutcheson  between  chapter  xv  of  Book  II,  '  Rights  arising
from  Damage  done  and  the  Laws  of  War/  and  the  last  two
chapters  of  Book  III,  on  the  '  Laws  of  War  '  and  'Of  Treaties,
and  Ambassadors,  and  the  entire  dissolution  of  States.'  Neither
Smith's  'Revenue'  nor  his  'Arms'  correspond  to  anything  in
Hutcheson,  and  nearly  as  much  may  be  said  of  his  '  Police.'
Hutcheson  has,  however,  a  short  chapter  in  Book  II  (ch.  xii),
'  Concerning  the  Values  or  Prices  of  Goods/  in  which  the  causes
of  high  and  low  price  and  the  characteristics  of  good  money
are  discussed.

Probably  it  is  in  this  chapter  that  the  germ  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations  is  to  be  found.  In  writing  the  chapter  Hutcheson
simply  followed  Pufendorf,  and  he  does  not  make  its  connexion
with  the  adjoining  chapters,  '  Of  Oaths  and  Vows/  and  '  Of  the
Several  Sorts  of  Contracts/  very  distinct  and  obvious,  so  that
Adam  Smith  may  well  have  thought,  when  he  began  his
lectures,  that  it  would  be  an  improvement  in  logical  arrange
ment  to  transfer  the  whole  to  a  new  heading,  '  Police/  since  the
regulation  of  prices  and  the  creation  of  money  by  the  state  both
came  under  the  head  of  '  Police/  as  the  word  was  understood
in  his  time.  As  he  lectured  year  by  year,  however,  he  would
be  led  from  this  by  two  ways  towards  the  consideration  of
the  question  what  constitutes  opulence  or  wealth.  He  would
perceive  both  that  regulations  which  interfere  with  natural
prices  diminish  plenty  or  opulence,  and  that  mere  additions
to  a  nation's  stock  of  money  do  not  increase  its  opulence,  as
some  at  least  of  the  more  extreme  mercantilists  really  be
lieved,  and  as  all  of  them  to  some  extent  tacitly  or  explicitly
assumed.  Observing  the  overwhelming  importance  of  this
question,  he  was  not  the  man  to  be  deterred  by  considerations
as  to  the  symmetry  of  his  general  scheme  of  arrangement
from  putting  it  in  the  principal  place  and  allowing  it  to  introduce
various  subjects  which  cannot  possibly  be  regarded  as  part
of  police.

In  some  such  way  as  this  the  second  and  only  considerable
portion  of  '  Police '  assumed  its  present  form,  in  which  it  consists


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxvii

of,  first,  a  discussion  of  the  material  wants  of  mankind  and  of
the  great  cause,  division  of  labour,  which  enables  them  to  be
better  satisfied  in  a  civilized  than  in  an  uncivilized  nation  (§§  1-6);
next,  the  traditional  inquiry  as  to  prices  and  money  (§§  7,  8)  with
a  large  appendix  explaining  various  evil  consequences  of  the
notion  that  money  alone  constitutes  opulence  (§§  9-13)  and  corol
laries  as  to  interest  (§  14)  and  exchange  (§  15) ;  thirdly,  a
dissertation  on  the  causes  why  opulence  does  not  increase  as
fast  as  might  be  expected  (§  16) ;  and,  lastly,  a  description  of
the  influence  of  commerce  (which,  in  consequence  of  the  effects
of  the  division  of  labour,  is  the  great  cause  of  opulence)  on
manners  (§  17).  Even  the  Third  Part  of  the  whole  scheme,  'Of
Revenue,'  is  brought  in  as  one  of  the  causes  of  the  slow
progress  of  opulence.  The  portion  of  '  Jurisprudence  '  dealing
with  '  Police '  thus  became,  with  the  exception  of  a  scrap
about  security  and  a  bare  mention  of  sanitation,  an  '  Inquiry
into  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations.'

If  the  Contents  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  and  those  of  the
lectures  on  '  Police,'  '  Revenue,'  and  'Arms  '  be  compared,  a  close
correspondence  between  them  is  observable.  The  first  three
chapters  of  the  first  book  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  on  the
division  of  labour,  correspond  with  §§  3-6  of  '  Cheapness  or
Plenty '  in  the  lectures ;  chapter  iv,  on  money,  corresponds
with  §  8,  and  chapters  v,  vi  and  vii,  on  prices,  correspond
with  §  7;  Book  II,  chapter  iv,  on  stock  lent  at  interest,  corre
sponds  with  §  14;  Book  III,  on  the  different  progress  of
opulence  in  different  nations,  has  practically  the  same  sub
ject  as  §  16 ;  the  first  eight  chapters  of  Book  IV,  on  the
mercantile  system,  treat  of  the  same  matter  as  §§  9-12  ;  Book  V,
on  revenue,  corresponds  with  Part  III  of  the  lectures,  and  also
absorbs  much  of  Part  IV,  'Of  Arms.'

Looking  at  the  question  first  from  the  side  of  the  lectures,
we  see  that  this  leaves  §§  i,  2,  13,  15  and  17  of  'Cheapness  or
Plenty  '  unaccounted  for.  It  is  not  easy  to  explain  why  the  first
two  sections  were  omitted  from  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and  the
fact  will  be  regretted  by  those  who  ask  for  a  theory  of
consumption  as  a  preliminary  to  the  other  parts  of  political
economy.  The  explanation  of  the  omission  of  §  13  is  given
by  Adam  Smith  himself.  It  was  simply  that  the  Mississippi
scheme  had  been  'explained  so  fully,  so  clearly,  and  with
so  much  order  and  distinctness  by  Mr.  Du  Verney'  that


XXV111


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION


it  was  unnecessary  to  give  any  account  of  it1.  A  mere  sum
mary  of  Duverney's  description,  however  well  suited  for  an
academical  lecture,  could  not  properly  appear  in  a  great  book.
Exchange  ('§  15)  was  doubtless  omitted  as  too  elementary,  and
§  17,  on  the  influence  of  commerce  on  manners,  finds  no  special
place,  because  most  of  it  was  absorbed  in  Book  V,  chapter  i.
article  ii.  '  Of  the  Expense  of  the  Institutions  for  the  Education
of  Youth.'

Turning  now  to  the  consideration  of  the  question  from  /
the  side  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  we  are  at  once  struck  by
the  fact  that  not  only  chapter  ix  of  Book  IV,  on  the  system
of  the  Economistes  or  physiocrats,  but  also  chapter  viii  of
Book  I,  on  wages,  chapter  ix,  on  profits,  chapter  x,  on  dif
ferences  of  wages  and  profits,  and  chapter  xi,  on  rent,  are
as  yet  unaccounted  for.  Further  examination  shows  that
the  main  ideas  and  many  of  the  illustrations  of  chapter  viii,
of  chapter  ix,  and  still  more  of  chapter  x,  are  contained  in
the  section  of  the  lectures  which  deal  with  prices,  but  that
there  is  no  trace  whatever  in  the  lectures  of  the  scheme  of
distribution  which  the  Wealth  of  Nations  sets  forth.  The
main  body  of  Book  II,  'Of  the  Nature,  Accumulation  and  Em
ployment  of  Stock,'  is  also  entirely  unaccounted  for.  There
is  nothing  at  all  about  capital  in  the  lectures,  and  stock  is  not
given  an  important  place,  while  there  is  no  mention  what
ever  of  that  distinction  between  productive  and  unproductive
labour  which  is  fundamental  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  and
to  which  a  large  portion  of  Book  II  is  devoted.

When  Adam  Smith  went  to  France  he  found  'a  few  men
of  great  learning  and  ingenuity'  whose  leader  had  constructed
an  elaborate  table  containing  an  arithmetical  example  of  '  three
sorts  of  expenses,  their  source,  their  advances,  their  distribution,
their  effects,  their  reproduction,  their  relation  to  each  other,
to  population,  to  agriculture,  to  manufactures,  to  commerce,
and  to  the  general  riches  of  a  nation.'  This  table  was  regarded
by  the  sect  with  extraordinary  veneration,  and  doubtless  every
possible  effort  was  made  to  explain  it  to  Adam  Smith.  Its
three  sorts  of  expenses  are  productive  expenses,  expenses
of  revenue  and  sterile  expenses,  but  of  these  three  the  middle
one,  expenses  of  revenue,  is  almost  immediately  divided  between
the  other  two.  Productive  expenses  are  annual  advances  in
1  W.  ofN.  bk.  ii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  318.


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxix

agriculture,  and  sterile  expenses  are  annual  advances  in  other
industries.  The  Reprodnit  totale,  estimated  at  the  bottom  of  the
table,  is  altogether  the  result  of  the  productive  expenses  and
operations,  and  not  at  all  of  the  sterile.  It  is  distributed
between  three  classes,  the  productive  class,  the  sterile  class
and  the  proprietors  of  land.

To  us  at  the  present  day  the  table,  with  its  tangle  of  zigzag
lines,  appears  an  almost  childish  toy,  and  its  recent  republica-
tion  by  the  British  Economic  Association1  excited  very  little
interest.  Nevertheless,  in  the  fact  that  it  attempts  to  give
a  comprehensive  view  of  the  total  results  of  the  industry  of
a  year,  it  marks  an  enormous  advance  in  economic  theory,
and  we  can  easily  imagine  that  an  acute  mind  like  Adam
Smith's  would  immediately  grasp  its  importance.  To  accept
it  as  it  stood  he  was  not  prepared,  but  he  adopted  the  point
of  view  of  its  author,  and  accordingly  we  find  in  the  Wealth
of  Nations  something  which  is  absent  from  the  lectures,  namely,
a  definite  conception  of  labour  set  in  motion  by  a  particular
kind  of  expenditure  and  producing  an  aggregate  annual  pro
duce  which  is  '  distributed  '  into  several  large  categories.  The
particular  kind  of  expenditure  which  sets  productive  labour
in  motion  is  identified  with  the  laying  out  of  capital  stock.
It  is  assumed  that  all  labour  set  in  motion  by  this  laying
out  of  capital  produces  vendible  objects,  and  argued  that  all
such  labour,  and  no  other,  is  properly  called  productive.  This
new  doctrine  forms  the  main  body  of  Book  II,  '  Of  the  Nature,
Accumulation,  and  Employment  of  Stock '  in  the  Wealth  of
Nations.

If  the  theory  were  thoroughly  believed  in,  it  would  appear
that  Book  II  ought  logically  to  have  been  placed  first.
According  to  the  Introduction  and  Plan,  the  average  produce
per  head  of  population  'must  in  every  nation  be  regulated
by  two  different  circumstances ;  first,  by  the  skill,  dexterity,
and  judgement  with  which  its  labour  is  generally  applied;
and,  secondly,  by  the  proportion  between  the  number  of
those  who  are  employed  in  useful  labour  and  that  of  those
who  are  not  so  employed.'  These  two  circumstances  are
evidently  in  the  wrong  order.  We  ought  to  consider  what
proportion  of  the  population  is  employed  in  useful  labour
before  we  consider  how  skilfully  and  dexterously  they  work.

1 Tableau  Oeconomiquc.  by  Franfois  Quesnay,  1894.


xxx  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

'The  number  of  useful  and  productive  labourers/  we  are
assured,  'is  everywhere  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  capital
stock  which  is  employed  in  setting  them  to  work,  and  to  the
particular  way  in  which  it  is  so  employed/  and  if  this  be  so,
an  economic  treatise  ought  surely  to  begin  with  a  dissertation
on  capital.  But  Adam  Smith  had  already,  in  his  lectures,
begun  his  treatment  of  the  subject  with  his  dissertation  on
the  productive  powers  of  labour,  and  had  incidentally  treated
of  stock  in  store  not  as  something  indispensable  before  labour
can  be  set  in  motion,  but  merely  as  something  required  'after
the  ages  of  hunting  and  fishing/  or  '  when  manufactures  were
introduced'  and  'a  great  deal  of  time'  required1.  It  would
have  been  astonishing  if  he  had  been  willing  to  relegate
his  own  excellent  disquisition  on  the  division  of  labour  to
the  second  place,  and  consequently  no  surprise  need  be  felt
that  capital  is  treated  only  in  the  second  Book,  in  spite  of  the
adoption  of  the  view  of  the  Tableau  as  to  its  function  in  govern
ing  the  amount  of  productive  labour2.

It  has  always  been  obvious  that  in  spite  of  the  mention
of  the  problem  of  distribution  in  the  title  of  Book  I  of  the
Wealth  of  Nations*,  'Adam  Smith's  theory  of  distribution,
instead  of  being  made  one  of  the  main  subjects  of  the  Book,
is  inserted  in  the  middle  of  the  chapter  on  prices  as  a  mere
appendage  or  corollary  of  his  doctrine  of  prices  ' 4.  By  way
of  explaining  the  discrepancy,  it  was  possible  to  conjecture
that  'in  all  probability  the  Book  existed  in  a  fairly  complete
form  before  Adam  Smith  became  acquainted  with  the  physio-
cratic  doctrine/  and  that  when  that  event  took  place  '  he  may
very  well  have  thought  that  his  theory  of  prices  and  his
observations  on  wages,  profit  and  rent  made  a  very  good
theory  of  what  the  physiocrats  called  "distribution,"  and  thus
have  been  led  to  affix  the  present  title  of  the  Book  and  to
interpolate  the  passage  about  the  whole  produce  being  parcelled
out  and  distributed  as  wages,  profit  and  rent ' 5.  This  conjecture

1  Below,  p.  181.  among the different Ranks of the

2  In  the  Introduction  to  Book  II,  an People."

attempt  to combine the old and the  *  Cannan, History of the Theories

new  view  is  observable.  of Production and Distribution in

3  'Of  the Causes of  Improvement  English  Political  Economy  from  1776  to
in  the  productive  Powers  of  Labour.  1848,  1893,  p.  186.

and  of  the  Order  according  to  which  5  Ibid.  p.  188.

its Produce is naturally distributed


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxxi

is  now  shown  to  be  substantially  correct.  The  dissertations
on  the  division  of  labour,  money,  prices,  and  the  causes  of
the  differences  of  wages  in  different  employments,  evidently
existed  very  nearly  in  their  present  form  before  Adam  Smith
went  to  France,  and  the  scheme  of  distribution,  on  the  other
hand,  was  wholly  absent.  It  is  plain  that  Smith  acquired
the  idea  of  the  necessity  of  a  scheme  of  distribution  from
the  physiocrats,  and  that  he  tacked  his  own  scheme  (very
different  from  theirs)  on  to  his  already  existing  theory  of^
prices  \

Besides  thus  elucidating  the  composition  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations,  the  lectures  serve  to  settle  the  doubtless  far  less
important  but  still  interesting  question  of  the  nature  of  Adam
Smith's  proposed  work  on  Justice,  or  that  portion  of  juris
prudence  not  dealt  with  in  the  Wealth  of  Nations.

Millar,  in  the  account  of  the  Glasgow  lectures  quoted  above,
says  that  Smith  intended  to  give  to  the  public  the  substance
of  the  third  part  of  his  course,  the  lectures  on  Justice,  and
that  he  mentioned  this  intention  in  the  conclusion  of  the
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments.  Turning  to  the  passage  referred
to,  which  is  the  same  in  the  sixth  as  in  the  first  edition,  we
find  Adam  Smith  first  condemning  casuistry,  and  then  de
claring  that  the  two  useful  parts  of  moral  philosophy  are
ethics  and  jurisprudence.  '  Every  system  of  positive  law,'
he  says,  '  may  be  regarded  as  a  more  or  less  imperfect  attempt
towards  a  system  of  natural  jurisprudence,  or  towards  an
enumeration  of  the  particular  rules  of  justice.'  But,  owing
to  various  difficulties  which  he  enumerates,  the  attempt  is
never  perfectly  successful.  '  The  reasonings  of  lawyers  upon
the  different  imperfections  and  improvements  of  the  laws  of
different  countries'  might  have  been  expected  to  'have  led
them  to  aim  at  establishing  a  system  of  what  might  properly
be  called  natural  jurisprudence,  or  a  theory  of  the  general
principles  which  ought  to  run  through  and  be  the  foundation
of  the  laws  of  all  nations.'  However,  '  it  was  very  late  in
the  world  before  any  such  general  system  was  thought  of,
or  before  the  philosophy  of  law  was  treated  by  itself  and

1  Appended to this Introduction  of  pages  occupied  in  Rogers'  edition

(pp.  xxxv-xxxix)  is  a  table  of  parallel  by  each  chapter  are  given  in  order  to

passages in the lectures and the  facilitate  reference  to  other  editions.
Wealth  of  Nations. The  total  number

C


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

without regard to the particular institutions of any one
nation/

'  Grotius,'  Adam  Smith  concludes,  '  seems  to  have  been  the  first
who  attempted  to  give  the  world  anything  like  a  system  of  those
principles  which  ought  to  run  through  and  be  the  foundation  of  the
laws  of  all  nations  ;  and  his  treatise  of  the  laws  of  war  and  peace,
with  all  its  imperfections,  is  perhaps  at  this  day  the  most  complete
work  that  has  yet  been  given  upon  this  subject.  I  shall  in  another
discourse  endeavour  to  give  an  account  of  the  general  principles  of
law  and  government  and  of  the  different  revolutions  they  have  under
gone  in  the  different  ages  and  periods  of  society,  not  only  in  what
concerns  justice,  but  in  what  concerns  police,  revenue  and  arms,  and
whatever  else  is  the  object  of  law.  I  shall  not,  therefore,  at  present
enter  into  any  further  detail  concerning  the  history  of  jurisprudence.'

In  the  Preface  to  the  sixth  edition  of  the  Moral  Sentiments,
published  in  1790,  after  quoting  from  this  passage  the  promise
of  'another  discourse,'  Adam  Smith  says —

'  In  the  Enquiry  concerning  the  Nature  and  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations,  I  have  partly  executed  this  promise ;  at  least  so  far  as
concerns  police,  revenue  and  arms.  What  remains,  the  theory  of
jurisprudence,  which  I  have  long  projected,  I  have  hitherto  been
hindered  from  executing  by  the  same  occupations  which  had  till  now
prevented  me  from  revising  the  present  work.'

It  has  always  appeared  somewhat  strange  that  the  publication
of  the  Wealth  of  Nations  should  have  been  regarded  by  Adam
Smith  as  a  partial  fulfilment  of  a  promise  to  give  an  account  of
the  general  principles  of  law  and  government  and  of  the
different  revolutions  they  have  undergone  in  the  different
ages  and  periods  of  society  in  what  concerns  police,  revenue
and  arms,  even  when  we  remember  the  wide  sense  then
borne  by  the  word  'police.'  Nor  has  it  been  altogether  clear
how  the  Wealth  of  Nations  fitted  into  the  '  history  of  juris
prudence/

The  report  clears  up  every  difficulty.  The  lectures  included
in  it  are  obviously  the  third  and  fourth  part  of  the  moral
philosophy  course  described  by  Millar,  and  they  are  also  the
draft  of  the  'account  of  the  general  principles  of  law  and
government '  or  '  history  of  jurisprudence '  contemplated  as  a
future  work  by  Adam  Smith  when  he  wrote  the  last  page  of  the
Moral  Sentiments  in  1759.  Part  I,  '  Of  Justice,'  with  perhaps
the  fifth  part,  entitled  '  Of  the  Laws  of  Nations/  is  the  third


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION  xxxiii

part  in  Millar's  description  of  the  whole  course,  and  is  also
the  '  account  of  the  general  principles  of  law  and  government
in  what  concerns  justice'  mentioned  in  1759  'and  the  theory
of  jurisprudence '  mentioned  in  1790.  Parts  II,  III  and  IV
'Of  Police,  Revenue  and  Arms,'  are  the  fourth  part  in
Millar's  description  of  the  course;  serving  as  the  first  draft
of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  they  induced  Adam  Smith  to  say
that  he  had  fulfilled  his  promise  as  regards  police,  revenue
and  arms,  though  no  one  unacquainted  with  the  lectures
would  have  described  the  Wealth  of  Nations  as  a  treatise  on
those  three  subjects  in  that  order.

It  does  not  seem  probable  that  Adam  Smith  ever  made  much
progress  with  the  projected  work  on  Justice.  Mackenzie,  if
Rogers  reports  him  correctly,  seems  to  have  believed  that  the
manuscripts  which  were  burnt  by  Black  and  Hutton  consisted
of  this  book  in  a  nearly  completed  condition.  Before  he  came
that  evening,  he  says,  Adam  Smith,  with  the  assistance  of
Dr.  Black,  'had  burnt  sixteen  volumes  in  manuscript  on  Juris
prudence—the  sum  of  one  course  of  his  lectures  at  Glasgow,
as  was  the  Wealth  of  Nations  of  another ;  but  these  had  not
received  his  last  corrections,  and  from  what  he  had  seen  he  had
formed  a  mean  opinion  of  posthumous  publications  in  general.'
Little  importance,  however,  need  be  attached  to  this,  since,
according  to  Rogers,  Mackenzie  also  described  Adam  Smith,  an
only  child,  as  'an  affectionate  brother,'  and  stated  that  he  died
'  a  few  hours  after '  the  supper,  though  he  lived  as  a  matter
of  fact  for  six  days '.  After  the  publication  of  the  Wealth  of
Nations  he  must  have  had  far  greater  distractions  than  before,
and  his  official  duties  at  the  Board  of  Customs  '2  must  have
occupied  a  portion  of  his  time.  In  November,  1785,  after
mentioning  a  new  edition  of  the  Moral  Sentiments,  he  wrote :
'  I  have  likewise  two  other  great  works  upon  the  anvil ;  the
one  is  a  sort  of  Philosophical  History  of  all  the  different
branches  of  Literature,  of  Philosophy,  Poetry  and  Eloquence ;
the  other  is  a  sort  of  theory  and  History  of  Law  and  Govern
ment.'  He  had,  it  thus  appears,  failed  to  concentrate  his
energies  on  one  work,  and  he  could  only  say  of  the  two  that
'  the  materials  of  both  are  in  a  great  measure  collected,  and

1  P. W. Clayden, Early Life of regular  attendant. Rae,  Life  of  Adam
Samuel  Rogers,  p.  167.  Smith,  p.  411.

2  He  describes  himself  in  1787  as  a


xxxiv  EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION

some  part  of  both  is  put  into  tolerable  good  order.'  That
he  did  indeed  'struggle  violently'  against  'the  indolence  of  old
age,' which  he  felt  'coming  fast  upon'  him1,  we  can  well  believe,
but  the  failure  of  his  health  which  took  place  soon  afterwards
forbids  the  supposition  that  he  could  have  done  much  more
before  his  death  in  1790.  It  is  therefore  unlikely  that  the
unfinished  work  ever  consisted  of  very  much  more  than  those
parts  of  the  lectures  on  Justice  which  were  not  incorporated  in
the  Wealth  of  Nations.  What  these  parts  were  the  reader  has
now  the  opportunity  of  judging  for  himself.

1  Letter  to  the  Duke  de  la  Roche- reprinted in the Economic  Journal,
foucauld, first published in the March,  1896,  pp.  165,  166.
Athenaeum,  December 28, 1895,  and


TABLE OF PARALLEL PASSAGES


WEALTH  OF  NATIONS.


INTRODUCTION  (vol.  i.  pp.  1-4).

W.  of  N.  LECTURES

2  Many  do  not  labour  at  all 163

2-3  Proportion  of  workers  dependent  on amount  of

stock  181


BOOK  I.
CHAP.  I  (vol.  i.  pp.  5-14).

6-7 Pin-making 163-4

7-8 Difficulty  of  dividing  labour  in  agriculture . .  164
Price  and  quality  of  French  and  English  corn  and

manufactures  ........  164

9-11 Advantages  of  division  of  labour ....  ^5~1

11-12 Philosophers  and  invention .....  167-8

12-14 The  making  of  the  labourer's  coat ....  161-2

CHAP.  II  (vol.  i.  pp.  14-18).
14-18 What  gives  occasion  to  the  division  of  labour . 168-71

CHAP.  Ill  (vol.  i.  pp.  18-23).

18-20 Division  of  labour  limited  by  the  extent  of  the

market 172


xxxvi  TABLE OF  PARALLEL PASSAGES

PAGE  IN CHAP.  IV  (vol.  i.  pp.  23-30).  PAGE  ,„•

W.  of  N.  LECTURES

24  Cattle  used  as  money : armour  of  Diomedes  and

Glaucus  .......••  183

27 Names  of  coins  originally  weights  ....  186

27-9 Debasement 186-9

CHAP.  V  (vol.  i.  pp.  30-49).

30 Labour  the  real  measure  of  value ....  190

41  Silver  the  standard .......  186

42  Bank  notes  for  coins ......  213

44-6 Gold  rated  too  high  .......  190

CHAP.  VI  (vol.  i.  pp.  49-57).

50  (cf.  67)  Originally the whole produce belongs to the

labourer  .........  162

CHAP.  VII  (vol.  i.  pp.  57-67).

57-8 Natural  and  market  prices 173.  176

64-6 Monopolies ........  179-80

CHAP.  VIII  (vol.  i.  pp.  67-92).

75  Wealth  of  China 165

76  Chinese  infanticide  by  drowning ....  92
85 Free  men's  work  cheaper  than  slaves' ...  99
90-1 Relation  between  price  of  corn  and  wages . .  177-8

CHAP.  X  (pt.  i.  vol.  i.  pp.  104-24;  pt.  ii.  pp.  124-51).

106-7 Wages  in  trades  which  require  expensive  training  .  173-5

iio-ii Earnings  of  lawyers 175

125-30 Apprenticeship 236

128 Stampmaster 236

134 Superiority  of  country  workmen ....  255

146-7 Migration  under  the  law  of  settlement ...  62

150 Legal  regulation  of  prices 180

CHAP.  XI  (pt.  i.  vol.  i.  pp.  155-71 ;  Digression,  pp.  187-261).

159  (cf.  398 1  Importation  of  corn  into  ancient  Italy . .  229

187-227 Variations  in  the  value  of  money ....  198

207-10 Corn-bounty ........  180-2

218 "Mr.  Meggens" .......  194

BOOK  II.

INTRODUCTION  (vol.  i.  pp.  273-5).

273-5 Necessity  of  a  stock .  181,223


IN  THE WEALTH  OF  NATIONS  xxxvii
CHAP.  II  (vol.  i.  pp.  283-331).

W.O/N.  LECTURES

291-3 Banking .........  191-2

318 Mississippi  scheme 211-19

322 Money  compared  to  a  highway ....  191

327 Difficulty  of  getting  Scotch  notes  cashed . .  221

328-30 American  depreciated  paper  currency . . .  221

CHAP.  Ill  (vol.  i.  pp.  332-53).

338-40 Idleness  in  capital  towns  ......  155

CHAP.  IV  (vol.  i.  pp.  353-62).

354 Loans  really  consist  of  goods,  not  money . .  220

357 Interest  does  not  depend  on  the  value  of  money .  219-20


BOOK  III.

CHAP.  II  (vol.  i.  pp.  386-98).

386-90 Primogeniture  and  entails  are  hindrances  to  agri
culture 120, 124,  228

388 Entails  and  fidei-commtssa 123

390-3 Slave  cultivation  esp.  in  West  Indies  and  America  225-6
391 Slavery  not  likely  to  be  abolished  where  slaves  are

numerous 96

393  Papal  influence  in  favour  of  emancipation . .  101-2
393-4 Metayer  or  steel-bow  tenants  .....  100,  226

394  Forty-shilling  freeholders .....  227-8
394-5 Tenancies  made  secure 226-7

396  Feudal  lords  allowed the king to  tallage  their

tenants 227

397  Tenant  who  pays  rent  has  less  to  lay  out  on  im

provements ........  226

CHAP.  Ill  (vol.  i.  pp.  398-409).

399  Feudal  imposts  on  traders 232-3

400  Borough  farms 40

404  King  uses  Commons  against  Lords ...  41

405  Freedom  of  a  villain  escaping  to  a  borough . .  40

CHAP.  IV  (vol.  i.  pp.  410-23).

411 Warwick  the  King-maker's  hospitality ...  42
413-4 Extent  of  allodial  and  feudal  jurisdictions . 36,38,116


TABLE  OF  PARALLEL  PASSAGES


BOOK  IV.


PAGE IN

W.  of  N.

2-3

41-1

CHAP.  1  (vol.  11.  pp.  i-
Locke  on  money

24). PAGE  IN
LECTURES
. . . . 198
195-6, 198

J  /

7
J5

J7
18,  19

Exportation  of  bullion  free
Amount  of  coin  in  Great  Britain
Supplies  granted  in  1761 .
The  cost  of  foreign  war .

2OI
199
207
209

CHAP.  II  (vol.  ii.  pp.  25-46).

29  National  advantage  in  trade  similar  to  individual .  204

41  Character  of  politicians ......  254

CHAP.  Ill  (Digression,  vol.  ii.  pp.  53-62;  pt.  ii.  pp.  62-73).


54-62 Bank  of  Amsterdam  .......

67-8 Dear  drink  and  drunkenness .....  179


CHAP.  V  (vol.  ii.  pp.  79-122).
81-91 Corn  bounty ........ 180-2

CHAP.  VI  (vol.  ii.  pp.  122-34).
131  Coinage  without  seigniorage ..... 59,  201

CHAP.  VII  (pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  134-44;  pt.  ii.  pp.  144-70).

136-7 Roman  colonies .......  274

152  Engrossing  land  may  be  forbidden  in  colonies .  226

168 • Slaves  better  off  under  despotism  than  democracy 96-7

CHAP.  VIII  (vol.  ii.  pp.  226-46).

227  Linen  bounty ........  180

232  Exportation  of  wool  a  capital  offence . . .  136

244  Consumption  the  sole  purpose  of  production  . .  199

CHAP.  IX  (vol.  ii.  pp.  246-73).

266  Hereditary  employments  in  Egypt . . .  168

269  Free  and  slave  labour  in  Hungarian  and  Turkish

mines .........  231


IN THE WEALTH  OF  NATIONS


l-AGK IN

W.ofN.

274


BOOK  V.

CHAP.  I  (pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  274-92  ;  pt.  ii.  pp.  292-305  ;

pt.  iii.  art.  2,  pp.  344-72).  PACE  ,„

LECTURES

nation  of

14
26-9,  260  i


No  sovereign  nor  commonwealth  in

hunters

Progress  of  military  service


274-81

275-6  Shepherds  more  formidable  than  hunters . .  20-1

290  Standing  army  and  liberty .....  30,  263

294-6  Four  circumstances  which  give  a  man  authority .  10

296  Upstart  greatness 10

297  Inequality  of  fortune  begins  in  the  shepherd  state  .  15

298  Civil  government  protects  the  rich  ....  15
352-3  Rivalry  among  English  courts  of  justice . .  49

361  Number  of  Athenian  judges 19

365-7  Disadvantages  of  division  of  labour . . . .  255-9

369  Every  one  in  Scotland  can  read ....  256


CHAP.  II  (pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  404-13;  pt.  ii.  art.  i,  pp.  413-40;
art.  2,  pp.  440-53 ;  art.  4,  pp.  463-506).

408-13 Rent  as  the  sole  source  of  public  revenue . .  238-9

411 Rents  of  land  in  Great  Britain ....  224,238

418 Land  tax  paid  as  part  of  rent 243-4

Land  tax  inexpensive  to  levy 240

418-19 Land  tax  does  not  check  improvement . . .  244

422 Rents  in  kind ........  227

442 Difficulty  of  taxing  stock 239

443-4 Stock  only  taxed  to  a  trifling  extent  under  the  land

tax 240

483-4 Walpole's  excise  scheme ......  242

495-6 Effect  of  import  and  export  duties  ....  245-6

497 England  has  the  best  financial  system . . .  245

499-504 French  system  of  finance  inferior  to  the  English .  244-5


CHAP.  Ill  (vol.  ii.  pp.  506-50).

508  Effect  of  the  introduction  of  luxury  on  the  kingly

power 42-3

512-17 The  national  debt 247-9

518-19 Loans  are  advanced  by  merchants  ....  250

523 Amount  of  the  national  debt 210

526-9 Pernicious  nature  of  the  national  debt . . .  210-11

542 American  currency  wholly  paper ....  192-3


NOTE

The  title  page  opposite  reproduces  that  of  the  manuscript  as
exactly  as  is  possible  in  type  and  allowing  for  the  fact  that  the
manuscript  is  an  inch  wider.


JURIS  PRUDENCE


or


Notes  from  the  Lectures

on  Juftice,  Tolice,  Revenue,  and  Arms

delivered  in  the  University  of  Glasgow
by


£mitf)  Profefsor  of  Moral  Philosophy.


MDCCLXVI.


JURISPRUDENCE

INTRODUCTION

[J  i.  Of  Works  on  Natural  Jurisprudence^

JURISPRUDENCE  is  that  science  which  inquires  into  the
general  principles  which  ought  to  be  the  foundation  of
the  laws  of  all  nations.  Grotius  seems  to  have  been  the
first  who  attempted  to  give  the  world  anything  like  a
regular  system  of  natural  jurisprudence,  and  his  treatise
On  the  Laws  of  War  and  Peace,  with  all  its  imperfections,  is
perhaps  at  this  day  the  most  complete  work  on  this  subject l.
It  is  a  sort  of  casuistical  book  for  sovereigns  and  states,
determining  in  what  cases  war  may  justly  be  made  and
how  far  it  may  be  carried  on.  As  states  have  no  common
sovereign  and  are  with  respect  to  one  another  in  a  state  of
nature,  war  is  their  only  method  of  redressing  injuries.
He  determines  war  to  be  lawful  in  every  case  where  the
state  receives  an  injury  which  would  be  redressed  by  an
equitable  civil  magistrate 2.  This  naturally  led  him  to
inquire  into  the  constitution  of  states  and  the  principles  of
civil  laws  ;  into  the  rights  of  sovereigns  and  subjects ;  into
the  nature  of  crimes,  contracts,  property,  and  whatever
else  was  the  object  of  law,  so  that  the  two  first  books  of

1  Moral  Sentiments,  ad  fin.  -  Lib.  ii.  cap.  i.  §  2.


2  JURISPRUDENCE

his  treatise,  which  are  upon  this  subject,  are  a  complete
system  of  jurisprudence.

The  next  writer  of  note  after  Grotius  was  Mr.  Hobbes.
He  had  conceived  an  utter  abhorrence  of  the  ecclesiastics,
and  the  bigotry  of  his  times  gave  him  occasion  to  think
that  the  subjection  of  the  consciences  of  men  to  ecclesiastic
authority  was  the  cause  of  the  dissensions  and  civil  wars
that  happened  in  England  during  the  times  of  Charles  I
and  of  Cromwell.  In  opposition  to  them  he  endeavoured
to  establish  a  system  of  morals  by  which  the  consciences
of  men  might  be  subjected  to  the  civil  power,  and  which
represented  the  will  of  the  magistrate  as  the  only  proper
rule  of  conduct.  Before  the  establishment  of  civil  society,
mankind,  according  to  him,  were  in  a  state  of  war  ;  and  in
order  to  avoid  the  ills  of  a  natural  state,  men  entered  into
contract  to  obey  one  common  sovereign  who  should
determine  all  disputes.  Obedience  to  his  will,  according
to  him,  constituted  civil  government,  without  which  there
could  be  no  virtue,  and  consequently  it  too  was  the  founda
tion  and  essence  of  virtue.

The  divines  thought  themselves  obliged  to  oppose  this
pernicious  doctrine  concerning  virtue,  and  attacked  it  by
endeavouring  to  show  that  a  state  of  nature  was  not  a  state
of  war,  but  that  society  might  subsist,  though  not  in  so
harmonious  a  manner,  without  civil  institutions.  They
endeavoured  to  show  that  man  in  this  state  has  certain
rights  belonging  to  him,  such  as  a  right  to  his  body,  to  the
fruits  of  his  labour,  and  the  fulfilling  of  contracts.  With
this  design  Puffendorf  wrote  his  large  treatise.  The  sole
intention  of  the  first  part  of  it  is  to  confute  Hobbes,  though
it  in  reality  serves  no  purpose  to  treat  of  the  laws  which
would  take  place  in  a  state  of  nature,  or  by  what  means
succession  to  property  wras  carried  on,  as  there  is  no  such
state  existing.

The  next  who  wrote  on  this  subject  was  the  Baron  de
Cocceii,  a  Prussian.  There  are  five  volumes  in  folio  of  his


INTRODUCTION


works  published,  many  of  which  are  very  ingenious  and
distinct,  especially  those  which  treat  of  laws.  In  the  last
volume  he  gives  an  account  of  some  German  systems  \

Besides  these  there  are  no  systems  of  note  upon  this
subject.

[}  2. Of  the  Division  of  the  Subject.']

Jurisprudence  is  the  theory  of  the  general  principles  of
law  and  government.

The  four  great  objects  of  law  are  justice,  police,  revenue,
and  arms.

The  object  of  justice  is  the  security  from  injury,  and  it
is  the  foundation  of  civil  government.

The  objects  of  police  are  the  cheapness  of  commodities,
public  security  and  cleanliness,  if  the  two  last  were  not
too  minute  for  a  lecture  of  this  kind.  Under  this  head
we  will  consider  the  opulence  of  a  state.

It  is  likewise  necessary  that  the  magistrate  who  bestows
his  time  and  labour  in  the  business  of  the  state  should  be
compensated  for  it.  For  this  purpose,  and  for  defraying  the
expenses  of  government,  some  fund  must  be  raised.  Hence
the  origin  of  revenue.  The  subject  of  consideration  under
this  head  will  be  the  proper  means  of  levying  revenue,


1  Neither  the  works  of  Hein-
rich,  Freiherr  von  Cocceii,  nor
those  of  his  son  Samuel  are
wholly  comprised  in  five  folio
volumes.  The  volumes  referred
to  are  probably  Henrici  de  Cocceii
sacrae  regiae  maiestati  borussicae
quondam  a  consiliis  secretioribus
Grothis  illitsfrahis,  Wratislaviae,
1744,  1746,  1747  and  1752,  4  vols.
folio,  published  with  observations
by  Samuel  Freiherr  von  Cocceii
long  after  his  father's  death,  and
Satnuelis  L.  B.  de  Cocceii  summi
regni  borussici  cancellarii  ministri


status  intiini  .  .  .  Introdiictio  ad
Henrici  L.  B.  de  Cocceii  Grotinm
illustratum,  Halae,  1748,  i  vol.
folio.  These  and  no  other  folio
works  of  either  author  appear
in  the  1776  catalogue  of  the
Edinburgh  Advocates'  Library,
and  all  except  vol.  iv  of  Grotius
ilhtstratus  are  in  Bonar,  Catalogue
of  Adam  Smith's  Library.  Dis
sertations  X  and  XI  in  the
Introdiictio  deal  with  '  some  Ger
man  systems,'  and  the  very
lengthy  Dissertation  XII  'treats
of  laws.'


B  2


4  JURISPRUDENCE

which  must  come  from  the  people  by  taxes,  duties,  &c.
In  general,  whatever  revenue  can  be  raised  most  insen
sibly  from  the  people  ought  to  be  preferred ;  and  in  the
sequel  it  is  proposed  to  be  shown,  how  far  the  laws  of
Britain  and  of  other  European  nations  are  calculated  for
this  purpose.

As  the  best  police  cannot  give  secur^  unless  the  govern
ment  can  defend  themselves  from  foreign  injuries  and
attacks,  the  fourth  thing  appointed  by  law  is  for  this
purpose ;  and  under  this  head  will  be  shown  the  different
species  of  arms  with  their  advantages  and  disadvantages,
the  constitution  of  standing  armies,  militias,  &c.

After  these  will  be  considered  the  laws  of  nations,  under
which  are  comprehended  the  demands  which  one  inde
pendent  society  may  have  upon  another,  the  privileges  of
aliens,  and  proper  grounds  for  making  war.


PART I: OF JUSTICE


[INTRODUCTION]

THE  end  of  justice  is  to  secure  from  injury.  A  man
may  be  injured  in  several  respects  :

First,  as  a  man.

Secondly,  as  a  member  of  a  family.

Thirdly,  as  a  member  of  a  state.

As  a  man  he  may  be  injured  in  his  body,  reputation,
or  estate.

As  a  member  of  a  family  he  may  be  injured  as  a  father,
as  a  son,  as  a  husband  or  wife,  as  a  master  or  servant,  as
a  guardian  or  pupil.  For  the  two  last  are  to  be  considered
in  a  family  relation,  till  such  time  as  the  pupil  can  take  care
of  himself.

As  a  member  of  a  state,  a  magistrate  may  be  injured  by
disobedience,  or  a  subject  by  oppression,  &c.

A  man  may  be  injured  :

First,  in  his  body  by  wounding,  maiming,  murdering,
or  by  infringing  his  liberty.

Secondly,  in  his  reputation,  either  by  falsely  representing
him  as  a  proper  object  of  resentment  or  punishment,  as  by
calling  him  a  thief  or  robber,  or  by  depreciating  his  real
worth,  and  endeavouring  to  degrade  him  below  the  level
of  his  profession.  A  physician's  character  is  injured  when


6  PART I  I JUSTICE

we  endeavour  to  persuade  the  world  he  kills  his  patients
instead  of  curing  them,  for  by  such  a  report  he  loses  his
business.  We  do  not  however  injure  a  man  when  we  do
not  give  him  all  the  praise  that  is  due  to  his  merit.  We
do  not  injure  Sir  Isaac  Newton  or  Mr.  Pope  when  we  say
that  Sir  Isaac  was  no  better  philosopher  than  Descartes,
or  that  Mr.  Pope  was  no  better  poet  than  the  ordinary  ones
of  his  own  time.  By  these  expressions  we  do  not  bestow
on  them  all  the  praise  that  they  deserve,  yet  we  do  them
no  injury,  for  we  do  not  throw  them  below  the  ordinary
rank  of  men  in  their  own  professions.  These  rights  which
a  man  has  to  the  preservation  of  his  body  and  reputation
from  injury  are  called  natural,  or  as  the  civilians  express
them  iura  horninum  naturalia.

Thirdly,  a  man  may  be  injured  in  his  estate.  His  rights
to  his  estate  are  called  acquired  or  iura  adventitia,  and
are  of  two  kinds,  real  and  personal.

A  real  right  is  that  whose  object  is  a  real  thing  and
which  can  be  claimed  a  quocumque  posscssore.  Such  are
all  possessions,  houses,  furniture.

Personal  rights  are  such  as  can  be  claimed  by  a  law-suit
from  a  particular  person,  but  not  a  quocumque  possessore.
Such  are  all  debts  and  contracts,  the  payment  or  per
formance  of  which  can  be  demanded  only  from  one  person.
If  I  buy  a  horse  and  have  him  delivered  to  me,  though  the
former  owner  sell  him  to  another,  I  can  claim  him  a  quo
cumque  possessore ;  but  if  he  was  not  delivered  to  me  I  can
only  pursue  the  seller.

Real  rights  are  of  four  kinds,  property,  servitudes,
pledges,  and  exclusive  privileges.

Property  is  our  possessions  of  every  kind,  which  if  any
way  lost,  or  taken  from  us  by  stealth  or  violence,  may  be
redemanded  a  quocumque  possessore.

Servitudes  are  burdens  upon  the  property  of  another.
Thus  I  may  have  a  liberty  of  passing  through  a  field
belonging  to  another  which  lies  between  me  and  the  high-


INTRODUCTION  7

way,  or  if  my  neighbour  have  plenty  of  water  in  his  fields
and  I  have  none  in  mine  for  my  cattle,  I  may  have  a  right
to  drive  them  to  his.  Such  burdens  on  the  property  of
another  are  called  servitudes.  These  rights  were  originally
personal,  but  the  trouble  and  expense  of  numerous  law
suits  in  order  to  get  possession  of  them,  when  the  adjacent
property  which  was  burdened  with  them  passed  through
a  number  of  hands,  induced  legislators  to  make  them  real
and  claimable  a  quocunique  possessore.  Afterwards  the
property  was  transferred  with  these  servitudes  upon  it.

Pledges,  which  include  all  pawns  and  mortgages,  are
securities  for  something  else  to  which  we  have  a  right.
The  laws  of  most  civilized  nations  have  considered  them
as  real  rights,  and  give  a  liberty  to  claim  them  as  such.

Exclusive  privileges  are  such  as  that  of  a  bookseller  to
vend  a  book  for  a  certain  number  of  years,  and  to  hinder
any  other  person  from  doing  it  during  that  period.  These
rights  are  for  the  most  part  creatures  of  the  civil  law,
though  some  few  of  them  are  natural,  as  in  a  state  of
hunters  even  before  the  origin  of  civil  government,  if
a  man  has  started  a  hare  and  pursued  her  for  some  time,
he  has  an  exclusive  privilege  to  hunt  her,  by  which  he
can  hinder  any  other  to  come  in  upon  her  with  a  fresh
pack  of  hounds.

An  heir  has  also  an  exclusive  privilege  of  hindering  any
person  to  take  possession  of  the  inheritance  left  him  while
he  is  deliberating  whether  or  not  it  will  be  for  his  interest
to  take  possession  of  it  and  pay  off  the  debts  with  which  it
is  burdened  \

Personal  rights  are  of  three  kinds,  as  they  arise  from
contract,  quasi  contract,  or  delinquency.

The  foundation  of  contract  is  the  reasonable  expectation,
which  the  person  who  promises  raises  in  the  person  to
whom  he  binds  himself;  of  which  the  satisfaction  may  be
extorted  by  force.

1  The  reference  is  to  Roman  or  Scotch  law,  not  English.


8  PART I  : JUSTICE

Quasi  contract  is  the  right  which  one  has  to  a  compensa
tion  for  necessary  trouble  and  expense  about  another  man's
affairs.  If  a  person  finds  a  watch  in  the  highway  he  has
a  claim  to  a  reward,  and  to  the  defraying  of  his  expenses
in  finding  out  the  owner.  If  a  man  lend1  me  a  sum  of
money,  he  has  a  right  not  only  to  the  sum,  but  to  interest
also.

Delinquency  is  founded  upon  damage  done  to  any
person,  whether  through  malice  or  culpable  negligence.
A  person  has  a  right  to  claim  these  only  from  a  certain
person.

The  objects  of  these  seven  rights  make  up  the  whole  of
a  man's  estate.

The  origin  of  natural  rights  is  quite  evident.  That
a  person  has  a  right  to  have  his  body  free  from  injury  and
his  liberty  free  from  infringement  unless  there  be  a  proper
cause,  nobody  doubts.  But  acquired  rights  such  as  property
require  more  explanation.  Property  and  civil  government
very  much  depend  on  one  another.  The  preservation  of
property  and  the  inequality  of  possession  first  formed  it,
and  the  state  of  property  must  always  vary  with  the  form
of  government.  The  civilians  begin  with  considering
government  and  then  treat  of  property  and  other  rights.
Others  2  who  have  written  on  this  subject  begin  with  the
latter  and  then  consider  family  and  civil  government.
There  are  several  advantages  peculiar  to  each  of  these
methods,  though  that  of  the  civil  law  seems  upon  the
whole  preferable.

1  Sell. '  involuntarily/ i.  e. if  ditction  to  Moral  Philosophy,  1747,

I find a man's money and  p.  224.

keep it till I discover the 2  E.g.  Hutcheson,  Introduction

owner. See Hutcheson, Intro-  to  Moral  Philosophy.


[DIVISION  I.] OF  PUBLIC  JURISPRUDENCE

[$  i.  Of  the  Original  Principles  of  Government.']

THERE  are  two  principles  which  induce  men  to  enter
into  a  civil  society,  which  we  shall  call  the  principles  of
authority  and  utility.  At  the  head  of  every  small  society  or
association  of  men,  we  find  a  person  of  superior  abilities.
In  a  warlike  society  he  is  a  man  of  superior  strength,  and
in  a  polished  one  of  superior  mental  capacity.  Age  and
a  long  possession  of  power  have  also  a  tendency  to
strengthen  authority.  Age  is  naturally  in  our  imagination
connected  with  wisdom  and  experience,  and  a  continu
ance  in  power  bestows  a  kind  of  right  to  the  exercise
of  it.  But  superior  wealth  still  more  than  any  of  these
qualities  contributes  to  confer  authority.  This  proceeds
not  from  any  dependence  that  the  poor  have  upon  the
rich,  for  in  general  the  poor  are  independent,  and  support
themselves  by  their  labour,  yet,  though  they  expect  no
benefit  from  them,  they  have  a  strong  propensity  to  pay
them  respect.  This  principle  is  fully  explained  in  the
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments1,  where  it  is  shown  that  it
arises  from  our  sympathy  with  our  superiors  being  greater
than  that  with  our  equals  or  inferiors  :  we  admire  their

1  The  Theory  of  Moral  Senti-  146)  in  one  octavo  volume  of  551
ments  by  Adam  Smith,  Professor  pages.  This  edition  contains
of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  Univer-  much  less  matter  than  the  sixth
sity  of  Glasgow,  was  published  (1790),  which  would  occupy  con-
early  in  1759  (see  John  Rae,  Life  siderably  more  than  800  similar
of  Adam  Smith,  1895,  PP-  I4I~  pages.


10  PART I  : JUSTICE

happy  situation,  enter  into  it  with  pleasure,  and  endeavour
to  promote  it l.

Among  the  great,  as  superior  abilities  of  body  and  mind
are  not  so  easily  judged  of  by  others,  it  is  more  convenient,
as  it  is  more  common,  to  give  the  preference  to  riches.  It
is  evident  that  an  old  family,  that  is,  one  which  has  been
long  distinguished  by  its  wealth,  has  more  authority  than
any  other.  An  upstart  is  always  disagreeable,  we  envy
his  superiority  over  us  and  think  ourselves  [as]  well  entitled
to  wealth  as  he 2.  If  I  am  told  that  a  man's  grandfather  was
very  poor  and  dependent  on  my  family,  I  will  grudge  very
much  to  see  his  grandson  in  a  station  above  me,  and  will
not  be  much  disposed  to  submit  to  his  authority.  Superior
age,  superior  abilities  of  body  and  of  mind,  ancient  family
and  superior  wealth  seem  to  be  the  four  things  that  give
one  man  authority  over  another".

The  second  principle  which  induces  men  to  obey  the
civil  magistrate  is  utility.  Every  one  is  sensible  of  the
necessity  of  this  principle  to  preserve  justice  and  peace  in
the  society.  By  civil  institutions  the  poorest  may  get  redress
of  injuries  from  the  wealthiest  and  most  powerful ;  and
though  there  may  be  some  irregularities  in  particular
cases,  as  undoubtedly  there  are,  yet  we  submit  to  them  to
avoid  greater  evils.  It  is  the  sense  of  public  utility,  more
than  of  private,  which  influences  men  to  obedience.  It  may
sometimes  be  for  my  interest  to  disobey,  and  to  wish
government  overturned,  but  I  am  sensible  that  other  men
are  of  a  different  opinion  from  me,  and  would  not  assist  me

1  Moral  Sentiments,  1759,  pt.  i.  joy.'  Moral  Sentiments,  1759,  p.  86.
sect.  4.  ch.  ii. '  Of  the  origin  of  '  Upstart  greatness  is  everywhere
ambition,  and  of  the  distinction  less  respected  than  ancient  great-
of  ranks.'  ness.' W.  of  N,  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  2,

2  '  An upstart, though of  the  vol.  ii.  p.  296.

greatest  merit,  is  generally  dis-  s  The  four  things  reappear  in

agreeable, and a sentiment of  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  2,  vol.  ii.

envy  commonly  prevents  us  from  pp.  294-6,  and  are  there  more  fully

heartily  sympathizing  with his  treated.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  II

in  the  enterprise.  I  therefore  submit  to  its  decision  for  the
good  of  the  whole.

If  government  has  been  of  a  long  standing  in  a  country,
and  if  it  be  supported  by  proper  revenues,  and  be  at  the
same  time  in  the  hands  of  a  man  of  great  abilities,  authority
is  then  in  perfection.

In  all  governments  both  these  principles  take  place  in
some  degree,  but  in  a  monarchy  the  principle  of  authority
prevails,  and  in  a  democracy  that  of  utility.  In  Britain,
which  is  a  mixed  government,  the  factions  formed  some
time  ago,  under  the  names  of  Whig  and  Tory,  were
influenced  by  these  principles,  the  former  submitted  to
government  on  account  of  its  utility  and  the  advantages
which  they  derived  from  it,  while  the  latter  pretended  that
it  was  of  divine  institution,  and  to  offend  against  it  was
equally  criminal  as  for  a  child  to  rebel  against  its  parent.
Men  in  general  follow  these  principles  according  to  their
natural  dispositions.  In  a  man  of  a  bold,  daring  and  bustling
turn  the  principle  of  utility  is  predominant,  and  a  peaceable
easy  turn  of  mind  usually  is  pleased  with  a  tame  submission
to  superiority l.

It  has  been  a  common  doctrine  in  this  country  that
contract  is  the  foundation  of  allegiance  to  the  civil  magis
trate  2.  But  that  this  is  not  the  case  will  appear  from  the
following  reasons.

In  the  first  place  the  doctrine  of  an  original  contract  is
peculiar  to  Great  Britain,  yet  government  takes  place  where
it  was  never  thought  of,  which  is  even  the  case  with  the
greater  part  of  people  in  this  country3.  Ask  a  common

1  Hume, 'Of  the Parties of 1755,  vol.  ii.  pp.  225  sqq.

Great Britain,'  ad init,  Essays,  3  'These  connexions  are  always

1741,  pp.  119,  120.  conceived  to  be  equally  indepen-

2  Adam  Smith's  master,  Hut-  dent  of  our  consent,  in  Persia  and
cheson,  taught  the  doctrine. See  China  ; in France  and Spain  ;
his  Introduction  to  Moral  Philo-  and  even  in  Holland  and  England
sophy,  1747,  p.  285,  and  hisposthu-  wherever the doctrines above
mous  System  of  Moral  Philosophy,  mentioned  have  not  been  care-


12  PART I  : JUSTICE

porter  or  day-labourer  why  he  obeys  the  civil  magistrate,
he  will  tell  you  that  it  is  right  to  do  so,  that  he  sees  others
do  it,  that  he  would  be  punished  if  he  refused  to  do  it,  or
perhaps  that  it  is  a  sin  against  God  not  to  do  it.  But  you
will  never  hear  him  mention  a  contract  as  the  foundation
of  his  obedience.

Secondly,  when  certain  powers  of  government  were  at
first  entrusted  to  certain  persons  upon  certain  conditions,
it  is  true  that  the  obedience  of  those  who  entrusted  it  might
be  founded  on  a  contract,  but  their  posterity  have  nothing  to
do  with  it,  they  are  not  conscious  of  it,  and  therefore  cannot
be  bound  by  it.  It  may  indeed  be  said  that  by  remaining
in  the  country  you  tacitly  consent  to  the  contract  and  are
bound  by  it.  But  how  can  you  avoid  staying  in  it?  You
were  not  consulted  whether  you  should  be  born  in  it  or
not.  And  how  can  you  get  out  of  it  ?  Most  people
know  no  other  language  nor  country,  are  poor,  and  obliged
to  stay  not  far  from  the  place  where  they  were  born,  to
labour  for  a  subsistence.  They  cannot,  therefore,  be  said
to  give  any  consent  to  a  contract,  though  they  may  have
the  strongest  sense  of  obedience.  To  say  that  by  staying
in  a  country  a  man  agrees  to  a  contract  of  obedience  to
government  is  just  the  same  with  carrying  a  man  into
a  ship  and  after  he  is  at  a  distance  from  land  to  tell  him
that  by  being  in  the  ship l  he  has  contracted  to  obey  the
master 2.  The  foundation  of  a  duty  cannot  be  a  principle
with  which  mankind  is  entirely  unacquainted.  They  must
have  some  idea,  however  confused,  of  the  principle  upon
which  they  act.

fully  inculcated,'  Hume,  'Of  the  guage  or  manners,  and  lives  from

Original  Contract,'  Essays,  1748,  day  to  day  by  the  small  wages

p.  293.  he  acquires  ? We  may  as  well

1  MS.  reads  'shop.'  assert  that  a  man  by  remaining

2  '  Can  we  seriously  say  that  a  in  a  vessel  freely  consents  to  the
poor  peasant  or  artisan  has  a  free  dominion  of  the  master;  though  he
choice  to  leave  his  own  country  was  carried  on  board  while  asleep.'
when  he  knows  no  foreign  Ian-  Hume,  Essays,  1748,  p.  299.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  13

But  again,  upon  the  supposition  of  an  original  contract,
by  leaving  the  state  you  expressly  declare  that  you  will
no  longer  continue  a  subject  of  it  and  are  freed  from  the
obligation  which  you  owed  it.  Yet  every  state  claims  its
own  subjects  and  punishes  them  for  such  practices l,  which
would  be  the  highest  injustice  if  their  living  in  the  country
implies  a  consent  to  a  former  agreement.  Again,  if  there
be  such  a  thing  as  an  original  contract,  aliens  who  come
into  a  country,  preferring  it  to  others,  give  the  most  express
consent  to  it.  Yet  a  state  always  suspects  aliens  as  retain
ing  a  prejudice  in  favour  of  their  mother  country,  and  they
are  never  so  much  depended  upon  as  free-born  subjects 2.
So  much  is  the  English  law  influenced  by  this  principle
that  no  alien  can  hold  a  place  under  the  government,  even
though  he  should  be  naturalized  by  act  of  parliament 3.
Besides,  if  such  a  contract  were  supposed,  why  should
the  state  require  an  oath  of  allegiance,  whenever  a  man
enters  on  any  office?  For  if  they  supposed  a  previous
contract,  what  occasion  is  there  for  renewing  it  ?  Breach
of  allegiance  or  high  treason  is  a  much  greater  crime,  and
more  severely  punished,  in  all  nations,  than  breach  of  con
tract,  in  which  no  more  but  fulfilment  is  required.  They
must,  therefore,  be  on  a  different  footing,  the  less  can  by
no  means  involve  in  it  the  greater  contract.  Contract  is
not  therefore  the  principle  of  obedience  to  civil  govern
ment,  but  the  principles  of  authority  and  utility  formerly
explained.

1  Viz.  emigration  coupled  with  2  '  Yet  is  his  allegiance,  though
renunciation  of  allegiance.  Hume  more  voluntary,  much  less  ex-
notices  that  colonists  peopling  pected  or  depended  on  than
an  uninhabited  region  are  still  that  of  a  natural  born  subject.'
claimed  by  their  sovereign.  Essays,  Hume,  Essays,  1748,  p.  300.
1748,  p.  300.  3  See  below,  p.  65,  note  i.


14  PART I  : JUSTICE

[§  2. Of  the  Nature  of  Government  and  its
Progress  in  the  first  Ages  of  Society. ,]

We  shall  now  endeavour  to  explain  the  nature  of
government,  its  different  forms,  what  circumstances  gave
occasion  for  it,  and  by  what  it  is  maintained.

The  forms  of  government,  however  various,  may  not
improperly  be  reduced  to  these  three,  monarchical,  aris-
tocratical,  and  democratical.  These  may  be  blended  in
a  great  number  of  ways,  and  we  usually  denominate  the
government  from  that  one  which  prevails.

Monarchical  government  is  where  the  supreme  power
and  authority  is  vested  in  one  who  can  do  what  he  pleases,
make  peace  and  war,  impose  taxes,  and  the  like.

Aristocratical  government  is  where  a  certain  order  of
people  in  the  state,  either  of  the  richest  or  of  certain
families,  have  it  in  their  power  to  choose  magistrates  who
are  to  have  the  management  of  the  state.

Democratical  government  is  where  the  management  of
affairs  belongs  to  the  whole  body  of  the  people  together.

These  two  last  forms  may  be  called  republican,  and  then
the  division  of  government  is  into  monarchical  and  repub
lican.

To  acquire  proper  notions  of  government  it  is  necessary
to  consider  the  first  form  of  it,  and  observe  how  the  other
forms  arose  out  of  it.

In  a  nation  of  hunters  there  is  properly  no  government
at  all 1.  The  society  consists  of  a  few  independent  families

1  '  In  the  first  state  of  man,  viz.  good neighbourhood.' William

that  of  hunting  and  fishing,  there  Douglass, Summary, historical

obviously  is  no  place  for  govern-  and  political,  of  the  first  planting,

ment.' Lord Kames,  Historical  progressive  improvements,  and  pre-

Law  Tracts,  1758,  vol.  i.  p.  78  note.  sent  state  of  the  British  Settlements

'Strictly  speaking  they  [the  ab-  in  North  America,  1760,  vol.  i.  p.

original  Americans]  seem  to  have  160. See  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.

no  government,  no  laws,  and  are  pt.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  274.
only  cemented  by  friendship  and


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  15

who  live  in  the  same  village  and  speak  the  same  language,
and  have  agreed  among  themselves  to  keep  together  for
their  mutual  safety,  but  they  have  no  authority  one  over
another.  The  whole  society  interests  itself  in  any  offence  ;
if  possible  they  make  it  up  between  the  parties,  if  not  they
banish  from  their  society,  kill  or  deliver  up  to  the  resent
ment  of  the  injured  him  who  has  committed  the  crime1.
But  this  is  no  regular  government,  for  though  there  may
be  some  among  them  who  are  much  respected,  and  have
great  influence  in  their  determinations,  yet  he  never  can
do  anything  without  the  consent  of  the  whole.

Thus  among  hunters  there  is  no  regular  government,
they  live  according  to  the  laws  of  nature.

The  appropriation  of  herds  and  flocks  W7hich  introduced
an  inequality  of  fortune,  was  that  which  first  gave  rise
to  regular  government 2.  Till  there  be  property  there  can
be  no  government,  the  very  end  of  which  is  to  secure
wealth,  and  to  defend  the  rich  from  the  poor3.  In  this
age  of  shepherds,  if  one  man  possessed  500  oxen,  and
another  had  none  at  all,  unless  there  were  some  govern
ment  to  secure  them  to  him,  he  would  not  be  allowed  to
possess  them.  This  inequality  of  fortune,  making  a  dis
tinction  between  the  rich  and  the  poor,  gave  the  former
much  influence  over  the  latter,  for  they  who  had  no  flocks
or  herds  must  have  depended  on  those  who  had  them,
because  they  could  not  now  gain  a  subsistence  from
hunting,  as  the  rich  had  made  the  game,  now  become
tame,  their  own  property.  They  therefore  who  had
appropriated  a  number  of  flocks  and  herds,  necessarily

1  Lafitau,  Mceurs  des  sauvages  perty.' Locke,  Civil  Government,
ame'riquains  comparers  aux  mceurs  §  94. In  W.  of  N.  a  qualification  is
des  premiers  temps,  1724,  4to,  torn.  introduced  : '  Civil government,
i.  p.  490  sqq.  so  far  as  it  is  instituted  for  the

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  2,  security  of  property,  is  in  reality
vol.  ii.  p.  297.  instituted  for  the  defence  of  the

3  '  Government has no other  rich  against  the  poor '  (bk.  v.  ch.
end  but  the  preservation  of  pro-  i.  pt.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  298).


l6  PART I  : JUSTICE

came  to  have  great  influence  over  the  rest;  and  ac
cordingly  we  find  in  the  Old  Testament  that  Abraham,
Lot,  and  the  other  patriarchs  were  like  little  petty  princes.
It  is  to  [be]  observed  that  this  inequality  of  fortune  in
a  nation  of  shepherds  occasioned  greater  influence  than
in  any  period  after  that.  Even  at  present,  a  man  may
spend  a  great  estate,  and  yet  acquire  no  dependents.
Arts  and  manufactures  are  increased  by  it,  but  it  may
make  very  few  persons  dependent.  In  a  nation  of  shep
herds  it  is  quite  otherways.  They  have  no  possible  means
of  spending  their  property,  having  no  domestic  luxury,
but  by  giving  it  in  presents  to  the  poor,  and  by  this  means
they  attain  such  influence  over  them  as  to  make  them,  in
a  manner,  their  slaves1.

We  come  now  to  explain  how  one  man  came  to  have
more  authority  than  the  rest,  and  how  chieftains  were
introduced.  A  nation  consists  of  many  families  who  have
met  together,  and  agreed  to  live  with  one  another.  At
their  public  meetings  there  will  always  be  one  of  superior
influence  to  the  rest,  who  will  in  a  great  measure  direct
and  govern  their  resolutions,  which  is  all  the  authority  of
a  chieftain  in  a  barbarous  country.  As  the  chieftain  is
the  leader  of  the  nation,  his  son  naturally  becomes  the
chief  of  the  young  people,  and  on  the  death  of  his  father
succeeds  to  his  authority.  Thus  chieftainship  becomes
hereditary.  This  power  of  chieftainship  comes  in  the
progress  of  society  to  be  increased  by  a  variety  of  circum
stances.  The  number  of  presents  which  he  receives,
increase  his  fortune,  and  consequently  his  authority;
for  amongst  barbarous  nations  nobody  goes  to  the
chieftain,  or  makes  any  application  for  his  interest,  with
out  something  in  his  hand.  In  a  civilized  nation  the
man  who  gives  the  present  is  superior  to  the  person  who
receives  it,  but  in  a  barbarous  nation  the  case  is  directly
opposite.

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  2,  vol.  ii.  pp.  294,  295.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  17

We  shall  now  consider  the  different  powers  which
naturally  belong  to  government,  how  they  are  distributed,
and  what  is  their  progress  in  the  first  periods  of  society.

The  powers  of  government  are  three,  to  wit,  the  legis
lative,  which  makes  laws  for  the  public  good  :  the  judicial,
or  that  which  obliges  private  persons  to  obey  these  laws,
and  punishes  those  who  disobey :  the  executive,  or  as
some  call  it,  the  federal  power,  to  which  belongs  the
making  war  and  peace1.

All  these  powers  in  the  original  form  of  government
belonged  to  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  It  was  indeed
long  before  the  legislative  power  was  introduced,  as  it
is  the  highest  exertion  of  government  to  make  laws  and
lay  down  rules  to  bind  not  only  ourselves,  but  also  our
posterity,  and  those  wrho  never  gave  any  consent  to
the  making  them.  As  for  the  judicial  power,  when  two
persons  quarrelled  between  themselves,  the  whole  society
naturally  interposed,  and  when  they  could  not  make  up
matters,  turned  them  out  of  the  society.  During  this  early
age  crimes  were  few 2,  and  it  was  long  before  the  punish
ment  was  made  equal  to  the  crime.

Cowardice  and  treason  were  the  first  crimes  punished,
for  cowardice  among  hunters  is  considered  as  treason,
because  when  they  went  out  in  small  numbers,  if  their
enemy  attacked  them,  and  some  of  their  party  deserted
them,  the  rest  might  suffer  by  it,  and  therefore  they  who
deserted  were  punished  for  treason.

The  priest  generally  inflicted  the  punishment,  as  it  were
by  command  of  the  gods,  so  weak  at  that  time  was  govern
ment.  The  power  of  making  peace  and  war  in  like
manner  belonged  to  the  people,  and  all  the  heads  of
families  were  consulted  about  it

Though  the  judicial  power  which  concerns  individuals

1  '  La  puissance  legislative';  quieu,  Esprit  des  lots,  liv.  xi.  ch.vi.
'la  puissance  executrice  '  ;  'la  2  I.e.  '  of  few  kinds,'  not  '  in-

puissancc de juger.' Montes- frequent.' Cf.  pp.  18,  19.

C


l8  PART I  : JUSTICE

was  long  precarious,  the  society  first  interposing  as
friends  and  then  as  arbitrators,  the  executive  power  came
very  soon  to  be  exerted  absolutely.  When  any  private
quarrel  happens  concerning  the  property  of  this  cow,  or  of
that  ox,  society  is  not  immediately  concerned,  but  it  is
deeply  interested  in  making  peace  and  war.  In  the  age  of
shepherds  this  power  is  absolutely  exerted.  In  Great
Britain  we  can  observe  vestiges  of  the  precariousness  of
the  judicial  power,  but  none  of  the  executive.  When
a  criminal  was  brought  to  trial,  he  was  asked  how  he  would
choose  that  his  cause  should  be  decided,  whether  by
combat,  the  ordeal  trial,  or  the  laws  of  his  country.  The
society  only  obliged  him  not  to  disturb  them  in  the
decision.  In  England  the  question  still  remains,  though
the  answer  is  not  now  arbitrary1.  It  was  very  common  in
the  ruder  ages  to  demand  a  trial  by  dipping  their  hands  in
boiling  water,  by  means  of  which  almost  every  one  was
found  innocent,  though  now  scarce  any  one  would  escape
by  this  means.  When  people  were  constantly  exposed  to
the  weather,  boiling  water  could  have  little  effect  upon
them,  though  now,  when  we  are  quite  covered,  it  must
have  a  contrary  effect-.  This  choice  of  trial  shows  the
weakness  of  the  judicial  laws.  We  find  that  the  judicial
combat  continued  in  England  as  late  as  the  days  of  Queen
Elizabeth3.  It  has  now  worn  out  gradually  and  insensibly
without  so  much  as  a  law  or  a  rule  of  court  made  against  it.
In  the  periods  of  hunters  and  fishers,  and  in  that  of
shepherds,  as  was  before  observed,  crimes  are  few ;  small
crimes  passed  without  any  notice.  In  those  ages  no  con
troversies  arose  from  interpretations  of  testaments,  settle
ments,  contracts,  which  render  our  law-suits  so  numerous,

1  I.e.  is  not  now  dependent  on  accustomed  to  arms  and  labour,
the  will  of  the  accused.  Esprit  des  lots,  liv.  xxviii.  ch.  xvii.

2  Montesquieu attributes sue-  3  John Dairy m pie, Essay to-
cess  in  passing  the  ordeal  of  fire  wards  a  General  History  of  Feudal
or  boiling  water  to the callous  Property  in Great  Britain, third
nature of the skin of people  edition,  1758,  p.  312.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  19

for  these  were  unknown  among  them.  When  these  took
place  and  difficult  trades  began  to  be  practised,  contro
versies  became  more  frequent,  but  as  men  were  generally
employed  in  some  branch  of  trade  or  another,  without  great
detriment  to  themselves  they  could  not  spare  time  to  wait
upon  them.  All  causes  must  be  left  undecided,  which
would  be  productive  of  every  inconvenience,  or  they  must
fall  upon  some  other  method  more  suitable  to  the  several
members  of  society.  The  natural  means  they  would  fall
upon  would  be  to  choose  some  of  their  number  to  whom
all  causes  should  be  referred.  The  chieftain  who  was
before  this  distinguished  by  his  superior  influence,  when
this  comes  to  be  the  case,  would  preserve  his  wonted  pre
cedence,  and  would  naturally  be  one  of  those  who  were
chosen  for  this  purpose.  A  certain  number  would  be
chosen  to  sit  along  with  him,  and  in  the  first  ages  of
society  this  number  was  always  considerable1.  They  would
be  afraid  to  trust  matters  of  importance  to  a  few,  and
accordingly  we  find  that  at  Athens  there  were  500  judges
at  the  same  time2.  By  this  means  the  chieftain  would  still
further  increase  his  authority,  and  the  government  would
appear  in  some  degree  monarchical.  But  this  is  only  in
appearance,  for  the  final  decision  is  still  in  the  whole  body
of  the  people,  and  the  government  is  really  democratical.

The  power  of  making  peace  and  war,  as  was  before
observed,  was  at  first  lodged  in  the  whole  body  of  the
people.  But  when  society  advanced  [and]  towns  \vere
fortified,  magazines  prepared,  stocks  of  money  got  together,
generals  and  officers  appointed,  the  whole  body  of  the
people  could  not  attend  to  deliberations  of  this  kind.
This  province  would  either  fall  to  the  court  of  justice,  or

1  Brady,  quoting  from  Tacitus, and  authority,  which  were  called
Germ.  cap.  12,  says,  '  Every  one  of cotm'fes.' Complete  History  of  Eng-
these  princes  had  a  hundred  of land,  1685,  p.  55.
the  common  people  their  asses- 2  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  3,
sors,  from  whom  they  had  advice art.  2,  vol.  ii.  pp.  361,  362.
C  2


20  PART I  : JUSTICE

there  would  be  another  set  of  people  appointed  for  this
purpose,  though  it  would  naturally  at  first  fall  to  the  court
of  justice.  This  is  properly  called  the  senatorial  power,
which  at  Rome  took  care  of  the  public  revenue,  public
buildings,  and  the  like.  But  afterwards  at  Rome,  the  court
of  justice  and  the  senatorial  one  became  quite  distinct.
The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Areopagite  court  at  Athens.

We  shall  now  make  some  observations  on  nations  in
the  two  first  periods  of  society.  Those,  viz.  of  hunters  and
shepherds.

In  a  nation  of  hunters  and  fishers  few  people  can  live
together,  for  in  a  short  time  any  considerable  number
would  destroy  all  the  game  in  the  country,  and  consequently
would  want  a  means  of  subsistence.  Twenty  or  thirty
families  are  the  most  that  can  live  together,  and  these  make
up  a  village.  But  as  they  live  together  for  their  mutual
defence,  and  to  assist  one  another,  their  villages  are  not
far  distant  from  each  other.  When  any  controversy
happens  between  persons  of  different  villages,  it  is  decided
by  a  general  assembly  of  both  villages.  As  each  particular
village  has  its  own  leader,  so  there  is  one  who  is  the  leader
of  the  whole  nation.  The  nation  consists  of  an  alliance
of  the  different  villages,  and  the  chieftains  have  great
influence  on  their  resolutions,  especially  among  shepherds.
In  no  age  is  antiquity  of  family  more  respected  than  in
this.  The  principle  of  authority  operates  very  strongly,
and  they  have  the  liveliest  sense  of  utility  in  the  main
tenance  of  law  and  government.

The  difference  of  the  conduct  of  these  nations  in  peace
and  war  is  worth  our  observation.

The  exploits  of  hunters,  though  brave  and  gallant,  are
never  very  considerable.  As  few  of  them  can  march  to
gether,  so  their  number  seldom  exceeds  200  men,  and  even
these  cannot  be  supported  above  fourteen  days.  There  is
therefore  very  little  danger  from  a  nation  of  hunters.  Our
colonies  are  much  afraid  of  them  without  any  just  grounds.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  21

They  may  indeed  give  them  some  trouble  by  their  inroads
and  excursions,  but  can  never  be  very  formidable1.  On  the
other  hand  a  much  greater  number  of  shepherds  can  live
together.  There  may  be  a  thousand  families  in  the  same
village.  The  Arabs  and  Tartars,  who  have  always  been
shepherds,  have  on  many  occasions  made  the  most
dreadful  havoc.  A  Tartar  chief  is  extremely  formidable,
and  when  one  of  them  gets  the  better  of  another,  there
always  happens  the  most  dreadful  and  violent  revolutions.
They  take  their  whole  flocks  and  herds  into  the  field  along
with  them,  and  whoever  is  overcome  loses  both  his  people
and  wealth.  The  victorious  nation  follows  its  flocks,  and
pursues  its  conquest,  and  if  it  comes  into  a  cultivated
country  with  such  numbers  of  men,  it  is  quite  irresistible.
It  was  in  this  manner  that  Mahomet  ravaged  all  Asia-.

There  is  a  very  great  difference  betwixt  barbarous  nations
and  those  that  are  a  little  civilized.  Where  the  land  is
not  divided,  and  the  people  live  in  huts  which  they  carry
about  with  them,  they  can  have  no  attachment  to  the  soil,
as  all  their  property  consists  in  living  goods  which  they
can  easily  carry  about  with  them.  On  this  account  bar
barous  nations  are  always  disposed  to  quit  their  country.
Thus  we  find  such  migrations  among  the  Helvetii,  Teu-
tones,  and  Cimbrians.  The  Huns,  who  dwelt  for  a  long
time  on  the  north  side  of  the  Chinese  wall,  drove  out  the
Astrogoths  on  the  other  side  of  the  Palus  Maeotis,  they
again  the  Wisigoths,  &c.

[§  3. How  Republican  Governments  were
introduced]

Having  considered  the  original  principles  of  government,
and  its  progress  in  the  first  ages  of  society,  having  found

1  Douglass,  British  Settlements  ist's  mistake  for  'Arabia.' This
in  North  America,  vol.  i.  p.  183,  paragraph  reappears  without  im-
note.  portant  alteration  in  W.  of  N.  bk.

2  Probably  a  reporter's  or  copy-  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  i,  vol.  ii.  pp.  275,  276.


22  PART I  : JUSTICE

it  in  general  to  be  democratical,  we  come  now  to  consider
how  republican]  governments  were  introduced.

It  is  to  be  observed  in  general  that  the  situation  of
a  country,  and  the  degree  of  improvement  of  which  it  is
susceptible,  not  only  in  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  but  in
other  branches  of  trade,  is  favourable  to  the  introduction
of  a  republican  government.  There  is  little  probability
that  any  such  government  will  ever  be  introduced  into
Tartary  or  Arabia,  because  the  situation  of  their  country
is  such  that  it  cannot  be  improved.  The  most  part  of
these  is  hills  and  deserts  which  cannot  be  cultivated,
and  is  only  fit  for  pasturage.  Besides,  they  are  generally
dry,  and  have  not  any  considerable  rivers1.  The  contrary
of  this  is  the  case  in  those  countries  where  republican
governments  have  been  established,  and  particularly  in
Greece.  Two-thirds  of  Attica  are  surrounded  by  sea,
and  the  other  side  by  a  ridge  of  high  mountains.  By
this  means  they  have  a  communication  with  their  neigh
bouring  countries  by  sea,  and  at  the  same  [time]  are
secured  from  the  inroads  of  their  neighbours.  Most  of
the  European  countries  have  most  part  of  the  same
advantages.  They  are  divided  by  rivers  and  branches
of  the  sea,  and  are  naturally  fit  for  the  cultivation  of
the  soil  and  other  arts.  We  shall  now  see  how  favour
able  this  is  to  the  reception  of  a  republican  government.
We  may  suppose  the  progress  of  government  in
Attica  in  the  infancy  of  the  society  to  have  been  much
the  same  with  that  in  Tartary  and  the  other  countries
we  have  mentioned,  and  we  find  in  reality  that  at  the
time  of  the  Trojan  war  it  was  much  in  the  same  situation,
for  then  there  was  little  or  no  cultivation  of  the  ground,
and  cattle  was  the  principal  part  of  their  property.  All
the  contests  about  property  in  Homer  regard  cattle2.
Here,  as  in  every  other  country  in  the  same  period,  the

1  Different  reasons  for  the  same  quieu,  Esprit  des  lois,\\v.  xvii.ch.vi.
proposition  are  given  by  Montes-  2  E.g.  Iliad,  I.  154,  XI.  670.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  23

influence  of  the  chieftain  over  his  own  vassals  was  very
considerable.  A  people  inhabiting  such  a  country,  when
the  division  of  land  came  to  take  place  and  the  cultivation
of  it  to  be  generally  practised,  would  naturally  dispose  of  the
surplus  of  their  product  among  their  neighbours,  and  this
would  be  a  spur  to  their  industry.  But  at  the  same  time
it  would  be  a  temptation  to  their  neighbours  to  make
inroads  upon  them.  They  must  therefore  fall  upon  some
method  to  secure  themselves  from  danger,  and  to  preserve
what  it  formerly  cost  them  so  much  trouble  to  procure.
It  would  be  more  easy  to  fortify  a  town  in  a  convenient
place  than  to  fortify  the  frontiers  of  the  whole  country,
and  accordingly  this  was  the  method  they  fell  upon.
They  built  fortified  towns  in  the  most  convenient  places,
and  whenever  they  were  invaded  took  shelter  in  them
with  their  flocks  and  moveable  goods,  and  here  they
cultivated  the  arts  and  sciences.  Agreeable  to  this,  we
find  that  Theseus  fortified  Athens  and  made  the  people  of
Attica  carry  into  it  all  their  goods1,  which  not  only
increased  his  power  over  them,  but  also  the  authorit}'  of
that  state  above  others.  When  people  agreed  in  this
manner  to  live  in  towns,  the  chieftains  of  the  several  clans
would  soon  lose  their  authority,  and  the  government
would  turn  republican,  because  their  revenue  was  small,
and  could  not  make  them  so  conspicuous  and  distin
guished  above  others  as  to  retain  them  in  dependence.
The  citizens  gradually  increase  in  riches,  and  coming
nearer  the  level  of  the  chieftain,  become2  jealous  of  his
authority.  Accordingly  we  find  that  Theseus  himself  was
turned  out.  After  this  nine  regents  were  set  up  who
were  at  first  to  have  authority  for  life,  but  were  after
wards  continued  only  for  ten  years3.  Thus  Athens,  and  in

1  The  reporter  may  have  omit-  2  MS.  reads 'his' after 'become.'

ted  some  qualifying  phrase  such  3  It  was  the  single  'regent'  or

as 'to market'  or  'in time of  archon  who  held  office  at  first  for

war.'  life  and  afterwards  for  ten  years ;


24  PART I  : JUSTICE

like  manner  all  the  Greek  states,  came  from  a  chieftain
ship  to  something  like  monarchy,  and  from  thence  to
aristocracy.  In  general,  as  was  before  observed,  the
revenue  becomes  insufficient  to  support  the  authority  of
a  number  of  chieftains,  but  a  few,  getting  into  their  hands
superior  wealth,  form  an  aristocracy.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  a  considerable  dif
ference  between  the  ancient  and  modern  aristocracies.
In  the  modern  republics  of  Venice,  Milan,  &c.,  the  govern
ment  of  the  state  is  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  hereditary
nobility,  who  are  possessed  of  all  the  three  powers  of
government.  Both  in  modern  and  ancient  aristocracies
the  people  had  the  choice  of  those  in  authority,  but  the
difference  is  this,  that  only  the  nobility  could  be  elected
in  modern  times.  The  institution  of  slavery  is  the  cause
of  this  difference.  When  the  free  men  had  all  their  work
done  by  slaves,  they  had  it  in  their  power  to  attend  on
public  deliberations,  but  when  the  ground  came  to  be
cultivated  by  free  men,  the  lower  sort  could  not  have  it
in  their  power  to  attend,  but,  consulting  their  interest,
they  would  endeavour  to  avoid  it.  Agreeable  to  this  we
find  that  at  Venice  the  populace  desired  to  be  free  of  it.
In  the  same  manner  the  towns  in  Holland  voluntarily
gave  it  up  to  the  town  council,  which  was,  in  consequence
of  this,  vested  with  the  whole  power.

Nothing  like  this  happened  in  the  republics  of  Greece
and  Rome.  In  the  early  ages  of  these  states,  though  the
populace  had  the  whole  power,  they  were  called  aristo
cracies,  because  they  always  chose  their  magistrate  from
among  the  nobility.  They  were  not  indeed  hindered  by
any  express  law  to  do  otherwise,  but  it  was  customary

when  his  duties  were  divided  follow  John  Potter,  Archaeologia
among  nine  archons,  the  office  Graeca,  1706.  The  phrase  'con-
became  an  annual  one.  The  con-  tinued  them  in  their  government
fusion  in  the  text  might  easily  only  for  ten  years  '  occurs  in  that
be  made  by  any  one  trying  to  work,  vol.  i.  p.  13.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  25

to  do  so,  because  the  lower  classes  were  maintained  by
the  fortunes  of  the  rich,  and  thereby  became  dependent  on
them,  and  gave  their  vote  for  him  whose  bounty  they
shared.  The  nobility  might  differ  among  themselves
about  elections,  but  would  never  propose  the  election  of
plebeians.  Thus  the  influence  of  the  nobility  was  the  law,
and  not  any  express  prohibition.

At  Athens  Solon  enacted  that  none  of  the  lower  of
the  four  classes  into  which  the  people  were  divided
should  be  elected ;  but  afterwards  magistrates  were
elected  out  of  all  classes,  and  the  government  became
democratical l.

At  Rome  it  was  long  before  the  power  of  being  elected
extended  to  the  whole  body  of  the  people.  After  decem
virs  were  appointed,  the  power  of  the  people  began  to
encroach  more  and  more  upon  the  nobles,  and  still  more
when  they  got  military  tribunes  elected.  The  cause  of
this  was  the  improvement  of  arts  and  manufactures.  When
a  man  becomes  capable  of  spending  on  domestic  luxury
what  formerly  supported  an  hundred  retainers,  his  power
and  influence  naturally  decrease.  Besides,  the  great  usually
had  every  trade  exercised  by  their  own  slaves,  and  there
fore  the  tailors  and  shoemakers,  being  no  longer  dependent
on  them,  would  not  give  them  their  votes.  The  popular
leaders  then  endeavoured  to  get  laws  passed  by  which
they  might  be  allowed  to  be  elected  magistrates.  It  was
long  before  the  generality  even  of  the  plebeians  would
consent  to  this,  because  they  thought  it  disagreeable  to
have  their  equals  so  far  above  them2.  In  process  of
time,  however,  they  got  it  enacted  that  there  should  be
in  authority  an  equal  number  of  patricians  and  plebeians,
viz.,  a  consul  chosen  out  of  each.

1  Potter,  Archaeologia  Craeca,  vol.  i.  pp.  14,  16.

2  Livy,  Hist.,  lib.  iv.  cap.  25.


26  PART I  : JUSTICE


[$4. How  Liberty  ivas  lost.']

We  have  shown  how  republics  arose,  and  how  they
again  became  democratical ;  we  are  next  to  show  how  this
liberty  was  lost,  and  monarchy  or  something  like  it  was
introduced.

Considering  these  states  in  the  situation  above  described,
as  possessed  of  their  towns  and  a  small  territory  in  the
adjacent  country,  they  must  either  confine  themselves
within  their  ancient  boundaries,  or  enlarge  their  territory
by  conquest.  They  must  either  be  what  may  not  im
properly  be  called  a  defensive  republic  or  a  conquering
one.  The  Grecian  states  are  a  good  example  of  the
former,  and  Rome  and  Carthage  of  the  latter.  We  are
to  show  how  each  of  these  lost  their  liberty:  and  first
how  the  defensive  states  lost  theirs.

When  a  country  arrives  at  a  certain  degree  of  refinement
it  becomes  less  fit  for  war.  When  the  arts  arrive  at  a
certain  degree  of  improvement,  the  number  of  the  people
increases,  yet  that  of  fighting  men  becomes  less.  In
a  state  of  shepherds  the  whole  nation  can  go  out  to  war ;
and  even  when  it  becomes  more  refined,  and  the  division
of  labour  takes  place,  and  everyone  is  possessed  of  a  small
farm,  they  can  send  out  a  great  number.  In  such  an  age
their  campaigns  are  always  in  summer,  and  from  seed  time
till  harvest  their  young  men  have  nothing  ado  but  to  serve
in  them.  The  whole  business  at  home  can  be  performed
by  the  old  men  and  women,  and  even  these  have  sometimes
beat  the  enemy  in  the  absence  of  their  soldiers.  In  a  state
where  arts  are  carried  on,  and  which  consists  chiefly  of
manufacturers1,  there  cannot  be  sent  out  such  numbers,

1  The  word  is  used  (as  always  modern  sense  of  '  persons  who
by  Adam  Smith)  in  its  old  and  employ  others  to  make  things  by
more  literal  sense,  not  in  its  machinery.'


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  27

because  if  a  weaver  or  tailor  be  called  away,  nothing  is
done  in  his  absence.  Scarce  one  in  an  hundred  can  be
spared  from  Britain  and  Holland1.  Of  an  hundred  inhabit
ants  fifty  are  women,  and  of  fifty  men  twenty-five  are  unfit
for  war.  In  the  last  war  Britain  could  not  spare  so  many,
as  any  one  almost  may  be  convinced,  if  he  reflect  whether
among  his  acquaintances  he  missed  one  out  of  twenty-five.
According  to  this  principle  Athens,  though  a  small  state,
could  once  send  out  30,000  fighting  men,  wrhich  made
a  very  considerable  figure ;  but  after  the  improvement
of  arts,  they  could  not  send  out  more  than  10,000,
which  was  quite  inconsiderable.  Britain,  notwithstanding
the  politeness  and  refinement  at  which  it  has  arrived,  on
account  of  the  largeness  of  its  territories2,  can  still  send
out  a  very  formidable  army,  but  a  small  state  necessarily
declines.  However,  there  is  one  advantage  attending
slavery  in  a  small  republic,  which  seems  to  be  its  only
advantage,  that  it  retards  their  declension.  At  Rome  and
Athens  the  arts  were  carried  on  by  slaves,  and  the  Lace
daemonians  went  so  far  as  not  to  allow  any  freeman  to  be
brought  up  to  mechanic  employments,  because  they
imagined  that  they  hurt  the  body.  Accordingly  we  find
that  at  the  battle  of  Chaeronea,  when  the  Athenians  were
come  to  a  considerable  degree  of  politeness,  they  were  able
to  send  out  great  numbers  of  men  purely  on  this  account,
that  all  trades  were  carried  on  by  slaves.  We  may  observe
that  in  the  Italian  republics,  where  slavery  did  not  take
place,  they  soon  lost  their  liberty.  When,  in  consequence
of  the  improvement  of  arts,  a  state  has  become  opulent,  it
must  be  reckoned  a  great  hardship  to  go  out  to  war,  where
as  among  our  ancestors  it  was  thought  no  inconvenience
to  take  the  field.  A  knight  (eques)  was  no  more  than
a  horseman,  and  a  foot-soldier  was  a  gentleman.  They
were  inured  to  hardships  at  home,  and  therefore  a  campaign

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  i,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276-279.
-  Scil.  'compared  with  those  of  Greek  states.'


28  PART I  ! JUSTICE

appeared  no  way  dreadful.  But  when  opulence  and  luxury
increased,  the  rich  would  not  take  the  field  but  on  the  most
urgent  account,  and  therefore  it  became  necessary  to  em
ploy  mercenaries  and  the  dregs  of  the  people  to  serve  in
war.  Such  persons  could  never  be  trusted  in  war  unless
reduced  to  the  form  of  a  standing  army,  and  subjected  to
rigid  discipline,  because  their  private  interest  was  but  little
concerned,  and  therefore  without  such  treatment  they  could
not  be  expected  to  be  very  resolute  in  their  undertakings.
Gentlemen  may  carry  on  a  war  without  much  discipline,
but  this  a  mob  can  never  do.  As  the  citizens  in  Greece
thought  it  below  them  to  bear  arms,  and  entrusted  the
republic  to  mercenaries,  their  military  force  was  diminished,
and  consequently  a  means  was  provided  for  the  fall  of  the
government.  Another  cause  of  their  declension  was  the
improvement  of  the  art  of  war,  which  rendered  everything
precarious.  In  early  ages  it  was  very  difficult  to  take
a  city,  as  it  could  only  be  done  by  a  long  blockade.  The
siege  of  Troy  lasted  ten  years,  and  Athens  once  could  with
stand  for  two  years1  a  siege  both  by  land  and  sea.  In
modern  times  the  besiegers  have  an  advantage  over  the
besieged,  and  a  good  engineer  can  force  almost  any  town
to  surrender  in  six  weeks.  But  it  was  not  so  once.  Philip
of  Macedon  made  great  improvements  in  this  art,  which  at
last  occasioned  the  dissolution  of  all  the  Greek  governments
and  their  subjection  to  foreign  powers.  Rome  stood  out
much  longer  than  Greece  because  the  number  of  its  citizens
was  daily  increasing.  At  Rome  any  person  might  be  made
a  citizen,  as  this  was  of  little  advantage.  But  at  Athens
the  right  of  citizenship  was  given  to  very  few,  as  it  was
itself  a  little  estate.  However,  Rome  itself  after  opulence
and  luxury  increased,  shared  the  fate  of  other  republics,
though  the  event  was  brought  about  in  a  different  manner.
Till  the  time  of  Marius,  the  better  sort  of  free  men  went  out

1  No  siege  of  Athens  of  such  long  duration  appears  to  be  known
to  historians.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  29

to  the  field.  Marius  was  the  first  that  recruited  [slaves].
He  gathered  the  freed  slaves  into  his  army,  and  established
a  rigid  military  discipline.  That  army  which  before  had
consisted  of  gentlemen  was  now  made  up  of  runaway  slaves
and  the  lowest  of  the  people.  With  such  an  army  Marius
conquered  and  kept  in  awe  the  provinces.  He  had  the
disposal  of  all  offices  and  posts  in  this  army.  Every  one
among  them  owed  his  rise  to  him,  and  was  consequently
dependent  upon  him.

Whenever  such  a  general  was  affronted  he  would
naturally  apply  to  his  army  for  relief,  who  would  easily  be
induced  to  side  with  their  general  against  their  own
nation.  This  was  the  very  expedient  that  Marius  fell  upon.
By  the  influence  of  Sylla  he  was,  in  his  absence,  banished
from  Rome,  and  a  price  set  upon  him.  Marius  applied  to
his  army,  who  were  determined  at  all  events  to  follow  him,
marched  to  Rome  when  Sylla  was  abroad  on  an  expedition
against  Mithridates,  took  possession  of  the  government
and  vanquished  Sylla's  party.  Marius  died  soon  after,  and
Sylla,  having  conquered  Mithridates,  returned  to  Rome,
and  in  his  turn  beat  the  Marian  party,  changed  the
government  into  a  monarchy,  and  made  himself  perpetual
Dictator,  though  he  afterwards  had  the  generosity  and
magnanimity  to  resign  it.  About  thirty  or  forty  years
afterwards  the  same  thing  happened  between  Caesar  and
Pompey.  Caesar  as  well  as  Sylla  got  himself  made
perpetual  Dictator,  but  had  not  enough  of  public  spirit  to
resign  it.  His  veteran  troops  which  were  settled  in  Italy,
mindful  of  the  favours  which  he  conferred  upon  them,
after  his  death  gathered  about  Octavius,  his  adopted  son,
and  invested  him  with  the  supreme  authority.  Much  the
same  thing  happened  in  our  own  country  with  respect  to
Oliver  Cromwell.  When  the  Parliament  became  jealous
of  this  man,  and  disbanded  the  army,  he  applied  to  them  in
a  manner  indeed  more  canting  than  that  of  the  Roman
generals,  and  got  the  Parliament  turned  out  and  a  new


30  PART I  : JUSTICE

one  appointed  more  suitable  to  his  mind,  with  the  whole
authority  vested  in  himself1.

Thus  we  have  seen  how  small  republics,  whether  con
quering  or  defensive,  came  at  length  to  a  dissolution  from
the  improvements  in  mechanic  arts,  commerce,  and  the
arts  of  war.


[}  5. Of  Military  Monarchy]

We  are  next  to  consider  what  form  of  government
succeeded  the  republican.

When  small  republics  were  conquered  by  another  state,
monarchy,  or  whatever  other  government  pleased  the  con
querors,  was  established,  though  they  generally  followed
the  model  of  their  own  country.  The  Athenians  always
established  democracy,  and  the  Spartans  aristocracy.
The  Romans  indeed  more  prudently  divided  their  con
quests  into  provinces  which  were  governed  pretty  abso
lutely  by  persons  appointed  by  [the]  Senate  for  that
purpose.  The  case  is  somewhat  different  when  a  state
is  conquered  by  its  own  subjects.  Both  the  nature  of  the
action  and  the  instruments  by  which  it  is  performed  require
a  military  monarchy,  or  a  monarchy  supported  by  military
force,  because  it  is  as  necessary  to  keep  them  in  awe  as  to
conquer  them.  This  was  the  form  of  government  that  was
established  in  Rome  during  the  time  of  the  emperors.
These  emperors  took  the  whole  executive  power  into
their  own  hands,  they  made  peace  and  war  as  they,  thought
proper,  and  even  named  the  magistrates  either  immediately
themselves,  or  by  means  of  a  Senate  of  their  own  appoint
ment.  They  did  not,  however,  alter  any  institutions  of  the
civil  law;  right  and  wrong  were  decided  as  formerly.
Cromwell  did  the  same  in  our  own  country,  he  kept  the
State  in  awe  by  an  insignificant  army,  but  he  allowed  the

1  The  facts  are  more  shortly  dealt  with  in IV.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.
pt.  i,  vol.  ii.  p.  290.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  31

judge  to  determine  right  and  wrong  as  formerly.  Nay,  he
made  such  improvement  in  the  civil  law  by  taking  away
wardships,  &c.,  that  the  first  thing  the  Parliament  of  Charles
II  did  was  to  confirm  many  of  Cromwell's  laws.

The  Roman  authors  tell  us  that  justice  was  never
better  administered  than  under  the  worst  of  the  emperors,
Domitian  and  Nero1.  It  is  the  interest  of  all  new  adminis
trators  to  make  few  alterations  in  what  the  generality  of
people  are  much  concerned  and  have  been  long  accustomed
to.  They  will  more  easily  go  into  anything  else,  when
they  are  indulged  in  this.  It  was  particularly  the  interest
of  the  emperors  to  keep  up  the  ancient  system  of  laws,
and  accordingly  we  find  that  all  consuls  who  misbehaved
in  their  respective  provinces  were  severely  punished.  It
was  not  so  under  the  republic  ;  the  mo^t  scandalous  crimes
were  committed  by  governors,  as  we  learn  from  Cicero's
Orations.  A  military  government  allows  the  strictest
administration  of  justice.  Nobody  indeed  can  have  a  fair
trial  where  the  Emperor  is  immediately  concerned :  then
he  will  do  as  he  pleases ;  but  where  he  is  in  no  way
interested  it  is  his  interest  to  adhere  to  the  ancient
laws.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  was  a  very  great  difference
between  the  military  government  established  at  Rome  and
those  that  were  established  in  Asia.  At  Rome  the  con
querors  and  conquered  were  the  same  people.  The
conquerors  themselves  were  sensible  of  the  good  effects
of  these  laws,  and  were  so  far  from  being  willing  to  abrogate
them,  that  they  made  improvements  upon  them.  It  is  not
so  with  the  Asiatic  governments,  though  they  are  purely
military.  Turkey,  Persia,  and  the  other  countries  were  con
quered  by  Tartars,  Arabians,  and  other  barbarous  nations
who  had  no  regular  system  of  laws,  and  were  entirely
ignorant  of  their  good  effects.  They  established  in  all
public  offices  their  own  people,  who  were  entirely  ignorant

1  Suetonius,  Nero,  15,  sqq. ;  Doinitianus,  8.


32  PART I  I JUSTICE

of  all  the  duties  of  them.  A  Turkish  bashaw  or  other
inferior  officer  is  decisive  judge  of  everything,  and  is  as
absolute  in  his  own  jurisdiction  as  the  Signior.  Life  and
fortune  are  altogether  precarious,  when  they  thus  depend
on  the  caprice  of  the  lowest  magistrate.  A  more  miserable
and  oppressive  government  cannot  be  imagined.

[§  6. Hozu  Military  Monarchy  was  dissolved.']

We  have  considered  how  the  dissolution  of  small  states
was  brought  about,  and  what  form  of  government  succeeded
them,  by  what  means  an  imperial  government  was  intro
duced  into  conquering  republics,  and  what  kind  of  admin
istration  this  was.  We  come  now  to  show  how  this
military  monarchy  came  to  share  that  fated  dissolution
that  awaits  every  state  and  constitution  whatever.

In  the  time  of  the  imperial  governments  at  Rome  they
had  arrived  at  a  considerable  degree  of  improvement  both
in  arts  and  commerce.  In  proportion  as  people  become
acquainted  with  these  and  their  consequence,  domestic
luxury,  they  become  less  fond  of  going  out  to  war ;  and
besides,  the  government  finds  that  it  would  hurt  its
revenue  [to  call  out]  those  employed  in  manufactures.
If  barbarous  nations  be  in  the  neighbourhood,  they  can
employ  them  as  soldiers  at  an  easier  rate,  and  at  the  same
time  not  hurt  their  own  industry.  Sensible  of  these  things,
the  Romans  recruited  their  armies  in  Germany,  Britain,  and
the  northern  barbarous  countries  which  bordered  on  the
Roman  Empire.  They  had  the  liberty  of  recruiting  in  these
countries  in  the  same  manner  that  the  Dutch  did  in  Scotland
before  the  beginning  of  the  last  war  \  After  they  had  gone

1  Enlistment  or  recruiting  with-  to  prevent  his  Majesty's  subjects

out  leave or licence from the  from serving as  officers under

crown  was felony  under  9  Geo.  the  French  king; for  the  better

II,  cap.  30. In  1756,  at  the  begin-  enforcing  of  the  act  9  Geo.  II,  cap.

ning  of  the  Seven  Years'  War,  an  30  ;  '  and  for  obliging  such  of  his

act  (29  Geo.  II,  cap.  17)  was  passed  Majesty's  subjects  as  shall  accept


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  33

on  for  some  time  in  this  practice,  they  would  find  for
several  reasons  that  it  would  be  much  easier  to  make
a  bargain  with  the  chieftains  of  these  barbarous  nations
whom  they  employed,  and  give  him  so  much  money
to  lead  out  a  number  of  men  to  this  or  that  expedition.

Supposing  then  an  institution  of  this  kind,  the  bar
barous  chieftain,  at  the  head  of  his  own  men,  possessed
the  whole  military  authority  of  the  people  for  whom  he
fought,  and  whenever  the  government  in  the  least  offended
him,  he  could  turn  his  arms  against  those  who  employed
him,  and  make  himself  master  of  their  country.  We  find
that  all  the  western  provinces  were  taken  possession  of
much  in  this  manner.  After  they  had  by  their  practice
given  such  invitations  to  the  inroad  of  barbarians,  we  find
that  most  of  the  Roman  provinces  were  infested  by  them.
In  this  country  the  Romans  built  a  wall  and  kept  garrisons
to  secure  their  province  from  the  pillagers  of  the  north.
The  garrisons  which  secured  this  station  were  called  away
to  the  defence  of  Gaul,  which  at  that  time  was  also  infested.
The  historians  tell  us  that  the  Britons  then  got  leave  to
shake  off  the  Roman  yoke,  but  it  could  be  no  advantage  to
the  Romans  to  give  any  country  in  Britain  its  liberty,  and  it
was  no  favour  done  it  to  have  no  protection  from  Rome,
which  the  province  in  reality  wanted  to  have  continued.
The  Romans  undoubtedly  meant  that  they  should  take
the  trouble  of  defending  themselves,  as  they  were,  for
some  time,  to  be  otherwise  employed.  The  Britons,  how
ever,  did  not  like  the  proposal,  but  resolved  to  invite  over
a  body  of  Saxons  to  their  relief.  Accordingly  Hengist
and  Hursa  came  over  with  a  considerable  army  which  was
frequently  recruited,  entirely  drove  out  the  Romans J,  and

commissions  in  the  Scotch  Bri-  be  correctly  applied  to  the Ro-

gade,  in  the  service  of  the  States  manized  population  of  Britain,  but

General  of  the  United  Provinces,  it  is  probably  used  here  merely  by

to  take the oaths of  allegiance  mistake  for 'Britons,' since  a  little

and  abjuration.'  lower  down  we  find  the  phrase

1  The term  '  Romans ' might  '  the  old inhabitants ' employed


34  PART I  : JUSTICE

finding  themselves  masters  of  the  whole  country,  took
possession  of  it  and  founded  the  Saxon  Heptarchy.  In
this  manner  fell  the  Western  Empire  of  Europe,  and
military  monarchy  came  to  ruin.  We  find  in  the  last
hundred  and  fifty  years  of  the  Roman  Empire  this  custom
of  recruiting  in  barbarous  nations  carried  on,  and  many  of
their  chieftains  had  greatly  raised  themselves.  Patricius
^Elias 1  under  Honorius,  and  many  others,  acquired  great
power.  In  the  same  manner  all  the  Asiatic  governments
were  dissolved.  Their  soldiers  were  hired  from  Tartary,
arts  and  manufactures  were  carried  on,  the  people  made
more  by  their  trades  than  by  going  to  war.  The  East
India  trade  which  Italy  and  some  other  nations  carried  on
by  the  Red  Sea  had  rendered  them  very  opulent.  Every
nation  as  well  as  Rome  was  willing  to  make  a  bargain
with  the  neighbouring  barbarous  princes  to  defend  them,
and  this  proved  the  ruin  of  the  government.

[}  7. Of  the  Allodial  Government^

Having  now  considered  all  the  ancient  forms  of  govern
ment  of  which  we  have  any  distinct  accounts,  we  show
next  what  form  succeeded  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,
and  give  an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  modern  govern
ments  of  Europe.

The government  which succeeded this period  was

in  the  case  of  Gaul  in  order  to  printed  with  a  capital  initial  letter,

avoid  the  ambiguity  of '  Romans.'  as  it  is  in  Muratori,  Rerum  Itali-

1  A  mistake  for  'the  patrician  carurn  scriptores, torn. i. pars i,

Aetius.' An  easily-made  error  might  easily  mislead  any  one  who

in  transcription  will  account  for  did  not  happen  to  be  very  familiar

'  ^Elias.'  '  Patricius '  may  possibly  with  the  technical  use  of  the  term

be  due  to  phrases  in  Jornandes  in the later Roman Empire.

De  Gefarumorigme,suchas  'JEtius  Aetius  was  later  than  Honorius.

ergo Patricius tune praeerat  The influential  barbarian  under

militibus fortissimorum Moesio-  Honorius was Stilicho, whose

rum  stirpe  progenitus '  (cap.  34),  name was  very probably men-

'tanta Patricii  ^Etii providentia  tioned  in  the  lecture  and  omitted

fuit ' (cap. 36). Patricius, thus  by  the  reporter.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  35

not  altogether  unlike  the  Tartar  constitution  formerly
mentioned,  though  the  Germans  and  others  who,  upon
the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  took  possession  of  the
western  countries,  had  better  notions  of  property,  and
were  a  little  more  accustomed  to  the  division  of  lands.
The  king  and  the  other  chieftains,  after  they  had  become
conquerors  of  the  country,  would  naturally  for  their  own
purposes  take  possession  of  a  great  part  of  it.  They  would
distribute  it  among  their  vassals  and  dependents,  as  they
thought  proper,  and  would  leave  but  a  very  inconsiderable
share  to  the  ancient  inhabitants.  They  did  not,  however,
extirpate  them  entirely,  but  still  paid  them  some  little
regard.  Among  the  Franks  who  took  possession  of  Gaul,
the  person  who  killed  a  Frank  paid  only  five  times  the  fine
which  was  payable  for  killing  one  of  the  old  inhabitants 1.
As  these  nations  were  almost  lawless,  and  under  no  au
thority,  depredations  were  continually  committed  up  and
down  the  country,  and  all  kinds  of  commerce  stopped.

In  consequence  of  this  arose  the  allodial  government,
which  introduced  an  inequality  of  fortune.  All  these
chieftains  held  their  lands  allodially  without  any  burden
of  cess,  wardship,  &c.  One  of  these  great  lords  was
possessed  of  almost  a  county,  but  as  he  was  unable  himself
to  reap  any  advantage  from  so  much  of  it,  he  found  it
necessary  to  parcel  it  out  among  vassals,  who  either  paid
a  certain  annuity,  attended  him  in  war,  or  performed  some
service  of  this  nature.  By  this  means  his  incomes  became
so  great  that,  as  there  was  then  no  domestic  luxury,  he
could  not  consume  them  in  any  way  but  by  maintaining
a  great  number  of  retainers  about  his  house.  These  were
another  species  of  dependents,  who  increased  his  authority
and  secured  domestic  peace,  for  they  kept  the  tenants  in
awe  and  were  kept  in  awe  by  the  tenants.  So  great  was  the
authority  of  these  lords,  that  if  any  one  claimed  a  debt  from

1  For  a Frank 200  sous, for  a Roman  serf  45; Montesquieu,
Esprit  des  lots,  liv.  xxviii.  ch.  iii ;  liv.  xxx.  ch.  xxv.
D  2


36  PART I  : JUSTICE

any  of  their  vassals  the  king  had  no  power  to  send
a  messenger  into  the  lord's  dominions  to  force  payment1.
He  could  only  apply  to  the  lord,  and  desire  him  to  do
justice.  To  them  also  lay  the  last  resort 2  in  judging  of  all
manner  of  property  under  their  own  jurisdiction,  the  power
of  life  and  death,  of  coining  money,  and  of  making  bye-
laws  and  regulations  in  their  own  territories.  But  besides
this  power  of  government,  which  in  a  great  measure  was
betwixt  the  king  and  the  great  lords,  if  there  had  been  no
other  the  balance  would  not  have  been  properly  kept.
But  besides  the  allodial  lords  there  was  a  great  number  of
free  people  who  were  allowed  to  consult  about  justice
in  their  own  spheres.  Every  county  was  divided  into
hundreds  and  subdivided  into  tens.  Each  of  these  had
their  respective  court,  viz :— the  decennary  court,  the  hundred
court.  Over  those  was  placed  the  Wittenagemot  or  as
sembly  of  the  whole  people 3.  Appeals  were  brought  from
the  ten  to  the  hundred,  and  from  it  to  [the]  county  court.
An  appeal  could  be  brought  to  the  king's  court  in  case
the  inferior  court  denied  justice  by  refusing  to  hear
a  cause,  or  if  it  was  protracted  by  unreasonable  delays4.
Appeals  were  also  sometimes  carried  to  the  Wittenagemot,
which  was  made  up  of  the  king,  allodial  lords,  aldermen
or  earls,  bishops,  abbots,  &c.  This  was  the  first  form  of
government  in  the  West  of  Europe,  after  the  downfall  of
the  Roman  Empire.

[}  8. Of  the  Feudal  System.]

We  are  next  to  show  how  the  allodial  government  was
overturned  and  the  feudal  system  introduced.
As  these  great  lords  were  continually  making  war  upon

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i. 1723,  pt.  ii.  p.  61),  not  'assembly
p.  413.  composed  of  the  whole  people.'

2  MS.  reads  '  result.'  *  Hume, History of  England

3  I.e.  commune  concilium  totius  front  Julius  Caesar  to  Henry  VII,
regni  (Spelman,  English  Works, 1762,  vol.  i.  pp.  151,  152.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  37

one  another,  in  order  to  secure  the  attendance  of  their
tenants,  they  gave  them  leases  of  the  lands  which  they
possessed  from  year  to  year,  which  afterwards,  for  the
same  reasons,  came  to  be  held  for  life l.

When  they  were  about  to  engage  in  any  very  hazardous
enterprise,  that,  in  case  of  the  worst  consequences,  the
families  of  their  vassals  who  went  along  with  them  might
not  be  left  destitute,  and  that  they  might  still  be  more
encouraged  to  follow  them,  they  extended  this  right  to
the  life  of  the  son  and  grandson  :  as  it  was  thought  cruel
to  turn  out  an  old  possessor,  the  right  became  at  last
hereditary,  and  was  called  feuda 2.  The  feudal  tenant  was
bound  to  certain  offices,  but  service  in  war  was  the  chief
thing  required,  and  if  the  heir  was  not  able  to  perform  it,
he  was  obliged  to  appoint  one  in  his  place.  It  was  in  this
manner  that  wardships  were  introduced  ;5.  When  the  heir
female  succeeded,  the  feudal  baron  had  a  right  to  marry  her
to  whomever  he  pleased,  because  it  was  thought  reasonable
that  he  should  have  a  vassal  of  his  own  choosing4.  The
prima  seizin  was  another  emolument  of  the  master.  When
the  father  died  the  son  had  no  right  to  the  estate  till  he
publicly  declared  his  willingness  to  accept  of  it ;  and  on
this  account  the  lord  sometimes  had  the  estate  in  his  own

1  Hume, History of  England death,  that  the  sons  should  not
from  Julius  Caesar  to  Henry  VII, have  the  possession  of  what  they

1762,  vol.  i.  p.  399.  had  formerly  had  a  share  in  the

2  Reference to Smith's au-  enjoyment  of; it  occurred  like-
thority shows that the plural  wise readily  to superiors that
'feuda'  is  correct  in  spite  of  the  a man would venture himself
context properly requiring the  less in battle,  when  the  loss  of
singular. Dalrymple, in his  his  life  was  to  be  attended  with
Feudal Property, pp. 198, 199,  the  ruin  of  his  family  ;  from  these
says  that  when  the  grants  of  land  considerations the grants were
were held at  will they '  were  extended  to  the  vassal  and his
properly  called  Munera.  .  .  .  Soon  sons  ;  and  they  were  then,  and  not
afterwards they were granted  till  then,  properly  styled  Feuda.'
for life, and they were then 3  Dalrymple, Feudal Property,
called  Beneflcia. .  .  .  But  ...  it  was  pp.  44,  45.

accounted  hard,  after  the  father's 4  Ibid.  pp.  45-47.


38  PART I  : JUSTICE

hand,  and  enjoyed  the  profits  of  it  for  some  time.  The
heir  paid  a  sum  to  get  it  back,  which  was  called  relief1.
There  was  still  another  emolument  belonging  to  the  lord,
called  escheat ;  that  is,  after  the  estate  became  hereditary,
if  there  was  no  heir  of  the  family  to  succeed,  it  returned
to  the  lord.  The  same  thing  happened  if  the  heir  failed  of
performing  the  services  for  which  he  had  the  tenure 2.
There  were  besides  these  some  small  sums  due  to  the
superior  on  redeeming  his  son  when  taken  prisoner,  or  on
knighting  him 3,  and  on  the  marriage  of  his  daughter,  and
some  such  occasions  4.

The  same  causes  that  made  allodial  lords  give  away  their
lands  to  their  vassals  on  leases  which  afterwards  became
hereditary,  made  the  king  give  away  the  greater  part  of  his
lands  to  be  held  feudally  :  and  what  a  tenant  possessed  in
feu  was  much  the  same  with  real  property.  They  were
indeed  subject  to  the  above-mentioned  emoluments,  but
they  possessed  their  lands  for  themselves  and  posterity.
Feudal  property  may  in  some  respects  be  inferior  to  allo
dial,  but  the  difference  is  so  inconsiderable  that  allodial
lordships  soon  become  to  be  held  feudally.  About  the
tenth  century  all  estates  came  to  be  held  feudally,  and  the
allodial  lords,  that  they  might  enjoy  the  king's  protection,
exchanged  their  rights  for  a  feudal  tenure  5.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  those  historians  who  give  an
account  of  the  origin  of  feudal  laws  from  the  usurpation  of
the  nobility  are  quite  mistaken 6.  They  say  that  the  nobility
wanted  to  have  those  lands  which  they  held  at  pleasure  of
the  king  to  be  hereditary,  that  it  might  not  be  in  his  power
to  turn  them  out,  and  that  the  feudal  law  was  introduced

1  Dalrymple,  Feudal  Property,  4  Dalrymple, Feudal  Property,
PP-  49-59-  p.  61.

2  Ibid.  pp.  66-67.  5  Hume, History of  England

3  This  should,  of  course,  read  (Caesar  to  Henry  VI 7),  vol.  i.  p.
'for  redeeming  him  when  taken  400.

prisoner,  or  on  the  knighting  of  "  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.
Jiis  eldest  son.'  p.  414.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  39

on  account  of  the  diminution  of  the  king's  power.  But  it
was  actually  the  contrary ;  it  was  on  account  of  the  increase
of  his  power,  and  it  required  great  influence  in  the  king  to
make  the  lords  hold  their  lands  feudally.  The  best  proof
of  this  is  that  William  the  Conqueror  changed  all  the
allodial  lordships  in  England  into  feudal  tenures  and
Malcolm  Kenmure l  did  the  same  in  Scotland  ~.

The  introduction  of  the  feudal  system  into  all  Europe
took  away  everything  like  popular  government.  The
popular  courts  were  all  removed.  Neither  decennary,
hundred,  nor  county  courts  were  allowed.  All  public  affairs
were  managed  by  the  king  and  the  great  feudal  lords.  No
commoners,  none  but  hereditary  lords  had  a  right  to  sit  in
parliament.  Those  great  lords  who  held  immediately  of
the  king  were  considered  as  his  companions,  pares  convivii
comites.  They  advised  concerning  public  affairs,  and
nothing  of  importance  could  be  done  without  them.  The
consent  of  the  majority  was  to  be  obtained  before  any  law
could  be  passed,  and  it  was  necessary  to  have  them  called
together.  The  barons  or  inferior  lords  observed  the  same
method  in  their  jurisdictions,  and  they  who  held ;i  of
them  were  called  pares  curiae  baronis.  It  was  likewise
necessary  that  they  should  be  consulted,  as  they  too  were  in
arms.  The  baron  could  neither  go  to  war,  nor  make  a  law,
without  the  consent  of  the  majority.  Nothing  could  be
done  in  the  kingdom  without  almost  universal  consent,
and  thus  they  fell  into  a  kind  of  aristocracy  with  the  king
at  the  head  of  it.

Besides  these  orders  of  men  of  which  we  have  taken
notice,  there  were  two  others  which  in  that  period  were
held  in  the  utmost  contempt 4.  The  first  was  that  of  the
villains  (villani}  who  ploughed  the  ground  and  were

1  Canmore.  3  MS. reads 'them' between

2  Lord Kames, Essays upon '  held '  and  '  of  them.'

British  Antiquities,  1747,  pp.  11-17;  4  Hume,  History  of  England
Dairy  mple,  Feudal  Property,  p.  25.  ( Caesar  to  Henry  VII) ,  vol.  i.  p.  404.


40  PART I  : JUSTICE

adscripti  glebae.  The  second  order  was  the  inhabitants
of  boroughs,  who  were  much  in  the  same  state  of  villainage
with  the  former,  or  but  a  little  beyond  it.  As  the  boroughs
were  much  under  the  influence  of  the  lord  who  gave  them
protection,  it  was  the  king's  interest  to  weaken  as  much  as
possible  this  interest  and  to  favour  their  liberty.  Henry
II  carried  this  so  far  that  if  a  slave  escaped  to  a  borough
and  lived  there  peaceably  a  year  and  day,  he  became  free  *.
He  gave  them  many  other  privileges,  but  what  secured
them  most  was  the  power  of  forming  themselves  into
corporations  upon  paying  a  certain  sum  to  the  king.  They
held  of  him  in  capitc 2,  and  at  first  every  man  paid  his  pro
portion  to  the  king  3;  but  afterwards  the  borough  paid  the
sum  and  levied  it  as  it  seemed  proper  to  itself.  By  this
means,  as  the  number  of  inhabitants  increased,  the  burden
became  lighter,  and  the  boroughs  became  opulent  and  very
considerable.  In  the  reign  of  King  John  a  law  was  made
that  if  a  lord  married  his  ward  to  a  burgher  he  only
forfeited  his  wardship  4.

G  9- Of  the  English  Parliament.]

Thus  we  have  considered  the  several  orders  of  men  of
which  the  whole  kingdom  then  consisted.  We  shall  next
show  how  each  of  them  got  a  share  in  the  government,
and  what  share  of  it  was  allotted  to  each  of  them.  Every
person  who  had  an  estate  great  or  small,  had  a  right  to  sit

1  This  is  ascribed  to  Henry  II, 3  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iii.  vol.  i.
probably  only  because  it  is  men- p.  400.

tioned in Glanvill, De legibus  4  '  King  John '  appears  to  be  a

Angliae, lib.  v. cap.  5. Brady,  mistake  for  'Henry  III,'  the  re-

Complete  History  of  England,  pref.  ference  apparently  being  to  the

p. xxvii, quotes from  Glanvill.  Statute  of  Merton,  20  Hen.  Ill,

In  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iii.  vol.  i.  cap.  6,  'As  touching  lords  which

p. 405, the phrase is 'at that  marry  those  that  they  have  in  ward

to  villains  or  other,  as  burgesses,

2  Madox,  Firma  burgi,  ch.  i.  §  8,  where  they  be  disparaged  ...  the
pp.  21-23.  lord  shall  lose  the  wardship.'


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  41

in  the  king's  court,  and  to  consult  and  advise  with  him
about  public  matters.  In  the  reign  of  William  Rufus  700  sat
in  parliament1.  In  Henry  Ill's  time  it  was  enacted  that  the
smaller  barons,  who  could  not  afford  to  attend  in  parliament,
should  send  a  representative.  These  representatives  were
considered  as  lords,  and  sat  in  the  same  house  with  them 2.
In  the  same  manner  boroughs  came  to  have  representatives
in  parliament,  because  they  themselves  were  become
opulent  and  powerful,  and  the  king  found  it  his  interest  to
give  them  some  weight  so  as  to  lessen  the  authority  of  the
peers3.  It  became  necessary  to  have  their  consent  as  well
as  that  of  the  barons  before  any  law  was  passed.  These
representatives  of  the  boroughs  sat  in  a  house  by  them
selves,  and  the  smaller  barons,  being  far  from  the  level
of  the  great  lords  with  whom  they  sat,  and  not  much
superior  to  the  commons,  soon  joined  them4.  The
king's  revenues  were  then  on  many  occasions  insuffi
cient  for  his  demands.  They  consisted  chiefly,  first,  of
the  royal  demesnes;  secondly,  knights'  services;  thirdly,
feudal  emoluments  such  as  wardships;  fourthly,  fines,
amercements,  compositions  for  crimes,  &c. ;  fifthly,  all
waff5  goods,  res  nullius,  &c.  These  were  the  principal
sources  of  the  king's  revenue.  But  these  were  by  no
means  sufficient  to  supply  the  increasing  expenses  of
government.  The  two  bodies  of  the  commoners  when
joined  made  a  very  considerable  figure,  and  the  greater
part  of  the  subsidies  came  from  them.  The  king  excused
the  smaller  barons  from  a  constant  attendance,  and  called

1  Dalrymple, Feudal  Property,  2  Hume, History of  England

pp.  325,  326,  says  that  Domesday  (Caesar  to  Henry  VII),  vol.  ii.  p.  88.

shows  that  there  were  700  im-  8  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iii.  vol.  i.

mediate  vassals  of  the  crown  in  p.  404.

the  time  of  the  Conqueror,  and  *  Hume, History of  England

then  mentions  that '  all  who  held  (Caesar to Henry VII),  vol.  ii.

of  the  king  in  capite  sat  in  parlia-  pp. 92, 93; Carte, History of

ment.' Cp. Hume, History of  England,  1750,  vol.  ii.  p.  451.

England  (Caesar  to  Henry  VII),  5  I.e.  ownerless;  a  Scotch  form

vol.  i.  p.  407.  of '  waif.'


42  PART I  : JUSTICE

them  or  not  as  he  pleased l.  When  he  did  call  them  he
issued  a  writ  summoning  them,  and  from  this  was  the
origin  of  creating  peers  by  writ  or  patent,  which  is  the  only
way  of  doing  it  at  present.

[§  10. How  the  Government  of  England  became
Absolute^

Having  shown  how  the  House  of  Commons  became
considerable,  we  shall  next  show  how  the  nobility's  power
decreased  and  the  government  turned  arbitrary.

In  all  the  courts  of  Europe  the  power  of  the  nobility
declined  from  the  common  causes,  the  improvements  in
arts  and  commerce.  When  a  man  could  spend  his  fortune
in  domestic  luxury  he  was  obliged  to  dismiss  his  retainers.
By  their  ancient  rustic  hospitality  they  could  more  easily
maintain  1000  retainers  than  at  present  lodge  one  lord
for  a  night.  Richard,  Earl  of  Warwick,  who  was
styled  Make-King,  maintained  every  day  forty  thousand
people  besides  tenants 2.  But  when  luxury  took  place
he  was  unable  to  do  this 3.  Thus  the  power  of  the
nobility  was  diminished,  and  that  too  before  the  House
of  Commons  had  established  its  authority,  and  thus  the
king  became  arbitrary.  Under  the  House  of  Tudor  the
government  was  quite  arbitrary,  the  nobility  were  ruined,
and  the  boroughs  lost  their  power.

It  might  be  expected  that  the  sovereign  also  should
have  lost  his  authority  by  the  improvement  of  arts  and
commerce,  but  a  little  attention  will  convince  us  that  the
case  must  have  been  quite  opposite.  A  man  possessed
of  forty  thousand  pounds  a  year,  while  no  other  body

1  Hume, History of  England  History of  England (Caesar to
(Caesar  to  Henry  VII),  vol.  ii.  p.  88.  Henry VII],  vol.  ii.  pp.  361,  362.

2  '  Forty  thousand '  is  probably  3  Andrew Fletcher, Political
a  mistake  for  the  thirty  thousand  Works,  1737,  pp.  11-16; Hume,
mentioned in W, of  N.  bk.  iii.  History of England under the
ch.  iv.  vol.  i.  p.  411. See  Hume,  House  of  Tudor,  1759,  vol.  i.  p.  63.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  43

can  spend  above  a  hundred,  cannot  be  affected  by  the
increase  of  luxury.  This  is  precisely  the  case  of  the  king.
He  is  possessed  of  a  million,  while  none  of  his  subjects
can  spend  above  thirty  or  forty  thousand  pounds,  and
therefore  he  can  spend  it  in  no  other  way,  but  by  main
taining  a  great  number  of  people1.  Luxury  must  therefore
sink  the  authority  of  the  nobility,  whose  estates  are  small
in  proportion  to  that  of  the  king ;  and  as  his  continues
unaffected,  his  power  must  become  absolute.  Though
this  was  the  case  in  most  nations  of  Europe,  yet  in
Germany  it  was  quite  otherways.  The  monarchy  there
was  elective,  and  consequently  never  could  have  so  much
authority.  The  country  is  much  larger  than  any  other  in
Europe,  and  at  the  dissolution  of  the  feudal  government
the  nobility,  who  were  possessed  of  considerable  fortunes
already,  got  more  in  proportion  than  the  rest ;  thus  their
estates  rose  so  high  above  those  that  were  immediately
below  them,  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  spend
them  in  luxury,  and  therefore  they  were  able  to  keep
a  considerable  number  of  retainers.  Thus  in  Germany
the  power  of  the  nobility  was  preserved,  while  in  England
it  was  utterly  destroyed,  and  the  king  rendered  absolute.


[§  ii. How  Liberty  was  restored. .]

We  have  now  shown  how  the  government  of  England
turned  absolute :  we  shall  next  consider  how  liberty  was
restored,  and  what  security  the  British  have  for  the
possession  of  it.

The  act  of  Henry  VII  allowing  the  nobility  to  dispose
of  their  estates2  had  already  placed  them  entirely  on  a
level  with  the  commons.  Elizabeth,  who  always  affected

1  In W.  of  N. bk.  v. ch.  iii.  2  4  Hen.  VII.  c.  24 ;  Dalrymple,

vol.  ii.  p.  508,  the  whole  of  this  Feudal  Property,  p.  166; Hume,

argument is rather contemp-  History of England under the

tuously  rejected.  House  of  Tudor,  vol.  i.  p.  63.


44  PART I  : JUSTICE

popularity,  was  continually  unwilling  to  impose  taxes
on  her  subjects.  In  order  to  supply  her  exigencies
she  sold  the  royal  demesnes,  as  she  knew  that  none
of  her  offspring  was  to  succeed  her1.  Her  successors
therefore,  standing  in  need  of  frequent  supplies,  were
obliged  to  make  application  to  parliaments.  The  Com
mons  were  now  become  very  considerable,  as  they
represented  the  whole  body  of  the  people  ;  and  as  they
knew  the  king  could  not  want,  they  never  granted  him
anything  without  in  some  degree  infringing  his  privileges.
At  one  time  they  obtained  freedom  of  speech,  at  another
they  got  it  enacted  that  their  concurrence  should  be
necessary  to  every  law.  The  king,  on  account  of  his
urgent  necessities,  was  forced  to  grant  whatever  they
asked,  and  thus  the  authority  of  the  parliament  established
itself.  A  peculiar  advantage  which  Britain  enjoyed  after
the  accession  of  James  I  was  that  as  the  dominions  of
Britain  were  every  way  bounded  by  the  sea,  there  was  no
need  for  a  standing  army,  and  consequently  the  king  had
no  power  by  which  he  could  overawe  either  people  or
parliament.  The  i,20o,ooo2  pounds  a  year  which  was
settled  upon  the  king  at  that  time3  might  have  secured
his  independency,  had  not  the  bad  economy  of  Charles  II
rendered  him  as  indigent  as  any  of  his  predecessors.  His
successor  was  still  more  dependent,  and  was  forced  to  quit
the  throne  and  the  kingdom  altogether.  This  brought
in  a  new  family,  which,  as  the  royal  demesnes  were
entirely  alienated,  depended  wholly  upon  taxes,  and  were
obliged  to  court  the  people  for  them.  Ever  since,  the
king's  revenue,  though  much  greater  than  it  was  then,
depends  so  much  on  the  concurrence  of  the  parliament
that  it  never  can  endanger  the  liberty  of  the  nation.

1  Dalrymple, Feudal  Property,  2  MS.  reads  '  120,000.'

p. 168; Hume,  History  of  Eng-  3  At  the  Restoration, Rapin,

land  tinder  the  House  of  Tudor,  History of England, translated

vol.  ii.  p.  729.  by  Tindal,  1743,  vol.  ii.  p.  621.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  45

The  revenues  at  present  consist  chiefly  of  three  branches,
to  wit,  first,  the  civil  list,  which  is  entirely  consumed  in  the
maintenance  of  the  royal  family,  and  can  give  the  king
no  influence,  nor  hurt  the  liberty  of  the  subject ;  secondly,
the  annual  land  and  malt  taxes,  which  depend  entirely  on
the  parliament ;  thirdly,  the  funds  mortgaged  for  paying
off  the  public  debts,  such  as  the  taxes  on  salt,  beer,  malt1,
&c.,  levied  by  the  officers  of  custom  and  excise.  These
the  king  can  by  no  means  touch  :  they  are  paid  to  the
court  of  exchequer,  which  is  generally  managed  by  people
of  interest  and  integrity,  who  possess  their  offices  for  life
and  are  quite  independent  of  the  king.  Even  they  can
pay  nothing  but  to  those  appointed  by  parliament,  and
must  have  the  discharge  of  the  public  creditor.  The
surplus  of  the  mortgages 2  goes  into  what  is  called  the
sinking  fund  for  paying  the  public  debt,  [which]  secures
the  government  in  the  present  family,  because  if  a  revolu
tion  were  to  happen,  the  public  creditors,  who  are  men  of
interest,  would  lose  both  principal  and  interest.  Thus
the  nation  is  quite  secure  in  the  management  of  the
public  revenue,  and  in  this  manner  a  rational  system  of
liberty  has  been  introduced  into  Britain.  The  parliament
consists  of  about  200  peers  and  500  commoners.  The
Commons  in  a  great  measure  manage  all  public  affairs,
as  no  money  bill  can  take  its  rise  except  in  that  House.
Here  is  a  happy  mixture  of  all  the  different  forms  of
government  properly  restrained,  and  a  perfect  security  to
liberty  and  property.

There  are  still  some  other  securities  to  liberty.  The
judges  appointed  for  the  administration  of  justice  are
fixed  for  life,  and  quite  independent  of  the  king.  Again,

1  In addition to the annual  been  paid  out  of  the  produce  of
malt-tax mentioned under the  the  mortgaged  taxes. See  Thos.
second  head,  there  was a per-  Mortimer, Every  Man  his own
petual  malt-tax.  Broker,  fifth edition, 1762, pp.

2  I.e. the surplus remaining  205-207.
after  the  interest  on  the  debt  has


46  PART I  : JUSTICE

the  king's  ministers  are  liable  to  impeachment  by  the
House  of  Commons  for  maladministration,  and  the  king
cannot  pardon  them1.  The  Habeas  Corpus  Act,  by  which
the  arbitrary  measures  of  the  king  to  detain  a  person  in
prison  as  long  as  he  pleased  is  restrained,  and  by  which
the  judge  who  refuses  to  bring  a  prisoner  to  his  trial  if
desired  within  forty2  days  is  rendered  incapable  of  any
office,  is  another  security  to  the  liberty  of  the  subject.
The  method  of  election,  and  placing  the  power  of  judging
concerning  all  elections  into  the  hands  of  the  Commons,
are  also  securities  to  liberty.  All  these  established  cus
toms  render  it  impossible  for  the  king  to  attempt  anything
absolute.

Besides  all  these,  the  establishment  of  the  courts  of
justice  is  another  security  to  liberty.  We  shall  therefore
consider  the  origin  of  these  courts,  the  history  of  them,
and  their  present  state.

[}  12. Of  the  English  Courts  of  Justice^

In  England,  and  indeed  in  all  Europe,  after  the  feudal
law  was  introduced,  the  kingdom  was  governed  and  justice
administered  in  the  same  manner  as  by  a  baron  in  his
jurisdiction ;  as  a  steward  managed  all  affairs  in  the  county
belonging  to  the  lord,  so  the  grand  justiciary  had  the
management  of  all  in  the  kingdom.  He  appointed  sheriffs
and  other  inferior  officers.  He  was  himself  a  great  lord,
and,  by  the  authority  of  his  office,  in  every  country  but
England  he  became  as  powerful  as  the  king.  But
Edward  I  saw  the  danger  and  got  it  prevented.  All  kinds
of  law,  criminal  or  civil,  were  determined  by  the  justiciary
or  king's  court  which  always  attended  the  king:  those
delays  and  adjournments  in  civil  suits  to  which  this  court

1  This  should  read,  'cannot  2  Twenty  days  is  the  outside
stay  the  proceedings  by  pardon-  limit.  The  same  mistake  occurs
ing  them.'  again  below,  Div.  iii.  §  n.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  47

always  attending  the  king  must  have  been  liable,  gave
occasion  for  separating  common  causes  from  the  king's
court,  and  fixing  for  them  at  Westminster  a  court  of
common  pleas.  Criminal  causes  have  always  a  more
speedy  determination ].  One  would  indeed  think  that
when  a  person's  life  is  at  stake,  the  debate  should  be
longer  than  in  any  other  case  :  but  resentment  is  roused
in  these  cases  and  precipitates  to  punish.  It  is  a  matter
of  no  moment  to  the  spectator  how  a  trifling  matter  of
cash  be  determined,  but  it  is  by  no  means  so  in  criminal
cases.  When  common  pleas  were  taken  away  the  criminal
and  fiscal  powers  were  connected,  and  the  power  and
authority  of  the  great  justiciary  little  diminished.  After
wards  Edward  I  divided  the  business  of  the  justiciary  into
three  different  courts,  viz  : —

The  court  of  king's  bench.

The  court  of  exchequer.

The  court  of  common  pleas.

In  the  last  all  civil  suits  were  tried.  In  the  first  all
criminal  ones,  and  to  it  lay  the  appeal  from  the  court  of
common  pleas.  It  was  called  king's  bench,  because  the
king  then  frequently  sat  upon  it,  though  this  cannot  now
be  done,  as  it  is  improper  that  the  king  should  judge  of
breaches  of  the  king's  peace.  The  court  of  exchequer
judged  in  all  affairs  between  the  king  and  his  subjects,  the
debts  due  by  either  of  them  to  the  other,  and  whatever
regarded  the  revenue.  The  court  of  chancery  was  origin
ally  no  court  at  all.  The  chancellor  was  no  more  than
a  keeper  of  briefs  or  writs  according  to  which  justice  was
done.  What  gave  occasion  to  the  keeping  of  these  briefs
shall  now  be  considered.

Edward  I  abolished  the  power  of  the  grand  justiciary2.
He  employed  mean  persons  to  be  judges,  generally  clergy-

1 It was the rule to finish of  England,  vol.  vi.  1887,  p.  252.
every  criminal  trial  on  the  day 2 Hume, History  of  England
on  which  it  began  ;  Lecky,  History (Caesarto  Henry  F//),vol.  ii.  p.  122.


48  PART I  : JUSTICE

men.  As  the  decision  depended  on  such  persons,  their
jurisdictions  would  be  exercised  very  precariously,  and
accordingly  we  find  that  both  in  criminal  and  civil
cases  they  interposed  with  hesitation,  in  the  former  as
mediators,  and  in  the  latter  as  arbitrators,  and  accordingly
they  would  be  unwilling  to  give  justice  in  those  cases
where  they  had  no  precedent  from  the  court  of  justiciary.
On  this  account  all  the  briefs  by  which  the  court  of
justiciary  determined  were  kept.  To  keep  these  seems  to
have  been  originally  the  office  of  chancellor.  If  a  person
had  a  law-suit  he  went  to  the  clerk  of  the  court  of  chancery,
who  examined  the  briefs,  and  if  he  found  one  that  compre
hended  your  case,  justice  was  done  accordingly ;  but  if  one
could  not  be  found,  you  could  not  have  justice.  Thus  we
find  that  the  chancellor  was  not  a  judge  originally.  In
Scotland  the  office  of  the  English  chancellor  is  lodged  in
the  court  of  session.  In  England  a  brief  was  sent  from
the  chancellor  to  the  sheriff  by  which  he  was  obliged  to
appear  before  the  king's  judges.  Judges  then,  from  the
irregularity  and  inaccuracy  of  their  proceedings,  gave  great
jealousy  to  the  king,  and  on  this  account  many  severe
sentences  went  out  against  them  ;  £10,000  has  at  one  time
been  levied  from  the  judges  on  account  of  corruption1.
They  were  therefore  tied  down  strictly  to  the  chancery
briefs,  and  always  bound  by  their  records  in  such  a  manner
that  they  could  not  be  in  the  least  amended,  not  so  much
as  a  word  wrong  spelled  rectified.  This  precision  still
remains  in  some  cases  where  not  taken  away  by  the
statutes  of  amendment;  a  mere  orthographical  blunder,
though  evidently  so,  has  in  many  cases  made  the  whole
of  no  effect.  The  judges  were  therefore  tied  down  to
the  precise  words  of  the  brief,  or  if  there  was  a  statute,
to  the  words  of  it.  This  was  the  origin  and  jurisdiction
of  the  court  of  chancery.

1 Hume, History  of  England (Caesar  to Henry VII), vol. ii.
p.  68 ; but  the  amount  should  be  100,000  marks.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  49

During  the  improvement  of  the  law  of  England  there
arose  rivalships  among  the  several  courts.  We  shall
therefore  show  how  each  of  them  began  to  extend  its
power  and  encroach  [on]  the  privileges  of  another,  and  how
the  court  of  chancery  increased  its  influence.  The  court
of  king's  bench,  which  judged  criminal  causes  and  every
breach  of  the  king's  peace,  was  the  first  that  assumed
immediately,  and  previously  to  an  appeal,  to  judge  in  civil
causes,  and  to  encroach  on  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  by  what  is  called  a  writ  of  error,  that  is,
they  supposed  the  person  to  be  guilty  of  a  trespass.  For
example,  when  a  man  owed  ,£10,  and  did  not  come  to  pay
it  at  the  time  appointed,  an  order  went  out  from  the  king's
bench  to  examine  and  find  him  out,  supposing  that  he
intended  to  conceal  himself,  and  they  punished  him  for
this  trespass1.  At  present  an  action  on  contract  can  come
immediately  before  the  king's  bench.  In  this  manner  it
was  that  this  court  extended  its  power,  and,  being  supreme
over  all,  none  could  encroach  upon  it.

The  court  of  exchequer  brought  in  civil  causes  to  be
tried  immediately  by  them  in  the  following  manner:
suppose  a  man  owed  a  sum  of  money  to  the  king,  which
it  is  the  business  of  the  court  to  take  care  of,  and  the  man
cannot  pay  unless  his  debtors  first  pay  him,  the  court  took
upon  them  to  sue  this  other  man  by  what  is  called  the
quo  minus,  that  is,  by  what  he  is  rendered  less  able  to  pay
the  king.  As  the  debts  of  the  king  were  many,  and  as  the
profits  of  the  judges  arose  from  sentence  money,  which
was  more  or  less  according  to  the  business  of  the  court,
they  eagerly  grasped  at  this  extension  of  their  power.  All
the  courts  endeavoured,  by  the  speediness  of  their  deter
minations  and  accuracy  of  their  proceedings,  to  encourage
prosecutors  to  come  before  them2.

1  There  is  some confusion  or Middlesex,' not  a  '  writ  of  error.'
omission,  as  the  process  described 2  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i. pt.  2,
is  that  followed  under  a  '  bill  of vol.  ii.  pp.  302,  303.

E


50  PART I  : JUSTICE

In  what  manner  the  chancellor  came  to  attain  his
equitable  jurisdiction  shall  be  taken  notice  of  in  the  next
place.  After  the  improvement  of  arts  and  commerce,
which  gave  occasion  to  many  law-suits  unheard  of  before,
people  suffered  a  great  deal  by  the  imperfections  of  law.
Edward  III1  found  that  there  were  a  great  many  injuries
to  which  no  brief  nor  court  statute  extended  ;  and  therefore
the  parliament  allowed  that  if  a  person  applied  to  the
clerk  of  chancery  and  found  there  was  no  brief  that
could  give  him  any  remedy,  the  clerk  should  look  for
some  briefs  of  a  similar  nature  and  out  of  them  compose
a  new  one  by  which  the  complainer  might  have  redress2.
In  this  manner  the  chancery  prescribed  rules  to  the  other
courts ;  but  as  they  appointed  the  briefs  and  manner  of
proceeding,  this  was  putting  an  end  to  the  affair,  for  there
was  no  occasion  to  go  to  any  other  court,  and  the  chancery
got  these  affairs  into  its  own  hands.  There  could  be  no
appeal  brought  from  the  courts  of  king's  bench  or  of
common  pleas  to  that  of  chancery,  but  they  applied  to  it
for  what  the  common  law  could  not  redress.  The  chancellor
in  this  manner  obtained  the  power  of  judging  in  all  cases
of  equity,  and  is  applied  to  in  the  greater  part  of  civil  cases,
the  chief  of  which  are,  first,  the  specific  performance  of
contracts.  By  the  common  law  if  a  person  was  bound  by
contract  to  deliver  a  piece  of  ground,  and  afterwards
refused  to  do  it,  he  was  only  obliged  to  pay  damages,  but
not  to  perform  it  specifically.  The  chancery,  which  was
now  considered  as  a  court  of  conscience,  enjoined  the
specific  performance  of  it.  Secondly,  the  chancery  gave
redress  for  all  incests 3  and  frauds  in  trust  when  the
common  law  could  not.  As  the  leaving  lands  to  the
church  deprived  the  king  of  the  emoluments  arising  from

1  This  should  be  '  Edward  I.'  3  The reporter's or  copyist's

2  Stat.  Westm.  II,  13  Ed.  I.  cap. mistake for some other  word,
24  ; Dalrymple,  Feudal  Property, possibly  '  deceits.'

p.  316.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  51

them,  an  act  was  passed  against  it.  The  clergy  ordered
that  they  should  be  left  to  certain  persons  who  would
dispose  of  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  church,  and  if  they
did  not  perform  it,  then,  as  it  was  a  fraud  in  trust,  the
chancellor  allowed  the  bishop  to  see  it  done.  In  like
manner,  when  persons  in  the  state  of  affairs  at  that  time
were  obliged  to  alienate  their  estates  to  persons  that  had
no  concern  in  them,  the  chancellor  caused  them  to  be
restored.  Wills,  legacies,  and  things  of  this  sort  also  fell
under  the  equitable  decision  of  the  chancellor.

It  will  be  proper  when  we  are  treating  of  courts  to
inquire  into  the  origin  of  juries.  In  the  beginning  of  the
allodial  government  when  the  several  courts  had  arrived
at  a  very  small  degree  of  improvement,  and  before  they  had
experience  to  examine  thoroughly  into  matters,  when  any
person  was  brought  before  them  on  an  action  depending
on  his  oath,  he  was  obliged  to  bring  twelve  compurgators
to  swear  that  the  oath  was  just.  There  are  remains  of  this
at  present  in  actions  of  debt,  where,  if  the  person  can  bring
in  a  certain  number  of  persons  to  swear  that  his  oath  is
just,  he  gains  the  suit.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  im
perfection  of  this  way  of  trying  was  one  of  the  great  causes
that  gave  origin  to  the  judicial  combat.  A  nobleman,  or
indeed  any  man  of  spirit,  who  was  eluded  of  his  right  by
a  set  of  perjured  fellows,  would  rather  choose  to  combat
it  in  the  field  and  appeal  to  the  judgement  of  God  than  leave
his  cause  to  them.  Henry  II  first  instituted  that  the
sheriff  and  a  certain  number  of  persons  who  had  oppor
tunity  to  be  best  acquainted  with  the  crime  should  have
the  whole  affair  laid  before  them,  and  that  the  person
should  be  judged  by  their  sentence.  The  law  of  England,
always  the  friend  of  liberty,  deserves  praise  in  no  instance
more  than  in  the  careful  provision  of  impartial  juries.
They  who  are  chosen  must  be  near  the  place  where  the
crime  was  committed  that  they  may  have  an  opportunity
of  being  acquainted  with  it.  A  great  part  of  the  jury  may

E  2


52  PART I  ! JUSTICE

be  laid  aside  by  the  panel1.  He  can  lay  aside  thirty  of
their  number,  and  he  can  challenge  them  either  per  capita,
that  is,  any  single  juryman,  or  any  number  of  them,  if  he
suspect  the  sheriff  of  partiality.  There  may  be  many  small
causes  for  suspicion  of  partiality,  and  of  the  relevancy  of
these  the  court  is  judge.  Nothing  can  be  a  greater  security
for  life,  liberty,  and  property  than  this  institution ;  the  judges
are  men  of  integrity,  quite  independent,  holding  their  offices
for  life  but  are  tied  down  by  the  law.  The  jurymen  are
your  neighbours  who  are  to  judge  of  a  fact  upon  which
your  life  depends.  They  too  can  be  laid  aside  for  several
reasons.

The  laws  of  England  with  regard  to  juries  are  only
defective  in  one  point,  in  which  they  differ  from  the  laws  of
Scotland.  In  England  the  whole  jury  must  be  unanimous,
which  renders  the  office  of  a  juryman  a  very  disagreeable
service.  A  case  may  appear  to  you  more  clear  than  it
does  to  me,  and  may  really  be  different  from  what  it
appears  to  either  of  us,  and  yet  there  is  a  necessity  for  our
agreement,  and  of  consequence  a  necessity  that  one  of
us  should  swear  contrary  to  our  conscience.  In  criminal
causes  there  is  little  danger,  people  are  generally  disposed
to  favour  innocence  and  to  preserve  life.  But  in  civil  cases
people  are  not  so  much  troubled,  they  are  not  so  much
disposed  to  favour,  and  many  of  them  are  exceedingly
doubtful.  People  of  fashion  are  not  fond  of  meddling  in
a  jury  attended  with  such  inconveniences,  and  therefore
only  the  meaner  sort  of  people  attend  the  judge.  A  great
man  would  not  choose  to  be  so  often  called  and  returned,
and  perhaps  treated  in  such  a  manner  as  no  gentleman
would  choose  to  be.  In  this  case  the  law  providing  for
security  has  done  too  much.  In  this  country,  where
unanimity  is  not  required,  the  service  is  not  so  disagree
able.  Though  a  person  differ  from  the  majority  he  may
stand  by  his  opinion  and  is  not  forced  to  comply,  and  the
1  Scotch  term  for  the  accused.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  53

people  of  the  highest  rank  are  willing  to  be  jurors.  In
the  actions  which  come  before  the  court  of  chancery  no
jury  is  required,  and  the  court  of  session  in  Scotland  has
taken  them  away  in  civil  causes.

Besides  the  courts  that  have  been  mentioned  there  were
several  others  erected  by  the  king's  patent.  Henry  VIII
erected  three.  The  court  of  high  commission  which  sat
upon  ecclesiastics,  the  court  of  star  chamber  which  takes
in  anything  less  than  death,  and  the  court  of  wardship
which  took  care  of  the  king's  interest  in  these  emoluments.
This  last  was  taken  away  by  Charles  II,  who  accepted  a
sum  for  the  whole.  It  is  now  understood  that  the  king
cannot  erect  a  court  without  consent  of  parliament.  In  no
other  country  of  Europe  is  the  law  so  accurate  as  in  Eng
land,  because  it  has  not  been  of  so  long  standing.  The
parliament  of  Paris  was  only  erected  about  the  time  of
Henry  VIII  of  England.  The  British  parliament  consists
of  a  great  number  of  men,  and  these  of  great  dignity  \  All
new  courts  disdain  to  follow  the  rules  that  were  formerly
established.  All  new  courts  are  a  great  evil,  because  their
power  at  first  is  not  precisely  determined,  and  therefore
their  decisions  must  be  loose  and  inaccurate.

Thus  we  have  considered  the  origin  of  government

1.  Among  a  nation  of  savages  ;

2.  Among  a  nation  of  shepherds  ;

3.  The  government  of  small  clans  with  chieftains ;  the
manner  in  which  aristocracies  arose ;  the  fall  of  little  re
publics,  conquering  or  defensive,  and,  lastly,  the  different
forms  of  government  that  arose  in  Europe  after  the  dis
solution  of  arbitrary  government.

[$ 13. Of  the  little  Republics  in  Europe^

We  shall  next  consider  the  origin  of  the  little  republics
in  Europe,  and  consider  the  rights  of  sovereign  and  subject.

1  This  and  the  preceding  sentence  appear  hopelessly  corrupt.


54  PART I  : JUSTICE

First,  of  the  origin  of  these  republics.  In  some  countries
the  provinces  which  were  far  from  the  seat  of  government
sometimes  became  independent,  as  was  the  case  in  a  good
part  of  Germany  and  France  during  the  time  of  Charle
magne.  Hugh  Capet,  who  was  chief  justiciary1,  got  the
government  into  his  hands,  but  took  only  the  title  of  the
King  of  France.  The  Pope,  by  raising  disturbances  in
Germany,  for  a  long  time  hindered  the  Emperor  Otho
from  taking  possession  of  Italy.  But  when  he  got  posses
sion  of  it,  on  account  of  its  distance,  he  could  not  retain  it.
Every  little  town  formed  itself  into  a  republic,  with  a
council  of  its  own  choosing  at  its  head.  Some  towns  in
Germany  being  well  fortified,  such  as  Hamburgh,  assumed
the  same  privileges,  and  still  in  some  measure  retain2  them.
The  Italian  towns  are  governed  by  a  hereditary  nobility,
though  the  ancient  republics  were  perfectly  democratical.
In  Venice  the  people  freely  gave  up  the  government,  as
they  also  did  in  Holland,  because  they  could  not  support
the  trouble  which  it  gave  them.  The  Dutch  and  Swiss
republics  are  formed  into  a  respublica  foederaia,  and  on  this
depends  their  strength.

We  shall  make  some  remarks  on  the  manner  of  voting
in  these  republics.  When  there  are  100  votes  and  three
candidates,  it  is  possible  that  the  person  who  is  most  odious
may  be  elected.  If  A,  B  and  C  be  candidates,  there  may
be  34  votes  for  A,  and  33  for  B,  and  as  many  for  C.  Thus
though  there  are  66  votes  against  A,  he  carries  it.  This
must  be  still  more  the  case  when  a  criminal  is  brought
before  this  assembly,  for  34  may  think  him  guilty  of
murder,  33  of  manslaughter,  and  33  of  chance  medley,
yet  he  must  suffer  for  murder3.  To  prevent  this,  in
some  of  these  republics  they  always  bring  the  question

1  Gilbert,  Treatise  on  the  Court  Philosophy,  vol.  ii.p.  241  ;  Grotius,
of  Exchequer,  1758,  p.  8.  DP.  iure  belli  et  pacts,  lib.  ii.  cap.  v.

2  MS.  reads  '  retains.'  §  19;  Pufendorf,  De  tun'  naturae

3  Hutcheson,  System  of  Moral  et  gentium,  lib.  vii.  cap.  ii.  §  18.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  55

to  a  simple  state.  Is  he  guilty  of  murder  or  not  ?  If  there
be  three  candidates,  they  put  a  previous  vote,  by  which
they  exclude  one  of  the  candidates.  In  their  senates
the  president  never  has  a  deliberative  vote,  but  only
a  decisive  one,  because  they  will  allow  no  member
to  have  two  votes.  When  there  is  an  equality  on  both
sides,  nothing  can  be  done,  and  therefore  the  business
is  not  rejected,  but  referred  to  another  meeting.


[§  14. Of  the  Rights  of  Sovereigns]

We  shall  now  consider  what  duty  is  owing  to  the
sovereign,  and  what  is  the  proper  punishment  of  dis
obedience.  Every  attempt  to  overturn  this  power  is  in
every  nation  considered  as  the  greatest  crime,  and  is  called
high  treason.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  a  great
difference  between  treason  in  monarchies  and  treason  in
republics.  In  the  one  it  is  an  attempt  on  the  king's
person,  and  in  the  other  on  the  liberties  of  the  people,
from  whence  we  may  see  how  the  maxim  of  assassination
came  to  be  established  in  republics,  and  not  in  monarchies.
It  is  the  interest  of  monarchies  that  the  person  in  authority
be  defended,  whatever  his  title  or  conduct  be,  and  that  no
person  be  allowed  to  enquire  into  them.  The  laws  of
monarchy  are  therefore  unfavourable  to  the  assassination
of  tyrants.  In  a  republic  the  definition  of  a  tyrant  is  quite
clear.  He  is  one  who  deprives  the  people  of  their  liberty,
levies  armies  and  taxes,  and  puts  the  citizens  to  death  as
he  pleases.  This  man  cannot  be  brought  to  a  court  of
justice,  and  therefore  assassination  is  reckoned  just  and
equitable.  The  present  republican  governments  in  Europe,
indeed,  do  not  encourage  this  maxim,  because  monarchies
now  set  the  fashion,  and  [other]  governments]  copy  their
pattern.  According  to  our  present  notions  Oliver  Crom
well's  assassination  is  most  opprobrious,  but  it  would  have


56  PART I  : JUSTICE

appeared  otherwise  when  the  republics  of  Greece  and
Rome  set  the  fashion.

Having  thus  taken  notice  of  this  difference  between
monarchical  and  republican  governments,  we  shall  next  con
sider  the  crimes  reckoned  treason.  There  are  three  kinds
of  treason  or  attacks  upon  the  essence  of  government.
First,  perduellio,  or  an  attempt  to  subvert  the  established
government  by  force  or  rebellion.  Secondly,  proditio,  or
the  joining  of  the  enemy,  delivering  up  to  him  forts,  hos
tages,  &c.,  or  the  refusing  to  deliver  up  garrisons,  &c.,  to
the  government  when  they  demand  them.  This  is  called
high  treason.  Thirdly,  laesa  tnaiestas,  or  an  insult  on  the
authority  of  the  magistrate,  which  is  not  so  heinous  a
crime  as  the  two  former.  These  were  the  kinds  of  treason
among  the  Romans.  Under  the  emperors  these  were
blended,  and  a  breach  of  the  smallest,  even  in  so  trifling
a  manner  as  throwing  a  stone  at  the  emperors  statue,  was
punished  with  death1.  Under  Honorius,  a  conspiracy
against  any  of  the  emperor's  ministers  was  high  treason  '-'.

The  crimes  accounted  treason  by  the  English  law 3  are
the  following.  First,  killing  the  king,  wishing  his  death 4,
or  providing  arms  against  him,  with  every  attempt  of  this
kind  are  punished  capitally.  The  gunpowder  plot  was
never  executed,  yet  the  conspirators  were  put  to  death.
Had  they  intended  only  the  death  of  some  other  person,
they  would  not  have  been  executed.  Secondly,  corrupting
the  king's  wife  or  oldest  daughter5,  because  these  are

1  According to  Marcianus (in  to  throw  a  stone  at  the  emperor's

Digest,  lib.  xlviii.  tit.  iv.  5),  '  non  statue  on  purpose,

contrahit crimen maiestatis qui  2  Cod.  lib.  ix.  tit.  viii.  5.

statuas  Caesaris  vetustate  corrup-  3  I.e.  by  25  Ed.  III.  st.  5.  cap.  2.

tas  reficit,  nee  qui,  lapide  iactato  4  Compassing  or  imagining  the

incerto,  fortuito  statuam  attigerit,  death  of  the  king  or  queen,  or  of

crimen  maiestatis commisit ; et  their  eldest  son.

ita Severus et  Antoninus lulio  5  Eldest daughter unmarried,

Cassiano rescripserunt.' It is  or  the  wife  of  the  king's  eldest

natural  to  infer  that  it  was  treason  son.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  57

affronts  to  the  king,  and  may  introduce  a  spurious  offspring
to  the  crown.  If  it  be  a  younger  daughter,  the  crime  is
not  so  great.  Thirdly,  levying  a  force  against  the  king,
aiding  his  enemies,  &c.  Fourthly,  attempting  the  life  of
the  chancellor  or  [judge  of]  assize  when  sitting  in  court ;
at  another  time  it  is  only  felony.  Edward  I,  however,
made  the  mere  wounding  of  them  not  treason1.  Fifthly,
counterfeiting  the  king's  great  or  privy  seal,  which  is
accounted  an  usurpation  of  the  government,  because  by
them  the  acts  of  government  are  carried  on.  Sixthly,
counterfeiting  of  the  king's  coin,  though  this  should  not
properly  be  treason,  because  it  is  no  attempt  on  the
essence  of  government.  This  crime  is  no  more  than
forgery,  and  is  usually  punished  as  such'-.  These  were  the
branches  of  treason  before  the  reformation.  At  this  period
Henry  VIII  declared  himself  head  of  the  Church,  assumed
the  sovereignty  in  ecclesiastical  affairs  as  a  part  of  his  pre
rogative,  and  established  for  this  purpose  the  court  of  high
commission  to  judge  of  ecclesiastics,  which  was  abolished
by  Mary  and  restored  by  Elizabeth.  As  there  was  some
danger  then  from  the  Popish  party,  the  Catholic  religion
was  considered  as  influencing  the  being  of  government,
and  therefore  it  was  declared  high  treason  to  bring  in  any
bull  of  the  Pope,  agnns  dci,  or  whatever  might  support
his  authority3,  to  support  popish  seminaries4,  or  conceal

1  Under  25  Ed.  Ill,  51.5.  cap.  2,  bowelled  and  quartered. Haw-
it  was  high  treason  to  take,  not  kins,  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  3rd  ed.
merely  to  attempt,  the  life  of  a  1762,  bk.  ii.  ch.  xlviii.  §  4.
judge  on  the  bench. Adam  Smith  3  Under  13  Eliz.  cap.  2,  it  was
may  have had  authority  for  be-  high  treason  to  introduce  a  bull,
lieving  that  before  that  statute  an  but to bring in or  receive an
attempt was high treason, in  agnusdei  only  subjected  offenders
which case 'taking' should be  to  the  pains  of  praemunire. Haw-
read  for  '  attempting  '  and  '  Ed-  kins,  P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xvii.  §  75 ;  ch.
ward  III'  for  '  Edward  I,  how-  xix.  §  24.

ever.'  *  It  was  treason  under  27  Eliz.

2  Men  convicted  were drawn cap.  2,  for  a  lay  person  to  remain
and hanged, but not disem- at  a  foreign  popish  seminary  in


58  PART I  : JUSTICE

popish  priests l.  This  law,  however  proper  then,  should
now  be  repealed,  as  there  is  no  more  occasion  for  it ;  no
notice  would  now  be  taken  of  entertaining  a  popish  priest.

During  the  civil  war  and  usurpation  of  Cromwell  it
became  a  question  how  far  it  is  lawful  to  resist  the  power
of  government.  The  court  party  believed  the  king  to  be
absolute,  and  the  popular  doctrine  was  that  the  king  is
only  a  steward,  and  may  be  turned  out  at  the  pleasure  of
the  people.  After  the  restoration  the  court  party  got  the
better,  and  the  other  party  became  odious.  At  the  Revolu
tion  the  Stewart  family  were  set  aside  for  excellent  reasons,
and  the  succession  established  in  the  present  family.  By
this  the  court  party  was  turned  out,  and  began  to  influence
the  dispositions  of  the  people.  It  was  therefore  enacted
that  whoever  should  speak  against  the  present  succession
should  be  guilty  of  treason2.  This  is  now  altogether
unnecessary,  because  the  government  is  now  so  well
established  that  there  is  no  reason  to  take  notice  of  those
who  write  or  speak  against  it.

In  Scotland  the  laws  were  very  confused  with  regard  to
treason.  Prejudicing  the  people  against  the  king,  or  the  king
against  the  people,  were  made  high  treason.  But  by  the
Union  they  are  made  the  same  writh  those  of  England3.
These  are  the  laws  of  Britain  with  respect  to  treason,  and
they  subject  the  person  who  breaks  them  to  the  highest
penalties.  He  is  half  hanged,  and  then  his  entrails  are
taken  out,  he  forfeits  his  estate,  his  wife's  dowry4,  £c.,


defiance  of  a  proclamation  ; but  son,  P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xvii.  §  81.

only  praemunire  to  send  money  2  '  Speak  '  should  be  ;  write  or

to  such seminaries. Hawkins,  print.' Mere  speaking  was  only

P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xvii.  §  80 ;  ch.  xix.  praemunire  (4  Ann.  cap.  8  ;  and  6

§  26.  Ann.  cap.  7). Both  offences  are

1  Concealment  of  popish  priests  dealt  with in Hawkins'  chapter

was  only  punishable  by  fine  and  on  high  treason,  §  85.

imprisonment  under  27  Eliz.  cap.  s  7  Ann.  cap.  21,  §  3.

2 ;  but  the  offence  is  dealt  with  in  4  A  mistake  for  '  his  wife  her

Hawkins'  chapter  on  high  trea-  dower.'


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  59

and corrupts his blood, so that his children cannot
succeed.

Besides  these  there  are  other  offences  against  the  crown
which  do  not  subject  to  the  pains  of  high  treason,  but  to
those  of  felony1.  First,  the  making  of  coin  below  the
standard 2  and  the  exportation  of  coin  3.  From  the  notion
that  opulence  consists  in  money,  the  parliament  resolved  that
every  one  might  have  bullion  coined  without  any  expense
of  mintage4.  Thus  coined  money  was  never  below  the
value  of  bullion,  and  therefore  there  was  a  temptation
to  melt  it  down.  This  occasioned  the  act  declaring  this
practice  felony5.  Secondly,  any  attempt  to  increase  the  coin,
as  by  the  philosopher's  stone,  was  made  felony6.  Thirdly,
destroying  the  king's  armour  is  also  felony7.  Fourthly,
any  attempt  against  the  king's  officers  is  also  felony 8,  and
in  general  whatever  is  felony  against  another  person  is
felony  against  the  king.  If  his  pocket  were  picked  it
would  be  felony  against  him,  as  it  is  against  any  private
gentleman,  but  the  former  offences  are  committed  against
him  as  king.  There  are  some  other  small  offences  which
may  be  done  to  the  king  which  do  not  amount  to  felony,
but  incur  what  is  called  a  praemunire.  This  is  necessary
to  explain.  In  the  reigns  of  King  John  and  Henry  III,

1  Hawkins,  P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xviii.  sembling Spanish ingots. This

2  7  Ann.  cap.  25.  practice  was  forbidden under  a

3  An  erroneous  inference  from  penalty  of  ^500,  by  6  &  7  Will,
an  incorrect  statement  in  Haw-  III. cap. 17,  which  is probably
kins, P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch. xviii §  2.  the  act  referred  to. It  does  not
Though  still  prohibited,  exporta-  declare the practice felony,
tion had not been felony  since  but it is included in Hawkins'
I573- See Hale,  History  of  Hie  chapter on '  Felonies against
JVi'ds  of  the  Crown,  1736,  \ol.  i.  pp.  the  King,'  P.  C. bk.  i.  ch.  xviii.
654  656.  §§  1-3.

4  i8&  19  Car.  II.  cap.  5.  "5 Hen. IV. c. 4; repealed
8  By  15  Car.  II.  cap.  7,  expor- however  by  i  W.  &  M.  cap.  30.

tation  of  foreign  bullion  was  per- 7  31  Eliz.  cap.  4.

mitted. English coin was  then 8  3 Hen.  VII. cap.  14,  and  9

melted down into ingots re- Ann.  cap.  16.


63  PART I  : JUSTICE

England  was  entirely  under  the  dominion  of  the  Pope.  His
legate  brought  over  bulls,  and  raised  contributions  as  he
pleased,  and  long  before  the  Reformation  it  was  necessary
to  defend  the  king's  liberty  against  the  Pope.  The  king
sometimes  appointed  one  to  a  benefice,  and  the  Pope
another,  and  the  Pope's  candidate  was  often  preferred.
A  law  was  therefore  made  forbidding  any  bull  to  be  brought
from  Rome,  or  any  appeal  to  be  carried  thither,  and  sub
jecting  every  person  who  refused  to  ordain  the  king's
presentee,  to  the  penalties  of  praemunire  regem,  i.  e.  to
fortify  the  king  against  the  Pope x ;  the  penalty  was
forfeiture  of  goods  and  outlawry.  After  Henry  VIII  was
declared  head  of  the  Church  by  the  Pope,  it  was  made
a  praemunire  to  attack  the  king's  prerogative  with  regard
to  ecclesiastical  matters 2.

Beside  these  there  are  other  offences  called  misprisions
of  treason,  and  are  either  positive  or  negative.  Positive 3
misprision  of  treason  is  the  not  revealing  an  attempt
against  the  king's  person,  his  oldest  daughter,  or  the

1  'Touching  the  etymology  of  (Praemonere) according to our

this word (Pracmitnire) thus  proverb:  He  that  is  well  warned,

affirmeth  Sir  Tho.  Smith,  "that  is half armed. And of this I

it  is  so-called of Praemuniting  gather  reason  from  the  form  of

and  fortifying  and  strengthening  a  writ,  which  is  thus  conceived  in

the  Crown  by  the  former  statutes,  the  Old  Nat.  Br.  fol.  143. Prae-

against  the  usurpation  of  foreign  munire  facias praedictum prae-

and unnatural power : " which  positum,  et I.  R.  procuratorem,

opinion  may  receive  some  ground  &c.,  quod  tune  sint  coram  nobis,

from  the  statute  an.  25  Ed.  Ill,  &c. For  these  words can be

Stat.  6.  c.  i  ;  or  to  grow  from  the  referred to none but parties

verb  praemonere,  that  is  to  fore-  charged  with  the  offence.' Min-

warn,  as  it  were  a  forewarning  to  shaeus,  The  Guide  into  Tongues,

any,  lest  he  fall  by  such  attempt  1626,  p.  572. Coke,  Inst.  pt.  iii.

into  a  Praemunire,  being  barba-  ch.  53  says he  that  ispraemonitus

rously turned for praemonere,  is  praemunitus.'

which corruption  is  taken  from  2  Hawkins,  P.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xix.

the  rude  interpreters  of  the  civil  §  23  ;  cf.  ch.  xvii.  §  72.

and  canon  laws,  who  indeed  do  3  A mistake for '  negative.'

use  the  effect  (Praemunire)  many  Hawkins,  P.  C.  bk.  i ch.  xx.  §§

times for the efficient cause  1-6.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  6l

heir  of  the  kingdom.  In  like  manner  it  is  felony  if  you
do  not  reveal  any  notice  you  receive  of  conspiracies  and
rebellions.  Negative  J  misprision  is  the  counterfeiting  of
foreign  coin  current  in  the  kingdom,  such  as  Portuguese
gold,  but  it  is  not  felony  to  counterfeit  French  or  Dutch
money,  because  they  are  not  current  here  2.

In  the  last  place  there  are  offences  against  the  king
called  contempts,  which  are  fourfold  3.  First,  contempt  of
the  king's  court  or  palaces.  A  riot  committed  in  any  of
these  is  a  great  indignity  offered  to  the  sovereign.  Riots
in  courts  of  justice  are  also  severely  punished,  because
there  persons  are  often  provoked,  and  if  the  law  were
not  strict  they  would  disturb  the  court4.  Secondly,  con
tempt  of  the  king's  prerogative,  such  as  disobeying  the
king  when  lawfully  called,  going  out  of  the  kingdom,  when
in  office,  without  his  leave,  refusing  to  come  after  a
summons  under  the  privy  seal,  accepting  a  pension  from
a  foreign  prince  without  the  king's  permission 5,  even  in
a  man  of  letters  Thirdly,  contempt  of  the  king's  person
and  government  (of  which  many  are  guilt)7),  as  by  saying
he  is  indolent  or  cowardly,  that  he  has  broken  the  corona
tion  oath,  or  to  speak  disrespectfully  of  his  ministers  c.
These  are  never  regarded  at  present,  because  the  govern
ment  is  so  well  established  that  writing  and  speaking
cannot  affect  it.  Fourthly,  contempt  of  the  king's  title,
by  denying  it,  or  preferring  the  Pretender's  to  it,  by
drinking  the  Pretender's  health,  or  refusing  the  oath  of
allegiance  and  abjuration7 ;  all  these  subject  to  imprison-

1  A mistake for 'positive.'  to  forge  foreign  coin  which  was
Hawkins, P. C. bk. i. ch. xx.  not  current. Hawkins,  P.  C.  bk.i.
§  7.  ch.  xvii.  $  59  ;  ch.  xx.  §  7.

2  This  is  altogether  erroneous. 3  Hawkins,./3.  C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xxi.
Under  i Mar.  sess.  2.  cap.  6,  it  ad  init.

was  high treason to forge any  4  Ibid.  bk.  i.  ch.  xxi.  §§  1-15.

foreign  coin current  by  consent  5  Ibid.  bk.  i.  ch.  xxii.

of  the  crown  ;  and  under  14  Eliz.  6  Ibid.  bk.  i.  ch.  xx  ii.

cap.  3,  it  was  misprision  of  treason  ~  Ibid.  bk.  i.  ch.  xxiv.


62  PART I  ! JUSTICE

ment  or  fining,  but  not  to  the  penalties  of  treason,  felony,
praemunire,  nor  outlawry.

Having  considered  the  offences  of  the  subject  against
the  sovereign,  we  shall  next  treat  of  the  crimes  which  the
sovereign  may  commit  against  the  subject.  But  first  it  is
proper  to  consider  who  are  subjects  of  a  state.

[§15. Of  Citizenship^

The  laws  of  different  countries  vary  much  with  regard
to  those  to  whom  the  right  of  citizenship  belongs.  In  most
of  the  Swiss  republics  nothing  gives  the  right  of  citizen
ship,  but  to  be  born  of  a  citizen.  In  Rome  a  family  might
be  peregrina  for  four  or  five  generations.  At  Athens  no
man  was  a  citizen  unless  both  father  and  mother  were
Athenians.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  Athenians  were
particularly  sparing  in  giving  the  right  of  citizenship,
because  it  entitled  them  to  very  great  privileges.  Even
kings  were  denied  that  honour;  all  they  did  when  they
wanted  to  bestow  a  favour  on  a  neighbouring  king  was
to  free  him  from  taxes  on  imports.  This  they  did  to
Arnyntas,  father  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedon.  As  aliens^
paid  higher  duties  than  natives,  it  was  no  small  privilege
to  have  these  removed.  After  the  defeat  of  the  Persians
their  forces  amounted  to  25,000  men :  their  country  was
well  cultivated  :  many  cities  in  Asia  paid  them  tribute.  In
consequence  of  this  the  people  we're  entitled  to  attendance
on  the  court  of  justice,  to  have  their  children  educated  at
the  public  expense,  to  have  certain  distributions  of  money
among  them,  with  many  other  emoluments.  If  the  number
of  citizens  increased,  these  privileges  would  not  be  so
valuable,  and  therefore  they  were  very  jealous  of  it.  As
whoever  comes  into  a  parish  in  England  must  give
a  bond  not  to  be  burdensome  to  it l,  so  [in]  all  little

1  Either  '  sufficient  security '  (13  was  last  legally  settled  (8  &  9  W.
&  14  Car.  II.  cap.  12)  or  a  cer-  III.  cap.  30),  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  x.
tificate  from  the  parish  where  he  vol.  i.  pp.  146,  147.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  63

republics  where  the  number  of  freemen  are  small  and
election  in  the  hands  of  a  few,  citizenship  is  of  great  im
portance,  but  in  a  large  city  such  as  Rome  it  was  a  very
small  compliment,  and  accordingly  they  made  whole
provinces  citizens  at  once.  In  Britain  one  born  within
the  kingdom  is  under  the  protection  of  the  laws,  can
purchase  lands,  and  if  of  the  established  religion,  can  be
elected  to  any  office.  In  great  states1  the  place  of  birth
makes  a  citizen,  and  in  small  ones  the  being  born  of
parents  who  are  citizens.  In  like  manner  the  incapacity
of  being  a  citizen  is  different  in  different  countries.  By
the  old  laws  of  Rome,  and  of  every  barbarous  nation,  the
goods  of  every  person  who  came  within  their  territories
were  confiscated,  and  he  himself  became  a  slave  to  the
first  person  who  happened  upon  him.  By  a  law  of
Pomponius,  if  he  came  from  a  nation  at  peace  with  Rome,
he  was  treated  as  the  law  prescribed-.  In  barbarous
countries  they  have  but  one  word  to  signify  a  stranger
and  an  enemy.  At  Rome  every  stranger  was  hostis*,  as  they
considered  all  nations  as  their  enemies,  and  the  person  who
came  from  them  as  a  spy.  The  Litchfield  man  of  war  was
shipwrecked  on  the  Emperor  of  Morocco's  dominions,
and  because  we  had  no  league  with  him,  the  whole  crew
were  made  slaves.  Our  sovereign  so  far  complied  with

1  MS.  reads  '  estates.'  tius  nor  Cocceius  mention  Pom-

a  '  Si  cum  gente  aliqua  neque  ponius  or  give  the  reference  to

amicitiam,  neque  hospitium,  ne-  the  Digest. Montesquieu  (Esprit

que  foedus  amicitiae  causa  factum  deslois,  liv.  xxi.  chap.  14)  however,

habemus,  hi  hostes  quidem  non  in  quoting  the  passage,  attributes

sunt ; quod  autem  ex  nostro  ad  it  to  Pomponius,  and gives  the

eos  pervenit,  illorum  fit,  et  liber  reference  as  '  Leg.  5,  §  2,  if.  de

homo  noster  ab  iis  captus  servus  capitivis^  which  may  account  for

fit  et  eorum. Idemque  est,  si  ab  the phrase '  a law of Pompo-

illis ad nos aliquid perveniat.'  nius.'

Pomponius in Digest, lib. xlix. 3  '  Ipsa  vox  hostis  veteri  Latio

tit.  xv.  5. The  words  are  quoted  nihil  nisi  externum  significabat.'

in  Grotius,  De  hire  belli  et  pacts,  lib.  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et  pacts,  lib.  ii.

ii.  cap.  xv.  §  5,  but  neither  Gro-  cap.  xv.  §  15.


64  PART I  : JUSTICE

the  custom  of  the  place  as  to  ransom  them1.  When  they2
found  the  advantage  of  exporting  their  own  goods,  and
importing  those  of  others,  they  would  naturally  allow
those  who  trafficked  with  them  to  be  in  a  state  of  safety,
both  with  respect  to  his  person  and  goods,  and  would
allow  him  an  action  if  injured  in  either.  This  is  the  state
of  aliens  in  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe  at  present.
In  Britain  an  alien  cannot  purchase  nor  inherit  land
property,  nor  maintain  a  real  action.  He  cannot  make
a  will  because  it  is  the  greatest  extension  of  property,
and  is  founded  on  piety  and  affection  to  the  dead,  which
an  alien  can  have  but  few  opportunities  of  deserving.  By
a  particular  statute  an  alien  merchant,  but  not  a  tradesman,
may  have  a  lease  of  a  house.  This  arises  from  a  whim
sical  principle  that  it  would  discourage  our  own  tradesmen
to  allow  foreigners  to  settle  among  them  3.  This  is  the  state
of  aliens  in  most  countries.

In  Britain  the  manner  of  obtaining  citizenship  is  twofold.
First,  by  letters  of  denization,  which  is  a  part  of  the  king's
prerogative.  Secondly,  by  a  bill  of  naturalization,  which
is  an  act  of  parliament.  By  the  former  an  alien  is  capaci
tated  to  purchase  lands  and  to  transmit  them  to  posterity
if  subjects  of  Great  Britain,  but  he  cannot  inherit,  because


1  The  Litchfield  was  wrecked  man)  from  holding  a  lease  of  a
on  29  Nov.  1758,  and the  crew  house. The 'whimsical  principle'
were  ransomed  for  225,000  hard  is enunciated in the preamble,
dollars  in  April  1760. See  Gen-  which denounces the 'infinite
tleniaris  Magazine,  1760,  pp.  200,  number  of  strangers  and  aliens  of
391 ;  and  1761,  pp.  359  63.  foreign countries and nations

2  I.e.  the  nations  mentioned  a  which daily do increase and
few  lines  higher  up.  multiply  within  his  grace's  realm

3  The judges decided that a  and  dominions  in  excessive  num-
merchant  might  hold  a  lease  of  bers, to the great detriment,
a  house. Coke,  Little/on,  2b. The  hindrance,  loss  and  impoverish-
'particularstatute'is32Hen.VIII.  ment  of  his  grace's  natural  true
c.  16,  which  prohibits  a  '  trades-  lieges and subjects of this his
man' (i.e., as usual in Adam  realm,  and  to  the  great  decay  of
Smith,  an  artificer  or  handicrafts-  the  same.'


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  65

as  the  king  is  heir  of  aliens  he  may  transfer  his  own
right,  but  cannot  take  away  the  right  of  the  person  who
ought  to  succeed.  A  denizen  alien  may  inherit  an  estate
bequeathed  to  him,  but  to  be  capable  of  inheriting  in  all
respects,  an  act  of  naturalization  is  necessary,  by  which
he  has  a  right  to  all  the  privileges  of  a  freeborn  subject.
When  king  William  came  to  the  throne,  naturalized  aliens
were  made  peers.  As  many  Dutch  families  came  over
with  him,  it  was  natural  to  suppose  that  he  would  favour
them  with  every  privilege.  The  English,  offended  at  this
partiality,  made  an  act  declaring  that  there  should  be  no
act  of  parliament  for  the  future  by  which  they  should
be  allowed  such  emoluments l.  As  in  most  countries
they  are  [not]  allowed  the  right  of  transmitting  lands,  it
was  [un] necessary  that  they  should  have  an  action  for
it.  Neither  in  England  nor  in  Germany  are  aliens
allowed  to  make  a  will 2.  In  Saxony  there  was  made
a  very  equitable  law  that  aliens  from  countries  where
they  were  allowed  no  privileges,  should  be  allowed


1  The  act,  which  has  been  in  either  house  of  parliament,
already  somewhat  obscurely  re-  unless  such  clause  or  words
ferred  to  on  p.  13  above,  is  be  first  inserted  or  contained
i  Geo.  I.  cap.  4.  which  provides  therein.'  The  provision  was
that '  no  person  shall  hereafter  be  often  repealed  by  special  act
naturalised  unless  in  the  bill  (see  Margrave's  Coke  upon  Lit-
exhibited  for  that  purpose  there  tleton,  1788,  p.  129  a,  note).
be  a  clause  or  particular  words  2  A  mistake  as  regards  alien
inserted  to  declare  that  such  per-  friends  in  England  (see  Black-
son  shall  not  thereby  be  enabled  slone,CotntHentaries,vol.  i.  p. 372).
to  be  of  the  privy  council,  or  a  Matthew  Bacon  in  his  New
member  of  either  house  of  parlia-  Abridgement  of  the  Law,  1736,
ment,  or  to  take  any  office  or  which  Adam  Smith  possibly
place  of  trust  either  civil  or  mili-  followed  in  this  account  of  aliens,
tary,  or  to  have  any  grant  of  says  nothing  about  the  matter,
lands,  tenements,  or  heredita-  s.  v.  'aliens.'  As  to  Germany,
ments  from  the  crown  to  himself  Vattel,  Droit  des  gens,  1758,  liv.  ii.
or  to  any  other  person  in  trust  ch.  viii.  §  112,  does  not  clearly
for  him  ;  and  that  no  bill  of  natural-  decide  the  point,
isation  shall  hereafter  be  received


66  PART I  I JUSTICE

none  among  them1. In  Rome  it  was  the  right  of  citizens
only  to  make  a  will.

It  is  to  be  observed  with  respect  to  aliens,  that
they  are  aliens  amis,  or  aliens  ennemie2.  If  a  number  of
the  latter  should  make  war  upon  the  king,  or  injure  him,
they  cannot  be  prosecuted  for  high  treason,  because  he
is  not  their  lawful  sovereign,  and  they  owe  no  allegiance
to  him.  If  the  laws  of  nations  do  not  protect  them,  they
must  be  dealt  with  by  martial  law.  Aliens,  however,  who
live  in  the  country,  are  protected  by  the  laws,  and  as  they
thus  own  allegiance  to  the  king,  they  may  be  prosecuted
for  treason,  and  punished  accordingly.  Whatever  makes
a  freeborn  subject  guilty  of  treason  makes  an  alien  ami
guilty  of  it.  An  alien  ennemie,  that  is  one  who  comes
from  a  country  at  war  with  us,  if  he  give  information  to  his
natural  sovereign,  is  also  guilty  of  treason.

H  1 6. Of  the  Rights  of  Subjects]

Having  thus  considered  who  are  properly  the  subjects
of  a  state,  we  come  now  to  treat  of  the  crimes  of  the
sovereign  against  the  subject,  or  the  limitations  of  his
power.

On  this  branch  of  public  law  it  is  impossible  to  speak
with  any  degree  of  precision.  The  duties  of  one  sub
ject  to  another  are  sufficiently  ascertained  by  the  laws
of  every  country  and  the  courts  of  justice,  but  there  are
no  judges  to  determine  when  sovereigns  do  wrong.  To
suppose  a  sovereign  subject  to  judgement,  supposes
another  sovereign.  In  England  it  can  be  exactly  as-

1  '  Le  droit  d'aubaine  est  6tabli  preserved  here  and  ten  lines

en  Saxe  ;  mais  le  souverain  juste  lower  down,  as  it  apparently

et  dquitable  n'en  fait  usage  que  represents  a  careful  though

centre  les  nations  qui  y  assuje-  unsuccessful  attempt  to  repro-

tissent  les  Saxons.'  Vattel,  Droit  duce  law-French.  Elsewhere  in

des gens,  liv.  ii.  ch.  viii.  §  112.  the  MS.,  'enemy'  is  spelt  in  the

8  The  spelling  of the  MS.  is  ordinary  way.


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  67

certained  when  the  king  encroaches  on  the  privileges
of  the  people,  or  they  on  that  of  the  king,  but  none  can
say  how  far  the  supreme  power  of  king  and  parliament
may  go.  In  like  manner  where  the  absolute  power  of
sovereignty  is  lodged  in  a  single  person,  none  can  tell
what  he  may  not  do,  with  accuracy.  God  is  the  only  judge
of  sovereigns,  and  we  cannot  say  how  he  will  determine.
All  decisions  on  this  subject  have  been  made  by  the
prevailing  party,  and  never  coolly  by  a  court  of  justice,
and  can  give  us  no  light  into  the  subject.  Our  best
notions  of  it  will  arise  from  considering  the  several  powers
of  government  and  their  progress.

In  the  beginning  of  society  all  the  powers  of  govern
ment  are  exercised  precariously.  The  majority  may  make
war,  but  cannot  force  the  minority  to  it,  though  this  power
was  the  first  that  was  exerted  absolutely.  The  judicial
power  was  much  longer  executed  precariously  than  the
federative.  In  every  country  the  judges  once  only  inter
posed  as  mediators,  and  sometimes  the  panel  had  his
choice  to  refer  his  cause  to  the  judge  or  to  God,  by  combat,
hot  water,  and,  nay,  if  the  sentence  of  the  judge  did  not
please  the  panel,  he  might  challenge  the  judge  to  fight
him  in  the  court1.  In  time,  however,  it  became  absolute.
The  legislative  power  was  absolute  whenever  it  was
introduced,  but  it  did  not  exist  in  the  beginnings  of  society,
it  arose  from  the  growth  of  judicial  power.  When  the
judicial  power  became  absolute,  the  very  sight  of  a  judge
was  terrible,  as  life,  liberty,  and  property  depended  on
him.  Tacitus  tells  us  that  Quintilius  Varus,  having
conquered  a  part  of  the  Germans,  wanted  to  civilize  them
by  erecting  courts  of  justice,  but  this  so  irritated  them
that  they  massacred  him  and  his  whole  army2.  To  a  rude

1  Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  lots,  to  be  taken  from  Florus,  Epitome
liv.  xxviii.  ch.  xxvii.  rerum Romanarum,  lib. iv.  cap.

2  The particular information  xii.  30-38. It  is  not  all  to  be  found
contained  in  thissentence  appears  either  in  Tacitus  or  in  Montes-

F  2,


68  PART I  : JUSTICE

people  a  judge  is  the  most  terrible  sight  in  the  world.
When  property  was  extended,  it  therefore  became  neces
sary  to  restrain  their  arbitrary  decisions  by  appointing
strict  rules  which  they  must  follow.  Thus  the  legislative
power  was  introduced  as  a  restraint  upon  the  judicial.  In
Britain  the  king  has  the  absolute  executive  and  judicial
power.  However,  the  Commons  may  impeach  his  minis
ters,  and  the  judges,  whom  he  appoints,  are  afterwards
independent  of  him.  The  legislative  power  is  absolute
in  the  king  and  parliament.  There  are,  however,  certain
abuses  which  no  doubt  make  resistance  in  some  cases
lawful,  on  whatever  principle  government  be  founded.

Suppose  that  government  is  founded  on  contract,  and
that  these  powers  are  entrusted  to  persons  who  grossly
abuse  them,  it  is  evident  that  resistance  is  lawful,  because
the  original  contract  is  now  broken.  But  we  showed
before  that  government  was  founded  on  the  principles  of
utility  and  authority.  We  also  showed  that  the  principle
of  authority  is  more  prevalent  in  a  monarchy,  and  that  of
utility  in  a  democracy,  from  their  frequent  attendance  on
public  meetings  and  courts  of  justice.  In  such  a  govern
ment  as  this  last,  as  the  principle  of  authority  is,  as  it
were,  proscribed,  popular  leaders  are  prevented  from
acquiring  too  great  power,  because  they  are  not  allowed
to  continue  in  office  till  they  acquire  any  great  ascendency ;
but,  still,  there  is  a  respect  paid  to  certain  offices,  whoever
be  the  person  that  exercises  them.  In  Britain  both
principles  take  place.  Whatever  be  the  principle  of  alle
giance,  a  right  of  resistance  must  undoubtedly  be  lawful,
because  no  authority  is  altogether  unlimited.  Absurdity
of  conduct  may  deprive  an  assembly  of  its  influence  as
well  as  a  private  person,  an[d]  imprudent  conduct  will
take  away  all  sense  of  authority.  The  folly  and  cruelty

quieu,  Esprit  des  his,  liv.  xix.  ch.  ii, to  hiss,'  is  erroneously  attributed
where  the  Germans'  saying  to  the to  Tacitus  instead  of  Florus.
Roman  advocates,  'Viper,  cease


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  69

of  the  Roman  emperors  make  the  impartial  reader  go
along  with  the  conspiracies  formed  against  them.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  right  of  resistance  is  more
frequently  exerted  in  absolute  monarchies  than  in  any
other,  because  one  man  is  more  apt  to  fall  into  imprudent
measures  than  a  number.  In  Turkey  eight  or  ten  years
seldom  pass  without  a  change  of  government.  The  same
degree  of  ill  usage  will  justify  resistance  to  a  senate  or
body  of  men.  It  must  be  allowed  that  resistance  is  in
some  cases  lawful,  but  it's  excessively  difficult  to  say  what
an  absolute  sovereign  may  do  or  may  not  do,  and  there
are  different  opinions  concerning  it.  Mr.  Locke  says  that
when  a  sovereign  raises  taxes  against  the  will  of  the
people  resistance  is  lawful1,  but  there  is  no  country  besides
England  where  the  people  have  any  vote  in  the  matter.
In  France  the  king's  edict  is  all  that  is  necessary,  and
even  in  Britain  it  is  but  a  very  figurative  consent  that  we
have,  for  the  number  of  voters  is  nothing  to  that  of  the
people.  Exorbitant  taxes  no  doubt  justify  resistance,  for  no
people  will  allow  the  half  of  their  property  to  be  taken  from
them ;  but  though  the  highest  propriety  be  not  observed,
if  they  have  any  degree  of  moderation,  people  will  not
complain.  No  government  is  quite  perfect,  but  it  is  better
to  submit  to  some  inconveniences  than  make  attempts
against  it.

Some  other  writers  allege  that  the  king  cannot  alienate
any  part  of  his  dominions2.  This  notion  is  founded  on  the
principle  of  the  original  contract,  by  which  indeed,  though
a  people  were  willing  to  submit  to  one  government,  they
will  not  have  one  of  another's  choosing.  This  doctrine  is,
however,  groundless.  In  France  and  Spain  great  part  of

1  Locke, Civil  Government,  §§  Cocceius  on  Grotius,  De  iure  belli
138-140,  as  quoted  by  Hume,  '  Of  et pads,  lib.  i.  cap.  iii.  §  12;  Vattel,
the Original Contract,' Essays,  Droit  des  gens,  liv.  i.  ch.  i.  §  17;
1748,  p.  307.  Hutcheson,  System  of  Moral  Phi-

2  E.g.  Pufendorf,  De  iure  natu-  losophy,  vol.  ii.  pp.  297-299.
rae  et  gentium,  lib.  viii.  cap.  v.  §  9 ;


70  PART I  I JUSTICE

the  dominions  have  been  given  to  the  king's  children  as
a  portion  without  any  complaint ;  when  Florida  was  put
into  our  hands,  they  never  made  any  opposition.  The
King  of  Spain  and  Czar  of  Moscovy  can  even  alter  the
succession  as  they  please.  This  was  in  general  the  case
in  all  feudal  jurisdictions,  they  were  divisible1  at  the
pleasure  of  the  lord.  It  was  but  lately  that  the  right  of
primogeniture  took  place  in  the  principalities  of  Germany.
It  is  alleged  that  the  King  of  France  cannot  alter  the  Salic
law,  by  which  daughters  cannot  succeed  to  the  crown.
This  law  was  owing  to  the  power  of  the  princes  of
the  blood,  who  would  not  allow  the  succession  to  go
past  themselves.  But  if  France  had  been  as  destitute  of
nobility  as  Britain  was  at  the  accession  of  the  present
family,  the  Salic  law  might  have  been  altered  as  easily  as
any  other  law.

It  is  hard  to  determine  what  a  monarch  may  or  may
not  do.  But  when  the  summa  potestas  is  divided  as  it
is  in  Britain,  if  the  king  do  anything  which  ought  to  be
consented  to  by  the  parliament,  without  their  permission,
they  have  a  right  to  oppose  him.  The  nature  of  a  parlia
mentary  right  supposes  that  it  may  be  defended  by  force,
else  it  is  no  right  at  all.  If  the  king  impose  taxes  or
continue  them  after  the  time  is  expired,  he  is  guilty  of
breach  of  privilege.  James  II  attempted  some  impositions
of  this  sort  upon  importation.  In  the  petition  of  right2  it
is  expressly  appointed  that  the  taxes  shall  not  continue
a  moment  after  the  time  determined  by  act  of  parliament.

When  the  parliament  saw  the  crown  going  to  James  II,
who  was  a  Roman  Catholic,  they  appointed  two  tests,  to
wit,  an  abjuration  of  the  Pope  and  the  oath  of  supremacy,
and  that  every  person  within  three  months  after  his
acceptance  of  any  office  should  take  the  sacrament  after
the  form  prescribed  by  the  Church  of  England.  King
James  employed  Roman  Catholics  both  in  the  army  and
1  See  below,  p.  118.  2  A  slip  for  '  Bill  of  Rights.'


PUBLIC JURISPRUDENCE  71

privy  council,  and  besides,  appointed  persons  entirely  un
qualified  to  the  treasury,  and  broke  in  upon  the  privileges
of  the  Universities.  He  also  assumed  a  power  of  dis
pensing  with  the  law  in  cases  where  he  himself  was  no
way  concerned.  Some  of  the  bishops,  merely  for  doing
what  every  British  subject  has  a  right  to  do,  to  wit,
remonstrating  against  such  proceedings,  were  sent  to  the
Tower.  Nothing  could  more  alarm  the  nation  than  this
attack  upon  the  bishops.  One  Sharp  preached  against
popery,  the  religion  of  the  king,  upon  which  the  bishop
of  London  was  ordered  to  suspend  him,  but  he  only
cautioned  him  against  such  practices.  The  king,  not
pleased  with  this,  created  a  court  of  high  commission,
which  had  been  long  abrogated  and  discharged  ever  after
to  be  erected,  and  summoned  both  the  bishop  and  Sharp
to  appear  before  it.  The  king,  perceiving  the  disgust  of
the  people,  and  thinking  it  proceeded  from  the  fear  of
those  possessed  of  abbey  lands,  lest  they  should  be  taken
from  them,  and  from  a  fear  of  a  change  in  the  religion  of
the  country,  he  declared  that  he  would  grant  liberty  of
conscience  to  all,  and  retain  every  one  in  the  possession
of  the  Church  lands.  This  plainly  showed  his  intention
to  change  the  religion  of  the  country,  which  is  the  most
difficult  thing  in  the  world.  It  is  necessary  before  a  religion
be  changed  that  the  opinions  of  the  people  be  changed,
as  was  done  by  Luther,  Calvin,  John  Knox,  and  others
before  the  Reformation.  King  James  then  applied  to  the
army,  but  found  they  by  no  means  sympathized  with  him.
He,  in  return,  told  them  that  he  would  never  any  more
bring  down  his  sentiments  to  theirs,  nor  consult  them  on
any  occasion1.  It  was  no  wonder  that  by  such  practices

1  He  '  sullenly  told  them  that  768. But  the  rest  of  the  account

for  the  future  he  would  not  do  of  the  causes  of  the  Revolution

them the honour  to ask their  appears  to  be  founded  on  Burnet,

advice.' Rapin,  History  of  Eng-  History  of  his  Own Time,  vol.  i.

land,  transl.  by  Tindal,  vol.  ii.  p.  pp.  621-714,  rather  than  Rapin.


72  PART I  : JUSTICE

the  Revolution  was  brought  about,  and  the  family  set
aside,  for  the  whole  nation  was  disposed  to  favour  the
Prince  of  Orange.  They  might  justly  have  passed  by  the
whole  family,  but  they  generously  dispensed  with  the
rigorous  law  which  corrupts  the  blood  with  the  forfeiture
of  the  estate,  and  bestowed  the  crown  on  his  two  Protes
tant  daughters.  Their  brother,  on  account  of  the  suspicions
of  his  being  a  Papist,  as  he  had  been  educated  in  that
religion,  was  rejected.  The  present  family,  being  the
nearest  Protestant  heirs,  was  by  an  act  of  parliament
settled  in  the  government,  and  it  was  enacted  that  no
prince,  unless  a  Protestant,  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of
Britain.  Thus  King  James,  on  account  of  his  encroach
ments  on  the  body  politic,  was  with  all  justice  and  equity
in  the  world  opposed  and  rejected.

Thus  we  have  considered  man  as  a  member  of  a  state.

As  ecclesiastics  and  laymen  are  two  grand  divisions  of
men  in  a  state,  under  this  head  too  might  be  considered
ecclesiastic  law  and  the  respective  rights  of  these  two
bodies  of  men.  Here  too  we  might  consider  military  law,
which  arises  from  considering  the  state  as  divided  into  two
bodies,  civil  and  military.  But  these  are  foreign  to  our
purpose.


[DIVISION  II.] DOMESTIC LAW

[§  i.  Husband  and  Wife^\

WE  come  now  to  consider  man  as  a  member  of  a  family,
and  in  doing  this  we  must  consider  the  threefold  relation
which  subsists  in  a  family.  These,  to  wit,  between
husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  master  and  servant '.

First  of  these  we  shall  consider  husband  and  wife.  In
every  species  of  animals  the  connexion  between  the  sexes
is  just  as  much  as  is  necessary  for  the  propagation  and
support  of  the  species.  Quadrupeds,  whenever  the  female
impregnates,  have  no  farther  desire  for  each  other;  the
support  of  the  young  is  no  burden  to  the  female,  and  there
is  no  occasion  for  the  assistance  of  the  male.  Among
birds  some  such  thing  as  marriage  seems  to  take  place,
they  continue  the  objects  of  desire  to  each  other,  their
connexion  remains  for  a  considerable  time,  and  they  jointly
support  the  young ;  but  whenever  the  young  can  shift  for
themselves  all  further  inclination  ceases 2.  In  the  human
species  women  by  their  milk  are  not  capable  of  providing
long  for  their  children.  The  assistance  of  the  husband  is
therefore  necessary  for  their  sustenance,  and  this  ought  to
make  marriage  perpetual3.  In  countries,  however,  where
Christianity  is  not  established,  the  husband  possesses  an

1  Hutcheson, System  of  Moral  *  Hutcheson, Introduction to
Philosophy,  vol.  ii.  p.  149.  Moral  Philosophy,  p.  257  ;  System

2  Locke,  Civil  Government,  §§  79,  of  Moral  Philosophy,  vol. ii. pp.
80  ; Hume, '  Of  Polygamy  and  150,  161.

Divorces,'  Essays,  1748,  p.  249.


74  PART  I  : JUSTICE

unlimited  power  of  divorce,  and  is  not  accountable  for  his
conduct.  In  ancient  Rome,  though  they  had  the  power
of  doing  it,  yet  it  was  thought  contrary  to  good  manners  l.
We  may  observe  an  utility  in  this  constitution  of  our
nature  that  children  have  so  long  a  dependence  upon  their
parents,  to  bring  down  their  passions  to  theirs,  and  thus
be  trained  up  at  length  to  become  useful  members  of
society.  Every  child  gets  this  piece  of  education,  even
under  the  most  worthless  parent.

On  this  subject  it  is  proposed  to  consider  the  duties  of
each  of  the  two  parties  during  their  union,  how  this  union
should  [be]  begun  and  ended,  and  what  are  the  particular
rights  and  privileges  of  each.

The  first  duty  is  fidelity  of  the  wife  to  the  husband ;
breach  of  chastity  is  the  greatest  of  offences.  Spurious
children  may  be  introduced  into  the  family,  and  come  to
the  succession  instead  of  lawful  ones.  This  real  utility,
however,  is  not  the  proper  foundation  of  the  crime.  The
indignation  of  the  public  against  the  wife  arises  from  their
sympathy  with  the  jealousy  of  the  husband,  and  ac
cordingly  they  are  disposed  to  resent  and  punish  it.  The
sentiment  of  jealousy  is  not  chiefly  founded,  or  rather  not
at  all,  upon  the  idea  of  a  spurious  offspring.  It  is  not  from
the  particular  act  that  the  jealousy  arises,  but  he  considers
her  infidelity  as  an  entire  alienation  of  that  preference  to
all  other  persons  which  she  owes  him.  This  is  the  real
idea  he  has  of  it,  as  may  appear  from  the  following  con
sideration.  The  idea  we  have  of  a  father  does  not  arise
from  the  voluptuous  act  which  gave  occasion  to  our
existence,  for  this  idea  is  partly  loathsome,  partly  ridiculous.
The  real  idea  that  a  son  has  of  a  father  is  the  director
of  his  infancy,  the  supporter  of  his  helplessness,  his

1  Sell,  'to  exercise  the power  Opera  omm'a,  1744-8,  vol.  iv),  lib.  i.

of  divorce.' Heineccius,  Antiqiti-  adp.  §  45; Montesquieu,  Esprit

latum Romanarum hmspruden-  des  lot's,  liv.  xvi.  ch.  xvi.
tiam illustrantium syntagma  (in


DOMESTIC LAW  75

guardian,  pattern  and  protector.  These  are  the  proper
filial  sentiments.  The  father's  idea  of  a  son  is  of  one  that
depends  upon  him,  and  was  bred  up  in  his  house  or  at  his
expense,  by  which  connexion  there  should  grow  up  an
affection  towards  him ;  but  a  spurious  offspring  is  dis
agreeable  from  the  resentment  that  arises  against  the
mother's  infidelity.

In  those  countries  where  the  manners  of  the  people  are
rude  and  uncultivated,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  jealousy,
every  child  that  is  born  is  considered  as  their  own.  The
foundation  of  jealousy  is  that  delicacy  which  attends  the
sentiment  of  love,  and  it  is  more  or  less  in  different
countries,  in  proportion  to  the  rudeness  of  their  manners.
In  general,  wherever  there  is  little  regard  paid  to  the  sex,
infidelity  is  little  regarded,  and  there  will  be  the  greatest
looseness  of  manners.  Agreeable  to  this  we  find  that
Menelaus  expressed  his  resentment  against  Paris,  not
against  Helen,  and  this  not  for  debauching  her,  but  for
carrying  her  away.  In  the  Odyssey  she  talks  before  her
husband  of  that  action  without  reserve.  In  Sparta  it  was
common  for  them  to  borrow  and  lend  their  wives.  When
manners  became  more  refined,  jealousy  began,  and  rose  at
length  to  such  a  height  that  wives  were  shut  up,  as  they
are  among  the  Turks  at  this  day.  As  mankind  became
more  refined,  the  same  fondness  which  made  them  shut  up
women  made  them  allow  them  liberties.  In  the  latter  ages
of  Greece  women  were  allowed  to  go  anywhere.  This
same  fondness,  carried  to  a  high  degree,  gives  as  great
a  licence  as  when  infidelity  was  disregarded.  In  no
barbarous  country  is  there  more  licentiousness  than  in
France.  Thus  we  may  observe  the  prejudice  of  manners,
with  respect  to  women,  in  the  different  periods  of  society.

Though  there  was  little  or  no  regard  paid  to  women  in
the  first  state  of  society  as  objects  of  pleasure,  yet  there
never  was  more  regard  paid  them  as  rational  creatures.
In  North  America  the  women  are  consulted  concerning  the


76  PART  i  :  JUSTICE

carrying  on  of  war,  and  in  every  important  undertaking1.
The  respect  paid  to  women  in  modern  times  is  very  small ;
they  are  only  put  to  no  trouble  for  spoiling  of  their  beauty.
A  man  will  not  exempt  his  friend  from  a  laborious  piece  of
business,  but  he  will  spare  his  mistress.  When  the  in
fidelity  of  the  wife  is  considered  as  an  injury  to  the  husband,
it  is  necessary  that  unmarried  women  should  be  laid  under
restraints,  that  when  married  they  may  be  accustomed  to
them.  Hence  the  origin  of  punishment  for  fornication.

We  come  now  to  consider  how  this  union  is  begun.  As
the  duty  after  marriage  is  quite  different  from  what  it  was
before,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  some  ceremony
at  the  commencement  of  it.  This  differs  in  different
countries,  but  in  general  is  connected  with  religion,  as  it
is  supposed  to  make  the  greatest  impression.  In  the
infancy  of  society,  though  marriage  seemed  intended  to  be
perpetual,  yet  the  husband  had  an  unlimited  power  of
divorce,  though  it  was  reckoned  indecent  to  exercise  it
unless  for  an  enormous  crime.  The  reason  was  that  the
government  durst  intermeddle  little  with  private  affairs,
and  far  less  with  matters  in  private  families.  For  the
security  of  government  they  endeavoured  by  all  means  to
strengthen  the  power  of  the  husband  and  make  him  as
absolute  as  possible.  In  ancient  Rome  the  husband  was
sovereign  lord  of  life  and  death  in  all  matters  belonging
to  his  own  family.

In  Rome  three  kinds  of  marriages  took  place2:

First,  by  confarreation,  a  religious  ceremony ;

Secondly,  by  coemption  3,  when  the  husband  bought  his
wife ;

Thirdly,  by  use.  If  he  had  lived  with  her  a  year  and
day,  she  was  his  by  prescription,  and  he  could  divorce
her.

1  Lafitau,  Mceitrs  des  sauvages i.  tit.  x.  §  i.

ainenqt<ains,  torn.  i.  p.  477.  3  MS.  reads  '  exemption '  here

2  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom.  lib. and  below,  p.  79.


DOMESTIC LAW  77

The  power  of  divorce  extended  to  the  wife  after  female
succession  took  place.  A  woman  possessed  of  a  great
fortune,  who  lived  happily  before  marriage  and  had  so
much  in  her  own  power,  would  not  incline  to  give  it  all  to
her  husband.  The  lawyers  therefore  invented  a  new  kind
of  marriage  in  favour  of  heiresses,  which  was  called  the
deductio  domi,  or  marriage  by  contract ;  certain  terms  were
agreed  on  between  the  parties,  and  then  the  husband  came
and  carried  her  home.  To  prevent  prescription  taking
place,  she  went  away  three  or  four  days  every  year,  which,
according  to  the  form  of  the  contract,  secured  her  fortune  *.
Thus  the  wife  became  equally  independent  with  the  hus
band,  and  had  equally  the  power  of  divorce.  As  the
marriage  was  founded  upon  the  consent  of  both  parties,
it  was  reasonable  that  the  dissent  of  either  party  should
dissolve  it.

This  form  of  marriage  is  pretty  similar  to  the  present,
with  this  material  difference  however,  that  it  did  not
legitimate  the  children  nor  preserve  the  honour  of  the
women 2.  The  Roman  form  caused  great  disorders.  When
the  parties  separated,  which  was  often  the  case,  they  married
others,  and  very  often  the  women  went  through  five  or  six
husbands3.  This  so  corrupted  their  morals  that  about  the
end  of  the  monarchy  there  was  scarce  a  great  man  that
was  not  cuckolded.  The  disorder  came  to  such  a  height

1  '  Deductio domi ' should be  from Heineccius' statement,
'  deductio  in  domum.' This  was  '  Contracto sine uno horum
an  incident  of  all  kinds  of  mar-  rituum matrimonio, uxor non
riage. The '  new  kind  of  mar-  conveniebat in manum mariti,
riage' is thus described by  neque  adeo  fiebat  materfamilias,
Heineccius  : '  Si itaque uxor  sed  matrona.' Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  i.
nollet  in  manum  convenire :  in-  tit.  x.  §  14.

strumentaquidemdotaliaconficie-  8  '  Nobiles feminae non con-

bantur,  et domum deducebatur,  sulum numero sed maritoruin

sed dabat ilia  operam  ut  saltim  annos  suos computant' Seneca,

tres noctes a marito abesset'  De  benef.  lib.  iii.  cap.  xvi,  quoted  in

Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  i.  tit.  x.  §  14.  Heineccius,  Antiq. Rom. lib.  i.

2  Perhaps a rash inference  adp.  §  46.


78  PART I  I JUSTICE

that,  after  the  establishment  of  Christianity,  the  power  of
divorce  was  restrained  unless  for  certain  causes.  Among
the  Scythian  nations,  which  settled  in  the  West  of  Europe,
divorce  was  taken  away  altogether.  In  Burgundy,  how
ever,  the  power  of  the  husband  was  very  great.  By  a  law
there,  if  a  man  abused  his  wife  he  was  liable  to  a  fine,  but
if  the  wife  misbehaved  she  was  put  to  death.

As  in  general  only  flagrant  crimes  were  taken  notice  of
by  the  civil  court,  small  ones  went  into  the  hands  of  the
ecclesiastics,  and  that  first  gave  occasion  to  their  great
power.  When  the  civil  court  gave  no  redress  for  breach
of  contract,  the  ecclesiastics  punished  the  offender  for
perjury,  and  when  any  difference  happened  betwixt  man
and  wife,  they  made  them  suffer  penance  for  it.  Afterwards
the  power  of  divorce  was  taken  away  unless  for  adultery,
and  when  the  one  was  afraid  of  bodily  harm  from  the  other.
Even  this  last  was  not  a  perfect  divorce,  for  neither  of  the
parties  was  allowed  to  marry  again,  but  only  a  separation
a  mcnsa  et  toro.

The  causes  of  a  perfect  divorce,  after  which  they  were
allowed  to  marry  again,  were  these  three.  First,  if  they
were  within  the  degrees  of  consanguinity,  the  marriage
was  made  null  unless  they  had  a  dispensation  from  the
Pope.  Secondly,  precontract  with  any  other  woman.
Thirdly,  frigidity  in  a  man,  and  incapacity  in  a  woman.
The  ecclesiastics  brought  in  other  alterations  besides
these  with  regard  to  marriage.  It  is  to  be  observed  that
the  laws  made  by  men  are  not  altogether  favourable  to
women.  They  considered  the  infidelity  of  the  husband
and  wife  were  equally  punished,  he  had  no  more  power  to
divorce  than  she  l.  Adultery,  saevitia,  and  metus  were  con
sidered  as  causes  of  separation,  but  not  of  divorce.

1  The text appears to be  altogether  unfavourable  to  women,

corrupt. It  should  perhaps  read,  They  considered  the  infidelity  of

'  It is to be observed that the  the husband and  wife  were to

laws  made  by  clergymen  are  not  be  equally  punished ;  he  had  no


DOMESTIC LAW  79

The  canon  law,  when  it  took  place,  was  dictated  by
ecclesiastics,  who  on  most  occasions  copied  the  Roman
law,  as  they  were  the  only  persons  that  understood  Latin,
and  among  whom  the  remains  of  literature  were  preserved.
At  first  even  the  ecclesiastic  law  required  no  ceremonies
at  marriage.  As  the  ceremonies  of  confarreation  and
coemption  l  had  gone  into  desuetude  in  the  latter  times
of  the  Roman  law,  when  the  only  thing  that  was  required
was  the  dcdudio  domi 2 ;  so  by  the  ecclesiastic  law  for  a  long
time,  a  contract  of  any  kind  made  a  marriage,  whether
a  contract  in  praesenti  or  in  futuro.  Contract  in  praesenti
is  when  I  say,  I  take  you  for  a  wife,  or,  I  take  you  for  a
husband.  Contract  in  futuro  is  when  they  say,  I  will  do  it.
Either  of  these  contracts  might  be  proved  either  by
evidence  or  by  oath,  if  they  declared  themselves  married
persons,  or  that  they  were  to  be  so.  Pope  Innocent  III
enacted  that  all  marriages  should  be  performed  in  facie
ccclesiae,  but  though  this  was  considered  as  the  only  decent
marriage,  yet  others  were  often  in  use  and  in  some  cases
were  valid.  If  a  person  was  married  in  futuro,  and  after
wards  in  facie  ccclesiae,  and  the  first  wife  made  no  opposi
tion  till  after  the  banns  were  out,  the  first  marriage  was
null.  If  it  was  contract  in  praesenti  the  second  was  null  3.
This  was  the  case  in  England  till  the  late  Marriage  Act4.
If  a  contract  in  futuro  can  be  proved,  or  if  the  man  refuse
his  oath,  the  marriage  is  in  some  countries  considered  as
valid.  The  contract  in  praesenti  is  everywhere  valid,  espe
cially  if  they  cohabit  afterwards.  All  these  institutions
are  derived  from  the  canon  law,  which  made  the  breach
of  them  liable  to  church  censures  as  ours  does.

more  power  to  divorce  than  she.'  *  The report is unduly  con-

Cp.  Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  lots,  densed. What 'the late Mar-

liv.  xxvi.  ch.  viii.  riage  Act'  (26  Geo.  II.  cap.  33)

1  MS.  reads  '  exemption  '  as  on  did was to make contracts  of
p.  76  above.  matrimony  no  longer  enforceable

2  See  above,  p.  77,  note  T.  in  the  ecclesiastical  courts.

3  MS.  reads 'contractu  present!.'


8o  PART I  : JUSTICE

An  act  of  parliament  only  makes  a  divorce  in  England,
the  infidelity  of  the  wife  will  not  do  it.  In  Scotland  it  is
much  more  easily  done.  Protestants  never  carried  matters
so  far  as  the  canon  law,  for  the  clergy  married  themselves.
Besides,  love,  which  was  formerly  a  ridiculous  passion,
became  more  grave  and  respectable.  As  a  proof  of  this,  it
is  worth  our  observation  that  no  ancient  tragedy  turned
on  love,  whereas  now  it  is  more  respectable  and  influences
all  the  public  entertainments.  This  can  be  accounted  for
only  by  the  changes  of  mankind.

The  species  of  marriage  of  which  we  have  been  treating
took  place  only  in  Rome  and  in  the  Christian  countries
with  a  few  others,  for  in  many  countries  they  took  as  many
wives  as  they  were  able  to  maintain.  This  naturally  leads
us  to  consider  the  origin  of  polygamy.  It  is  to  [be]  observed
that  though  voluntary  divorce  be  attended  with  incon
veniences,  yet  it  is  not  altogether  contrary  to  the  principle
of  justice  that  a  man  should  put  away  his  wife  and  take
another  for  less  reasons  than  adultery,  because  they  make
them  quite  unhappy  together,  though  either  of  them  might
live  very  well  elsewhere.  The  same  is  the  case  with  poly
gamy.  If  a  woman  consents  to  be  one  of  five,  or  twenty,  or
more  wives,  and  the  law1  allows  it,  there  is  no  injury  done
her,  she  meets  with  the  treatment  which  she  might
naturally  expect.  The  ancient  Jewish  and  oriental  laws
tolerated  polygamy,  but  though  it  and  voluntary  divorce
be  not  altogether  contrary  to  justice,  it  must  always  be
a  very  bad  policy  where  they  are  established  or  allowed.

Polygamy  excites  the  most  violent  jealousy,  by  which
domestic  peace  is  destroyed.  The  wives  are  all  rivals  and
enemies,  besides,  the  children  are  ill  taken  care  of,  and
the  wife  complains  that  her  children  are  not  used  as
they  ought;  because  she  measures  the  affection  of  the
father  by  her  own,  between  which  there  is  no  proportion,
as  his-  is  divided  among  forty  or  fifty  children,  and  hers
J  MS.  reads  '  laws.'  2  MS.  reads  '  he.'


DOMESTIC LAW  8l

only  among  four  or  five.  Where  polygamy  takes  place
there  must  both  be  a  jealousy  of  love  and  a  jealousy  of
interest,  and  consequently  a  want  of  tranquillity.  It  may
be  said  that  in  the  seraglios  of  the  Eastern  monarchs  there
is  the  greatest  peace,  but  this  is  owing  to  the  most
imperious  discipline :  when  rebels  are  subdued  their
humility  is  remarkable.  In  Africa  we  find  the  most
horrid  disorders,  their  discipline  not  being  severe  enough.
It  is  the  greatest  misery  to  the  women  that  they  are  en
tirely  shut  up  and  can  enjoy  no  company  but  that  of  the
eunuchs,  which  they  detest.

The  man  too  who  has  the  seraglio  is  by  no  means  happy,
though  apparently  so.  He  too  must  be  jealous,  and  on
account  of  the  inequality  betwixt  him  and  them  he  can
have  no  entertainment  at  his  own  house,  no  opportunity
of  social  improvements  ;  you  must  never  mention  his  wife
to  a  Turk,  she  can  never  be  seen  by  men,  not  even  by  her
physician,  as  Tournefort  tells  us '.  This  gravity  and
reserve  of  the  husband  must  have  a  bad  effect  upon  the
manners  of  the  country.  As  the  men  have  no  trust  nor
dependence  upon  each  other,  they  cannot  form  into
parties,  and  therefore  the  government  must  always  be
arbitrary,  of  which  they  have  a  model  in  their  own  houses,
where  there  is  little  parental  and  less  conjugal  affec
tion.  Besides  all  this  it  tends  to  depopulate  the  species,
the  greater  part  of  men  can  get  no  wives,  and  many
of  them  are  castrated  to  take  care  of  the  seraglio.
It  is  indeed  alleged  that  there  are  more  women  born
than  men.  Montesquieu  says  that  at  Bantam  in  the
East  Indies  there  are  ten  women  born  for  one  man2.
Dutch  authors  say  that  on  the  coast  of  Guinea  there
are  fifty  to  one.  The  account  from  Japan  is  better
attested,  where  it  is  said  there  are  eleven  women  to  nine

1  Relation  (fun  voyage  du  Le-  and  Divorces.  'Essays,  1748,  p.253.
mint,  1718,  torn.  ii.  pp.  27,  28,  2  Esprit  des  lots,  liv.  xvi.  ch.  iv ;
quoted  in  Hume, '  Of  Polygamy  liv.  xxiii.  ch.  xii.

G


82


PART I  : JUSTICE


men1.  Where  this  is  the  case,  if  the  fact  be  true,  it
would  be  an  inconvenience  if  polygamy  did  not  take
place.

By  strict  examination  we  find  that  in  Europe  there  is
little  difference.  The  general  computation  is  that  there
are  thirteen  men  to  twelve  women,  or  seventeen  to
sixteen,  which,  as  men  are  more  exposed  to  dangers  than
women,  makes  the  number  about  equal2.  Now  if  there  be
no  difference  in  Europe,  we  have  reason  to  conclude  that


1  Montesquieu,  Esprit  des  his,
liv.  xvi.  ch.  iv.  note  (b),  quotes
from  Kaempfer,  History  of  Japan
(transl.  by  J.  G.  Scheuchzer,
1727,  p.  199),  an  enumeration
of  182,072  males  and  223,573
females,  and  gives  '  le  voyage  de
Guince  de  M.  Smith,  partie
seconde,  sur  le  pays  d'Ante'  as
his  authority  for  the  statement
that  more  girls  than  boys  are
born  in  Africa.  He  does  not
refer  to  '  Dutch  authors '  nor
give  the  figures  50  to  i.  But,  as
is  remarked  by  J.  Green,  the
editor  of  A  new  general  collection
of  Voyages  and  Travels,  1745-7.
vol.  ii.  p.  464,  much  of  William
Smith's  New  Voyage  to  Guinea,
1744,  is  taken  from  Bosnian,  New
and  accurate  description  of  the  Coast
of  Guinea,  1705,  a  work  originally
written  in  Dutch.  Bosnian  (pp.
211,  344)  and  Smith  (pp.  200,
224)  following  him,  say  that
the  women  continue  longest  un
married  because  their  number
greatly  exceeds  that  of  the  men,
and  also  that  men  commonly
have  forty  or  fifty  wives.  These
two  statements  taken  together
would  justify  any  one  in  con
cluding  that  there  must  be  about


fifty  women  to  one  man.  It  is
true  that  they  do  not  apply  to
exactly  the  same  part  of  the
Gold  Coast ;  but  minute  accuracy
in  ridiculing  travellers'  tales
would  not  appear  necessary  to
Adam  Smith.

2  Montesquieu  fails  to  distin
guish  between  the  proportion  of
males  to  females  born,  and  the
proportion  of  males  to  females
living.  In  the  text  above  the
two  things  are  kept  separate.
The  remarks  about  Guinea  and
Japan  refer  to  persons  living,
the  '  thirteen  men  to  twelve
women,  or  seventeen  to  sixteen  '
refer  to  persons  born,  and  '  the
number'  to  the  number  living.
Dr.  John  Arbuthnot,  whom
Montesquieu  quotes  as  an  au
thority  for  the  statement  that
the  number  of  boys  born  in
England  exceeds  that  of  girls,
gave  some  London  statistics
on  the  subject  in  Philosophical
Transactions,  1710,  pp.  186-90,
and  remarked  that  the  greater
number  of  boys  was  necessary  in
order  to  make  up  for  their  greater
liability  to  '  external  accidents  '
in  consequence  of  their  having
to  '  seek  their  food  with  danger.'


DOMESTIC LAW  83

there  is  not  any  difference  in  any  other  place.  The  laws
of  nature  are  the  same  everywhere,  the  laws  of  gravity
and  attraction  the  same,  and  why  not  the  laws  of
generation  ?  In  some  of  the  fore-mentioned  places  there
may  indeed  be  more  women  than  men.  In  places  where
the  seat  of  religion  is,  and  where  the  court  sits,  and
consequently  the  opulent  live,  there  must  be  more  women,
because  the  rich  only  have  seraglios,  and  they  purchase
the  women  from  other  places,  so  that  there  is  a  constant
import  of  women  from  those  countries  in  which  polygamy
does  not  take  place.

Polygamy  takes  place  under  despotic  governments.
When  a  country  is  conquered  by  savages,  they  indulge
themselves  in  all  manner  of  brutality,  and  this  among
the  rest,  as  there  is  no  established  law  to  the  contrary.
It  never  took  place  in  ancient  Carthage  or  Rome,  though
it  takes  place  in  Turkey.  In  every  country  freedom  puts
out  polygamy;  there  is  nothing  that  free  men  will  less
submit  to  than  a  monopoly  of  this  kind,  but  despotism
is  always  favourable  to  polygamy.

Montesquieu  observes  still  further  in  favour  of  poly
gamy,  that  in  some  countries  women  are  marriage
able  at  eight  or  nine,  and  are  old  and  withered  at
twenty  l.  When  they  have  their  beauty  they  cannot  have
much  understanding,  and  when  it  increases  their  beauty
is  gone,  and  consequently  they  cannot  long  be  agreeable
companions,  and  therefore  a  husband  had  need  of  more
than  one2.  It  may  be  their  custom3  indeed  to  deflower
infants,  but  the  fact  is  not  well  attested.  Cleopatra  was

1  MS.  reads  '  30,'  which  is  in-  vingt : la  raison ne se trouve

consistent  with  the  context  and  jamais  chez  elles  avec  la  beaute.'

Esprit  des  lot's,  liv. xvi. ch. ii :  2  A  free  translation from  the

1  Les  femmes  sont  nubiles  dans  first  paragraph  of  Esprit  des  lots,

les  climats chauds  a huit, neuf  liv.  xvi.  ch.  ii.

et  dix  ans  : ainsi  1'enfance  et  le  3  I.  e.  the  custom  of  the  people

manage  y  vont  presque  toujours  in  the  warm  climates  spoken  of

ensemble. Elles sont  vieilles  a  by  Montesquieu.

G  2


84  PART I  : JUSTICE

thirty-six  when  taken  by  Augustus,  yet  she  was  with
child.  Constantia  bore  a  child  at  fifty-four1.  But
though  the  fact  were  true2,  it  is  not  reasonable  that
polygamy  should  take  place,  but  only  voluntary  divorce.
If  women  were  only  useful  ten  or  twelve  years,  it  might
be  reasonable  to  take  another,  but  not  a  number  at  the
same  time.

Wherever  polygamy  takes  place  there  can  be  no
hereditary  nobility.  It  is  difficult  to  make  the  right  of
primogeniture  take  place  where  there  are  so  many  wives,
several  of  whom  bring  forth  nearly  at  the  same  time.
Where  there  are  so  many  children,  they  cannot  all  have
the  affection  of  the  parent,  and  it  is  only  by  this  means
that  any  of  them  can  establish  themselves.  Where  the
children  are  numerous  affection  diminishes.  I  may  regard
four  or  five  children  who  are  connected  with  my  friend,
but  if  there  are  a  hundred  in  the  same  relation  they  are
little  regarded.  Now  hereditary  nobility  is  the  great
security  of  the  people's  liberty.  Being  in  every  corner
of  the  country,  whenever  the  subjects  are  oppressed  they
fly  to  him  as  their  head.  In  Eastern  countries  there  is  no
such  thing.  Every  man  is  almost  an  upstart,  and  the  royal
family  alone  is  regarded.  The  families  of  the  Bashaws
after  their  death  mix  with  the  vulgar.  Wherever  there  is
a  hereditary  nobility,  the  country  cannot  easily  be  con
quered,  or  rather  not  at  all.  They  may  be  beat  once
or  twice,  but  they  still  recover  under  their  natural
heads.  Eastern  countries,  for  this  very  reason  that
they  want  these,  make  feeble  resistance  against  foreign
invaders.

Polygamy  is  exceedingly  hurtful  to  the  populousness

1  Villani  says  that  Constance  of  '  fifty-four  ' is a reporter's mis-
Sicily  was  '  d'anni  50  o  piu'  at  the  take  for  '  fifty  or  more.'
birth of  Frederick II (Historic  2  That girls are married at
Florentine,  lib.  v.  cap.  xvi.  in  Mura-  an early  age, and become old
tori,  Rerum  Italicarnm  scriptores,  and  withered  at  twenty,
torn. xiii. p. 140 B). Possibly


DOMESTIC LAW  85

of  a  nation.  An  hundred  women  married  to  an  hun
dred  men  will  have  more  children  than  the  same
number  married  to  two  or  three.  It  may  indeed  be  said
that  in  China,  about  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,  and  in
Egypt,  they  are  populous  notwithstanding  polygamy.  In
those  countries  there  are  regulations  regarding  populous-
ness,  and  some  other  circumstances  contribute  to  it,  such
as  the  remarkable  fertility  of  the  soil.

Thus  we  see  marriage  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.  polygamy
or  monogamy,  of  which  the  latter  is  of  three  kinds :
first,  when  the  husband  can  divorce  the  wife  at  pleasure ;
secondly,  when  the  power  of  divorce  is  equally  in  their
power l ;  and  thirdly,  when  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  civil
magistrate  entirely.  Where  polygamy  is  allowed,  the  wife
is  entirely  in  the  power  of  the  husband,  he  may  divorce
her  or  dispose  of  her  as  he  pleases.

The  laws  concerning  monogamy  differ  according  to  the
species  of  it.  That  kind  where  the  contract  or  agreement
is  indissoluble  but  by  the  civil  magistrate,  is  the  most
convenient.  By  this  indeed  nothing  but  \vhat  is  very
disagreeable  to  society  is  the  occasion  of  divorce.  But  it
is  always  better  that  the  marriage  tie  should  be  too  strait,
than  that  it  should  be  too  loose.  The  unlimited  power  of
divorce  in  the  latter  ages  of  the  Republic  2  was  productive
of  the  most  disorderly  consequences,  the  prevention  of
which  sufficiently  atones  for  any  hardships  it  may  occasion.
When  both  parties  have  the  power  of  divorce,  they  can
have  no  mutual  trust  nor  dependence  upon  each  other,  but
their  interests  are  quite  separate.

We  come  now  to  consider  what  interest  the  husband  has
in  the  property  of  the  wife,  or  the  wife  in  that  of  the
husband,  according  to  the  different  species  of  marriage.
Where  polygamy  takes  place,  the  wife,  being  in  absolute

'This should obviously  read either  'in  her  power'  or  'in  the
power  of  each.'
2  Of  Rome.


86  PART I  : JUSTICE

slavery,  has  no  interest  at  all  in  the  husband's  property,
and  is  only  entitled  to  an  aliment  after  his  death.  When
the  husband  only  has  the  power  of  divorce,  the  property
of  the  wife  becomes  his  as  much  as  his  own.  When  they
have  the  power  of  divorce  in  the  hands  of  both,  whatever
portion  the  wife  brings  is  secured,  and  the  husband  can
have  no  more  ado  with  it  but  to  manage  it.  When  he
dies,  the  wife  has  no  more  share  of  the  husband's  property
than  was  agreed  upon  by  the  contract.  In  the  species  of
monogamy  when  divorce  is  in  the  hand  of  the  magistrate,
the  right  of  the  husband  extends  not  so  far  as  formerly ;
but  that  of  the  wife  extends  further,  as  she  is  more  inde
pendent  of  him  than  in  any  other  species.  If  a  wife  has
a  land  estate,  the  husband  receives  the  rents,  which  are  at
his  absolute  disposal.  If  the  wife  die  and  leave  a  son,
the  husband  is  the  natural  guardian  of  it,  and  is  entitled
to  a  courtesy  of  the  life-rent  of  his  wife's  estate.  In
England  the  husband  can  dispose  of  all  [his  wife's]  chattels
real  in  his  lifetime,  but  if  he  do  not  dispose  of  them  in  his
lifetime,  they  go  to  the  wife,  not  to  the  heir  at  his  death.
All  [her]  chattels  personal  he  can  dispose  of  as  he  pleases.
Debts  on  bonds  are  the  same  with  chattels  real.  If  the
husband  demands  payment  of  the  debt,  he  can  dispose  of
the  money  as  he  pleases,  but  if  he  do  not  claim  it  in  his
lifetime,  it  goes  to  his  wife  after  his  death.  If  the  wife  die
first,  all  chattels  real  and  debts  on  bond  go  to  her  relations,
if  the  husband  have  not  already  disposed  of  them.  If  the
husband  die  first,  the  wife  has  a  third  part  of  his  land
estate  l,  whether  there  be  children  or  not.  This  is  con
sidered  as  her  dowry2.  In  England  she  has  a  complete
third  of  all 3,  but  in  Scotland  she  has  only  a  third  of  all

1  Scil.  '  for  her  life.'  qualification '  if there be chil-

2  A  mistake  for  '  dower.'  dren '  as  regards  personal  estate,
8  Of  course  with  the  qualifi- since if  there  are  no children

cation  indicated  in  note  i  above the  widow  takes  half,
as regards land, and with the


DOMESTIC LAW  87

bills,  money,  moveables,  and  bygone  rents ;  bonds  bearing
interest  go  to  the  children.  In  Scotland  the  husband  can
sell  his  wife's  land  with  her  own  consent,  but  she  must  first
be  examined  before  a  court,  and  declare  that  it  was  with
her  own  consent,  and  then  her  executors  j  cannot  claim  it.
Both  in  Scotland  and  in  England,  no  bond  granted  by  the
wife  is  binding  upon  the  husband  unless  it  be  granted  for
the  necessaries  of  life.  In  this  respect  she  is  considered
as  a  servant,  for  if  a  servant  buys  provision  in  his  name,
he  is  obliged  to  pay  [for]  them.  In  Scotland  the  husband
may  have  a  writ  of  inhibition  to  prevent  the  wife  from
contracting  debts  in  his  name.  In  England  any  verbal
notice  that  he  will  not  be  accountable  for  them  is  sufficient.
If  they  be  separated  he  is  not  even  obliged  to  pay  [for]
what  she  purchases  for  her  aliment.

We  come  now  to  consider  what  persons  are  capable  of
contracting  marriage.  Betwixt  ascendants  and  descendants
marriage  is  prohibited  in  infmitum.  Nothing  can  be  more
shocking  to  nature  than  for  a  mother  to  marry  her  son.
By  this  the  mother  becomes  inferior  to  her  son,  and  on
account  of  the  inequality  of  their  ages  the  ends  of  marriage
are  seldom  accomplished.  Therefore  it  is  never  tolerated
unless  where  superstition  takes  place.  In  like  manner
a  marriage  between  a  father  and  a  daughter  is  incestuous.
It  is,  however,  to  be  observed  that  this  is  not  so  contrary
to  nature  as  the  former,  because  the  father  still  is  superior
when  he  is  husband,  and  accordingly  we  find  that  many
barbarous  nations  tolerated  this  2.  But  still  it  is  unnatural
that  the  father,  the  guardian  and  instructor  of  the  daughter,
should  turn  her  lover  and  marry  her.  Besides,  a  mother
can  never  look  agreeably  on  a  daughter  who  will  probably
supply  her  place.  Nothing  can  be  more  destructive  of
domestic  happiness.  For  the  same  reasons,  the  uncle  and

1  Rather,  '  heirs.'

2  The  argument  is  the  same  as  that  of  Montesquieu,  Esprit  lies
his,  liv.  xxvi.  ch.  xiv.


88  PART I  : JUSTICE

niece,  or  the  aunt  and  nephew,  never  marry.  At  Rome
and  Carthage  indeed,  they  used  sometimes  to  give  a  dis
pensation  to  the  uncle  and  niece,  but  never  to  the  aunt
and  nephew.

The  marriage  of  collaterals,  such  as  brother  and  sister,
seems  to  have  been  prohibited  chiefly  from  political  views,
because  they  are  bred  up  together,  and  would  be  in  danger
of  mutual  corruption,  unless  properly  restrained.  The
same  reason  lay  against  a  marriage  between  cousins  in
those  ages  when  they  were  brought  up  in  the  same  house.
At  Athens  a  man  might  marry  his  sister  consanguinea  but
not  his  sister  literal^.  Many  eminent  men  married  in
this  manner,  thus  Cimon  married  his  father's  daughter
Elpinice  2.  By  the  law  of  England  the  wife  of  the  deceased
grand-uncle  can  marry  her  husband's  grand-nephew,  it
being  above  four  degrees  3.

Affinity  by  the  Christian  law  is  considered  as  the  same
with  consanguinity.  The  wife's  sister  is  considered  as
the  husband's  sister,  and  the  wife's  aunt  as  the  husband's
aunt.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  rules  of  affinity  are
rather  rules  of  police  than  of  nature,  for  it  is  not  contrary
to  nature  that  a  man  should  marry  his  wife's  sister.  In
many  countries  of  the  East  Indies  this  kind  of  marriage
takes  place,  because  they  think  that  the  wife's  sister
will  probably  make  the  best  mother-in-law  to  her  sister's
children.  But  it  may  be  answered  to  this  that  it  entirely
hinders  all  intercourse  between  the  sister  and  her  brother-
in-law's  family,  and  that  it  might  be  expected  that  she
would  answer  this  purpose  by  living  in  his  house  un
married  with  no  children  of  her  own.  The  canon  and

1  Uterine.  natas  uxores  ducere.'  Cornelius

2  '  Habebat  in  matrimonio  so- Nepos,  Cimon.

rorem suam  germanam nomine  3  This was decided in 1669

Elpinicem, non magis amore  in  the  case  of  Thomas  Harrison

quam  patria  more  ductus,  nam  and  Jane  Abbot. Vaughan,  Re-

Atheniensibus  licet  eodem  patre  ports,  pp.  206-250.


DOMESTIC LAW  89

civil  law  reckoned  affinity1  differently.  The  civil  law
counted  brothers  and  sisters  as  one  degree  removed  from
the  common  stock,  and  cousins  german  two.  The  canon
law  counted  how  far  the  persons  were  asunder.  Brothers
were  two  degrees,  the  father  being  one,  and  either  of  the
brothers  another.  In  the  same  manner  cousins  german
were  four  degrees.  The  canon  counted  both  sides  from
the  stock,  and  the  civil  law  only  one 2.  When  the  one  says
the  second  degree  was  prohibited  from  marriage,  and  the
other  the  fourth,  they  both  mean  cousins  german.  The
Pope  often  dispensed  with  these  laws,  and  by  that  means
extended  his  authority  and  promoted  his  interest.

Having  now  considered  all  the  different  species  of
marriage,  we  come  to  consider  the  effects  of  the  want  of  it.
The  effect  of  marriage  is  to  legitimate  the  children.  We
must  therefore  consider  the  difference  of  legitimate  and
illegitimate.  Legitimation  gives  the  children  inheritable
blood,  so  that  they  can  succeed  to  their  father  and  his
relations.  An  illegitimate  child  has  no  inheritable  blood,
and  therefore  cannot  succeed  to  his  father  intestate,  because
it  is  unknown  who  is  his  father,  nor  to  his  mother,  because
no  child  succeeds  that  is  not  lawfully  begotten.  As
a  bastard  can  succeed  to  nobody,  so  nobody  can  succeed
to  him  3,  as  he  is  not  related  to  any  human  creature.  If  he
die  intestate  without  children,  his  wife  has  one  half  of  his
moveables  and  one  third  of  his  land  estate,  and  the  rest
goes  to  the  king;  but  if  he  has  children,  the  wife  has
a  third  of  all4.  The  king  is  still  considered  as  ultimus
heres.  In  Scotland  there  is  a  further  inconvenience
attending  it.  As  the  king  is  the  heir  of  bastards,  a  bastard

1  A mistake for '  consan-  of  the  two  different  methods  of
guinity ' or '  consanguinity and  computing the degrees of re-
affinity.'  lationship. The  case  is  exactly

2  Doubtless owing to a slip  the  opposite  of  what  is  stated  in
on the part of the lecturer,  the  text.

'  canon  '  and  '  civil '  have  changed z  Scil.  '  if  he  die  childless.'
places  throughout  this  exposition 4  See  above,  p.  86  and  notes.


90  PART I  : JUSTICE

is  incapable  of  making  a  testament,  because  it  would  cut
the  king  out  of  his  right.  The  king  can,  however,  grant
him  letters  of  legitimation  which  make  him  capable  of
testating,  because,  as  the  right  of  succession  belongs  to  the
king,  he  may  dispose  of  it  as  he  pleases.  However,  this,
or  anything  less  than  an  act  of  parliament,  cannot  give  him
inheritable  blood,  but  an  act  of  the  whole  legislature  can
do  anything.

The  canon  and  civil  law  restore  to  blood  a  person  born
out  of  wedlock  in  the  following  ways  l : —

First,  per  subsequens  mafn'mom'um,  or  marrying  the
woman  that  had  the  children.  As  concubines  were
numerous,  it  was  enacted  that  whoever  married  his  con
cubine  legitimated  her  children.  This  Justinian  after
wards  made  perpetual.

Secondly,  per  oblationem  curiac.  When  the  children
were  willing  to  execute  certain  parish  offices,  as  deacons  2,
&c.,  though  this  entitled  them  only  to  succeed  to  the
father,  and  not  to  his  relations.

Thirdly,  per  adrogationem.  As  for  example,  one  Roman
could  adopt  the  son  of  another,  and  the  son  accept  of  him
as  a  father.  They  had  it  in  their  power  to  adrogate  any
free  man.  Bastards  wrere  considered  as  free  men,  and
if  they  were  willing  to  accept  might  be  adrogated  as
such  3.

Fourthly,  per  [rc]scriphtm  principis,  which  was  much
the  same  with  letters  of  legitimation.

Fifthly,  per  testainentum,  by  which  they  probably  suc
ceeded  only  to  their  father's  estate.

The  canon  law  introduced  the  subsequens  matrimonium
into  all  countries  but  England.  The  English  clergy  were

1  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  non essent in patria potestate
i.  tit.  x.  §§  23-28.  sed sui iuris, poterant profecto

2  A free  rendering of  '  decu-  aparentenaturaliadrogari.' Hei-
riones.'  neccius, Antiq. Rom. lib. i. tit.

3  '  Quum  enim  naturales  liberi  x.  §  27.


DOMESTIC LAW  91

then  l  unpopular  by  joining  with  the  king  against  the
barons,  and  therefore  in  England  the  subsequens  matri-
monium  never  could  legitimate.  That  subsequens  ma-
trimoninm  might  legitimate,  the  canon  law  made  some
restrictions  which  did  not  take  place  at  Rome.  Bastards
of  adulterous  persons  could  not  succeed,  those,  to  wit,  of
a  woman  who  has  a  husband  alive,  or  of  a  concubine
to  a  man  whose  wife  is  alive,  though  they  should  marry
afterwards.  Incestuous  children  also  could  not  succeed,
unless  legitimated  by  a  dispensation  from  the  Pope.

Thus  we  have  seen  the  disabilities  and  incapacities  of
illegitimate  children,  which  can  only  have  an  effect  where
monogamy  prevails ;  and  indeed,  these  alone  hinder  poly
gamy  from  gaining  ground  in  any  country,  because,  if
bastards  were  allowed  to  succeed,  men  would  hardly
subject  themselves  to  the  inconveniences  of  lawful  mar
riage.  To  have  a  wife  entirely  in  their  power,  and  to  take
others  when  they  please,  would  be  more  convenient.

[§  2. Parent  and  Child.}

We  come  now  to  consider  the  history  of  parentage,
being  the  second  relation  in  which  we  were  to  consider
man  as  a  member  of  a  family.  The  authority  of  the
father  over  his  children,  both  with  respect  to  liberty  and
property,  was  at  first  absolute.  He  was  at  liberty  to  choose
whether  he  would  bring  up  his  children  or  not,  and  it  was
accounted  no  injustice  to  refuse  to  do  it.  The  law  hinders
the  doing  injuries  to  others,  but  there  can  be  no  fixed  laws
for  acts  of  benevolence.  All  that  the  law  prohibited  was
immediately  putting  them  to  death  ;  but  he  might  expose
them  if  he  pleased.  Even  with  us  a  father  is  not  obliged
to  ransom  a  son  who  is  taken  captive,  but  may  do  it  or  not

1  Presumably  in  1235-6,  when law  should  be  altered. Statute  of
the  earls  and  barons  refused  the Merton,  20  Hen.  III.  cap.  9.
request  of  the  bishops  that  the


92  PART I  ! JUSTICE

as  he  pleases.  In  the  same  manner  anciently  a  father
might  choose  whether  he  would  ransom  his  son  from
starving,  from  wild  beasts,  and  the  like.  Though  some
regulations  were  made  in  Rome  concerning  this,  they  were
never  well  kept,  and  the  practice  was  not  abolished  till  the
establishment  of  Christianity.  In  China,  at  present,  where
polygamy  takes  place,  they  are  often  obliged  to  expose
them  and  generally  drown  them1.  As  the  father  had  it
entirely  in  his  power  to  bring  up  his  son  or  not,  he  had  an
absolute  jurisdiction  over  him  if  he  did  bring  him  up.  At
Rome  the  father  had  the  ins  vitae  et  necis  et  vendendi.
Besides,  whatever  the  son  acquired  belonged  to  the
father,  and  if  he  married,  his  children  were  considered  as
members  of  the  grandfather's  family.  This  power  of  the
father  over  his  son  was  very  soon  lessened.  The  son  was
connected  with  the  mother's  relations,  and  the  uncle,  whom
on  some  occasions  he  was  to  succeed,  would  naturally  look
after  the  person  who  was  to  be  his  heir.  By  a  law  of
Numa  Pompilius,  if  a  son  was  married,  it  was  no  longer  in
the  father's  power  to  sell  him  2.  The  twelve  tables  indeed
mention  this  privilege  of  the  father,  but  it  is  probable  it
was  only  those  who  married  without  their  father's  consent.
In  like  manner  the  ins  vitae  ct  necis  went  out.  The
father  only  put  in  execution  the  laws  of  his  country  for
capital  crimes.  He  could  take  the  power  out  of  the  hands
of  the  magistrate,  and  condemn  his  son  to  punishment
himself,  but  he  could  not  free  his  son  if  he  was  accused  by
the  laws  of  his  country.  This  shows  that  the  patria
potestas  was  not  altogether  absolute.  This  power  of  the
father  weakened  by  degrees,  and  at  last  went  out  altogether.
The  father  only  pronounced  the  sentence  as  it  was  dictated
to  him  by  the  civil  magistrate,  as  he  himself  might  have
gone  wrong  in  some  forms,  and  by  that  means  rendered

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  viii.  vol.  i.  p.  76.

2  Dion.  Hal.  Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxvii.  quoted  in  Heineccius,
Aittiq.  Rom.  lib.  i.  tit.  ix.  §  6.


DOMESTIC LAW  93

the  whole  null.  It  is  much  the  same  with  the  gentlemen
in  this  country,  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  seize  the
goods  of  their  tenants  when  in  debt,  without  any  form  of
law.  As  they  are  ignorant  how  it  ought  to  be  done,  they
are  obliged  as  well  as  others  to  apply  for  authority  to  the
civil  court,  though  they  are  vested  with  the  power  of
doing  it  themselves.

The  power  of  the  father  with  respect  to  the  property  of
the  son  soon  went  out  likewise.  We  find  that  very  early,
by  a  law  of  Marcianus,  the  fathers  were  obliged  to  provide
proper  wives  for  their  sons,  and  to  bestow  proper  portions
upon  [them];  and  if  they  refused,  the  government  was  to
see  it  done 7.  This  shows  that  the  property  after  marriage
must  have  been  their  own.  The  law  seems  to  have-  been
made  because  the  wife  brought  a  fortune  along  with  her,
and  therefore  it  was  but  reasonable  the  husband  should
also  have  some  property  independent  of  his  father.  It
must  therefore  only  have  been  the  property  of  unmarried
children  over  which  the  parent  had  any  power,  and  this
is  not  unreasonable.  The  authority  of  the  father  was  not
arbitrary  at  Rome,  for  we  often  find  men  accused  there  for
not  taking  proper  care  of  their  children,  which  could
hardly  have  been  the  case  if  they  could  have  put  them
to  death.

Julius  Caesar,  and  after  him  Augustus,  were  the  first
that  gave  to  sons  property  independent  of  their  fathers.
At  first  they  kept  as  their  own  whatever  they  took  in  war,
or  the  peculium  castrcnsc,  afterwards  whatever  they  acquired
by  the  liberal  and  mechanic  arts.  This  was  extended  b}'
Adrian  and  afterwards  by  Justinian  to  everything  unless
what  they  got  from  their  fathers.  All  donations  and
legacies  were  entirely  at  their  own  disposal.  We  also
find  the  power  of  the  father  in  disinheriting  them  limited.
There  were  only  certain  cases  in  which  it  was  in  his  power.

1  Digest,  lib.  xxiii.  tit.  ii.  cap.  19.

2  MS.  reads  '  &  has  '  for  '  to  have,'  but  '  has '  is  written  over  '  have.'


94  PART I  : JUSTICE

After  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  the  power  of  the  father
over  the  son,  as  well  as  over  the  wife,  was  softened.  The
father  came  to  have  over  the  son,  while  he  continued  in  the
family  with  him,  an  authority  much  the  same  with  that
a  father  has  among  us,  that,  to  wit,  of  taking  care  of  his
morals.  But  when  out  of  the  family  he  was  not  so  imme
diately  concerned  about  him.  The  father  has  this  particular
privilege  with  respect  to  his  son,  that  he  can  become  tutor
to  him  without  surety,  and  is  not  accountable,  as  every
other  tutor  is,  for  negligence  and  omission.  This  is  the
natural  authority  the  father  has  over  the  son.  The  father
is  obliged  to  bring  up  his  children,  and  the  children,  in
case  of  old  age  or  infirmity,  to  maintain  the  father.

[$  3. Master  and  Servant.]

We  now  come  to  consider  the  history  of  law  with  regard
to  masters  and  servants,  which  was  the  third  relation  in
which  we  proposed  to  consider  family.  We  have  found
that  the  same  principle  which  gave  the  husband  authority
over  the  wife,  also  gave  the  father  authority  over  the  son.
As  the  power  of  the  husband  was  softened  by  means  of  his
wife's  friends,  with  whom  she  was  connected,  and  to  whom
she  could  complain,  so  that  of  the  father  was  softened  by
the  same  means.  But  it  was  not  so  with  the  servants ;  they
had  nobody  to  whom  they  could  complain,  they  had  no
connexion  with  any  person,  and  having  none  to  take  their
part  they  necessarily  fell  into  a  state  of  slavery.  Accord
ingly  we  find  that  the  master  had  the  power  of  life  and
death  over  them,  quite  different  from  the  ius  vitae  et  necis
over  the  wife  and  children,  which  was  restricted  to  criminal
cases  :  the  power  over  the  servants  was  perfectly  arbitrary.
Besides,  as  the  master  had  the  disposal  of  his  liberty,  a  slave
could  have  no  property.  Whatever  he  has  or  can  acquire
belongs  to  his  master.  No  contract  of  the  slave  could  bind
the  master,  however,  unless  the  laws  found  a  tacit  consent


DOMESTIC LAW  95

of  the  master  implied.  A  slave  can  only  acquire  for  his
master.  If  I  promised  a  slave  .£10,  I  am  obliged  to  pay  it
to  the  master.  But  besides  these  disadvantages,  there  are
many  others,  to  which  the  ancient  Greek  and  Roman
slaves  as  well  as  our  negroes  were  liable,  though  less
attended  to.

First.  They  were  hindered  from  marriage.  They  may
cohabit  with  a  woman,  but  cannot  marry,  because  the  union
between  two  slaves  subsists  no  longer  than  the  master
pleases.  If  the  female  slave  does  not  breed,  he  may  give
her  to  another  or  sell  her.  Among  our  slaves  in  the  West
Indies  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  lasting  union,  the  female
slaves  are  all  prostitutes,  and  suffer  no  degradation  by  it.

Second.  But  slavery  is  attended  with  still  greater  evils
than  these  ;  fora  slave  who  is  a  polytheist  is  properly  under
the  protection  of  no  religion.  He  has  no  God  any  more
than  liberty  and  property.  The  polytheistic  religion  con
sists  of  a  great  number  of  local  deities.  Every  place  has
its  own  divinity.  The  slaves  belong  not  to  the  country,
and  therefore  its  gods  are  no  way  concerned  about  them.
Besides,  a  heathen  can  never  approach  a  deity  empty
handed.  The  slaves  had  nothing  to  offer,  and  therefore
could  expect  no  favour  from  them.  Those  slaves  who
were  employed  about  the  temples  were  the  only  ones  who
could  have  any  title  to  the  protection  of  the  gods.  The
master  prayed  for  them,  but  it  was  in  the  same  manner  that
he  prayed  for  his  cattle.  Every  person  is  superstitious
in  proportion  to  the  precariousness  of  his  life,  liberty,  or
property,  and  to  their  ignorance.  Gamesters  and  savages
are  remarkably  so.  It  is  then  a  very  great  hardship  that
a  slave,  who  is  addicted  to  superstition  from  both  these
causes,  should  be  deprived  of  that  which  is  so  well  fitted
to  soothe  the  natural  feelings  of  the  human  breast.  The
religion  therefore  which  discovered  one  God  who  governed
all  things,  would  naturally  be  very  acceptable  to  slaves.
Accordingly  we  find  that  the  Jewish  religion,  which,  though


96  PART I  : JUSTICE

well  fitted  for  defending  itself,  is,  of  all  others,  the  worst
adapted  to  the  making  of  converts,  because  they  could
never  be  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  from  whom  the  Messiah
was  to  come,  could  not  be  on  a  level  with  the  Jews,  but
only  proselytes  of  the  gate,  and  were  obliged  to  abstain
from  many  kinds  of  food,  with  all  these  disadvantages
made  great  progress  among  the  Roman  slaves.  When
Christianity  was  introduced,  which  was  attended  with  none
of  these  disadvantages,  it  made  the  most  rapid  progress
among  the  slaves.

We  are  apt  to  imagine  that  slavery  is  quite  extirpated,
because  we  know  nothing  of  it  in  this  part  of  the  world ;
but  even  at  present  it  is  almost  universal.  A  small  part  of
the  West  of  Europe  is  the  only  portion  of  the  globe  that  is
free  from  it,  and  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  vast
continents  where  it  still  prevails.  We  shall  endeavour  to
show  how  it  was  abolished  in  this  quarter,  and  for  what
reasons  it  has  continued  in  other  parts,  and  probably
will  continue.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  slavery  takes  place  in  all  societies
at  their  beginning,  and  proceeds  from  that  tyrannic  dis
position  which  may  almost  be  said  to  be  natural  to  mankind.
Whatever  form  of  government  was  established,  it  was  a  part
of  its  constitution  that  slavery  should  be  continued.  In
a  free  government  the  members  would  never  make  a  law
so  hurtful  to  their  interest,  as  they  might  think  the  abolishing
of  slavery  would  be  l.  In  [a]  monarchy  there  is  a  better
chance  for  its  being  abolished,  because  one  single  person  is
lawgiver,  and  the  law  will  not  extend  to  him,  nor  diminish
his  power,  though  it  may  diminish  that  of  his  vassals.  In
a  despotic  government  slaves  may  be  better  treated  than
in  a  free  government,  where  every  law  is  made  by  their
masters,  who  will  never  pass  anything  prejudicial  to  them-

1  '  The  late  resolution  of  the  may  satisfy  us  that  their  number
quakers  in  Pennsylvania  to  set  cannot  be  very  great.'  W.  of  N-
at  liberty  all  their  negro  slaves  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  391.


DOMESTIC LAW  97

selves.  A  monarch  is  more  ready  to  be  influenced  to  do
something  humanely  for  them.  When  Augustus  was  visit
ing  Vedius  Pollio,  one  of  the  slaves,  who  had  accidentally
broken  a  platter,  threw  himself  down  before  Augustus
imploring  his  protection,  that  he  might  not  be  cut  in
pieces  and  thrown  into  the  fish  pond.  Augustus  was  so
shocked  with  this,  that  he  immediately  manumitted  all
Pollio's  slaves,  though  Pollio,  no  doubt,  relished  not  the
behaviour  of  his  guest1.  In  the  reigns  of  Adrian  and
Antoninus,  when  monarchy  had  taken  place,  there  were
several  laws  made  in  favour  of  slaves,  but  never  one  in
the  times  of  the  Republic.  Slavery,  then,  may  be  gradually
softened  under  a  monarch,  but  not  entirely  abolished,  be
cause  no  one  person  whatever  can  have  so  much  authority
as  to  take  away  at  once  the  most  considerable  part  of  the
nation's  property,  because  this  would  occasion  a  general
insurrection.

In  an  opulent  country  the  slaves  are  always  ill-treated,
because  the  number  of  slaves  exceeds  the  number  of  free
men,  and  it  requires  the  most  rigid  discipline  to  keep  them
in  order.  If  a  free  man  was  killed  in  a  house  all  the  slaves

1  This  story  is  to  be  found  in  fol.  Hamburg,  1750-2),  proceeds,
Seneca,  De  t'ra,  lib.  iii.  cap.  40,  '  Quod  visum  etsi  indigne  fere-
and  in  Dio  Cassius,  Hist.  lib.  liv.  bat  Vedius,  quia  tamen  neque
cap.  23,  but  neither  of  these  propter  unicum  poculum,  re-
authorities  says  that  all  Pollio's  spectu  tantae  eorum,  quae  perie-
slaves  were  manumitted.  Seneca  rant,  multitudinis,  amplius  irasci,
says,  '  Motus  est  novitate  cru-  neque  poenas  eius  rei  quam
delitatis  Caesar  et  ilium  quidem  et  Augustus  fecisset,  a  servo
mitti,  crystallina  autem  omnia  exigere  poterat,  vel  invitus  con-
coram  se  fringi  iussit,  com-  quievit.'  In  IV.  of  N.  bk.  iv.
plerique  piscinam.'  Dio  Cassius  chap.  vii.  pt.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  168,
says  nothing  of  manumission.  Vedius  is  said  to  have  been
After  describing  the  destruction  commanded  '  to  emancipate  im-
of  Pollio's  valuable  goblets,  his  mediately  not  only  that  slave,
account  of  the  matter,  in  the  but  all  the  others  that  belonged
words  of  the  Latin  translation  to  him,'  so  that  the  mistake
probably  used  by  Adam  Smith  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  re-
(ed.  H.  S.  Reimarus,  2  vols.  porter.


98  PART I  : JUSTICE

were  put  to  death l.  Several  authors  tell  us  that  in  the
night-time  at  Rome,  nothing  was  to  be  heard  but  the  cries
of  slaves  whom  their  masters  were  punishing 2.  Ovid  tells
us  that  the  slave  who  kept  the  gate  was  chained  to  it 3,  and
the  slaves  who  manured  the  ground  were  chained  together
lest  they  should  run  away 4  ;  and  what  was  more  cruel,
when  an  old  slave  was  incapable  for  work  he  was  turned  out
to  die  on  an  island,  near  the  city 5,  kept  for  that  purpose.
Slavery  is  more  tolerable  in  a  barbarous  than  in  a  civilized
society.  In  an  uncultivated  country  the  poverty  of  the
people  makes  the  number  of  the  slaves  anyone  can  keep
quite  inconsiderable,  and  therefore  their  discipline  will  not
be  so  rigid  as  when  they  are  numerous c.  Besides,  in
a  barbarous  country,  the  master  labours  himself  as  well  as
the  slave,  and  therefore  they  are  more  nearly  on  a  level.
In  the  early  periods  of  Rome  the  slave  worked  with  his
master  and  ate  with  him,  and  the  only  punishment  in  case
of  misbehaviour  was  the  carrying  a  cross  stick  through  the

1  Sell,  'at  Rome'; 'a  house' established  custom  had  assigned
should be '  his house.' Hume, for  them.'

'  Of  the  Populousness  of  Ancient  3  '  A  chained  slave  for  a  porter

Nations,'  Political  Discourses,  1752,  was  usual  in  Rome,  as  appears

p. 174, quotes a case from  from Ovid and other  authors:'

Tacitus,  Ann.  lib.  xiv.  cap.  42  45,  Hume,  'Of  the  Populousness  of

where  four  hundred  slaves  were  Ancient Nations,' Political  Dis-

put  to  death.  courses,  1752^.164.  The  reference

2  Seneca,  as  quoted  by  Hume,  is  to  Amor.  lib.  i.  cleg.  6,  '  lani-
'  Of  the  Populousness  of  Ancient  tor (indignum  !) dura religate
Nations,'  Political  Discourses,  1752,  catena.'

pp.  164,  165,  mentions  the  case *  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  i.

of  a man who  turns  night  into  tit.  iii.  §  8n: 'Sic  et  ruri  quidam

day,  so  that  regularly  about  the  vincti  faciebant  opus ;  Columella,

third  hour  of  the  night,  his  neigh-  De  re  rust.  I.  ult. ;  Plin.  Hist.  nat.

bours hear the noise  of  whips  xviii.  3;  Seneca,  De  benef.  vii.  10 '.

and lashes. 'This is not re-  'Manured'  is  of course  used  in

marked,'  says  Hume,  'as  an  in-  its  old  sense  of  ' cultivated.'
stance of cruelty, but only  of 5  In  the  Tiber:  Hume, 'Of  the

disorder,  which,  even  in  actions  Populousness  of  Ancient  Nations,'

the  most usual  and  methodical,  Political  Discourses,  1752,  p.  163.
changes  the  fixed  hours  that  an c  Ibid.  p.  223.


DOMESTIC LAW  99

town  or  village.  In  Jamaica  and  Barbadoes,  where  slaves
are  numerous  and  objects  of  jealousy,  punishments  even
for  slight  offences  are  very  shocking ;  but  in  North  America
they  are  treated  with  the  greatest  mildness  and  humanity l.

Thus  we  have  shown  that  slavery  is  more  severe  in  pro
portion  to  the  culture  of  society.  Freedom  and  opulence
contribute  to  the  misery  of  the  slaves.  The  perfection
of  freedom  is  their  greatest  bondage ;  and,  as  they  are
the  most  numerous  part  of  mankind,  no  human2  person
will  wish  for  liberty  in  a  country  where  this  institution  is
established.

It  is  almost  needless  to  prove  that  slavery  is  a  bad  institu
tion  even  for  free  men.  A  free  man  who  works  for  day's
wages  will  work  far  more  in  proportion  than  a  slave  in  pro
portion  to  the  expense  that  is  necessary  for  maintaining
and  bringing  him  up:!.  In  ancient  Italy  an  estate  managed
by  slaves,  in  the  most  fertile  country,  yielded  to  the  master
only  one-sixth  of  the  produce,  whereas  a  landlord  even  in
our  barren  country  receives  a  third,  and  the  tenants  live
much  better.  Slaves  cultivate  only  for  themselves  ;  the
surplus  goes  to  the  master,  and  therefore  they  are  careless
about  cultivating  the  ground  to  the  best  advantage.  A
free  man  keeps  as  his  own  whatever  is  above  his  rent,  and
therefore  has  a  motive  to  industry.  Our  colonies  would
be  much  better  cultivated  by  free  men.  That  slavery  is
a  disadvantage  appears  from  the  state  of  colliers  and  salters
in  our  own  country.  They  have  indeed  privileges  which
slaves  have  not.  Their  property  after  maintenance  is
their  own,  they  cannot  be  sold  but  along  with  the  work,
they  enjoy  marriage  and  religion,  but  they  have  not  their
liberty  altogether,  and  it  would  certainly  be  an  advantage

1  Kalm, En Resa til Norra  ever  have  come  across  a  quota-

America,  1753-61,  torn.  ii.  (1756),  tion from the German version

p. 480, makes a statement to  (1754-1764).

this effect,  but his work was  2  Humane,

not translated into English till  3  IV.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  viii.  vol.  i.

1770-71.  Adam  Smith  may  how-  p.  85.

H  2


100  PART I  : JUSTICE

to  the  master  that  they  were  free.  The  common  wages  of
a  day  labourer  is  between  six  and  eight  pence,  that  of
a  collier  is  half-a-crown.  If  they  were  free  their  prices
would  fall.  At  Newcastle  the  wages  exceed  not  tenpence
or  a  shilling,  yet  colliers  often  leave  our  coal-works,  where
they  have  half-a-crown  a  day,  and  run  there,  though  they
have  less  wages,  where  they  have  liberty.

There  is  still  one  inconvenience  more  that  attends  slavery,
that  it  diminishes  the  number  of  free  men  even  to  a  degree
beyond  imagination,  for  every  slave  takes  up  the  room  of
a  free  man.  The  inequality  of  fortune  seemed  at  first  a  mis
fortune,  and  laws  were  made  against  it.  £10  per  annum
is  reckoned  the  necessary  expense  of  one  man.  A  landed
gentleman  who  has  £10,000  per  annum  spends  what  would
maintain  a  thousand  men.  At  first  sight  we  are  apt  to  con
ceive  him  a  monster  who  eats  up  the  food  of  so  many,  but
if  we  attend  to  it  he  is  really  useful,  and  he  eats  or
wears  no  more  than  the  rest.  £10  serves  him  too,  and
his  £10,000  maintains  a  thousand  people  who  are  em
ployed  in  refining  his  £10  by  an  infinity  of  ways  so  as
to  make  it  worth  the  whole.  This  gives  room  for  all
kinds  of  manufactures.  When  slaves  are  employed  to
sift,  as  it  were,  this  £10  out  of  the  £10,000,  one  must  be
a  tailor,  another  a  weaver,  a  third  a  smith,  and  thus
each  takes  up  a  free  man's  place.

We  come  now  to  account  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  in
this  part  of  the  world.  The  slaves  in  this  and  the  neigh
bouring  countries  were  those  who  cultivated  the  ground,
and  were  what  was  called  adscripti  glebae,  and  could  only
be  sold  along  with  the  land.  As  they  had  nothing  but
their  maintenance  for  their  labour,  the  ground  was  but
badly  cultivated.  To  remedy  this  disadvantage,  tenants  by
steelbow  were  introduced  *.  They  had  no  stock  them
selves,  and  therefore  the  landlord  gave  them  cattle  and
the  implements  for  ploughing,  which  they  resigned  at  the
1  IV.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  393.


DOMESTIC LAW  IOI

end  of  the  lease.  At  harvest  the  crop  was  equally  divided
between  the  landlord  and  tenant.  This  was  the  first
species  of  free  tenants,  who  were  plainly  emancipated
villains.  After  this  custom  had  continued  for  a  long  time
the  tenants  picked  up  so  much  as  enabled  them  to  make
a  bargain  with  the  landlord  to  give  him  a  certain  sum  for
a  lease  of  so  many  years  ;  and  whatever  the  ground  should
produce  they  would  take  their  venture.  This  is  plainly
an  advantage  to  the  landlord ;  the  ground  every  year  is
better  cultivated,  he  is  at  no  expense,  and  the  half  of  the
product  was  better  to  the  tenants  than  any  sum  they  would
give l.  By  the  feudal  law  the  lord  had  an  absolute  sway
over  his  vassals.  In  peace  he  was  the  administrator  of
justice,  and  they  were  obliged  to  follow  him  in  war.  When
government  became  a  little  better  established,  the  sovereign
did  all  he  could  to  lessen  this  influence,  which  on  some
occasions  was  dangerous  to  himself,  and  hindered  people
from  applying  to  him  for  justice.  As  therefore  the  ancient
villains  were  tenants  at  will,  were  obliged  to  perform
certain  duties  to  their  master,  and  were  entirely  at  his
disposal,  a  law  was  made  taking  away  all  their  burdens
but  that  of  being  tenants  at  will,  and  at  last  their  privilege
was  extended  and  they  became  copyholders.

Another  cause  of  the  abolition  of  slavery  was  the  in
fluence  of  the  clergy,  but  by  no  means  the  spirit  of  Chris
tianity,  for  our  planters  are  all  Christians.  Whatever
diminished  the  power  of  the  nobles  over  their  inferiors
increased  the  power  of  the  ecclesiastics.  As  the  clergy
are  generally  more  in  favour  with  the  common  people
than  the  nobility,  they  would  do  all  they  could  to  have
their  privileges  extended,  especially  as  they  might  have
expectations  of  reaping  benefit  by  it.  Accordingly  we

1  I.e.  the  half  of  the  product  to  the  other  half,  was  of more

which  the  tenants  used  to  hand  value  to  them  than any  money

over  to  the landlord,  and now  rent they were likely to pay

kept for  themselves  in  addition  instead  of  it.


102  PART I  : JUSTICE

find  that  Pope  Innocent  III  encouraged  all  landlords
to  emancipate  their  slaves1.  Thus  the  influence  of  the
clergy,  combining  with  that  of  the  king,  hastened  the
abolition  of  slavery  in  the  West  of  Europe.  Agreeable
to  this  we  find  that,  in  countries  where  neither  the  king
nor  the  church  were  very  powerful,  slavery  still  prevails.
In  Bohemia,  Hungary,  and  those  countries  where  the
sovereign  is  elective,  and  consequently  never  could  have
great  authority,  and  besides,  where  the  church  never  had
any  great  influence,  servitude  still  remains,  because  the
court  is  by  no  means  powerful  enough  to  emancipate  the
slaves  of  the  nobility.

To  show  by  what  means  slaves  are  acquired,  to  consider
the  state  of  domestic  servants  in  our  own  country,  together
with  mentioning  a  certain  particular  state  of  families,  will
be  all  that  is  to  be  said  on  this  head  respecting  man  as
a  member  of  a  family.

Slaves  may  be  acquired  five  different  ways.  First,
captives  in  war,  in  almost  every  country,  are  slaves.  If
the  conqueror  does  not  kill  them,  he  has  a  right  to  make
them  slaves.  Secondly,  as  captives  become  slaves,  having
nobody  to  deliver  them,  so  their  children  become  slaves
also.  Thirdly,  persons  guilty  of  certain  crimes  were
made  slaves,  sometimes  to  the  person  injured,  sometimes
to  the  public.  Fourthly,  debtors  in  the  ancient  state  of
the  Roman  Republic  were  made  slaves.  If  they  could
not  pay  their  debt  it  was  thought  reasonable  they  should
work  for  it.  This  still  takes  place  in  all  countries  where
slavery  is  established.  Fifthly,  there  is  a  sort  of  voluntary
slavery  when  an  indigent  citizen  sells  himself  to  be
the  slave  of  another  person.  When  a  person  sells  him
self  to  another  for  any  sum,  by  the  laws  of  slavery  this
very  sum  becomes  the  property  of  the  person  who  bought

1  In W.  of  N. bk. iii. ch.  ii. bull  for  the  general  emancipation
vol.  i.  p. 393,  Alexander III is of  slaves,
mentioned as the author  of  a


DOMESTIC LAW  103

him.  But  when  a  person  was  in  debt  and  obliged  to
become  a  slave  for  it,  he  would  not  perhaps  choose  to
be  his  creditor's  slave  for  fear  of  ill-usage,  and  would
therefore  sell  himself  to  another  person,  on  condition
that  he  would  pay  his  debt.  The  citizens  of  Rome  were
often  in  debt,  and  by  that  means  became  entirely  dependent
upon  their  superiors.  Many  of  them  had  no  means  of
subsistence  but  what  they  received  from  candidates  for
their  votes,  and,  as  this  was  by  no  means  sufficient  for  that
purpose,  they  often  borrowed  from  them  to  whom  they
gave  their  votes,  who  were  ready  enough  to  lend  that  they
might  secure  them  entirely  to  their  interest.  By  this
means  they  could  not  give  their  vote  to  any  other  person
unless  he  paid  what  they  owed  to  their  creditors,  which
few  would  be  willing  to  do,  as  for  the  most  part  they  owed
more  than  the  value  of  their  votes.

In  the  middle  age  of  the  Republic  these  two  last  methods
of  acquiring  slaves  were  prohibited  by  express  laws,  the
first  by  what  was  called  cessio  bonorum,  and  the  latter  by
a  law  prohibiting  any  free  man  to  sell  himself.

The  slavery  in  the  West  Indies  took  place  contrary  to
law.  When  that  country  was  conquered  by  Spain,
Isabella  and  Ferdinand  were  at  the  greatest  pains  to
prevent  the  Indians  from  falling  into  a  state  of  servitude,
their  intention  being  to  make  settlements,  to  trade  with
them,  and  to  instruct  them.  But  Columbus  and  Cortez
were  far  from  the  law,  and  obeyed  not  their  orders,  but
reduced  them  to  slavery,  which  in  a  manner  instituted
itself  among  them.

We  come  now  to  consider  the  state  of  servants.  A  negro
in  this  country  is  a  [free]  man.  If  you  have  a  negro
servant  stolen  from  you,  you  can  have  no  action  for  the
price,  but  only  for  damages  sustained  by  the  loss  of  your
servant.  In  like  manner  if  a  negro  is  killed,  the  person
who  does  it  is  guilty  of  murder ;  but  though  a  negro
servant  is  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  a  free  man  while


104  PART I  : JUSTICE

here,  you  can  oblige  him  to  return  to  America  and
keep  him  as  formerly.  It  is  not  from  Christianity,  but
from  the  lav/s  of  this  country  that  he  enjoys  freedom,
because  there  is  no  such  thing  as  slavery  among  us.

The  greatest  dependents  among  us  are  menial  servants
(inter  moenia)  who  are  bound  from  one  term  to  another.
They  have  almost  the  same  privileges  with  their  master,
liberty,  wages,  &c.  The  master  has  a  right  to  correct  his
servant  moderately,  and  if  he  should  die  under  his  cor
rection  it  is  not  murder,  unless  it  was  done  with  an
offensive  weapon,  or  with  forethought  and  without  provo
cation.  A  servant  can  acquire  property  for  his  master
either  when  he  acts  by  his  express  authority,  or  when
a  tacit  consent  is  implied.  If  a  servant  buys  or  sells
goods  in  his  master's  name,  his  master  has  room  for  an
action  in  case  of  non-payment  or  of  non-delivery.  As
there  is  a  peculiar  connexion  between  master  and
servant,  they  can  be  vindicated  in  many  cases  where  any
other  person  would  be  found  guilty.  If  either  master
or  servant  kill  any  other  person  in  defence  of  each
other,  it  is  justifiable  homicide.  If  a  master  dies  before
the  term,  the  executors  are  obliged  to  pay  up  the  whole
of  the  servant's  wages  and  to  maintain  him  besides.

Apprentices  are  much  in  the  same  way  with  servants,
only  with  this  difference,  that  the  master  receives  a  fee
with  the  apprentice,  and  is  obliged  to  teach  him  a  trade ;
and  if  he  refuse  to  do  it  he  may  be  pursued  for  damages
and  loss  of  time.


\j  4.  Guardian  and  Warct\

We  come  now  to  consider  the  particular  state  of
families.  When  a  father  dies  leaving  his  children  young,
it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  taken  care  of.  Even  in
the  times  of  exposition,  when  an  infant  was  some  time  kept,
it  was  thought  cruel  to  put  him  to  death :  the  child  was


DOMESTIC LAW  105

destitute,  there  were  then  no  hospitals  or  places  of
charity :  it  must  therefore  be  put  into  the  custody  of  some
person.  The  nearest  relation  by  the  father's  side  was  he
whom  the  law  fixed  upon.  In  an  early  age  the  mainten
ance  of  the  child  was  all  that  was  to  be  taken  care  of,  for
there  were  no  estates  to  manage,  and  the  mother  went
back  to  her  father's  family.  This  guardianship  terminated
when  the  child  was  about  thirteen  or  fourteen  years  of  age,
at  which  time  it  was  capable  in  that  age  to  shift  for  itself.
But  when  men  came  to  be  possessed  of  estates,  though  he
might  be  supposed  capable  of  shifting  for  himself  about
that  age,  yet  he  could  not  be  capable  of  managing  an
estate.  Now  it  became  necessary  to  retain  him  in  pupil-
larity  more  than  fourteen  years.  By  praetorian  law,  at
that  age  he  was  allowed  to  choose  his  guardians  or
curators.  A  curator  can  do  nothing  without  the  consent
of  the  pupil ;  a  guardian  can  act  without  his  consent,  but
is  accountable  to  his  pupil  for  whatever  he  does  during
his  minority.  At  first  lunatics  and  idiots  were  almost
the  only  persons  who  had  guardians ;  and,  on  account  of
its  being  disgraceful  to  have  one,  it  was  generally  de
clined.  Afterwards  the  law  made  invalid  all  acts  of  the
pupil,  till  he  was  twenty-one,  without  the  consent  of  his
curators.  As  the  nearest  relation  by  the  father's  side  is
often  next  heir,  it  was  reckoned  improper  to  trust  the
person  of  the  son  with  him.  The  English  law  carried
this  so  far  that  if  an  estate  was  left  to  the  son  in  [his]
father's  lifetime  he  was  not  trusted  with  him.  By  our
law  the  care  of  an  estate  is  entrusted  to  the  next  heir,
as  he  will  probably  take  best  care  of  it ;  and  the  heir  to
a  more  remote  relation,  who  will  take  best  care  of  him,  as
he  cannot  be  benefited  by  his  death.

[$  5. Domestic  Offences  and  their  Punishments]

We  will  now  mention some  offences  in  families  with
their  peculiar  punishments. Infidelity  of  the  wife  to  the


106  PART I  : JUSTICE

husband  is  punished  with  the  greatest  ignominy.  In  the
husband,  it  never  was  punished  with  death,  nor  in  the
woman  unless  where  the  greatest  jealousy  prevails.  It
would  be  thought  ridiculous  in  our  country  to  bring
a  woman  to  the  scaffold  for  adultery.  Forcible  marriages
and  rapes  are  generally  punished  with  death l.  Bigamy,  as
it  dishonours  the  former  wife,  is  punished  capitally 2.  As
there  is  the  closest  connexion  betwixt  persons  in  a  family,
if  the  wife  kills  3  the  husband,  it  is  considered  as  a  sort  of
petty  treason,  and  the  punishment  by  the  English  law  is
burning  alive4.  The  same  is  the  punishment  if  a  servant
kills  his  master  or  makes  an  attempt  upon  him 5.  Thus  we
have  finished  all  that  is  to  be  said  with  regard  to  man,
considered  as  a  member  of  a  family.

1  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Croivn,  History  of  England,  vol.  i.  p.  506.

bk.  i.  chs.  xli,  xlii.  5  '  His'  should  be  '  her,'  since

'2  Ibid.  ch.  xliii,  under  i  Jac.  'the  same  is  the  punishment'

I.  cap.  n.  would  of  course  only  be  true  if

3  MS.  reads  '  punishes.'  the servant was a woman. A

4  Hawkins,  P.C.  bk.  i.  ch.  xxxii,  man-servant's  punishment  was  to
bk.  ii.  ch.  xlviii.  §  6. This  \vas  be  drawn  and  hanged  (see  Haw-
nominally  the  woman's punish-  kins,  P.  C.  bk.  ii.  ch.  xlviii.  §  5).
ment  in  all  cases  of  treason,  but  <  Or  makes  an  attempt '  is  simply
the  practice  was  to  strangle  her  erroneous. Hawkins,  P.  C.  bk.  i.
before  burning  her. See  Lecky,  ch.  xxxii.


[DIVISION III.] PRIVATE LAW

[J  i . First  way  of  acquiring  Property :
Occupation]

WE  formerly  explained  the  nature  of  rights,  and  divided
them  into  natural  and  acquired.  The  former  need  no
explanation ;  the  latter  are  divided  into  real  and  personal.
Real  rights  are  property,  servitude,  pledge,  and  exclusive
privilege.  We  are  first  to  treat  of  property.

Property  is  acquired  five  ways.  First,  by  occupation,
or  the  taking  possession  of  what  formerly  belonged  to
nobody.  Second,  by  accession,  when  a  man  has  a  right
to  one  thing  in  consequence  of  another,  as  of  a  horse's
shoes  along  with  the  horse.  Third,  by  prescription,
which  is  a  right  to  a  thing  belonging  to  another  arising
from  long  and  uninterrupted  possession.  Fourth,  by  suc
cession  to  our  ancestors  or  any  other  person,  whether  by
a  will  or  without  one.  Fifth,  by  voluntary  transference,
when  one  man  delivers  over  his  right  to  another.

We  shall  first  treat  of  occupation,  the  laws  of  which
vary  according  to  the  periods  of  human  society.  The
four  stages  of  society  are  hunting,  pasturage,  farming,
and  commerce.  If  a  mimhiT  <>t"  persons  were  ship
wrecked  on  a  desert  island  their  first  sustenance  would
be  from  the  fruits  which  the  soil  naturally  produced,  and
the  wild  beasts  which  they  could  kill.  As  these  could
not  at  all  times  be  sufficient,  they  came  at  last  to  tame
some  of  the  wild  beasts  that  they  might  always  have
them  at  hand.  In  process  of  time  even  these  would


108  PART I  : JUSTICE

not  be  sufficient ;  and  as  they  saw  the  earth  naturally
produce  considerable  quantities  of  vegetables  of  its  own
accord,  they  would  think  of  cultivating  it  so  that  it
might  produce  more  of  them.  Hence  agriculture,  which
requires  a  good  deal  of  refinement  before  it  could
become  the  prevailing  employment  of  a  country.  There
is  only  one  exception  to  this  order,  to  wit,  some  North
American  nations  cultivate  a  little  piece  of  ground,
though  they  have  no  notion  of  keeping  flocks.  The
age  of  commerce  naturally  succeeds  that  of  agriculture.
As  men  could  now  confine  themselves  to  one  species
of  labour,  they  would  naturally  exchange  the  surplus
of  their  own  commodity  for  that  of  another  of  which
they  stood  in  need.  According  to  these  stages  occupa
tion  must  vary.  Occupation  seems  to  be  well  founded
when  the  spectator  can  go  along  with  my  possession  of
the  object,  and  approve  me  when  I  defend  my  posses
sion  by  force.  If  I  have  gathered  some  wild  fruit,  it
will  appear  reasonable  to  the  spectator  that  I  should
dispose  of  it  as  I  please.

The  first  thing  that  requires  notice  in  occupation  among
hunters  is  what  constitutes  it,  and  when  it  begins,  whether
it  be  on  the  discovery  of  the  wild  beast  or  after  it  is
actually  in  possession.  Lawyers  have  varied  on  this  head,
some  give  a  part  to  the  person  who  has  formerly  wounded
a  wild  beast,  though  [he]  have  given  up  the  chase,  and
others  do  not.  All  agree  that  it  is  a  breach  of  property
to  break  in  on  the  chase  of  a  wild  beast  which  another
has  started,  though  some  are  of  opinion  that  if  another
should  wound  the  beast  in  its  flight  he  is  entitled  to
a  share,  as  he  rendered  the  taking  of  it  more  easy  upon
the  whole  l.  Among  savages  property  begins  and  ends
with  possession,  and  they  seem  scarce  to  have  any  idea

1  Instit.  lib.  ii.  tit.  i.  §  13.  Cp  Government,  §  30 ;  Pufendorf,  De
Hutcheson,  Introduction  to  Moral  iure  naturae  et gentium,  lib.  iv.  cap.
Philosophy,  p.  154  ;  Locke,  Civil  vi.  §  10.


PRIVATE LAW  109

of  anything  as  their  own  which  is  not  about  their  own
bodies.

Among  shepherds  the  idea  of  property  is  further
extended.  Not  only  what  they  carry  about  with  them,
but  also  what  they  have  deposited  in  their  hovels,  is
their  own.  They  consider  their  cattle  as  their  own
while  they  have  a  habit  of  returning  to  them  l.  When
the  generality  of  beasts  are  occupied,  they  consider  them
as  their  own  even  after  they  have  lost  the  habit  of
returning  home,  and  they  may  be  claimed  for  a  certain
time  after  they  have  strayed.  But  property  receives  its
greatest  extension  from  agriculture.  When  it  first  became
necessary  to  cultivate  the  earth,  no  person  had  any
property  in  it,  and  the  little  plot  which  was  dressed  near
their  hovels  would  be  common  to  the  whole  village,  and
the  fruits  would  be  equally  divided  among  the  individuals.
There  are  the  remains  of  a  common  land  property  in  our
own  country  at  this  day.  In  many  places  there  is  a  piece
of  ground  belonging  equally  to  several  persons,  and  after
harvest,  cattle  are,  in  many  places,  allowed  to  feed  where
they  please.  Private  property  in  land  never  begins  till
a  division  be  made  from  common  agreement,  which  is
generally  when  cities  begin  to  be  built,  as  everyone  \vould
choose  that  his  house,  which  is  a  permanent  object,  should
be  entirely  his  own  2.  Moveable  property  may  be  occupied
in  the  very  first  beginnings  of  society,  but  lands  cannot  be
occupied  without  an  actual  division.  An  Arab  or  a  Tartar
will  drive  his  flocks  over  an  immense  country  without
supposing  a  single  grain  of  sand  in  it  his  own  3.  By  the
laws  of  many  countries  there  are  some  things,  however,
that  cannot  be  occupied  by  any  private  person.  Treasure
and  derelict  goods,  by  the  laws  of  Britain,  belong  to  the
king.  This  arises  from  that  natural  influence  of  superiors

1  Instit.  lib.  ii.  tit.  i.  §  15.  s  Locke,  Civil  Government,  §  38,

2  Pufendorf,  De  hire  naturae  et of  Abraham  :  Dalrymple,  Feudal
gentium,  lib.  iv.  cap.  iv.  §  6.  Property,  p.  91,  of  North  America.


110  PART I  : JUSTICE

which  draws  everything  to  itself  that  it  can  without  a
violation  of  the  most  manifest  rules  of  justice.  In  like
manner  seas  and  rivers  cannot  be  occupied  by  any  private
person :  unless  [it  is]  particularly  specified  in  your
charter,  you  cannot  take  large  fishes  in  a  river  running
through  your  own  estate '.  A  sea  surrounded  by  several
nations  cannot  be  occupied  by  any  one,  but  all  must  have
a  part  of  the  jurisdiction,  but  any  nation  may  hinder
another  from  fishing  in  its  bays,  or  approaching  its  coasts
with  vessels  of  war.


[§  2.  Second  way  of  acquiring  Property :  Accession^

The  right  of  accession  is  not  so  much  founded  in  its
utility  as  in  the  impropriety  of  not  joining  it  to  that  object
on  which  it  has  a  dependence.  The  milk  of  a  cow  I  have
purchased  may  not  be  of  great  value,  but  it  is  very
improper  that  another  person  should  have  a  right  to  bring
up  his  calf  upon  it.  The  most  important  accessions  are
in  land  property.  Land  property  is  founded  on  division
or  an  assignation  by  the  society  to  a  particular  person  of
a  right  to  sow  and  plant  a  certain  piece  of  ground.  In
consequence  of  this  right  he  must  also  have  a  right  to
whatever  it  produces,  trees,  fruit,  minerals,  &c.  Alluvions
made  by  any  river  naturally  belong  to  the  proprietor  of
the  adjacent  territory  ;  but  when  the  additions  are  very
large,  as  is  often  the  case  in  low  countries,  the  government
claims  them,  and  the  proprietor  of  the  adjacent  estate  must
purchase  it  before  he  possess  it 2.

The  principal  dispute  concerning  accession  is,  when
does  the  principal  belong  to  me,  and  the  accession  to
another,  or,  if  they  be  mixed,  to  whom  does  the  whole
belong?  It  is  a  maxim  in  law  that  no  person  be  a  gainer

1  The  reference  is to salmon* 1751-3,  vol.  i.  p.  574.
fishing  in  Scotland : MacDouall, 2  Pufendorf,  De  hire  naturae  et
Institute  of  the  Laws  of  Scotland, gentium,  lib.  iv.  cap.  vii.  §  12.


PRIVATE LAW  III

by  another's  loss '.  If  a  man  build  a  house  by  mistake
upon  my  ground,  though  the  materials  be  his,  it  is  but
reasonable  that  I  should  have  the  house,  or  be  indemnified
for  my  loss.  In  general  the  accession  follows  the  principal,
though  in  some  cases,  as  where  the  workmanship  is  of
more  value  than  the  materials,  substcvitia  cedet  formae.  The
lawyers  were,  however,  unwilling  directly  to  contradict  their
general  and  established  maxim,  and  therefore  evaded  it  by
giving  the  principal  to  the  proprietor  of  the  accession
when  it  became  a  new  species,  that  is,  when  it  received
a  new  form  and  a  new  name.  This,  however,  was  liable
to  exceptions.  A  picture  and  the  board  on  which  it  was
painted  were  in  Latin  of  the  same  species  ;  each  was
a  tabula,  and  therefore  the  picture  by  this  amendment  still
belonged  to  the  proprietor  of  an  insignificant  board.  The
most  general  rule  with  regard  to  accessions  is  this,  when
the  thing  can  be  reduced  to  its  primitive  form  without
lessening  its  value  or  without  any  great  loss  to  the  pro
prietor  of  the  accession,  the  proprietor  of  the  principal
may  justly  claim  it,  but  when  this  cannot  be  done,  the
law  justly  favours  the  proprietor  of  the  accession,  and
obliges  him  only  to  content  the  original  proprietor  for  his
property.

[}  3.  Third  way  of  acquiring  Property:  Prescription^

Prescription  is  founded  on  .the  supposed  attachment  of
the  possessor  to  what  he  has  long  been  possessed  of,  and
the  supposed  detachment  of  affection  in  the  old  possessor
to  what  has  been  long  out  of  his  possession.  There  are  four
things  requisite  to  form  a  right  by  prescription.  First,
bona  fides,  for  if  a  person  be  sensible  that  his  right  to
a  thing  is  bad,  it  is  no  injury  -to  deprive  him  of  it,  and

1  '  Nihil tritius ea sententia 9inre naturae et  gentium, lib. iv.
nemo  debet ex alterius damno cap.  xiii.  §  6.
lucrum  capere.' Pufendorf,  De


112  PART I  : JUSTICE

the  indifferent  spectator  can  easily  go  along  with  the
depriving  him  of  the  possession.  Second,  Justus  titulus,
by  which  is  not  meant  a  title  just  in  all  respects,  for  this  is
of  itself  sufficient  without  anything  else,  but  a  iustus  titulus
signifies  some  reasonable  foundation  that  the  person  has
to  think  a  thing  his  own,  such  as  [a]  charter  of  some  kind.
If  he  claims  a  right  without  any  such  title,  no  impartial
spectator  can  enter  into  his  sentiments.  Third,  un
interrupted  possession  is  also  necessary  to  prescription,
for  if  the  property  have  often  been  claimed  of  him,
the  former  possessor  has  not  derelinquished  his  right.
Fourth,  the  time  is  only  to  be  reckoned  when  there  was
a  person  to  claim  the  property ;  and  therefore  the  longest
uninterrupted  possession  when  the  proprietor  was  a
minor,  a  lunatic,  or  in  banishment,  can  give  no  right.

A  iustus  titulus  is  a  proof  of  bona  fides,  and  bona  fides  is
requisite  to  a  iustus  titulus.  By  the  Roman  law,  bona  fides
was  only  required  at  the  first  taking  possession,  and,  though
afterwards  you  found  a  fault  in  your  title,  prescription  took
place.  Nature  has  fixed  no  period  for  prescription,  and
accordingly  it  varies  according  to  the  stability  of  property
in  a  country.  At  Rome,  [imjmoveables  once  prescribed
in  two  years,  but  afterwards  more  was  required1.  In
our  country  a  feudal  lord,  who  continually  had  claims
upon  his  neighbour,  could  scarce  be  brought  to  admit  any
law  of  this  nature.  He  was  willing  to  revive  a  claim
though  as  old  as  the  days  of  Noah,  and  when  at  last
they  fixed  on  a  period,  they  made  it  as  long  as  possible,
to  wit,  forty  years.  Among  the  Romans,  it  is  to  [be]
observed,  that  if  anyone's  possession  was  interrupted
during  the  time  required  for  prescription,  by  an  enemy
coming  into  the  country,  he  had  to  begin  anew  again.  By

1  '  Res  ergo  immobiles  Romae  decennio,  inter  absentes  vicennio

biennio,  mobiles  anno  usucapie-  usucapi  voluit.'  Heineccius,^/*!/.

bantur. Sed  lustinianus  ...  res  Rom.  lib.  ii.  tit.  vi.  §§  2,  9.
.  . .  immobiles  inter  praesentes


PRIVATE LAW  113

the  English  law  nothing  can  interrupt  prescription  but
a  claim  of  the  old  possessor.  Kings  seldom  ever  allow
their  claims  to  prescribe  l,  at  least  they  account  no  length
of  uninterrupted  possession  sufficient  to  do  it.  However,
immemorial  possession  will  ever  carry  this  along  with  it.


[§  4.  Fourth  way  of  acquiring  Property  :  Succession.]

Succession  is  either  legal  or  testamentary.  By  legal
succession  is  meant  that  the  law  should  distribute  the
goods  of  the  deceased  to  those  [to]  whom  it  is  to  be
presumed  the  person  himself  would  have  chosen  that
they  should  be  given,  according  to  some  lawyers2.  But
this  supposes  that  testamentary  succession,  or  a  dis
tribution  of  the  goods  according  to  the  will  of  the
deceased,  was  previous  to  legal  succession,  which  is
contrary  to  experience.  In  a  rude  period  a  man  had
scarce  the  full  property  of  his  goods  during  his  life
time,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  then  he
should  have  had  a  power  to  dispose  of  them  after  his
death.  In  all  nations  the  relations  of  the  dead  person
succeeded  long  before  there  was  any  such  thing  as  a
testament.  The  twelve  tables  at  Rome,  and  the  laws
of  Solon  at  Athens,  seem  first  to  have  introduced
testamentary  succession  :5 ;  but  long  before  this  there  was
legal  succession  in  both  countries.  The  claim  of  the  heir
of  blood  is  always  thought  the  preferable  one,  but  this
claim  is  never  founded  on  the  presumed  will  of  the  de
ceased.  If  we  consider  succession  in  the  earliest  times,
we  shall  find  that  it  is  more  founded  on  the  connexion
of  goods  than  of  persons 4.  As  the  father  and  sons  lived

1  I.e.  kings  seldom  allow  their  3  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom. lib.
claims  ever  to  prescribe.  ii.  tit.  x.  §  5.

2  E.g. Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et  4  '  Veteres  Romani  in succes-
/Hicis, lib. ii. cap. vii. § 3, and  sione  intestatorum  non  id  agebant
Pufendorf,  De  iure  naturae  et  gen-  ut  heredes  essent,  quos  defunctus
/nini,  lib.  iv.  cap.  xi.  §  i.  reliquis cariores habuisse vide-


114  PART I  : JUSTICE

together,  and  were  joint  acquirers  of  any  property  they
had,  when  the  father  died  the  children  had  a  joint  right  to
the  goods,  not  so  much  on  account  of  their  relation  to  the
father  as  on  account  of  the  labour  they  had  bestowed  on
acquiring  them.  The  mother  and  the  children  would  there
fore  continue  in  possession.  Among  the  Romans  the  wife
was  considered  as  a  daughter,  and  had  her  share  ac
cordingly.  If  any  of  the  children  were  settled  out  of  the
family  or  were  emancipated,  they  had  no  share  in  the  suc
cession1,  because  they  ceased  to  co-operate  with  the  rest
in  acquiring  the  goods.  It  may  be  observed  that  when
families  in  this  manner  lived  together  it  was  neces
sary  to  prohibit  marriages  of  cousins.  When  men's 2  sons
and  grandsons  lived  in  the  same  house,  if  all  succeeded
equally  it  was  called  siicccssio  secinidiiin  capita,  but  if  the
grandson  succeeded  only  to  his  father's  part  it  was  sc-
cundinn  stirpes.  If  a  man  had  three  sons  who  were  all
dead,  but  the  oldest  had  left  behind  him  one  son,  the
second  two,  and  [the]  third  three,  by  the  former  rule,  on
the  death  of  their  grandfather,  each  would  have  a  sixth  ;
but  by  the  latter,  the  son  of  the  oldest  would  have  a  third
alone,  the  two  sons  of  the  second  a  third  between  them,
and  the  three  sons  of  the  third  a  third  among  them.
The  grandsons  were  as  it  were  the  representatives  of
their  father.  The  right  of  representation  is  the  same
with  the  successio  secundum  stirpes.  Among  the  Romans
the  right  of  representation  was  introduced  in  favour  of
the  strong,  and  in  prejudice  of  the  weak,  but  in  Britain
[it]  is  the  contrary3.

Among  the  Romans  a  son  could  not  succeed  to the
mother  when  she  died,  because,  as  she  was  considered

retur, (quod principium postea  .  *  Ibid.  §  6.

lustiniano  placuit)  sed ut  facul-  2  MS.  reads  '  wives.'

tates  penes  familiam  manerent.'  3  The  meaning  of  this  possibly

Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom. lib.  iii.  corrupt passage is not easy to

tit.  i.  §  i.  conjecture.


PRIVATE LAW  115

as  a  daughter  of  the  family,  everything  she  had  belonged
to  the  husband  ;  if  the  husband  died  first,  the  wife  shared
with  her  children,  and  then  went  home  to  her  father's
house,  and  succeeded  anew  to  her  father.  But  in  times
of  more  refinement  under  the  emperors,  the  mother
could  succeed  to  the  son,  and  the  son  to  the  mother  '.
Anciently,  when  a  son  died,  no  person  succeeded  to  him,
because  he  and  everything  he  had  belonged  to  his  father.
Caesar  first  made  a  law  that  a  son  might  possess  as
his  own  whatever  he  got  in  war,  or  acquired  by  the
liberal  arts2.

Three  classes  of  men  may  succeed,  ascendants,  de
scendants,  and  collaterals,  as  those  in  an  upper  line  may
succeed  to  those  in  a  lower,  those  in  a  lower  to  those  in
an  upper  line,  or  those  of  the  same  line  to  one  another.
Collateral  succession  at  first  extended  only  to  the  nearest
in  blood  :i,  and  if  he  refused  it  the  goods  belonged  to  the
public4,  but  afterwards  the  praetor  extended  it  to  the
seventh  in  blood fl.  When  a  brother  died  and  another
succeeded,  it  was  in  consequence  of  their  connexion
with  the  father,  who  is  the  common  stock,  and  therefore
succession  of  ascendants  must  have  been  prior  to  that  of
collaterals.  But  the  right  of  descendants  is  stronger
than  either  of  these,  because  the  son's  claim  on  the
father  is  evidently  more  strong  than  that  of  the  father
on  the  son.  The  principles  of  succession  then  in  move-
ables  are  founded  on  the  community  of  goods  which
took  place  anciently  in  families.

The  different  state  of  families  in  our  country  makes  a
considerable  difference  betwixt  ourr>  law  and  ihat  of  the
Romans.  The  wife  is  among  us  a  much  more  considerable
person  than  a  daughter,  and  accordingly  succeeds  to  more.

1  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom.  lib. 4  To  the 'gentiles' or  members
iii.  tit.  iii.  of  the  clan;  ibid.  §  7.

2  Ibid.  lib.  ii.  tit.  ix.  §  2.  5  Ibid  tit.  v.  §  5.

3  Ibid.  lib.  iii.  tit.  ii.  §  3.  6  I.e.  Scotch.


Il6  PART I  : JUSTICE

When  the  husband  dies,  the  goods  are  supposed  to  be
divided  into  three  equal  parts,  one  of  which  is  supposed  to
belong  to  the  deceased  husband,  one  to  the  wife  and  one
to  the  children  :  there  is  however  this  difference,  that  the
husband  can  dispose  of  his  part  by  testament,  which  the
wife  cannot.  A  forisfamiliated  son  is  not  in  the  same
condition  with  an  emancipated  son  among  the  Romans.
He  can  succeed  with  his  brothers ;  only  if  he  has  got
a  portion  he  must  bring  it  into  the  common  stock  at  his
father's  death.  Grandchildren  do  not  succeed  in  place
of  their  deceased  father,  as  among  the  Romans.  The
English  law,  however,  admits  of  representation,  and  it
prefers  ascendants,  if  males,  to  collaterals.

We  come  now  to  treat  of  indivisible  inheritance,  which
was  introduced  by  the  feudal  law.  When  the  nations  that
conquered  the  Roman  Empire  settled  in  the  West  of
Europe,  an  inequality  of  fortune  necessarily  ensued.  As
the  great  had  no  way  of  spending  their  fortunes  but  by
hospitality,  they  necessarily  acquired  prodigious  influence
over  their  vassals  l.  They  gave  out  their  lands  merely  as
a  maintenance  to  their  dependents  ;  and  it  is  observable
that  the  Saxon  word  farm  signifies  victuals 2.

The  chieftains,  from  their  influence,  were  the  sole
administrators  of  justice  in  their  own  territories.  It  was
the  interest  of  government  to  authorize  this  jurisdiction,  as
it  was  the  only  method  of  preserving  peace,  and  as  the
superior  was  the  leader  both  in  peace  and  war.  So  lately
as  in  the  year  1745  this  power  remained  in  the  Highlands
of  Scotland,  and  some  gentlemen  could  bring  several
hundreds  of  men  into  the  field3.  As  these  lords  had  no
other  way  to  dispose  of  their  lands,  they  gave  some  of  them
as  munera,  which  were  revocable  at  their  pleasure,  and

1  Cp.  above,  p.  35.  pp.  413,  414,  where,  however,  the

2  Dalrymple, Feudal  Property,  jurisdiction  is  said  to  be  allodial,
p.  33.  not  feudal.

3  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.


PRIVATE LAW  117

others  they  gave  as  beneficia,  which  continued  during  life
and  returned  to  the  lord  after  their  decease  1.

The  benefices  of  the  clergy  seem  to  have  been  on  this
foundation  and  have  retained  the  name.  By  this  means
the  lords  secured  the  fidelity  of  their  vassals.  As  benefices
were  for  life,  the  property  of  them  naturally  came  to  be
extended  to  the  son  of  the  deceased  tenant,  and  by  degrees
the  tenures  became  hereditary  and  were  called  feudal ;
thus  the  tenant  became  more  independent.  When  any
chieftain  died  and  left  his  son  a  minor,  the  king  appointed
a  leader  to  the  vassals  during  the  minority,  and  appropriated
the  profits  and  emoluments  arising  from  the  lands  to  his
own  use.  When  a  female  succeeded,  the  lord  had  the
power  of  disposing  of  her  in  marriage,  as  it  was  reason
able  that  he  should  name  the  husband  who  was  to  be  his
own  vassal.  As  the  lord  was  guardian  of  the  heir  male,
it  was  also  thought  unreasonable  that  he  should  marry
without  his  consent.  As  the  feudal  lord  possessed  the
lands  during  a  minority,  before  the  minor  could  recover
his  estate,  he  was  obliged  to  pay  what  is  called  a  relief.
This  was  introduced  by  the  court  of  the  king  or  lord,
before  which  the  minor  was  obliged  to  swear  fealty  before
he  could  recover  his  estate.  He  was  also  obliged  to
promise  homage  to  his  superior  before  he  could  enter  on
possession.  Thus  they  held  their  lands  of  the  superior
for  military  service,  homage,  fealty,  wardship,  marriage,
relief,  &c.  Allodial  estates  were  free  from  all  such  sendees  ;
but  as  it  was  for  security  of  property  to  hold  of  some
great  man  who  could  protect  the  proprietor  from  violence,
the  generality  of  estates  became  feudal.  For  the  same
reason  men  possessed  of  great  estates  paid  feu  and  swore
fealty  to  the  sovereign 2.

It  appears  from  this  that  it  must  have  been  a  very
difficult  matter  to  secure  property,  especially  if  it  was

1  Dalrymple,  Feudal  Property,  2  This  paragraph  is  a  summary
p.  199.  See  above,  p.  37,  n.  2.  of  pp.  36  39  above.


Il8  PART I  : JUSTICE

small,  in  those  early  times,  and  therefore  nothing  could
have  a  worse  consequence  than  the  division  of  estates.
The  consequences  of  dividing  the  kingdom  of  France  were
sufficiently  experienced,  and  the  case  would  have  been
still  worse  in  private  estates.  However,  on  account  of
the  opposition  from  the  rest  of  the  sons,  it  was  long  before
the  right  of  primogeniture  or  the  indivisibility  of  estates
could  be  introduced,  and  in  Germany  it  did  not  fully  take
place  before  the  last  century;  but  as  the  circumstances
necessarily  required  it,  estates  were  at  last  made  indivisible,
and  since  a  single  person  was  to  be  preferred,  the  oldest
son  would  naturally  be  the  person.  This  legal  preference
must  be  given  for  some  quality  that  is  altogether  indis
putable.  If  it  were  to  be  given  to  wisdom  or  valour,  there
might  be  great  disputes,  but  among  brothers  there  can  be
[no]  contest  who  is  the  oldest.  In  the  beginnings  of
society  age  itself  is  very  much  respected  ;  and  to  this
day,  among  the  Tartars,  the  king  is  not  succeeded  by  his
son,  but  by  that  one  of  the  royal  family  who  is  oldest.

Primogeniture,  when  introduced,  would  naturally  occa
sion,  succession  by  representation  for  the  following
reason  :  the  younger  brothers  at  first  would  think  it
hard  that  their  older  brother  should  be  preferred  to  them,
and  if  he  died  they  would  still  think  it  harder  that  his
son,  an  infant,  should  come  in  before  them ;  accordingly
in  many  places  this  has  been  disputed  in  single  combat l.
Bruce  and  Balliol  disputed  on  this  account.  According
to  our  notions,  Balliol  had  the*  best  right,  for  he  was
descended  from  the  oldest  daughter,  though  Bruce  was
a  step  nearer  the  common  stock.  The  difficulty  of
introducing  this  at  first  gave  rise  to  a  new  species  of
succession,  by  which,  when  a  father  died,  his  estate
went  to  his  eldest  son,  but  if  he  died  while  his  children

1  '  Non  minus  agitatum  etiam  teriori  sit  praeferendus.'  Grotius,
bellis  et  pugnis  singularibus,  an  De  iure  belli  et  pads,  lib.  ii.  cap.  vii.
nepos  ex  filio  priore  filio  pos-  §  30.


PRIVATE LAW  119

were  minors,  or  if  he  died  while  his  father  was  alive,
his  brother,  not  his  sons,  succeeded.  This  was  at
tended  with  one  inconvenience,  that  on  the  death  of  the
youngest  his  sons  were  preferred  to  those  of  the  other
brothers.  By  the  Roman  law  a  grandson  succeeded  only
to  his  father's  part :  he  might  succeed  as  a  son,  but  not  as
an  oldest  son.  The  brothers  naturally  thought  that  they
were  nearer  the  father  than  any  grandson  he  could  have  ;
but  as  this  was  a  hardship  to  the  brother's  claim,  so  it  was
also  a  hardship  to  cut  off  the  reasonable  expectation  which
the  grandson  had  if  his  father  had  lived.  This  last  circum
stance  after  [wards]  gave  occasion  to  lineal  succession.
When  this  difficulty  is  got  over  there  is  little  dispute  about
collateral  succession.  In  feudal  lordships  a  woman  could
not  succeed,  as  she  was  incapable  of  performing  military
services;  but  they  could  succeed  to  lands  where  there  was
required  any  other  kind  of  service  l.  Of  fiefs  there  are
two  kinds,  masculine  and  feminine.  France,  to  the  crown
of  which  no  woman  can  succeed,  is  an  instance  of  the
former,  and  England  of  the  latter.

There  are  some  niceties  whimsical  enough  in  the  Scotch
law  with  regard  to  succession  of  collaterals.  If  the  second
brother  has  an  estate  and  dies,  it  goes  to  the  third  and
not  to  the  oldest,  who  is  supposed  to  have  been  sufficiently
provided  for.  Conquest  ~  on  the  contrary  ascends,  but  it
does  not  go  to  the  oldest,  but  to  the  immediately  older
brother.  By  the  English  law  the  old  brother  excludes
the  whole  blood  from  one  half  of  the  estate  by  conquest,
in  other  countries  the  preference  is  not  so  great 3.

1  Dalrymple,  Feudal Property,  heir  praeceptione  hereditatis  or

pp.  229-231.  otherwise.' MacDouall,  Institute

2 'Conquest  that  falls  to  the  heir  of  the  Laws  of  Scotland,  vol.  ii.

of  conquest  is  all  heritable  rights  p.  297.

whereupon infeftment did or  s  This sentence is evidently

might follow, acquired by the  corrupt. See  Craig,  IKS  feudale,

deceased  upon  singular  titles,  i.e.  ed.  J.  Baillie,  1732,  pp.  334-336.
to  which  he  did  not  succeed  as


120  PART I  : JUSTICE

We  must  observe  that  the  right  of  primogeniture  hinders
agriculture  \  If  the  whole  estate  were  divided  among  the
sons,  each  one  would  improve  his  own  part  better  than
one  can  improve  the  whole ;  besides,  tenants  never  cultivate
a  farm  so  well  as  if  it  were  their  own  property.  Primo
geniture  is  also  hurtful  to  the  family,  for,  while  it  provides  for
one,  it  suffers  all  the  rest  in  a  few  generations  to  be  reduced
to  beggary 2.  In  succession  to  a  monarchy,  however,  it  has
one  evident  advantage,  that  it  prevents  all  dangerous  rival-
ships  among  the  brothers.

There  are  some  other  kinds  of  succession  that  take
place,  or  have  taken  place  in  several  countries.  Thus  in
some  countries  the  youngest  son  succeeds  to  the  father.
There  is  something  like  this  among  our  tenants  to  this
day  :  the  older  sons  as  they  grow  up  are  provided  for,
and  the  youngest,  remaining  with  the  father,  succeeds
to  him.

So  much  for  legal  succession.  We  come  next  to
testamentary.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  no
extension  of  property  so  great  as  this,  and  therefore  it  was
long  before  it  could  be  introduced ;  it  was  very  natural  to
give  a  man  a  right  to  dispose  of  his  property  while  he
lived,  but  a  testament  supposes  him  to  dispose  of  a  right
when,  properly  speaking,  he  can  have  none  himself.  He
cannot  be  said  to  transfer  his  right,  for  the  heir  has  no
right  in  consequence  of  the  testament  till  after  the  testator
himself  have  none.  Puffendorf  whimsically  accounts  for
this  from  the  immortality  of  the  soul3.  At  Rome  the
right  of  making  testaments  was  introduced  gradually.
At  first  it  was  only  allowed,  and  that  too  after  the  con-

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  § 4), who gives this explana-
pp.  386-389.  tion. Pufendorf says '  quod

2  Ibid.  p.  388.  autem comminiscitur auctor

3  It  is  not  Pufendorf  but  Leib-  novae methodi iurisprudentiae
nitz, quoted by him (De iure  p.  m.  56  id  nescio  an  cordati  sint
naturae  et  gentium,  lib.  iv.  cap.  x.  adprobaturi.'


PRIVATE LAW  121

sent  of  the  fellow  citizens  was  asked  and  obtained,  to
childless  people.  This  was  much  the  same  with  adopting
children  l.  When  a  person  died  and  wanted  to  leave  his
estate  to  a  son  in  exile,  he  would  naturally  request  his
neighbours  not  to  take  it  from  him  after  his  own  death.
This  request  would  be  regarded,  not  so  much  on  account
of  its  being  his  will,  as  from  a  kind  of  piety  for  the  dead.
We  naturally  find  a  pleasure  in  remembering  the  last
words  of  a  friend  and  in  executing  his  last  injunctions,
the  solemnity  of  the  occasion  deeply  impresses  the
mind  ;  besides,  we  enter  as  it  were  into  his  dead  body,
and  conceive  what  our  living  souls  would  feel  if  they
were  joined  with  his  body,  and  how  much  we  would  be
distressed  to  see  our  last  injunctions  not  performed2.
Such  sentiments  naturally  inclined  men  to  extend
property  a  little  farther  than  a  man's  lifetime.

This  seems  to  have  been  the  foundation  of  testamentary
succession.  It  was  a  sort  of  impiety  not  to  comply  with
the  father's  desire,  though  it  was  no  injury  to  deprive  the
heir  of  the  estate,  as  there  was  no  law  established  in  his
favour,  and  as  his  being  in  exile  cut  off  all  reasonable
expectation  of  succeeding.  The  injury  is  conceived  to  be
done  to  the  dead  person,  as  we  enter  into  what  would  be
his  sentiments  were  he  to  live  again.  It  is  to  be  observed
that  this  practice  is  a  considerable  refinement  in  humanity,
and  never  was  practised  in  a  rude  nation.  Before  the
twelve  tables  no  Roman  had  a  right  to  make  a  will 3.  Our
Saxon  ancestors  had  no  right  to  dispose  of  their  lands  by
testament4,  and  in  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  we
hear  of  no  such  practice.  Piety  for  the  dead  could  take

1  Lord  Kames,  Law  Tracts,  vol.  *  This  too  absolute  assertion  is
i.  pp.  186-7  >  Dalrymple,  Feudal  probably  a  rash  inference from
Property, p. 152  ; Heineccius,  Dalrymple's  history  of  the  alien-
Antiq.  Rom.  lib.  ii.  tit.  x.  §  2.  ation  of  land-property  by  will  in

2  Dalrymple, Feudal  Property,  Feudal  Property,  ch.  iii.  sect.  3,
p.  154.  pp.  149-162.

3  Above,  p.  113.


122  PART I  : JUSTICE

place  only  with  regard  to  the  immediate  successor,  and
therefore  at  first  the  right  of  making  testaments  extended
no  further,  unless  in  case  the  person  in  whose  favour  it
was  made  should  refuse  to  succeed,  in  which  case
another  might  be  appointed.  This  was  a  further  extent  of
the  right.  Again,  if  a  man  died  and  left  his  sister's1  son
heir  to  him,  that  the  estate  might  not  go  to  foreign  relations,
the  testator  was  allowed  to  say  that  if  the  pupil  die  at
a  certain  age,  the  estate  shall  go  to  such  another  person.
This  was  called  pupillar  substitution2.  Thus  property
was  still  further  extended.

The  greatest  of  all  extensions  of  property  is  that  by
entails.  To  give  a  man  power  over  his  property  after  his
death  is  very  considerable,  but  it  is  nothing  to  an  exten
sion  of  this  power  to  the  end  of  the  world.  In  the  begin
nings  of  society  the  state  of  families  is  very  different  from
what  it  is  at  present.  As  the  wife  was  subject  to  the
husband,  and  at  the  best  only  on  the  footing  of  a  daughter,
she  seldom  made  any  addition  to  the  husband's  estate
unless  by  her  own  industry  ;  but  when  female  succession
took  place,  and  women  came  to  be  possessed  of  fortunes,
they  would  not  marry  without  a  previous  capitulation  by
which  the}^  insured  themselves  of  good  usage,  and
stipulated  that  some  part  of  their  fortune  should  go  to
their  relations  after  their  death.  By  this  arose  a  new
species  of  marriage  from  agreement  which  rendered  the
parties  equally  independent  3.  This  great  alteration  in
domestic  affairs  would  naturally  at  first  be  complained  of,
and,  as  the  ultimate  cause  of  it  was  the  succession  of
females,  they  would  endeavour  to  prevent  their  opulence.
On  this  account  a  law  was  made  at  Rome  bringing  matters
to  their  ancient  footing,  called  the  Voconian  law.  To  elude
this  law  ayfafejY]  commissum  was  invented,  by  which,  when


1  A  mistake. The  pupil  must 2  MS. reads 'popular suc-
be  a  descendant  in  the  power  of cession.'
the  testator.  8  Above,  p.  77.


PRIVATE LAW  123

a  man  had  a  mind  to  leave  his  estate  to  a  person  whom
the  law  would  not  allow,  [he  left  it  to  someone  else]  and
took  his  solemn  promise  that  he  would  transfer  it  to  the
person  for  whom  he  intended  it.  Augustus  made  a  law
obliging  the  trustee  always  to  restore  it,  and  appointed  a
[fidei-]commissary  praetor  for  that  purpose  \  The  person
to 2  whom  the  estate  was  left  was  called  hercs  fiduciarius,
and  the  person  to  whom  it  was  to  be  restored  was  called
fide\i~\  commissaries :  thus  property  was  extended  beyond
the  first  successor,  and  when  this  step  was  gained  they
easily  advanced  further  and  introduced  entails.

Entails  were  first  introduced  into  the  modern  law  by
the  ecclesiastics,  whose  education  made  them  acquainted
with  the  Roman  customs 3.  As  they  were  the  preachers
of  this  doctrine,  they  naturally  became  the  explainers
and  executors  of  wills  till  Theodosius  and  Valentinian4
took  it  from  them.  In  England  William  the  Conqueror
restored  it  to  the  ecclesiastics5.

By  the  customs  of  our  country6  a  man,  if  he  leave  a  wife
and  children,  can  dispose  only  of  a  third  by  testament ;
and  if  he  leave  a  wife  without  children,  only  a  half.
Lands  after  the  introduction  of  the  feudal  system  could
only  be  disposed  [of]  by  testament  in  the  same  way  with
military  services,  by  the  consent  of  the  superior.  Origin
ally  in  England  there  were  no  entails  by  will,  but  by

1  Heineccius,^////#. Rom.  lib.  ii. to  meddle  with  wills; Cod.  lib.  i.
tit.  xxiii.  §§  2-4.  tit.  iii.  §  40  (41).

2  MS.  reads 'for.'  8  Perhaps  a  rash  inference  from
:f  The  Roman  origin  of  entails statements to the effect that

is  denied  in  W.ofN.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  anciently the probate of wills

vol.  i.  p.  388.  was  in  the  county  court,  where

4  MS.  reads 'Theodosius  Valen-  the  bishop  and  sheriff  sat  together,

tinus.' It  is  difficult  to  account  and  that  William  the  Conqueror

for the statement in the text,  divided  the  ecclesiastical  from  the

which exaggerates enormously  civil jurisdiction : see Bacon,

the  powers  of  the ecclesiastics.  New  Abridgement  of  the  Law,  s.  v.

Justinian  considered  it  manifestly  Courts  ecclesiastical,  vol.  i.  p.  618.

absurd  that  they  should  attempt  tf  I.e.  Scotland.


124  PART I  I JUSTICE

tenure.  A  man  held  an  estate  for  himself  and  his  heirs,
but  if  he  had  no  heirs  he  could  not  alienate  it,  it  returned
to  the  superior.  But  if  he  had  heirs  he  could  alienate  it,
and  thus  the  lord  was  deprived  of  his  right  of  reversion.
A  law  1  was  afterwards  made  to  secure  this.

Upon  the  whole  nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than
perpetual  entails.  In  them  the  principle  of  testamentary
succession  can  by  no  means  take  place.  Piety  to  the
dead  can  only  take  place  when  their  memory  is  fresh  in
the  minds  of  men  :  a  power  to  dispose  of  estates  for  ever
is  manifestly  absurd.  The  earth  and  the  fullness  of  it
belongs  to  every  generation,  and  the  preceding  one  can
have  no  right  to  bind  it  up  from  posterity  - ;  such  exten
sion  of  property  is  quite  unnatural.  The  insensible
progress  of  entails  was  owing  to  their  not  knowing
how  far  the  right  of  the  dead  might  extend,  if  they  had
any  at  all.  The  utmost  extent  of  entails  should  be
to  those  who  are  alive  at  the  person's  death,  for  he
can  have  no  affection  to  those  who  are  unborn.  Entails
are  disadvantageous  to  the  improvement  of  the  country,
and  those  lands  where  they  have  never  taken  place
are  always  best  cultivated :  heirs  of  entailed  estates
have  it  not  in  their  view  to  cultivate  lands,  and  often
they  are  not  able  to  do  it.  A  man  who  buys  land  has
this  entirely  in  view,  and  in  general  the  new  purchasers
are  the  best  cultivators.

1  Stat.  Westm.  II,  13 Ed.  Leap.  i.  to the  earth and  to  all  that  it
De  donis  conditionalibus.  possesses  ;  but  that  the  property

2  'In  the  present  state  of  Europe  of  the  present  generation  should
...  nothing  can  be  more  completely  be restrained and regulated
absurd  [than  entails]. They  are  according to  the  fancy  of  those
founded  upon  the  most  absurd  of  who  died  perhaps  500  years  ago.'
all  suppositions,  the  supposition  W. of  N. bk. iii. ch. ii. vol. i.
that  every  successive  generation  p.  388. '  Absurd '  occurs twice,
of  men  have  not  an  equal  right  as  in  the  text  above.


PRIVATE LAW  125

[$5. Fifth  way  of  acquiring  Property :
Voluntary  Transference?^

In  voluntary  transference  two  things  are  required:
first,  a  declaration  of  the  intention  both  of  the  person
who  transfers,  and  of  him  to  whom  it  is  transferred :
second,  the  actual  delivery  of  the  thing.  In  most  cases
the  first  of  these  is  not  binding  without  the  latter,  because
there  is  no  right  without  possession.  If  a  man  indeed
have  borrowed  a  thing  and  afterwards  purchase  it,  there
is  no  need  of  delivery,  for  it  is  already  in  his  possession.
Before  possession  you  can  have  no  right  to  the  thing,
though  you  may  have  a  right  to  make  the  man  keep  his
promise  or  contract.  If  I  buy  a  horse  from  a  man,
and  before  delivery  he  sell  him  to  a  third  person,
I  cannot  demand  the  horse  from  the  possessor,  but  onl\-
from  the  person  who  sold  him.  But  if  he  has  been
delivered  I  can  claim  him  from  any  person.  Property
therefore  cannot  be  transferred  without  tradition  or
delivery.  Grotius  indeed  justly  observes  that  in  the
transference  of  a  pledge  there  is  no  need  of  deliver}-,
because  in  this  case  the  thing  is  already  in  the  man's
possession  *.  In  France,  if  a  man  declare  his  purpose
to  make  a  donation,  and  die  before  the  delivery,  the
donation  goes  to  the  heir.  This  was  also  a  custom
among  the  Wisigoths.  In  transferring  the  property  of
lands  and  other  large  objects,  what  gives  possession  is  not
so  easy  to  determine.  As  there  cannot  be  an  actual
delivery,  in  our  country  a  symbolical  delivery  is  used ;
an  ear  or  sheaf  of  corn  signifies  the  whole  field,  a  stone
and  turf,  the  estate  to  the  centre  of  the  earth,  and  the  keys
of  the  door,  the  house.  By  the  Scotch  law,  if  there  be
a  transference  of  several  estates,  the  purchaser  must
be  infeft  in  each.  By  the  English  law  infeftment  in  one

1  De  hire  belli  et pact's,  lib.  ii.  cap.  viii.  §  25.


126  PART I  : JUSTICE

serves  for  all l  when  done  in  presence  of  the  county
court2.  In  Scotland  it  must  be  done  on  the  land:  it  is
enough  in  England  if  it  be  done  in  view  of  it.  Besides
delivery  a  charter  or  writing,  showing  on  what  terms  the
transference  was  made,  is  also  requisite  for  security.  Till
the  custom  was  abolished  by  a  late  statute,  no  vassal  or
possessor  had  a  right  of  alienating  his  estate  without  the
consent  of  the  superior 3.  As  he  held  it  for  military  service,
it  was  requisite  that  the  estate  should  be  resigned  to  the
superior,  who  resigned  it  to  the  purchaser,  as  it  was
proper  that  his  vassal  should  be  of  his  own  choosing.
Afterwards,  however,  it  became  necessary  to  accept  of
creditors,  and  this  was  often  used  as  a  handle  to  elude
the  law.  The  seller  gave  a  bond  for  a  sum  of  borrowed
money  without  any  mention  that  it  was  a  sale,  by  which
means  the  lands  were  adjudged  to  the  creditor,  and  the
lord  was  obliged  to  accept  of  him  as  his  vassal.  In  like
manner,  as  the  tenant  was  liable  to  oppression  from  a  new
superior,  the  lord  could  not  dispose  of  his  estate
without  consent  of  his  vassal.  If  therefore  either  of
them  alienated  any  part  of  their  estates  without  the
other's  consent,  his  right  was  forfeited.

The  duty  of  vassals  to  their  lords  continued  longer  in
Scotland  than  in  England,  which  may  be  accounted  for
from  the  difference  of  their  government,  for  that  [of]  Eng
land  all  along  favoured  democracy,  and  that  of  Scotland
aristocracy.  After  society  was  fully  established,  there  was
no  occasion  for  mutual  consent,  because  the  tenant  was
protected  by  law,  whatever  the  lord  was.

In  the  time  of  the  civil  wars  4  a  new  sort  of  delivery  took
place.  When  a  person  transferred  his  estate  to  another

1  Scil.  'in  the  same  county.'  Feoffment,  vol.  ii.  p.  492;  Coke,

2  This should probably read Littleton,  p.  253  a.

'as the feoffment and giving  s  In  Scotland.  The 'late statute'
livery was anciently done in  is  20  Geo.  II.  cap.  50.
presence of the county  court.'  4  Of  the  Lancastrians  and  York-
See Bacon, Abridgement, s.  v.  ists.


PRIVATE LAW  127

for  his  own  use  it  was  not  affected  by  forfeiture  ;  the  person
to  whom  it  was  transferred  was  considered  as  the  bailiff,
and  took  possession  in  the  other's  name.


[§6. Of  Servitudes.]

The  second  species  of  real  rights  is  servitudes  or  burdens
which  one  man  has  on  the  property  of  another.  These
rights  were  at  first  personal,  as  they  were  entered  into  by
a  contract  between  the  persons.  It  is  necessary  that  I
should  have  a  road  to  the  market  town  ;  if  a  man's  estate
lie  between  me  and  it,  I  must  bargain  with  him  for  the
privilege  of  a  road  through  it.  This  contract  produces
only  a  personal  right,  though  I  should  bind  him  not  to
sell  this  estate  without  the  burden ;  but  here  was  an  incon-
veniency,  for,  if  the  land  were  sold  and  the  new  proprietor
refused  the  road,  I  could  not  sue  him  on  a  personal  right
upon  the  former  proprietor.  Before  I  can  come  at  the
new  purchaser,  I  must  pursue  the  person  from  whom
I  had  the  right,  who  must  pursue  him  to  whom  he  sold
it.  If  the  land  has  gone  through  several  hands  this  is
very  tedious  and  inconvenient.  The  law,  to  remedy  this,
made  servitudes  real  rights,  demandable  a  quociunque
posscssore.

Servitudes  were  rusticae,  such  as  the  right  of  a  road
to  the  town,  or  to  the  river,  and  of  feeding  so  many  cows
on  another  man's  pasture  grounds,  or  iirbanac,  such  as
the  right  of  leaning  the  beams  of  my  house  on  your
gable,  the  right  of  obliging  him  who  is  proprietor  of  the
under-story  to  make  his  wall  strong  enough  to  support
mine,  and  the  like.  These  are  all  naturally  personal  rights
and  are  only  made  real  by  lawyers.  Life  rents  on  estates
and  many  other  things  are  also  servitudes,  and  are  properly
personal.  Feudal  burdens  were  only  persons'  rights,  and
therefore  every  new  vassal  must  renew  his  homage  and
the  promise  of  fealty.


128  PART I  : JUSTICE

In  the  beginning  of  the  feudal  law,  if  the  proprietor  did
not  perform  his  duty  in  every  article  he  forfeited  his  feu  ;  in
like  manner,  if  the  tenant  encroached  on  his  lord's  grounds,
what  he  had  feued  returned  to  the  superior.  The  right
of  the  vassal  is  founded  on  the  charter  of  the  superior,
and  every  article  of  it  must  be  fulfilled,  and  every  new
possessor  must  renew  the  obligation.  When  tenants  be
came  independent  and  had  a  real  property,  they  were  said
to  have  the  dominhnn  directum,  not  the  dominium  utile1.

[I  7. Of  Pledges  and  Mortgages^

Pledges  and  mortgages  are  certain  securities  for  the
payment  of  debts.  At  first  they  could  not  be  claimed  as
real  rights,  though  afterwards  the  law  considered  them  as
such.  Pledges  properly  regard  moveable  subjects,  and
mortgages  immoveable ;  if  a  pledge  be  not  redeemed  at
a  certain  time,  it  is  forfeited.  As  people  in  bad  circum
stances  are  naturally  slothful,  the  negligence  of  debtors
among  the  Romans  gave  occasion  to  the  lex  comtnissaria,
by  which  the  creditor  was  empowered  to  seize  the  pledge,
and  return  the  overplus  if  there  was  any.  By  the  English
law,  if  no  day  be  named,  the  pledge  falls  to  the  pawntaker
on  the  death  of  the  pawner-.  In  immoveables,  lands  are
mortgaged  but  not  delivered,  and  in  case  of  failure  they
are  forfeited.  The  Roman  law  and  ours  are  much  the
same  on  this  head.  If  payment  be  not  made  within  some
few  months  after  demand,  the  creditor  adjudges  the  land
for  the  whole  sum  and  the  penalty  incurred ;  but  his
property  is  not  secure  without  long  possession,  for  the
proprietor  has  a  power  of  redeeming  it  within  a  reasonable
time ;  but,  as  upon  redemption  much  trouble  must  be

1  By  a  slip  of  the lecturer  or  directum.' Dalrymple, Feudal

the reporter, 'directum' and  Property,  pp.  200,  238.

'  utile ' have been transposed.  ~ Bacon, Abridgement, s.  v.

The  text  should  read  '  the  domi-  Bailment,  vol.  i.  p.  239.
nium utile, not the dominium


PRIVATE LAW  129

occasioned  in  examining  old  accounts  and  the  like,  the
law1  has  made  twenty  years  the  stated  time  in  England
for  redeeming  mortgages.

Hypothecs  are  another  kind  of  pledges  really  arising
from  contract,  but  made  real  rights  by  the  civil  law.  By
them  anciently  the  landlord  was  empowered  to  detain  the
furniture  and  whole  stock  of  the  tenant  if  he  turned  bank
rupt,  and  could  claim  them  a  qiiocumque  possessore.  This
arose  from  the  practice  of  keeping  tenants  by  steel-bow,
by  which  the  whole  stock  in  the  farm  was  the  landlord's.
At  present  the  landlord  has  only  a  right  of  preference,  and
we  have  not  so  many  hypothecs  as  the  Romans  had.

All  pledges  are  naturally  personal  rights,  and  are  only
made  real  by  the  "civil  law.

[§  8. Of  Exclusive  Privileges.']

Exclusive  privileges  are  the  last  division  of  real  rights.
Among  these  is  the  right  of  inheritance,  which  is  not  a
creature  of  the  civil  law,  but  arises  from  nature.  The  heir,
previous  to  any  other  person,  has  a  privilege  of  demanding
what  belonged  to  the  deceased,  and  after  he  is  admitted
heir  it  is  his  real  property.  Again,  if  a  person  start  a  wild
beast,  he  has  an  exclusive  privilege  of  pursuing,  and  what
ever  person  comes  in  upon  the  chase  is  liable  to  punish
ment2  because  he  breaks  in  upon  his  exclusive  privilege.
In  the  year  1701  an  English  man-of-war  engaged  with  a
French  merchant  fleet  under  convoy,  which  was  just  about
to  fall  into  their  hands,  when  a  Scotch  privateer  came  and
carried  off  the  prize.  A  lawsuit  commenced  and  the  Scotch
privateer  was  declared  guilty  of  breach  of  property,  but
upon  strict  inquiry  we  shall  find  that  it  was  only  breach
of  privilege3.  Though  these  and  some  other  exclusive

1  I.e.  the  practice  of  the  courts.  3  No  such  case  appears  to  have
Bacon,  Abridgement,  vol.  iii.  p.  654.  occurred  in  1701. In  1677,  how-

2  MS.  erroneously  reads  'not'  ever,  a  case  (King's  Advocate  v.
here.  Rankin) was tried which is

K


130  PART I  : JUSTICE

privileges  arise  from  nature,  they  are  generally  the
creatures  of  the  civil  law.  Such  are  monopolies  and  all
privileges  of  corporations,  which,  though  they  might  once
be  conducive  to  the  interest  of  the  country,  are  now  pre
judicial  to  it.  The  riches  of  a  country  consist  in  the  plenty
and  cheapness  of  provisions,  but  their  effect  is  to  make
everything  dear.  When  a  number  of  butchers  have  the
sole  privilege  of  selling  meat,  they  may  agree  to  make
the  price  what  they  please,  and  we  must  buy  from  them
whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  Even  this  privilege  is  not  of
advantage  to  the  butchers  themselves,  because  the  other
trades  are  also  formed  into  corporations,  and  if  they  sell
beef  dear  they  must  buy  bread  dear.  But  the  great  loss
is  to  the  public,  to  whom  all  things  are  rendered  less
comeatable,  and  all  sorts  of  work  worse  done  ;  towns  are
not  well  inhabited,  and  the  suburbs  are  increased.  The
privilege,  however,  of  vending  a  new  book  or  a  new
machine  for  fourteen  years  has  not  so  bad  a  tendency,  it  is
a  proper  and  adequate  reward  for  merit.  A  right  to  servi
tudes  and  exclusive  privileges,  it  is  to  be  observed,  may  be
acquired  by  prescription.

So  much  for  the  different  kinds  of  real  rights  :  we  proceed
now  to  personal  rights,  which  arise  either  from  contract,
quasi-contract,  or  delinquency.

U  9-] Of  Contract.

That  obligation  to  performance  which  arises  from
contract  is  founded  on  the  reasonable  expectation  pro-

possibly the one referred to.  had  captured  one  of  the  prizes.

The  frigate  Nightingale  pursued  The court held that Rankin's

a Dutch privateer which was  action  was  injurious  'otherways

taking  home  three  French  prizes  than  to  assist  the first  attacter,

(England  and  France  being  then  unless it had  been  proven that

in alliance against Holland).  the prize  would have escaped '

When she returned from the  if  he  had  not  stopped  her. W.  M.

pursuit,  she  found  that  Rankin,  Morison,  Decisions  of  the  Court  of

in  command  of  a  Scotch  privateer,  Session,  1811,  pp.  11930-11936.


PRIVATE LAW  131

duced  by  a  promise,  which  considerably  differs  from
a  mere  declaration  of  intention.  Though  I  say  I  have
a  mind  to  do  such  a  thing  for  you,  yet  on  account  of  some
occurrences  do  not  do  it,  I  am  not  guilty  of  breach  of
promise.  A  promise  is  a  declaration  of  your  desire  that
the  person  for  whom  you  promise  should  depend  on  you
for  the  performance  of  it.  Of  consequence  the  promise
produces  an  obligation,  and  the  breach  of  it  is  an  injury.

Breach  of  contract  is  naturally  the  slightest  of  all
injuries,  because  we  naturally  depend  more  on  what  we
possess  than  what  is  in  the  hands  of  others.  A  man
robbed  of  five  pounds  thinks  himself  much  more  injured
than  if  he  had  lost  five  pounds  by  a  contract.  Accordingly
in  rude  ages  crimes  of  all  kinds,  except  those  that  disturb
the  public  peace,  are  slightly  punished,  and  society  is  far
advanced  before  a  contract  can  sustain  action  or  the
breach  of  it  be  redressed.  The  causes  of  this  were
the  little  importance  of  contracts  in  those  times,  and  the
uncertainty  of  language.

The  first  contracts  that  sustained  action  would  be  those
where  the  damage  done  was  very  great,  and  where  there
could  be  no  doubt  but  the  person  once  intended  to  perform.
Accordingly  among  the  ancients  promises  entered  into
with  great  solemnity  first  sustained  action.  Among  them
no  stipulation  could  be  made  unless  the  contractors  were
personally  present,  and  no  promissory  note  in  writing  was
binding.  As  no  promises  by  the  Roman  law  sustained
action  without  a  stipulation,  so  by  the  English  a  consider
ation  or  cause  for  the  promise  was  at  first  necessary  to
make  it  obligatory.  It  was  thought  contrary  to  good
manners  to  insist  on  a  promise :  if  a  man  promised  with
his  daughter  a  certain  sum,  there  is  a  consideration,  and
therefore  he  was  obliged  to  perform  it ;  but  if  he  promised
it  with  any  other  man's  daughter  it  was  sine  causa,
and,  unless  she  was  a  relation,  could  not  sustain  action.
If  I  made  you  a  promise  it  did  not  sustain  action,  but

K  2


132  PART I  I JUSTICE

if  I  again  promised  not  to  forget  my  former  promise,
the  latter  promise  was  obligatory,  and  the  former  was  the
consideration  that  made  it  so 1.

By  the  civil  law  the  first  promises  that  sustained  action
were  those  entered  into  in  presence  of  a  court  where
there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  intention,  and  accordingly
recognizance  of  every  promise  was  taken  before  some
court.  A  recognizance  is  when  a  debtor  comes  before
a  court  with  the  creditor,  and  acknowledges  that  he  owes
him  a  certain  sum ;  a  copy  of  this  acknowledgment  was
given  to  the  creditor  and  another  lodged  in  the  hands  of
the  clerk,  and  whenever  the  creditor  produced  this,  if  it
was  found  to  correspond  to  the  other,  he  might  pursue
for  his  money.  Afterwards  a  recognizance  before  the
magistrate  of  a  staple  town  served  the  purpose 2.

The  next  contracts  that  sustained  action  were  the  con-
tractus  reales,  or  those  which  were  entered  into  by  the
delivery  of  a  thing  to  be  returned  itself,  or  in  species,  or
in  value.  These  are  of  four  kinds,  the  muttium,  commo-
datum,  depositum  andpignus*.

The  mutuum  is  when  I  lend  anything  to  be  returned  in
value,  as  money.  This  soon  sustained  action.

Commodahim  is  when  the  thing  itself  is  to  be  restored,
as  a  borrowed  horse.

Depositum  is  when  a  thing  is  committed  to  another's
care  but  not  to  his  use.

Pignits  is  a  security  for  debt.

All  these  sustained  action  before  the  consensual  con
tracts,  which  are  also  four,  to  wit,  buying  and  selling,  letting

1  This  appears to  be an  ex-  self  liable  for  otherwise  irrecover-

aggerated  or  misreported  account  able debts contracted when he

of  the  old  rule,  '  that  wherever  a  was  a  minor,  and  a  liability  barred

defendant  is  under  a  moral  ob-  by  the  statute  of  limitations  may

ligation,  or  is  liable  in  conscience  be  similarly  revived,

and  equity  to  pay,  that  is  a  sufficient  2  Bacon,  Abridgement,  s.  v.  Exe-

consideration.' Cowper,  Reports,  cution,  vol.  ii.  pp.  330-332.

p.  294. So  a  man  may  make  him-  3  Instit.  lib.  hi.  tit.  xiv.


PRIVATE LAW  133

and  hiring,  partnership,  and  commission.  In  buying,  if  the
contract  be  not  fulfilled,  you  lose  your  earnest  money.
Letting  and  hiring  once  comprehended  leases,  day's  wages,
building,  and  almost  everything  with  regard  to  society.
If  the  contract  of  commission  was  performed  gratuitously
it  could  not  at  first  sustain  any  action,  but  if  a  reward  was
given,  it  was  nearly  the  same  with  the  cormnodahim.  If
a  small  price  be  paid  for  the  loan  of  a  thing  it  becomes
letting  and  hiring.  The  mutuum  does  not  infer  interest,
and  in  a  bond,  unless  the  interest  be  specified,  it  will  carry
none.

Besides  these  there  was  in  the  Roman  law  what  was
called  a  pactuni  nudum,  when  there  was  a  bare  promise
without  any  consideration,  which  produced  an  exception
or  defence  against  the  action  of  the  pursuer  \  As  contracts
deprive  men  of  that  liberty  which  every  man  wishes  to
enjoy,  a  very  small  defence  set  them  free.  Originally  no
contracts  were  sued  before  any  court  but  the  ecclesiastic,
but  they  came  gradually  to  civil  courts  a.  The  canon  s  law,
which  judged  from  principles  of  honour  and  virtue,  obliged
men  to  perform  even  those  promises  that  were  made
gratuitously.  This  was  imitated  by  the  civil  law ;  and  by
our  law  if  a  promise  be  clearly  proven,  he  who  promises
must  perform  it.  In  general  the  law  gave  only  action  for
damages  till  the  court  of  chancery  was  introduced.  It  is
indeed  the  natural  idea  of  [a]  court  to  redress  injuries,  and
accordingly  if  a  person  refused  to  perform  his  contract
he  was  only  obliged  to  pay  the  loss  which  the  other  had
sustained  ;  but  the  court  of  chancery  forced  the  person
to  a  performance  of  the  agreement.

Nothing  can  be  more  different  than  the  present  and
ancient  state  of  contracts.  Execrations  and  the  most

1  '  Nuda pactio obligationem be 'some  cases  of  breach  of  faith
non  parit,  sed  parit  exceptionem.' were  not.'

Digest,  lib.  ii.  tit.  xiv.  §  7.  3  MS.  reads  '  common.'

2  '  No contracts were '  should


134  PART  I  :  JUSTICE

solemn  ceremonies  were  scarce  thought  sufficient  to
secure  the  performance  of  a  contract ;  drinking  blood  and
water  mixed,  bleeding  one  another,  promising  before  the
altar,  breaking  a  straw,  and  a  number  of  other  ceremonies
to  impress  the  mind,  were  invented.  At  present  almost
anything  will  make  a  contract  obligatory.

There  are  some  questions  concerning  contracts  much
agitated  by  lawyers,  especially  one  in  the  case  when  the
coin  happens  to  be  debased1.  [If]  I  borrow  £LOO  when
the  coin  is  4  oz.  [to]  the  pound,  and  it  be  afterwards
debased  to  2  oz.,  whether  should  I  pay  ^100  of  the  new
coin  or  ,£200  ?  When  the  government  makes  any
alteration  in  the  coin  it  is  to  answer  some  urgent
necessity.  In  1705  the  crown  of  France  had  a  demand
for  ten  million,  and  could  raise  only  five 2.  They  cried  up
the  coin  and  paid  the  ten  with  five.  As  the  government
allows  private  persons  to  pay  with  the  new  coin,  the
injury  is  not  great.  The  debasement  of  the  coin
cheapens  for  some  time  all  commodities  and  provisions,
as  all  are  paid  in  the  new  coin,  and  therefore  the  uses
of  money  may  be  served  by  the  new  as  well  as  the  old
coin 3.

\_§  10. Of  Quasi-Contract?[

Quasi-contract  is  founded  on  the  duty  of  restitution.
If  you  find  a  watch  on  the  way,  you  are  obliged  to  restore
it  by  the  right  of  property,  because  a  man  loses  not
property  with  possession.  But  if  you  and  I  balance
accounts,  and  you  pay  me  a  sum  which  both  think  due,
but  you  afterwards  find  you  did  not  owe  that  sum,  how

1  Pufendorf,  De  hire  naturae  et  sur  le  commerce,  1734  (in  Daire's
gentium,  lib.  v.  cap.  vii.  §  6.  Economistes  financiers,  p.  721),  and

2  The date in  the  MS.  is  not  Dutot,  Reflexions  politiques  sur  les
clearly written and might be  finances  et  le  commerce,  1738  (in  the
1703, 1705, or 1706. The pro-  same  collection,  p.  797),  though  on
bability  is that  the reference  is  that  occasion the augmentation
to  the  recoinage  of  1708-9  men-  was  only  25  per  cent.

tioned in Melon,  Essai  politique 3  See  below,  Part  ii.  Div.  ii.  §  8.


PRIVATE LAW  135

will  you  claim  it?  You  cannot  ask  it  as  your  property,
for  you  alienated  that  sum,  nor  can  you  claim  it  by
contract,  for  there  never  was  one  made  between  us 1,  yet
it  is  evident  that  I  am  a  gainer  by  your  loss,  and  there
fore  restitution  is  due.

In  the  same  manner  if  a  man  was  called  away  by  a
sudden  order  of  the  state  without  leaving  an  attorney  to
manage  a  law  suit  that  he  had  going  on,  and  a  friend
undertakes  this  office  without  commission,  as  the  defence
is  necessary,  and  the  undertaking  it  prudent,  restitution
of  his  expenses  are  due.  On  the  same  principle  were
founded  the  actioncs  contrariac  of  the  Roman  law.  If
you  lent  me  a  horse  which  had  cost  me  extraordinary
expenses,  by  the  contract  commodate  you  could  redemand
your  horse  in  the  same  [state]  in  which  you  lent  him,
but  I  could  claim  my  extraordinary  expenses  by  an  acfio
contraria.  The  same  principle  takes  place  in  many  other
cases.  If  a  person  borrows  money,  and  gets  three  of  his
acquaintances  sureties  for  him,  jointly  and  severally,  and  if
he  turn  bankrupt,  the  creditor  pursues  the  ablest  surety,
who  has  a  claim  by  the  duty  of  restitution  on  the  other  two
for  their  thirds.  The  Scotch  law  carries  this  still  farther.
If  a  bankrupt  had  two  estates,  and  two  creditors  A  and  B :
A  has  a  security  on  both  estates,  B  has  security  only  on
the  best :  A  has  a  liberty  of  drawing  his  money  from  either
estate  he  pleases,  and  draws  from  that  on  which  B  has  his
security.  As  B  in  this  case  is  cut  out,  the  law  obliges  A
to  give  up  his  security  on  the  other  estate  to  B.  The
same  was  the  case  in  tho  Roman  law  with  regard  to  tutory.

[§  ii. Of  Delinquency^

We  come  now  to  the  third  kind  of  personal  rights,  those
to  wit,  ex  deli  do.

Delicts  are  of  two  kinds,  as  they  arise  ex  dolo  when

1  '  Namqui  solvendianimopecu-  trahat  potius  ncgotium  quam  con-
niamdat,inhocdarevidetur,utdis-  trahat.'  Instit.  lib.  iii.  tit.  xxvii.  §  6.


136  PART I  : JUSTICE

there  is  a  blameable  intention,  or  ex  culpa  when  they  are
done  through  a  culpable  negligence.

Injury  naturally  excites  the  resentment  of  the  spectator,
and  the  punishment  of  the  offender  is  reasonable  as
far  as  the  indifferent  spectator  can  go  along  with  it.
This  is  the  natural  measure  of  punishment.  It  is  to  be
observed  that  our  first  approbation  of  punishment  is  not
founded  upon  the  regard  to  public  utility  which  is
commonly  taken  to  be  the  foundation  of  it.  It  is  our
sympathy  with  the  resentment  of  the  sufferer  which  is
the  real  principle.  That  it  cannot  be  utility  is  manifest
from  the  following  example.  Wool  in  England  was
conceived  to  be  the  source  of  public  opulence,  and  it  was
made  a  capital  crime  to  export  that  commodity1.  Yet
though  wool  was  exported  as  formerly  and  men  were
convinced  that  the  practice  was  pernicious,  no  jury,  no
evidence,  could  be  got  against  the  offenders.  The  ex
portation  of  wool  is  naturally  no  crime,  and  men  could
not  be  brought  to  consider  it  as  punishable  with  death '-.
In  the  same  manner,  if  a  sentinel  be  put  to  death  for
leaving  his  post,  though  the  punishment  be  just  and  the
injury  that  might  have  ensued  be  very  great,  yet  mankind
can  never  enter  into  this  punishment  as  if  he  had  been
a  thief  or  a  robber.

Resentment  not  only  prompts  to  punishment,  but
points  out  the  manner  of  it.  Our  resentment  is  not
gratified  unless  the  offender  be  punished  for  the  parti
cular  offence  done  ourselves,  and  unless  he  be  made
sensible  that  it  is  for  that  action.  A  crime  is  always
the  violation  of  some  right,  natural  or  acquired,  real  or
personal.  The  non-performance  of  a  contract  indeed

1  13  and  14  Car.  II.  cap.  18.  of  the  penalty  under 13  and 14

2  The  preamble  of  7  and  8  W.  Car.  II.  cap.  18,  'the  prosecution
III.  cap.  28,  quoted  in  W.  of  N.  of offenders hath not been so
bk. iv. ch. viii. vol. ii. p. 232,  effectually  put  in  execution.'
says  that  owing  to  the  severity


PRIVATE LAW  137

is  not  a  crime,  unless  it  be  through  some  fraudulent
intention.

The  greatest  crime  that  can  be  done  against  any  person
is  murder,  of  which  the  natural  punishment  is  death,  not  as
a  compensation,  but  as  a  reasonable  retaliation.  In  every
civilized  nation  death  has  been  the  punishment  of  the
murderer,  but  in  barbarous  nations  a  pecuniary  compensa
tion  was  accepted  of,  because  then  government  was  weak,
and  durst  not  meddle  in  the  quarrels  of  individuals  unless
in  the  way  of  mediation.  In  the  age  of  hunters  particularly
there  was  little  more  than  the  name  of  authority,  and  a  man
of  superior  influence  can  do  no  more  than  persuade  the
parties  to  an  agreement.  When  one  man  killed  another,
the  whole  society  met  and  advised  the  one  party  to  give,
and  the  other  to  take,  a  compensation.  In  America  when
one  member  of  a  family  kills  another,  the  society  does  not
intermeddle  with  them,  as  this  cannot  hurt  the  peace  of
the  society;  they  only  take  notice  of  it  when  one  family
attacks  another1.  It  was  long  before  the  government
could  call  a  man  before  them  and  tell  him  what  he  must
do,  because  it  was  long  before  people  would  submit  to
such  absolute  authority.

In  the  laws  of  all  nations  we  have  the  remains  of  this
ancient  state  of  weakness.  When  government  became
more  powerful,  the  murderer  was  not  only  obliged  to  make
a  compensation  to  the  relations  of  the  slain,  but  likewise  to
the  public,  who  were  put  to  the  trouble  of  lending  him
their  protection,  on  that  occasion,  against  the  revenge  of
those  who  were  concerned.  This  was  the  state  of  criminal
law  among  the  Germans  at  the  declension  of  the  Roman
Empire.  The  Germans  were  much  farther  advanced  than
the  Americans  at  this  day.  Though  they  seldom  punished
with  death,  yet  they  seemed  to  make  the  punishment  in
some  measure  proportioned  to  the  crime.  A  price  was  set

1  Lafitau,  Mwurs  des  sauvages  Anie'nquains,  torn.  i.  pp.  486,  487,  490.
See  above,  p.  15.


138  PART I  : JUSTICE

on  every  person  according  to  his  station.  There  was  one
price  paid  for  killing  the  king,  and  another  for  killing
a  slave.  The  compensation  was  proportioned  to  the  dignity
of  the  person  and  of  his  relations.  What  was  paid  to  the
prince  for  interposition  was  increased  and  diminished  in
the  same  proportion.  It  was  a  higher  fine  to  kill  a  man
belonging  to  a  lord  than  one  belonging  to  a  little  baron.
To  disturb  the  king's  peace  subjected  to  a  greater  fine  than
to  disturb  the  peace  of  a  baron  or  lord.  If  the  injurer
refused  to  pay  the  compensation  he  was  left  to  the  resent
ment  of  the  injured,  and  if  he  was  not  able  to  pay  it,  he
was  obliged  to  implore  the  assistance  of  his  friends.  As
the  compensation  was  not  adequate  to  the  offence,  the
government,  after  it  acquired  strength,  took  this  additional
compensation  to  itself  as  the  price  of  the  offender's  freedom.
From  this  the  sovereign  acquired  the  right  of  pardoning
criminals,  for  naturally  he  has  no  more  right  to  pardon
a  crime  than  to  discharge  an  unpaid  debt.

Anciently  a  crime  was  considered  in  two  lights,  as
committed  against  the  family  injured  and  against  the  peace.
The  government  had  the  exclusive  right  of  punishing  those
who  had  disturbed  the  peace  and  killed  any  of  the  king's
vassals.  The  compensation  to  the  government  was  after
wards  changed  into  a  capital  punishment.  After  the  king's
pardon,  the  offender  was  free,  and  the  relation  had  no
right  to  pursue  him.  In  England  the  offender  can  be
punished  for  the  relation  as  well  as  for  the  king.  When
an  appeal1  is  made  to  the  king,  he  cannot  pardon,  but  appeals
are  seldom  or  never  used,  as  it  is  difficult  to  bring  them
about.  If  a  man  was  murdered,  nobody  but  the  wife  could
pursue  for  an  appeal,  or,  if  she  was  accessory,  the  legal

1  '  Appeal  is  a  word  used  in  our  by  a  party  who  had  interest  in

law  for the removal  of  a  cause  the  person  killed,  or  of  a  felon  by

from  an  inferior  court  or  judge  one  of  his  accomplices.' G.Jacob,

to  a  superior ;  but  more  commonly  New  Law  Dictionary,  8th  ed.  1762,

for  the  accusation  of  a  murderer,  s.  v.  Appeal.


PRIVATE LAW  139

heir1.  Any  mistake  in  the  process,  such  as  a  word  wrong
spelled,  stopped  the  procedure 2,  for  the  statute  of  amend
ment,  which  permitted  courts  to  overlook  errors,  did  not
extend  to  appeals.  Appeals  in  former  times  were  often
made  in  cases  of  maiming,  hurting,  &c.3

There  are  several  kinds  of  murder  by  the  English  law.
The  word  originally  signified  stealth,  as  the  crime  was
usually  committed  in  private.  Afterwards  felonious4  killing
of  every  kind  was  called  murder,  and  compensation  made
for  it  accordingly.  Murder  arises  either  from  malice
prepense,  or  from  sudden  provocation,  or  from  chance  per
infortnnium.  Of  these  the  first  alone  is  properly  called
murder,  the  second  is  manslaughter,  and  the  last  chance
medley,  which  is  often  excusable  and  often  justifiable.
Murder  committed  se  dcfcndcndo  is  when  two  persons
quarrel,  and  the  one  is  obliged  to  kill  the  other  for  his  own
safety.  This  is  excusable,  not  justifiable  homicide.  Justi
fiable  homicide  is  of  two  kinds.  First,  in  defence  [of]  one's
person,  goods,  or  house.  It  differs  from  homicide  se  defcn-
dcndo  in  this,  that  there  is  no  quarrel,  but  an  attack  on  the
highway,  or  in  a  man's  house.  Second,  homicide  is  justifi
able  in  support  of  a  constable  or  officer  of  justice.

These  are  the  different  species  of  murder  and  homicide,
we  shall  next  show  what  is  the  nature  of  each.  When  a
person  lies  in  wait  for  another  and  kills  him,  it  is  plainly
murder.  It  is  the  same  when  a  man  kills  another  without
provocation.  By  the  English  law  there  is  no  provocation
without  a  blow ;  no  words  or  menaces  are  sufficient.  How
ever,  if  a  man  give  you  a  blow,  and  you  return  it  and  kill
him,  it  is  not  murder,  but  manslaughter.  If  a  man  be
shooting  at  tame  fowl,  or  doing  any  other  criminal  action,

1  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  '  Appeals  of  rape  and  robbery  are

bk.  ii.  ch.  xxiii.  §§  36-43.  now much out of use,  but the

-  Ibid.  §§  103-125.  appeal  of  murder  still  continues,

3  Jacob,  New Law  Dictionary  and  is  often  brought.'

(s.v.  Appeal of  Robbery),  says,  *  MS.  reads 'felony  and.'


140  PART I  : JUSTICE

and  without  intending  it,  kill  a  man,  it  is  murder.  Where-
ever  there  is  any  appearance  of  malice  or  forethought  it  is
murder.  If  a  person  kills  another  in  the  afternoon  for
some  provocation  received  in  the  forenoon,  it  is  murder,
but  if  he  has  only  retired  a  few  steps,  and  returned  to  do  it
immediately,  it  is  not  murder,  but  manslaughter.  Homicide
se  defendcndo  is  not  punishable  if  there  was  no  possibility
of  escape,  but  if  a  man  had  time  to  retire  and  draw  his
sword,  it  is  punishable,  because  he  might  have  escaped l.

The  Scotch  law  makes  no  distinction  between  man
slaughter  and  murder2.  In  England  manslaughter  was
introduced  by  what  is  called  benefit  of  clergy.  When
civil  government  increased  in  authority,  the  punishment[s]
of  crimes  were  made  more  severe  that  the  peace  might  be
less  disturbed.  The  clergy  pled  that  this  was  not  agree
able  to  the  word  of  God,  and  as  they  derived  their  authority
from  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Pope,  they  would  answer  before
no  civil  judicatory.  They  pretended  that  the  scripture  did
not  consider  any  crime  where  there  was  no  malice  or  fore
thought  as  murder,  and  this  they  proved  from  Deuteronomy
xixth.  When  any  [clerical]  person  therefore  had  com
mitted  a  crime,  the  bishop  had  a  power  to  claim  him  and
take  him  out  of  the  hands  of  the  secular  power.  If
a  person  could  get  twelve  persons  to  swear  for  him,
he  was  acquitted.  If  not,  the  bishop  judged  whether  he
was  corrigible  or  not.  If  he  was  incorrigible,  he  was
degraded.  The  bishop  could  claim  in  this  manner  all
clergy  and  beadles,  wardens,  or  other  persons  \vho  had

1  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  the  intention  to  kill  is  antecedent
bk.  i.  chs.  xxviii-xxxi.  even  to  the  very  blow;  it  follows

2  '  As  by  intended  homicide  we  that  the  homicide  which  is  corn-
mean  not  only  that  which  is  pre-  mitted  in  Rixa  or  Tulzie  will  be
meditated and the consequence  construed by  us  to  be  intended
of  malice  preconceived,  but  also  homicide,' Alex. Bayne,  Institu-
that  which  is  instantly  conceived  tions of tlie Criminal Law of
in  the  very  encounter,  so as to  Scotland,  1748,  pp.  33,  34.
comprehend  all  slaughter  where


PRIVATE LAW  14!

any  connexion  with  the  Church,  but  the  civil  courts  after-
[wards]  allowed  him  only  to  claim  those  that  could  read,
as  this  [was]  more  immediately  connected  with  the  office
of  the  clergy.  Queen  Anne  afterwards  extended  the
privileges  arising  from  benefit  of  clergy,  with  regard  to
manslaughter,  to  all  equally1.  For  chance  medley  a  man
forfeits  his  goods,  but  he  has  the  power  of  suing  for  them
again  and  of  obtaining  pardon.  In  justifiable  homicide  a
man  must  plead  not  guilty  of  anything  the  court  can
meddle  [with],  and  if  he  can  bring  in  his  evidence  he
is  not  arraigned2.

Our  resentment  naturally  falls  upon  inanimate  as  well
as  animate  objects,  and  in  many  places  the  sword  or
instrument  that  had  killed  any  person  was  considered  as
execrable,  and  accordingly  was  destroyed,  particularly
among  the  Athenians.  By  the  English  law  if  a  man  fell
from  a  house  and  was  killed,  the  house  was  forfeited  by
the  law  of  deodand :i.  Deodand  signifies  to  be  given  to  the
devil,  by  the  same  sort  of  metaphor  that  the  scripture
uses  where  it  is  said  he  blessed  God  in  his  heart,  that  is,
he  cursed  him.  Afterwards  the  clergy  applied  deodands
to  charitable  uses.  If  a  man  was  killed  by  an  object  at
rest,  only  the  part  by  which  he  was  killed  was  forfeited.

1  'And  forasmuch  as  when  any  of  the  Realm). The indulgence

person  is  convicted  for  any  felony  had already  been extended to

within  the  benefit  of  clergy,  upon  women  (who  were  of  course  in-

his prayer  to have  the benefit  capable  of obtaining benefit  of

thereof allowed to him it  hath  clergy)  by  3  W.  and M.  cap.  9.

been  used  to  administer  a  book  The account of the origin of

to him to try  whether he can  benefit  of  clergy  in the  text  is

read as  a  clerk,  which by ex-  far  from  accurate,

perience  is  found  to  be  of  no  use,  2  Not  quite  accurately  put.  See

be  it  therefore  enacted '  that  such  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Crown,  bk.  i.

person  '  shall  not  be  required  to  ch.  xxix.  §  25.

read, but without any  reading  s  This  is  erroneous,  as  nothing

shall  be  allowed,  taken,  and  re-  annexed to  the freehold could

puted to be and punished as  be deodand. Probably 'house'

a  clerk  convict.' 5  and  6  Ann.  is  a  copyist's  error  for  '  horse.'
cap.  6  (6  Ann.  cap.  9  in  Statutes


142  PART I  : JUSTICE

If  he  was  killed  [by  falling]  from  the  wheel  of  a  wagon
standing,  only  that  wheel  was  deodand,  but  if  the  wagon
was  in  motion,  the  whole  team  was  forfeited.  It  was
long  questioned  if  a  ship  was  forfeited  by  a  man  being
killed  in  it,  but  as  mariners  are  so  much  exposed,  it  was
thought  hard  that  it  should  l.

A  person  may  also  be  injured  in  his  body  by  demem-
bration,  mutilation,  assault  and  battery,  or  restraint  on  his
liberty.  Maiming  and  mutilation  originally  by  the  Roman
law  were  compensated  for  in  the  same  way  with  murder,
and  if  the  person  was  incapable,  with  the  assistance  of  his
friends,  to  pay  the  compensation,  he  was  given  over  to  the
person  maimed,  to  be  maimed  in  the  same  manner,  as  we
are  acquainted  by  the  Salic  law,  which  gives  us  the  form  of
their  procedure.  In  the  same  manner  all  hurts  among
many  nations,  particularly  among  the  Lombards,  were
compounded  for ;  they  paid  so  much  for  a  tooth,  so  much
more  if  it  was  a  foretooth,  so  much  for  two  teeth,  but,  what
is  very  remarkable,  though  twenty  were  knocked  out,  the
injured  person  could  claim  no  more  than  the  price  of  three.
They  had  a  precise  sum  for  every  member  of  the  body.
Among  the  Romans,  if  a  man  could  not  pay  his  composition,
he  was  obliged  to  make  satisfaction  by  the  law  of  retaliation  ;
he  received  as  many  blows  as  he  gave.  An  eye  went  for
an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.  This  custom  continued
long,  and  is  in  general  reasonable,  but  in  some  cases  it  is
not  proper.  If  a  man  got  his  arm  broken  in  wrestling,
it  was  hard  that  another's  should  be  broken  for  it  in  cold
blood.  In  some  cases  it  was  impracticable,  as  when  a  man
causes  an  abortion  in  a  woman,  he  could  not  be  punished
in  the  same  manner.  This  custom  by  degrees  went  out,
and  pecuniary  fines,  according  to  the  circumstances  of
him  who  was  to  pay  them,  were  introduced,  and  the
praetor  at  Rome  caused  them  to  be  received,  but  in  some
countries  it  continued  longer,  and  there  are  remains  of  it
1  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Croivn,  bk.  i.  ch.  xxvi.


PRIVATE LAW  143

in  Holland  to  this  day.  When  a  person  was  maimed  in
any  member  that  rendered  him  incapable  of  military
service 1,  the  punishment  was  more  severe.

By  the  Coventry  Act,  maiming  in  the  face  from  malice
or  forethought  was  punished  with  death2.  The  reason  of
this  was  that  Sir  John  Coventry  had  spoken  impertinently
against  the  king  in  parliament.  The  Prince  of  Wales,  with
some  others,  probably  not  without  the  king's  permission,
laid  wait  for  him,  and  cut  his  ears  and  his  face  3.  The
parliament  immediately  enacted  that  maiming  in  the  face
from  forethought  should  be  punishable  with  death.  There
was  never  one,  however,  executed  upon  this  law  but  one
Cook,  who  lay  in  wait  to  murder  his  brother,  but  did
not  get  it  executed,  only  he  maimed  him  in  the  face.
He  was  therefore  by  the  Coventry  Act  found  guilty  of
deliberate  malice.  He  pled  that  his  intention  was  to
murder,  not  to  maim,  but  the  court  from  the  instrument  he
used  found  that  he  intended  to  maim  as  well  as  murder4.

A  man  may  also  be  injured  by  assault  and  battery.  When
a  person  is  put  to  bodily  fear  it  is  assault,  and  when  he
is  actually  beat  it  is  battery.  Originally  no  assault  by
words  subjected  to  punishment,  unless  there  was  likewise

1  The  term 'mayhem 'or 'maim'  *  In 1721 Arundel Cooke or
was  properly  applied  only  to  such  Coke,  an  attorney,  was tried at
injuries. Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  the Suffolk assizes with John
Crown,  bk.  i.  ch.  xliv.  §  i.  Woodburne,  his  hired  accomplice,

2  22  and  23  Car.  II.  cap.  i.  for  lying  in  wait  for  and  disfigur-

3  '  The  Prince  of  Wales '  is  an  ing  his  brother-in-law,  who  had
extraordinary mistake for 'the  just been supping with him.
king's  son,'  i.e.  Monmouth. Ra-  Attempt  to murder  was  not  at
pin's  account  is  that  the  attack  on  that  time  a  capital  oifence,  and
Sir  John 'was,  by  the  king's  order,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Cooke  did
committed  to  the  Duke  of.  Mon-  intend  to  murder  his  brother-in-
mouth,  his  natural  son,  and  the  law,  and  not  merely  to  maim  him.
Duke  had  employed  some  other  Yet both criminals were con-
persons,  who  after  the  deed  re-  demned,  as  stated  in the text,
tired  to  his  house.'  History  of  Eng-  and  executed. State  Trials,  1730,
land,  translated  by  Tindal,  vol.  ii.  vol.  vi.  pp.  212-228.

p.  658. Sir  John's  nose  was  slit.


144  PART I  : JUSTICE

a  shaking  of  the  fist,  drawing  an  instrument  or  something
of  this  kind.  A  composition  was  the  first  punishment  for
these  crimes,  but  now  it  is  fine  and  imprisonment.

A  man  may  further  be  injured  in  his  body  by  restrain
ing  his  liberty,  therefore  the  laws  of  every  country  are
particularly  careful  of  securing  it.  No  magistrate  in  this
country  has  an  arbitrary  power  of  imprisonment.  It  is
indeed  reasonable  that  he  should  have  it  in  his  power  to
imprison  when  there  is  ground  of  suspicion,  though  an
innocent  man  may  sometimes  suffer  a  little  by  it.  Nothing
is  more  difficult  than  perfectly  to  secure  liberty.  If  the
person  can  bring  some  circumstances  to  alleviate  the
suspicion,  he  may  be  set  at  liberty  upon  bail,  unless  it  be
a  capital  crime.  If  the  bail  be  not  sufficient,  it  is  unjust  in
the  magistrate  to  accept  of  it,  but  if  it  be,  he  is  punishable
if  he  do  not.  If  a  person  be  wrongously  kept  in  prison
beyond  the  time  when  he  ought  to  have  been  tried,  he
has  so  much  a  day  according  to  his  station.

In  England,  if  a  person  be  confined  the  day  after  the
assizes,  forty 1  days  after  he  may  have  the  benefit  of  the
Habeas  Corpus  Act,  that  is,  he  may  be  carried  to  London
at  his  own  expense,  but  if  he  cannot  afford  this,  he  must
wait  till  the  next  assizes.  In  Scotland  there  is  no  occasion
for  the  Habeas  Corpus  Act.  A  person  may  be  tried  by
the  sheriff  if  he  pleases,  and  at  any  rate  can  be  carried  to
Edinburgh  to  the  king's  court.  All  this  is  for  the  security
of  liberty  in  free  governments,  but  in  despotic  governments
the  will  of  the  magistrate  is  law.

It  is  to  be  observed  with  respect  to  what  is  done
through  fear,  that  a  bond  given  from  this  principle  is  not
binding;  no  obligation  is  valid  unless  the  person  acted
voluntar[il]y.  However  if  a  person  is  threatened  to  be
pursued  *,  and  gives  a  bond  to  avoid  it,  the  bond  is  valid,
and  the  fear  is  not  considered  as  a  mctus  iniustus.

1  '  Forty ' should be '  not in see  above,  p.  46,  note  2.
any case more than twenty;' -  I.e.  of  course,  prosecuted.


PRIVATE LAW  145

A  rape  or  forcible  marriage  is  capital,  because  the
woman  is  so  dishonoured  that  no  other  punishment  can
be  a  sufficient  retaliation.  Though  forcible  marriage  be
forbidden  by  law,  yet  if  the  woman  afterwards  consent,
the  friends  can  have  no  appeal,  yet  the  king  may
pursue  it.

A  man  may  be  injured  in  his  reputation,  by  affronts,
by  words,  and  by  writings.  An  affront  in  company
is  a  real  injury ;  if  the  affront  be  offered  in  words  it  is
a  verbal  injury  ;  if  in  writing  it  is  a  written  injury.  In  all
these  the  law  gives  redress.  Affronts  by  the  old  law  were
punished  in  the  same  manner  with  assault  and  battery.
Affronts  in  company  are  most  atrocious  crimes  ;  the  trifling
fine  of  five  or  ten  pounds  is  by  no  means  an  adequate
compensation  for  them.  Where  the  law  denies  justice,
we  are  naturally  led  to  take  it  ourselves.  This  intro
duced  duelling  in  Europe,  which  brings  along  with  it
an  additional  injury;  I  must  not  only  receive  a  box  on
the  ear,  but  I  am  obliged  to  expose  my  life,  or  become
altogether  odious.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  Socrates'
time  the  affront  of  giving  the  lie  was  little  thought  of;
he  does  it  himself  without  any  ceremony.

Verbal  injuries  are  redressed  both  by  ancient  and  modern
laws.  When  a  person  is  accused  by  words,  it  sustains
a  process  before  a  court  of  justice.  If  he  be  accused  of
forgery,  theft,  or  any  crime,  as  he  may  be  subjected  to
great  damages,  he  is  entitled  to  sufficient  redress.  In  the
same  manner  if  a  person's  right  or  title  be  slandered  he
suffers  an  injury.  If  I  say  you  have  no  more  right  to  your
own  house  than  I  have,  it  is  an  injury,  as  it  may  excite
those  who  have  pretended  titles.  Though  it  be  true,  this
is  only  an  alleviation,  and  will  not  secure  me  from  a  prose
cution.  There  are  some  offences  that  are  only  prosecuted
in  spiritual  courts,  as  if  a  person  call  a  woman  a  whore.

Written  injuries  are  subjected  to  severer  punishments
than  verbal  ones,  as  they  are  more  deliberate  malice.


146  PART I  : JUSTICE

Abusive  words  in  a  libel  give  a  process,  though  the
same  words  would  not  if  spoken.  Libels  and  satires  are
punished  according  to  the  nature  of  the  government.  In
aristocratical  governments  they  are  punished  severely.
Little  petty  princes  may  be  quite  destroyed  by  abusive
libels,  whereas  kings  and  ministers  of  state  in  a  free
country,  being  far  out  of  their  reach,  cannot  be  hurt  by
them.  In l  governments,  and  in  Rome  for  a  long  time,  they
were  not  punished.  Augustus  at  last  revived  the  law
subjecting  the  authors  to  a  capital  punishment2.  In  general
people  of  circumstances  take  no  notice  of  such  libels
unless  it  be  absolutely  necessary  to  clear  themselves  of
some  crime.

A  person  may  be  injured  in  his  estate,  real  or  personal.
With  regard  to  his  real  estate  he  may  be  injured  either  in
his  moveables  or  immoveables.  In  his  immoveables  he
may  be  injured  by  arson  or  forcible  entry.  Arson  is
wilful  fire-raising3  either  in  the  house  of  another,  or  in
our  own,  so  as  to  affect  that  of  another.  By  the  Roman,
English  and  Scotch  law  this  is  punished  capitally.  If
the  fire  be  occasioned  by  negligence  no  punishment  is
inflicted.  Forcible  entry  is  the  violently  putting  a  man
out  of  his  estate.  The  laws  are  so  strict  on  this  head
that  the  person  ousted  may  retake  his  own  by  violence4.
This  was  occasioned  by  the  feudal  customs,  by  which
it  was  very  common  for  barons  and  their  vassals  to  deprive
one  another  of  their  possessions,  and  this  was  the  only
way  [that]  then  could  be  fallen  on  to  get  it  restored.
Afterwards  it  was  enacted  that  if  any  person  could  prove

1  Some words, possibly 'the  4  '  It  seems  that  at  the  common
Greek,' have evidently  dropped  law  a  man  disseised  of  any  lands
out.  or  tenements (if he could not

2  Tacitus,  Ann.  lib.  i.  cap.  72.  prevail by fair means) might

3  The  term 'wilful  fire-raising'  lawfully regain the possession
is  used  for  arson  in  Scotch  law  thereof by force.' Hawkins,
books. Bayne,  Institutions  of  the  Pleas of  the Croivn,  bk. i. ch.
Criminal  Law  of  Scotland,  p.  26.  Ixiv.  §  i.


PRIVATE LAW  147

that  he  was  violently]  dispossessed,  his  estate  should  be
restored l.  But  if  the  violent  possessor  had  kept  it  three
years,  the  old  possessor  must  prove  not  only  that  he
was  dispossessed  by  violence,  but  that  he  has  a  real
right  to  it,  before  it  be  restored2.

A  man  may  be  injured  in  his  moveables  three  ways,  by
theft,  robbery,  and  piracy.  Theft  is  the  clandestinely
taking  away  the  property  of  another.  This  crime  does
not  naturally  excite  that  degree  of  resentment  which
prompts  to  capital  punishment;  and  for  a  long  time  it
was  not  punished  with  death.  By  the  old  Roman  law
the  thief  was  obliged  to  restore  what  he  had  taken,  and
to  add  to  it  as  much  more.  If  he  stole  a  sheep  he  re
stored  two.  There  was,  however,  a  peculiar  distinction
between  ihefitr  manifestus  and  fur  nee  manifestos.  The
former,  as  he  was  taken  with  the  goods  about  him,  paid
quadruple,  and  the  latter  only  double  the  value  of  things
stolen.  This  they  borrowed,  it  is  said,  from  the  Lace
daemonians3,  who  taught  their  youth  to  steal  and  hide  well,
as  they  thought  it  improved  them  in  that  cunning  which  is
necessary  in  war.  However,  the  Lacedaemonians  never
encouraged  the  stealing  the  property  of  another.  In
their  feasts  nothing  was  prepared  for  their  young  men,
and  it  was  expected  that  they  should  purloin  from  the
tables  of  their  fathers  what  was  sufficient  for  themselves ;
to  steal  such  trifles  as  a  crust  of  bread  was  indulged,  but
nothing  else.  The  real  reason  of  their  punishing  the
fur  manifestus  more  severely  than  another  was  that
barbarous  nations  punish  crimes  according  to  the  degree
of  resentment  they  excite,  and  when  the  thief  was  catched
in  the  act  their  resentment  was  very  high,  and  con
sequently  disposed  them  to  punish  him  severely.  Since

1  5  Ric.  II,  cap.  7  ;  15  Ric.  II, P.C.,  bk.  i.  ch.  Ixiv.  §  8.

cap.  2;  8  Hen.  VI,  cap.  9;  Haw-  3  But  Heineccius,  Antiq.  Rom.
kins,  P.C.,  bk.  i.  ch.  Ixiv.  §§  6,  7.  lib.  iv.  tit.  i.  §  12,  says  they  bor-

2  31 Eliz. cap. ii ; Hawkins, rowed  it  ' ex  iure  Attico.'

L  2


148  PART I  : JUSTICE

the  thirteenth  century  this  crime  has  been  punished
capitally.  The  vassals  of  great  lords  were  continually
making  incursions  into  the  neighbouring  territories  and
carrying  off  booty.  When  government  came  to  be
established,  it  naturally  punished  most  severely  those
crimes  to  which  men  had  the  greatest  propensity,  and
consequently  endeavoured  to  restrain  this  practice.  The
Emperor  Barbarossa  first  made  this  crime  capital,  and  he
was  followed  by  all  civilized  nations,  though  undoubt
edly  the  punishment  is  too  great,  for  a  thief  is  but  a  petty
mean  creature  and  does  not  excite  a  very  high  degree
of  resentment ;  he  seems  to  be  in  some  degree  below
this  passion.  By  the  old  Scotch  law  theft  in  a  landed
gentleman  was  considered  as  treason1,  because  the  gentry
were  considered  as  theabettors  and  assistants  of  thieves
and  vagrants;  and,  as  they  made  war  on  one  another,  which
looked  like  an  usurpation  of  sovereignty,  they  were
considered  as  guilty  of  treason.  By  the  English  law  any
theft  below  a  shilling  was  punished  with  the  pillory,  and
above  that  with  death.  In  Scotland  it  requires  a  much
greater  sum2.  Nothing  is  theft  with  us  but  what  belongs
to  particular  persons.  The  man  who  stole  deer  in
a  forest  or  pigeons  at  a  distance  from  a  pigeon-house
could  not  be  punished  till  by  a  late  statute3.  House-
breaking  indeed,  though  there  was  not  the  value  of
a  shilling  carried  off,  was  punished  capitally.  Such
punishments,  however  necessary  once,  are  certainly  now
too  severe.  Government  [was]  at  first  weak,  and  could
not  punish  crimes,  but  was  obliged  to  interpose  in  those
cases  in  which  the  interest  of  society  was  concerned  ;  but

1  '  One circumstance in the  2  No  sum  was  specified,  man}'

offender, namely, his being a  circumstances besides value

landed  man,  formerly  made  the  being  taken  into  account,

punishment  of  this  crime  [theft]  3  2  Geo.  III,cap.29,ormoreprob-

to  be  that  of  high  treason.'  Bayne,  ably  an  error  for  '  late  statutes.'

Institutions  of  the  Criminal  Law  MacDouall,  Institute,  vol.  i.  p.  594  ;

of  Scotland,  p.  46.  Bacon,  Abridgement,  s.v.  'Game.'


PRIVATE LAW  149

when  it  acquired  more  strength  it  made  punishments
severe  that  it  might  restrict  the  licentiousness  of  manners
which  lax  discipline  had  introduced.  Accordingly  we
find  that  the  laws  of  the  twelve  tables  made  almost
every  crime  capital.  In  Europe  after  the  custom  of
compensation  went  out,  they  punished  everything  as
treason,  theft  in  a  landed  man,  a  servant  killing  his  master,
a  curate  his  bishop,  or  a  husband  his  wife1  were  all  petty
treason.  Afterwards  only  crimes  respecting  the  state
were  considered  as  treason;  and  this  crime  came  by
degrees  to  its  proper  extent.

Robbery,  as  it  puts  a  man  to  the  greatest  bodily  fear,  is
subjected  to  the  greatest  punishment :  no  occasion  can
save  the  robber,  even  though  he  should  cover  the  injury
by  pretending  to  buy  a  man's  goods  after  he  has  forced
him  to  sell  them  to  him2.

Piracy  is  punished  still  more  severely3.

A  man  may  be  injured  in  his  personal  estate  by  fraud
or  forgery.  The  natural  punishment  of  the  dolns  mains
is  not  death,  but  some  sort  of  ignominy  such  as  the  pillory.
Some  frauds,  however,  on  account  of  the  facility  and
security  with  which  they  may  be  committed,  and  the  loss
which  they  occasion,  are  justly  subjected  to  capital  punish
ment.  When  an  insured  ship,  for  instance,  is  cast  away,
it  is  difficult  to  prove  that  it  was  done  by  fraud ;  but  if  she
be  insured  to  the  full  value  there  is  a  great  temptation  to
cast  her  away,  and  therefore  the  law,  in  order  to  intimidate
the  merchant,  made  death  the  punishment4.  It  was  a  ques
tion  whether  a  ship  ought  to  be  insured  for  her  value  at  the
port  whence  she  sets  out,  or  at  the  port  to  which  she  is

1  'A  husband  his  wife '  should  compel  him  to  sell  them  to  him
be 'a  wife  her  husband.'  against his  will,  he  is  guilty  of

2  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Croivn,  robbery,  though  he  give  for  them
bk.  i.  ch.  xxxv. § 10, says  that  more  than  they  are  worth.'
some  hold  that  '  if  a  man  meeting  3  Ibid.  ch.  xxxvii.

another  going  with  his  goods  to 4  i  Ann.  St.  2,  cap.  9.
market in order  to sell them,


150  PART I  : JUSTICE

bound,  and  it  was  determined  that  it  should  be  at  the  port
where  she  sets  out.  If  a  Glasgow  merchant  sends  out
a  ship  with  £3000  worth  of  goods  for  Virginia,  they  are
worth  more  than  £4000  when  they  arrive  there;  and  if
the  merchant  were  allowed  to  insure  for  this  last  sum  he
would  have  a  great  temptation  to  make  shipwreck  of  her.
He  can  expect  no  more  when  he  is  at  the  expense  of  taking
his  goods  to  Virginia ;  he  may  meet  with  bad  debtors,  and
he  can  lose  nothing  by  the  insurers.  In  the  same  manner
it  was  anciently  capital  to  steal  anything  from  the  plough,
as  it  was  so  much  exposed l.

In  England  a  bankrupt  may  have  a  discharge  on  sur
rendering  himself  and  all  his  effects,  but  as  he  has  it  in  his
power  to  defraud  his  creditors,  if  he  does  not  give  up  all
he  has,  he  is  punishable  by  death2.  Forgery  is  also
punished  capitally,  and  nobody  complains  that  this  punish
ment  is  too  severe,  because  when  contracts  sustain  action
property  can  never  be  secure  unless  the  forging  of  false
ones  be  restrained.  However,  the  forgery  of  every  deed
is  not  capital 3,  but  only  the  forgery  of  deeds  payable  to  the
bearer  on  demand,  because  any  forgery  of  a  deed  regarding
the  conveyance  of  land  may  easily  be  discovered  before
any  damage  be  done.

Perjury  is  not  punished  capitally4.

As  there  are  several  ways  of  acquiring  personal  rights
so  there  are  several  ways  in  which  they  expire.  First,
by  payment  of  what  is  due  by  contract  or  quasi-contract,
because  the  fulfilment  of  the  obligation  satisfies  the  other
party.  Secondly,  by  discharge  or  acquittance,  even  though
the  debt  be  not  paid.  This  also  takes  place  with  regard

1  Among 'certain  offences  which  ing to  the plough.' Institutions

will  not  fall  under  the  definition  of  the  Criminal  Law  of  Scotland,

of  theft, which however have  p.  47.

been  so  called  because  they  were  2  Hawkins,  Pleas  of  the  Crown,

declared to be punishable as  bk.  i.  ch.  Ivii.

theft,' Bayne  mentions '  cutting  8  Ibid.  chs.  Iviii,  Ixx.

and  destroying  the  gear  belong-  4  Ibid.  ch.  Ixix.


PRIVATE LAW  151

to  crimes,  for  when  the  king  or  the  injured  person  choose
to  drop  prosecution  or  to  give  a  pardon,  the  person  is
free.  Thirdly,  by  prescription.  If  a  debt  be  not  claimed
within  a  certain  time  the  debtor  is  free.  This  is  very
reasonable,  for  if  a  debt  be  not  claimed  for  a  long  time
the  negligence  of  the  debtor  is  encouraged.  By  the
Scotch  law,  if  he  call  for  neither  principal  nor  interest
of  a  bond  for  forty  years,  it  very  justly  prescribes.  No
body  of  common  prudence  would  neglect  any  part  of  his
affairs  for  forty  years,  if  ever  he  intended  to  meddle
with  them  again.  According  to  strict  law,  if  the  interest
be  demanded  in  the  thirty-ninth  year  the  capital  does
not  prescribe.  Crimes  likewise  prescribe,  and  it  is  rea
sonable  that  they  should,  whether  they  be  punished
from  a  sympathy  with  the  resentment  of  the  sufferer,  or
from  public  utility,  or  to  satisfy  the  public.  Resentment
wears  out  in  a  few  years,  and  a  person  who  has  behaved
well  for  twenty  years,  the  time  fixed  on  by  our  law,  cannot
be  very  dangerous  to  the  public.  Appeals  by  the  English
law  prescribe  in  one  year1;  but  an  indictment  does  not
prescribe  so  soon 2,  because  the  king  prosecutes  for
public  security  and  not  to  gratify  private  resentment,  and
therefore  the  law  favours  his  claim.  At  any  rate  it  would
be  unreasonable  to  prosecute  a  man  fora  crime  committed
forty  years  ago,  because  he  may  now  be  a  quite  different
man  from  what  he  was  then.  Besides,  the  thing  is  quite
forgotten,  and  the  end  of  punishing  and  public  example  is
entirety  lost.  Treason  itself  prescribes  in  a  few  years3.
From  a  resentment  in  law,  however,  if  sentence  have
actually  passed  upon  a  person,  and  he  have  made  his  escape,
he  may  be  executed  on  his  former  sentence  :  the  escape  is
considered  as  a  new  crime.  However,  this  is  not  very

1  This  applies  only  to  appeals  2  Ibid.  ch.  xxvi.  §  41.

of  death. See Hawkins,  Pleas  3  Three  years,  under  7  &  8  W.

of  the Crown, bk. ii.  ch.  xxiii.  Ill,  cap.  3.
§48.


152  PART I  : JUSTICE

natural,  and  if  a  man  live  quietly  after  his  return  he  is
seldom  troubled.  We  had  an  instance  of  an  earl  who  had
been  sentenced  in  1715  and  had  returned  to  his  native
country  and  lived  peaceably  in  it  till  the  year  1745,  when  he
again  joined  the  rebels  and  was  executed  on  his  former
sentence l.  Dr.  Cameron  suffered  in  Scotland  in  the  same
manner2.  In  every  country,  if  a  person  return  after  twenty
years  he  is  not  troubled ;  it  would  be  thought  invidious  in
the  officers  of  justice  to  meddle  with  him.

Some  general  observations  on  the  criminal  law  is  all
that  remains  on  this  subject.

Resentment  seems  best  to  account  for  the  punishment  of
crimes.  If  a  person  fires  a  pistol  down  a  street,  though
he  do  no  harm,  public  utility  requires  that  he  should  be
punished  ;  but  such  crimes  are  by  the  laws  of  every  country
more  slightly  punished  than  if  some  mischief  had  ensued.
The  reason  is  plain.  Resentment  never  rises  to  any  great
pitch  unless  some  injury  be  actually  done;  some  things
that  are  in  themselves  criminal  are  not  punished  unless
some  bad  consequence  follow.  A  man  meets  with  little
resentment  for  riding  an  unruly  horse  in  the  market-place,
but  if  he  kill  anybody,  resentment  is  very  high.  For  the
same  reason,  deodands,  though  inanimate  objects,  are
accounted  execrable.  In  many  cases  the  resentment  falls
upon  the  very  member  of  the  body  which  perpetrated  the

1  This was Charles  Ratcliffe,  Howell's  State  Trials,  1813,  vol.

who  claimed  to  be  Earl  of  Der-  xviii.  p.  430  sqq.
wentwater  in succession to his 2  Dr. Archibald Cameron,

brother  James. Both  were  con-  Lochiel's  brother,  was  executed

demned to death in 1716, but  in London in 1753 on the

Charles escaped from prison.  strength of a bill of attainder

In 1745 he was captured on  passed against him in 1746.

board  a  vessel  said  to  be  going  Ibid.  vol.  xix.  p.  734  sqq. '  Su'f-

to the  assistance  of  the rebels,  fered  in Scotland ' is probably

and  was  arraigned  and  executed  a mistake of the reporter  for

in  London  without  another  trial.  '  suffered after being captured

He had  resided  abroad,  not  in  in  Scotland,'  or  some  equivalent

Scotland  as  stated in  the  text,  phrase.


PRIVATE LAW  153

action.  Resentment  is  on  the  whole  a  very  indiscrimin-
ating  principle,  and  pays  little  attention  to  the  disposition
of  the  mind.

Certain  persons  are  not  to  be  considered  as  subjects  of
punishment,  such  as  idiots,  madmen,  and  children.  We
are  not  so  much  shocked  by  an  action  done  by  a  madman,
as  one  done  by  another  person.  We  think  binding  the
only  punishment  adequate  to  their  crimes.

This  is  all  we  intended  on  the  injuries  that  may  be  done
to  a  man  as  a  man.

Having  now  considered  man  as  a  member  of  a  state,  as
a  member  of  a  family,  and  as  a  man,  we  proceed  to  police,
[the]  second  division  of  jurisprudence.


PART II: OF  POLICE


[DIVISION  I. CLEANLINESS  AND  SECURITY.]

POLICE  is  the  second  general  division  of  jurisprudence.
The  name  is  French,  and  is  originally  derived  from  the
Greek  TroAn-em,  which  properly  signified  the  policy  of  civil
government,  but  now  it  only  means  the  regulation  of  the
inferior  parts  of  government,  viz  :— cleanliness,  security  and
cheapness  or  plenty1.  The  two  former,  to  wit,  the  proper
method  of  carrying  dirt  from  the  streets,  and  the  execution
of  justice,  so  far  as  it  regards  regulations  for  preventing
crimes  or  the  method  of  keeping  a  city  guard,  though
useful,  are  too  mean  to  be  considered  in  a  general
discourse  of  this  kind.  An  observation  or  two  before  we
proceed  to  the  third  particular  is  all  that  is  necessary.

We  observe  then,  that  in  cities  where  there  is  most  police
and  the  greatest  number  of  regulations  concerning  it,  there
is  not  always  the  greatest  security.  In  Paris  the  regula
tions  concerning  police  are  so  numerous  as  not  to  be
comprehended  in  several  volumes ;  in  London  there  are

1  Johnson (Dictionary, 1755)  and government of  a city or

describes '  police '  as  of  French  country, so far  as  regards  the

origin,  and  mentions  Ti-oXireia  as  inhabitants;'  and  '  policy '  as  '  the

the  original  of  '  policy.' He  de-  art  of  government,  chiefly  with

fines  '  police  '  as  '  the  regulation  respect  to  foreign  powers.'


CLEANLINESS AND SECURITY  155

only  two  or  three  simple  regulations.  Yet  in  Paris  scarce
a  night  passes  without  somebody  being  killed,  while  in
London,  which  is  a  larger  city,  there  are  scarce  three  or
four  in  a  year.  On  this  account  one  would  be  apt  to  think,
that  the  more  police  there  is  the  less  security ;  but  this  is
not  the  cause.  In  England  as  well  as  in  France,  during
the  time  of  the  feudal  government,  and  as  late  as  Queen
Elizabeth's  reign,  great  numbers  of  retainers  were  kept
idle  about  the  noblemen's  houses1,  to  keep  the  tenants  in
awe.  These  retainers,  when  turned  out,  had  no  other  way
of  getting  their  subsistence  but  by  committing  robberies,
and  living  on  plunder,  which  occasioned  the  greatest
disorder.  A  remain  of  the  feudal  manners,  still  preserved
in  France,  gives  occasion  to  the  difference.  The  nobility
at  Paris  keep  far  more  menial  servants  than  ours,  who
are  often  turned  out  on  their  own  account  or  through  the
caprice  of  their  masters,  and,  being  in  the  most  indigent
circumstances,  are  forced  to  commit  the  most  dreadful
crimes.  In  Glasgow,  where  almost  nobody  has  more
than  one  servant,  there  are  fewer  capital  crimes  than  in
Edinburgh.  In  Glasgow7  there  is  not  one  in  several  years  ;
but  not  a  year  passes  in  Edinburgh  without  some  such
disorders.  Upon  this  principle,  therefore,  it  is  not.  so
much  the  police  that  prevents  the  commission  of  crimes
as  the  having  as  few  persons  as  possible  to  live  upon
others.  Nothing  tends  so  much  to  corrupt  mankind  as
dependency,  while  independency  still  increases  the  honesty
of  the  people.

The  establishment  of  commerce  and  manufactures,  which
brings  about  this  independency,  is  the  best  police  for  pre
venting  crimes2.  The  common  people  have  better  wages  in

1  Hume, History of  England  industry  in  towns  where  courts
under  the  House  of  Tudor,  vol.  ii.  and parliaments reside is at-
P-  735- Cp.  above,  p.  35.  tributed to the fact that the

2  In W.  of  N.  bk.  ii. ch. iii.  inhabitants  are  not  employed  by
vol.  i.  pp. 338-340,  the  want  of  capital.


156  PART II  ! POLICE

this  way  than  in  any  other,  and  in  consequence  of  this  a
general  probity  of  manners  takes  place  through  the  whole
country.  Nobody  will  be  so  mad  as  to  expose  himself
upon  the  highway,  when  he  can  make  better  bread  in  an
honest  and  industrious  manner.  The  nobility  of  Paris  and
London  are  no  doubt  much  upon  a  level ;  but  the  common
people  of  the  former,  being  much  more  dependent,  are  not
to  be  compared  with  those  of  the  latter:  and  for  the
same  reason  the  commonalty  in  Scotland  differ  from
those  in  England,  though  the  nobility  too1  are  much  upon
a  level.

Thus  far  for  the  two  first  particulars  which  come  under
the  general  division  of  police.

1  I.e.  the  nobility  of  England  and  Scotland  as  well  as  the  nobility
of  Paris  and  London.


[DIVISION II. CHEAPNESS  OR  PLENTY.]

[§  i. Of  the  Natural  Wants  of  Mankind^

IN  the  following  part  of  this  discourse  we  are  to  confine
ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  cheapness  or  plenty,  or,
which  is  the  same  thing,  the  most  proper  way  of  procuring
wealth  and  abundance.  Cheapness  is  in  fact  the  same
thing  with  plenty.  It  is  only  on  account  of  the  plent}'
of  water  that  it  is  so  cheap  as  to  be  got  for  the  lifting ;  and
on  account  of  the  scarcity  of  diamonds  (for  their  real  use
seems  not  yet  to  be  discovered)  that  they  are  so  dear  *.  To
ascertain  the  most  proper  method  of  obtaining  these
conveniences  it  will  be  necessary  to  show  first  wherein
opulence  consists,  and  still  previous  to  this  we  must
consider  what  are  the  natural  wants  of  mankind  which  are
to  be  supplied  ;  and  if  we  differ  from  common  opinions,  we
shall  at  least  give  the  reasons  for  our  non-conformity.

Nature  produces  for  every  animal  everything  that  is
sufficient  to  support  it  without  having  recourse  to  the
improvement  of  the  original  production.  Food,  clothes  and
lodging  are  all  the  wants  of  any  animal  whatever2,  and  most

1  The cheapness of  water  on  of  useful  water  arising  from  its

account  of  its  abundance  is  an  plcntifulness is  contrasted  with

ancient commonplace. Bar-  the  high  value  of  useless  diamonds

beyrac on Pufendorf, De Jure  arising from their scarcity  b}-

naturae  et  gentium,  lib.  v.  cap.  i.  §  Law,  Money  and  Trade  considered,

4,  quotes  Plato,  Euthydem.  304  B,  1705,  ch.  i,  and  by  Joseph  Harris,

TO yap  airiiviov,  Z>  EiBvfypf,  Ti(w>t>'  Essay  on  Money  and  Coins, 1757,

TO  8e  v&ap  tiwvTaTOV  <*pi<rroi»  ov  o>s  pt.  i.  §  3-

6(/>?7 IlivSapr.s. The low value  "  'Les  choses  nccessaires  a  la


158  PART II  I POLICE

of  the  animal  creation  are  sufficiently  provided  for  by
nature  in  all  those  wants  to  which  their  condition  is  liable.
Such  is  the  delicacy  of  man  alone,  that  no  object  is
produced  to  his  liking.  He  finds  that  in  everything  there
is  need  of  improvement.  Though  the  practice  of  savages
shows  that  his  food  needs  no  preparation,  yet  being
acquainted  with  fire,  he  finds  that  it  can  be  rendered  more
wholesome  and  easily  digested,  and  thereby  may  preserve
him  from  many  diseases  which  are  very  violent  among
them.  But  it  is  not  only  his  food  that  requires  this
improvement ;  his  puny  constitution  is  hurt  also  by  the
intemperature  of  the  air  he  breathes  in,  which,  though  not
very  capable  of  improvement,  must  be  brought  to  a  proper
temperament  for  his  body,  and  an  artificial  atmosphere
prepared  for  this  purpose.  The  human  skin  cannot  endure
the  inclemencies  of  the  weather,  and  even  in  those  countries
where  the  air  is  warmer  than  the  natural  warmth  of  the
constitution,  and  where  they  have  no  need  of  clothes,  it
must  be  stained  and  painted  to  be  able  to  endure  the
hardships  of  the  sun  and  rain.  In  general,  however,  the
necessities  of  man  are  not  so  great  but  that  they  can  be
supplied  by  the  unassisted  labour  of  the  individual.  All
the  above  necessities  everyone  can  provide  for  himself,  such
as  animals  and  fruits  for  his  food,  and  skins  for  his
clothing.

As  the  delicacy  of  a  man's  body  requires  much  greater
provision  than  that  of  any  other  animal,  the  same  or
rather  the  much  greater  delicacy  of  his  mind  requires  a
still  greater  provision  to  which  all  the  different  arts  [are]
subservient.  Man  is  the  only  animal  who  is  possessed  of
such  a  nicety  that  the  very  colour  of  an  object  hurts  him.
Among  different  objects  a  different  division  or  arrangement
of  them  pleases.  The  taste  of  beauty,  which  consists

vie  sont  la  nourriture,  le  vete-  en  general,  1755,  p.  163.  Cf.  Moral
ment  et  le  logement,'  Cantillon,  Sentiments,  ist  ed.,  pt.  i.  sect.  iv.
Essai  sur  la  nature  du  commerce  ch.  ii.,  6th  ed.,  pt.  i.  sect.  iii.  ch.  ii.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  159

chiefly  in  the  three  following  particulars,  proper  variety,
easy  connexion,  and  simple  order,  is  the  cause  of  all  this
niceness.  Nothing  without  variety  pleases  us;  a  long
uniform  wall  is  a  disagreeable  object.  Too  much  variety,
such  as  the  crowded  objects  of  a  parterre,  is  also  dis
agreeable.  Uniformity  tires  the  mind  ;  too  much  variety,
too  far  increased,  occasions  an  over-great  dissipation  of  it.
Easy  connexion  also  renders  objects  agreeable ;  when  we
see  no  reason  for  the  contiguity  of  the  parts,  when  they
are  without  any  natural  connexion,  when  they  have
neither  a  proper  resemblance  nor  contrast,  they  never  fail
of  being  disagreeable.  If  simplicity  of  order  be  not
observed,  so  as  that  the  whole  may  be  easily  comprehended,
it  hurts  the  delicacy  of  our  taste.  Again,  imitation  and
painting  render  objects  more  agreeable.  To  see  upon
a  plain,  trees,  forests,  and  other  such  representations,  is
an  agreeable  surprise  to  the  mind  l.  Variety  of  objects
also  renders  them  agreeable.  What  we  are  every  day
accustomed  to  does  but  very  indifferently  affect  us.  Gems
and  diamonds  are  on  this  account  much  esteemed  by  us.
In  like  manner  our  pinchbeck  and  many  of  our  toys  2  were
so  much  valued  by  the  Indians,  that  in  bartering  their
jewels  and  diamonds  for  them  they  thought  they  had
made  by  much  the  better  bargain.

[$  2.  That  all  the  Arts  are  subservient  to  the
Natural  Wants  of  Mankind^

Those  qualities,  which  are  the  ground  of  preference,  and
which  give  occasion  to  pleasure  and  pain,  are  the  cause  of
many  insignificant  demands,  which  we  by  no  means  stand

1  '  Of the Imitative Arts,' thing  of  no  value,'  and quotes
Essays,  p.  137.  from  Abbot,  '  They  exchange  for

2  Johnson (Dictionary, 1755) knives,  glasses,  and  such  toys,
gives  as  the  first  meaning  of  toy, great abundance of gold and
'  a  petty  commodity ;  a  trifle  ; a pearl.'


l6o  PART II  : POLICE

in  need  of.  The  whole  industry  of  human  life  is  employed
not  in  procuring  the  supply  of  our  three  humble  neces
sities,  food,  clothes  and  lodging,  but  in  procuring  the
conveniences  of  it  according  to  the  nicety  and  delicacy  of
our  taste.  To  improve  and  multiply  the  materials,  which
are  the  principal  objects  of  our  necessities,  gives  occasion
to  all  the  variety  of  the  arts.

Agriculture,  of  which  the  principal  object  is  the  supply
of  food,  introduces  not  only  the  tilling  of  the  ground,  but
also  the  planting  of  trees,  the  producing  of  flax,  hemp,  and
innumerable  other  things  of  a  similar  kind.  By  these
again  are  introduced  different  manufactures,  which  are  so
very  capable  of  improvement.  The  metals  dug  from  the
bowels  of  the  earth  furnish  materials  for  tools,  by  which
many  of  these  arts  are  practised.  Commerce  and  naviga
tion  are  also  subservient  to  the  same  purposes  by  collecting
the  produce  of  these  several  arts.  By  these  again  other
subsidiary  [arts]  are  occasioned.  Writing,  to  record  the
multitude  of  transactions,  and  geometry,  which  serves
many  useful  purposes.  Law  and  government,  too,  seem
to  propose  no  other  object  but  this ;  they  secure  the
individual  who  has  enlarged  his  property,  that  he  may
peaceably  enjoy  the  fruits  of  it.  By  law  and  government
all  the  different  arts  flourish,  and  that  inequality  of  fortune
to  which  they  give  occasion  is  sufficiently  preserved.  By
law  and  government  domestic  peace  is  enjoyed  and  security
from  the  foreign  invader.  Wisdom  and  virtue  too  derive
their  lustre  from  supplying  these  necessities.  For  as  the
establishment  of  law  and  government  is  the  highest  effort
of  human  prudence  and  wisdom,  the  causes  cannot  have
a  different  influence  from  what  the  effects  have.  Besides,  it
is  by  the  wisdom  and  probity  of  those  with  whom  we  live
that  a  propriety  of  conduct  is  pointed  out  to  us,  and  the
proper  means  of  attaining  it.  Their  valour  defends  us,
their  benevolence  supplies  us,  the  hungry  is  fed,  the  naked
is  clothed,  by  the  exertion  of  these  divine  qualities.  Thus,


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  l6l

according  to  the  above  representation,  all  things  are  sub
servient  to  supplying  our  threefold  necessities.


[§  3. That  Opulence  arises  from  the  Division
of  Labour.]

In  an  uncivilized  nation,  and  where  labour  is  undivided1,
everything  is  provided  for  that  the  natural  wants  of  man
kind  require  ;  yet,  when  the  nation  is  cultivated  and  labour
divided,  a  more  liberal  provision  is  allotted  them  ;  and  it  is
on  this  account  that  a  common  day  labourer  in  Britain  has
more  luxury  in  his  way  of  living  than  an  Indian  -  sovereign.
The  woollen  coat  he  wears  requires  very  considerable
preparations — the  wool-gatherer,  the  dresser,  the  spinster,
the  dyer,  the  weaver,  the  tailor,  and  many  more,  must  all
be  employed  before  the  labourer  is  clothed.  The  tools
by  which  all  this  is  effectuated  employ  a  still  greater
number  of  artists — the  loom-maker,  miln-wright,  rope-
maker,  not  to  mention  the  bricklayer,  the  tree-feller,  the
miner,  the  smelter,  the  forger,  the  smith,  &c.  Besides  his
dress,  consider  all  his  household  furniture,  his  coarse
linens,  his  shoes,  his  coals  dug  out  of  the  earth  or  brought
by  sea,  his  kitchen  utensils  and  different  plates,  those  that
are  employed  in  providing  his  bread  and  beer,  the  sower,
the  brewer,  the  reaper,  the  baker,  his  glass  windows  and
the  art  required  in  preparing  [them],  without  which  our
northern  climate  could  hardly  be  inhabited.  When  we
examine  the  conveniences  of  the  day  labourer,  we  find

1  The  term  '  division  of  labour'  phrase  without  explanation. See

does  not  appear  to  be  an  old  one.  too the index to part ii. s.  v.

Mandeville,  in  part  ii.  (published  Labour.

in  1729)  of  the  Fable  of  the  Bees, 2 I.  e. of course, American

Dialogue  vi.  p.  335,  makes  Cleo-  Indian. '  A  king  of  a  large  and

menes  say  that  people  enjoying  fruitful  territory  there  [America],

quiet  will  soon  learn  '  to  divide  and  feeds,  lodges,  and  is  clad  worse

subdivide  their  labour,'  but  Hora-  than  a  day  labourer  in  England.'

tins does not understand the  Locke,  Civil  Government,  §  41.

M


162


PART II  : POLICE


that  even  in  his  easy  simple  manner  he  cannot  be  ac
commodated  without  the  assistance  of  a  great  number,
and  yet  this  is  nothing  compared  with  the  luxury  of  the
nobility.  An  European  prince,  however,  does  not  so  far
exceed  a  commoner,  as  the  latter  does  the  chief  of  a  savage
nation  l.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  how  the  rich  can  be  so
well  provided  for,  as  they  can  direct  so  many  hands  to
serve  their  purposes.  They  are  supported  by  the  industry
of  the  peasant.  In  a  savage  nation  every  one  enjoys  the
whole  fruit  of  his  own  labour2,  yet  their  indigence  is
greater  than  anywhere.

It  is  the  division  of  labour  which  increases  the  opulence
of  a  country.

In  a  civilized  society,  though  there  is  a  division  of  labour,


1  The  whole  of  this  passage
from  the  beginning  of  the  para
graph  reappears  without  much
alteration  in  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.
vol.  i.  pp.  12-14.  Locke  had  said  :
'  'Tis  not  barely  the  ploughman's
pains,  the  reaper's  and  thresher's
toil,  and  the  baker's  sweat  [that]
is  to  be  counted  into  the  bread  we
eat ;  the  labour  of  those  who  broke
the  oxen,  who  digged  and  wrought
the  iron  and  stones,  who  felled
and  framed  the  timber  employed
about  the  plough,  mill,  oven,  or
any  other  utensils,  which  are  a
vast  number,  requisite  to  this  corn,
from  its  being  seed  to  be  sown
to  its  being  made  bread,  must  all
be  charged  on  the  account  of
labour.'  Civil  Government,  §  43.
Mandeville  had  wondered  'what
a  number  of  people,  how  many
different  trades,  and  whatavariety
of  skill  and  tools  must  be  employ
ed  '  to  produce  the  'thick  parish
gown  '  of  the  pauper  (Fable  of  the
Bees,  pt.  i.  Remark  P.  anded.,  1723,


p.  182),  and  '  what  a  bustle  is  there
to  be  made  in  several  parts  of  the
world  before  a  fine  scarlet  or
crimson  cloth  can  be  produced,
what  multiplicity  of  trades  and
artificers  must  be  employed  !  Not
only  such  as  are  obvious,  as  wool-
combers,  spinners,  the  weaver,
the  cloth-worker,  the  scourer,  the
dyer,  the  setter,  the  drawer  and
the  packer ;  but  others  that  are
more  remote  and  might  seem
foreign  to  it,  as  the  mill-wright,
the  pewterer,  and  the  chemist,
which  yet  are  all  necessary,  as
well  as  a  great  number  of  other
handicrafts,  to  have  the  tools^
utensils,  and  other  implements
belonging  to  the  trades  already
named  '  (ibid.  '  A  Search  into  the
Nature  of  Society,'  pp.  325,  326).
A  shorter  reference  to  the  number
of  operations  requisite  to  provide
a  coat  occurs  in  Harris,  Essay
of  Money  and  Coins,  pt.  i.  §  12.

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  chs.  vi,  viii.
vol.  i.  pp.  50,  67,  68.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  163

there  is  no  equal  division,  for  there  are  a  good  many  who
work  none  at  all l.  The  division  of  opulence  is  not  according
to  the  work.  The  opulence  of  the  merchant  is  greater
than  that  of  all  his  clerks,  though  he  works  less2;  and
they  again  have  six  times  more  than  an  equal  number
of  artisans,  who  are  more  employed :!.  The  artisan  who
works  at  his  ease  within  doors  has  far  more  than  the  poor
labourer  who  trudges  up  and  down  without  intermission.
Thus,  he  who  as  it  were  bears  the  burden  of  society,  has
the  fewest  advantages.


[$4.  How  the  Division  of  Labour  multiplies
the  Product.}

We  shall  next  show  how  this  division  of  labour  occasions
a  multiplication  of  the  product,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,
how  opulence  arises  from  it.  In  order  to  this  let  us  observe
the  effect  of  the  division  of  labour  in  some  manufactures.
If  all  the  parts  of  a  pin  were  made  by  one  man,  if  the  same
person  dug  the  ore,  [sjmelted  it,  and  split  the  wire,  it  would
take  him  a  whole  year  to  make  one  pin,  and  this  pin  must
therefore  be  sold  at  the  expense  of  his  maintenance  for  that
time,  which,  taking  [it]  at  a  moderate  computation,  would
at  least  be  six  pounds  for  a  pin.  If  the  labour  is  so  far
divided  that  the  wire  is  ready-made,  he  will  not  make  above
twenty  per  day,  which,  allowing  ten  pence  for  wages,  makes
the  pin  a  half-penny 4.  The  pin-maker  therefore  divides  the
labour  among  a  great  number  of  different  persons;  the
cutting,  pointing,  heading,  and  gilding  are  all  separate
professions.  Two  or  three  are  employed  in  making  the
head,  one  or  two  in  putting  it  on,  and  so  on,  to  the  putting

1  W.ofN.  Introduction,  vol.  i. *  MS. reads  'two  pence,'  the
p.  2.  copyist  probably  having  misread

2  Ibid.  bk.  i.  ch.  vi.  pp.  50,  51. '  £d.'
s  I.e.  who  work  harder.

M  2


164  PART II  : POLICE

them  in  the  paper,  being  in  all  eighteen  l.  By  this  division
every  one  can  with  great  ease  make  2000  a  day2.  The  same
is  the  case  in  the  linen  and  woollen  manufactures.  Some
arts,  however,  there  are  which  will  not  admit  of  this  divi
sion,  and  therefore  they  cannot  keep  pace  with  other  manu
factures  and  arts.  Such  are  farming  and  grazing.  This  is
entirely  owing  to  the  return  of  the  seasons,  by  which  one
man  can  only  be  for  a  short  time  employed  in  any  one
operation.  In  countries  where  the  season[s]  do  not  make
such  alterations  it  is  otherwise.  In  France  the  corn  is
better  and  cheaper  than  in  England  :!.  But  our  toys,  which
have  no  dependence  on  the  climate,  and  in  which  labour
can  be  divided,  are  far  superior  to  those  of  France  4.

When  labour  is  thus  divided,  and  so  much  done  by  one
man  in  proportion,  the  surplus  above  their  maintenance
is  considerable,  which  each  man  can  exchange  for  a  fourth  5
of  what  he  could  have  done  if  he  had  finished  it  alone.


1  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.  vol.  i.  pp.
6,  7.  The  fifth  volume  of  the
Encyclopedic,  1755,  s.  v.  '  Epingle,'
contains  an  elaborate  description
of  the  eighteen  operations,  con
tributed  by  '  M.  Delaire,  qui  de-
crivait  la  fabrication  de  1'epingle
dans  les  ateliers  meme  des
ouvriers,  ....  tandis  qu'il
faisait  imprimer  a  Paris  son
analyse  .  .  .  du  chancelier  Bacon,'
(p.  807).  If  Adam  Smith  had
relied  on  an  English  authority,
he  might  have  mentioned  a  larger
number.  '  Notwithstanding  that
there  is  scarce  any  commodity
cheaper  than  pins,  there  is  none
that  passes  through  more  hands
ere  they  come  to  be  sold.  They
reckon  twenty-five  workmen
successively  employed  in  each  pin
between  the  drawing  of  the  brass
wire  and  the  sticking  of  the


pin  in  the  paper.'  Ephraim
Chambers,  Cyclopaedia,  s.v.  '  Pin,'
vol.  ii.  and  ed.  1738,  4th  ed.  1741.

2  This figure is  not  from  the
Encyclopedic,  and  the  number  pro
duced per man in the small
factory spoken of  in W.  of  N.
was  4800.

3  Ibid. bk.  i. ch.  i.  vol.  i. pp.
7,8.

4  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.  vol.  i.
p.  9,  it  is  not  the  toys,  but  '  the
hardware  and  the  coarse  woollens
of  England '  which  '  are  beyond  all
comparison  superior.'

5  '  A  fourth of '  is probably  a
mistake  of  the  copyist  foretimes.'
The  calculation  is  perhaps  from
Cantillon, who says that the
labour  of  25  adults  is  sufficient
to procure for 100 others all
the necessaries of life. Essai,
pp.ii3,  "4-


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  165

By  this  means  the  commodity  becomes  far  cheaper,  and
the  labour  dearer.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  price  of
labour  by  no  means  determines  the  opulence  of  society ;
it  is  only  when  a  little  labour  can  procure  abundance.
On  this  account  a  rich  nation,  when  its  manufactures  are
greatly  improven,  may  have  an  advantage  over  a  poor  one
by  underselling  it.  The  cotton  and  other  commodities
from  China  would  undersell  any  made  with  us,  were  it  not
for  the  long  carriage,  and  other  taxes  that  are  laid  upon
them  \  We  must  not  judge  of  the  dearness  of  labour  by
the  money  or  coin  that  is  paid  for  it2.  One  penny  in  some
places  will  purchase  as  much  as  eighteenpence  in  others.
In  the  country  of  the  Mogul,  where  the  day's  wages  are
only  twopence,  labour  is  better  rewarded  than  in  some
of  our  sugar  islands,  where  men  are  almost  starving  with
four  or  five  shillings  a  day.  Coin,  therefore,  can  be  no
proper  estimate.  Further,  though  human  labour  be
employed  both  in  the  multiplication  of  commodities  and  of
money,  yet  the  chance  of  success  is  not  equal.  A  farmer,
by  the  proper  cultivation  of  an  acre,  is  sure  of  increase  ;
but  the  miner  may  work  again  and  again  without  success.
Commodities  must  therefore  multiply  in  greater  proportion
than  gold  and  silver 3.

But  again  4,  the  quantity  of  work  which  is  done  by  the
division  of  labour  is  much  increased  by  the  three  following

1  According to  the fashion  of  men get 2ii. a day for towing
the  time  China  is  here  regarded  as  boats  from  the  canal  banks,  while
a  rich  nation. See  Cannan,  His-  in the American colonies five
tory  of  the  Theories  of  Production  shillings a day  and in  Jamaica
and  Distribution,  1893,  p.  12,  note.  six  or  seven  shillings  a  day  are

2  According  to  Defoe,  Plan  of  regular  wages  (pp.  66,  67).

the  English Commerce,  1728, the  3  And therefore  will become

manufactures of China, India,  cheaper,  so  that  the  same  income

and  other  Eastern  countries  '  push  in coin will indicate a larger

themselves upon  the  world by  amount  of  real  opulence  as  time

the  mere  stress  of  their  cheap-  goes  on.

ness' (p.  65). A page or  two  4  I.e. 'to return to  our  main

further  on  he  says  that  in  China  subject  again.'


166  PART  ii  : POLICE

articles :  first,  increase  of  dexterity ;  secondly,  the  saving
of  time  lost  in  passing  from  one  species  of  labour  to
another ;  and  thirdly,  the  invention  of  machinery.  Of
these  in  order :

First,  when  any  kind  of  labour  is  reduced  to  a  simple
operation,  a  frequency  of  action  insensibly  fits  men  to
a  dexterity  in  accomplishing  it.  A  country  smith  not
accustomed  to  make  nails  will  work  very  hard  for  three
or  four  hundred  a  day,  and  those  too  very  bad  ;  but  a  boy
used  to  it  will  easily  make  two  thousand,  and  those
incomparably  better ;  yet  the  improvement  of  dexterity
in  this  very  complex  manufacture  can  never  be  equal
to  that  in  others.  A  nail-maker  changes  postures,
blows  the  bellows,  changes  tools,  £c.,  and  therefore  the
quantity  produced  cannot  be  so  great  as  in  manufactures
of  pins  and  buttons,  where  the  work  is  reduced  to
simple  operations1.

Secondly,  there  is  always  some  time  lost  in  passing
from  one  species  of  labour  to  another,  even  when  they
are  pretty  much  connected.  When  a  person  has  been
reading  he  must  rest  a  little  before  he  begin  to  write.
This  is  still  more  the  case  with  the  country  weaver,  who
is  possessed  of  a  little  farm  ;  he  must  saunter  a  little  when
he  goes  from  one  to  the  other.  This  in  general  is  the
case  with  the  country  labourers,  they  are  always  the
greatest  saunterers ;  the  country  employments  of  sowing,
reaping,  threshing  being  so  different,  they  naturally
acquire  a  habit  of  indolence,  and  are  seldom  very  dex
terous.  By  fixing  every  man  to  his  own  operation,


1  IV.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  9.  unique  chose  ;  tel  autre  une  autre

The  Encyclopedic,  torn.  i.  1751,  s.  v.  chose  :  d'oii  il  arrive  que  chacune

'Art' says,  '  Lorsqu'une  manu-  s'execute  bien  et  promptement,  et

facture est nombreuse, chaque  que 1'ouvrage  le  mieux fait est

operation occupe un homme  encore  celui  qu'on  a  a  meilleur

different. Tel  ouvrier  ne  fait  et  marche.'
ne  fera  de  sa  vie  qu'une  seule  et


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  167

and  preventing  the  shifting  from  one  piece  of  labour  to
another,  the  quantity  of  work  must  be  greatly  increased  '.
Thirdly,  the  quantity  of  work  is  greatly  increased  by
the  invention  of  machines.  Two  men  and  three  horses
will  do  more  in  a  day  with  the  plough  than  twenty  men
without  it.  The  miller  and  his  servant  will  do  more  with
the  water  miln  than  a  dozen  with  the  hand  miln,  though  it,
too,  be  a  machine2.  The  division  of  labour  no  doubt  first
gave  occasion  to  the  invention  of  machines.  If  a  man's
business  in  life  is  the  performance  of  two  or  three  things,
the  bent  of  his  mind  will  be  to  find  out  the  cleverest  way
of  doing  it;  but  when  the  force  of  his  mind  is  divided  it
cannot  be  expected  that  he  should  be  so  successful 3.  We
have  not,  nor  cannot  have,  any  complete  history  of  the
invention  of  machines,  because  most  of  them  are  at  first
imperfect,  and  receive  gradual  improvements  and  increase
of  powers  from  those  who  use  them.  It  was  probably
a  farmer  who  made  the  original  plough,  though  the
improvements  might  be  owing  to  some  other.  Some
miserable  slave  who  had  perhaps  been  employed  for
a  long  time  in  grinding  corn  between  two  stones,  probably
first  found  out  the  method  of  supporting  the  upper  stone
by  a  spindle.  A  miln-wright  perhaps  found  out  the  way
of  turning  the  spindle  with  the  hand,  but  he  who  contrived
that  the  outer  wheel  should  go  by  water  was  a  philosopher,
whose  business  it  is  to  do  nothing,  but  observe  every-

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  a fourth makes garments, and
10,  where,  however,  the  example  a fifth utensils,  they  not only
of  the  little  rest  between  reading  become useful to one another^
and  writing  is  omitted.  but  the  callings  themselves  will,

2  Ibid.  loc.  cit.,  it  is  considered  in the same number  of years,
'unnecessary to give any ex-  receive much greater  improve-
ample.'  ments  than  if  all  had  been  pro-

;i  '  If  one will wholly apply  miscuously followed by every

himself  to  the  making of  bows  one of the five.' Mandeville,

and  arrows,  whilst  another  pro-  Fable  of  the  Bees,  pt.  ii.  Dialogue  vi-

vides  food, a  third builds huts,  pp.  335,  336.


l68  PART II  I POLICE

thing.  They  must  have  extensive  views  of  things,  who,  as
in  this  case,  bring  in  the  assistance  of  new  powers  not
formerly  applied.  Whether  he  was  an  artisan,  or  whatever
he  was  who  first  executed  this,  he  must  have  been
a  philosopher.  Fire  machines,  wind  and  water-milns  were
the  invention  of  philosophers,  whose  dexterity  too  is
increased  by  a  division  of  labour1.  They  all  divide  them
selves,  according  to  the  different  branches,  into  the
mechanical,  moral,  political,  chemical  philosophers.

Thus  we  have  shown  how  the  quantity  of  labour  is
increased  by  machines.

[§  5. What  gives  Occasion  to  the  Division
of  Labour]

We  have  already  shown  that  the  division  of  labour  is
the  immediate  cause  of  opulence ;  we  shall  next  consider
what  gives  occasion  to  the  division  of  labour2,  or  from
what  principles  in  our  nature  it  can  best  be  accounted  for.
We  cannot  imagine  this  to  be  an  effect  of  human  prudence.
It  was  indeed  made  a  law  by  Sesostris  that  every  man
should  follow  the  employment  of  his  father3,  but  this  is  by
no  means  suitable  to  the  dispositions  of  human  nature,
and  can  never  long  take  place  ;  every  one  is  fond  of  being
a  gentleman,  be  his  father  what  he  would.  They  who  are
strongest  and,  in  the  bustle  of  society4,  have  got  above  the
weak,  must  have  as  many  under  as  to  defend  them  in
their  station.  From  necessary  causes,  therefore,  there  must
be  as  many  in  the  lower  stations  as  there  is  occasion  for,

1  W.  ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  i.  vol.  i.  pp. 3  Ibid. bk. iv.  ch.  ix. vol.  ii.
ii,  12. Mandeville,  Fable  of  the  p.  266,  where,  however,  Sesostris
Bees,  pt.  ii.  Dialogue  iii.  pp.  152,  is  not  named,  the  reference  being
J53> is much less favourable  merely  to  Egypt  and  Hindostan.
to  the  philosophers'  claim  to  be *  'To  what  purpose  is  all  the
regarded  as  useful  inventors.  toil and bustle of  this  world  ? '

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  ii.  heading.  Moral  Sentiments,  1759,  p.  108.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  169

there  must  be  as  many  up  as  down,  and  no  division  can
be  overstretched  '.  But  it  is  not  this  which  gives  occasion
to  the  division  of  labour ;  it  flows  from  a  direct  propensity
in  human  nature  for  one  man  to  barter  with  another,
which  is  common  to  all  men,  and  known  to  no  other
animal.  Nobody  ever  saw  a  dog,  the  most  sagacious
animal,  exchange  a  bone  with  his  companion  for  another.
Two  greyhounds,  indeed,  in  running  down  a  hare,  seem  to
have  something  like  compact  or  agreement  betwixt  them, but
this  is  nothing  else  but  a  concurrence  of  the  same  passions.
If  an  animal  intends  to  truck,  as  it  were,  or  gain  anything
from  man,  it  is  by  its  fondness  and  kindness.  Man,  in  the
same  manner,  works  on  the  self  love  of  his  fellows,  by
setting  before  them  a  sufficient  temptation  to  get  what
he  wants.  The  language  of  this  disposition  is,  '  Give  me
what  I  want,  and  you  shall  have  what  you  want.'  It  is  not
from  benevolence,  as  the  dogs,  but  from  self  love  that
man  expects  anything.  The  brewer  and  the  baker  serve
us  not  from  benevolence,  but  from  self  love.  No  man  but
a  beggar  depends  on  benevolence,  and  even  they  would
die  in  a  week  were  their  entire  dependence  upon  it2.

By  this  disposition  to  barter  and  exchange  the  surplus
of  one's  labour  for  that  of  other  people,  in  a  nation  of
hunters,  if  any  one  has  a  talent  for  making  bows  and
arrows  better  than  his  neighbours,  he  will  at  first  make
presents  of  them,  and  in  return  get  presents  of  their  game.
By  continuing  this  practice  he  will  live  better  than  before,

1  This  passage  is  absent  from  solicitude in life of every
IV.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  14.  individual person. To expect

2  Ibid.  pp. 14-16. Mandeville  that others should serve us
says :' The  whole  superstructure  for nothing is unreasonable;
is made up of the reciprocal  therefore  all  commerce  that  men
services  which men  do  to  each  can  have  together  must  be  a  con-
other. How  to  get  these ser-  tinual  bartering  of  one  thing  for
vices  performed  by  others  when  another.'  Fable  of  the  Bees,  pt.  ii.
we have occasion for them is  Dialogue  vi.  p.  421.

the grand  and almost  constant


170  PART II  : POLICE

and  will  have  no  occasion  to  provide  for  himself,  as  the
surplus  of  his  own  labour  does  it  more  effectually  l.

This  disposition  to  barter  is  by  no  means  founded  upon
different  genius  and  talents  -.  It  is  doubtful  if  there  be  any
such  difference  at  all,  at  least  it  is  far  less  than  we  are  aware
of.  Genius  is  more  the  effect  of  the  division  of  labour  than
the  latter  is  of  it.  The  difference  between  a  porter  and
a  philosopher  in  the  first  four  or  five  years  of  their  life  is,
properly  speaking,  none  at  all.  When  they  come  to  be
employed  in  different  occupations,  their  views  widen  and
differ  by  degrees.  As  every  one  has  this  natural  disposition
to  truck  and  barter,  by  which  he  provides  for  himself,
there  is  no  need  for  such  different  endowments ;  and
accordingly,  among  savages  there  is  always  the  greatest
uniformity  of  character.  In  other  animals  of  the  same
species  we  find  a  much  greater  difference  than  betwixt
the  philosopher  and  porter,  antecedent  to  custom.  The
mastiff  and  spaniel  have  quite  different  powers,  but
though  these  animals  are  possessed  of  talents  they  cannot,
as  it  were,  bring  them  into  the  common  stock  and  exchange
their  productions,  and  therefore  their  different  talents  are

1  The  example  of  the  bow  and  with ease and comfort. This
arrow  maker  is  in  the  passage  in  creates  a  dependence  of  one  man
Mandeville,  quoted  above,  p.  167  upon  another,  and  naturally  unites
note. In  the  parallel  passage  in  men into societies. In like
W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  16,  manner, as all countries differ
Mandeville's hut-maker also  more  or  less,  either  in  the  kinds
reappears.  or goodness of  their products,

2  This  contradicts  a  passage  in  natural or artificial, particular
H arris'  Essay  on  Money  and  Coins,  men  find  their  advantages,  which
pt.  i.  §  ii. '  Men  are  endued  with  extend  to  communities  in  general,
various  talents  and  propensities  by trading with the remotest
which naturally  dispose and fit  nations.' Hume, 'Of  the  Original
them for different  occupations  ;  Contract,'  requires  his  readers  to
and  are  .  .  .  under  a  necessity  of  '  consider how nearly  equal  all
betaking  themselves  to  particular  men  are  in  their  bodily  force,  and
arts  and  employments  from  their  even  in  their  mental  powers  and
inability  of  otherwise acquiring  faculties, 'ere  cultivated  by  educa-
all the necessaries they want  cation.' Essays,  1748,  p.  291.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  171

of  no  use  to  them1.  It  is  quite  otherwise  among  mankind  ;
the}'  can  exchange  their  several  productions  according  to
their  quantity  or  quality ;  the  philosopher  and  the  porter
are  both  of  advantage  to  each  other.  The  porter  is  of
use  in  carrying  burdens  for  the  philosopher,  and  in  his
turn  he  burns  his  coals  cheaper  by  the  philosopher's
invention  of  the  fire  machine2.

Thus  we  have  shown  that  different  genius  is  not  the
foundation  of  this  disposition  to  barter  which  is  the
cause  of  the  division  of  labour.  The  real  foundation  of
it  is  that  principle  to  persuade  which  so  much  prevails
in  human  nature.  When  any  arguments  are  offered  to
persuade,  it  is  always  expected  that  they  should  have
their  proper  effect.  If  a  person  asserts  anything  about
the  moon,  though  it  should  not  be  true,  he  will  feel
a  kind  of  uneasiness  in  being  contradicted,  and  would  be
very  glad  that  the  person  he  is  endeavouring  to  persuade
should  be  of  the  same  way  of  thinking  with  himself.  We
ought  then  mainly  to  cultivate  the  power  of  persuasion,
and  indeed  we  do  so  without  intending  it.  Since  a  whole
life  is  spent  in  the  exercise  of  it,  a  reacry  method  of
bargaining  with  each  other  must  undoubtedly  be  attained.
As  was  before  observed,  no  animal  can  do  this  but  by
gaining  the  favour  of  those  whom  they  would  persuade.
Sometimes,  indeed,  animals  seem  to  act  in  concert,  but
there  never  is  anything  like  bargain  among  them.
Monkeys,  when  they  rob  a  garden,  throw  the  fruit  from
one  to  another,  till' they  deposit  it  in  the  hoard,  but  there
is  always  a  scramble  about  the  division  of  the  booty,  and
usually  some  of  them  are  killed.

1  W,  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  working  under  the  protection  of
16-18.  the University  of  Glasgow,  and

2  The  steam  engines  of  the  time,  on  the  eve  of  making  his  inven-
used chiefly  in  draining  mines,  tion, when the lectures were
went  by  this name.  Watt  was  delivered.


172  PART II  ! POLICE

[  §  6.  That  the  Division  of  Labour  must  be
proportioned  to  the  Extent  of  Commerce^

From  all  that  has  been  said  we  may  observe  that  the
division  of  labour  must  always  be  proportioned  to  the
extent  of  commerce1.  If  ten  people  only  want  a  certain
commodity,  the  manufacture  of  it  will  never  be  so  divided
as  if  a  thousand  wanted  it.  Again,  the  division  of  labour,
in  order  to  opulence,  becomes  always  more  perfect  by
the  easy  method  of  conveyance  in  a  country.  If  the  road
be  infested  with  robbers,  if  it  be  deep  and  conveyance  not
easy,  the  progress  of  commerce  must  be  stopped.  Since
the  mending  of  roads  in  England  forty  or  fifty  years  ago,
its  opulence  has  increased  extremely.  Water  carriage  is
another  convenience,  as  by  it  300  ton  can  be  conveyed
at  the  expense  of  the  tear  and  wear  of  the  vessel,  and  the
wages  of  five  or  six  men,  and  that  too  in  a  shorter  time
than  by  a  hundred  wagons  which  will  take  six  horses  and
a  man  each  '2.  Thus  the  division  of  labour  is  the  great
cause  of  the  increase  of  public  opulence,  which  is  always
proportioned  to  the  industry  of  the  people  3,  and  not  to  the
quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  as  is  foolishly  imagined,  and
the  industry  of  the  people  is  always  proportioned  to  the
division  of  labour.

Having  thus  shown  what  gives  occasion  to  public
opulence,  in  farther  considering  this  subject  we  propose  to
consider:

First,  what  circumstances  regulate  the  price  of  com
modities  :

1  '  Limited  by  the  extent  of  the and  two  men,  and  carry  four  tons
market.' W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  iii. each.

heading.  f  3  '  Plus  il  y  a  de  travail  dansun

2  In  W.  ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.  vol.  i.  Etat,  et  plus  1'Etat  est  cense  riche
p.  19,  the  ship only  carries  200  naturellement.' Cantillon,  Essai,
tons  and  has  six  or  eight  men  ;  p.  113.

the  waggons  have  eight  horses


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  173

Secondly,  money  in  two  different  views,  first  as  the
measure  of  value,  and  then  as  the  instrument  of  commerce  :

Thirdly,  the  history  of  commerce,  in  which  shall  be  taken
notice  of  the  causes  of  the  slow  progress  of  opulence,
both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  which  causes  shall  be
shown  either  to  affect  agriculture  or  arts  and  manufactures :

Lastly,  the  effects  of  a  commercial  spirit,  on  the  govern
ment,  temper,  and  manners  of  a  people,  whether  good  or
bad,  and  the  proper  remedies.  Of  these  in  order.


[§  7- What  Circumstances  regulate  the  Price
of  Commodities^

Of  every  commodity  there  are  two  different  prices,  which
though  apparently  independent,  will  be  found  to  have
a  necessary  connexion,  viz.  the  natural  price  and  the
market  price1.  Both  of  these  are  regulated  by  certain
circumstances.  When  men  are  induced  to  a  certain  species
of  industry,  rather  than  any  other2,  they  must  make  as

1 IV. of N. bk. i. ch. vii.  tions the markets admit  of,  by

heading. Pufendorl'distinguishes  reason  of  the  plenty  or  scarcity  of

'common  or  natural  price'  from  buyers,  money,  or  commodities,  is

1  legal  price'  ('pretium  legitimum')  well  known.' Ibid.  §  10,  Rennet's

fixed  by  the  magistrate  (De  iure  transl.,  3rd  ed.  1717.
naturae  el  gentium,  lib.  v.  cap.  i. 2  '  People  that  have  children  to

§  8),  thus  including  both  Adam  educate  that  must  get  their  liveli-

Smith's  kinds  of  price  in  'natural  hood,  are  always  consulting  and

price.' But  he  also  says  :  '  In  re-  deliberating  what  trade  or  calling

gulatingthis  natural  price,  regard  they  are  to  bring  them  up  to,  till

is  to  be  had  to the  labour  and  they  are fixed  ; and thousands

expense  of  the  merchant  in  im-  think  on  this that  hardly  think

porting  and taking  care of  his  at  all  on anything  else. First,

goods;  ....  his  time,  his  study,  they  confine  themselves  to  their

his  care  in  getting, preserving,  circumstances,  and he that can

and  sorting  his  commodities,  as  give  but  ten  pounds  with  his  son

also  his servant's wages, may  must  not  look out for  a  trade

fairly be rated by him.  .  .  .  But  where  they  ask  an  hundred  with

what  sudden  and  frequent  altera-  an  apprentice  :  but  the  next  they


174  PART  ii  : POLICE

much  by  the  employment  as  will  maintain  them  while  they
are  employed.  An  arrow-maker  must  be  sure  to  exchange
as  much  surplus  product  as  will  maintain  him  during  as
long  time  as  he  took  to  make  them.  But  upon  this
principle  in  the  different  trades  there  must  be  a  con
siderable  difference,  because  some  trades,  such  as  those
of  the  tailor  and  weaver,  are  not  learned  by  casual
observation  and  a  little  experience,  like  that  of  the
day-labourer,  but  take  a  great  deal  of  time  and  pains
before  they  are  acquired.  When  a  person  begins  them,
for  a  considerable  time  his  work  is  of  no  use  to  his
master  or  any  other  person,  and  therefore  his  master
must  be  compensated,  both  for  what  maintains  him
and  for  what  he  spoils.  When  he  comes  to  exercise
his  trade,  he  must  be  repaid  what  he  has  laid  out,  both
of  expenses  and  of  apprentice  fee,  and  as  his  life  is  not
worth  above  ten  or  twelve  years'  purchase  at  most,  his
wages  must  be  high  on  account  of  the  risk  he  runs  of  not
having  the  whole  made  up1.  But  again,  there  are  many

think  on  is  always  which  will  et  dont  le  travail  ne  rapporte

be  the  most  advantageous.'  aucun  avantage  qu'au  bout  d'un

Mandeville,' Essay  on  Charity  and  certain  nombre  d'annees.  La  vie

Charily  Schools'  in  Fable  of  the  d'un  homme  n'est  calculee  qu'a

Bees,  pt.  i.  2nd  ed.,  p.  343 ;  cp.  dix  ou  douze  annees ;  et  comme

Remark  A,  p.  45.  on  en  perd  plusieurs  a  apprendre

1  'Le  fils d'un laboureur,  a  1'age  un  metier,  dont  la  plupart  de-

de  sept  ou  douze  ans,  commence  mandent  en  Angleterre  sept

a  aider  son  pere,  soit  a  garder  les  annees  d'apprentissage,  un

troupeaux,  soit  a  remuer  la  terre,  laboureur  ne  voudrait  jamais  en

soit  a  d'autres  ouvrages  de  la  cam-  faire  apprendre  aucun  a  son  fils

pagne.  qui  ne  demandent  point  si  les  gens  de  metier  ne  gagnaient

d'art  ni  d'habilete.  bien  plus  que  les  laboureurs.

Si  son  pere  lui  faisait  apprendre  Ceux  done,  qui  emploient  des

un  metier,  ilperdrait  a  son  absence  artisans  ou  gens  de  metier,

pendant  tout  le  temps  de  son  doivent  necessairement  payer

apprentissage,  et  serait  encore  leur  travail  plus  haut  que  celui

oblige  de  payer  son  entretien  et  d'un  laboureur  ou  manoeuvre ;  et

les  frais  de  son  apprentissage  ce  travail  sera  necessairement

pendant  plusieurs  annees  :  voila  cher  a  proportion  du  temps  qu'on

done  un  fils  a  charge  a  son  pere  perd  a  1'apprendre  et  de  la


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  175

arts  which  require  more  extensive  knowledge  than  is  to
be  got  during  the  time  of  an  apprenticeship.  A  blacksmith
and  weaver  may  learn  their  business  well  enough  without
any  previous  knowledge  of  mathematics,  but  a  watchmaker
must  be  acquainted  with  several  sciences  in  order  to
undertake  his  business  well,  such  as  arithmetic,  geometry,
and  astronomy  with  regard  to  the  equation  of  time,  and
their  wages  must  be  high  in  order  to  compensate  the
additional  expense1.  In  general,  this  is  the  case  in  all  the
liberal  arts,  because  after  they  have  spent  a  long  time  in
their  education,  it  is  ten  to  one  if  ever  they  make  anything
by  it.  Their  wages  therefore  must  be  higher  in  proportion
to  the  expense  they  have  been  at,  the  risk  of  not  living
long  enough,  and  the  risk  of  not  having  dexterity  enough
to  manage  their  business.  Among  the  lawyers  there  is
not  one  among  twenty  that  attains  such  knowledge  and
dexterity  in  his  business  as  enables  him  to  get  back  the
expenses  of  his  education,  and  many  of  them  never  make
the  price  of  their  gown,  as  we  say.  The  fees  of  lawyers
are  so  far  from  being  extravagant,  as  they  are  generally
thought,  that  they  are  rather  low  in  proportion.  It  is
the  eminence  of  the  profession,  and  not  the  money  made
by  it,  that  is  the  temptation  for  applying  to  it,  and  the
dignity  of  that  rank  is  to  be  considered  as  a  part  of
what  is  made  by  it'-.

depense  et  du risque qu'il faut  of  the  Bees, pt. ii. Dialogue  vi.

pour  s'y  perfectionner.'  Cantillon,  p.  423.

Essai,  pp.  23,  24.  z  W.  ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  x.  pt.  i.  vol.  i.

1 \V.ofN.\3\i.  i.  ch.  x.  pt.  i.vol.  i.  pp.  no,  in. Cf.  '  It  is  the  hopes

pp. 106, 107. Cf.  '  Scarcity  en-  either  of  gain or reputation,  of

hances  the  price  of  things  much  large  revenuesand  great  dignities,

oftener  than the usefulness of  that  promote  learning ;  and  when

them. Hence  it  is  evident  why  we  say  that  any  calling,  art,  or

those  arts  and  sciences  will  always  science is not  encouraged, we

be  the  most  lucrative  that  cannot  mean  no  more  by  it  than  that  the

be  attained  to  but  in  great  length  masters  or  professors  of  it  are  not

of  time,  by  tedious  study  and  close  sufficiently rewarded for their

application.' Mandeville, Fable  pains either with honour or


176  PART II  : POLICE

In  the  same  manner  we  shall  find  that  the  price  of
gold  and  silver  is  not  extravagant,  if  we  consider  it  in
this  view,  for  in  a  gold  or  silver  mine  there  is  a  great
chance  of  missing  it  altogether.  If  we  suppose  an  equal
number  of  men  employed  in  raising  corn  and  digging
silver,  the  former  will  make  more  than  the  latter,
because  perhaps  of  forty  or  fifty  employed  in  a  mine,  only
twenty  make  anything  at  all.  Some  of  the  rest  may  indeed
make  fortunes,  but  every  corn  man  succeeds  in  his  under
takings,  so  that  upon  the  whole  there  is  more  made  this
way  than  the  other.  It  is  the  ideal  acquisition  which  is
the  principal  temptation  in  a  mine.

A  man  then  has  the  natural  price  of  his  labour,  when
it  is  sufficient  to  maintain  him  during  the  time  of  labour,
to  defray  the  expense  of  education,  and  to  compensate
the  risk  of  not  living  long  enough,  and  of  not  succeeding
in  the  business.  When  a  man  has  this,  there  is  sufficient
encouragement  to  the  labourer,  and  the  commodity  will
be  cultivated  in  proportion  to  the  demand l.

The  market  price  of  goods  is  regulated  by  quite  other
circumstances.  When  a  buyer  comes  to  the  market,  he
never  asks  of  the  seller  what  expenses  he  has  been  at
in  producing  them.  The  regulation  of  the  market  price
of  goods  depends  on  the  three  following  articles  : —

First,  the  demand,  or  need  for  the  commod^.  There
is  no  demand  for  a  thing  of  little  use ;  it  is  not  a  rational
object  of  desire.

Secondly,  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  the  commodity
in  proportion  to  the  need  of  it.  If  the  commodity  be
scarce,  the  price  is  raised,  but  if  the  quantity  be  more
than  is  sufficient  to  supply  the  demand,  the  price  falls.
Thus  it  is  that  diamonds  and  other  precious  stones

profit.' Mandeville,  Fable  of  the  by the words '  and sold at its

Bees,  pt.  ii.  Dialogue  vi.  p.  414.  natural  price.' Cf.  W.  of  N.  bk.

1 There  is  evidently  a  hiatus  i.  ch.  vii.  4th  paragraph, vol.  i.

here, which may be supplied  p.  57.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  177

are  dear,  while  iron,  which  is  much  more  useful,  is  so
many  times  cheaper,  though  this l  depends  principally  on
the  last  cause,  viz. : —

Thirdly,  the  riches  or  poverty  of  those  who  demand.
When  there  is  not  enough  produced  to  serve  everybody,
the  fortune  of  the  bidders  is  the  only  regulation  of  the
price.  The  story  which  is  told  of  the  merchant  and  the
carrier  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia  is  an  evidence  of
this.  The  merchant  gave  10,000  ducats  for  a  certain
quantity  of  water.  His  fortune  here  regulated  the  price,
for  if  he  had  not  had  them,  he  could  not  have  given
them,  and  if  his  fortune  had  been  less,  the  water  would
have  been  cheaper.  When  the  commodity  is  scarce,  the
seller  must  be  content  with  that  degree  of  wealth  which
they  have  who  buy  it.  The  case  is  much  the  same
as  in  an  auction.  If  two  persons  have  an  equal  fond
ness  for  a  book,  he  whose  fortune  is  largest  will  carry
it.  Hence  things  that  are  very  rare  go  always  to  rich
countries.  The  King  of  France  only  could  purchase  that
large  diamond  of  so  many  thousand  pounds  value  2.  Upon
this  principle,  everything  is  dearer  or  cheaper  according
as  it  is  the  purchase  of  a  higher  or  lower  set  of  people.
Utensils  of  gold  are  comeatable  only  by  persons  in  certain
circumstances.  Those  of  silver  fall  to  another  set  of  people,
and  their  prices  are  regulated  by  what  the  majority  can
give.  The  prices  of  corn  and  beer  are  regulated  by  what
all  the  world  can  give,  and  on  this  account  the  wages  of
the  day-labourer  have  a  great  influence  upon  the  price  of
corn.  When  the  price  of  corn  rises,  wages  rise  also,  and
vice  versa 3 ;  when  the  quantity  of  corn  falls  short,  as  in

1  I.e.  the  proportion  between  credit  of  the  purchase  at  a  time
the  value  of  precious  stones  and  of  virtual bankruptcy to him-
iron.  self in conjunction with Law.

2  The  '  Regent '  diamond,  pur-  Me'tnoires,  ed.  Cheruel  et  Regnier,
chased  for  the  King  in  1717  for  torn.  xiv.  pp.  12-14.

two  million  livres,  according  3  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  viii.
to  Saint-Simon,  who  takes  the  vol.  i.  p.  90.


178  PART II  : POLICE

a  sea-voyage,  it  always  occasions  a  famine,  and  then  the
price  becomes  enormous.  Corn  then  becomes  the  pur
chase  of  a  higher  set  of  people,  and  the  lower  must  live
on  turnips  and  potatoes.

Thus  we  have  considered  the  two  prices,  the  natural
and  the  market  price,  which  every  commodity  is  supposed
to  have.  We  observed  before  that  however  seemingly
independent  they  appear  to  be,  they  are  necessarily  con
nected.  This  will  appear  from  the  following  considera
tions.  If  the  market  price  of  any  commodity  is  very
great,  and  the  labour  very  highly  rewarded,  the  market
is  prodigiously  crowded  with  it,  greater  quantities  of  it
are  produced,  and  it  can  be  sold  to  the  inferior  ranks  of
people.  If  for  every  ten  diamonds  there  were  ten
thousand,  they  would  become  the  purchase  of  everybody,
because  they  would  become  very  cheap,  and  would  sink
to  their  natural  price.  Again,  when  the  market  is  over
stocked,  and  there  is  not  enough  got  for  the  labour  of  the
manufacture,  nobody  will  bind  to  it,  they  cannot  have
a  subsistence  by  it,  because  the  market  price  falls  then
below  the  natural  price.  It  is  alleged  that  as  the  price  of
corn  sinkfs],  the  wages  of  the  labourer  should  sink,  as  he
is  then  better  rewarded.  It  is  true  that  if  provisions  were
long  cheap,  as  more  people  would  flock  to  this  labour
where  the  wages  are  high,  through  this  concurrence  of
labour,  the  wages  would  come  down,  but  we  find  that  when
the  price  of  corn  is  doubled,  the  wages  continue  the  same  as
before,  because  the  labourers  have  no  other  way  to  turn
themselves.  The  same  is  the  case  with  menial  servants  \

From  the  above  we  may  observe  that  whatever  police
tends  to  raise  the  market  price  above  the  natural,  tends  to
diminish  public  opulence.  Dearness  and  scarcity  are  in
effect  the  same  thing.  When  commodities  are  in  abun
dance,  they  can  be  sold  to  the  inferior  ranks  of  people,  who

1  W.ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  viii.  vol.  i.  pp.  90,  91.  The  reporter  has  evidently
carried  condensation  to  excess  at  this  point.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  179

can  afford  to  give  less  for  them,  but  not  if  they  are  scarce.
So  far,  therefore,  as  goods  are  a  conveniency  to  the  society,
the  society  lives  less  happy  when  only  the  few  can
possess  them.  Whatever  therefore  keeps  goods  above
their  natural  price  for  a  permanency,  diminishes  [a]
nation's  opulence.  Such  are

First,  all  taxes  upon  industry,  upon  leather,  and  upon
shoes,  which  people  grudge  most,  upon  salt,  beer,  or
whatever  is  the  strong  drink  of  the  country,  for  no
country  wants l  some  kind  of  it.  Man  is  an  anxious
animal,  and  must  have  his  care  swept  off  by  something
that  can  exhilarate  the  spirits.  It  is  alleged  that  this  tax
upon  beer  is  an  artificial  security  against  drunkenness,
but  if  we  attend  to  it,  [we  will  find]  that  it  by  no  means
prevents  it.  In  countries  where  strong  liquors  are
cheap,  as  in  France  and  Spain,  the  people  are  generally
sober,  but  in  northern  countries,  where  they  are  dear,
they  do  not  get  drunk  with  beer,  but  \vith  spirituous
liquors;  nobody  presses  his  friend  to  a  glass  of  beer,
unless  he  choose  it 2.

Secondly,  monopolies  also  destroy  public  opulence.
The  price  of  the  monopolized  goods  is  raised  above  what
is  sufficient  for  encouraging  the  labour.  When  only
a  certain  person  or  persons  have  the  liberty  of  importing
a  commodity,  there  is  less  of  it  imported  than  would
otherwise  be ;  the  price  of  it  is  therefore  higher,  and  fewer
people  supported  by  it.  It  is  the  concurrence  of  different
labourers  which  always  brings  down  the  price.  In  mono
polies,  such  as  the  Hudson's  Bay  and  East  India  companies,
the  people  engaged  in  them  make  the  price  what  they
please.

Thirdly,  exclusive  privileges  of  corporations  have  the
same  effect.  The  butchers  and  bakers  raise  the  price
of  their  goods  as  they  please,  because  none  but  their

1  I.  e.  of  course,  '  lacks  '  or  '  is  without.'

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  iii.  pt.  ii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  66-68.

N  2


l8o  PART II  : POLICE

own  corporation  is  allowed  to  sell  in  the  market,  and
therefore  their  meat  must  be  taken,  whether  good  or  not.
On  this  account  there  is  always  required  a  magistrate
to  fix  the  prices.  For  any  free  commodity,  such  as
broad  cloth,  there  is  no  occasion  for  this,  but  it  is
necessary  with  bakers,  who  may  agree  among  them
selves  to  make  the  quantity  and  price  what  they  please.
Even  a  magistrate  is  not  a  good  enough  expedient  for
this,  as  he  must  always  settle  the  price  at  the  outside,
else  the  remedy  must  be  worse  than  the  disease,  for
nobody  would  apply  to  these  businesses,  and  a  famine
would  ensue.  On  this  account  bakers  and  brewers  have
always  profitable  trades  l.

As  what  raises  the  market  price  above  the  natural
one  diminishes  public  opulence,  so  what  brings  it  down
below  it  has  the  same  effect.

It  is  only  upon  manufactures  to  be  exported  that  this
can  usually  be  done  by  any  law  or  regulation,  such  as  the
bounty  allowed  by  the  government  upon  coarse  linen,
by  which  it  becomes  exportable,  when  under  twelve  pence
a  yard  2.  The  public  paying  a  great  part  of  the  price,
it  can  be  sold  cheaper  to  foreigners  than  what  is  sufficient
for  encouraging  the  labour.  In  the  same  manner,  by  the
bounty  of  five  shillings  upon  the  quarter  of  corn  when
sold  under  forty3  shillings,  as  the  public  pays  an  eighth
part  of  the  price,  it  can  be  sold  just  so  much  cheaper  at
a  foreign  market.  By  this  bounty  the  commodity  is
rendered  more  comeatable,  and  a  greater  quantity  of  it
produced,  but  then  it  breaks  what  may  be  called  the
natural  balance  of  industry.  The  disposition  to  apply  to

1  See  on  the  assize  of  bread,  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  viii.  vol.

W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  x.  ad  fin. ;  vol.  ii.  p.  227,  the  statute  29  Geo.  II,

i.  pp.  150,  151.  See  also  bk.  i.  cap.  15,  is  referred  to  and  the  value

ch.  vii.  vol.  i.  pp.  64-66.  correctly  given.

*  This  should  read,  'upon  5  A  mistake  for  forty-eight,  i

coarse  linen  exported,  when  W.  &  M.  cap.  12.  W,  of  N.  bk.

under  eighteen  pence  a  yard.'  i.  ch.  xi.  vol.  i.  p.  208.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  l8l

the  production  of  that  commodity  is  not  proportioned  to
the  natural  cause  of  the  demand,  but  to  both  that  and  the
annexed  bounty.  It1  has  not  only  this  effect  with  regard
to  the  particular  commodity,  but  likewise  people  are
called  from  other  productions  which  are  less  encouraged,
and  thus  the  balance  of  industry  is  broken.

Again,  after  the  ages  of  hunting  and  fishing,  in  which
provisions  were  the  immediate  produce  of  their  labour,
when  manufactures  were  introduced,  nothing  could  be
produced  without  a  great  deal  of  time.  It  was  a  long  time
before  the  weaver  could  carry  to  the  market  the  cloth
which  he  bought  in  flax.  Every  trade  therefore  requires
a  stock  of  food,  clothes,  and  lodging  to  carry  it  on  -'.
Suppose  then,  as  is  really  the  case  in  every  country,  that
there  is  in  store  a  stock  of  food,  clothes,  and  lodging,  the
number  of  people  that  are  employed  must  be  in  proportion
to  it 3.  If  the  price  of  one  commodity  is  sunk  below  its
natural  price,  while  another  is  above  it,  there  is  a  smaller
quantity  of  the  stored  stock  left  to  support  the  whole.  On
account  of  the  natural  connexion  of  all  trades  in  the  stock,
by  allowing  bounties  to  one4  you  take  away  the  stock
from  the  rest.  This  has  been  the  real  consequence
of  the  corn  bounty.

The  price  of  corn  being  sunk,  the  rent  of  the  farms
sinks  also,  yet  the  bounty  upon  corn,  which  was  laid  on
at  the  time  of  the  taxes 5,  was  intended  to  raise  the  rent,
and  had  the  effect  for  some  time,  because  the  tenants
were  assured  of  a  price  for  their  corn,  both  at  home  and
abroad.  But  though  the  effects  of  the  bounty  encourag-

1  I.e.  the  bounty. MS. reads 6  'The Government of  King
'but.'  William  . . .  was  in  no  condition

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  Introduction,  to  refuse  anything  to  the  country
vol.  i.  p.  273.  gentlemen,  from  whom  it  was  at

3  W.  of  N.  Introduction,  vol.  i.  that  very  time  soliciting  the  first
pp.  2, 3.  establishment of the annual

4  MS. reads 'me,' evidently  land-tax.' W.  ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  xi.
a  copyist's  error.  vol.  i.  p.  208.


182  PART II  : POLICE

ing  agriculture  brought  down  the  price  of  corn,  yet  it
raised  the  grass  farms,  for  the  more  corn  the  less  grass.
The  price  of  grass  being  raised,  butchers'  meat,  in  con
sequence  of  its  dependence  upon  it,  must  be  raised  also,
so  that  if  the  price  of  corn  is  diminished,  the  price  of  other
commodities  is  necessarily  raised.  The  price  of  corn
has  indeed  fallen  from  forty-two  to  thirty-five1,  but  the
price  of  hay  has  risen  from  twenty-five  to  near  fifty
shillings.  As  the  price  of  hay  has  risen,  horses  are
not  so  easily  kept,  and  therefore  the  price  of  carriage
has  risen  also.  But  whatever  increases  the  price  of
carriage  diminishes  plenty  in  the  market2.  Upon  the
whole,  therefore,  it  is  by  far  the  best  police  to  leave
things  to  their  natural  course,  and  allow  no  bounties,  nor
impose  taxes  on  commodities.

Thus  we  have  shown  what  circumstances  regulate  the
price  of  commodities,  which  was  the  first  thing  proposed.


[§  8.  Of  Money  as  the  Measure  of  Value  and
Medium  of  Exchange]

We  come  now  to  the  second  particular,  to  consider
money,  first  as  the  measure  of  value  and  then  as  the
medium  of  permutation  or  exchange.  When  people  deal

1  Red  wheat  is  quoted  at  335.  shows that by  stimulating the
— 355. in the London Chronicle  foreign demand it must have
on Jan.  28,  1763,  and at 335.—  rather  tended  to  raise  it. He  even
365.  on  Oct.  20  and  27,  Nov.  3  and  speaks of the '  very moderate
10, 1763. The  other  weekly  prices  supposition '  that  the  bounty  may
during the academical session  have kept the price 45. per
of 1762-1763, and October to  quarter higher than it would
December, 1763, are somewhat  otherwise have been. Having
lower.  done  this,  he  proceeds  to  argue

2  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  xi.  vol.  that every alteration in the
i.  pp.  208-210,  and  bk.  iv.  ch.  v.  price  of  corn must  be  nominal
vol. ii.  pp.  81-84,  Adam Smith  and not real. He has there-
rejects  the  theory  that  the  bounty  fore no need  for  the  argument
had  lowered  the  home  price,  and  in  the  text  above  as  to  hay.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  183

in  many  species  of  goods,  one  of  them  must  be  considered
as  the  measure  of  value.  Suppose  there  were  only  three
commodities,  sheep,  corn,  and  oxen,  we  can  easily  re
member  them  comparatively,  but  if  we  have  a  hundred
different  commodities,  there  are  ninety-nine  values  of  each
arising  from  a  comparison  with  each  of  the  rest.  As  these
cannot  easily  be  remembered,  men  naturally  fall  upon  one
of  them  to  be  a  common  standard  with  which  they  compare
all  the  rest.  This  will  naturally  at  first  be  the  commodity
with  which  they  are  best  acquainted.  Accordingly  we
find  that  black  cattle  and  sheep  were  the  standard  in
Homer's  time.  The  armour  of  one  of  his  heroes  was
worth  nine  oxen,  and  that  of  another  worth  an  hundred1.
Black  cattle  was  the  common  standard  in  ancient  Greece.
In  Italy,  and  particularly  in  Tuscany,  everything  was
compared  with  sheep,  as  this  was  their  principal  com
modity.  This  is  what  may  be  called  the  natural  measure
of  value.  In  like  manner  there  \vere  natural  measures
of  quantity,  such  as  fathoms,  cubits,  inches,  taken  from
the  proportion  of  the  human  body,  once  in  use  with  every
nation.  But  by  a  little  observation  they  found  that  one
man's  arm  was  longer  or  shorter  than  another's,  and  that
one  was  not  to  be  compared  with  the  other,  and  therefore
wise  men  who  attended  to  these  things  would  endeavour
to  fix  upon  some  more  accurate  measure,  that  equal
quantities  might  be  of  equal  values.  This  method  became
absolutely  necessary  when  people  came  to  deal  in  many
commodities,  and  in  great  quantities  of  them.  Though  an
inch  was  altogether  inconsiderable  when  their  dealings
were  confined  to  a  few  yards,  more  accuracy  was  required

1  Glaucus  and  Diomedes,  Iliad,  lib.  v.  cap.  v.  §  i;  Martin-Leake,

vi.  236 ; W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch. iv.  Historical Account of English

vol.  i. p. 24. The quotation is  Money,  2nd  ed. 1745,  p.  4 ;  and

a  stock  one,  occurring  in  Pliny,  (with  a  mistake  as  to  the  num-

H.  N.  lib.  xxxiii.  cap.  iii ; Pufen-  bers)  E.  Chambers,  Cyclopaedia,

dorf,  De  in  re  naturae  et  gentium,  2nd  ed.  1738,  s.  v.  '  Money.'


184  PART II  I POLICE

when  they  came  to  deal  in  some  thousands.  We  find,  in
countries  where  their  dealings  are  small,  the  remains  of
this  inaccuracy.  The  cast  of  the  balance  is  nothing
thought  of  in  their  coarse  commodities.

Since,  then,  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  common
standard  of  which  equal  quantities  should  be  of  equal
values,  metals  in  general  seemed  best  to  answer  this
purpose,  and  of  these  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  could
best  be  ascertained.  The  temper  of  steel  cannot  be
precisely  known,  but  what  degree  of  alloy  is  in  gold  and
silver  can  be  exactly  found  out.  Gold  and  silver  were
therefore  fixed  upon  as  the  most  exact  standard  to  com
pare  goods  with,  and  were  therefore  considered  as  the
most  proper  measure  of  value.

In  consequence  of  gold  and  silver  becoming  the
measure  of  value,  it  came  also  to  be  the  instrument  of
commerce.  It  soon  became  necessary  that  goods  should
be  carried  to  market,  and  they  could  never  be  cleverly1
exchanged  unless  the  measure  of  value  was  also  the
instrument  of  commerce.  In  the  age  of  shepherds  it
might  be  no  great  inconvenience  that  cattle  should  be
the  medium  of  exchange,  as  the  expense  of  maintaining
them  was  nothing,  the  whole  country  being  considered
as  one  great  common ;  but  when  lands  came  to  be
divided,  and  the  division  of  labour  introduced,  this
custom  would  be  productive  of  very  considerable  in
conveniences.  The  butcher  and  shoemaker  might  at
times  have  no  use  for  one  another's  commodities.  The
farmer  very  often  cannot  maintain  upon  his  ground
a  cow  more  than  he  has.  It  would  be  a  very  great  hard-


1  The second meaning for  conversation ; and applied to

'  clever ' given by Johnson  anything a  man likes, without

(Dictionary, 1755) is 'just, fit,  a settled meaning.' See the

proper,  commodious.' He  says  :  quotations in Murray, New

'  This is a low word, scarcely  Englis/i  Dictionary.
ever  used  but  in burlesque or


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  185

ship  on  a  Glasgow  merchant  to  give  him  a  cow  for  one
of  his  commodities.  To  remedy  this,  those  materials
which  were  before  considered  as  the  measure  of  value,
came  also  to  be  the  instrument  of  exchange.  Gold  and
silver  had  all  advantages.  They  can  be  kept  without
expense,  they  do  not  waste,  and  they  are  very  portable.
Gold  and  silver,  however,  do  not  derive  their  whole  utility
from  being  the  medium  of  exchange ;  though  they  never
had  been  used  as  money,  they  are  more  valuable  than
any  other  metals.  They  have  a  superior  beauty,  are
capable  of  a  finer  polish,  and  are  more  proper  for  making
any  instrument,  except  those  with  an  edge.  For  all  these
reasons,  gold  and  silver  came  to  be  the  proper  measure
of  value,  and  the  instrument  of  exchange ;  but  in  order
to  render  them  more  proper  for  these  purposes,  it  was
necessary  that  both  their  weight  and  their  fineness  should
be  ascertained.  At  first  their  balances  were  not  very
accurate,  and  therefore  frauds  wrere  easily  committed.
However,  this  was  remedied  by  degrees;  but  common
business  would  not  allow  of  the  experiments  which  are
necessary  to  fix  precisely  the  degree  of  fineness.  Though
with  a  great  quantity  of  alloy,  they  are  to  appearance
good.  It  was  necessary  therefore,  to  facilitate  exchange,
that  they  should  fall  upon  some  expedient  to  ascertain
with  accuracy  both  weight  and  fineness.  Coinage  most
effectually  secures  both  these.  The  public,  finding  how
much  it  would  tend  to  facilitate  commerce,  put  a  stamp
upon  certain  pieces  that  whoever  saw  them  might  have
the  public  faith  that  they  were  of  a  certain  weight  and
fineness ;  and  this  would  be  what  was  at  first  marked  upon
the  coin,  as  being  of  most  importance !.

1  Aristotle,  Politics,  1257  a  38-  and  silver  coins,  and  have  there-

41,  quoted  in  Pufendorf,  De  iure  fore  been  regarded  as  qualities

naturae  et  gentium,  lib.  v.  cap.  i.  necessary  for  a  good  measure  of

§  12. On  the properties  which  value  and  medium  of  exchange,

have been observed in gold  see  Grotius,  DC  hire  belli  et  pacts,


186  PART  ii  : POLICE

Accordingly,  the  coins  of  every  country  appear  to  have
borne  l  the  names  of  the  weights  corresponding  to  them 2,
and  they  contained  the  denomination  they  expressed.
The  British  pound  sterling-  seems  originally  to  have  been
a  pound  weight  of  pure  silver 3.

As  gold  could  be  easily  exchanged  into  silver,  the  latter
came  always  to  be  the  standard  or  measure  of  value.
As  there  cannot  be  two  standards,  and  in  the  greater
part  of  purchases  silver  is  necessary,  we  never  say  a  man
is  worth  so  many  guineas,  but  always  pounds  4.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  measure  of  quantity  has
always  increased,  while  that  of  value  has  decreased.  The
British  pound  has  now  decreased  to  less  than  a  third  of
its  original  value,  which  was  sixty-three  shillings,  while
the  measure  of  quantity  has  considerably  increased.  The
reason  is  that  the  interest  of  the  government  requires  this.
It  is  the  interest  of  the  baker  and  the  brewer  to  make  the
measure  of  quantity  as  little  as  possible ;  and  therefore
there  are  inspectors  appointed  who,  when  it  is  brought
down,  always  settle  it  a  little  farther  up.  All  our  measures,
which  were  taken  from  the  Roman  foot,  fathom,  and  inch,

lib.  ii.  cap.  xii.  §  17 ;  Pufendorf,  utility,  portability,  indestructi-
De  iure  naturae  et  gentium,  lib.  v.  bility,  homogeneity,  divisibility,
cap.  i.  §  13 ;  Locke,  Some  Considera-  stability  of  value,  cognisability,  and
lions  of  the  Consequences  of  the  one  in  addition,  the  quality  of  not
Lowering  of  Interest  and  Raising  requiring  to  be  fed  like  cattle.
the  Value  of  Money,  2nd  ed.  1696,  The  five  given  in  the  text  above
p.  31 ;  Law,  Money  and  Trade  are  to  be  found  in  Harris.
considered,  1705,  ch.  i. ;  Hutche-  Divisibility,  which  he  also  men-
son,  Introduction  to  Moral  Philo-  tions,  reappears  in  W.  of  N.
sophy,  p.  211  ;  Montesquieu,  bk.  i.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.  pp.  24,  25.
Esprit  des  his,  liv.  xxii.  ch.  ii ;  l  MS.  reads 'been.'
Cantillon,  Essai,  pp.  153,  355-  2  Harris,  Money  and  Coins,  pt.
357 ;  Harris,  Money  and  Coins,  i.  §  28.

pt.  i.  §§  22-27. Taken  together,  3  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.

these passages include all the  p.  27.

properties  enumerated  by  Jevons  *  Ibid. ch. v. vol. i. p. 41.

(Money and the Mechanism of  Harris, Money  and  Coins,  pt.  i.

Exchange, 1875, ch. v.), viz.  §§  34, 35.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  187

are  now  a  great  deal  more.  In  like  manner  what  was
called  Troy  weight,  from  Troy,  a  town  in  Champaigne ],
where  then  the  greatest  commerce  was  carried  on,  gave
rise  to  a  heavier  weight,  because  there  was  usually  given
the  cast  of  the  balance  along  with  it,  and  as  this  rendered
dealings  inaccurate,  it  was  necessary  that  this  cast  of  the
balance  should  be  determined.  Accordingly,  averdupois
(avoir  du  poise2),  or  heavy  weight,  was  settled  at  thirteen
ounces  ;  but  as  this  was  a  number  not  easily  divided,  it
was  settled  at  sixteen,  the  ounces  being  made  proportioned
to  it 3.

Thus  the  measure  of  quantity  has  been  increasing;  we
shall  next  show  how  the  coin  decreased.  When  the
government  takes  the  coinage  into  its  own  hands,  the
expenses  naturally  fall  upon  it,  and  if  any  private  man
coins,  he  must  lessen  the  value  or  have  nothing  but  his
labour  for  his  pains;  and  besides,  as  no  man's  authority  can
be  so  great  as  to  make  his  coin  pass  in  common  payments,
he  must  forge  the  stamp  of  the  government.  As  the
government  took  the  task  upon  themselves,  they  would
endeavour,  in  order  to  prevent  frauds,  to  prevent  counter
feiting  the  king's  coin,  and  encroaching  on  his  prerogative  ;
besides,  as  the  public  faith  was  engaged,  it  was  necessary
to  prevent  all  kinds  of  fraud,  because  it  was  likewise
necessary  that  people  should  be  obliged  to  receive  the
coin  according  to  its  denomination,  and  that  if  any  refused  it
after  a  legal  tender  of  payment  was  made,  the  debtor  should
be  free,  and  the  creditor  guilty  of  felony4.  In  rude  and

1  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  iv.  vol.  recollection of Martin  -  Leake.
i. p. 27, Adam Smith writes,  Historical Account of English
' Troyes in Champaign' and  Money,  and  ed.  1745,  pp.  30,  31.
'  Troyes  weight.'  The  original  number  of  ounces

2  The  spelling  of  the MS.  is  in the pound avoirdupois is
retained.  there  given  as  fifteen.

3  This account of  the origin  *  To  refuse  legal  tender  was
of  avoirdupois  weight  may  per-  never  felony.

haps  be  the  result  of  an  inaccurate


l88  PART II  : POLICE

barbarous  periods  the  government  was  laid  under  many
temptations  to  debase  the  coin,  or,  according  to  the  mint
language,  to  raise  it ;  when,  for  instance,  on  any  important
occasion,  such  as  paying  of  debts,  or  of  soldiers,  it  has
occasion  for  two  millions,  but  has  no  more  than  one,  it
calls  in  the  coin  of  the  country,  and,  mixing  with  it
a  greater  quantity  of  alloy,  makes  it  come  out  two  millions,
as  like  as  possible  to  what  it  was  before.  Many  operations
of  this  kind  have  been  performed  in  every  country ;  but
England,  from  the  freedom  which  it  has  almost  uninter
ruptedly  enjoyed,  has  been  less  troubled  with  this  than
an'y  other  nation.  There  it  has  only  fallen  to  one-third,
but  in  many  other  countries  it  is  not  a  fiftieth  of  its
original  value.

The  inconveniences  of  such  practices  are  very  great.
The  debasement  of  the  coin  hinders  commerce,  or,  at
least,  greatly  embarrasses  it.  A  new  calculation  must  be
made  how  much  of  the  new  coin  must  be  given  for  so
much  of  the  old.  People  are  disposed  to  keep  their  goods
from  the  market,  as  they  know  not  what  they  will  get  for
them.  Thus,  a  stagnation  of  commerce  is  occasioned ;
besides,  the  debasing  of  the  coin  takes  away  the  public
faith.  Nobody  will  lend  any  sum  to  the  government,  or
bargain  with  it,  as  he  perhaps  may  be  paid  with  one  half
of  it.  As  there  is  a  fraud  committed  by  the  government,
every  subject  must  be  allowed  to  do  the  same,  and  pay
his  debts  with  the  new  money,  which  is  less  than  he  owed.
This  scheme,  however,  serves  the  purpose  for  some  small
time,  on  the  following  account.  The  use  of  money  is  two
fold  :  for  the  payment  of  debts,  and  the  purchasing  of
commodities.  When  the  coin  is  debased,  a  debt  of  twenty
shillings  is  then  paid  with  ten ;  but  if  the  new  coin  be
carried  to  a  foreign  market,  it  will  give  nothing  but  the
old  value.  All  day-labourers  are  paid  in  the  new  coin.
The  necessities  of  life  must  be  sold  at  what  the  greater
part  of  people  can  give,  and  consequently  their  price  will


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  189

for  some  time  be  diminished.  However,  the  king  himself
loses  much,  though  he  gains  in  the  meantime.  His
doubling  it  is  no  doubt  a  present  advantage,  but  it  neces
sarily  diminishes  his  revenue,  because  all  his  taxes  are
paid  in  the  new  coin.  To  prevent  this  loss  the  French,
and  indeed  all  other  nations  on  a  like  occasion,  when  they
double  the  money  by  edict  without  re-coinage,  make  the
augmentation  after  the  money  is  called  in,  and  before  it
goes  out,  and  a  diminution  is  made  before  next  term  of
payment1.  A  diminution  has  always  a  worse  effect  than
an  augmentation.  An  augmentation  injures  the  creditor,
a  diminution  the  debtor,  who  should  always  be  favoured  2.
If  I  bind  for  ten  pounds  and  be  obliged  to  pay  fifteen,
common  industry  must  be  excessively  embarrassed 3.

The  coins  of  most  countries  are  either  of  copper,  silver,
or  gold.  We  are  obliged  even  to  receive  payment  in
sixpences,  which  sometimes  is  the  occasion  of  confusion
and  loss  of  time.  The  different  coins  are  regulated,  not
by  the  caprice  of  the  government,  but  by  the  market  price
of  gold  and  silver,  and  according  to  this  the  proportion  of
gold  and  silver  [is]  settled.  This  proportion  sometimes
varies  a  little.  The  guineas  some  time  ago  were  valued  at

1  The  French  understood  by  an  p.  715.

augmentation without  recoinage  *  '  Les diminutions favorisent

an increase  of  the number of  le creancier,  et les augmenta-

livres  (a  money  of  account,  not  tions  le  dcbiteur ;  et  tout  le  reste

actual  coins)  which  go  to  a  coin  of  egal  en  matiere  d'Etat, c'est  le

given  weight,  and  by  a  diminu-  debiteur  qui  doit  etre  favorise.'

tion  a  decrease  of  this  number.  Ibid.  ch.  xii.  ad  fin. Dutot  criti-

Melon  gives  an  example  in  which  cizes the proposition and the

a  debtor  who  has  borrowed  2400  historical examples adduced

livres  in  100  louis  d'or  is  obliged  in support of  it  somewhat se-

to  repay  120  louis  d'or  of  the  same  verely. Reflexions  politiques  sur

weight  when  there  is  a  diminution  les  finances  et  le  commerce,  1738,

of  one-sixth  and  the  number  of  ch.  i.  (ibid.  pp.  789,  sqq.)

livres  equal  to  a  louis  d'or  conse-  3  W.  ofN.  bk.  i.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.  pp.

quently  reduced  from  24  to  20.  28,  29,  strongly condemns  aug-

Essai polititjiie 1734, ch. xii.  mentations  or  debasements,  but

in  Daire's  Econoinisles  financiers,  says  nothing  of  diminutions.


190  PART II  : POLICE

twenty-two  shillings,  and  at  other  times  they  have  been  at
twenty1.  The  gold  rises  more  in  proportion  in  Britain
than  anywhere  else,  and  as  it  makes  the  silver  of  some
what  less  value  it  is  the  cause  of  a  real  inconvenience.
As  silver  buys  more  gold  abroad  than  at  home,  by  sending
abroad  silver  they  bring  gold  in  return,  which  buys  more
silver  here  than  it  does  abroad.  By  this  means  a  kind  of
trade  is  made  of  it,  the  gold  coin  increasing  and  the  silver2
diminishing  3.  Some  time  ago  a  proposal  was  given  in  to
remedy  this,  but  it  was  thought  so  complex  a  case  that
they  resolved  for  that  time  not  to  meddle  with  it.


[§  9.  That  National  Opulence  does  not  consist  in
Money.']

We  have  shown  what  rendered  money  the  measure  of
value,  but  it  is  to  be  observed  that  labour,  not  money,  is
the  true  measure  of  value4.  National  opulence  consists
therefore  in  the  quantity  of  goods,  and  the  facility  of
barter.  This  shall  be  next  considered.

1  Guineas  were  twenty-shilling  guineas at 225. The maximum

pieces  when  first  coined  in  1663,  was reduced to  2is.  by  procla-

but  were  soon  taken  at  2is.,  and  mation,  060.22,1717,  in  pursuance

later at 215. 6d. Immediately  of Newton's Representation (in

before  the  great  silver  recoinage  Select  Tracts  on  Money,  1856,  pp.

they passed at  305. The  act  7  274-279). See Ruding, Annals

and  8  Will.  Ill,  cap.  10,  provided  of  the Coinage,  1817,  vol.  ii.  pp.

that  they should not be taken  405-410,  427,  446 ; Snelling,  View

at  more  than  265.,  but  prescribed  of  the  Gold  Coin  and  Coinage  of

no lower  limit. Cap.  19  of  the  England,  1763,  pp.  30-32 ;  London

same year  reduced this maxi-  Gazette,  Dec.  21-4,  1717.

mum  10225.  and  the  current  value,  2  MS.  reads  '  value.'

which was recognized by the  3  IV.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  v.  vol.  i.  pp.

revenue  officers,  fell  to  2is.  6./.  in  42-46; Harris,  Essay  on  Money

1699,  after  the  House  of  Commons  and  Coins,  pt.  ii.  §§  25,  39  ;  below,

had  passed  a  resolution  declaring  p.  203.

that  the  act  7  and  8  Will.  Ill,  cap.  4  IV.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  v.  vol.  i.

19,  did  not  oblige  any  one  to  accept  pp.  30-38.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  191

The  more  money  that  is  necessary  to  circulate  the
goods  of  any  country,  the  more  is  the  quantity  of
goods  diminished.  Suppose  that  the  whole  stock  of
Scotland  in  corn,  cattle,  money,  &c.  amounts  to  twenty
millions,  and  if  one  million  in  cash  is  necessary  to  carry
on  the  circulation,  there  will  be  in  the  country  only
nineteen  millions  of  food,  clothes,  and  lodging,  and  the
people  have  less  by  one  million  than  they  would  have  if
there  were  no  occasion  for  this  expedient  of  money.  It
is  therefore  evident  that  the  poverty  of  any  country
increases  as  the  money  increases,  money  being  a  dead
stock  l  in  itself,  supplying  no  convenience  of  life.  Money
in  this  respect  may  be  compared  to  the  high  roads  of
a  country,  which  bear  neither  corn  nor  grass  themselves,
but  circulate  all  the  corn  and  grass  in  the  country.
If  we  could  find  any  way  to  save  the  ground  taken  up
by  highways,  we  would  increase  considerably  the  quantity
of  commodities,  and  have  more  to  carry  to  the  market'-.
In  the  same  manner  as  [the  worth  of]  a  piece  of
ground  does  not  lie  in  the  number  of  highways  that  run
through  it,  so  the  riches  of  a  country  does  not  consist
in  the  quantity  of  money  employed  to  circulate  commerce,
but  in  the  great  abundance  of  the  necessaries  of  life.
If  we  could  therefore  fall  on  a  method  to  send  the  half  of
our  money  abroad  to  be  converted  into  goods,  and  at  the
same  time  supply  the  channel  of  circulation  at  home,
we  would  greatly  increase  the  wealth  of  the  country.

Hence  the  beneficial  effects  of  the  erection  of  banks  and
paper  credit.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  erection  of  banks
is  of  advantage  to  the  commerce  of  a  country.  Suppose
as  above  that  the  whole  stock  of  Scotland  amounted  to
twenty  millions,  and  that  two  millions  are  employed  in  the

1  Harris  speaks of  laying  up  Essay  on  Money  and  Coins,  pt.  i.

'  a kind of dead stock of  the  §  51.

precious metals against any  '2  W.  of  N.  bk ii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.

emergencies  that  might  happen.'  p.  322.


IQ2  PART II  : POLICE

circulation  of  it,  [and]  the  other  eighteen  are  in  com
modities.  If  then  the  banks  in  Scotland  issued  out  notes
to  the  value  of  two  millions,  and  reserved  among  them
£300,000  to  answer  immediate  demands,  there  would  be
one  million  seven  hundred  thousand  pounds  circulating
in  cash,  and  two  millions  of  paper  money  besides.  The
natural  circulation  however  is  two  million  and  the  channel
will  receive  no  more.  What  is  over  will  be  sent  abroad
to  bring  home  materials  for  food,  clothes,  and  lodging.
That  this  has  a  tendency  to  enrich  a  nation  may  be  seen
at  first  sight,  for  whatever  commodities  are  imported,  just  so
much  is  added  to  the  opulence  of  the  country.  The  only
objection  against  paper  money  is  that  it  drains  the  country
of  gold  and  silver,  that  bank  notes  will  not  circulate  in
a  foreign  market,  and  that  foreign  commodities  must  be
paid  in  specie.  This  is  no  doubt  the  case ;  but  if  we
consider  attentively  we  will  find  that  this  is  no  real  hurt
to  a  country.  The  opulence  of  a  nation  does  not  consist
in  the  quantity  of  coin,  but  in  the  abundance  of  com
modities  which  are  necessary  for  life,  and  whatever  tends
to  increase  these  tends  so  far  to  increase  the  riches  of
a  country.

Money  is  fit  for  none  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  It
cannot  of  itself  afford  either  food,  clothes,  or  lodging,  but
must  be  exchanged  for  commodities  fit  for  these  purposes.
If  all  the  coin  of  the  nation  were  exported,  and  our  com
modities  proportionably  increased,  it  might  be  recalled  on
any  sudden  emergency  sooner  than  anyone  could  well
imagine.  Goods  will  always  bring  in  money,  and  as  long
as  the  stock  of  commodities  in  any  nation  increases,  they
have  it  in  their  power  to  augment  the  quantity  of  coin,
if  thought  necessary,  by  exporting  their  stock  to  foreign
countries.  This  reasoning  is  confirmed  by  matter  of  fact.
We  find  that  the  commerce  of  every  nation  in  Europe  has
been  prodigiously  increased  by  the  erection  of  banks.
In  this  country  everybody  is  sensible  of  their  good  effects,


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  193

and  our  American  colonies,  where  most  of  the  commerce
is  carried  on  by  paper  circulation,  are  in  a  most  flourishing
condition  l.

What  first  gave  occasion  to  the  establishment  of  banks
was  to  facilitate  the  transference  of  money.  This  at  this
day  is  the  only  design  of  the  bank  at  Amsterdam.  When
commerce  is  carried  to  a  high  pitch,  the  delivery  of
gold  and  silver  consumes  a  great  deal  of  time.  When
a  great  merchant  had  ten  or  twenty  thousand  pounds  to
give  away,  he  would  take  almost  a  week  to  count  it
out  in  guineas  and  shillings.  A  bank  bill  prevents  all  this
trouble.  Before  the  erection  of  the  bank2  at  Amsterdam,
the  method  the  merchants  fell  upon  to  lessen  the
trouble  of  counting  out  great  quantities  of  cash,  was
to  keep  certain  sums  put  up  in  bags  to  answer  immediate
demands.  In  this  case  you  must  either  trust  the  honest)*
of  the  merchant,  or  you  must  take  the  trouble  of  counting
it  over.  If  you  trusted  his  fidelity,  frequent  frauds  would
be  committed,  if  not,  your  trouble  was  not  lessened.  The
inconveniences  arising  from  this  gave  occasion  to  the
erection  of  that  bank,  of  which  the  whole  transaction
is  this :  you  deposit  a  certain  sum  of  money  there,
and  the  bank  gives  you  a  bill  to  that  extent.  This
money  is  secure,  and  you  never  call  for  it,  because  the  bill
will  generally  sell  above  par,  and  it  is  therefore  an
advantage  to  yourself  to  let  it  lie ;  the  bank  has  no  office
for  payment,  because  there  is  seldom  any  payment
demanded.  In  this  manner  the  bank  of  Amsterdam  has
a  good  effect  in  facilitating  commerce,  and  its  notes
circulate  only  there ;  the  credit  of  that  city  is  not  in  the
least  endangered  by  the  bank.  In  1701 3,  when  the  French
army  was  at  Utrecht,  a  sudden  demand  was  made  upon  it,
and  all  Holland  was  alarmed  with  the  expected  fatal

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii. 3  A  mistake  for  1672,  the  date
p.  542.  given  in  W.  of  N,  bk.  iv.  ch.  iii.

2  MS.  reads  '  banks.'  vol.  ii.  pp.  59,  61.

O


194


PART II  : POLICE


consequences,  but  no  danger  ensued.  Before  this  a
suspicion  prevailed  that  the  bankers  had  fallen  into
a  custom  of  trading  with  the  money,  but  at  that  time  it
was  found  that  a  great  quantity  of  the  money  had  been
scorched  by  a  fire  that  happened  in  the  neighbourhood
about  fifty  years  before  that l.  This  plainly  showed  that
there  was  no  ground  for  the  suspicion,  and  the  credit  of
the  bank  remained  unhurt.  It  has  been  affirmed  by  some
that  the  bank  of  Amsterdam  has  always  money  in  its
stores  to  the  amount  of  eighty  or  ninety  millions  ;  but  this
has  lately  been  shown  by  an  ingenious  gentleman  to  be
false,  from  a  comparison  of  the  trade  of  London  and
Amsterdam  2.

The  constitution  of  the  banks  in  Britain  differs  widely
from  that  in  Amsterdam.  Here  there  is  only  about  a  sixth
part  of  the  stock  kept  in  readiness  for  answering  demands,
and  the  rest  is  employed  in  trade.  Originally  they  were


1  'Soon after  the bank was
established. '  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.
iii.  vol.  ii.  p.  61.

2  The  '  ingenious  gentleman '  is
Nicolas  Magens (the  '  Mr.  Meg-
gens  ' of  W.  of  N.  bk. i.  ch.  xi.
vol.  i. pp.  218,  222). He  says :
'  Now  it  is  known  that  although
Amsterdam  has  in  proportion  to
its inhabitants  more merchants
than London ; but as London
contains  four  to  one  more  people
than  Amsterdam,  there  are  more
merchants  and  men  of  business
who  keep  accounts  with  the  Bank.
The  utmost  which  appear  in  the
London  Directory  are  2800,  and
most  probably  at  Amsterdam  not
half  so  many  ;  and  although  many
have  accounts  with  the  Bank  who
are  not  resident  in  Amsterdam,  it
is  the  same  in  respect  to  London  ;
and  if  it  was  even  admitted  that


there  were  in  Amsterdam  3000,
and  each  of  these  to  have  on
advance  10,000  guilders,  the
amount  is  30,000,000  of  guilders  ;
and  if  20,000,  60.000,000,  which  I
am  persuaded  is  much  nearer  the
truth  than  what  is  asserted  above'
[i.  e.  by  Melon,  eighty  millions
sterling,  and  by  Davenant,  thirty-
six  millions  sterling].  Universal
Merchant  (anon.),  edited  by
William  Horsley,  1753,  p. 33.  The
story  of  the  scorched  money  is
not  taken  from  Magens.  The
description  of  the  bank  in  W.  ofN.
bk.  iv.  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  54-
62,  was  obtained  from  Mr.  Henry
Hope,  no  printed  account  having
ever  appeared  '  satisfactory  or
even  intelligible'  to  Adam  Smith,
as  he  says  in  the  Preface  or  '  Ad
vertisement  '  to  the  4th  edition
of  W.  o/N.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  195

on  the  same  footing  with  the  Amsterdam  bank,  but  the
directors  taking  liberty  to  send  out  money,  they  gradually
came  to  their  present  situation.  The  ruin  of  a  bank  would
not  be  so  dangerous  as  is  commonly  imagined.  Suppose
all  the  money  in  Scotland  was  issued  by  one  bank,  and
that  it  became  bankrupt,  a  very  few  individuals  would  be
ruined  by  it,  but  not  many;  because  the  quantity  of  cash  or
paper  that  people  have  in  their  hands  bears  no  proportion
to  their  wealth.  Neither  would  the  wealth  of  the  whole
country  be  much  hurt  by  it,  because  the  hundredth  part
of  the  riches  of  a  country  does  not  consist  in  money.  The
only  method  to  prevent  the  bad  consequence  arising  from
the  ruin  of  banks,  is  to  give  monopolies  to  none,  but  to
encourage  the  erection  of  as  many  as  possible.  When
several  are  established  in  a  country,  a  mutual  jealousy
prevails,  they  are  continually  making  unexpected  runs
on  one  another.  This  puts  them  on  their  guard  and
obliges  them  to  provide  themselves  against  such  demands.
Was  there  but  one  bank  in  Scotland  it  would  perhaps  be
a  little  more  enterprising,  as  it  would  have  no  rival,  and  by
mismanagement  might  become  bankrupt;  but  a  number
puts  this  beyond  all  danger :  even  though  one  did  break,
every  individual  [would]  have  very  few  of  its  notes.
From  all  these  considerations  it  is  manifest  that  banks
are  beneficial  to  the  commerce  of  a  country,  and  that  it
is  a  bad  police  to  restrain  them.

Several  political  writers  have  published  treatises  to
show  the  pernicious  nature  of  banks  and  paper  money.
Mun,  a  London  merchant,  published  one  with  this  intention,
in  answer  to  a  book  that  had  been  written  on  the  opposite
before.  He  affirms  that  as  England  is  drained  of  its
money,  it  must  go  to  ruin.  The  circulation  of  paper
banishes  gold  and  silver  from  the  country;  all  other
goods  which  we  have  in  our  possession  being  spent
upon  our  subsistence,  gradually  diminish,  and  must  at  last
come  to  an  end.  Money  never  decays,  a  stock  of  it  will
o  2


196  PART II  : POLICE

last  for  ever,  and  by  keeping  up  great  quantities  of  it  in
the  country  we  shall  insure  our  riches  as  long  as  the
world  stands.  This  reasoning  was  in  those  days  thought
very  satisfactory,  but  from  what  has  been  said  before
concerning  the  nature  of  public  opulence,  it  appears
evidently  absurd  7.

Some  time  after  that,  Mr.  Gee,  likewise  a  merchant,
wrote  with  the  same  intention 2.  He  endeavours  to  show
that  England  would  soon  be  ruined  by  trade  with  foreign
countries ;  by  the  exchange  he  calculates  that  the  balance
is  always  against  us,  and  consequently  that  in  almost  all
our  commercial  dealings  with  other  nations  we  are  losers 3 ;
as  they  drain  us  of  our  money,  we  must  soon  come  to  ruin.
The  absurdity  of  this  is  likewise  evident  from  former
considerations,  and  we  find  that  though  no  stop  was  put
to  the  manner  of  carrying  on  foreign  commerce  by  any
regulations,  the  nation  has  prodigiously  increased  in
riches,  and  is  still  increasing4.  He  proposed  indeed  some
regulations  to  prevent  our  ruin  from  this  quarter,  which  if
the  government  had  been  [so]  foolish  [as]  to  have  com-

1  No  work  attributed  to Mun  pernicious,  and  the  reporter  would

was  published  with  the  intention  misunderstand  him  to  mean  that

of  showing  the  pernicious  nature  Mun and  Gee held that paper

of  banks  and  paper  money,  and  money  was  pernicious. W.  of  N.

as  his  principal  work,  England's  bk.  iv.  ch.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  4-7  contains

Treasure  by  Foreign  Trade, 1664,  a  correct  summary  of  Mun's  argu-

was  reprinted  at  Glasgow  in  1755,  ment and a nearly verbatim

it  is  not  likely  that  Adam  Smith  quotation  from  the  fourth  chapter

was  criticizing  it  before  he  had  of  England's  Treasure.

seen it. The most plausible  2  I.  e.  according  to  the  explan-

explanation  is  that  he  was  using  ation  suggested  in  the  preceding

the  proved  utility  of  banks  and  pa-  note,  'with  the  intention  of  insist-

per  money  as  an  argument  against  ing  on  the  accumulation  of trea-

the  theory  that  the  wealth  of  a  sure.' Joshua  Gee's  Trade  and

country  is  represented  by  its  stock  Navigation  of  Great  Britain  Con-

of  the  precious  metals. He  would  sidered, 1730, was reprinted at

say that if the contention of  Glasgow  in  1750  and  1755.

writers  like  Mun  and  Gee  were  3  Chapters  i-xii,  xxxiv.

correct,  paper  money  must  be  most  4  Hume, '  Of  the Balance  of


CHEAPNESS OK PLENTY  197

plied  with,  they  would  more  probably  have  impoverished
the  nation  l.

Mr.  Hume  published  some  essays2  showing  the  absurdity
of  these  and  other  such  doctrines.  He  proves  very
ingeniously  that  money  must  always  bear  a  certain
proportion  to  the  quantity  of  commodities  in  every  country;
that  whenever 3  money  is  accumulated  beyond  the  pro
portion  of  commodities  in  any  country,  the  price  of  goods
will  necessarily  rise ;  that  this  country  will  be  undersold  at
the  foreign  market,  and  consequently  the  money  must
depart  into  other  nations;  but  on  the  contrary  whenever
the  quantity  of  money  falls  below  the  proportion  of  goods,
the  price  of  goods  diminishes,  the  country  undersells
others  in  foreign  markets,  and  consequently  money  returns
in  great  plenty.  Thus  money  and  goods  will  keep  near
about  a  certain  level  in  every  country4.  Mr.  Hume's
reasoning  is  exceedingly  ingenious.  He  seems,  however,
to  have  gone  a  little  into  the  notion  that  public  opulence
consists  in  money 6,  which  was  considered  above.

We  may  observe  upon  this  that  human  industry  always
multiplies  goods  and  money  together,  though  not  always
in  the  same  proportion.  The  labour  of  men  will  always
be  employed  in  producing  whatever  is  the  object  of
human  desire,  and  things  will  increase  in  proportion  as  it
is  in  the  power  of  man  to  cultivate  them.  Corn  and  other
commodities  of  that  kind  must  always  be  produced  in
greater  abundance  than  gold,  precious  stones,  and  the  like,

Trade,'  uses  the  same  argument  Trade' in Essays  and  Treatises,

against  Gee. Political  Discourses,  1758.

1752,  p.  81.  J  MS.  reads  '  wherever.'

1  Gee's 'regulations' (chs.  4  'Of the  Balance  of  Trade.'
xxiv-xxxiii.)  are  chiefly  directed  Political  Discourses, 1752, p. 82
towards extracting  wealth  from  sqq.

the  colonies  by  various  encourage- 3  Perhaps  where he argues

ments  and  restrictions.  against  paper  money.  '  Of  Money  '

2  '  Of  Money, '  '  Of  the  Balance  and  « Of  the  Balance  of  Trade.'
of  Trade, '  in  Political  Discourses,  Ibid.  pp.  43~45'  89-91.

1752,  and '  Of  the Jealousy of


198  PART II  : POLICE

because  they  are  more  within  the  reach  of  human  industry.
Almost  any  part  of  the  surface  of  the  earth  may,  by  proper
culture,  be  made  capable  of  producing  corn,  but  gold  is
not  to  be  found  everywhere,  and  even  where  it  is  to  be
found,  it  lies  concealed  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  to
produce  a  small  quantity  of  it,  long  time  and  much  labour
are  requisite1.  For  these  reasons  money  never  increases
in  proportion  to  the  increase  of  goods,  and  consequently
money  will  be  sold  at  a  cheaper  rate  in  proportion  as
a  country  becomes  opulent.  In  savage  nations  money
gives  a  vast  price,  because  savages  have  no  money  but
[what]  they  acquire  by  plunder,  for  they  have  not  that
knowledge  which  is  necessary  for  producing  money  in
their  own  country.  But  when  a  nation  arrives  at  a  certain
degree  of  improvement  in  the  arts,  its  value  diminishes ;
then  they  begin  to  search  the  mines  and  manufacture  it
themselves.  From  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  to  the
discovery  of  the  West  Indies,  the  value  of  money  was  very
high,  and  continually  increasing.  Since  that  latter  period
its  value  has  decreased  considerably 2.

Mr.  Locke,  too,  published  a  treatise  to  show  the
pernicious  consequences  of  allowing  the  nation  to  be
drained  of  money.  His  notions  were  likewise  founded
upon  the  idea  that  public  opulence  consists  in  money,
though  he  treats  the  matter  in  a  more  philosophical
light  than  the  rest.  He  affirms,  with  Mr.  Mun,  that  if
there  is  no  money  in  a  nation  it  must  soon  come  to
ruin,  that  all  commodities  are  soon  spent,  but  money
lasts  for  ever a.

1  Cp.  §  7  above.  about  1640,  when  it  fell ;  and  1570

2  The '  Digression  concerning to  1766,  when  it  remained  nearly
the variations in the value of  . stationary.

silver during the  course of  the  3  It  is  difficult  to  discover  an)'

four last  centuries '  in W.  of  N.  relation between this summary

bk.  i.  ch. xi.  vol.  i.  pp. 187-227  and  Locke's  Some  Considerations

deals  with  three  periods— 1350  to  of  the  Consequences  of  the  Low  ring

1570,  when  silver  rose; 1570  to  of  Interest  and  Raising  the  Value  of


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  199

Upon  the  whole  we  may  observe  on  this  subject,  that
the  reason  why  our  riches  do  not  consist  in  money  but
commodities  is,  that  money  cannot  be  used  for  any  of  the
purposes  of  life,  but  that  commodities  are  fitted  for  our
subsistence.  The  consumptibility,  if  we  may  use  the
word,  of  goods,  is  the  great  cause  of  human  industry  l,  and
an  industrious  people  will  always  produce  more  than  they
consume.  It  is  easy  to  show  how  small  a  proportion  the
cash  in  every  country  bears  to  the  public  opulence.  It  is
generally  supposed  that  there  are  thirty  millions  of  money
circulating  in  Britain  2,  but  the  annual  consumption  amounts
to  much  more  than  a  hundred  millions,  for,  computing  the
inhabitants  of  the  island  at  ten  millions,  and  allowing  ten
pounds  per  annum  for  the  subsistence  of  each  person,
which  is  by  much  too  little,  the  whole  annual  consumption
amounts  to  that  sum.  So  it  appears  that  the  circulating
cash  bears  but  a  small  proportion  to  the  wrhole  opulence
of  the  country.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  there  are  not
thirty  millions  in  Britain,  and  in  that  case  the  proportion
will  be  still  less.

It  is  said  by  some  who support the  notion that  the

Money, 1691,  or the other  two  1'interet rcciproque nous rend

tracts  reprinted  along  with  it  in  communs.

1696 under  the title  of  Several  Tous  ces biens se  communi-

Papers  relating  to  Money,  Interest  quent  a  nous  en  circulant d'un

and  Trade,  &c. But  as  the  sum-  endroit  a  1'autre,  jusqu'a  ce  que

mary  agrees  with  that  in  W.of  N.  nos besoins satisfaits les aient

bk.  iv.  ch.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  2, 3,  it  is  im-  consumes. La circulation est

possible  in  this  case  to  suppose  done  1'essence  du  commerce,  la

error  on  the  part  of  the  reporter.  consommation en est la fin.'

Adam  Smith  probably  had  in  his  Dutot,  Reflexions  politiques  sur  les

mind  pp.  17,  18  and  77-79  of  Some  finances  etle  commerce,  1738,  ch.  iii.

Considerations  (1696  edition),  and  art.  7  ad  init.  (p.  898  in Daire's

perhaps also §§ 46-50 of Civil  Economistes  financiers);  W.ofN.

Government,  where  the  indestruc-  bk.  iv.  ch.  viii.  vol.  ii.  p.  244.

tibility  of  money  is  insisted  on.  2  'The  most  exaggerated  com-

1  '  Le  commerce  est  1'echange  putation which I remember to

des  biens  distribucs  par  la  nature  have  either  seen  or heard of

en differents endroits, e't que  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  15.


200  PART II  : POLICE

riches  of  a  country  consists  in  money,  that  when  a  person
retires  from  trade  he  turns  his  stock  immediately  into
cash.  It  is  plain,  however,  that  the  reason  of  this  is
that  as  money  is  the  instrument  of  commerce,  a  man  can
change  it  for  the  necessaries  and  elegancies  of  life  more
easily  than  anything  else.  Even  the  miser  who  locks  up
his  gold  in  his  chest  has  this  end  in  view.  No  man  in  his
senses  hoards  up  money  for  its  own  sake,  but  he  considers
that  by  keeping  money  always  by  him,  he  has  it  in  his
power  to  supply  at  once  all  the  necessities  of  himself  and
his  family.

This  opinion  that  riches  consist  in  money,  as  it  is  absurd
in  speculation,  so  it  has  given  occasion  to  many  prejudi
cial  errors  in  practice,  some  of  which  are  the  following.

[jj  10.  Of  Prohibiting  the  Exportation  of  Coin]

It  was  owing  to  these  tenets  that  the  government
prohibited  the  exportation  of  coin  \  which  prohibition  has
been  extremely  hurtful  to  the  commerce  of  the  country,
because  whatever  quantity  of  money  there  is  in  any
country  above  what  is  sufficient  for  the  circulation  is
merely  a  dead  stock.

In  King  William's  time  there  were  two  species  of  coin,
milled  and  unmilled.  The  unmilled  was  frequently
clipped  by  different  persons  in  its  circulation.  This
occasioned  frequent  disorders  among  the  people,  and
therefore  the  parliament  ordered  all  the  clipped  money
to  be  brought  into  the  mint,  and  the  government  was  at
the  expense  of  recoining  it,  which  operation  cost  them
about  two  millions.  As  they  had  been  at  this  expense,  they
thought  it  just  and  proper  to  prohibit  the  exportation  of
money  for  the  future2.  The  merchants,  however,

1  MS.  reads  'corn.'  be  supplied  by  the  words,  'Till

2  There  is  evidently  an  omission the Restoration,  indeed, it had
at  this  point  which  may  perhaps been  unlawful  to  export  any  gold


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  2OI

complained  of  this  hardship,  and  were  then  allowed  to
export  money  to  a  small  extent1.  The  great  complaint,
however,  was  always  scarcity  of  money.  In  order  to
remedy  this,  the  government  established  a  common  office
for  coining  money  where  every  one  might  get  their  gold
and  silver  turned  into  coin  without  any  expense  2.  The
consequence  of  this  was  that  as  coin  was  of  no  more
value  than  bullion,  a  great  deal  of  coin  was  melted  down
and  exported.  To  prevent  this  it  was  rendered  felony
to  melt  coin  :! ;  but  it  is  so  simple  an  operation,  and  so  easily
gone  about,  that  the  law  was  easily  eluded.  The  im
mediate  effect  of  this  regulation  was  that  more  coin  was
exported  than  ever.  This  might  have  been  easily
prevented  by  fixing  a  certain  price  upon  the  coinage
of  bullion,  or  by  ordaining  the  master  of  the  mint  to  be
paid  by  the  persons  who  brought  their  money  to  be
coined  ;  but  such  a  regulation  was  never  thought  of.

Any  regulation  of  the  above  kind  is  very  absurd,  for  there
is  no  fear  if  things  be  left  to  their  free  course  that  any
nation  will  want  money  sufficient  for  the  circulation
of  their  commodities,  and  every  prohibition  of  exportation
is  always  ineffectual,  and  very  often  occasions  the
exportation  of  more  than  otherwise  would  be.  Suppose,
for  instance,  the  Portuguese  prohibited  from  exporting  their
money  by  a  capital  punishment.  As  they  have  few  goods
to  give  in  exchange  for  ours,  their  foreign  trade  must
cease ;  or  if  they  attempt  to  smuggle,  the  British  merchant

or  silver.'  See  9  Ed.  Ill, st.  2,  cap.  5. Above,  p.  59;  W.  of  N.

cap.  i,  2  Hen.  VI,  cap.  6,  and  the  bk.  iv.  ch.  vi.  vol.  ii.  p.  131.

summary  in  Hale,  History  of  the  3  To  melt  coin,  though  punish-

Pleas  of  the  Crown,  1736, vol. i.  able,  does  not  appear  to  have  ever

pp.  655,  656.  been  felony. The  act  referred  to

1  This probably  refers  to 15  is  probably  6&  7  Will.  Ill,  cap.  17,
Car.  II,  cap.  7,  which  allowed  the  of  which  §  2  is  directed  against
exportation of  foreign  coin  and  the  practice  of  making  ingots  in
bullion.  imitation  of  the  Spanish. For  the

2  Free  and  gratuitous  coinage  explanation  of  the  mistake see
was  established  by  i8&  19  Car.  II,  above,  p.  59,  note  5.


202  • PART II  I POLICE

must  lay  such  a  price  upon  his  goods  as  will  be  sufficient
to  reward  him  for  the  risk  he  runs  of  being  detected,  and
the  Portuguese  merchant,  being  obliged  to  buy  his  goods
too  dear,  must  be  a  loser.  In  general,  every  prohibition
of  this  kind  hurts  the  commerce  of  a  country.  Every
unnecessary  accumulation  of  money  is  a  dead  stock
which  might  be  employed  in  enriching  the  nation  by
foreign  commerce.  It  likewise  raises  the  price  of  goods
and  makes  the  country  undersold  at  foreign  markets.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  prohibiting  the  exportation  of
money  is  really  one  great  cause  of  the  poverty  of  Spain
and  Portugal.  When  they  got  possession  of  the  mines
of  Mexico  and  Peru,  they  thought  they  could  command  all
Europe  by  the  continual  supplies  which  they  received
from  thence,  if  they  could  keep  the  money  among  them,
and  therefore  they  prohibited  the  exportation  of  it.  But
this  had  a  quite  contrary  effect,  for  when  money  is,  as
it  were,  dammed  up  to  an  unnatural  height,  and  there
is  more  than  the  circulation  requires,  the  consequences
are  very  unfavourable  to  the  country.  For  it  is  impossible
that  the  exportation  of  gold  and  silver  can  be  wholly
stopped,  as  the  balance  of  trade  must  be  against  them,
that  is,  they  must  buy  more  than  they  sell,  and  it  is  in
dispensably  necessary  that  this  balance  be  paid  in  money.
Every  commodity  rises  to  an  extravagant  height.  The
Portuguese  pay  for  English  cloth,  additional  to  the
natural  price  of  it,  the  expense  and  risk  of  carrying  it
there,  for  nobody  ever  saw  a  Spanish  or  Portuguese  ship
in  a  British  harbour.  All  the  goods  sent  to  those
countries  are  carried  by  ourselves  and  consigned  to  the
British  factors,  to  be  disposed  of  by  them.  But  besides
the  carriage  and  insurance,  the  British  merchant  must  be
paid  for  the  risk  of  having  his  money  seized  in  Portugal,
in  consequence  of  the  prohibition.  All  risk  of  forfeiture
or  penalty  must  lie  upon  the  goods l.  This  has  a  miserable
1  Law,  Money  and  Trade  Considered,  ch.  ii.  2nd  ed.  pp.  21,  22.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  203

effect  upon  the  domestic  industry  of  those  countries,  and
has  put  a  stop  to  their  manufactures.  Nobody  ever  saw
a  piece  of  Spanish  cloth  in  any  other  country,  yet  they
have  the  best  materials  in  the  world,  and  with  the  same
art  that  we  have,  might  monopolise  the  trade  of  Europe.
It  drew  the  attention  of  the  nations  who  trade  with  them
in  these  commodities,  when  a  general,  on  a  certain
occasion,  presented  to  his  majesty  the  regiment  of  which
he  had  the  command  clothed  in  the  manufactures  of
Spain.  In  general  they  export  no  manufactured  com
modities,  swords  and  armour  excepted,  as  they  have
confessedly  the  best  steel  in  the  world,  but  only  the
spontaneous  productions  of  the  country,  such  as  fruits
and  wines.

Regulations  of  a  similar  nature  were  made  in  Britain  in
King  William's  time1.  Money  was  thought  to  constitute
opulence,  and  therefore  the  accumulation  of  it  commanded
the  whole  of  the  public  attention.  They  coined  all  money
brought  in  for  nothing,  and  the  expenses  of  coinage,
which  amounted  to  about  £140,000 2,  were  entirely  thrown
away;  and,  besides,  great  encouragement  was  given
to  exportation,  because,  as  gold  and  silver  were  coined
for  nothing,  coined  money  could  never  be  dearer  than
bullion.  As  the  exportation  of  bullion  was  free,  they
melted  down  the  coin  and  sent  it  abroad.  At  present
there  is  a  great  temptation  to  such  practices,  for  an  oz.  of
pure  silver  at  mint  price  is  exactly  valued  at  55.  2<^.,  but
bullion  is  often  bought  at  55.  6d.  As  nothing  is  lost  in
melting,  here  is  a  profit  of  4^.  per  oz.  It  is  on  this  account
that  we  seldom  or  never  see  a  new  shilling,  and  it  is  one
of  the  causes  that  silver  is  so  scarce  in  proportion  to  gold :t.

1  The  lecturer  now  returns  from  too little. In Lord Liverpool's
the digression contained  in  the  Treatise  on  the  Coins  of  the  Realm,
last  two  paragraphs.  1805,  p.  75,  the  Mint  charges  are

2  MS.  reads  'fourteen  thousand  stated  to  have  been  ,£179,431  6s.
pounds,'  which  is  obviously  much 3  See  above,  p.  190  and  notes.


204  PART II  I POLICE


[$  ii.  Of  the  Balance  of  Trade I\

The  idea  of  public  opulence  consisting  in  money  has
been  productive  of  other  bad  effects.  Upon  this  principle
most  pernicious  regulations  have  been  established.  Those
species  of  commerce  which  drain  us  of  our  money  are
thought  disadvantageous,  and  those  which  increase  it
beneficial,  therefore  the  former  are  prohibited  and  the
latter  encouraged.  As  France  is  thought  to  produce  more
of  the  elegancies  of  life  than  this  country,  and  as  we  take
much  from  them,  and  they  need  little  from  us,  the  balance
of  trade  is  against  us,  and  therefore  almost  all  our  trade
with  France  is  prohibited  by  great  taxes  and  duties  on
importation.  On  the  other  hand,  as  Spain  and  Portugal
take  more  of  our  commodities  than  we  of  theirs,  the
balance  is  in  our  favours,  and  this  trade  is  not  only  allowed,
but  encouraged.  The  absurdity  of  these  regulations  will
appear  on  the  least  reflection.  All  commerce  that  is
carried  on  betwixt  any  two  countries  must  necessarily  be
advantageous  to  both.  The  very  intention  of  commerce
is  to  exchange  your  own  commodities  for  others  which
you  think  will  be  more  convenient  for  you.  When  two
men  trade  between  themselves  it  is  undoubtedly  for  the
advantage  of  both.  The  one  has  perhaps  more  of  one
species  of  commodities  than  he  has  occasion  for,  he  there
fore  exchanges  a  certain  quantity  of  it  with  the  other,  for
another  commodity  that  will  be  more  useful  to  him.  The
other  agrees  to  the  bargain  on  the  same  account,  and  in
this  manner  the  mutual  commerce  is  advantageous  to
both.  The  case  is  exactly  the  same  betwixt  any  two
nations  *.  The  goods  which  the  English  merchants  want  to
import  from  France  are  certainly  more  valuable  to  them
than  what  they  give  for  them.  Our  very  desire  to  purchase
them  shows  that  we  have  more  use  for  them  than  either

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  29.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  205

the  money  or  the  commodities  which  we  give  for  them.
It  may  be  said  indeed  that  money  lasts  for  ever,  but  that
claret  and  cambrics  are  soon  consumed.  This  is  true :
but  what  is  the  intention  of  industry  if  it  be  not  to  produce
those  things  which  are  capable  of  being  used,  and  are
conducive  to  the  convenience  and  comfort  of  human  life?
Unless  we  use  the  produce  of  our  industry,  unless  we  can
subsist  more  people  in  a  better  way,  what  avails  it?
Besides,  if  we  have  money  to  spend  upon  foreign  com
modities,  what  purpose  serves  it  to  keep  it  in  the  country  ?
If  the  circulation  of  commodities  require  it,  there  will  be
none  to  spare ;  and  if  the  channel  of  circulation  be  full,
no  more  is  necessary.  And  if  only  a  certain  sum  be
necessary  for  that  purpose,  why  throw  more  into  it?

Again,  by  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  goods  to  foreign
markets,  the  industry  of  the  country  is  greatly  discouraged.
It  is  a  very  great  motive  to  industry,  that  people  have  it
in  their  power  to  exchange  the  produce  of  their  labour  for
what  they  please,  and  wherever  there  is  any  restraint  on
people  in  this  respect,  they  will  not  be  so  vigorous  in
improving  manufactures.  If  we  be  prohibited  to  send
corn  and  cloth  to  France,  that  industry  is  stopped  which
raises  corn  and  prepares  cloth  for  the  French  market.  It
may  be  said  indeed  that  if  we  were  allowed  to  trade  with
France  we  would  not  exchange  our  commodities  with
theirs,  but  our  money,  and  thus  human  industry  is  by  no
means  discouraged;  but  if  we  attend  to  it,  we  shall  find  that
it  comes  to  the  same  thing  at  last.  By  hindering  people
to  dispose  of  their  money  as  they  think  proper,  you
discourage  those  manufactures  by  which  this  money  is
gained.  All  jealousies  therefore  between  different  nations,
and  prejudices  of  this  kind,  are  extremely  [hurtful]  to
commerce,  and  limit  public  opulence  '.  This  is  always  the
case  betwixt  France  and  us  in  the  time  of  war.

1  Hume,  '  Of  the  Jealousy  of  Trade,'  in  Essays  and  Treatises,
1758,  passim.


205  PART II  : POLICE

In  general  we  may  observe  that  these  jealousies  and
prohibitions  are  most  hurtful  to  the  richest  nations,  and
that  in  proportion  as  a  free  commerce  would  be  advan
tageous.  When  a  rich  man  and  a  poor  man  deal  with  one
another,  both  of  them  will  increase  their  riches,  if  they
deal  prudently,  but  the  rich  man's  stock  will  increase  in
a  greater  proportion  than  the  poor  man's.  In  like  manner
when  a  rich  and  a  poor  nation  engage  in  trade,  the  rich
nation  will  have  the  greatest  advantage,  and  therefore  the
prohibition  of  this  commerce  is  most  hurtful  to  it  of  the
two.  All  our  trade  with  France  is  prohibited  by  the  high
duties  imposed  on  every  French  commodity  imported.  It
would,  however,  have  been  better  police  to  encourage  our
trade  with  France.  If  any  foreign  commerce  is  to  be  pro
hibited,  it  ought  to  be  that  with  Spain  and  Portugal.  This
would  have  been  most  advantageous  to  England.  France
is  much  more  populous,  a  more  extensive  country,  farther
advanced  in  arts  and  manufactures  of  every  kind,  and
the  industry  which  a  commerce  with  that  country  would
have  excited1  at  home  would  have  been  much  greater.
Twenty  millions  of  people  perhaps  in  a  great  society,
working  as  it  were  to  one  another's  hands,  from  the  nature
of  the  division  of  labour  before  explained,  would  produce
a  thousand  times  more  goods  than  another  society  con
sisting  only  of  two  or  three  millions.  It  were  happy
therefore,  both  for  this  country  and  for  France,  that  all
national  prejudices  were  rooted  out,  and  a  free  and
uninterrupted  commerce  established.

It  may  be  observed  in  general  that  we  never  heard  of
any  nation  ruined  by  this  balance  of  trade.  When  Gee
published  his  book,  the  balance  with  all  nations  was
against  us,  except  Spain  and  Portugal2.  It  was  then

1  MS.  reads 'exerted.'  convenient  to  reject  as  untrust-

2  And Holland, according to  worthy  in  this  case. Trade  and
the Custom House accounts,  Navigation,  chs.  xii,  xxxiv.
which, however, Gee finds it


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  207

thought  that  in  a  few  years  we  would  be  reduced  to
an  absolute  state  of  poverty.  This  indeed  has  been  the
cry  of  all  political  writers  since  the  time  of  Charles  II;
notwithstanding  all  this,  we  find  ourselves  far  richer
than  before,  and,  when  there  is  occasion  for  it,  we
can  raise  much  more  money  than  ever  has  been  done.
A  late  minister  of  state  levied  in  one  year  twenty-three
millions  '  with  greater  ease  than  Lord  Godolphin  could
levy  six  in  Queen  Anne's  time.  The  French  and  Dutch
writers,  embracing  the  same  principle,  frequently  alarmed
their  country  with  the  same  groundless  terror,  but  they
still  continue  to  flourish.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the
poverty  of  a  nation  can  never  proceed  from  foreign  trade
if  carried  on  with  wisdom  and  prudence.  The  poverty  of
a  nation  proceeds  from  much  the  same  causes  with  those
which  render  an  individual  poor.  When  a  man  consumes
more  than  he  gains  by  his  industry,  he  must  impoverish
himself  unless  he  has  some  other  way  of  subsistence.  In
the  same  manner,  if  a  nation  consume  more  than  it
produces,  poverty  is  inevitable ;  if  its  annual  produce  be
ninety  millions  and  its  annual  consumption  an  hundred,
then  it  spends,  eats,  and  drinks,  tears,  wears,  ten  millions
more  than  it  produces,  and  its  stock  of  opulence  must
gradually  [go]  to  nothing.

[§12. Of  the  Opinion  that  no  Expense  at  Home
can  be  hurtful^

There  is  still  another  bad  effect  proceeding  from
that  absurd  notion,  that  national  opulence  consists  in
money.  It  is  commonly  imagined  that  whatever  people

1  For  the  service  of  the  year  before  Adam  Smith  left  Glasgow

1760  ,£19,616,119,  and  for  that  of  (Sinclair, History of  the Public

1761  ,£18,299,153,  were  voted,  and  Revenue,  pt.  iii.  1790,  p.  69).  Pitt
these  amounts  were  far  in  excess  resigned  Oct.  5,  1761,  but  New-
of  the  votes  for  any  other  year  castle  continued  in  office  till  May,


208  PART II  : POLICE

spend  in  their  own  country  cannot  diminish  public
opulence,  if  you  take  care  of  exports  and  imports.  This
is  the  foundation  of  Dr.  Mandeville's  system  that  private
vices  are  public  benefits :  what  is  spent  -at  home  is
all  spent  among  ourselves,  none  of  it  goes  out  of  the
country l.  But  it  is  evident  that  when  any  man  tears,  and
wears,  and  spends  his  stock,  without  employing  himself
in  any  species  of  industry,  the  nation  is  at  the  end  of
the  year  so  much  the  poorer  by  it.  If  he  spend  only  the
interest  of  the  money  he  does  no  harm,  as  the  capital  still
remains,  and  is  employed  in  promoting  industry,  but  if  he
spend  the  capital,  the  whole  is  gone.  To  illustrate  this  let
us  make  a  supposition,  that  my  father  at  his  death,  instead
of  a  thousand  pounds  in  cash,  leaves  me  the  necessaries
and  conveniences  of  life  to  the  same  value,  which  is
precisely  the  same  as  if  he  left  it  in  money,  because
I  afterwards  purchase  them  in  money.  I  get  a  number
of  idle  folks  about  me.  and  eat,  drink,  tear,  and  wear,  till
the  whole  is  consumed.  By  this,  I  not  only  reduce
myself  to  want,  but  certainly  rob  the  public  stock  of
a  thousand  pounds,  as  it  is  spent  and  nothing  produced
for  it.  As  a  farther  illustration  of  the  hurt  which  the
public  receives  from  such  practices,  let  us  suppose  that
this  island  was  invaded  by  a  numerous  band  of  Tartars,
a  people  who  are  still  in  the  state  of  shepherds,  a  people
who  lead  a  roving  life,  and  have  little  or  no  idea  of
industry.  Here  they  would  find  all  commodities  for  the
taking,  they  would  put  on  fine  clothes,  eat,  drink,  tear,
and  wear  everything  they  laid  their  hands  upon.  The
consequence  would  be  that  from  the  highest  degree  of
opulence  the  whole  country  would  be  reduced  to  the

1762,50  that  either  1760  or  1761  'Levied1  should  be  'raised,'  as

may  be  referred  to. In  IV.  of  N.  more than half the amounts

bk.  iv.  ch.  i.  vol.  ii.  p. 17,  it  is  were  borrowed,

remarked that 'the expense of  J  In  Fable  of  the  Bees,  pt.  i.  Re-

1761,  for  example,  amounted  to  mark (L), Mandeville rather

more than nineteen millions.'  argues  against  the  doctrine.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  209

lowest  pitch  of  misery,  and  brought  back  to  its  ancient
state.  The  thirty  millions  of  money  would  probably  re
main  for  some  time,  but  all  the  necessaries  of  life  would  be
consumed.  This  shows  the  absurdity  of  that  opinion  that
no  home  consumption  can  hurt  the  opulence  of  a  country.

Upon  this  principle  that  no  public  expense  employed
at  home  can  be  hurtful,  a  war  in  Germany  is  thought
a  dreadful  calamity,  as  it  drains  the  country  of  money,  and
a  land  war  is  always  thought  more  prejudicial  than  a  sea  one
for  the  same  reason ;  but  upon  reflection,  we  will  find  that
it  is  the  same  thing  to  the  nation,  how  or  where  its  stock  be
spent.  If  I  purchase  a  thousand  pounds'  worth  of  French
wines,  and  drink  them  all  when  they  come  home,  the
country  is  two  thousand  pounds  poorer,  because  both
the  goods  and  money  are  gone ;  if  I  spend  a  thousand
pounds  worth  of  goods  at  home  upon  myself  the  country
is  only  deprived  of  one  thousand  pounds,  as  the  money
still  remains ;  but  in  maintaining  an  army  in  a  distant
war  it  is  the  same  thing  whether  we  pay  them  in  goods
or  money,  because  the  consumption  is  the  same  at  an}'
rate.  Perhaps  it  is  the  better  police  to  pay  them  in
money,  as  goods  are  better  fitted  for  the  purposes  of
life  at  home1.  For  the  same  reason  there  is  no  dif
ference  between  land  and  sea  wars,  as  is  commonly
imagined.

From  the  above  considerations  it  appears  that  Britain  *
should  by  all  means  be  made  a  free  port,  that  there  should
be  no  interruptions  of  any  kind  made  to  foreign  trade,
that  if  it  were  possible  to  defray  the  expenses  of  govern
ment  by  any  other  method,  all  duties,  customs,  and  excise
should  be  abolished,  and  that  free  commerce  and  liberty
of  exchange  should  be  allowed  with  all  nations,  and  for
all  things.

1  In  IV.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  i.  vol.  ii.  to  be  the  best  medium  for  de-
pp.  18,  19,  '  the  finer  and  more  fraying  the  expense  of  distant
improved  manufactures '  are  said  wars.

P


210  PART II  : POLICE

But  still  further,  and  on  the  same  principles  as  above,
an  apology  is  made  for  the  public  debt.  Say  they,
though  we  [owe]  at  present  above  a  hundred  millions1,
we  owe  it  to  ourselves,  or  at  least  very  little  of  it  to
foreigners.  It  is  just  the  right  hand  owing  the  left,  and
on  the  whole  can  be  little  or  no  disadvantage.  But  [it]
is  to  be  considered  that  the  interest  of  this  hundred
millions  is  paid  by  industrious  people,  and  given  to
support  idle  people  who  are  employed  in  gathering  it.
Thus  industry  is  taxed  to  support  idleness.  If  the  debt
had  not  been  contracted,  by  prudence  and  economy  the
nation  would  have  been  much  richer  than  at  present.
Their  industry  would  not  be  hurt  by  the  oppression  of
those  idle  people  who  live  upon  it.  Instead  of  the
brew7er  paying  taxes  which  are  often  improper,  the
stock  might  have  been  lent  out  to  such  industrious
people  as  would  have  made  six  or  seven  per  cent,  by
it,  and  have  given  better  interest  than  the  government
does :  this  stock  would  then  have  been  employed  for
the  country['s]  welfare.  When  there  are  such  heavy
taxes  to  pay,  every  merchant  must  carry  on  less  trade
than  he  would  otherwise  do ;  he  has  his  taxes  to  pay
before  he  sell  any  of  his  commodities.  This  narrows,
as  it  were,  his  stock,  and  hinders  his  trade  from  being
so  extensive  as  it  otherwise  would  be'-.  To  stop  this
clamour,  Sir  Robert  Walpole  endeavoured  to  show  that
the  public  debt  was  no  inconvenience :!,  though  it  is  to

1  According  to  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  occasion  (see  Historical  Register,

ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  p.  523,  the  debt  in  1733,  pp.  218,  219,  222,  223)  or  in

1764  amounted  to  ^139,516,807.  his  pamphlet,  Some  Considerations

'2  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  concerning  the  Public  Funds,  the

pp.  526-529.  Public  Revenues,  and  the  Annual

3  Walpole  took  half  a  million  Supplies,  1735.  Hume,  however,  in

from  the  Sinking  Fund  in  1733,  the  earlier  editions  of  his  Political

but  he  does  not  appear  to  have  Discourses,  said  that  arguments  in

contended  that  the  debt  was  no  favour  of  '  the  new  paradox,  that

inconvenience  either  in  debate  in  public  encumbrances  are  of  them-

the  House  of  Commons  on  that  selves  advantageous,  independent


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  211

be  supposed  that  a  man  of  his  abilities  saw  the  contrary
himself.

[§  13. Of  tJie  Scheme  of  Mr.  Law."]

The  last  bad  effect  that  shall  be  taken  notice  of  is  the
notion  of  Mr.  Law,  a  Scotch  merchant.  He  thought  that
national  opulence  consists  in  money,  and  that  the  value
of  gold  and  silver  is  arbitrary,  and  depends  on  constitution
and  agreement.  He  imagined  that  the  idea  of  value
might  be  brought  to  paper,  and  it  preferred  to  money.
If  this  could  be  done,  he  thought  it  would  be  a  great
convenience,  as  the  government  then  might  do  what  it
pleased,  raise  armies,  pay  soldiers,  and  be  at  any
expense  whatever.  Mr.  Law  proposed  his  scheme  to  the
Scotch  parliament  in  1701 J.  It  was  rejected,  and  he  went
over  to  France,  where  his  project  was  relished  by  the
Duke  of  Orleans.  In  this  book2  he  agrees  with  the
fore-mentioned  writers  that,  the  balance  of  trade  being
against  a  nation,  it  must  soon  be  drained  of  its  money.
In  order  to  turn  the  balance  of  trade  in  our  favours,  he
proposed  to  the  Scotch  Parliament  the  following  scheme :

of  the  necessity  of  contracting  Green  and  T.  H.  Grose,  1875,  vol.
them,' might  naturally  have  passed  i.  pp.  362,  363).
for  trials  of  wit  among  rhetori-  J  A  mistake  for'  1705.'  In  the
cians,  '  had  we  not  seen  such  ab-  2nd  edition  of  Monty  and  Trade,
surd  maxims  patronized  by  great  1720,  the  bookseller  requests  the
ministers  .  .  .  And  these  puzzling  reader  to  receive  favourably  '  the
arguments  (for  they  deserve  not  following  pages,  which  consist  of
the  name  of  specious),  though  some  heads  of  a  scheme  which
they  could  not  be  the  foundation  Mr.  Law  proposed  to  the  Parlia-
of  Lord  Orford's  conduct— for  lie  ment  of  Scotland  in  the  year  1705.'
had  more  sense— served  at  least  The  year  given  in  the  text  above
to  keep  his  partisans  in  counten-  was  the  date  of  Law's  Proposals
ance  and  perplex  the  understand-  and  Reasons  for  Constituting  a
ing  of  the  nation.'  '  Of  Public  Council  of  Trade  in  Scotland.
Credit,'  Political  Discourses,  1752,  2  I.e.  Money  and  Trade  Con-
p.  126.  After  1768  this  reference  sidered :  with  a  Proposal  for  sup-
to  Lord  Orford  was  omitted  (see  plying  the  Nation  with  Money,
Hume's  Essays,  edited  by  T.  H.  1705.
P  2


212  PART II  I POLICE

As  there  was  little  gold  or  silver  in  this  country  he
thought  they  might  fall  upon  some  other  method  of
creating  money,  independent  of  it,  to  wit,  by  paper.  On
this  account  he  proposed  the  erecting  of  a  land  bank  at
Edinburgh,  in  which  it  is  to  be  observed,  he  falls  into
many  blunders  concerning  tenures  and  the  nature  of
property.  At  this  bank  they  were  to  keep  by  them
only  twenty  or  thirty  thousand  pounds  to  answer  small
demands,  and  to  give  out  notes  for  land.  For  two
acres  of  arable  land  they  were  to  issue  out  a  note  of
equal  value,  and  if  any  extraordinary  demand  was  made
upon  them,  they  would  pay  so  much  of  it  in  money,
and  so  much  in  land.  By  this  means  in  a  very  short
time  the  whole  land  of  Scotland  would  go  from  hand  to
hand,  as  a  twenty-shilling  note  does1.

As  this  project  never  was  executed,  it  is  hard  to  say
what  the  consequence  might  have  been ;  it  is,  however,
obviously  liable  to  the  following  inconveniences.  Taking
the  land  rent  of  Scotland  at  five  millions  per  annum,
though  it  be  much  more,  at  twenty  years'  purchase  it
amounts  to  an  hundred  millions;  there  would  then  be
just  so  much  currency  in  the  country,  and  if  one  million
was  then  necessary  for  circulation  there  would  just  be
ninety-nine  millions  for  no  purpose,  as  none  of  it  could
go  abroad ;  they  would  not  have  been  able  to  maintain
one  man  more  than  formerly,  as  their  food,  clothes,  and
lodging  would  not  have  been  increased,  and  every  com
modity  would  have  risen  to  ninety-nine  times  its  present
value.

Mr.  Law,  not  meeting  with  the  encouragement  he
expected,  went  over  to  France  in  the  year2  1714,  and,  as
was  before  mentioned,  found  favour  with  the  Duke  of
Orleans,  then  3  Regent,  and  got  liberty  to  erect  a  bank

1  This  paragraph  appears  to  be ~  MS.  reads  'years.'
intended  as  a  summary  of  ch.  vii. 3  'Then'  refers  not  to  1714,  but
of  Money  and  Trade.  to  the  time  when  Law  found  suf-


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  213

there,  which  at  first  was  only  to  the  extent  of  six  millions
of  livres1  or  ^32o,o[oo]  sterling.  From  this  beginning  he
carried  it  on  to  a  very  great  height,  issued  out  many  notes,
and  in  a  short  time  engrossed  the  whole  circulation  of
France.  As  Mr.  Law's  notes  were  received  in  payment
of  the  revenue2,  this  contributed  to  the  success  of  the
scheme.  This,  too,  had  a  greater  effect  in  France  than
it  could  have  had  here,  considering  the  number  of  taxes,
and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  levied.  By  this  and
other  circumstances,  his  notes  were  always  at  par  with
gold  and  silver,  especially  as  they  were  making  continual
changes  in  their  coin.  About  that  time  twenty-eight  livres,
which  were  equal  to  eight  ounces  of  pure  silver,  were
raised  to  sixty  3,  and  as  a  diminution  of  coin  is  always  the
consequent  of  a  sudden  rise4,  this  was  daily  expected.
Mr.  Law  made  his  notes  payable  in  what  was  called  the
money  of  the  day 5.  Instead  of  promising  to  pay  his  notes,
as  we  would  say,  in  pounds  sterling,  he  did  it  in  crowns
and  half-crowns,  which  was  a  very  proper  method  to
make  them  par  with  gold  and  silver.  Suppose  that  our
coin  were  raised  to  double,  a  half-crown  would  become
a  crown,  and  so  in  this  manner  the  bank  notes  and  money
\vould  rise  and  fall  together0.

ficient  favour  to get liberty to  May, 1718.' Dutot, Reflexions

erect  a  bank. Louis XIV died  politiques sur les  finances d  It

on  Sept. i, 1715. Orleans had  commerce,  1738,  in  Daire's  Econo-

seen  Law,  and  spoken  of  him  as  tnistes  financiers, pp. 810, 847  ;

'  un homme de qui il pourrait  and Duverney,  Examen,  torn.  i.

tirer  des lumieres' before that  pp.  216,  217.

date  (Saint-Simon,  Mc'moires,  ed.  4  Above,  p.  189.

Cheruel  et  Regnier,  torn.  xiii.  p.  8  '  En  ecus  du  poids  et  litre  du

49).  jour.' Duverney, Examen, torn.

1  Paris  Duverney,  Examen  du  i.  p.  209.

livre  intitule  Reflexions  politiques  6  It  must  be  remembered  that

sur  les  finances  etle  commerce,  1740,  in  Adam  Smith's  time  the  pound

torn.  i.  p.  207.  sterling  was  just  as  much  a  mere

2  Ibid.  p.  210.  money  of  account  as  the  French
1  '  About  that  time '  apparently  livre. Its practical identifica-

stands for '  between 1715  and tion  with  a  particular  coin  is  of


214


PART II  : POLICE


As  Law  wanted  to  make  his  notes  above  par,  he  fell
upon  the  following  scheme.  He  issued  out  his  bank
notes  payable  in  livres  tournois,  by  which,  when  the  coin
came  to  be  diminished,  he  would  not  be  obliged  to  pay
above  one-half1.  The  coin  was  not  received  in  the  market
or  elsewhere,  as  the  diminution  was  still  expected,  and  did
not  come  for  some  time.  This  favoured  his  design,  and
kept  the  notes  above  par,  by  which  the  credit  of  his  bank
was  established.

The  next  step  Mr.  Law  fell  upon  was  the  relieving  of
the  public  debts,  which  amounted  to  2oo[o]  millions2.
As  he  saw  the  diminution  must  needs  come,  he  took
another  method  to  keep  up  his  notes.  He  got  a  grant
of  the  exclusive  privilege  of  trading  to  Canada,  and
established  the  Mississippi  Company.  To  this  he  joined
the  African,  the  Turkey,  and  the  East  India  companies.
He  also  farmed  the  tobacco  and  all  the  public  revenues
of  France  at  52  millions 3,  for  in  France  the  whole


later  date,  and  even  now  that
coin  is  not  called  a  pound,  but
a  sovereign.  Raising  our  coin
to  double  would  mean  halving
the  quantity  of  silver  coined
into  twenty  shillings  or  ' /i.'
Law's  notes  for  ecus  of  a  certain
weight  and  fineness  resembled
Drummond's  notes  for  guineas
mentioned  in  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.
v.  vol.  i.  p.  42.

1  There  appears  to  be  some
mistake  or  omission  here.  A
diminution  of  the  coin,  i.  e.  a  re
duction  of  the  number  of  livres
in  an  ecu  of  a  certain  weight  and
fineness  would  obviously  increase
the  bullion  value  of  notes  for
livres.  So,  if  the  coin  were  di
minished  50  per  cent,  and  no
change  made  as  regards  the  notes,
Law  would  be  obliged  to  pay


double,  not  half.  It  may,  how
ever,  have  been  supposed  that  the
notes  would  be  arbitrarily  re
duced  when  the  coin  was  di
minished,  as  an  edict  was  soon
issued  declaring  that  this  would
not  under  any  circumstances  take
place.  The  next  two  sentences
in  the  text  above  describe  the
natural  effect  of  this  edict  (see
T)uverney,Ex(inien,  torn.  i.  pp.235,
236),  and  do  not  at  all  follow  from
the  statement  that  Law  would
not  be  obliged  to  pay  above  a
half.

2  Dutot,  in  Daire's  Economises
financiers,  p.  806,  gives  the  amount

as  '  deux  milliards  soixante-deux
millions  cent  trente-huit  mille
une  livres.'

3  Duverney, Examen,  torn. i.
p.  249. MS.  reads  '  12  millions.'


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  215

revenue  is  farmed  by  one  man,  who  undertakes  it  and
levies  it  without  excisemen,  and  the  farmers  there  are
the  richest  in  the  country,  and  must  be  skilled  in  the
finances  and  public  revenues l.  Mr.  Law  undertook  this,
and,  having  the  whole  trade  of  the  country  monopolized,
it  was  difficult  to  say  what  profits  he  would  make.  He
wanted  to  lend  the  government  80  or  90  millions  [sterling],
which  he  could  easily  do  by  issuing  notes  to  that  value,
but  then  he  saw  that  they  would  soon  return  upon  him.
To  prevent  this,  his  invention  was  set  on  work,  and  we
shall  see  how  far  he  succeeded.  As  the  company  he
erected  seemed  to  be  in  a  very  flourishing  condition,
shares  were  purchased  in  it  at  a  very  considerable  rate.
He  opened  a  subscription  to  it  at  500  livres,  so  that  a
navy  ticket  or  billet  d'etat  purchased  a  share  into  it,  which
raised  them  to  a  par,  as  they  had  for  a  long  time  been  far
below  it.  The  government  of  France  was  never  in  such
a  miserable  condition  as  then.  The  interest  of  the  money
which  should  have  paid  the  billets  d'etat  was  seized  upon
for  other  purposes.  Never  was  monarch  more  degraded
than  Lewis  XIV.  After  the  treaty  of  Utrecht  he  had
occasion  to  borrow  8  millions  of  livres  from  Holland,  and
not  only  to  give  them  his  bond  for  32  millions,  but  to
get  some  merchants  to  be  security  for  him  -.  Since  that
was  the  case,  we  need  not  be  surprised  that  the  billets
d'etat  sold  at  great  discount,  as  they  bore  no  interest,  and
it  was  quite  uncertain  when  they  would  be  paid.  Law
published  a  declaration  that  one  of  these,  which  was
granted  for  500  livres,  should  purchase  a  share  in  the
company,  and  thus  they  came  again  to  par.  The  people
still  continuing  in  great  expectations  of  profit,  he  in
a  few  days  opened  a  new  subscription  at  5000  livres,

1  Duverney, Exatnen, torn. i. obtained  from  foreigners  on  the
p.  252.  credit  of  a private  person  and

2  Dutot,  in  Daire's  Economises his  friends,  but  does  not  specify
financiers,  p.  805,  mentions  these Holland.

terms,  and  says  that  the  loan  was


2l6  PART II  : POLICE

and  afterwards  another  at  10,000.  At  this  time  he  was
enabled  to  lend  the  government  1600  millions  of  livres
at  3  per  cent1.

Had  he  stopped  here,  it  is  probable  that  he  would
have  answered  all  engagements,  but  his  future  proceed
ings  ruined  all.  It  was  impossible  that  the  value  of
shares  could  long  continue  at  such  a  high  rate.  He
thought,  however,  that  it  was  necessary  to  do  all  that  he
could  to  keep  them  up,  as  the  whole  fortunes  of  many
people  were  in  the  bank.  He  had  issued  out  notes  to
double  the  circulation  of  the  country,  which  raised  the
price  of  everything  to  an  enormous  pitch,  and  conse
quently  the  exchange  was  against  France  in  all  foreign
trade.  This  was  principally  occasioned  by  his  opening
an  office  to  purchase  500  livres  shares  at  9000  livres  '\
which  obliged  him  to  issue  out  many  notes.  People  of
prudence  who  were  concerned  opposed  this  scheme,  and
indeed  it  was  the  first  thing  that  made  his  bank  lose
credit,  and  occasioned  its  dissolution.  As  he  was  not
obliged  to  pay  the  capital  sums,  only  the  annual  dividend
of  200  livres  arising  from  the  profits 3,  he  might  have  let
them  fall  to  their  original  500  without  any  great  loss  but
that  of  reputation ;  but  his  buying  up  the  shares  occasioned
his  issuing  out  so  many  notes  that  they  must  of  necessity
return  upon  him.  This  was  so  much  the  case  that  he
was  obliged  to  open  offices  in  different  parts  of  Paris
for  the  payment  of  them.  When  in  this  manner  oppressed,
he  was  making  continual  changes  on  the  coin,  in  order
to  dissuade  people  from  returning  on  the  bank,  and  disgust
them  at  gold  and  silver4.  He  cried  up  gold,  but  as  coin

1  Duverney, Examen, torn. i.  pany,  held  on  Dec.  30,  1719,  re
pp.  250,  273,  289.  solved that  the  dividend  should

2  Ibid.  pp.  280,  281.  be  40  per  cent.,  or  200  livres  per

3  The original fixed interest  share. Ibid.  pp.  215,  267,  268, 317.
was  only  4  per  cent,  or  20  livres  *  '  Pour  degouter  les peuples
on  the  shares  of  500  livres ;  but  des monnaies d'or  et d'argent.'
a general meeting  of  the com-  Ibid.  p.  316.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  217

cannot  be  kept  much  above  the  level  of  the  metal,  when
it  was  so  much  depreciated,  it  was  not  taken.  If  a  person
had  20,000  guineas,  as  he  was  afraid  that  the  coin  would
not  continue  at  that  value,  he  went  to  the  bank  and  got
it  exchanged  for  notes.  The  same  consideration  pre
vented  them  from  returning  upon  the  bank,  as  they  would
there  be  paid  in  coin.  By  this  means  he  not  only
prevented  his  notes  from  coming  upon  him,  but  filled
his  coffers  with  almost  all  the  gold  in  the  country.  In
order  to  accomplish  this  part  of  his  scheme  more  perfectly,
he  most  arbitrarily  published  an  edict  prohibiting  any
persons  from  keeping  by  them  gold  or  silver,  beyond
a  certain  sum1.  He  also  took  away  the  severe  penalties
that  were  in  force  against  the  exportation  of  coin,  and
every  person  was  allowed  to  export  money  free  from
duty2.  By  this  means  much  of  it  went  to  Holland.  He
reasoned  with  himself,  some  instrument  of  change  is
necessary,  paper,  gold,  and  silver,  at  present  are  the
medium ;  if  gold  and  silver  be  utterly  exported,  paper
only  remains,  and  may  be  rendered  the  sole  instrument
of  commerce.  This  he  thought  he  had  done  effectually
when  by  an  edict  he  had  swept  a  part  into  his  coffers,
and  cleared  the  country  of  the  remainder.  They  would
therefore  be  obliged  to  take  paper.  At  last,  however,
after  a  great  number  of  expedients,  he  found  it  was  im
practicable.  By  paying  out  great  sums,  he  kept  off  ruin
for  some  months,  but  at  last  published  an  edict  that  all
bank  notes  were  to  be  paid  only  in  one  half:  and  indeed
if  he  had  stood  to  this,  as  some  imagined  he  might  have
done,  it  would  have  been  far  better  than  to  have  suffered
the  after  consequences.  Upon  this  edict  the  credit  of
the  bank  was  entirely  broken,  and  the  bank  notes  all  on
a  sudden  sunk  to  nothing3.  This  ruined  an  immense
number  of  people.  Britain  can  never  be  much  hurt  by

1  Viz.  500  livres. Duverney,  Examen,  torn.  i.  p.  335.

2  Ibid.  pp.  320,  321.  3  Ibid.  torn.  ii.  pp.  6-8.


2l8  PART II  I POLICE

the  breaking  of  a  bank,  because  few  people  keep  notes
by  them  to  any  value1.  A  man  worth  £40,000  will
scarce  ever  have  £500  of  notes  by  him.  But  the  breaking
of  this  bank  in  France  occasioned  the  most  dreadful
confusion.  The  greatest  part  of  people  had  their  whole
fortunes  in  notes,  and  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  beggary.
The  only  people  who  were  safe  were  the  stock-jobbers
who  had  sold  out  in  time,  or  with  their  bank  notes  had
purchased  all  the  valuable  goods  and  a  great  deal  of  land,
though  at  the  highest  prices.  These  made  immense
fortunes  by  it.

The  South  Sea  scheme  incur  own  country  was  nothing
to  this.  Nobody  was  under  any  obligations  of  going  into
it,  the  government  had  no  share  in  it,  and  the  loss  was
but  a  trifle  in  comparison.  The  clamour  which  Law's  last
edict  made  caused  it  soon  to  be  rescinded 2,  and  the  notes
were  again  declared  to  be  paid  at  value,  but  the  bank  never
recovered  its  credit,  and  this  had  no  effect.  However,  by
raising  the  coin  and  other  expedients,  he  kept  it  from  May
to  October,  and  then  3  was  obliged  to  leave  France,  which
with  difficulty  he  accomplished  ;  his  goods  were  confiscated
and  he  died  soon  after  4.  This  amazing  scheme  was  founded
on  these  two  principles,  that  public  opulence  consists  in
money,  and  that  the  value  of  money  is  arbitrary,  founded
upon  the  common  consent  of  mankind.  Consistent  with
these  principles  he  thought  he  might  easily  increase  the
public  opulence  if  he  could  annex  the  idea  of  money  to
paper,  and  the  government  could  never  be  at  any  loss  to
produce  any  effect  that  money  could  do.  This  scheme  of
Mr.  Law's  was  by  no  means  contemptible ;  he  really
believed  in  it,  and  was  the  dupe  of  it  himself.  It  was
thought  he  had  provided  well  for  himself,  but  it  was  found
to  be  otherwise.  If  the  Duke  of  Orleans  had  lived  only

1  Above,  p.  195.  3  In  December,  1720. Ibid.  p.

2  Duverney, Exatnen, torn. ii. 132.

p.  n.  *  Not  till  1729.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  219

a  few  days  longer  it  was  agreed  upon  that  he  was  to  have
been  re-established.  After  his  death  it  was  not  thought
expedient  to  have  it  put  in  execution  '.

This  scheme  of  Law's  was  imitated  all  over  Europe.
It  gave  occasion  to  the  South  Sea  Company  in  England,
which  turned  out  at  last  a  mere  fraud,  and,  could  it
have  been  carried  to  as  great  an  extent  as  Law's,  would
have  been  productive  of  the  same  consequences.  It  was
erected  in  the  latter  end  of  Queen  Anne's  reign,  and  the
intention  of  it  was  to  carry  on  a  trade  to  the  South
Seas.  For  this  purpose  they  bought  up  the  greater
part  of  the  debts  of  the  nation.  Their  stock,  however,
was  not  great,  and  the  profits  which  could  be  expected
from  it  were  very  inconsiderable ;  the  expectations  of
the  people  were  never  greatly  raised,  and  its  fall  was
not  very  prejudicial  to  the  nation.

[§  14. Of  Interest.]

We  have  only  two  things  further  to  mention  relating
to  the  price  of  commodities,  to  wit,  interest  and  exchange.

It  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  premium  of  interest
depends  upon  the  value  of  gold  and  silver2.  The  value  of
these  are  regulated  by  their  quantity,  for  as  the  quantity
increases,  the  value  diminishes,  and  as  the  quantity  de-

1  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  exposed  by  Mr.  Hume,  that  it  is
i. p.  318,  Adam  Smith declines  perhaps  unnecessary  to  say  any-
to  give  any  account  of  the  'differ-  thing  more  about  it.' See  Locke,
ent  operations  '  of  Law's  scheme  Some Considerations  of  the  Con-
because  they  have  been  so  fully  sequences of the Lowering of
and clearly explained by Du-  Interest  and  Raising  the  Value  of
verney.  Money,  2nd  ed.,  1696,  pp.  6,  10,  ii ;

2  In  IV.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  ch.  iv.  vol.  Law,  Money  and  Trade  Considered,
i.  p.  357,  the  common  opinion  is  2nd  ed.,  p.  17,  and  Me'inoires  sur
attributed  to  Locke,  Law,  Monies-  les  banques  in  Daire's  Econotnistes
quieu,  and  'many  other  writers,'  financiers,  p. 518; Montesquieu,
and it is remarked that '  this  Esprit  des  lot's,  liv. xxii. ch.  vi  ;
notion,  which  at  first  sight  seems  Hume, '  Of Interest,' Political
so  plausible, has been so fully  Discourses,  1752,  pp.  61  78.


220  PART II  I POLICE

creases,  the  value  rises.  If  we  attend  to  it,  however,  we
shall  find  that  the  premium  of  interest  is  regulated  by  the
quantity  of  stock.  About  the  time  of  the  discovery  of  the
West  Indies  it  is  to  be  observed  that  common  interest  was
at  10  or  12  per  cent ,  and  since  that  time  it  has  gradually
diminished.  The  plain  reason  is  this.  Under  the  feudal
constitution  there  could  be  very  little  accumulation  of
stock,  which  will  appear  from  considering  the  situation  of
those  three  orders  of  men,  which  made  up  the  whole
body  of  the  people :  the  peasants,  the  landlords,  and  the
merchants.  The  peasants  had  leases  which  depended  upon
the  caprice  of  their  masters ;  they  could  never  increase
in  wealth,  because  the  landlord  was  ready  to  squeeze  it
all  from  them,  and  therefore  they  had  no  motive  to  acquire
it.  As  little  could  the  landlords  increase  their  wealth,  as
they  lived  so  indolent  a  life,  and  were  involved  in  perpetual
wars  l.  The  merchants  again  were  oppressed  by  all  ranks,
and  were  not  able  to  secure  the  produce  of  their  industry
from  rapine  and  violence.  Thus  there  could  be  little
accumulation  of  wealth  at  all ;  but  after  the  fall  of  the  feudal
government  these  obstacles  to  industry  were  removed,  and
the  stock  of  commodities  began  gradually  to  increase.

We  may  further  observe  that  what  one  trade  lends  to
another  is  not  so  much  to  be  considered  as  money,  as
commodities2.  No  doubt  it  is  generally  money  which
one  man  delivers  another  in  loan,  but  then  it  is  immediately
turned  into  stock,  and  thus  the  quantity  of  stock  enables
you  to  make  a  greater  number  of  loans.  The  price  of
interest  is  entirely  regulated  by  this  circumstance.  If
there  be  few  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  lend  money,
and  a  great  number  of  people  who  want  to  borrow  it,
the  price  of  interest  must  be  high ;  but  if  the  quantity  of
stock  on  hand  be  so  great  as  to  enable  a  great  number  to
lend,  it  must  fall  proportionably.

1  Above,  pp.  36,  37; W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  389,  390.

2  Ibid.  bk.  ii.  ch.  iv.  vol.  i.  p.  354.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  221


[$15. Of  Exchange.}

Exchange  is  a  method  invented  by  merchants  to  faci
litate  the  payment  of  money  at  a  distance.  Suppose
I  owe  £100  to  a  merchant  at  London,  I  apply  to
a  banker  in  Glasgow  for  a  bill  upon  another  merchant
in  London,  payable  to  my  creditor.  For  this  I  must
not  only  give  the  banker  .£100,  but  I  must  also  reward
him  for  his  trouble.  This  reward  is  called  the  price,  or
premium,  of  exchange.  Between  Glasgow  and  London
it  is  sometimes  at  2  per  cent.,  sometimes  more,  some
times  less.  Between  London  and  Glasgow  again  it  is
sometimes  4  or  5  per  cent,  below  par;  and  between
Glasgow  and  the  West  India  colonies  it  is  often  at  50
per  cent,  below  par.  The  value  of  exchange  is  always
regulated  by  the  risk  of  sending  money  between  two
places.  It  is  often,  however,  greater  than  the  risk  can  be
supposed  to  be,  and  this  is  owing  to  paper  circulation.
Between  Glasgow  and  London  one  can  easily  get  ;£ioo
carried  for  fifteen  or  sixteen  shillings  ;  but  as  paper  in
Scotland  makes  a  great  part  of  the  currency,  and  as  there
is  an  inconveniency  in  getting  bank  notes  exchanged  for
gold  and  silver,  a  merchant  chooses  rather  to  pay  2  per
cent,  than  take  the  trouble  of  changing  the  notes  for  cash,
and  sending  the  money  '.  This  too  is  the  cause  of  the  high
price  of  exchange  between  Virginia  and  Glasgow.  In  the
American  colonies  the  currency  is  paper,  and  their  notes
are  40  or  50  per  cent,  below  par.  because  the  funds  are  not
sufficient.  In  every  exchange  you  must  pay  the  price,  the
risk,  some  profit  to  the  banker,  and  so  much  for  the  degra
dation  of  money  in  notes.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  rise  of
exchange.  Whenever  it  rises  beyond  the  price  of  insurance
it  is  owing  to  the  money  of  one  country  being  lower  than
that  of  another.  This  was  the  cause  of  the  high  price  of

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  327.  328.


222  PART II  : POLICE

exchange  between  France  and  Holland  about  the  time  of
the  Mississippi  Company.  It  was  then  at  80  or  90  per
cent.  All  the  money  had  been  expelled  from  France  by
the  scheme  of  Mr.  Law,  and  the  whole  circulation  was
paper,  and  the  credit  of  the  bank  had  fallen.  All  these
reasons  conspired  to  raise  the  exchange  to  such  an
enormous  pitch.

[J  1 6.  Of  the  Causes  of  the  slow  Progress
of  Opulence.']

We  come  now  to  the  next  thing  proposed,  to  examine
the  causes  of  the  slow  progress  of  opulence.  When  one
considers  the  effects  of  the  division  of  labour,  what  an
immediate  tendency  it  has  to  improve  the  arts,  it  appears
somewhat  surprising  that  every  nation  should  continue
so  long  in  a  poor  and  indigent  state  as  we  find  it
does.  The  causes  of  this  may  be  considered  under  these
two  heads :  first,  natural  impediments ;  and  secondly,  the
oppression  of  civil  government.

A  rude  and  barbarous  people  are  ignorant  of  the  effects
of  the  division  of  labour,  and  it  is  long  before  one  person,
by  continually  working  at  different  things,  can  produce  any
more  than  is  necessary  for  his  daily  subsistence.  Before
labour  can  be  divided  some  accumulation  of  stock  is  neces
sary  ;  a  poor  man  with  no  stock  can  never  begin  a  manufac
ture.  Before  a  man  can  commence  farmer,  he  must  at  least
have  laid  in  a  year's  provision,  because  he  does  not  receive
the  fruits  of  his  labour  till  the  end  of  the  season.  Agreeably
to  this,  in  a  nation  of  hunters  or  shepherds  no  person  can
quit  the  common  trade  in  which  he  is  employed,  and  which
affords  him  daily  subsistence,  till  he  have  some  stock  to
maintain  him,  and  begin  the  new  trade.  Every  one  knowrs
how  difficult  it  is,  even  in  a  refined  society,  to  raise  one's
self  to  moderate  circumstances.  It  is  still  more  difficult
to  raise  one's  self  by  those  trades  which  require  no  art  nor


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  223

ingenuity.  A  porter  or  day-labourer  must  continue  poor
for  ever.  In  the  beginnings  of  society  this  is  still  more
difficult.  Bare  subsistence  is  almost  all  that  a  savage  can
procure,  and  having  no  stock  to  begin  upon,  nothing  to
maintain  him  but  what  is  produced  by  the  exertion  of  his
own  strength,  it  is  no  wonder  he  continues  long  in  an
indigent  state.  The  meanest  labourer  in  a  polished  society
has  in  many  respects  an  advantage  over  a  savage  :  he  has
more  assistance  in  his  labour;  he  has  only  one  particular
thing  to  do,  which,  by  assiduity,  he  attains  a  facility  in
performing;  he  has  also  machines  and  instruments  which
greatly  assist  him.  An  Indian  has  not  so  much  as  a  pick
axe,  a  spade,  or  a  shovel,  nor  anything  else  but  his  own
labour.  This  is  one  great  cause  of  the  slow  progress  of
opulence  in  every  country  ;  till  some  stock  be  produced
there  can  be  no  division  of  labour,  and  before  a  division
of  labour  take  place  there  can  be  very  little  accumulation
of  stock1.

The  other  cause  that  was  assigned  was  the  nature  of
civil  government.  In  the  infancy  of  society,  as  has  been
often  observed,  government  must  be  \veak  and  feeble,  and
it  is  long  before  its  authority  can  protect  the  industry  of
individuals  from  the  rapacity  of  their  neighbours.  When
people  find  themselves  every  moment  in  danger  of  being
robbed  of  all  they  possess,  they  have  no  motive  to  be
industrious.  There  could  belittle  accumulation  of  stock,
because  the  indolent,  which  would  be  the  greatest  number,
would  live  upon  the  industrious,  and  spend  whatever  they
produced.  When  the  power  of  government  becomes  so
great  as  to  defend  the  produce  of  industry,  another  obstacle
arises  from  a  different  quarter.  Among  neighbouring
nations  in  a  barbarous  state  there  are  perpetual  wars,  one
continually  invading  and  plundering  the  other,  and  though
private  property  be  secured  from  the  violence  of  neigh
bours,  it  is  in  danger  from  hostile  invasions.  In  this
1  W.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  Introduction,  vol.  i.  pp.  273-275.


224  PART II  I POLICE

manner  it  is  next  to  impossible  that  any  accumulation  of
stock  can  be  made.  It  is  observable  that  among  savage
nations  there  are  always  more  violent  convulsions  than
among  those  farther  advanced  in  refinement.  Among  the
Tartars  and  Arabs,  great  bands  of  barbarians  are  always
roaming  from  one  place  to  another  in  quest  of  plunder,
and  they  pillage  every  country  as  they  go  along.  Thus
large  tracts  of  country  are  often  laid  waste,  and  all  the
effects  carried  away.  Germany  too  was  in  the  same  con
dition  about  the  fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  ;  nothing  can
be  more  an  obstacle  to  the  progress  of  opulence.

We  shall  next  consider  the  effect  of  oppressive  measures,
first,  with  regard  to  agriculture,  and  then  with  regard  to
commerce.

Agriculture  is  of  all  other  arts  the  most  beneficent
to  society,  and  whatever  tends  to  retard  its  improvement
is  extremely  prejudicial  to  the  public  interest.  The
produce  of  agriculture  is  much  greater  than  that  of  any
other  manufacture.  The  rents  of  the  whole  lands  in
England  amount  to  about  24  millions1,  and  as  the  rent  is
generally  about  a  third  of  the  produce,  the  whole  annual
produce  of  the  lands  must  be  about  72  millions.  This
is  much  more  than  the  produce  of  either  the  linen  or
woollen  manufactures,  for,  as  the  annual  consumption
is  computed  to  be  about  100  millions,  if  you  deduce  from
this  the  72  millions,  the  produce  of  agriculture,  there  will
remain  only  28  millions  for  all  the  other  manufactures
of  the  nation.  Whatever  measures  therefore  discourage
the  improvement  of  this  art  are  extremely  prejudicial  to
the  progress  of  opulence.

One  great  hindrance  to  the  progress  of  agriculture  is  the
throwing  great  tracts  of  land  into  the  hands  of  single
persons.  If  any  man's  estate  be  more  than  he  is  able  to
cultivate,  a  part  of  it  is  in  a  manner  lost.  When  a  nation

1  Twenty  millions  is  the  estimate  mentioned  in  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.
ch.  ii.  pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  411.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  225

of  savages  takes  possession  of  a  country,  the  great  and
powerful  divide  the  whole  lands  among  them,  and  leave
none  for  the  lower  ranks  of  people.  In  this  manner  the
Celtae,  and  afterwards  the  Saxons,  took  possession  of  our
own  island l.  When  land  is  divided  in  great  portions
among  the  powerful,  it  is  cultivated  by  slaves,  which  is
a  very  unprofitable  method  of  cultivation.  The  labour  of
a  slave  proceeds  from  no  other  motive  but  the  dread  of
punishment,  and  if  he  could  escape  this,  he  would  work
none  at  all.  Should  he  exert  himself  in  the  most  extra
ordinary  manner,  he  cannot  have  the  least  expectations
of  any  reward ;  and  as  all  the  produce  of  his  labour
goes  to  his  master,  he  has  no  encouragement  to  industry.
A  young  slave  may  perhaps  exert  himself  a  little  at  first,
in  order  to  attain  his  master's  favour ;  but  he  soon  finds
that  it  is  all  in  vain,  and  that,  be  his  behaviour  what  it
will,  he  will  always  meet  with  the  same  severe  treatment.
When  lands,  therefore,  are  cultivated  by  slaves,  they  can
not  be  greatly  improven,  as  they  have  no  motive  to  in
dustry.  A  cultivation  of  the  same  kind  is  that  by  villains.
The  landlord  gave  a  man  a  piece  of  ground  to  cultivate,
allowing  him  to  maintain  himself  by  it,  and  obliging  him
to  restore  whatever  was  over  his  own  maintenance.  This
was  equally  unfavourable  to  the  progress  of  agriculture,
because  the  villains,  who  were  a  kind  of  slaves,  had  no
motive  to  industry  but  their  own  maintenance.  This
objection  lies  equally  against  all  cultivation  by  slaves.
Some  of  the  West  India  islands  have  indeed  been  cultivated
by  slaves,  and  have  been  greatly  improven,  but  they  might
have  been  cultivated  by  freemen  at  less  expense  ;  and  had
not  the  profits  of  sugar  been  very  great,  the  planters  could
not  have  supported  the  expense  of  slaves,  but  their  profits
have  been  so  enormous,  that  all  the  extraordinary  expense
of  slave  cultivation  has  vanished  before  it '-.  In  the  northern

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  ii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  386-390.

2  Ibid.  pp.  390-392.

Q


226  PART II  I POLICE

colonies  they  employ  few  slaves,  and,  though  they  are  in
a  very  flourishing  condition  in  those  colonies,  the  lands  are
generally  cultivated  by  the  proprietors,  which  is  the  most
favourable  method  to  the  progress  of  agriculture.  A  tenant
of  the  best  kind  has  always  a  rent  to  pay,  and  therefore  has
much  less  to  lay  out  on  improvements l.  When  a  country
sends  out  a  colony,  it  may  hinder  a  large  tract  of  land  to
be  occupied  by  a  single  person  2 ;  but  when  savages  take
possession  of  a  country,  they  are  subject  to  no  laws,  the
strongest  man  takes  possession  of  most  ground,  and  there
fore  among  them  agriculture  cannot  be  quickly  promoted.

After  villains  went  out,  as  was  explained  before  3,  tenants
by  steel  bow  succeeded.  The  landlord  gave  a  farm  with
a  stock  to  a  villain,  which  were  restored  with  half  of
the  produce,  at  the  end  of  the  year,  to  the  landlord  ;
but  as  the  tenant  had  no  stock,  nor  though  he  had 4,  any
encouragement  to  lay  it  out  on  improvements,  this
method  always  was  unfavourable  to  agriculture.  For
the  same  reason  that  tithes,  by  depriving  the  farmer  of
a  tenth  of  his  produce,  hinder  improvement,  this,  though
in  a  higher  degree,  was  a  hindrance,  because  the  tenant
was  deprived  of  one-half  of  the  produce.  A  great  part
of  France  is  still  cultivated  by  tenants  of  steel  bow,
and  it  is  said  that  it  still  remains  in  some  parts  of  the
Highlands  of  Scotland  5.

The  next  species  of  cultivation  was  that  by  tenants,
such  as  we  have  at  present.  Some  of  the  tenants  by
steel  bow,  by  extreme  pinching  and  cunning,  got  a  small
stock  laid  up  and  offered  their  masters  a  fixed  rent  for
the  ground.  Thus  in  progress  of  time  the  present
method  of  cultivation  was  introduced,  though  it  was  long

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i. 3  Above,  pp.  100,  101.

p.  397.  4  I.e.'  nor,  if  he  had  possessed

2  As in the English North any  stock.'

American  colonies.  Ibid.  bk.  iv.  6  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.
ch.  vii.  pt.  ii.  vol.  ii.  p.  152.  p.  393.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  227

liable  to  inconveniences.  If  the  landlord  sold  his  land,
the  new  proprietor  was  not  bound  to  the  terms  of
agreement,  and  the  tenant  was  often  turned  out  of  his
farm ;  the  landlord  too  invented  a  method  to  get  rid  of
the  tenant  when  he  pleased  by  selling  the  estate  to
another,  on  whom  he  had  a  back  bond  to  make  him
return  the  estate  whenever  the  tenants  were  turned  out.
As  the  tenants  were  continually  in  danger  of  being  turned
out,  they  had  no  motive  to  improve  the  ground.  This
takes  place  to  this  day  in  every  country  of  Europe,
except  Britain.  In  Scotland,  contracts  of  this  kind  were
rendered  real  rights  in  the  reign  of  James  III  \  and  in
England  in  that  of  Henry  VII2.

Besides  these  there  were  several  other  impediments  to
the  progress  of  agriculture.  At  first  all  rents  were  paid
in  kind,  by  which,  in  a  dear  year,  the  tenants  were  in
danger  of  being  ruined.  A  diminution  of  produce  seldom
hurts  the  tenant  who  pays  his  rent  in  money,  because  the
price  of  corn  rises  in  proportion  to  its  scarcity 3.  Society,
however,  is  considerably  advanced  before  money  comes
to  be  the  whole  instrument  of  commerce.

Another  embarrassment  was  that  the  feudal  lords
sometimes  allowed  the  king  to  levy  subsidies  from  their
tenants,  which  greatly  discouraged  their  industry 4.  Besides
all,  under  the  tyranny  of  the  feudal  aristocracy,  the  land
lords  had  nothing  to  stop  them  from  squeezing  their
tenants  and  raising  the  rents  of  their  lands  as  high  as  they
pleased.  England  is  better  secured  in  this  respect  than

1  Apparently a mistake for  Blackstone, Commentaries, vol.

'James  II,'  who,  with  the  act  of  iii.  p.  201.

1449,  is  mentioned  in W.  of  N.  3  This  objection  is  not  made  in

bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  395.  IV.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  ii.  art.  i,

-  Ibid.  p.  394  gives  the  more  vol.  ii.  p.  422,  where  rents  in  kind

exact date '  about the 141)1  are  condemned  along  with  rents

of  Henry VII,' for  which see  in  service.

Bacon, Abridgement, s.v. Eject-  *  Ibid. bk. iii. ch.  ii. vol. i.

ment, vol. ii. p.  160, and cp.  pp.  396, 397.
Q2


228  PART II  I POLICE

any  country,  because  everyone  who  hold[s]  but  405.  a  year
for  life  has  a  vote  for  a  member  of  parliament,  by  which,
if  he  rent  a  farm,  he  is  secure  from  oppression  l.

Several  circumstances  concurred  to  continue  the  en
grossment  of  lands.  The  right  of  primogeniture  was
pretty  early  established,  and  hindered  estates  from  being
divided.  The  institution  of  entails  is  to  this  day  attended
with  the  same  bad  consequences 2.  The  embarrassment,
too,  of  the  feudal  law  in  transferring  property,  detarded
the  progress  of  agriculture.  Any  quantity  of  any  other
commodity  may  be  bought  or  sold  in  an  instant,  but  in
purchasing  four  or  five  acres  of  land  a  great  deal  [of]  time
must  be  spent  in  examining  the  progress  of  writs3,  and
getting  your  right  legally  constituted.  This  tends  greatly
to  the  engrossment  of  lands,  and  consequently  stops  their
improvement.  If  all  the  forms  in  buying  lands  were
abolished,  every  person  almost  who  had  got  a  little  money
would  be  ready  to  lay  it  out  on  land,  and  the  land  by
passing  through  the  different  hands  would  be  much  better
improved.  There  is  no  natural  reason  why  a  thousand
acres  should  not  be  as  easily  purchased  as  a  thousand  yards
of  cloth.  The  keeping  land  out  of  the  market  always
hinders  its  improvement.  A  merchant  who  buys  a  little
piece  of  land  has  it  in  his  eye  to  improve  it,  and  make
the  most  of  it  he  can.  Great  and  ancient  families  have
seldom  either  stock  or  inclination  to  improve  their  estates,
except  a  small  piece  of  pleasure-ground  about  their  house.

There  are  many  errors  in  the  police  of  almost  every
country,  which  have  contributed  greatly  to  stop  the  pro
gress  of  agriculture.  Our  fathers,  finding  themselves  once
in  every  two  or  three  years  subject  to  the  most  grievous

1  I.  e.  '  because  every  one  who  stead of being content with

holds  land  to  the  value  of  405.  a  his own property, he rents a

year for life has a vote for  farm.' Cf.  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii.  ch.

a  member  of  parliament,  in  con-  ii.  vol.  i.  p.  394.

sequence of  which  fact he is  2  Above,  p.  124.

secure from oppression if, in-  3  Scotch  for 'investigating  title.'


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  229

dearths,  to  escape  that  calamity  prohibited  the  exportation
of  corn.  This  is  still  the  police  of  the  greater  part  of
Europe,  and  it  is  the  cause  of  all  that  dearth  it  is  intended
to  prevent.  In  a  plentiful  year  the  corn  of  Spain,  though
the  most  fertile  country  in  the  world,  is  not  worth  the
cutting  down  ;  they  suffer  it  to  lie  rotting  on  the  ground,
because  they  would  get  nothing  for  it.  The  cause  of  this
is  not  the  indolence  of  the  people,  as  is  commonly  imagined.
The  fact  is,  the  farmer,  finding  he  cannot  dispose  of  his
corn  this  year,  will  not  risk  a  crop  next  year,  but  turns
his  grounds  to  grass.  Next  year  a  famine  ensues,  and  he
sows  more  than  can  be  disposed  of  for  the  following  season.
It  is  to  be  observed  that  this  was  one  great  cause  of  the
depopulation  of  ancient  Italy.  Exportation  of  corn  was
prohibited  by  severe  penalties,  and  the  importation  of  it
encouraged  by  high  premiums,  so  that  the  Italian  farmers
had  no  encouragement  to  industry,  not  being  sure  of
a  market.  In  the  latter  times  of  the  Republic  the  Emperors
tried  several  methods  of  promoting  the  cultivation  of  the
country,  but  being  ignorant  that  the  real  cause  of  their
want  was  the  immense  quantity  of  corn  daily  imported
from  Egypt,  and  other  parts  of  Africa,  all  their  endeavours
were  ineffectual.  Caligula  and  Claudius  gave  their
soldiers  land  for  nothing,  upon  condition  that  they  would
cultivate  it,  but  as  the  soldiers  had  no  other  motive,  very
inconsiderable  improvements  were  made.  Virgil,  too,
published  his  Georgics  to  bring  the  cultivation  of  land
into  fashion,  but  all  was  in  vain.  Foreign  corn  was
always  sold  cheaper  than  their  own  could  be  raised1.
Agreeably  to  this  we  find  Cato  in  the  Third  Book  of
Cicero's  Offices,  preferring  pasturage  of  any  kind  to
farming 2.  The  Kings  of  Spain  have  also  done  all  in  their

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  xi.  pt.  i.  The  passage  referred  to,  which
vol.  i.  p.  159,  and  bk.  iii.  ch.  ii.  vol.  is  given  in  full  in  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.
i.  p.  398.  ch.  xi.  pt.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  159,  occurs

2  '  Third book  '  is  a  mistake.  in  the  last  chapter  of  lib.  ii.


230  PART II  I POLICE

power  to  promote  the  improvement  of  land.  Philip  IV
went  to  the  plough  himself  in  order  to  set  the  fashion.
He  did  everything  for  the  farmers  except  bringing
them  a  good  market ;  he  conferred  the  titles  of  nobility
upon  several  farmers;  he  very  absurdly  endeavoured
to  oppress  manufacturers  with  heavy  taxes  in  order
to  force  them  to  the  country;  he  thought  that  in  pro
portion  as  the  inhabitants  of  towns  became  more  nume
rous,  those  in  the  country  decreased.  This  notion  was
highly  ridiculous;  for  the  populousness  of  a  town  is
the  very  cause  of  the  populousness  of  the  country,
because  it  gives  greater  encouragement  to  industry.
Every  man  in  a  town  must  be  fed  by  another  in  the
country,  and  it  is  always  a  sign  that  the  country  is
improving  when  men  go  to  town.  There  are  no  parts
of  the  country  so  well  inhabited  nor  so  well  cultivated
as  those  which  lie  in  the  neighbourhood  of  populous
cities.

All  these  causes  have  hindered,  and  still  hinder,
the  improvement  of  agriculture,  the  most  important
branch  of  industry.  We  may  observe  that  the  greater
number  of  manufacturers  there  are  in  any  country,
agriculture  is  the  more  improved,  and  the  causes  which
prevent  the  progress  of  these  react,  as  it  were,  upon
agriculture.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  the  free  export  and
import  of  corn  is  favourable  to  agriculture.  In  England,
the  country  has  been  better  stored  with  corn,  and  the
price  of  it  has  gradually  sunk,  since  the  exportation  of  it
was  permitted.  The  bounty  on  exportation  does  harm
in  other  respects,  but  it  increases  the  quantity  of  corn  l.
In  Holland  corn  is  cheaper  and  plentyer  than  any
where  else,  and  a  dearth  is  there  unknown.  That
country  is  as  it  were  the  magazine  of  corn  for  a  great
part  of  Europe  :  this  is  entirely  owing  to  the  free  export
and  import  they  enjoy.  If  no  improper  regulations  took
1  Above,  pp.  181,  182.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  231

place, any  country of Europe might do more than
maintain  itself  with  all  sorts  of  grain.

The  slow  progress  of  arts  and  commerce  is  owing  to
causes  of  a  like  kind.  In  all  places  where  slavery  took
place,  the  manufactures  were  carried  on  by  slaves.  It  is
impossible  that  they  can  be  so  well  carried  on  by  slaves
as  by  freemen,  because  they  can  have  no  motive  to  labour
but  the  dread  of  punishment,  and  can  never  invent  any
machine  for  facilitating  their  business.  Freemen  who
have  a  stock  of  their  own,  can  get  anything  accomplished
which  they  think  maybe  expedient  for  carrying  on  labour.
If  a  carpenter  think  that  a  plane  will  serve  his  purpose
better  than  a  knife,  he  may  go  to  a  smith  and  get  it  made ;
but  if  a  slave  make  any  such  proposal  he  is  called  a  lazy
rascal,  and  no  experiments  are  made  to  give  him  ease.
At  present  the  Turks  and  Hungarians  work  mines  of  the
same  kind,  situated  upon  opposite  sides  of  the  same  range
of  mountains,  but  the  Hungarians  make  a  great  deal  more
of  them  than  the  Turks,  because  they  employ  free  men,
while  the  Turks  employ  slaves.  When  the  Hungarians
meet  with  any  obstacle  every  invention  is  on  work  to
find  out  some  easy  way  of  surmounting  it;  but  the
Turks  think  of  no  other  expedient  but  to  set  a  greater
number  of  slaves  to  work  l.  In  the  ancient  world,  as  the
arts  were  all  carried  on  by  slaves,  no  machinery  could  be
invented,  because  they  had  no  stock ;  after  the  fall  of  the
Roman  Empire,  too,  this  was  the  case  all  over  Europe.
In  a  rude  society  nothing  is  honourable  but  war.  In
1  'On  peut,  par  la  commodite  leurs  esclaves.'  Montesquieu,
des  machines  que  1'art  invente  Esprit  des lots,  liv.  xv.  ch.  viii.  In
ou  applique,  suppleer  au  travail  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  ix.  vol.  ii.  p.
force  qu'ailleurs  on  fait  faire  aux  269,  Montesquieu  is  named  as
esclaves.  Les  mines  des  Turcs,  the  authority  for  the  statement,
dans  le  bannat  de  Temeswar,  and  '  neighbourhood '  replaces
etaient  plus  riches  que  celles  de  the  '  opposite  sides  of  the  same
Hongrie  ;  et  elles  ne  produisaient  range  of  mountains,'  which  must
pas  tant,  parce  qu'ils  n'imagi-  have  been  obtained  from  some
naient  jamais  que  les  bras  de  other  source.


232  PART II  ! POLICE

the  Odyssey,  Ulysses  is  sometimes  asked,  by  way  of
affront,  whether  he  be  a  pirate  or  a  merchant1.  At  that
time  a  merchant  was  reckoned  odious  and  despicable  ;  but
a  pirate  or  robber,  as  he  was  a  man  of  military  bravery,
was  treated  with  honour.  We  may  observe  that  those
principles  of  the  human  mind  which  are  most  beneficial
to  society,  are  by  no  means  marked  by  nature  as
the  most  honourable.  Hunger,  thirst,  and  the  passion
for  sex  are  the  great  supports  of  the  human  species,
yet  almost  every  expression  of  these  excites  contempt.
In  the  same  manner,  that  principle  in  the  mind  which
prompts  to  truck,  barter,  and  exchange,  though  it  is
the  great  foundation  of  arts,  commerce,  and  the  division
of  labour,  yet  it  is  not  marked  with  anything  amiable.
To  perform  anything,  or  to  give  anything  without
a  reward,  is  always  generous  and  noble,  but  to  barter
one  thing  for  another  is  mean.  The  plain  reason
for  this  is  that  these  principles  are  so  strongly  im
planted  by  nature  that  they  have  no  occasion  for  that
additional  force  which  the  weaker  principles  need.  In
rude  ages  this  contempt  rises  to  the  highest  pitch,  and
even  in  a  refined  society  it  is  not  utterly  extinguished.
In  this  country  a  small  retailer  is  even  in  some  degree
odious  at  this  day.  When  the  trade  of  a  merchant  or
mechanic  was  thus  depreciated  in  the  beginnings  of
society,  no  wonder  that  it  was  confined  to  the  lowest
ranks  of  people.  Even  when  emancipated  slaves  began
to  practice  these  trades,  it  was  impossible  that  much
stock  could  accumulate  in  their  hands,  for  the  government
oppressed  them  severely,  and  they  were  obliged  to  pay
licences  for  their  liberty  of  trading.  In  Doomsday-book
we  have  an  account  of  all  the  different  traders  in  every

1  Odyssey,  ix.  252-255. Thucy-  similar  passages  as evidence  of

dides (i. 5), who  is quoted by  the honourable character of

Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et pacts,  lib.  ii.  piracy,  but  not  as  evidence  of  the

cap.  xv.  §  5,  refers  to  this  and  despicable  character  of  commerce.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  233

county,  how  many  of  them  were  under  the  king,  and  how
many  under  such  a  bishop,  and  what  acknowledgments
they  were  obliged  to  pay  for  their  liberty  of  trading1.

This  mean  and  despicable  idea  which  they  had  of
merchants  greatly  obstructed  the  progress  of  commerce.
The  merchant  is,  as  it  were,  the  mean  between  the  manu
facturer  and  the  consumer;  the  weaver  must  not  goto  the
market  himself,  there  must  be  somebody  to  do  this  for  him.
This  person  must  be  possessed  of  a  considerable  stock,
to  buy  up  the  commodity  and  maintain  the  manufacturer;
but  when  merchants  were  so  despicable  and  laid  under  so
great  taxations  for  liberty  of  trade,  they  could  never  amass
that  degree  of  stock  which  is  necessary  for  making  the
division  of  labour,  and  improving  manufactures.  The
only  persons  in  those  days  who  made  any  money  by
trade  were  the  Jews,  who,  as  they  were  considered  as
vagabonds,  had  no  liberty  of  purchasing  lands,  and  had
no  other  way  to  dispose  of  themselves  but  by  becoming
mechanics  or  merchants;  their  character  could  not  be
spoiled  by  merchandise,  because  they  could  not  be  more
odious  than  their  religion  made  them.  Even  they  were
grievously  oppressed,  and  consequently  the  progress  of
opulence  [was]  greatly  retarded.

Another  thing  which  greatly  retarded  commerce  was
the  imperfection  of  the  law  with  regard  to  contracts,
which  were  the  last  species  of  rights  that  sustained
action,  for  originally  the  law  gave  no  redress  for  any
but  those  concluded  on  the  spot2.  At  present  all  con
siderable  commerce  is  carried  on  by  commissions,  and
unless  these  sustained  action,  little  could  be  done.  The
first  action  on  contracts  extended  only  to  the  moveable
goods  of  the  contractor,  neither  his  lands  nor  his  person
could  be  touched ;  his  goods  were  often  very  incon-

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iii. ch.  iii.  vol. the  order  in  which  the  different
i.  pp.  399,  400.  kinds  of  contracts became en-

2  See  above,  pp.  132,  133,  for forceable.


234  PART  ii  : POLICE

siderable,  and  probity  is  none  of  the  most  prevalent
virtues  among  a  rude  people.  It  is  commerce  that  in
troduces  probity  and  punctuality.

Another  obstacle  to  the  improvement  of  commerce  was
the  difficulty  of  conveyance  from  one  place  to  another.
The  country  was  then  filled  with  retainers,  a  species
of  idle  people  who  depended  on  the  lords,  whose
violence  and  disorders  rendered  the  going  from  one
place  to  another  very  difficult.  Besides,  there  were
then  no  good  highways.  The  want  of  navigable  rivers
in  many  places  was1  also  an  inconvenience.  This  is
still  the  case  in  Asia  and  other  Eastern  countries :
all  inland  commerce  is  carried  on  by  great  caravans,
consisting  of  several  thousands,  for  mutual  defence,
with  waggons,  &c.  In  our  own  country  a  man  made
his  testament  before  he  set  out  from  Edinburgh  to
Aberdeen,  and  it  was  still  more  dangerous  to  go  to  foreign
countries.  The  laws  of  every  country  to  aliens  and
strangers  are  far  from  being  favourable.  It  is  difficult,  or
rather  impossible,  for  them  to  obtain  satisfaction.  After
this  was  a  little  remedied  still  conveyance  by  sea  re
mained  difficult.  Piracy  was  an  honourable  occupation.
Men  were  ignorant  of  navigation,  and  exposed  to  dangers
on  this  account.  The  price  of  all  these  risks  was  laid
upon  the  goods,  and  by  this  means  they  were  so  much
raised  above  the  natural  price  that  the  improvement  of
commerce  was  greatly  retarded.

Another  piece  of  police  which  was  thought  a  wrise
institution  by  our  forefathers  had  the  same  effect.  This  was
the  fairs  and  markets  all  over  Europe.  Till  the  sixteenth
century  all  commerce  was  carried  on  by  fairs.  The  fairs
of  Bartholomew2,  of  Leipzig,  of  Troy  in  Champaigne,  and
even  of  Glasgow,  are  much  talked  of  in  antiquity.  These

1  MS.  reads  '  were.'  Postlethwayt,  Dictionary  of  Trade

2  '  Bartholomew  fair  at  London and  Commerce,  1751,  s.  v.  Fair,
for  lean  and  Welsh  black  cattle.'


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  235

were  the  most  centrical  places,  and  best  fitted  for  carrying
on  business.  All  linen  and  black  cattle  were  brought  in
from  the  country  to  these  assignations  or  trysts,  and,  lest
the  purchaser  should  be  disappointed,  they  were  all
brought  on  a  certain  day,  and  were  not  allowed  to  be
sold  on  any  other  day.  Forestallers,  who  went  up  and
down  the  country  buying  up  commodities,  were  severely
punished,  as  this  was  a  temptation  not  to  bring  them
to  the  market.  This  might  be  necessary  when  it  was
not  safe  to  go  anywhere  alone,  but  though  you  make
no  fairs,  buyers  and  sellers  will  find  a  way  to  each
other.  Easy  conveyance  and  other  conveniences  of
trafficking  will  be  of  more  advantage  than  the  bringing
them  to  a  fixed  market  and  thereby  confining  buying  and
selling  to  a  certain  season.  All  fairs,  however  necessary
they  then  were,  are  now  real  nuisances.  It  is  absurd  to
preserve  in  people  a  regard  for  their  old  customs,  when
the  causes  of  them  are  removed.

Another  obstacle  to  commerce  was  staple  towns,  which
had  the  exclusive  privilege  of  selling  a  certain  commodity
within  that  district.  Calais,  when  it  belonged  to  the
English,  was  long  the  staple  for  wool l.  As  men  were
obliged  to  carry  their  wool  to  such  a  distance,  its  price
was  very  high.  It  was  however  a  very  great  advantage
to  any  town  to  have  the  staple,  and  therefore  the  king
gave  it  to  that  town  with  which  he  was  best  pleased,  and
took  it  away  whenever  it  disobliged  him  2.  Staple  towns
had  all  the  disadvantages  of  fairs  and  markets  with  this
additional  one,  that  the  staple  commodity  could  be  sold  at
no  fair  nor  market  except  one.  By  this  the  liberty  of


1  Sell.  '  exported.' The  next  that all wool, whether for

sentence possibly  refers  not  to  foreign  or  domestic  consumption,

Calais  in  particular,  but  to  staple  had  to  be  carried  there,

towns  in  general,  since  if  '  such  *  See John Smith, Memoirs

a  distance  '  applies  to  Calais  it  of  Wool,  1747,  ch.  vii.  esp.  §§  15,

would  seem  to  indicate  a  belief  16.


236  PART II  I POLICE

exchange,  and  consequently  the  division  of  labour,  was
diminished.

All  taxes  upon  exportation  and  importation  of  goods
also  hinder  commerce.  Merchants  at  first  were  in  so
contemptible  a  state  that  the  law,  as  it  were,  abandoned
them,  and  it  was  no  matter  what  they  obliged  them  to  pay.
They,  however,  must  lay  the  tax  upon  their  goods,  their
price  is  raised,  fewer  of  them  are  bought,  manufactures  are
discouraged,  and  the  division  of  labour  hindered.

All  monopolies  and  exclusive  privileges  of  corporations,
for  whatever  good  ends  they  were  at  first  instituted,  have
the  same  bad  effect.  In  like  manner  the  statute  of  appren
ticeship,  which  was  originally  an  imposition  on  government,
has  a  bad  tendency.  It  was  imagined  that  the  cause  of  so
much  bad  cloth  was  that  the  weaver  had  not  been  properly
educated,  and  therefore  they  made  a  statute  that  he  should
serve  a  seven  years  apprenticeship  before  he  pretended
to  make  any.  But  this  is  by  no  means  a  sufficient  security
against  bad  cloth.  You  yourself  cannot  inspect  a  large
piece  of  cloth,  this  must  be  left  to  the  stampmaster,  whose
credit  must  be  depended  upon  l.  Above  all  other  causes  the
giving  bounties  for  one  commodity,  and  the  discouraging
another,  diminishes  the  concurrence  of  opulence,  and  hurts
the  natural  state  of  commerce.

Before  we  treat  of  the  effects  of  police  upon  the
manners  of  a  people,  we  propose  to  consider  taxes  or
revenue,  which  is  in  reality  one  of  the  causes  that  the
progress  of  opulence  has  been  so  slow.

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  x.  pt.  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  125-130.


[PART III: OF REVENUE]


{Introduction^

IN  the  beginnings  of  society  all  public  offices  were
performed  by  the  magistrate  without  any  reward,  and
he  was  fully  satisfied  with  the  eminence  of  his  station.
This  is  the  case  among  the  Tartars,  Arabs,  and
Hottentots  even  to  this  day.  Voluntary  presents  only
are  accepted,  which  have  always  a  bad  effect,  but
cannot  be  prevented  while  one  is  willing  to  give,  and
another  to  receive.  It  was  in  this  manner,  too,  that
the  governors  of  the  Roman  provinces  got  their  revenues.
When  government  becomes  so  complex  as  to  take
up  the  whole  attention  of  the  public  magistrate,  he  must
undoubtedly  have  some  reward,  and  if  this  be  not  given
him  by  the  public,  he  will  fall  upon  some  more  dangerous
method  of  obtaining  it;  few  will  be  so  generous  as  to
exact  nothing1.  When  applications  are  made,  everyone
must  bring  his  present,  and  the  man  who  pays  best  will
be  best  heard.

When  government  is  a  little  farther  advanced,  magazines
must  be  provided,  ships  built,  palaces  and  other  public
buildings  erected  and  kept  up,  and  consequently  a  public
revenue  levied.  At  first  indeed  among  the  Romans  there

1  Above,  p.  16.


238  PART III  : REVENUE

was  no  revenue  levied  for  carrying  on  war,  because  the
soldiers  required  no  pay.  In  savage  nations  this  is
always  the  case ;  every  one  of  the  Athenians  went  out
to  war  at  his  own  expense.  The  same  was  the  case
with  our  feudal  lords ;  the  burden  of  going  to  war  was
connected  with  the  duty  of  the  tenant  or  vassal.  Such
a  practice  cannot  be  of  long  duration,  and  accordingly
we  find  that  it  ceased  at  Rome,  and  was  the  great  cause
of  the  dissolution  of  that  republic.  The  governors
of  provinces  made  such  grievous  exactions  from  the
people,  that  they  alienated  their  affections,  so  that
they  gave  no  assistance  in  defending  the  state  when
it  stood  in  need  of  assistance.

[$  i. Of  Taxes  on  Possessions]

After  the  appropriation  of  land  property,  a  portion  of
lands  was  commonly  assigned  for  the  maintenance  of
government.  The  free  states  of  Greece  had  land  set
apart  for  this  purpose,  and  we  find  Aristotle  giving  his
opinion  that  private  property  should  surround  the  royal
lands,  because  those  who  were  near  a  city  were  always
for  war,  because  they  were  sure  of  defence,  and  as  the
enemy  would  first  come  upon  those  lands  which  were
near  the  boundaries  l.  In  all  [barbarous]  countries  we
find  lands  appropriated  to  the  purposes  of  sovereignty,
and  therefore  little  occasion  for  taxes  and  customs.  We
shall  show  that  this  is  a  bad  police,  and  one  cause  of  the
slow  progress  of  opulence.

Let  us  conceive  what  an  immense  tract  of  land  would  be
required  to  support  the  British  government.  The  annual
expense  of  it  in  times  of  peace  amounts  to  3  millions,
the  whole  land  rents  amount 2  to  24  millions  3.  Therefore

1  He recommends that half  zen  should  have  one  lot  in  each

the private  property should be  portion. Politics,  1330  a  14-23.

near  the  city,  and  the  other  half  2  MS.  reads  '  amounts.'

on  the  border,  and  that  each  citi-  3  Above,  p.  224.


TAXES ON POSSESSIONS  239

the  government  must  have  an  eighth  part  in  its  own  hands.
If  we  conceive,  further,  how  such  a  tract  of  land  would
be  cultivated,  the  quantity  requisite  would  be  prodigious.
Allow  it  but  to  be  half  as  well  cultivated  as  the  rest,
which  for  many  reasons  would  not  be  the  case,  the
government  would  have  in  its  hands  a  fourth  of  the  whole
country.  By  this  therefore  the  stock  of  the  country  would
be  greatly  diminished,  and  fewer  people  maintained.
After  government  becomes  expensive,  it  is  the  worst
possible  method  to  support  it  by  a  land  rent.  We  may
observe  that  the  government  in  a  civilized  country  is  much
more  expensive  than  in  a  barbarous  one ;  and  when  we
say  that  one  government  is  more  expensive  than  another,
it  is  the  same  as  if  we  said  that  the  one  country  is  farther
advanced  in  improvement  than  another.  To  say  that  the
government  is  expensive  and  the  people  not  oppressed  is
to  say  that  the  people  are  rich.  There  are  many  expenses
necessary  in  a  civilized  country  for  which  there  is  no
occasion  in  one  that  is  barbarous.  Armies,  fleets,  fortified
places,  and  public  buildings,  judges,  and  officers  of  the
revenue  must  be  supported,  and  if  they  be  neglected,
disorder  will  ensue.  A  land  rent,  to  serve  all  these
purposes,  would  be  the  most  improper  thing  in  the  world.

All  taxes  may  be  considered  under  two  divisions,  to
wit,  taxes  upon  possessions  and  taxes  upon  consump
tions.  These  are  the  two  ways  of  making  the  subjects
contribute  to  the  support  of  government.  The  land
tax  is  of  the  former  kind,  and  all  taxes  upon  commodities
of  the  latter.

Possessions  are  of  three  kinds,  to  wit,  land,  stock,  and
money.  It  is  easy  to  levy  a  tax  upon  land,  because  it  is
evident  what  quantity  every  one  possesses,  but  it  is  very
difficult  to  lay  a  tax  upon  stock  or  money  without  very
arbitrary  proceedings1.  It  is  a  hardship  upon  a  man  in
trade  to  oblige  him  to  show  his  books,  which  is  the
1  W,  ofN.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  ii.  art.  2,  vol.  ii.  p.  442.


240  PART III  I REVENUE

only  way  in  which  we  can  know  how  much  he  is  worth.
It  is  a  breach  of  liberty,  and  may  be  productive  of  very
bad  consequences  by  ruining  his  credit ;  the  circum
stances  of  people  in  trade  are  at  some  times  far  worse
than  at  others.  But  if  on  account  of  this  difficultyyou
were  to  tax  land,  and  neither  tax  money  nor  stock,  ye
would  do  a  piece  of  very  great  injustice.  But  though
it  be  a  difficult  thing  to  tax  money  or  stock  without
being  oppressive,  yet  this  method  is  used  in  several
countries.  In  France,  for  example,  in  order  to  ascertain
the  circumstances  of  the  subject,  every  bill  is  assigned,
and  all  business  transacted  in  presence  of  a  public
notary,  and  entered  into  his  books,  so  that  land,  stock,
and  money  are  there  all  taxed  in  the  same  manner.
Of  these  three  only  land  is  taxed  in  England l,  because  to
tax  the  other  two  has  some  appearance  of  despotism,  and
would  greatly  enrage  a  free  people.  Excepting  the
land  tax,  our  taxes  are  generally  upon  commodities,  and
in  these  there  is  a  much  greater  inequality  than  in  the
taxes  on  land  possession.  The  consumptions  of  people
are  not  always  according  to  what  they  possess,  but  in
proportion  to  their  liberality.  When  taxes  are  laid  upon
commodities,  their  prices  must  rise,  the  concurrence  of
tradesmen  must  be  prevented,  an  artificial  dearth  occa
sioned,  less  industry  excited,  and  a  smaller  quantity  of
goods  produced.

Taxes  upon  land  possessions  have  this  great  advantage,
that  they  are  levied  without  any  great  expense ;  the
whole  land  tax  of  England  does  not  cost  the  government
above  eight  or  ten  thousand  pounds.  Collectors  are  chosen
by  the  gentlemen  of  the  county,  and  are  obliged  to

1  '  By  what  is  called  the  land  land  is,  perhaps,  scarce  rated  at

tax  in  England  it  was  intended  the  fiftieth  part  of  itsannual  value.'

that  stock  should  be  taxed  in  the  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  2,  art.  2,

same  proportion  as  land  .  .  .  the  vol.  ii.  pp.  443,  444.

greater  part  of  the  stock  of  Eng-  2  Ibid.  art.  i,  vol.  ii.  p.  418.


TAXES ON POSSESSIONS  241

produce  proper  security  for  their  carrying  safely  to  the
exchequer  the  money  which  they  collect.  The  taxes  of
customs  and  excise,  which  produce  such  immense  sums,
are  almost  eaten  up  by  the  legions  of  officers  that  are
employed  in  collecting  them.  These  officers  must  have
supervisors  over  them  to  examine  their  proceedings.  The
supervisors  have  over  them  collectors,  who  are  under  the
commissioners,  who  have  to  account  to  the  exchequer ;  to
support  these  officers  there  must  be  levied  a  great  deal
more  than  the  government  requires,  which  is  a  manifest
disadvantage.

Another  advantage  of  a  land  tax  is,  that  it  does  not  tend
to  raise  the  price  of  commodities,  as  it  is  not  paid  in
proportion  to  the  corn  and  cattle,  but  in  proportion  to
the  rent.  If  the  tenant  pay  the  tax,  he  pays  just  so
much  less  rent.  Excise  raises  the  price  of  commodities,
and  makes  fewer  people  able  to  carry  on  business.  If
a  man  purchase  £1000  worth  of  tobacco,  he  has  an
hundred  pounds  of  tax  to  pay,  and  therefore  cannot  deal  to
such  an  extent  as  he  would  otherwise  do ;  thus,  as  it
requires  greater  stock  to  carry  on  trade,  the  dealers  must
be  fewer,  and  the  rich  have,  as  it  were,  a  monopoly
against  the  poor.  It  was  observed  before  that  in
England,  from  a  kind  of  delicacy  with  regard  to  examin
ing  into  the  circumstances  of  particular  persons,  which
is  apparently  an  infringement  upon  liberty,  no  tax  is
laid  upon  stock  or  money,  but  all  upon  consumptions.
Whatever  advantages  this  method  may  have,  there
is  evidently  in  it  an  inequality.  The  landlord  who
pays  his  annual  land  tax  pays  also  a  great  part  of
the  taxes  on  consumptions.  On  this  account  the  landed
interest  complains  first  of  a  war,  thinking  the  burden  of
it  falls  upon  them,  while  on  the  other  hand  the  monied
men  are  gainers,  arrd  therefore  oppose  them.  This  per
haps  occasions  the  continuance  of  what  is  called  the  Tory
interest.

R


242  PART III  : REVENUE

[02. Of  Taxes  on  Consumptions^

Taxes  upon  possessions  are  naturally  equal,  but  those
upon  consumptions  naturally  unequal,  as  they  are  sometimes
paid  by  the  merchant,  sometimes  by  the  consumer,  and
sometimes  by  the  importer,  who  must  be  repaid  it  by  the
consumer.  In  Holland  all  goods  are  deposited  in  a  public
warehouse,  one  key  of  which  is  kept  by  the  commissioner
of  the  customs,  and  another  by  the  owner  of  the  goods.
If  the  goods  are  exported,  no  tax  is  advanced,  but  if  they
go  into  the  country  the  consumer  pays  down  the  price  to
the  merchant  and  the  custom  to  the  commissioner.  This
method  is  much  the  same  with  the  famous  excise  scheme
of  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  which  was  at  last  his  ruin.  It  was
to  this  effect,  that  a  general  excise  should  be  established,
and  all  goods  imported  deposited  in  a  public  warehouse,
and  the  tax  should  only  be  paid  upon  the  inland  sale  of
them1.  Though  this  scheme  be  liable  to  inconveniences,
such  as  subjecting  the  owner  to  anxiety  from  not  having
his  goods  entirely  in  his  own  power,  yet  it  is  plainly  this
which  gives  the  Dutch  so  great  an  advantage  over  all  the
other  nations  of  Europe.  The  Dutch  are  in  a  manner  the
carriers  of  the  other  Europeans  ;  they  bring  corn  from  the
Baltic  and  those  places  where  it  is  cheap,  and  wines  from
those  places  where  there  has  been  a  good  vintage,  and  keep
them  by  them  till  they  hear  of  a  dearth,  and  then  export
them  to  the  places  where  it  is.  But  in  England  the  moment
you  bring  the  commodities  to  the  country,  you  must  pay
the  tax  and  sell  them  where  you  please.  Thus  the
merchant  may  lie  out  of  his  interest  for  a  long  time,  and
therefore  must  sell  his  commodities  dearer.  The  Dutch,
having  no  tax  to  pay  but  upon  inland  sale,  are  enabled  to
sell  cheaper  than  the  English  or  any  other  nation.

Taxes  on  consumptions  have  however  some  advantage
over  those  on  possessions.  They  are  not  felt,  being  paid

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  ii.  art.  4,  vol.  ii.  pp.  481-484.


TAXES ON CONSUMPTIONS  243

imperceptibly;  but  a  person  possessed  of  a  thousand
pounds  of  land-rent  feels  very  sensibly  an  hundred  pounds
going  from  him.  The  taxes  on  consumptions  are  not  so
much  murmured  against,  because  they  are  laid  upon  the
merchant,  who  lays  them  on  the  price  of  goods,  and  thus
they  are  insensibly  paid  by  the  people.  When  we  buy
a  pound  of  tea  we  do  not  reflect  that  the  most  part  of  the
price  is  a  duty  paid  to  the  government,  and  therefore  pay  it
contentedly,  as  though  it  were  only  the  natural  price  of
the  commodity.  In  the  same  manner  when  an  additional
tax  is  laid  upon  beer,  the  price  of  it  must  be  raised,  but  the
mob  do  not  directly  vent  their  malice  against  the  govern
ment,  who  are  the  proper  objects  of  it,  but  upon  the
brewers,  as  they  confound  the  tax  price  with  the  natural
one.  Taxes  upon  consumptions  therefore,  which  are  paid
by  the  merchant,  seem  most  to  favour  liberty,  and  will
always  be  favoured  by  this  government.  In  Holland  they
buy  a  hogshead  of  wine  and  first  pay  the  price  to  the
merchant,  and  then  so  much  to  the  officers  of  excise,  as  it
were  to  get  leave  to  drink  it.  We  in  reality  do  the  very
same  thing,  but  as  we  do  not  feel  it  immediately,  we  imagine
it  all  one  price,  and  never  reflect  that  we  might  drink  port
wine  below  sixpence  a  bottle,  were  it  not  for  the  duty.

Taxes  on  consumptions  have  still  another  advantage
over  those  on  possessions.  If  a  person  be  possessed  of
a  land-rent  of  an  hundred  pounds  per  annum,  and  this
estate  be  valued  at  a  high  rate,  he  perhaps  pays  £20  to
the  government.  The  collector  must  be  paid  at  a  certain
time  of  the  year,  and  few  people  have  so  much  self-
command  as  to  lay  up  money  to  be  ready.  He  has
therefore  £20  to  borrow  to  answer  his  present  demands.
When  next  payment  comes,  he  has  not  only  the  tax
to  pay,  but  also  the  interest  of  the  money  borrowed
the  former  year.  He  begins  to  encumber  his  estate;
and  thus  upon  examination  it  will  be  found  that  man)'
landholders  have  been  ruined.  The  best  method  of

R  2


244  PART III  : REVENUE

preventing  this  is  to  make  the  tenant  pay  the  land  tax  in
part  payment  of  his  rent 1.  The  taxes  on  consumptions  are
not  liable  to  this  inconvenience.  When  a  person  finds
that  he  is  spending  too  much  on  the  elegancies  of  life,  he
can  immediately  diminish  his  consumption.  Taxes  upon
consumptions  are  therefore  more  eligible  than  taxes  upon
possessions,  as  they  have  not  so  great  a  tendency  to  ruin
the  circumstances  of  individuals.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  taxes  both  on  consumptions
and  possessions  are  more  or  less  advantageous  to  in
dustry  according  to  the  manner  in  which  they  are
levied.  The  land  tax  in  England  is  permanent  and
uniform,  and  does  not  rise  with  the  rent,  wrhich  is
regulated  by  the  improvement  of  the  land2;  notwith
standing  modern  improvements  it  is  the  same  that  it  was
formerly.  In  France  the  tax  rises  proportionably  to  the
rent,  which  is  a  great  discouragement  to  the  landholder.
It  has  much  the  same  effect  with  the  tithes  in  England.
When  we  know  that  the  produce  is  to  be  divided  with
those  who  lay  out  nothing,  it  hinders  us  from  laying  out
what  we  would  otherwise  do  upon  the  improvement  of
our  lands.  We  are  better  financiers  than  the  French 3,  as  we
have  also  the  advantage  of  them  in  the  following  particulars.

In  the  method  of  levying  our  customs  we  have  an
advantage  over  the  French.  Our  customs  are  all  paid  at
once  by  the  merchants,  and  goods,  after  their  entry  in  the
custom  house  books,  may  be  carried  by  a  permit  through
any  part  of  the  country  without  molestation  and  expense,
except  some  trifles  upon  tolls,  &c.  In  France  a  duty  is
paid  at  the  end  of  almost  every  town  they  go  into,  equal,
if  not  greater,  to  what  is  paid  by  us  at  first ;  inland

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  ii.  art.  increased  in  consequence  of  his
i,  vol.  ii.  p.  418.  improvements.

2  Ibid., with, however, the  3  'The  French  system  of  taxa-
qualification that the owner of  tion seems in every respect
a portion  only  of  a  parish  may  inferior  to  the  British.1 Ibid.  art.
find his land  tax very slightly  4  ad  fin.,  vol.  ii.  p.  504.


TAXES ON CONSUMPTIONS  245

industry  is  embarrassed  by  theirs,  and  only  foreign  trade
by  ours.

We  have  another  advantage  in  levying  our  taxes  by  com
mission,  while  theirs  are  levied  by  farm,  by  which  means
not  one  half  of  what  they  raise  goes  into  the  hands  of  the
government.  In  England  the  whole  expense  of  levying
above  seven  millions  does  not  come  to  £300,000.  In
France  twenty-four  millions  are  levied  every  year,  and  not
above  twelve  goes  to  the  expense  of  the  government,  the
rest  goes  for  defraying  the  expense  of  levying  it,  and  for
the  profit  of  the  farmer  l.  In  England  no  excise  officers  are
requisite  but  at  the  seaports,  except  a  few  up  and  down
the  country.  The  profits  of  the  farmers  in  France  would
pay  the  expense  of  them  all.  In  the  collecting  of  our
excise  there  is  a  regular  subordination  of  officers  who
have  their  fixed  salaries  and  nothing  more,  but  in  France
the  highest  bidder  has  the  place,  and,  as  the  man  who
undertakes  it  must  advance  the  sum  at  a  certain  time,  and
runs  a  risk  of  not  getting  it  up,  he  deserves  a  very  high
profit :  besides,  in  an  auction  of  this  kind  there  are  few
bidders,  as  none  are  capable  of  undertaking  the  office  but
those  who  are  brought  up  to  business,  and  are  possessed
both  of  a  great  stock  and  credit,  and  can  produce  good
security.  When  there  are  few  bidders  they  can  easily
enter  into  an  association  among  themselves,  and  have  the
whole  at  a  very  easy  rate'-.  Upon  the  whole  we  may
observe  that  the  English  are  the  best  financiers  in  Europe,
and  their  taxes  are  levied  with  more  propriety  than  those
of  any  country  whatever  :J.

Upon  this  subject  it  is  in  general  to  be  observed  that
taxes upon exportation are much more hurtful than

1  The amount paid into  the  2  Ibid.  pp.  499-504.

treasury '  did not amount to  3  '  Our  state  is  not  perfect,  and

fifteen  millions  sterling' in  1765,  might  be mended, but it is as

and  the  amount  levied  must  have  good  or  better  than  that  of  most

been  about  double. W.  ofN.  bk.  of  our  neighbours.' Ibid.  p.  497.
v.  ch.  ii.  ad  fin.,  vol.  ii.  p.  504.


246  PART III  I REVENUE

those  upon  importation.  When  the  inhabitants  of  a
country  are  in  a  manner  prohibited  by  high  taxes
from  exporting  the  produce  of  their  industry,  they  are
confined  to  home  consumption,  and  their  motives  to
industry  are  diminished.  Taxes  upon  importation,  on  the
contrary,  encourage  the  manufacturing  of  these  particular
commodities.  The  tax  upon  Hamburgh  linen,  for  example,
hinders  the  importation  of  great  quantities  of  it,  and
causes  more  linen  to  be  manufactured  at  home.  In  general,
however,  all  taxes  upon  importation  are  hurtful  in  this
respect,  that  they  divert  the  industry  of  the  country  to  an
unnatural  channel.  The  more  stock  there  is  employed
in  one  way,  there  is  the  less  to  be  employed  in  another ;
but  the  effects  of  taxes  upon  exportation  are  still  more
pernicious.  This  is  one  great  cause  of  the  poverty  of
Spain  ;  they  have  imposed  a  high  tax  on  the  exportation  of
every  commodity,  and  think  that  by  this  means  the  taxes
are  paid  by  foreigners,  whereas,  if  they  were  to  impose
a  tax  on  importation,  it  would  be  paid  by  their  own
subjects  \  not  reflecting  that  by  bringing  a  burden  on  the
exportation  of  commodities,  they  so  far  confine  the  con
sumption  of  them,  and  diminish  industry2.

To  conclude  all  that  is  to  be  said  of  taxes,  we  may
observe  that  the  common  prejudice  that  wealth  consists  in
money  has  not  been  in  this  respect  so  hurtful  as  might
have  been  imagined,  and  has  even  given  occasion  3  to
regulations  not  very  inconvenient.  Those  nations  to  whom
we  give  more  goods  than  we  receive,  generally  send  us

1  '  I  have  found  ministers  and  subjects are at the charge of

others,  both  in  their  conversation  them.' Uztariz,  Theory  and  Prac-

and  writings,  maintain  the  erro-  tice  of Commerce  and Maritime

neous  maxim  that  high  duties  are  Affairs,  transl.  by  John  Kippax,

to  be  laid  upon  commodities  ex-  1751,  vol.  ii.  p.  52 ; cp.  vol.  i.  p.

ported, because foreigners pay  xiii.

them  ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  very  'L  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  ii.  pt.  ii.

moderate  ones  on such  as  are  art.  4,  vol.  ii.  pp.  495,  496.

imported,  because  his majesty's  3  MS.  reads  '  occasions.'


STOCKS  247

manufactured  goods ;  those  on  the  contrary,  from  whom
we  receive  more  goods  than  we  give,  or  with  respect  to
whom  the  balance  is  in  our  favour,  generally  send  us
unmanufactured  goods.  To  Russia,  for  example,  we  send
fine  linen  and  other  manufactured  goods,  and  for  a  small
quantity  of  these  receive,  in  return,  great  quantities  of  un
manufactured  goods.  This  kind  of  trade  is  very  advan
tageous,  because  goods  in  an  unmanufactured  and  rude
state  afford  employment  and  maintenance  to  a  great
number  of  persons.  It  is  merely  from  the  absurd  notion
that  wealth  consists  in  money,  that  the  British  encourage
most  of  those  branches  of  foreign  trade,  where  the  balance
is  paid  in  money.

There  are  still  some  other  species  of  taxes,  but  as
their  nature  is  much  the  same,  it  is  unnecessary  to
mention  them.

Having  thus  given  a  general  view  of  taxes,  it  will  not
be  improper  here,  on  account  of  their  connexion,  to  con
sider  the  nature  of  stocks,  and  the  causes  of  their  rising
and  falling.

[§3. Of  Stocks.}

Soon  after  the  Revolution,  on  account  of  the  necessities
of  government,  it  was  necessary  to  borrow  money  from
subjects,  generally  at  a  higher  rate  than  common  interest,
to  be  repaid  in  a  few  years.  The  funds  allotted  for  pay
ment  of  this  interest  were  taxes  on  certain  commodities.
These  taxes  were  at  first  laid  on  for  a  certain  number  of
years,  according  to  the  term  for  which  the  money  was
borrowed  ;  but  when,  by  various  arts  of  government,  these
loans  came  to  be  perpetual,  the  taxes  came,  of  course,  to
be  perpetual,  and  thus  the  funds  were  mortgaged.  Though
they l  were  made  perpetual  when  money  could  no  longer

be  borrowed  upon  them,  yet  they  were  still  redeemable

'•v

1  I.e.  the  mortgaged  taxes  or  funds.  '  The  funds'  originally  meant
nothing  but  the  aggregate  produce  of  certain  taxes.


248  PART III  I REVENUE

upon  paying  up  the  money  borrowed  on  them l.  When
these  taxes  were  laid  on,  nothing  would  have  shocked
people  more,  than  to  have  thought  that  they  were  to  be
perpetual,  but  their  progress  was  so  insensible,  that  it  was
never  murmured  at.  What  shocks  at  first  will  soon  become
easy  from  custom,  which  sanctifies  everything.  Thus  [the]
taxes  were  first  laid  on,  and  thus  they  came  to  the  situa
tion  in  which  they  are  at  present.  When  a  sum  of  money
is  lent  to  a  private  person,  the  creditor  can  come  upon  the
debtor  when  he  pleases  for  both  capital  and  interest ;  but  it
is  not  on  this  footing  that  the  government  borrows  money  ;
they  give  you  a  right  to  a  perpetual  annuity  of  three  or  four
per  cent.,  but  not  to  redemand  your  capital  It  seems  very
odd  at  first  sight  that  the  creditor  should  consent  to  such
an  inconvenience  as  that  his  money  should  never  be  paid
up2,  but  this  is  really  his  advantage.  If  you  lend  to  the
government  a  thousand  pounds  in  time  of  war,  as  they  have
immediate  use  for  it,  they  will  perhaps  be  obliged  to  give
you  five  per  cent,  of  interest,  and  when  peace  comes  they
continue  your  annuity.  You  have  it  in  your  power  to
dispose  of  your  annuity,  and  as  your  money  is  perfectly
secure,  and  interest  is  paid  by  no  private  person  with  so
much  punctuality  as  by  the  government,  you  may  very  often
sell  the  annuity  of  your  £1000  at  .£1100  or  more.  The
government,  finding  that  these  annuities  sold  above  par,  and
for  the  same  reason  that  people  were  much  disposed  to
subscribe  to  the  government  funds,  they  resolved,  as  the
funds  were  still  redeemable,  to  take  the  advantage  by
paying  up  the  sums  borrowed  at  five  per  cent.,  and

1  I.e.  the  stockholder's  claim  to  2  Mortimer  talks  of  the  incon-

his  perpetual  annuity  from the  veniencies that might  arise  to

mortgaged  funds  could  be  extin-  contributors  from  being  obliged

guished  by  repaying  the  capital  to  keep  their  money  constantly

borrowed  from  him. A  detailed  in  the  hands  of  the  government.'

account of the early  funds is  Every  Man  his  own  Broker,  5th  ed.,

given  in  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  iii.  1762,  p.  12.
vol.  ii.  pp.  513-517.


STOCKS  249

borrowing  money  at  a  lower  rate l.  This  made  the  con
tractors  with  the  government  to  be  on  their  guard,  and,  as
they  saw  their  design,  they  would  not  lend  them  any  more
money,  without  at  least  some  part  of  the  interest  should  be
irredeemable,  perhaps  two  per  cent,  of  the  four  they  were
to  receive.  In  every  fund  therefore  there  was  a  part  irre
deemable  2,  which  made  them  continue  to  sell  above  par.

In  the  reigns  of  King  William,  Queen  Anne,  and  in  the
beginning  of  that  of  King  George  I,  the  funds  rose  and
fell,  according  to  the  credit  of  the  government,  as  there
was  still  some  risk  of  a  revolution.  Of  late,  though  there
be  no  danger  of  a  revolution,  even  in  the  times  of  peace
stocks  are  sometimes  at  ten,  twenty,  or  even  fifty  per  cent,
below  par,  and  sometimes  as  much  above  it :!.  Nobody
can  suspect  any  risk  of  losing  that  money  by  change  of
government.  How  then  comes  it  that  stocks  are  thus  every
day  fluctuating  without  any  visible  cause  ?  How  comes
it  that  good  or  bad  news  have  such  an  influence  on
the  rising  and  falling  of  stocks?  The  real  cause  is  as
follows :

Every  misfortune  in  war  makes  peace  to  be  at  a  greater
distance,  and  every  fortunate  occurrence  seems  to  favour
its  approach.  When  war  continues,  the  necessities  of
government  must  be  supplied,  more  money  levied  and
new  subscriptions  opened  for  these  purposes.  As  in  war
the  interest  must  necessarily  rise,  every  one  is  eager  to  be
in  the  new  subscription,  and  they  who  have  annuities  find
that  it  will  be  for  their  advantage  to  sell  out  of  the  old
stocks  in  prospect  of  a  higher  interest.  The  number  of
sellers,  therefore,  increases  with  the  prospect  of  a  war,  and

1  Details  are  given  in  W.  of  N, pp.  516,  517.

bk.  v.  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  515,  516.  3  On  March  3,  1763,  3  per  cent.

2  The  '  irredeemables  '  of  this  consols  were  quoted  at  95  J. They
period  were  terminable  annuities,  had steadily risen in thirteen
They  were  never  so  largely  used  months from 62}. See the
as  the arithmetical example in  London  Chronicle  for  Feb.  3,  1762,
the  text  suggests. Ibid.  vol. ii.  and  March  3,  1763.


250  PART III  : REVENUE

consequently  stocks  fall.  On  the  other  hand,  whenever
there  is  a  prospect  of  peace,  as  there  are  no  expectations
that  new  subscriptions  will  be  opened,  they  who  have
annuities  are  not  fond  of  selling  them  ;  and  therefore,  the
number  of  sellers  decreasing,  stocks  must  rise.  In  time
of  war,  every  one  who  has  any  stock  runs  to  have  it  in  the
hands  of  the  government,  as  it  cannot  be  so  advantageously
employed  anywhere  else,  as  they  get  interest  perhaps  at
seven  or  eight  per  cent.,  of  which  two  or  three  perhaps  is
[irredeemable,  and  frequently  a  lottery  ticket  into  the
bargain.  A  person  who  has  an  annuity  only  at  three  per
cent,  will  do  all  he  can  to  sell  it,  that  he  may  employ  his
stock  to  greater  advantage,  and  for  this  reason  will  often  sell
it  below  par,  and  consequently  stocks  must  necessarily  fall.
But  in  time  of  war,  for  the  following  reasons,  even  the  new
subscriptions  come  to  sell  below  par.

As  there  are  a  great  many  stock-holders  who  are  mer
chants,  and  who  keep  their  stocks  in  the  hands  of  the
government  that  they  may  be  ready  to  sell  out  on  any
sudden  demand,  and  take  the  advantage  of  a  good  bargain
when  it  casts  up1,  and  as  these  chances  occur  most
frequently  in  time  of  war,  they  have  often  occasion  to  sell
out,  and  thus  more  stock  runs  to  the  market,  and  the  new
subscriptions  sink 2  below  par.  But  further,  in  time  of  war,
as  was  observed  before,  stock  cannot  be  so  advantageously
employed,  and  everybody  is  tempted  to  subscribe.  Even
those  whose  circumstances  are  but  very  inconsiderable,
subscribe  for  great  sums  in  hopes  that  stocks  will  rise,  and
that  they  may  sell  out  before  the  time  of  delivery,  to  great
advantage  ;  but  when  things  do  not  answer  their  expecta
tions,  and  they  are  forced  to  sell  out  one  way  or  another
to  support  their  credit,  they  are  often  obliged  to  sell  below
par.  In  this  manner  the  new  subscriptions  may  fall.
Stock-jobbers  that  are  well  acquainted  with  their  business,
observe  particularly  when  a  number  of  indigent  persons

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  pp.  518,  519. -  MS.  reads  'sinks.'


STOCK-JOBBING  251

are  in  the  subscriptions,  and  as  they  are  soon  obliged  to
sell  out,  and  consequently  stocks  fall,  it  is  their  proper
time  to  purchase  them.

[§  4. Of  Stock-jobbing.-]

The  practice  of  stock-jobbing,  or  the  buying  stocks  by
time  has,  too,  on  all  occasions,  a  very  considerable  influence
on  the  rise  and  fall  of  stocks.  The  method  in  which  this
practice  is  carried  on  is  as  follows.  A  man  who  has  not
perhaps  £1000  in  the  world,  subscribes  for  £100,000,  which
is  to  be  delivered  at  several  fixed  times,  and  in  certain
portions.  He  therefore  hopes  to  get  these  several  portions
sold  out  to  great  advantage  by  the  rising  of  the  stocks
before  they  fall  due,  but  as  anything  he  is  worth  would  go
if  the  stocks  should  fall,  he  uses  all  means  to  make  them
rise,  he  spreads  reports  at  Change  Alley  that  victories  are
gained,  that  peace  is  to  be  concluded,  ftc.1  On  the  other
hand,  they  who  want  to  purchase  a  stock,  and  want  that  it
should  fall,  propagate  such  reports  as  will  sink  the  stocks
as  low  as  possible,  such  as  that  war  will  continue,  that
new  subscriptions  are  thought  on,  &c.  It  is  owing  to  this
that,  in  time  of  war,  our  newspapers  are  so  filled  with
invasions  and  schemes  that  never  were  thought  of.  In  the
language  of  Change  Alley  the  buyer  is  called  the  bull  \  and
the  seller  the  bear  :!,  and  as  the  bulls  or  bears  predominate,

1  Mortimer,  Every  Man  his  own  asked  a  civil  question,  he  answers

Broker,  5th  ed.,  pp.  31,  37-40.  with a  surly  look,  and  by  his

3  Ibid.  p.  45,  note.  '  A  Bull  is  the  dejected,  gloomy  aspect  and  mo-
name  by  which  the  gentlemen  of  roseness  he  not  badly  represents
'Change  Alley  choose  to  call  all  the  animal  he  is  named  after.'
persons  who  contract  to  buy  any  3  Ibid.  p.  47,  note.  '  A  Bear  in
quantity  of  government  securities  the  language  of 'Change  Alley  is
without  an  intention  or  ability  to  a  person  who  has  agreed  to  sell
pay  for  it,  and  who  consequently  any  quantity  of  the  public  funds
are  obliged  to  sell  it  again  either  more  than  he  is  possessed  of,  and
at  a  profit  or  a  loss  before  the  often  without  being  possessed  of
time  comes  when  they  have  con-  any  at  all,  but  which  nevertheless
tracted  to  take  it.  ...  If  he  is  he  is  obliged  to  deliver  against


252  PART III  : REVENUE

stocks  rise  or  fall.  This  practice  of  buying  stocks  by  time
is  prohibited  by  the  government,  and  accordingly,  though
they  should  not  deliver  up  the  stocks  they  have  engaged
for,  the  law  gives  no  redress  l.  There  is  no  natural  reason
why  £1000  in  the  stocks  should  not  be  delivered,  or  the
delivery  of  it  enforced,  as  well  as  £1000  worth  of  goods  ;
but  after  the  South  Sea  Scheme  this  was  thought  upon  as
an  expedient  to  prevent  such  practices,  though  it  proved
ineffectual.  In  the  same  manner,  all  laws  against  gaming
never  hinder  it,  and  though  there  is  no  redress  for  a  sum
above  £$'2,  yet  all  the  great  sums  that  are  lost  are  punctually
paid.  Persons  who  game  must  keep  their  credit,  else
nobody  will  deal  with  them.  It  is  quite  the  same  in  stock
jobbing,  they  who  do  not  keep  their  credit  will  soon  be
turned  out,  and  in  the  language  of  Change  Alley  be  called
lame  duck  3.  It  is  unnecessary  here  to  give  any  account  of
particular  funds,  as  they  are  all  of  the  same  nature,  and  the
security  equal.  If  the  interest  of  any  sum  of  money  be
not  paid  by  the  funds  allotted  for  that  purpose,  it  is  paid
out  of  the  sinking  fund,  which  is  the  surplus  of  all  the  rest.
There  is  perhaps  some  little  difference  in  the  facility  of
payment,  but  this  is  by  no  means  considerable,  and  merits
not  our  attention.

a  certain  time  ;  before  this  time  play  were  void,  and  if  paid,  such

arrives he is continually going  sums  could  be  recovered  from  the

up  and  down  seeking  .  .  .  whose  winner.

property  he  can  devour.'  But  see  3  'A name given in 'Change

Murray,  New  English  Dictionary,  Alley to those who refuse to

s.  v.  Bear.  fulfil  their  contracts  .  .  .  The  pun-

1  7  Geo.  II,  cap.  8. 'An  act  to  ishment  for  non-payment  is  ban-
prevent  the  infamous  practice  of  ishment from Jonathan's, but
stock-jobbing.'  they  can  still  act  as  brokers  at

2  Under  9  Ann.  cap.  14,  secu-  the  offices.'  Mortimer,  Every  Man
rities  for  sums  over  £10  lost  at  Ins  own  Broker,  5th  ed.,  p.  57,  note.


[PART II: OF POLICE]

[RESUMED]

[§  17. Of  the  Influence  of  Commerce  on  Manners.]

It1  remains  now  that  \ve  consider  the  last  division  of
police,  and  show  the  influence  of  commerce  on  the
manners  of  a  people.  Whenever  commerce  is  introduced
into  any  country  probity  and  punctuality  always  accom
pany  it.  These  virtues  in  a  rude  and  barbarous  country
are  almost  unknown.  Of  all  the  nations  in  Europe,  the
Dutch,  the  most  commercial,  are  the  most  faithful  to
their  word.  The  English  are  more  so  than  the  Scotch,
but  much  inferior  to  the  Dutch,  and  in  the  remote  parts
of  this  country  they  [are]  far  less  so  than  in  the  commercial
parts  of  it.  This  is  not  at  all  to  be  imputed  to  national
character,  as  some  pretend  ;  there  is  no  natural  reason
why  an  Englishman  or  a  Scotchman  should  not  be  as
punctual  in  performing  agreements  as  a  Dutchman.  It
is  far  more  reducible  to  self-interest,  that  general  prin
ciple  which  regulates  the  actions  of  every  man,  and  which
leads  men  to  act  in  a  certain  manner  from  views  of  advan
tage,  and  is  as  deeply  implanted  in  an  Englishman  as
a  Dutchman 2.  A  dealer  is  afraid  of  losing  his  character,

1  MS.  reads  '  In.'  of other men's ignorance and

2  'They  make  use  of  their  skill folly  they  deal  with  ; are  great
and  their  wit  to  take  advantage exacters  where  the  law  is  in  their


254  PART II  : POLICE (RESUMED]

and  is  scrupulous  in  observing  every  engagement.  When
a  person  makes  perhaps  twenty  contracts  in  a  day,  he  can
not  gain  so  much  by  endeavouring  to  impose  on  his  neigh
bours,  as  the  very  appearance  of  a  cheat  would  make  him
lose.  When  people  seldom  deal  with  one  another,  we  find
that  they  are  somewhat  disposed  to  cheat,  because  they
can  gain  more  by  a  smart  trick  than  they  can  lose  by  the
injury  which  it  does  their  character.

They  whom  we  call  politicians  are  not  the  most  re
markable  men  in  the  world  for  probity  and  punctuality  l.
Ambassadors  from  different  nations  are  still  less  so ;  they
are  praised  for  any  little  advantage  they  can  take,  and
pique  themselves  a  good  deal  on  this  degree  of  refinement.
The  reason  of  this  is  that  nations  treat  with  one  another
not  above  twice  or  thrice  in  a  century,  and  they  may
gain  more  by  one  piece  of  fraud,  than  [lose]  by  having  a
bad  character.  France  has  had  this  character  with  us  ever
since  the  reign  of  Lewis  XIV,  yet  it  has  never  in  the  least
hurt  either  its  interest  or  splendour.  But  if  states  were
obliged  to  treat  once  or  twice  a  day,  as  merchants  do,
it  would  be  necessary  to  be  more  precise,  in  order  to
preserve  their  character.  WTherever  dealings  are  frequent,
a  man  does  not  expect  to  gain  so  much  by  any  one  con
tract,  as  by  probity  and  punctuality  in  the  whole,  and


own hands  : in other points,  break  up,  merchants  would  turn

where  they  deal  with men  that  pedlars, and soldiers thieves.'

understand  like  themselves,  and  Temple, Observations upon the

are under the reach of  justice  United  Provinces,  in  Works,  1757,

and laws,  they  are  the plainest  vol.  i.  p.  154.

and  best  dealers  in  the  world  ;  1  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  ii.  vol.  ii.
which  seems  not  to  grow  so  much  p.  41  contrasts  a  legislator  gov-
from  a  principle  of  conscience  or  erned  by  general  principles  with
morality,  as  from  a  custom  or  '  that  insidious  and  crafty  animal,
habit  introduced  by  the  necessity  vulgarly  called  a  statesman  or
of  trade  among  them,  which  politician,  whose  councils  are
depends  as  much  upon  common  directed  by  the  momentary  flue-
honesty  as  war  does  upon  disci-  tuation  of  affairs.'
pline,  and  without  which  all  would


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  255

a  prudent  dealer,  who  is  sensible  of  his  real  interest,  would
rather  choose  to  lose  what  he  has  a  right  to,  than  give  any
ground  for  suspicion.  Everything  of  this  kind  is  odious
as  it  is  rare.  When  the  greater  part  of  people  are
merchants,  they  always  bring  probity  and  punctuality
into  fashion,  and  these,  therefore,  are  the  principal  virtues
of  a  commercial  nation.

There  are  some  inconveniences,  however,  arising  from
a  commercial  spirit.  The  first  we  shall  mention  is  that
it  confines  the  views  of  men.  Where  the  division  of
labour  is  brought  to  perfection,  every  man  has  only
a  simple  operation  to  perform  ;  to  this  his  whole  atten
tion  is  confined,  and  few  ideas  pass  in  his  mind  but
what  have  an  immediate  connexion  with  it.  When  the
mind  is  employed  about  a  variety  of  objects,  it  is  some
how  expanded  and  enlarged,  and  on  this  account  a
country  artist  is  generally  acknowledged  to  have
a  range  of  thoughts  much  above  a  city  one  l.  The  former
is  perhaps  a  joiner,  a  house  carpenter,  and  a  cabinet
maker,  all  in  one,  and  his  attention  must  of  course  be
employed  about  a  number  of  objects  of  very  different
kinds.  The  latter  is  perhaps  only  a  cabinet-maker;
that  particular  kind  of  work  employs  all  his  thoughts,
and  as  he  had  not  an  opportunity  of  comparing  a  number
of  objects,  his  views  of  things  beyond  his  own  trade
are  by  no  means  so  extensive  as  those  of  the  former.
This  must  be  much  more  the  case  when  a  person's  whole
attention  is  bestowed  on  the  seventeenth  part  of  a  pin  2
or  the  eightieth  part  of  a  button,  so  far  divided  are

1  In  W.  of  N.  bk.  i.  ch.  x.  pt.  ii.  z  The  eighteen  operations  men-
vol.  i.  p.  134,  the  superiority  of  tioned  on  p.  164  above  include
the  countryman  over  the  towns-  putting  the  pins  in  paper.  He
man  is  not  said  to  be  '  generally  who  does  this  does  not  make
acknowledged,'  but  only  '  well  part  of  a  pin,  so  that  the  '  seven-
known  to  every  man  whom  either  teenth  part '  here  is  consistent
business  or  curiosity  has  led  to  with  the  eighteen  operations,
converse  much  with  both.'


256  PART II  I POLICE (RESUMED]

these  manufactures.  It  is  remarkable  that  in  every  com
mercial  nation  the  low  people  are  exceedingly  stupid.
The  Dutch  vulgar  are  eminently  so,  and  the  English
are  more  so  than  the  Scotch.  The  rule  is  general ;  in
towns  they  are  not  so  intelligent  as  in  the  country,  nor
in  a  rich  country  as  in  a  poor  one  l.

Another  inconvenience  attending  commerce  is  that
education  is  greatly  neglected.  In  rich  and  commercial
nations  the  division  of  labour,  having  reduced  all  trades
to  very  simple  operations,  affords  an  opportunity  of
employing  children  very  young.  In  this  country 2,  indeed,
where  the  division  of  labour  is  not  far  advanced,  even
the  meanest  porter  can  read  and  write,  because  the  price
of  education  is  cheap  ;i,  and  a  parent  can  employ  his  child
no  other  way  at  six  or  seven  years  of  age.  This,  how
ever,  is  not  the  case  in  the  commercial  parts  of  England.
A  boy  of  six  or  seven  years  of  age  at  Birmingham  can
gain  his  threepence  or  sixpence  a  day,  and  parents  find
it  to  be  their  interest  to  set  them  soon  to  work ;  thus
their  education  is  neglected.  The  education  which  low
people's  children  receive  is  not,  indeed,  at  any  rate  con
siderable  ;  however,  it  does  them  an  immense  deal  of
service,  and  the  want  of  it  is  certainly  one  of  their
greatest  misfortunes.  By  it  they  learn  to  read,  and  this
gives  them  the  benefit  of  religion,  which  is  a  great
advantage,  not  only  considered  in  a  pious  sense,  but  as
it  affords  them  subject  for  thought  and  speculation.
From  this  we  may  observe  the  benefit  of  country  schools,
and,  however  much  neglected,  must  acknowledge  them  to
be  an  excellent  institution.  But,  besides  this  want  of
education,  there  is  another  great  loss  which  attends  the
putting  boys  too  soon  to  work.  The  boy  begins  to  find
that  his  father  is  obliged  to  him,  and  therefore  throws

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  iii. 3  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  iii.
art.  2,  vol.  ii.  pp.  365  -367  art.  2,  vol  ii.  p.  369.

2  Scotland.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  257

off  his  authority.  When  he  is  grown  up  he  has  no  ideas
with  which  he  can  amuse  himself.  When  he  is  away
from  his  work  he  must  therefore  betake  himself  to
drunkenness  and  riot.  Accordingly  we  find  that  in  the
commercial  parts  of  England,  the  tradesmen  are  for  the
most  part  in  this  despicable  condition  ;  their  work  through
half  the  week  is  sufficient  to  maintain  them,  and  through
want  of  education  they  have  no  amusement  for  the  other,
but  riot  and  debauchery1.  So  it  may  very  justly  be  said
that  the  people  who  clothe  the  whole  world  are  in  rags
themselves.

Another  bad  effect  of  commerce  is  that  it  sinks  the
courage  of  mankind,  and  tends  to  extinguish  martial
spirit.  In  all  commercial  countries  the  division  of  labour
is  infinite,  and  every  one's  thoughts  are  employed  about
one  particular  thing.  In  great  trading  towns,  for  example,
the  linen  merchants  are  of  several  kinds,  for  the  dealing
in  Hamburg  and  Irish  linens  are  quite  distinct  professions.
Some  of  the  lawyers  attend  at  King's  Bench,  some  at
the  court  of  Common  Pleas,  and  others  at  the  Chancery.
Each  of  them  is,  in  a  great  measure,  unacquainted  with  the
business  of  his  neighbour.  In  the  same  manner  war
comes  to  be  a  trade  also.  A  man  has  then  time  to  study
only  one  branch  of  business,  and  it  would  be  a  great
disadvantage  to  oblige  every  one  to  learn  the  military  art
and  to  keep  himself  in  the  practice  of  it.  The  defence  of
the  country  is  therefore  committed  to  a  certain  set  of  men
who  have  nothing  else  ado,  and  among  the  bulk  of  the

1  '  Those  who are  concerned  tions  on  Taxes  as  they  are  supposed

in  the  manufactories  of  this  king-  to  affect  the  Price  of  Labour  in  our

dom know  by  experience that  Manufactories:  also  some  reflections

the  poor  do  not  labour  upon  an  on  the  general  behaviour  and  dispo-

average  above  four  days  in  a  week,  sition  of  the  Manufacturing  Popu-

unless provisions  happen  to  be  lace  of  this  kingdom  ;  showing  by

very  dear.  .  .  .  When  wheat  and  arguments  drawn  from  experience

other provisions are at a low  that nothing but necessity will

price  . . .  idleness  and  debauchery  enforce labour, &>c., 2nd ed.

generally  take  place.' Considera-  1765,  pp.  12,  13.


258  PART II  ! POLICE (RESUMED]

people  military  courage  diminishes.  By  having  their
minds  constantly  employed  on  the  arts  of  luxury,  they
grow  effeminate  and  dastardly.

This  is  confirmed  by  universal  experience.

In  the  year  1745  four  or  five  thousand  naked  unarmed
Highlanders  took  possession  of  the  improved  parts  of  this
country  without  any  opposition  from  the  unwarlike
inhabitants.  They  penetrated  into  England,  and  alarmed
the  whole  nation,  and  had  they  not  been  opposed  by
a  standing  army,  they  would  have  seized  the  throne
with  little  difficulty.  Two  hundred  years  ago  such
an  attempt  would  have  roused  the  spirit  of  the  nation.
Our  ancestors  were  brave  and  warlike,  their  minds
were  not  enervated  by  cultivating  arts  and  commerce,
and  they  were  all  ready  with  spirit  and  vigour  to  resist
the  most  formidable  foe.  It  is  for  the  same  reason,
too,  that  an  army  of  four  or  five  hundred  Europeans  have
often  penetrated  into  the  Mogul's  country,  and  that  the
most  numerous  armies  of  the  Chinese  have  always
been  overthrown  by  the  Tartars.  In  those  countries  the
division  of  labour  and  luxury  have  arrived  at  a  very  high
pitch,  they  have  no  standing  army,  and  the  people  are  all
intent  on  the  arts  of  peace.  Holland,  were  its  barriers  '
removed,  would  be  an  easy  prey.  In  the  beginning  of
this  century  the  standing  arm}'  of  the  Dutch  was  beat  in
the  field,  and  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants,  instead  of  rising
in  arms  to  defend  themselves,  formed  a  design  of  deserting
their  country,  and  settling  in  the  East  Indies  -.  A  com
mercial  country  may  be  formidable  abroad,  and  may
defend  itself  by  fleets  and  standing  armies,  but  when  they

1  Probably the Barrier fort-  1757,  p.  226. It  is  perhaps  not  a
resses. The removal of the  mere  coincidence  that  six  pages
dykes  would not  make  Holland  earlier Hume uses the words
an  easy  prey.  'would  prove  an  easy  prey'  in

2  In  1672,  not  at  the  beginning  speaking of the northern pro
of  the  eighteenth  century. Hume,  vinces  of  the  Netherlands.
HiktJty  of  Great  Britain,  vol.  ii.


CHEAPNESS OR PLENTY  259

are  overcome,  and  the  enemy  penetrates  into  the  country,
the  conquest  is  easy.  The  same  observation  may  be
made  with  respect  to  Rome  and  Carthage.  The  Cartha
ginians  were  often  victorious  abroad,  but  when  the  war
was  carried  into  their  own  country,  they  had  no  share
with  the  Romans.  These  are  the  disadvantages  of
a  commercial  spirit.  The  minds  of  men  are  contracted,
and  rendered  incapable  of  elevation.  Education  is
despised,  or  at  least  neglected,  and  heroic  spirit  is  almost
utterly  extinguished.  To  remedy  these  defects  would  be
an  object  worthy  of  serious  attention.

Thus  we  have  finished  the  three  first  great  objects  of
law,  to  wit,  justice,  police,  and  revenue.  We  proceed  now
to  treat  of  arms,  the  fourth  part  of  the  general  division  of
jurisprudence.


s  2


[PART IV:] OF  ARMS


[f  i. Of  Militias.}

IN  the  beginning  of  society  the  defence  of  the  state
required  no  police,  nor  particular  provision  for  it.  The
whole  body  of  the  people  rose  up  to  oppose  any  attempt
that  was  made  against  them,  and  he  who  was  chief  in  time
of  peace,  naturally  preserved  his  influence  in  time  of  war.
But  after  the  division  of  labour  took  place,  it  became
necessary  that  some  should  stay  at  home,  to  be  employed
in  agriculture  and  other  arts,  while  the  rest  went  out  to
war.  After  the  appropriation  of  lands  and  the  distinction
of  ranks  were  in  some  measure  introduced,  the  cultivation
of  the  ground  would  naturally  fall  to  the  meanest  rank.
The  less  laborious,  but  more  honourable  employment  of
military  service,  would  be  claimed  by  the  highest  order.
Accordingly  we  find  that  this  was  the  practice  of  all  nations
in  their  primitive  state.  The  Roman  equitcs  or  knights
were  originally  horsemen  in  the  army,  and  no  slaves  or
those  who  did  not  pay  taxes  ever  went  out  to  war.  In  like
manner  among  our  ancestors  only  they  who  held  by  what
was  called  knight's  service  were  employed  in  the  defence
of  the  state,  and  the  ancient  villains  were  never  considered
as  a  part  of  the  national  force.

When  the  state  was  thus  defended  by  men  of  honour


MILITIAS  261

who  would  do  their  duty  from  this  principle,  there  was  no
occasion  for  discipline.  But  when  arts  and  manufactures
increased,  and  were  thought  worthy  of  attention,  and  men
found  that  they  could  rise  in  dignity  by  applying  to  them,
and  it  became  inconvenient  for  the  rich  to  go  out  to  war,
from  a  principle  of  avarice,  these  arts,  which  were  at  first
despised  by  the  active  and  ambitious,  soon  came  to  claim
their  whole  attention.  The  merchant  who  can  make  two
or  three  thousand  pounds  at  home  will  not  incline  to  go
out  to  war,  but  it  was  an  amusement  to  an  ancient  knight
who  had  nothing  else  ado.  When  the  improvement  of
arts  and  manufactures  was  thought  an  object  deserving
the  attention  of  the  higher  ranks,  the  defence  of  the  state
naturally  became  the  province  of  the  lower,  because  the
rich  can  never  be  forced  to  do  anything  but  what  they
please.  In  Rome,  after  the  knights  gave  over  serving  in
the  army,  the  lowest  of  the  people  went  in  their  stead,  and
in  our  own  country,  after  the  feudal  militia  went  out,  another
of  the  lowest  ranks  succeeded.  This  therefore  is  the  pro
gress  of  military  service  in  every  country.  Among  a  nation
of  hunters  and  shepherds,  and  even  when  a  nation  is  ad
vanced  to  agriculture,  the  whole  body  goes  out  together  to
make  war.  When  arts  and  manufactures  begin  to  advance,
the  whole  cannot  go  out,  and  as  these  arts  are  laborious,
and  not  very  lucrative,  for  the  reasons  formerly  adduced,
the  highest  go  out.  After  that,  when  arts  and  commerce
are  still  farther  advanced,  and  begin  to  be  very  lucrative,
it  falls  to  the  meanest  to  defend  the  state '.  This  is  our
present  condition  in  Great  Britain.

1  'According  to  modern  cus-  are  such  a  low,  rascally  set  of
torn,  armies  are  made  up  of  the  people.'  Hume, 'Of the  Populous-
very  dregs  of  a  people,  fellows  too  ness  of  Ancient  Nations,'  Political
dissolute  and  worthless  for  any  Discourses,  1752,  p.  188.  Cp.with
other  occupation.'  Hutcheson,  the  whole  section,  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.
Introduction  to  Moral  Philosophy,  ch.  i.  pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  pp.  274-281 ;  and
p.  324.  '  Our  common  soldiers  see  above,  pp.  26-29.


262  PART IV  I ARMS

[J  2. Of  Discipline^

When  the  whole  body  went  out  together  there  could
l)e  no  occasion  for  military  discipline,  they  being  all,  as
it  were,  upon  the  same  level,  and  as  their  common  cause
was  so  well  discerned,  it  was  quite  unnecessary.  When
the  highest  orders  went  out,  a  principle  of  honour  would
supply  the  place  of  discipline,  but  when  this  office  fell
upon  the  lowest  order,  the  most  severe  and  rigid  discipline
became  necessary,  and  accordingly  we  find  that  it  has
been  introduced  into  all  standing  armies.  In  general,
it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  kept  under  such
authority  as  to  be  more  afraid  of  their  general  and
officers  than  of  the  enemy.  It  is  the  fear  of  their  officers
and  of  the  rigid  penalties  of  the  martial  law,  which  is  the
chief  cause  of  their  good  behaviour,  and  it  is  to  this
principle  that  W7e  owe  their  valiant  actions.  In  the  late
war  eight  hundred  Prussians  defended  a  pass  a  \vhole
day  against  several  thousands  of  Austrians,  and  at  night
in  their  retreat  deserted  almost  to  a  man.  What  could  be
the  foundation  of  this  courage  ?  It  was  not  a  principle  of
honour,  nor  love  to  their  country,  nor  a  regard  to  their
officers,  for  these  would  still  have  detained  them ;  it  was
nothing  but  the  dread  of  their  officers,  who  were  hanging,
as  it  were,  over  their  heads,  and  whom  they  durst  not
disobey.  This,  by  the  by,  shows  the  governableness  of
our  nature,  and  may  also  show  how  much  that  manly
courage  we  so  much  boast  of  depends  upon  external
circumstances.  We  may  further  observe  how  far  this
principle  of  fear  may  be  carried.  If  a  bold,  fierce,  and
tyrannic  adjutant  be  succeeded  by  one  of  a  mild  and
gentle  disposition,  the  ideas  of  terror  are  conveyed  with
the  coat,  and  it  is  some  time  before  it  be  perceived  that
he  is  not  so  terrible  as  the  other.


STANDING ARMIES  263

l§  3- Of  Standing  Armies.']

In  this  manner  standing  armies  came  to  be  introduced,
and  where  there  are  none,  the  country  is  an  easy  prey  to
its  enemies.  The  only  thing  to  be  observed  concerning
them  is  that  they  should  be  raised  in  the  most  convenient
way,  and  with  as  little  hurt  as  possible  to  the  country.
However  much  standing  armies  may  be  exclaimed  against,
in  a  certain  period  of  society  they  must  be  introduced.
A  militia  commanded  by  landed  gentlemen  in  possession
of  the  public  offices  of  the  nation  can  never  have  any
prospect  of  sacrificing  the  liberties  of  the  country  for
any  person  whatever.  Such  a  militia  would  no  doubt  be
the  best  security  against  the  standing  army  of  another
nation.

Standing  armies  are  of  two  kinds  :  the  first  is  when  the
government  gives  offices  to  particular  persons,  and  so
much  for  every  man  they  levy.  From  such  a  standing
army  as  this,  which  is  the  model  of  our  own,  there  is
less  danger  than  from  the  second  kind,  when  the  govern
ment  makes  a  slump  bargain  with  a  general  to  lead  out
a  certain  number  of  troops  for  their  assistance,  which  is
the  model  of  the  standing  armies  in  some  little  states  of
Italy.  They  make  a  bargain  with  some  chieftain  in  those
parts  where  the  arts  have  not  yet  reached,  and  as  the
officers  are  all  dependent  on  him,  and  he  independent  of
the  state,  his  employers  lie  at  his  mercy.  But  a  standing-
army  like  ours  is  not  so  apt  to  turn  their  arms  against  the
government,  because  the  officers  are  men  of  honour,  and
have  great  connexions  in  the  country.  Yet  on  some
occasions  a  standing  army  has  proved  dangerous  to  the
liberties  of  the  people,  when  that  question  concerning
the  power  of  the  sovereign  came  to  be  disputed,  as  has
been  the  case  in  our  own  country,  because  the  standing
army  generally  takes  the  side  of  the  king l.  The  principle

1  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.  ch.  i.  pt.  i.  vol.  ii.  p.  290  ;  and  above,  pp.  29,  30.


264  PART IV: ARMS

of  the  soldier  is  to  obey  his  leader,  and  as  the  king
appointed  him  and  pays  him,  it  is  to  him  that  he  thinks
he  owes  his  service.  This  would  never  be  the  case  if
a  proper  militia  were  established.  In  Sweden,  where  it
takes  place,  they  are  in  no  danger.  Thus  far  concerning
standing  armies.  It  is  needless  to  enter  into  any  account
of  their  pay,  and  other  circumstances.

Having  considered  the  laws  of  nature  as  we  proposed,
as  they  regard  justice,  police,  revenue,  and  arms,  we  shall
proceed  to  the  last  part  of  our  plan,  which  is  to  consider
the  law  of  nations,  or  the  claims  which  one  nation  may
have  upon  another.


[PART  V:]
OF THE LAWS OF NATIONS

[Introduction.]

IT  is  to  be  observed  that  the  rules  which  nations  ought
to  observe,  or  do  observe  with  one  another,  cannot  be
treated  so  accurately  as  private  or  public  law.  We  find
the  rules  of  property  pretty  exactly  established  in  every
nation.  The  extent  of  the  sovereign's  power,  as  well  as
the  duty  of  the  subject,  so  far  as  justice  is  concerned,  are
pretty  uniform  everywhere.  But  with  respect  to  the  laws
of  nations,  we  can  scarce  mention  any  one  regulation  which
is  established  with  the  common  consent  of  all  nations,  and
observed  as  such  at  all  times  l.  This  must  necessarily  be
the  case,  for  where  there  is  no  supreme  legislative  power
nor  judge  to  settle  differences,  we  may  always  expect  un
certainty  and  irregularity.

The  laws  of  nations  are  such  as  take  place  either  in
peace  or  war.  Those  that  take  place  in  times  of  peace
have  been  formerly  explained,  where  it  was  shown  with
respect  to  aliens  that  they  are  entitled  to  security  as  to
their  persons  and  effects,  but  that  they  have  no  power  to

1  '  Vix  ullum  ius  reperitur  extra  ius  naturale  .  .  .  omnibus  gentibus
commune.'  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et pads,  lib.  i.  cap.  i.  $  14.


266  PART V  I LAWS OF NATIONS

make  a  will,  but  all  goes  to  the  sovereign  at  their  death l.
The  laws  or  rules  observed  in  time  of  war  shall  be  con
sidered  in  the  following  order:

First,  what  is  a  just  cause  of  war,  or  according  to  the
Latin  phrase,  quando  liceat  bellare  ?

Secondly,  what  it  is  lawful  for  one  nation  to  do  to
another  in  time  of  war,  or  quantum  liceat  in  hello,  and  upon
this  head  we  shall  consider  the  differences  between  the
ancient  and  modern  governments,  and  the  great  modifi
cations  of  the  latter.

Thirdly,  what  is  due  to  neutral  nations  from  the  belli
gerent  powers.

Fourthly,  the  rights  of  ambassadors  between  different
nations.

g  i. When  is  War  Lawful?}

First,  quando  liceat  bellare?  In  general  whatever  is
the  foundation  of  a  proper  law  suit  before  a  court  of  justice
may  be  a  just  occasion  of  war-.  The  foundation  of  a  law
suit  is  the  violation  of  some  perfect  right  whose  perform
ance  may  be  extorted  by  force,  and  is  so  extorted  in  a  rude
society,  but  in  modern  times  is  decided  by  the  magistrate,
lest  the  society  should  be  disturbed  by  every  one  taking
justice  at  his  own  hands.  When  one  nation  encroaches  on
the  property  of  another,  or  puts  to  death  the  subjects  of
another,  imprisons  them,  or  refuses  them  justice  when
injured,  the  sovereign  is  bound  to  demand  satisfaction  for
the  offence,  as  it  is  the  intention  of  the  government  to
protect  its  several  members  from  foreign  enemies,  and  if
redress  be  refused,  there  is  a  foundation  for  war.  In  the
same  manner  breach  of  contract,  as  when  a  debt  is  due  by
one  nation  to  another,  and  payment  refused,  is  a  very  just
occasion  of  war.  If,  for  example,  the  king  of  Prussia  should

1  Above,  p.  65,  where  see  note  2. belli ; nam  ubi iudicia deficiunt

2  'Ac plane quotactionumforen- incipit  bellum.' Grotius,  De  iure
slum sunt fontes, totidem sunt belli  ei  pads,  lib.  ii.  cap.  i.  §  2.


WHAT IS LAWFUL IN WAR  ?  267

refuse  to  pay  the  money  advanced  for  him  by  the  British
nation  in  the  time  of  the  last  war,  a  declaration  of  war
against  him  would  be  just  and  reasonable.  Every  offence
of  the  sovereign  of  one  country  against  the  sovereign  of
another,  or  of  the  sovereign  against  the  subject,  or  of  the
subject  of  one  country  against  the  subject  of  another,  with
out  giving  reasonable  satisfaction,  may  be  the  cause  of
a  war.

There  seems  to  be  only  one  exception  to  the  general
rule,  that  everything  that  is  the  subject  of  a  law  suit  may
be  a  cause  of  war,  and  that  is  with  respect  to  quasi-con-
tracts.  In  this  case,  indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  determine
whether  a  war  would  be  reasonable  or  not,  and  we  find  no
instance  of  a  war  declared  upon  the  violation  of  this  right.
It  must  be  allowed  that  the  introduction  of  quasi-contract
wfas  the  highest  stretch  of  equity,  and  except  in  the  Roman
law  it  was  never  perfected  nor  introduced.  In  England,  if
you  repair  a  man's  house  in  his  absence,  you  must  trust
to  him  for  the  payment  of  it,  for  you  have  no  action  by  law.
In  the  same  manner,  if  a  Russian  do  a  piece  of  service  to
an  English  merchant,  which,  if  he  had  not  done,  the
merchant  would  have  suffered  extremely,  and  afterwards
demand  satisfaction  for  his  trouble,  if  he  be  refused  it  and
apply  to  the  courts  of  justice,  they  will  tell  him  that  he
must  depend  on  the  honour  of  the  merchant  for  payment.
Excepting  this,  everything  which  is  the  foundation  of  a
proper  law  suit,  will  also  make  war  just  and  reasonable.

U  2. What  is  Lawful  in  War  7}

[Second,]  quantum  liceat  [in]  hello?  How  far  a  nation
may  push  the  resentment  of  an  injury  against  the  nation
which  has  injured  them,  is  not  easy  to  determine.  The
practice  of  ancient  and  modern  nations  differs  extremely.
In  general,  when  an  injury  is  clearly  and  distinctly
done,  or  when  it  is  plainly  intended  and  satisfaction


268  PART V  : LAWS OF NATIONS

refused,  resentment  is  necessary  and  just.  There  are  a
few  cases  in  which  it  is  lawful  even  without  satisfaction
being  demanded.  If  a  robber  was  plainly  intending  to
kill  you,  it  would  be  quite  lawful  in  you  to  do  all  you
could  to  prevent  him.  The  injury  is  plain.  In  the  same
manner,  when  one  nation  seems  to  be  conspiring  against
another,  though  it  may  have  done  no  real  injury,  it  is
necessary  that  it  should  be  obliged  to  declare  its  inten
tions,  and  to  give  security  when  this  demand  would  not
subject  it  to  inconveniences.  Though  this  satisfaction  be
not  demanded,  when  the  King  of  Prussia  saw  his  dominions
about  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  Elector  of  Saxony  and
the  Queen  of  Hungary1,  it  was  quite  right  in  him  to  be
beforehand  with  them,  and  to  take  possession  of  their
territories,  and  nothing  would  have  been  more  absurd
than  for  him  to  have  told  them  that  he  was  going  to  attack
them.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be  only  a  debt  that  is  due,
it  would  be  as  unreasonable  to  go  to  war  without  demand
ing  satisfaction,  and  it  is  only  upon  the  dilatory  and  evasive
manner  of  giving  satisfaction  that  a  war  in  this  case
becomes  lawful.

But  to  consider  a  little  more  particularly  what  is  lawful
in  war,  suppose  a  subject  of  any  government  is  injured,
they  who  have  injured  him  become  natural  objects  of
resentment,  and  also  the  government  which  protects
him  if  it  refuse  satisfaction,  but  the  greater  part  of  the
nation  is  perfectly  innocent,  and  knows  nothing  about
the  affair.  In  the  late  war  with  France,  not  one  out  of
twenty,  either  of  the  French  or  us,  knew  anything  of  the
offences  done.  Upon  what  principle  or  foundation  of
justice  therefore  do  we  take  their  goods  from  them,  and
distress  them  in  all  possible  ways?  This  can  by  no
means  be  founded  upon  justice  and  equity,  properly  so
called,  it  must  be  upon  necessity,  which,  indeed,  in  this
case,  is  a  part  of  justice.

1  In  1756.


WHAT IS LAWFUL IN WAR?  269

Mr.  Hutcheson1  indeed  very  ingeniously  accounts  for
this,  but  if  we  examine  his  opinion  thoroughly,  we  shall
find  that  he  has  not  built  his  reasoning  on  a  proper
foundation.  Every  nation,  says  he,  maintains  and  sup
ports  the  government  for  its  own  good.  If  the  govern
ment  commit  any  offence  against  a  neighbouring  sovereign
or  subject,  and  its  own  people  continue  to  support  and
protect  it,  as  it  were,  in  it,  they  thereby  become  accessory
and  liable  to  punishment  along  with  [it].  As  by  the  Roman
law,  if  any  of  those  slaves  which  every  private  person  kept
for  his  own  advantage,  had  done  any  damage  to  another,
one  of  these  two  things  was  to  be  done,  he  must  either
keep  the  slave  no  longer,  or  pay  the  damage,  in  like
manner  a  nation  must  either  allow  itself  to  be  liable  for  the
damages,  or  give  up  the  government  altogether  2.  It  is  to
be  observed  that  in  this  reasoning,  though  excessively  in
genious,  the  cases  are  not  in  the  smallest  degree  parallel.
A  man  can  do  with  his  slave  as  he  pleases,  he  can  either
put  him  away,  or  pay  what  damages  he  has  occasioned,
but  a  nation  in  most  cases  can  neither  do  the  one  nor  the
other.  A  government  is  often  maintained,  not  for  the
nation's  preservation,  but  its  own.  It  was  never  the
doctrine  of  any  public  law  that  the  subjects  had  a  right
to  dispose  of  the  sovereign,  not  even  in  England,  where
his  right  has  been  so  much  contested.  How  then  comes
.it  that  a  nation  should  be  guilty  of  an  injury  which  was
not  in  its  power  ?

The  real  cause  why  the  whole  nation  is  thought  a
reasonable  object  of  resentment  is  that  we  do  not  feel
for  those  at  a  distance  as  we  do  for  those  near  us.  We
have  been  injured  by  France,  our  resentment  rises  against
the  whole  nation  instead  of  the  government,  and  they,
through  a  blind  indiscriminating  faculty  natural  to  man-

1  MS.  reads  '  Hutchinson.'  336. Cf.  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et

2  Hutcheson, Introduction to pads,  lib.  ii.  cap.  xxi.  §§  2,  7.
Moral Philosophy, pp. 276-277,


270  PART V  : LAWS OF NATIONS

kind,  become  the  objects  of  an  unreasonable  resentment.
In  a  war  between  France  and  us,  a  Dane  would  naturally
enter  into  the  same  sentiments  that  we  do,  and  would
involve  together  without  distinction  both  the  guilty  and
the  innocent l.  This  is  however  quite  contrary  to  the  rules
of  justice,  observed  with  regard  to  our  own  subjects.  We
would  rather  choose  that  ten  guilty  persons  should  escape
than  that  one  innocent  person  should  suffer.  Another
cause  is  that  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  get  satisfaction
from  a  subject  or  from  a  sovereign  that  may  have  offended.
They  are  generally  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  and  per
fectly  well  secured.  If  we  could  get  at  them  no  doubt  they
would  be  the  first  objects  of  our  resentment,  but  as  this
is  impossible,  we  must  make  reprisals  some  other  way.
We  have  suffered  unjustly  on  account  of  our  connexions,
let  them  also  suffer  unjustly  on  account  of  theirs.  In
war  there  must  always  be  the  greatest  injustice,  but  it  is
inevitable.

The  practice  of  ancient  and  modern  nations  differs  widely
with  regard  to  the  length  to  which  the  outrages  of  war  may
be  carried.  Barbarians,  if  they  do  not  kill  those  taken  in
war,  may  dispose  of  them  as  they  please.  As  all  who  made
war  were  considered  as  robbers  and  violators  of  the  peace
of  society,  such  punishments  were  by  no  means  thought  in
adequate.  Even  among  the  Romans,  if  the  battering  ram
had  once  struck  the  walls,  no  agreement  nor  capitulation
was  allowed,  but  everything  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
conquerors,  and  they  were  at  liberty  to  use  it  as  they
pleased.  So  much  was  this  the  case  in  Cicero's  time
that  he  represents  it  as  the  greatest  stretch  of  humanity
that  a  capitulation  was  allowed  after  the  ram  had  once
struck  the  walls  2.  But  though  force  and  fraud  were  in

1  I.e. an impartial foreigner  be  enraged  at  each  other,

would  consider it  quite natural  2  '  At  Cicero  (Off.  i.  n)  non  tarn

that 'we '  (the whole  English  and  quid fiat, quam quid natura

the  whole  French  nation)  should  aequum  sit  respiciens,  sic  ea  de


WHAT IS LAWFUL IN WAR  ?  271

former  periods  the  great  virtues  of  war,  modern  manners
have  come  to  a  greater  degree  of  refinement,  both  with
respect  to  persons  and  effects.  Captives  in  war  are  now
by  no  means  made  slaves  or  liable  to  oppression  :  an
officer  is  set  free  upon  his  parole  or  word  of  honour;  and
in  the  war  between  France  and  us,  they  generally  treated
our  wounded  prisoners  better  than  their  own  wounded
soldiers1.  Indeed,  there  is  no  nation  that  pushes  this
point  of  gallantry  farther  than  we  do.  When  the  sixpence
a  day  which  was  allowed  the  French  prisoners  at  Edin
burgh  and  elsewhere,  was  thought  insufficient  to  maintain
them  on  account  of  the  diminution  it  sustained  before  it
came  to  their  hands  by  sub-contracts,  £c,  a  collection
of  £10,000  was  generously  made  for  them.  In  general
prisoners  of  war  are  now  as  well  treated  as  other  people.

In  the  same  manner  cartel  treaties,  by  which  soldiers
and  sailors  are  valued  at  so  much,  and  exchanged  at  the
end  of  every  campaign,  the  nation  which  has  lost  most
prisoners  paying  the  balance,  is  an  evidence  of  our  refine
ment  in  humanity-'.  In  the  late  war  indeed,  we  refused  to
enter  into  any  such  treaty  with  France  for  sailors,  and  by
this  wise  regulation  soon  unmanned  their  navy,  as  we  took
a  great  many  more  than  they  \  It  was  the  want  of  humanity

re  pronuntiat  :  ct cum iis,  quos  Hume,  '  Of  the  Populousncss  of

vi  deviceris  consulendum  est,  turn  Ancient Nations,' Political Dis-

iiquiarmispositisadimperatorum  courses,  1752,  p.  191.  The  London

fidem  confugiunt  quamvis  murum  Chronicle for March 5, 1763,

aries percusserit, recipiendi.'  mentions,£i,2oo,oooasthebalance

Grotius,  De  hire  belli ei pads,  lib.  iii.  due  for  the  maintenance,  &c.,  of

cap.  xi.  §  14.  French  prisoners.  W.  of  N.  bk.  v.

1  See  e.g.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  ch.  iii.  vol.  ii.  p.  524  gives  ,£670,000
Jan.,  1759.  p.  42.  as  the 'composition  for  French

2  '  The  only  cartel  I  remember  prisoners.' The  practice  of  ran-
in  ancient  history  is  that  betwixt  soming  prisoners  did  not  die  out
Demetrius Poliorcetes  and the  before  1780. See  W. E. Hall,
Rhodians ; when it  was agreed  International  Law,  4th  ed.,  1895,
that a free citizen should be  p.  428,  note  i.

restored  for  1000  drachmas,  a  3  See  Considerations  on  the
slave  bearing  arms  for  500.'  Exchange  of  Seamen  Prisoners  of


272  PART V  I LAWS OF NATIONS

no  doubt  which  rendered  ancient  towns  so  obstinate,  for  it
was  better  to  sustain  the  most  terrible  hardships  than  to
surrender,  but  now  the  besieged  know  very  well  how  they
will  be  treated  before  they  capitulate,  and  will  run  no  great
risk  before  they  do  so l.

This  superior  degree  of  humanity  was  introduced  during
the  time  of  Popery.  We  never  find  it  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  notwithstanding  all  their  attainments.  The
Pope  was  considered  as  the  common  father  of  Christendom,
the  clergy  were  under  his  subjection,  and  he  had  inter
course  by  his  legates  with  all  the  courts  of  Europe.  By
this  they  were  more  nearly  connected,  and  he  obliged
them  to  treat  one  another  with  more  humanity.  The
Holy  War  too,  which  at  that  time  was  undertaken  by
most  of  the  princes  in  Europe,  made  them  turn  their  arms
against  all  those  of  a  different  religion,  who  they  thought
deserved  to  be  treated  in  the  most  cruel  manner,  but  when
they  came  to  be  engaged  in  a  war  among  themselves,  as
they  had  all  been  on  one  side  in  that  common  cause,  and
as  they  thought  that  Christians  should  not  be  treated  in
the  same  manner  with  infidels,  a  greater  degree  of
humanity  was  introduced.  From  these  causes,  moderns
behave  differently  from  the  ancients  with  regard  to  the
persons  of  prisoners.

It  is  more  from  motives  of  policy  than  humanity  that
the  effects  of  enemies  are  secured.  When  a  French  army
invades  Germany,  the  general  makes  a  law  that  all  the
people  who  will  live  quietly,  and  do  not  rise  against  him,
shall  be  secure  in  their  persons  and  possessions,  and  he
will  punish  a  soldier  as  severely  for  injuring  the  peasants
of  his  enemy's  country  as  those  of  his  own.  But  this  is
not  the  case  in  a  sea  war.  An  admiral  seizes  and  plunders

War, 1758,  a  pamphlet on the  the Populousness of Ancient

other  side.  Nations,'  Political  Discourses,  1752,

1  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et  facts,  p.  190.
lib.  iii.  cap.  xii.  §  8 ;  Hume,  '  Of


WHAT IS LAWFUL IN WAR?  273

all  the  merchant  ships  he  can  get.  Many  of  the  merchants
have  done  as  little  harm  as  the  peasants ;  why  then  this
distinction  ?  It  is  the  interest  of  the  general  not  to  rob
the  peasants,  because  it  would  be  difficult  to  march  an
army  carrying  all  its  provisions  through  the  country  of  an
enemy.  But  by  engaging  them  to  stay  he  is  supplied  with
out  any  other  expedient.  By  this  means  war  is  so  far  from
being  a  disadvantage  in  a  well  cultivated  country,  that
many  get  rich  by  it.  When  the  Netherlands  is  the  seat
of  war  all  the  peasants  grow  rich,  for  they  pay  no  rent
when  the  enemy  are  in  the  country,  and  provisions  sell
at  a  high  rate.  This  is  indeed  at  the  expense  of  the  land
lords  and  better  sort  of  people,  who  are  generally  ruined
on  such  occasions.  This  is  so  much  the  case  that  all  the
poor  people  who  are  abroad,  whenever  the}'  hear  of  a  war,
will  not  stay  from  their  native  country.  It  is  quite  other-
ways  in  a  sea  war.  Every  ship  carries  its  own  provisions,
and  has  no  dependence  for  them  upon  the  ships  which  it
meets.

Another  cause  of  modern  refinement  is  that  courtesy,  or
rather  gallantry,  which  takes  place  between  hostile  nations,
by  which  even  ambassadors  are  kept  at  their  several  courts.
Anciently  it  was  the  greatest  gallantry  to  kill  the  general
of  an  army1,  but  nothing  could  make  a  person  more  infamous
at  present  than  such  a  practice.  When  the  king  of  France
in  perse-  besieged  a  certain  castle,  the  governor  sent  to
know  in  what  part  of  the  camp  the  king  lodged,  that  he
might  not  cannonade  it2.  The  king  of  Prussia  indeed  did
not  grant  the  princes  of  Saxony  this  request,  when  they

1  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et  pads,  quartier  :  Louis  XIV  le  remercia
lib.  iii.  cap.  iv.  §  18.  de sa politesse, et lui fit  dire

2  '  Le  comte  de  Croui,  qui  etait  que  son  quartier  serait  dans  tout
gouverneur  de  la  ville  [Lille]  ...  le  camp  de  son  armee.' Histoire
envoya  complimenter  le  Roi,  et  de  Henri  de  la Tour  d'Auvergne
le  supplier  de  le  faire  avertir  de  Vicomte  de  Turenne,  1735,  torn.  i.
quel  cote  il  camperait,  pour  em-  p.  416.

pecher qu'on ne  tirat sur  son


274  PART V  : LAWS OF NATIONS

informed  him  where  the  royal  tent  stood,  but  this  was
because  he  was  assured  that  the  chief  magazine  was  there.
Now  if  there  be  any  in  a  nation  who  have  injured  more
than  others,  they  are  the  king  and  generals.  How  comes
it  then  that  it  is  not  now  thought  lawful  to  kill  them  as
well  as  formerly  ?  The  plain  reason  is  that  monarchies,
whose  interest  it  always  is  to  show  respect  to  those  in
authority,  set  the  example  at  present,  but  republics,  whose
interest  lies  in  adopting  the  opposite  maxim,  formerly  led
the  fashion1.

The  same  policy  which  makes  us  not  so  apt  to  go  to
war  makes  us  also  more  favourable  than  formerly,  after  an
entire  conquest.  Anciently  an  enemy  forfeited  all  his
possessions,  and  was  disposed  of  at  the  pleasure  of  the
conquerors.  It  was  on  this  account  that  the  Romans
had  often  to  people  a  country  anew,  and  sent  out  colonies2.
It  is  not  so  now,  a  conquered  country  in  a  manner  only
changes  masters,  they  may  be  subjected  to  new  taxes
and  other  regulations,  but  need  no  new  people.  The
conqueror  generally  allows  them  the  possession  of  their
religion  and  laws,  which  is  a  practice  much  better  than
the  ancient.  Modern  armies  too,  are  less  irritated  at  one
another,  because  fire  arms  keep  them  at  a  greater  distance3.
When  they  always  fought  sword  in  hand,  their  rage  and
fury  were  raised  to  the  highest  pitch,  and  as  they  were
mixed  with  one  another  the  slaughter  was  vastly  greater.


\§  3- Of  the  Rights  of  Neutral  Nations.]

Third,  we  are  next  to  show  what  is  due  to  neutral  nations
from  the  belligerent  powers.

The rule  of  justice  with  respect  to  neutral  nations  is,

'This remark has already 3  Hume,  '  Of  the  Populousness

occurred  above,  pp.  55,  56.  of  Ancient  Nations,'  Political  Dis-

2  W.  of  N.  bk.  iv.  ch.  vii.  pt.  i.  courses,  1752.  p.  189.
vol.  ii.  pp.  136,  137.


RIGHTS OF NEUTRALS  275

that  as  they  have  offended  no  party,  they  should  suffer  no
injury.  In  a  war  between  France  and  England  the  Dutch
should  have  the  liberty  of  trading  to  both  countries,  as  in
the  time  of  peace,  as  they  have  injured  neither  party.  Un
less  when  they  carry  contraband  goods,  or  are  going  to
a  town  that  is  besieged,  they  can  trade  to  any  part  of  the
country  without  molestation.  A  neutral  bottom  will  not,
however,  protect  the  goods  of  the  enemy,  nor  does  the
hostility  of  the  bottom,  so  to  speak,  forfeit  the  goods  of  the
neutral  power.  There  is  some  difference  between  the
practice  of  ancient  and  modern  nations  with  respect  to
the  ins  postliniinii,  or  the  recovery  of  what  was  lost1.  The
maxim  in  time  of  war  anciently  was,  we  are  always  in  the
right,  and  our  enemies  always  in  the  wrong;  whatever  is
taken  from  the  enemy  is  justly  taken,  whatever  is  taken
from  us  is  unjustly  taken.  On  this  account  if  a  Cartha
ginian  had  sold  to  a  Roman  a  Roman  ship  taken  in  war,
the  former  owner,  whenever  he  had  an  opportunity,  took
it  back,  as  on  the  above  principle  it  was  unjustly  taken
from  him.  Now  it  is  quite  otherways  ;  we  consider  every
thing  done  in  war  as  just  and  equitable,  and  neither  demand,
nor  would  take  back  any  captures  made  in  it.  If  an  English
ship  be  taken  by  the  French  and  sold  to  the  Dutch,  and
come  to  a  British  harbour,  the  former  owner  pretends  no
claim  to  her,  for  he  had  lost  all  hopes  of  it  when  it  had
gone  into  the  possession  of  the  enemy.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  there  is  a  very  great  difference
in  the  conduct  of  belligerent  nations  towards  one  that  is
neutral,  in  a  land  war,  from  what  [it]  is  in  a  sea  war,  which  is
more  the  effect  of  policy  than  humanity.  When  an  army
retreats,  and  the  conqueror  pursues  into  a  neutral  nation,
unless  it  have  power  to  hold  out  both,  it  becomes  the  seat
of  war,  as  is  often  the  case,  and  little  or  no  satisfaction  is
given  for  damages  ;  but  in  a  sea  war,  a  ship  taken  from  the
most  inconsiderable  neutral  power  is  always  restored.
1  Grotius,  De  inre  belli  et pacts,  lib.  iii.  cap.  vi.  §  3,  cap  ix.  §  15.
T  2


276  PART V  : LAWS OF NATIONS

The  reason  commonly  assigned,  that  it  injures  their
commerce  more  to  take  their  ships  than  anything  else,
is  unsatisfactory,  for  a  land  war  hurts  commerce  more
than  it  does.  The  real  reason  is  that  a  small  country
has  it  not  in  its  power  to  assert  its  neutrality  in  a  land
war,  but  the  smallest  is  able  to  do  it  in  a  sea  war.  A
small  fort  can  oblige  of  the  greatest  nation  to  respect  the
neutrality  of  its  harbour.


[$4. Of  the  Rights  of  Ambassadors^]

Four[th],  we  are  in  the  last  place  to  consider  the  rights
of  ambassadors  between  different  nations.

When  nations  came  to  have  a  great  deal  of  business  one
with  another,  it  was  found  necessary  to  send  messengers
betwixt  them,  who  wrere  the  first  ambassadors.  Anciently,
as  there  was  little  commerce  carried  on  between  different
nations,  ambassadors  were  only  sent  on  particular  occa
sions,  and  were  what  wre  now  call  ambassadors  extraor
dinary,  who  returned  home  after  their  business  was
transacted.  We  find  nothing  like  resident  ambassadors
in  Rome  or  Greece  ;  their  whole  office  was  on  particular
occasions  to  conclude  peace,  make  alliances,  &c.  The
first  time  that  resident  ambassadors  were  employed,  was
in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  by  Ferdinand,
King  of  Spain.  Even  the  word  ambassador  comes  from
the  Spanish  verb,  ambassare,  to  send  '.  The  Pope,  indeed,
from  the  earliest  times  had  residents,  or  legates,  at  all  the
courts  of  Europe.  The  very  same  reason  that  makes
embassies  now  so  frequent,  induced  the  Pope  formerly
to  fall  upon  this  method.  He  had  business  in  all  the
countries  of  Europe,  and  a  great  part  of  his  revenue  was
collected  from  them,  and  as  they  were  continually  attempt-

1  '  Le  mot  d'Ambassadeur,  qui  signifie  envoyer.'  Wicque-
Ambasiadore,  ou  Embaxador  tire  fort,  LAmbassadeur  et  ses  /one-
son  origine  de  1'espagnol  embiar,  fions,  1681,  p.  4.


RIGHTS OF AMBASSADORS  277

ing  to  infringe  the  right  he  claimed,  he  found  it  necessary
to  have  a  person  constantly  residing  at  their  courts,  to  see
that  his  privileges  were  preserved.  The  Pope  from  this
custom  derived  several  advantages.

When  commerce  was  introduced  into  Europe,  and  the
privileges  of  every  country,  with  the  duties  payable  on
goods  in  another,  were  settled,  the  merchants  of  one
country  had  constant  claims  on  those  of  another.  They
themselves  were  strangers  in  those  countries,  and  would
very  readily  be  injured,  and  oftener  think  themselves  so.
It  became  necessary,  therefore,  to  have  one  of  their  country
men  constantly  residing  at  the  courts  of  different  nations
to  protect  the  rights  of  his  fellow-subjects.  Anciently,  as
was  observed,  there  was  little  intercourse  with  different
nations,  and  therefore  no  occasion  for  resident  ambassadors,
but  now,  as  there  is  something  almost  every  day  to  adjust
betwixt  dealers,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  some
person  of  weight  and  authority  who  has  access  to  the
court,  to  prevent  any  occasion  of  quarrel  betwixt  them.
We  have  already  observed  that  it  was  Ferdinand  of  Spain
who  established  this  practice.  At  first  it  gave  great
jealousy  to  the  neighbouring  nations  to  keep  ambassadors
residing  at  their  courts.  He,  indeed,  pretended  to  have  no
right  to  do  this,  but  by  sending  an  ambassador  upon  a
certain  occasion,  and  starting  different  questions,  he  found
means  of  keeping  him  there.  This  practice  was  soon
imitated,  and  it  immediately  became  the  universal  custom
of  the  European  princes,  and  was  so  far  from  being  taken
amiss  that  it  was  reckoned  a  great  affront  not  to  send  one.
Grotius,  whose  opinions  are  founded  on  the  practice  of
ancient  nations,  declares  against  resident  ambassadors,  and
calls  them  resident  spies  ',  but  if  he  had  lived  in  the  present

1  Grotius,  De  iure  belli  et  pacts,  quibus quam non sit opus

lib.  ii.  cap.  xviii.  §  3,  says  '  optimo  docet mos antiquus cui illae

iure  reiici  possunt  quae  nunc  in  ignoratae,' but does not call

usu sunt legationes assiduae,  permanent  ambassadors  resident


278  PART V  I LAWS OF NATIONS

age,  he  would  have  found  that  extensive  commerce  renders
it  impossible  to  preserve  peace  a  month,  unless  grievances
be  redressed  by  a  man  of  authority,  who  knows  the  customs
of  the  country,  and  is  capable  of  explaining  what  injuries
are  really  done.  The  custom  of  sending  ambassadors  pre
serves  peace,  and  by  giving  intelligence,  prevents  one
country  from  being  invaded  by  another  without  timeous
notice.  When  any  kind  of  dispute  happens  and  the
ambassador  is  recalled,  you  can  have  intelligence  by
your  communication  with  other  courts,  your  ambassador
there  being  informed,  for  ambassadors  in  general  are
acquainted  with  all  the  business  in  Europe.

Though  one  country  might  attain  some  kind  of  pre
eminence  by  the  influence  and  assiduity  of  its  ambassador,
no  attention  was  for  a  long  time  given  to  it,  and  that
balance  of  power  which  has  of  late  been  so  much  talked
of,  was  never  then  heard  of.  Every  sovereign  had
enough  to  do  within  his  own  dominions,  and  could  bestow
little  attention  on  foreign  powers.  Before  the  institution
of  residents  they  could  have  little  intelligence,  but  ever
since  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century  the  nations
of  Europe  were  divided  into  two  great  alliances.  On  the
one  hand  were  England,  Holland,  Hungary,  Muscovy,  £c.,
on  the  other  France,  Spain,  Prussia,  Denmark,  Sweden,  &c.
In  this  manner  a  kind  of  alliance  was  kept  up,  sometimes
one  leaving  the  one  side,  and  another  joining  it,  as  at
present  Prussia  is  with  L^ngland,  and  Hungary  on  the
other  side.  A  system  of  this  kind  was  established  in  Italy
about  [the]  fifteenth  century  among  the  great  families  there.
The  resident  ambassadors  of  these  nations  hinder  any  one
country  from  domineering  over  another,  either  by  sea  or
land,  and  are  formed  into  a  kind  of  council  not  unlike  that

spies. Cocceius' note on the  who  there  mentions  acting  as  a

passage,  however, quotes  Wicque-  spy  as  one  of  the  functions  of  a

fort,  Memoires  touchant  les  Am-  resident  ambassador.
b.issadeitrs,  La  Haye,  1677,  p.  438,


RIGHTS OF AMBASSADORS  279

of  the  Amphictyons  in  ancient  Greece.  They  have  power
to  advise  and  consult  concerning  matters,  but  not  to  deter
mine  any,  and  by  combining  together  can  threaten  any  one
country  pretending  to  superiority,  or  making  an  unreason
able  demand.  Post  offices,  too,  are  of  great  importance
for  procuring  intelligence,  as  communication  is  open
through  all  these  countries,  both  in  peace  and  war,
which  makes  commerce  easy,  and  gives  notice  of  every
movement.

An  ambassador's  person  must  be  sacred,  and  not  subject
to  any  of  the  courts  of  justice  in  the  country  where  he
resides.  If  he  contract  debts,  or  do  an)'  injury,  a  com
plaint  must  be  made  to  his  country.  When  the  Dutch
arrested  the  Russian  ambassador  in  the  year  1718,  it  was
complained  of  as  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  nations  l.  The
goods  which  an  ambassador  buys  are  not  subject  to  any
custom.  As  a  sovereign  would  be  exempted  from  taxes,
so  must  his  ambassador  who  represents  him  ~.  When  an
ambassador  makes  any  attempt  to  disturb  the  peace  by
entering  into  conspiracies  or  the  like,  he  may  be  im
prisoned.  By  way  of  compliment,  and  to  keep  up  the
dignity  of  an  ambassador,  his  house  is  considered  as  an
asylum  for  offenders.  He  must  be  cautious,  however,  of
this  privilege,  and  extend  his  authority  only  to  the  pro
tection  of  debtors  and  small  delinquents,  for  the  right  will
be  broken  through  if  he  harbour  those  guilty  of  capital
crimes.  The  servants  of  ambassadors,  too,  are  entitled  to
some  considerable  privileges ;  if  indeed  they  have  con
tracted  debts,  they  may  be  arrested,  but  this  is  never  done
voluntarily.

1  It is probable that two, or  arrested  the  Spanish  ambassador

possibly  three,  cases  are  here  con-  in  1718.

fused  by  the  reporter. The  Dutch a  Eighteenth  century London

arrested Goertz, the Swedish  local ratingactscommonly provide

minister,  in  1717; the English  that  rates  on  houses  let  to  ambas-

arrested  the  Russian  ambassador  sadors  shall  be  paid  by  the  land-

for debt in 1708; the French  lords.


280  PART V  I LAWS OF NATIONS

All  the  words  that  signify  those  persons  employed  by
one  court  at  another  are  derived  from  the  Spanish  language.
The  Spanish  court  was  then  the  most  ceremonious  in
the  world,  and  Spanish  dress  was  everywhere  affected.
As  ambassadors  were  obliged  to  keep  up  much  ceremony,
they  were  hindered  in  the  prosecution  of  their  business.
A  man  that  has  to  negociate  matters  of  the  highest  import
ance  could  not  allow  so  much  time  to  be  spent  in  the  end
less  ceremony  of  paying  and  returning  visits.  Envoys
were  therefore  sent,  to  whom  less  ceremony  was  due,  and
who  could  be  addressed  on  any  occasion;  their  dignity,  too
soon  advanced,  and  incapacitated  them  to  transact  business!
As  they  continued  for  some  time,  they  were  called  resident
ambassadors  ordinary,  being  of  an  inferior  order  to  the
ambassadors  extraordinary.  Below  this  rank  is  the
minister,  who  resides  in  the  country  on  account  of  his
own  business,  and  has  power  to  transact  any  little  busi
ness  of  the  country  to  which  he  belongs.

A  consul  is  a  particular  magistrate  who  is  a  judge  of  all
matters  relating  to  the  merchants  of  his  own  country,  and
takes  care  to  do  them  justice  in  those  places  where  it  may
not  be  very  accurately  administered.

These  are  the  names  and  offices  of  the  several  persons
employed  in  the  foreign  affairs  of  the  nation,  occasioned  by
the  introduction  of  commerce,  and  now  become  absolutely
necessary.

Thus  we  have  considered  both  the  laws  of  nature  and
the  laws  of  nations.


FINIS


I  N  D  E  X


A.

Authority  when  in  perfec
tion ii.

Aliens-  -  13,  65,  66.

Aristocracey 14,  24.

Arts  -  26,  231,  232.

Artists  original 27.

Administration  Mai- - 46.

Assassination 55,  56.

Adoption -  - 90.

Accession no.

Ascendants  -  -  115.

Act  Coventry 143.

Apprentices  -  -  104,  236.

Agriculture  160,  224,  229,  230.
Annuities  -  -  248.

Arms 260.

Ambassadors

Rights -  -  276.

Resident 277.

Person & Goods  -  278[?J,
279.

first  Established  277,  279-80.

Extraordinary  -  -  280.

Ordinary 280.

B.

Bastards 89.

Bigamy- 106,  I45[?J.


B.

Bail 144.

Bankruptcey  -  150.

Barter 169,  170.

Banks -  -  191-2.

Bullion 203.

Brokers -  251-2.

I Besieging •  •  •  276  [?28,  272].
Balance  of  Power - -  278.

C.
Contract

Foundation  of 7.

Original  u.

who  Capable  of •  •  •  • 87.

Breach  -  -  131.

Reales 132.

Consential - -  132,  133.

Quasi 134.

render'd  Real  Rights 227.

Chieftans 16.

Crimes

in  general  in  Origin - 17.

of  London  &  Paris •  • 155.
Citizenship  origin - - 28.
-  British  •  •  •  • 64.
Citizens  according  to  Law

of  Nations 62.

Courts  popular 39.


282


ORIGINAL INDEX


c.

Courts of  Justice  estab
lished 46,  47.

48.
49
53


Chancery

— Exchequer

— High  Commission

Commons  House  allowed

freedom  of  speech - - 44.
Corruption  in  Judges •  • 48.

Colliers  -  99.

Curators 105.

Collaterals -  115.

Coin  debased 134.

—  &  Money  - -  182,  183.

Chance  Medley •  141.

Children not Objects  of
Punishment  -  -  153.

Carnage 172.

Commodities -  173.

Cultivation  by  Slaves •  •  225.
Corn  it's  cheapest  Mercat  230.
Commerce by what re
tarded  • 232.

it's  influence —  253.

—  inconveniences
attending  255,  256,  257,  258.
Collectors  -  -  240-1.

Customs  French 244.

Capitulations -  -  270.

Captives 271.

Cartel  treaties d°.

Captures 275.

Consuls 280.

D.

Delinquencey 8.

Democracey T4-

So/o n  's  '  •  • 25.

Demesnes  Royal 44.

Divorces 77)  78,  80.


D.

Derelict  -  109.

Descendants 115.

Delivery,  Symbolical 125.

Duty  of  Vassals 126.

—  &  Taxes  -  -  239.

Delicts 135,  136.

Division of Labour en-
crease  Opulence 163.

— —  of  Lands  •  •  •  •  225.

Debt  public  -  -  210.

Dearths 228-9.

E.

Empire  fall  of  the  Roman

33-  34-

Entails  -  -  122-3.

Entry  forcible  or  Willfire  146.

Expence  of  Sea  &:  Land
War -  -  209.

- of  British Go
vernment  238.

-  of  Levying  Eng
lish  Land  Tax  - -  240.

Exchange 221.

English  Land  Rent -  224.

Expedition  of  the  High
landers 258.

Escape  better  for  Guilty
than  Innocent  to  suffer 270.

Effects  of  Enemies  policey
to  secure 272.

European Balance of
Power 278.

Envoys 280.


Family Injuries to Man

as  a  Member 5.

Jealousy 75.


ORIGINAL INDEX


283


Forms of  Original Go
vernment  14.

Fishers  in  ist  periods  of
Society  -  — 20.

Conduct  in  Peace

and  War d".

Fall  of  the Roman Em
pire •  -  33,  34.

&  decline  of  Repub
lic  Government  •  •  • 21,  22.

Fortifying  -  - 23.

Feudal  System 36.

• Subsists 227.

Farmers 39,  40.

Felony  -  -  - 59.

Filial  independencey  •  •  • 93.

Forcible  Marriages 106,  145.
—  Entry  or  Willfire  146.

Fiefs  -  117,  118  [?  119].

Forgery 150.

Fairs  -  -  234.

Funds •  •  249.

G.

Government  it's general
principles 3.

—  Original  Forms

14.  34-

—  Powers •  •  •  17.

—  Republican  -  22.

—  Military  •  •  •  30.
-  Turkish - -  31.

—  Modern •  •  •  34.

—  Allodial - -  35.

—  Arbitrary •  •  42.


British An


nual  expence 238.

Expence  Levy
ing  Land  Tax 240.


G.

Government  Annuities -  248.

Guardians 105.

Goods  (S:  Treasure  Dere
lict  -  109.

of  Ambassadors •  279.

Guilty  better  to  Escape
than  Innocent  to  Suffer  270.

Gallantry  in  Killing  Gene
rals  of  Armies  273.

II.

Hunter's  their  original
State 14,  20.

Conduct  in  Peace

and  War  -  -  20.

Human  Species 73.

Husband  and  Wife -  85,  86.

Humanity 97,  272.

Hypothecs -  -  129.

Homicide 139.

Highlanders  their  Expe
dition  -  258.


I.

Jurisprudence  definition
of

Justice

Injuries  to  Man  as  Man
&«».

Verbal  -

Written

Inducements  to  Obey  Ma
gistrates  —

Judges  independencey  •  •

rendered  incapable

—  Corruption  •  •  •  •

Justiciary Grand abol


ished

Juries  their  Origin


10.

45-
46.

48.

47-


284


ORIGINAL INDEX


I.

Judicial power became

Absolute 67.

-  Restrained  •  •  •  • 68.

Importation  -  70.

Institution  of  Rome's
Marriages 76.

Illegittimacey -  - 89.

Infedility  in  a  Wife 105,  106.

Inheritance  indevisible •  116.

Ideots  not  Objects  of  pun
ishment  153.

Invention  of  Machinery  -  166.

Interest  of  Money •  •  •  •  220.

Innocent  not  to  Suffer -  270.

K.

Killing  Generals  of  Ar
mies  a  Gallantry  •  •  •  •  273.

King  cannot  pardon  Mai-
Administration  45,  46.


Law

its  general  principles • 3.

of  Nations - - 62,  265.

Cannon  Law 79.

Domestic - 73.

Private 107.

Lords  Hereditary 39.

Legislative  power  •  •  17,  72
[?67J.

Legittimacey 89.

Labourers 99.

-  Wages


165-
101.
161.

163.

Land-Rent  of  England  -  224.
of  Brittain  •  •  238.


Leases  introduced

Luxury

Labour encrease
lence


Opu-


L.

Lands  their  Division 225.

Levying English Land

Tax 240.

Legates-  -  276.

M.

Magistracey 10.

Magistrates  performing

without  reward  -  -  237.

Monarchy 14.

Mai-Administration-  -  46.

Marriages 76,  106.

Masters  &  Servants  -  -  94.
Manumitting  •  •  97,  271-2  [?].

Mortgages 128.

Murther 137.

Manslaughter  -  -  139.

Medley-chance  141.

Maiming  and  Mutilation  142.
Madmen  not  Objects  of

punishment 153.

Money  and  Coin 182-3.

Measures  and  Weights  186-7.
Mandeville  Doct*'*  System  208.
Mercats  commenced  •  •  •  234.

N.
Nations  barbarous  .... 21.

—  Neutral 274,  275.

—  Belligerent  •  •  •  • d°.
Natural  Rights -

Natures  Produce  •  •  156,  157.

O.

Oeconomy 14.

Office origin of Chan
cellors - 47.

Public 237.

Offences 60,  61.


ORIGINAL INDEX


285


O.

Occupation 107.

Opulence  - -  157,  179,  236.

—  encreased  by  di
vision  of  Labour  •  •  •  •  163.

—  consists  not in
Money - -  211.
Outrages 270.

P.

Priviledges  exclusive •  7,  129.
Pledges  or  Pawns -  7.

Power  Senatorial •  •  •  • 20.

Balance of in

Europe  - -  278.
Parliament Representa
tives  41.

-  Right -  70.

Prisoners  and  Causes  de-
tain'd  renders  a  Judge

incapable 46.

Premunires -  - 59.

Polygamy 80.

Parentage  -  - 91.

Property  how  acquired  •  107.
Prescription  -  -  in.

Primogeniture 118.

Promises  Verbal 131,  133.

Pignus  Security 132.

Piracey  -  -  149.

Perjury 150.

Policey  147-8(7],  154,  272.
Price  of  Commodities  •  •  173.
Possessions  -  -  239,  242.

Politicians 254.

Pope's  Legates -  -  276.

Power  Balance  in  Europe  278.
Person  of  Ambassadors  -  279.


Quadrupeds


73-


R.

Rights 6.

Origin  -  8.

—  of  Resistance  •  •  • 68.

Parliamentary- 70.

Accession no.

Testamentary 120.

Representatives  41, 1 14.

—  Personal  - -  130.
Ambassadors  •  •  •  276.

Revenue -  -  42,  44.

Republic  origin 54.

Religion -  - 57,  58,  71.

Rapes 106,  145.

Robbery -  -  149.

Resentment 152.

Rent  of  England  -  -  224.

—  of  Brittain 238.

Refinement  modern - -  273.

S.

Society 9.

Stateof  Hunters  in  Origin

1 4.  15-
Shepherds  Patriarchs  •  •  • 15.

—  in  ist  periods  of
Society  -  -  19,  20.

—  Conduct  in  Peace
and  War 20.

Senatorial  Power  -  - d".

Speech freedom  allowed
House  of  Commons  •  • 44.

Subjects  distinction  from
Aliens -  -  65,  66.

Succession  Royal 69.

—  Legal  and  Tes
tamentary  -  -  113

Species  Human 72.

Servants -  • 94-

to  Ambassadors .  279.


286


ORIGINAL INDEX


s.

Slaves  Roman  -  - 95.

British 99.

Cultivation 225-6.

Slavery 101.

Salters 99.

Steel  Bow  Tenants  • 100,  226.

Symbolical  delivery 125.

Servitudes 127.

System Doctr. Mande-
ville's 208.

Grotius \

—  Hobbes-  [  1,2,3.
Baron  de  Coccei )

Subsists  feudal 227.

Sciences 231.

Staple  Towns -  235.

Stocks 250.

Stockholders - d°.

Stockjobbers d°.

Satisfaction from Sove
reigns  difficult  -  -  270.

T.

Torry  and  Whig n.

Treasons -  -  56,  151.

Tests 70.

Tenants — -  100,  101,  226.

Treasure  derelict 109.

Transferrance  Voluntary 125.

Theft 147.

Towns  Staple 235.

Taxes 239,  242.

Tittlesof  London  Brokers  251.
Treaties  Cartel 271.


U.

Utility  in  Society


Villani  the  Ancient  Far
mers  39,  40.

Voluntary  transference  -  125.
Vassals  Duty -  126


W.

Whig  and  Torry n.

War 20.

Expence 209.

honourable  in  rude

Society  — -  231-2.
Arms 261.

—  Outrages  -  -  270.
-  When  Lawfull •  •  •  266.

—  Holy 272.

—  Jus  post  Liminii •  •  275.
Woemen  when  Marriage
able -  - 83.

Wife  and  Husband's  in
terest  85,  86.

Wife's  infidelity 105,  106.

Willfire 146.

Wealth  - -  157, 179, 236.

Wages 165.

Weights  and  Measures  186-7.

Walpole  Sir  Robert's
ruin 242.


EDITOR'S INDEX


Abraham,  16,  96.

Accession,  107,  no-n.

Accumulation  of  stock,  220,  223.

Actio  conti'cinci,  135.

Adscripti glcbae,  40,  101.

Adultery,  105-6.

Aetius,  34.

Affront,  145.

Africa,  81,  229.

Agriculture, 108, 109, 120. 160, 164.

224-30.

Alien,  13,  62-6,  265.
Alienation  of  dominions,  69.
Allodial government, 35  ; property

38,  in-
Alluvions,  no.

Ambassadors,  254,  273,  276  80.
American  Colonies,  99,  221,  225  6.
—  Indians,  75,  137,  161,  223.
Amphictyons,  279.
Amsterdam,  Bank  of,  193  4.
Amyntas,  62.
Annuities,  248.
Appeals,  138-9,  151.
Apprenticeship,  104,  174  5,  236
Arabia,  Arabs,  21,  22, 31,  109,  177, 224,

237-

Areopagus,  20.
Aristocracy,  14,  24.  39,  53.
Aristotle,  238.
Arms,  4,  26-9,  260-4.
Arson,  146.
Artisan,  163.

Artists,  country  and  city,  255.
Ascendants,  115.
Assassination,  55-6,  273-4.


Assault  and  battery,  143  4.

Astrogoths,  21.

Athenians,  Athens, 19.  20,  23,  25,  27,

28.  30.  62,  88,  113,  141,  238.
Attica,  22,  23.
Augustus,  29,  84,  93,  97.
Authority,  9-11.  68.
Avoirdupois,  187.

Balance  of  power,  278.

—  of  trade,  204-7,  24^~1-

Baliiol,  118.

Bank,  191 5,  217-18.

Bankrupt,  135,  150.

Bantam,  81.

Barbadoes,  99.

Barter,  169,  232.

Bartholomew  fair,  234.

Bashaws,  32,  84.

Bastards,  89  91.

Bear  (Stock  Exchange),  251.

Beneficia,  117.

Benefit  of  clergy,  140-1.

Bigamy,  106.

Birmingham.  256.

Bohemia,  102.

Bona  fides,  m 12.

Boroughs,  40  i.

Bounty. See  Corn,  Linen.

Britons,  33.

Bruce,  118.

Bull  i^Stock  Exchange),  251.

Burgundy,  78.

Button-making,  255.

Caesar,  29,  93,  115-
Calais,  235.


283


EDITOR'S  INDEX


Calvin,  71.

Cameron,  Dr.,  152.

Canon  law,  79,  88  90,  133.

Capet,  Hugh,  54.

Caravans,  234.

Carriage,  cost  of,  182,  234  ;  land  and

water,  172.
Cartels,  271.

Carthage,  26,  83,  88,  259,  275.
Cato,  229.

Cattle  in  Homer,  22,  183.
Celtae,  235.
Cess,  35.

Cessio  bonorum,  103.
Chaeronea,  battle  of,  27.
Chance-medley,  141.
Chancery,  47-51,  133.
Change  Alley,  251-2.
Charles  II,  44.
Cheapness,  130,  157.
Chieftains,  16.  53,  116.
Children,  employment  of,  256-7.
China,  Chinese,  85,  92,  165,  258.
Christianity,  73,  80,  96,  101.  104,  272.
Cicero,  31,  229,  270.
Cimbrians,  21.
Cimon,  n.
Citizenship,  28,  62-6.
City  artisan,  255.

—  guard,  154-6.
Civilians,  8.
Clans.  53.
Cleopatra,  83.
Clergy,  47-8,  72,  101.
Coat,  the  labourer's,  161.
Cocceius,  2-3
Coemption 76,  79.

Coin,  amount  of,  199 ;  debasement,
134,  187-9  !  export,  59.  200-1  ;
offences,  57  59,  6r.

Coinage,  origin  of,  185 ;  without
seigniorage,  59,  201,  203.

Collaterals,  115.

Colliers,  99-100.

Colonies,  99,  226,  274.

Columbus,  103.

Combat 18,  51,  67.

Commission,  133,  233,  245.

Commodatum,  132-3.

Common  lands,  109.

—  pleas,  47,  49-50.
Community  of  goods,  113,  115.


Compositions  for  crimes,  35  41,  137-8,

144-

Confarreation,  76.  79
Conquest,  119.
Constantia.  84.
Consul  (mod.  ,  280.

—  (Rom.),  25.
Consumptibility,  199.
Contempts,  61-2.
Contract,  7,  130-5,  233.

—  original,  n.  13,  68-9.
Conversion  of  loans,  248  9.
Conveyance,  cost  of,  234.
Cook  (Arundel),  143.
Copyholders,  roi.
(Copyright,  7,  130.)

Corn,  164,  176,  197-8,  229-30.

—  bounty,  181-2,  231.
Corporations,  130.  179,  236.
Cortez,  103.

Cotton,  165.

Countryman,  255.

Courts  of  justice,  46-53,  133.

Coventry  Act,  143.

Crimes,  17,  47. See  Compositions.

Cromwell,  29,  30,  55-6.

Customs,  old,  235.

Customs  and  excise,  241.

Dane. See  Denmark.
Dead  stock,  200,  202.
Dearness,  178.
Debt,  36,  51,  102.

—  public,  45,  210-n,  247-51.
Decemvirs,  25.
Decennary  court,  36,  39.
Deductio  domi,  77,  79.
Deer-stealing,  148.
Delinquency,  8,  135-53.
Delivery,  125  6.

Demand,  176.
Demesnes,  41,  44.
Democracy,  14,  25,  68.
Denization,  64.
Denmark,  270,  278.
Deodand,  141-2.
Depositum.  132.
Derelict  goods,  109.
(Derwentwater,  Earl  of,  152.)
Descartes,  6.
Descendants,  115.
Deuteronomy,  140.


EDITOR'S  INDEX


289


Discipline,  28,  261-2.
Division  of  labour,  26,  162,  165-8,  222,
255-8,  360.

—  of  land,  23,  109,  224-5.
Divorce,  73,  76-8,  80.
Dominiuni  direction  and  utile,  128.
Domitian,  31.

Doomsday  Book,  232-3.

Drunkenness,  179.

Duck,  lame  (Stock  Exchange),  252.

Duel,  145.

Dutch  and  Holland,  24,  27,  32,  54,  65,
143,  193,  230,  242,  253,  256,  258,
273,  278-9  ;  authors,  81,  207.

East  India  Company,  179.

—  trade,  34.
East  Indies,  88.
Edinburgh,  155,  271.
Education,  74,  176,  256.
Egypt,  85,  229.
Ejectment,  226-7.
Elizabeth.  44.
Elpinice.  88.
(Emigration,  13.)
Entails,  122-4,  22&-
Eqm'tcs,  260 i.

Error,  writ  of,  49
Escheat,  38.
Exception,  133.
Exchange,  221-2.
Exchequer,  45 ;  court,  47,  49.
Exclusive  privileges,  7,  129  30.
Exports,  taxes  on,  236,  245  6.

Fairs  and  markets,  234  5.

Farm  means  victuals,  116.

Farmers  of  French  taxes,  214  15,  245.

Federal  or  federative  power,  17,  19,

20,  67.

Felony  against  the  Crown,  59.
Ferdinand,  103,  276  7.
Feuda,  37.

Feudalism,  35-6,  38,  117.
Fidei  contniissutM,  1 22.
Fire-arms.  274.
Fire-machine,  171.
Fishers,  20,  181.
Florida,  70.
Forcible  entry,  i46~7-
—  marriage,  106.
Forestallers,  235.
Forfeiture,  128.


Forgery,  149-50-
•"ortification,  23.

•Vance or French, 54, 69  70, 75,
118-9,  125,  134,  164,  179,  189,  204-
209.  214-5,  226,  240,  244-5,  271-2;
writers,  207.
•"ranks,  35.

rraud,  149  ;  in  trust,  50.
Frederick  the  Great,  268,  273.)
Free  commerce,  209.
—  port,  Britain  should  be,  209.
Freeholders,  40-1,  228.
Funds,  247-51.
Fur  manifestos,  147.

aming  laws,  252.
Ganges,  mouth  of,  85.
Gaul,  33.  35.
Gee,  196,  206.
Genius,  170  i.
German  systems,  3.
Germany,  32,  35,  43,  54.  65.  67,  7°.

18,  137,  209,  224.
Glasgow,  150,  155,  185,  221,  234.
Godolphin,  207.

Gold  and  silver,  176,  184-5,  203.
Government,  foundation  of,  3;  forms
of,  14  ;  powers  of  17  ;  object  of,  160.
Greece, 22, 24,  26,  28,  56,  75,  183,

238,  278  9.
Grotius,  i,  125,  277.
Guardians,  104-5.
Guinea,  186,  189-90.
—  coast,  81.

Habeas  Corpus.  46 144.

Hamburg,  54  ;  linen,  246.

Helen,  75.

Helvetii,  ar.

Hengist,  33.

Heptarchy,  34-

Hereditary  nobility,  84.

High  Commission  Court,  53,  7'-

Highlands,  116,226,258.

Hobbes,  2.

Holland. See  Dutch.

Holy  war,  272.

Homage,  117-

Homer,  22,  75,  183,  232.

Homicide,  139-4°-

Horsa,  33.

Host  is,  63.

Hottentots,  237.

U


290


EDITOR'S  INDEX


Housebreaking,  148.

Hudson's  Bay  Company,  179.

Hume,  197.

Hundred  court,  36,  39.

Hungary,  102,  231,  268,  278.

Huns,  21.

Hunters,  14,  20,  169,  181,  261.

Hutcheson,  269.

Hypothecs,  129.

Idiots,  105,  153.

Impeachment,  46,  68.

Imports,  taxes  on,  236.

Incests  (?),  50.

Incomes,  35.

Inequality  of  fortune,  15,  16,  116,  160,

Infanticide,  91-2,  104.

Infeftment,  125.

Infidels,  272.

Inheritance,  129.

Injuries,  5.

Innocent  III,  102.

Interest,  219-20.

Kaly,  34,  54,  183,  229,  263,  278.

Ins  postliminii,  275.

lus  vitae  et  necis,  92,  94.

iHStuS  tituluSj 112.

Jamaica,  99.
James  II,  70-2.
Japan,  81-2.

Jealousy,  74-5,  80-1,  106.
—  in  trade,  205-6.
Jewish  religion,  95-6.
Jews  and  trade,  233.
Judges,  19,  45,  47,  48.
Judicial  power,  17,  18,  67.
Jurisprudence,  i,  3.

Jury,  51-3-

Justice,  3,  5.
Justiciary,  46-7.

King's  Bench,  47,  49-50.
Knighting  lord's  eldest  son,  38.
Knights,  27,  260-1.

—  service,  41,  260.
Knox,  71.

Labour,  division  of. See  Division.

—  price  of,  162,  165.
Labourer,  161,  163.
Lacedaemonians  and  Spartans,  27,  30,

75,  147-


Laesa  ntaiestas,  56.
Lame  duck  (Stock  Exchange),  252.
Land, division of, 23, 109 ; trans
ference  of,  228.

—  public,  238.

—  tax,  45,  227,  239-41,  244.
Law  (John\  211-19,  222,
Leases,  37,  ior.

Legal  tender,  187.
Legates,  276-7.
Legislative  power,  17,  68.
Legitimation,  89-91.
Leipzig  fair,  234.
Lewis  XIV,  215,  273.
Lex  commissaria,  118.
Libel,  145-6.
Liberty,  26,  45-6,  51.
—  of  exchange,  209.
Linen  bounty,  180.
Litchfield  man  of  war,  63-4.
Locke,  69,  198.
Lombards,  142.
London,  154-6,  221.
Lot,  1 6.

Lunatics,  105,  153.
Luther,  71.
Luxury,  25,  28,  35,  42-3.

Machines,  167.

(Magens,  194.)

Mahomet,  21.

Malcolm  Canmore,  39.

Mandeville,  208.

Manslaughter,  139-40.

Marcianus,  93.

Marius,  28-9.

Marriage,  73-91  ;  feudal,  38,  n7.

—  forcible,  106.

Measure  of  value,  182,  184.

Measures,  183,  186-7.

Medium  of  exchange,  182-4.

VIenelaus,  75.
Messiah,  96.

Metayer,  100,  ior,  226.)
Metus  iniustus,  144.

Mexico,  202.
"Milan,  24.

Military  tribunes,  25.
Militias,  260-1,  263.
Mining,  176,  198,  231.

tiser,  200.
Misprision  of  treason,  60- 1.


EDITOR'S  INDEX


291


Mississippi  Company,  214-19,  222.

Mithridates,  29.

Mogul,  country  of,  165.  258.

Monarchy,  14,  26,  55,  68-9.

Money,  173,  183-4,  190-1,  199.

-  bill,  45-

Monopoly,  130,  179.

Montesquieu,  81,  83.

Moral  Sentiments,  9.

Morocco,  63.

Mortgages,  128-9.

Mortgaged  taxes,  45,  247-8.

Mun,  195-6,  198.

Murder,  137-40.

Muscovy,  70,  278.

Mutntnn,  132-3.

Nations,  laws  of,  4,  265-80  ;  rich,  165

resentment  against,  268-70.
Natural  rights,  2,  6,  8.
Naturalization,  64.
Nature,  laws  of,  15.
Navigation,  234.
Negro  in  England,  103-4.
Nero,  31.

Netherlands. See  Dutch.
Neutrals,  274-6.
Newcastle  on  Tyne,  100.
Newton,  6.

Occupation,  107-10.

Octavi[an]us. See  Augustus.

(Octrois,  244-5.)

Old  Testament,  16,  121.

Opulence,  162,  193,  222-36.

Ordeal,  18,  67.

Orleans,  Duke  of,  211-12,  218  9.

Otho,  54.

Outlawry,  62.

Pactutn  nudwtt,  133.

Paper  credit  and  currency,  191-2,  221.

Pares,  39.

Paris  (of  Troy),  75.

Paris,  police,  154-6  ;  parliament,  52-3.

Parliament,  41-2,  44-5,  70.

Partnership,  123.

(Patent,  130.)

Pawns,  128.

Peculium  castrense,  93,  115.

Peers,  creation  of,  42.

Perdttellio,  56.

Peregrina,  62.


Perjury,  150.
Persia,  31.

Personal  rights,  6,  7.
Peru,  202.

Petty  treason,  106,  149.
Philip  of  Macedon,  28,  62.
Philip  IV  of  Spain,  230.
Philosophers,  168.
—  stone,  59.
Pigeon-stealing,  148.
Pignus,  132.
Pillory,  148.
Pinmaking,  163-4,  255.
Piracy,  147,  149,  232,  234.
Pledges,  128-9.

Plenty,  157.

Police,  3,  154.

Politicians,  254.

Pollio,  Vedius,  97.

Polygamy,  80-6.

Pompey,  29.

Pomponius,  63.

Poor,  independent,  9.

Pope  (Alexander),  6.

Portugal,  Portuguese,  201-2,  204,  206.

Post  offices,  279.

Pound  sterling,  186.

Praemunire,  59.

Prescription,  107,  1  11-13.  *Sl~2-

Pretender,  the,  72.

Price,  172-9.

Prima  seizin,  37.

Primogeniture,  70,  116-18,  120,  228.

Prisoners,  38  ;  in  late  war,  271.

Probity,  160,  234,  253-5.

Proditio,  56.
Promise,  130-2.
Protestant  succession,  72.
Protestants  and  divorce,  80.
Prussia,  Prussians,  262,  278.
Pufendorf,  2,  120.
Pupil,  105.
Pupillar  substitution,  122.


Quasi-contract,  8,
Quo  minus,  49.


Ranks,  168-9.

Rape,  106,  145.

Reading,  knowledge  of,  in  Scotland,

256.
Real  rights,  6,  107.


U  2


292


EDITOR'S  INDEX


Rebellion  of  1715,  152.

—  of  1745,  116,  152,  258.
Recognisance,  132.
Recoinage  of  1696,  200,  203.
(Regent  diamond,  177.)
Relief,  37-8,  117.
Religion,  76,  256.

Rent,  aggregate,  of  England,  224,  238.

—  in  kind,  227.
Republic,  14,  22.

Republics,  little,  in  Europe,  53-4.
Res  nidlius,  41.
Resistance,  right  of,  58,  68  9.
Respublicafoederata,  54.
Retainers,  25,  42-3,  155,  234.
Revenue,  3-4,  41,  44-5,  237-52.
Revolution  of  1688,  58,  72.
Riches  of  a  country,  130.
Rights,  2,  6-8,  107.

—  Petition  (?)  of,  70.
Rising  in  life  difficult,  222-3.
Risk,  price  of,  222.
Roads,  172,  234.

Roman  law,  &c. See  under  Subjects.

—  provinces,  30,  31,  33,  237-8.
Russia,  247,  267.

Salic  law,  70,  142.

Salters,  99.

Saxons  (in  England),  33,  121,  225.

Saxony,  65-6,  268,  273.

Scarcity,  157,  176-8.

Schools,  256.

Scythians,  78.

Seasons  and  agriculture,  164.

Security,  154-6.

Senatorial  power,  20.

Servants,  103-4.

Servitudes,  127-8.

Sesostris,  168.

Session,  Court  of,  48.

(Settlement,  law  of,  62.)

Sexes,  proportion  between  the,  81-3.

Sharp,  71.

Shepherds, 15, 18,  20,  26,  53, 109,

208,  261.
Sheriffs,  46.

Ships  in  war,  273,  275-6.
—  insurance  of,  149-50.
Sieges,  28,  272.
Sinking  fund,  45,  252.
(Slander,  145.)


Slaves,  24,  25,  27,  29,  94-104,  269.

—  bad  economy  of,  99,  225-6,  231-2.

Socrates,  145.

Solon,  25,  113.

South  Sea  Company,  218-19,  252-

Sovereigns'  rights,  55-62.

Spain,  69-70,  103,  179,  202-6,  229-30,

246,  278,  280.
Stampmaster,  236.
Standard  of  value,  a  single,  186.
Staple,  235.
Star  Chamber,  53.
Steel-bow  tenants,  100-1,  226.
Stewarts,  58.
Stipulation,  131.
Stock,  181,  222-3.
• —  tax  on,  239-41.
Stocks  and  stockjobbing,  247-52.
Subjects,  rights  of,  66-72.
Subsidies,  41,  227.
Substantia  cedetformae,  in.
Succession,  legal,  113-20.
—  testamentary,  120-4.
Sugar  colonies,  wages  in,  j65.
Sweden,  264,  278.
Switzerland,  54,  62.
Sylla,  29.


Tabula,  in.

Tacitus  (?),  67.

Tartars  and  Tartary,  22,  35,  109,  208,

224,  237,  258.
Taxes,  44,69,  179,238-47.
Teutones,  21.
Theft,  147  9.
Theseus,  23.

Time  required  for  production,  181.
—  bargain,  252.
Tory,  n,  241.
Tournefort,  81.
Towns  deserted  owing  to  corporations,

130.

Toys,  159,  164,
Tradesmen  debauched,  257.
Treason,  17,  55-9,  149.
Treasure  trove,  109.
Troy,  28.

Troyes  fair,  234  ;  weight,  187.
Turkey  and  Turks,  31-2,  69,  75,  81,

83,  231.
Tuscany,  183.


EDITOR'S  INDEX


293


Twelve  Tables,  113,  121,  149,  183.
Tyrants,  55.

Ulysses,  232.
Upstart,  10,  84.
Utility,  9,  10,  68,  136.
Utrecht,  193.

Value,  160,  173,  190;  of  money,  197  8.

Varus,  Quintilius,  67.

Venice,  24,  54.

Villains,  39-40,  101,  226,  260.

Virgil,  229.

Virginia,  150,  221.

Voconian  law,  122.

Voting,  54-5.

Waff  goods,  41.


117.
Holland,


Wages,  100,  165,  175,  I77'8-
Wales,  Prince  of  (?},  143-
Walpole,  210-11,  242.
War,  28,  209,  231,  266-76.
—  the  late,  27,  32,  268,  271.
Wardships,  30,  35,  37,  4°  i,
Warehouses (bonded, in

242-3.

Warwick  the  King-maker,  42.
Wealth,  9.

West  Indies,  95,  103,  165,  220,  225.
Whig,  ii.
William  I,  39 123.
WTilliam  III,  65,  72.
Wills,  51,  120-4,  265-6.
Wisigoths,  21,  36,  125.
Wool,  136,  224,  235.


THE END


