Holism and Evolution (Jan Christiaan Smuts, 1926)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/20191002holismandevolution). Smuts's philosophy of wholes: holism as the fundamental factor in evolution and reality.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

HOLISM  AND
EVO  LUTION


BY

GENERAL  THE  RIGHT  HONORABLE

J.  C.  SMUTS

i/i


jUtto  iocfe

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY
1926


All  rights  reserved


TUolo04  Ubrorq

SCHOOL  CL  ;  I  EOLOGTf
AT  CLAiTtniMONIT

.  p  Copyright,  1926,


Set  up  and  printed.
Published  September,  1926.


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America  by

J.  J.  LITTLE  AND  IVES  COMPANY,  NEW  YORK


FVrv


PREFACE


This  work  deals  with  some  of  the  problems  which  fall
within  the  debatable  borderland  between  Science  and
Philosophy.  It  is  a  book  neither  of  Science  nor  of  Philo¬
sophy,  but  of  some  points  of  contact  between  the  two.  To
my  mind  it  is  the  surface  of  contact  between  the  two  that  will
prove  fruitful  and  creative  for  future  progress  in  both,  and
to  which  special  attention  should  be  directed.  Some  border
problems  between  the  two  are  here  considered  in  the  light
of  recent  advances  in  physical  and  biological  science.  And  a
re-examination  of  fundamental  concepts  in  the  light  of  these
advances  reveals  the  existence  of  a  hitherto  neglected
factor  or  principle  of  a  very  important  character.  This
factor,  called  Holism  in  the  sequel,  underlies  the  synthetic
tendency  in  the  universe,  and  is  the  principle  which  makes
for  the  origin  and  progress  of  wholes  in  the  universe.  An
attempt  is  made  to  show  that  this  whole-making  or  holistic
tendency  is  fundamental  in  nature,  that  it  has  a  well-marked
ascertainable  character,  and  that  Evolution  is  nothing
but  the  gradual  development  and  stratification  of  progressive
series  of  wholes,  stretching  from  the  inorganic  beginnings
to  the  highest  levels  of  spiritual  creation.  This  work  deals
with  our  primary  concepts  of  matter,  life,  mind  and  person¬
ality  in  the  light  of  this  principle,  and  discusses  some  of  the
problems  of  Evolution  from  this  new  point  of  view.  The
discussion  is  not  technical,  specialist  or  exhaustive  in  any
sense.  It  is  intended  to  sketch  and  explain  the  general  lines
of  argument  rather  than  to  go  into  details.  It  is  especially
the  fundamental  concept  of  Holism  which  I  wish  to  explain
and  justify,  as  well  as  the  scientific  and  philosophic  view¬
point  to  which  it  leads.  The  detailed  elaboration  must  be
left  to  more  competent  hands  and  to  those  favoured  with
more  leisure  than  I  can  find  in  a  busy  public  life.  I  have


V


vi


PREFACE


tried  to  sketch  the  general  lines  of  reasoning  in  a  way  which,
while  I  hope  scientifically  accurate  so  far  as  they  go,  are  yet
popular  enough  to  be  readily  understood  by  readers  with
a  fair  average  reading  in  general  science.

It  is  my  belief  that  Holism  and  the  holistic  point  of  view
will  prove  important  in  their  bearings  on  some  of  the  main
problems  of  science  and  philosophy,  ethics,  art  and  allied
subjects.  These  bearings  are,  however,  not  fully  discussed
in  this  work,  which  is  more  of  the  nature  of  an  introduction,
and  is  concerned  more  with  the  laying  of  foundations  than
with  the  superstructure.  I  have  no  time  at  present  to  do
more  than  write  an  introductory  sketch;  but  I  hope  in  the
years  to  come  to  find  time  to  follow  up  the  subject  and  to
show  how  it  affects  the  higher  spiritual  interests  of  mankind.
The  old  concepts  and  formulas  are  no  longer  adequate  to
express  our  modern  outlook.  The  old  bottles  will  no  longer
hold  the  new  wine.  The  spiritual  temple  of  the  future,  while
it  will  be  built  largely  of  the  old  well-proved  materials,  will
require  new  and  ampler  foundations  in  the  light  of  the
immense  extension  of  our  intellectual  horizons.  This  little
book  indicates  the  lines  along  which  my  own  mind  has  trav¬
elled  in  the  search  for  new  and  more  satisfactory  concepts.

A  generation  ago,  when  I  was  an  undergraduate  at  Cam¬
bridge,  the  subject  of  Personality  interested  me  greatly,  and
I  wrote  a  short  study  on  “Walt  Whitman:  A  Study  in  the
Evolution  of  Personality/’  in  order  to  embody  the  results  I
had  arrived  at.  This  study  was  never  published,  but  the
subject  continued  at  odd  intervals  to  engage  my  attention.
Gradually  I  came  to  realise  that  Personality  was  only
a  special  case  of  a  much  more  universal  phenomenon,
namely,  the  existence  of  wholes  and  the  tendency  towards
wholes  and  wholeness  in  nature.  In  1910  I  sought  relief
from  heavy  political  labours  in  an  attempt  to  embody  my
new  results  in  a  study  called  “  An  Inquiry  into  the  Whole/’
which  also  was  not  published.  I  had  no  time  to  return  to
the  subject  until,  in  1924,  a  change  of  government  released
me  from  burdens  which  I  had  continuously  borne  for  more
than  eighteen  years.  When  I  came  to  read  once  more  the


PREFACE


Vll


MS.  of  fourteen  years  earlier  I  found  much  of  the  scientific
setting  out  of  date  and  I  found  my  conception  of  Holism
had  also  altered  in  certain  respects.  I  therefore  decided  once
more  to  make  a  fresh  start  with  my  study  of  wholes  and
Holism  in  nature.  The  present  work  is  the  first-fruits  of  this
fresh  effort.  The  aspects  and  bearings  of  Holism  in  which  I
am  mainly  interested  are  not  yet  reached  in  this  study,
which,  as  I  have  said,  is  of  an  introductory  character.  But  I
feel  that  unless  I  now  make  a  determined  attempt  to  pre¬
pare  at  least  a  part  of  my  inquiry  for  publication,  it  will
in  all  probability  never  get  beyond  the  incubation  stage  in
which  it  has  remained  so  many  years.  This  I  would  person¬
ally  regret,  as  I  think  that  in  Holism  we  have  an  idea  which
may  perhaps  prove  valuable  and  fruitful,  and  which  for
better  or  worse  should  be  lifted  out  of  the  obscurity  in  which
it  has  so  long  remained  in  my  mind.  Whether  my  partiality
for  the  idea,  which  has  been  my  companion  throughout  a
crowded  life,  will  be  shared  by  others,  time  alone  will  show.

The  work  has  unfortunately  had  to  be  written  in  some¬
what  of  a  hurry  and  amid  the  pressure  of  many  other  calls
on  my  time.  Nor  in  writing  it  have  I  had  the  advantage  of
consulting  any  expert  friends  on  details.  This  must  be  my
excuse  for  any  incidental  mistakes  or  slips  which  may  be
found  in  it.

J.  C.  Smuts.

Irene ,  Transvaal,

September  1925.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER

Preface  .

PAGE

V

I.

The  Reform  of  Fundamental  Concepts  .

I

II.

The  Reformed  Concepts  of  Space  and  Time

22

III.

The  Reformed  Concept  of  Matter

.  35

IV.

The  Cell  and  the  Organism  ....

.  59

V.

General  Concept  of  Holism  ....

.  8S

VI.

Some  Functions  and  Categories  of  Holism

.  n8

VII.

Mechanism  and  Holism .

.  145

VIII.

Darwinism  and  Holism .

182

IX.

Mind  as  an  Organ  of  Wholes

.  224

X.

Personality  as  a  Whole .

.  261

XI.

Some  Functions  and  Ideals  of  Personality

.  290

XII.

The  Holistic  Universe

.  3*7

Index .

.  347

HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAPTER  I


THE  REFORM  OF  FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS

Summary— In  spite  of  the  great  advances  which  have  been
made  in  knowledge,  some  fundamental  gaps  still  remain;  matter,
life  and  mind  still  remain  utterly  disparate  phenomena.  Yet  the
concepts  of  all  three  arise  in  experience,  and  in  the  human  all
three  meet  and  apparently  intermingle,  so  that  the  last  word  about
them  has  not  yet  been  said.  Reformed  concepts  of  all  three  are
wanted.  This  will  come  from  fuller  scientific  knowledge,  and
especially  from  a  re-survey  of  the  material  from  new  points  of
view.  The  fresh  outlook  must  accompany  the  collection  of  further
detailed  knowledge,  and  nowhere  is  the  new  outlook  more  urgently
required  than  in  the  survey  of  these  great  divisions  of  knowledge.

Take  Evolution  as  a  case  in  point.  The  acceptance  of  Evolu¬
tion  as  a  fact,  the  origin  of  life-structures  from  the  inorganic,  must
mean  a  complete  revolution  in  our  idea  of  matter.  If  matter
holds  the  promise  and  potency  of  life  and  mind  it  is  no  longer  the
old  matter  of  the  physical  materialists.  We  have  accepted  Evo¬
lution,  but  have  failed  to  make  the  fundamental  readjustment  in
our  views  which  that  acceptance  involves.  The  old  mechanical
view-points  persist,  and  Natural  Selection  itself  has.  come  to  be
looked  upon  as  a  mere  mechanical  factor.  But  this  is  wrong:
Sexual  Selection  is  admittedly  a  psychical  factor,  and  even  Natural
Selection  has  merely  the  appearance  of  a  mechanical  process,  be¬
cause  it  is  viewed  as  a  statistical  average,  from  which  the  real
character  of  struggle  among  the  living  has  been  eliminated.

Nineteenth-century  science  went  wrong  mostly  because  of  the
hard  and  narrow  concept  of  causation  which  dominated  it.  It  was
a  fixed  dogma  that  there  could  be  no  more  in  the  effect  than  there
was  in  the  cause;  hence  creativeness  and  real  progress  became  im¬
possible.  The  narrow  concept  of  causation  again  arose  from  a
wider  intellectual  error  of  narrowing  down  all  concepts  into  hard
definite  contours  and  wiping  out  their  indefinite  surrounding
“fields.”  The  concept  of  “fields”  is  absolutely  necessary  in  order


2  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

to  get  back  to  the  fluid  plastic  facts  of  nature.  The  elimination  of
their  “fields”  in  which  things  and  concepts  alike  meet  and  inter¬
mingle  creatively  made  all  understanding  of  real  connections  and
inter-actions  impossible.  The  double  mistake  of  abstraction  and
generalisation  has  thus  led  to  a  departure  in  thought  from  the
fluid  procedure  of  nature.  This  narrowing  of  concepts  and
processes  into  hard  and  rigid  outlines,  and  their  rounding  off  into
definite  scientific  contours  temporarily  simplified  the  problems
of  science  and  thought,  but  we  have  outlived  the  utility  of  this
procedure,  and  for  further  advance  we  have  now  to  return  to  the
more  difficult  but  more  correct  view  of  the  natural  plasticity  and
fluidity  of  natural  things  and  processes.  From  this  new  view-point
a  re-survey  will  be  made  in  the  sequel  of  our  ideas  relating  to
matter,  life  and  mind,  and  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  reach  the
fundamental  unity  and  continuity  which  underlie  and  connect  all
three.  We  shall  thus  come  to  see  all  three  as  connected  steps  in  the
same  great  Process,  the  nature  and  functions  of  which  will  be
investigated.

Among  the  great  gaps  in  knowledge  those  which  separate
the  phenomena  of  matter,  life  and  mind  still  remain  un¬
bridged.  Matter,  life  and  mind  remain  utterly  unlike  each
other.  Apparently  indeed  their  differences  are  ultimate,  and
nowhere  does  there  appear  a  bridge  for  thought  from  one  to
the  other.  And  their  utter  difference  and  disparateness  pro¬
duce  the  great  breaks  in  knowledge,  and  separate  knowledge
into  three  different  kingdoms  or  rather  worlds.  And  yet  they
are  all  three  in  experience,  and  cannot  therefore  be  so  utterly
unlike  and  alien  to  each  other.  What  is  more,  they  actually
intermingle  and  co-exist  in  the  human,  which  is  compounded
of  matter,  life  and  mind.  If  indeed  there  were  no  common
basis  to  matter,  life  and  mind,  their  union  in  the  human
individual  would  be  the  greatest  mystery  of  all.  What  is
in  fact  united  in  human  experience  and  existence  cannot  be
so  infinitely  far  asunder  in  human  thought,  unless  thought
and  fact  are  absolutely  incongruous.  Not  only  do  they
actually  co-exist  and  mingle  in  the  human,  they  appear  to
be  genetically  related  and  to  give  rise  to  each  other  in  a
definite  series  in  the  stages  of  Evolution;  life  appearing  to
(arise  in  or  from  matter,  and  mind  in  or  from  life.  The  actual
transitions  have  not  been  observed,  but  are  assumed  to  have


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


3


taken  place  under  certain  conditions  in  the  course  of  cosmic
Evolution.  Hence  arise  the  three  series  in  the  real  world:
physical,  biological  and  psychical  or  mental.  These  con¬
nections  between  them,  which  are  based  not  on  thought  but
the  facts  of  existence  and  experience,  tend  to  show  that  they
cannot  be  fundamentally  alien  and  irreconcilable,  and  that
some  sort  of  bridge  between  them  must  be  possible,  un¬
less  we  are  to  assume  that  our  human  experience  is  indeed
a  mere  chaotic  jumble  of  disconnected  elements.

As  I  have  said,  the  problem  does  not  arise  from  the  facts
either  of  experience  or  of  existence.  The  problem  is  one  for
our  thought  and  our  science.  It  is  for  our  thought  that  the
mystery  exists,  and  it  is  for  knowledge  that  the  great  gaps
between  the  physical,  the  biological  and  the  mental  series
arise.  The  solution  must  therefore  ultimately  depend  on
our  more  extended  knowledge  of  these  series  and  the  dis¬
covery  of  interconnections  between  them.  The  great  dark¬
nesses  and  gaps  in  experience  are  mostly  due  to  ignorance.
Our  experience  is  clear  and  luminous  only  at  certain  points  <■
which  are  separated  by  wide  regions  of  obscurity;  hence
the  apparent  mystery  of  the  luminous  points  and  of  their
isolation  and  unlikeness.  Hence  also  the  still  greater
mystery  of  their  actual  union  in  the  threefold  incarnation
which  constitutes  human  personality.

But  it  is  just  this  union  which  ought  to  warn  us  that  the
apparent  separateness  of  these  three  fundamental  concepts
is  not  well  founded  in  fact,  and  that  a  wider  knowledge  and  a
deeper  insight  might  be  able  to  clear  up  the  mystery,  at  least
to  some  extent,  and  to  produce  for  thought  as  for  existence  a
sort  of  union  or  harmony  of  these  apparently  unrelated  or
independent  elements  in  our  real  world.  More  knowledge  is
wanted.  Our  physical  science  ought  to  provide  the  solvent
for  our  idea  of  hard  impenetrable  inert  matter,  and  in  the
third  chapter  I  shall  inquire  in  how  far  there  are  already  the
materials  for  such  a  solvent.  Again,  our  biological  science
should  dispel  the  vagueness  of  the  concept  of  life,  and  replace
it  by  a  more  definite  meaningful  concept,  which  will  yet
not  depend  on  purely  material  or  physical  elements.  At


4


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


present  the  concept  of  life  is  so  indefinite  and  vague  that,
although  the  Kingdom  of  life  is  fully  recognised,  its  govern¬
ment  is  placed  under  the  rule  of  physical  force  or  Mecha¬
nism.  Life  is  practically  banished  from  its  own  domain,  and
its  throne  is  occupied  by  a  usurper.  Biology  thus  becomes  a
subject  province  of  physical  science — the  Kingdom  of
Beauty,  the  free  artistic  plastic  Kingdom  of  the  universe,  is
inappropriately  placed  under  the  iron  rule  of  force.  Mind
again,  which  is  closest  to  us  in  experience,  becomes  farthest
from  us  in  exact  thought.  The  concepts  in  which  we  envisage
it  are  so  vague  and  nebulous,  compared  with  the  hard  and
rigid  contours  of  our  concepts  of  matter,  that  the  two  appear
poles  asunder.  Here  too  a  reformed  concept  of  mind  might
bring  it  much  closer  to  a  reformed  concept  of  matter.  And
thus,  out  of  the  three  at  present  utterly  heterogeneous  polar
concepts  of  matter,  life  and  mind  it  might  be  possible  to
develop  concepts  moulded  more  closely  to  fact  and  experi¬
ence,  freed  of  all  adventitious  and  unnecessary  elements  of
separateness  and  disparity,  and  forming  (as  in  all  true
science  they  should  rightly  form)  the  co-operative  elements
and  aspects  in  a  wider,  truer  conception  of  Reality.  It  may
be  said  that  in  making  this  demand  for  new  concepts  of  mat¬
ter,  life  and  mind  we  are  imposing  an  impossible  task  on
thought.  We  are  asking  it  to  go  beyond  itself  and  deal  with
matters  entirely  beyond  its  own  proper  world.  Matter,  it
may  be  urged,  is  essentially  outside  and  beyond  thought,
something  hard  and  impervious  to  thought,  an  object  to
thought  which  thought  can  only  just  barely  reach  up  to  in  its
utmost  effort,  and  no  more.  Life  is,  of  course,  not  alien  to
thought  in  the  same  sense  as  matter,  but  still  it  also  falls
outside  the  province  of  thought,  it  also  has  a  reality  of  its
own  beyond  thought,  and  it  also  is  an  object  to  thought.  How
then  could  thought  embrace  these  provinces,  how  could  it  be
a  measure  of  these  provinces  beyond  its  ken ;  how  could  the
part  envisage  the  whole?  Our  standard  of  measurement  is
inadequate,  our  task  therefore  impossible.

The  answer  is  that,  while  mind  or  thought  may  not  have
made  matter,  it  has  undoubtedly  assisted  in  making  the


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


5


concept  of  matter;  and  this  concept,  based  as  it  is  on
mere  empirical  experience,  on  inadequate  knowledge  and
covered  with  a  thick  over-burden  of  unsifted  tradition,
may  be  mostly  wrong,  however  deeply  embedded  in  human
thought  it  may  be.  A  reform  of  the  concept  of  matter
is  urgently  required,  and  is  indeed  amply  justified  by
the  unprecedented  recent  advances  in  physical  science,
and  especially  in  our  knowledge  of  the  constitution
of  matter.  And  a  reform  will,  as  I  shall  show  in  the
third  chapter,  bring  matter  considerably  nearer  to  the
concept  of  life.

With  regard  again  to  the  concept  of  life,  what  is  most
urgently  required  is  that  it  should  be  rid  of  that  haziness,
indefiniteness,  and  vagueness  which  makes  it  practically
worthless  for  all  exact  scientific  purposes.  Biological
science  has  not  in  recent  years  made  the  same  gigantic
strides  forward  in  the  knowledge  of  fundamentals  that
physical  science  has  taken,  and  yet  for  Biology  too  the  sky
has  considerably  cleared,  and  what  two  or  three  decades  ago
was  still  hotly  disputed  is  to-day  generally  accepted.  Be¬
sides,  the  greatest  development  in  Biology  during  this  cen¬
tury  has  taken  place  in  the  science  of  Genetics,  and  the  trend
there  has  been  steadily  away  from  the  hard  mechanical
conceptions  which  dominated  Biology  more  than  a  genera¬
tion  ago.  The  time  here  too  may  be  ripe  for  a  reconsidera¬
tion  of  some  of  the  fundamental  concepts  and  standpoints.  I
may  express  the  hope  that  the  masters  of  this  science  will  not
concentrate  all  their  attention  on  special  researches,  how¬
ever  promising  the  clues  at  present  followed  may  be;  but
that  they  will  find  time  for  a  reconsideration  of  the  wider
conceptions  which,  ever  since  the  great  time  of  Darwin,
have  been  getting  further  out  of  gear.  Unless  Biology  can
succeed  in  clarifying  her  fundamental  conceptions  there  is
risk  of  great  confusion  in  a  science  in  which  old  general
ideas  have  persisted  in  spite  of  great  progress  in  detailed
knowledge.  If  in  the  sequel  I  join  in  the  discussion  of  the
foundations  of  Biology,  not  as  entitled  of  right  to  speak  but
more  in  the  character  of  an  outside  spectator  urging  the


6


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


importance  of  a  new  point  of  view,  I  hope  my  presumption
in  so  doing  may  be  forgiven  me.

For  welcome  as  any  new  and  deeper  knowledge  would  be
on  these  high  matters,  the  present  situation  calls  even  more
urgently  for  fresh  points  of  view.  Matter,  life  and  mind
are,  so  to  speak,  the  original  alphabet  of  knowledge,  the
original  nuclei  of  all  experience,  thought,  and  speculation.
Their  origin  is  purely  empirical,  their  course  has  been
shaped  by  tradition  for  thousands  of  years,  and  all  sorts
of  discarded  philosophies  have  gone  towards  the  making  of
their  popular  meanings.  In  spite,  therefore,  of  the  great
fundamental  aspects  of  truth  which  they  embody,  the  kernel
of  truth  in  them  has  become  overlaid  by  deep  incrustations
of  imperfect  and  erroneous  knowledge.  Modern  science  and
philosophy  have  repeatedly  ventured  on  reforms,  but  the
popular  use  of  these  terms  tends  to  obliterate  all  fine  dis¬
tinctions.  I  do  not  believe  that  an  abiding  scientific  or
philosophic  advance  in  this  respect  will  be  possible  until  a
more  exact  nomenclature  has  been  adopted.  Such  a  reform
I  am  going  to  advocate  and  suggest  in  the  sequel,  but  in  the
meantime  I  wish  to  emphasise  how  important  it  is,  not
merely  to  continue  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  but  also  to
develop  new  view-points  from  which  to  envisage  all  our  vast
accumulated  material  of  knowledge.  The  Copernican  revo¬
lution  was  not  a  revolution  in  the  acquisition  of  new  knowl¬
edge,  but  in  view-point  and  perspective  in  respect  of  existing
knowledge.  The  most  far-reaching  revolutions  in  knowledge
are  often  of  this  character.  Evolution  in  the  mind  of  Darwin
was,  like  the  Copernican  revolution,  a  new  view-point,  from
which  vast  masses  of  biological  knowledge  already  existing
fell  into  new  alignments  and  became  the  illustrations  of  a
great  new  Principle.  And  similarly  Einstein’s  conception
of  General  Relativity  in  the  physical  universe,  whatever  its
final  form  may  yet  be,  is  a  new  view-point  from  which  the
whole  universe  and  all  its  working  mechanisms  acquire  a
new  perspective  and  meaning.

More  knowledge  is  undoubtedly  required,  but  its  acquisi¬
tion  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  the  exploration  of  new  con-


i  FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS  7

cepts  and  new  points  of  view.  It  will  not  help  merely  to
accumulate  details  of  which,  even  in  the  special  departments
of  the  separate  biological  sciences,  the  masses  are  already
becoming  more  than  any  individual  mind  can  bear.  New
co-ordinations  are  required,  new  syntheses  which  will  sum
up  and  explain  and  illuminate  the  otherwise  amorphous
masses  of  material.  While  research  is  being  prosecuted  as
never  before,  while  in  biological  science  great,  and  in  the
physical  sciences  unprecedented,  progress  is  being  recorded,
the  call  becomes  ever  more  urgent  for  a  reconsideration  of
fundamental  concepts  and  the  discovery  of  new  standpoints
which  might  lead  to  the  formulation  of  more  general  prin¬
ciples  and  wider  generalisations.  Nowhere  are  new  view¬
points  more  urgently  called  for  than  in  respect  of  the
fundamental  concepts  of  matter,  life,  and  mind,  of  which  the
reform  is  overdue  and  the  present  state  is  rapidly  becoming  a
real  obstacle  to  further  progress.  And  I  may  point  out  that
the  formulation  of  new  view-points  will  depend  not  so  much
on  masses  of  minute  details,  as  on  the  consideration  of  the
general  principles  in  the  light  of  recent  advances,  the  colla¬
tion  and  comparison  of  large  masses  of  fact,  and  the  survey
of  fairly  large  areas  of  knowledge.  The  road  is  to  be  dis¬
covered,  not  so  much  by  minute  local  inspection  as  by  wide
roaming  and  exploration  and  surveying  over  large  districts.
Both  methods  are  needed,  and  the  question  narrows  itself
down  to  one  of  comparative  values.  Just  as  in  the  cases  of
Newton  and  Einstein,  the  new  clues  are  more  likely  to  be
indicated  by  certain  crucial  dominant  facts  than  by  small
increments  of  research.  It  would  therefore  be  a  great  mis¬
take  to  let  the  completion  of  present  detailed  researches  take
precedence  over  the  more  general  and  urgent  questions  to
which  I  am  drawing  attention.

Let  me  mention  one  matter  of  crucial  significance  to  which
I  think  sufficient  importance  has  not  yet  been  attached.
To-day  I  think  it  is  generally  accepted  that  life  has  in  the
process  of  cosmic  Evolution  developed  from  or  in  the  bosom
of  matter,  and  that  mind  itself  has  its  inalienable  physical
basis.  I  do  not  think  that  among  those  who  have  given


8


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


thought  and  attention  to  these  matters  there  are  to-day  any
who  seriously  question  this  position.  Life  is  no  dove  that  has
flown  to  our  shores  from  some  world  beyond  this  world;  mind
or  soul  is  not  an  importation  from  some  other  universe.  Life
and  mind  are  not  mere  visitants  to  this  world,  but  not  of  this
world.  There  is  nothing  alien  in  them  to  the  substance  of
the  universe;  they  are  with  us  and  they  are  of  us.  The
popular  view  still  looks  upon  the  association  of  life  and  mind
with  matter  as  a  sort  of  symbiosis,  as  the  close  living  together
of  three  different  beings,  as  the  dwelling  of  life  and  the  soul
in  the  body  of  matter,  just  as  in  the  organic  world  one  plant
or  animal  organism  will  be  found  normally  living  with  and
in  another.  This  popular  traditional  view  comes  from  the
hoary  beginnings  of  human  thought  and  speculation,  but  it
is  definitely  abandoned  by  all  those  who  have  assimilated
the  modern  view-point  of  Evolution.  For  them  in  some  way
not  yet  fully  understood,  but  accepted  as  an  undoubted
fact,  both  life  and  mind  have  developed  from  matter  or
the  physical  basis  of  existence.  The  acceptance  of  this  fact
must  have  far-reaching  consequences  for  our  world-view.

But  before  I  refer  to  that  aspect  of  the  matter  let  me  point
out  how  this  acceptance  affects  the  grave  issues  over  which
our  fathers  fought  a  continuous  battle  royal  during  the  latter
half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  materialists  contended
for  this  very  point,  namely,  that  life  and  mind  were  born  of
matter.  From  this  they  proceeded  (quite  illegitimately)  to
infer  the  primacy  and  self-sufficiency  of  matter  in  the
order  of  the  universe,  and  to  reduce  life  and  mind  to  a
subsidiary  and  subordinate  position  as  mere  epiphenomena,
as  appearances  on  the  surface  of  the  one  reality,  matter.
To  use  the  Platonic  figure,  to  them  matter  was  the  lyre,
and  the  soul  was  the  music  of  that  lyre;  the  lyre  was  the
substantive  and  abiding  reality,  and  the  music  a  mere  pass¬
ing  product.  And  thus  the  priority  and  dominance  of  mat¬
ter  made  of  life  and  the  soul  merely  transient  and
embarrassed  phantoms  on  the  stage  of  existence.  This
materialism  was  most  hotly  resented  and  contested  by  those
who  held  to  the  spiritual  values  and  realities.  They  denied


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


9


not  only  the  primacy  of  matter  but  also  that  life  or  mind
sprang  from  it  and  were  dependent  on  it  in  any  real  sense.
In  fact  they  denied  the  principle  of  Evolution  as  under¬
mining  all  the  spiritual  and  moral  values  of  life.  Both
sides,  materialists  and  spiritualists  alike,  were  under  the
influence  of  the  hard  physical  concepts  of  cause  and  effect
which  played  such  a  great  part  in  the  science  of  the
nineteenth  century.  There  could  be  nothing  more  in  the
effect  than  there  was  already  in  the  cause;  and  if  matter
caused  the  soul,  there  could  be  nothing  more  in  the  soul
than  there  already  was  in  matter.  In  other  words,  the  soul
was  merely  an  apparent  and  no  real  substantial  advance
on  matter.  The  abstract  validity  of  this  argument  was
never  questioned  and  was  thoroughly  believed  in  by  both
sides.  Hence  those  who  affirmed  the  theory  of  Evolution
logically  tended  to  be  materialists,  and  those  who  were
spiritualists  were  logically  forced  to  deny  Evolution.

Without  their  knowing  it  the  great  battle  raged,  not  over
the  facts  of  Evolution,  but  over  a  metaphysical  theory  of
causation  in  which  they  both  believed  and  were  both  wrong.
Such  is  the  irony  of  history.  To-day  we  pick  the  poppies  on
the  old  bloody  battlefield  of  Evolution,  and  can  afford  to  be
fair  to  both  sides.  The  essential  terms  have  changed  their
meaning  for  us.  We  believe  in  Evolution,  but  it  is  no  more
the  mechanical  Evolution  of  a  generation  or  two  ago,  but  a
creative  Evolution.  We  believe  in  the  growth  which  is
really  such  and  becomes  ever  more  and  more  in  the  process.
We  believe  in  Genesis  which  by  its  very  nature  is  epigenesis.
For  us  there  is  no  such  thing  as  static  Evolution,  a  becoming
which  does  not  become  but  in  its  apparent  permutations
ever  remains  the  same.  The  absolute  equation  of  cause
and  effect,  which  was  a  dogma  implicitly  believed  in  by
the  men  of  that  day,  does  not  hold  for  us,  as  I  shall  later
on  explain.  The  temperature  has  changed,  the  view-point
has  shifted,  and  to-day  thoughtful  men  and  women  are
sincere  and  convinced  Evolutionists,  without  troubling
themselves  over  the  dead  and  forgotten  issue  of  materialism
versus  spiritualism.  We  accept  the  theory  of  descent,  of


IO


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


life  from  matter,  and  of  the  mind  from  both.  For  educated
men  and  women  to-day  Evolution  is  just  as  much  part
and  parcel  of  their  general  outlook,  of  their  intellectual
atmosphere,  so  to  say,  as  is  the  Copernican  theory.

As  I  said  before,  this  is  a  fact  with  very  far-reaching
implications.  If  we  believe  that  life  and  mind  come  from
matter,  if  they  are  evolved  from  matter,  if  matter  holds  the
promise,  the  dread  potencies  of  life  and  mind,  it  can  for  us
no  longer  be  the  old  matter  of  the  materialists  or  the
physicists.  The  acceptance  of  the  view  for  which  the
materialists  fought  so  hard  means  in  effect  a  com¬
plete  transformation  of  the  simple  situation  which  they
envisaged.  Matter  discloses  a  great  secret;  in  the  act  of
giving  birth  to  life  or  mind  it  shows  itself  in  an  entirely
unsuspected  character,  and  it  can  never  be  the  old  matter
again.  The  matter  which  holds  the  secret  of  life  and  mind  is
no  longer  the  old  matter  which  was  merely  the  vehicle  of
motion  and  energy.  The  landmarks  of  the  old  order  are
shifting,  the  straight  contours  of  the  old  ideas  are  curving,
the  whole  situation  which  we  are  contemplating  in  the
relations  of  matter,  life  and  mind  is  becoming  fluid  instead
of  remaining  rigid.  The  point  to  grasp  and  hold  on  to
firmly  is  that  the  full  and  complete  acceptance  of  Evolu¬
tion  must  produce  a  great  change  in  the  significance  of  the
fundamental  concepts  for  us.  Life  and  mind  now,  instead
of  being  extraneous  elements  in  the  physical  universe,
become  identified  with  the  physical  order,  and  they  are  all
recognised  as  very  much  of  a  piece.  This  being  so,  it
obviously  becomes  impossible  thereupon  to  proceed  to  erect
an  all-embracing  physical  order  in  which  life  and  mind  are
once  more  declared  aliens.  This  cat  and  mouse  procedure
is  simply  a  case  of  logical  confusion.  This  in-and-out  game
will  not  do.  If  Evolution  is  accepted,  and  life  and  mind  are
developments  in  and  from  the  physical  order,  they  are  in
that  order,  and  it  becomes  impossible  to  continue  to  envisage
the  physical  order  as  purely  mechanical,  as  one  in  which
they  have  no  part  or  lot,  in  which  they  are  no  real  factors,
and  from  which  they  should  be  logically  excluded.  If


I  FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS  n

Evolution  is  right,  if  life  and  mind  have  arisen  in  and  from
matter,  then  the  universe  ceases  to  be  a  purely  physical
mechanism,  and  the  system  which  results  must  provide  a
real  place  for  the  factors  of  life  and  mind.  To  my  mind
there  is  no  escape  from  that  argument,  and  its  implications
must  have  a  very  far-reaching  effect  on  our  ideas  of  the
physical  order,  and  on  a  biology  in  which  mechanical  views
are  still  dominant.

The  point  I  have  been  trying  to  make  is  that  our
ultimate  concepts  need  reconsideration,  and  that  above  all
new  view-points  are  necessary  from  which  to  re-survey  the
vast  masses  of  physical  and  biological  knowledge  which  have
already  accumulated.  I  have  said  that  certain  large  domi¬
nant  facts  may  be  sufficient  to  lead  to  a  new  orientation  of
our  ideas.  And  I  have  taken  the  accepted  fact  of  Evolution
as  a  case  in  point.  The  older  materialists  and  the  present-
day  mechanical  biologists  have  both  fought  hard  for  the
acceptance  of  Evolution  as  a  fact,  without  realising  that  such
an  acceptance  must  inevitably  mean  a  transformation  of
their  view-points,  and  that  both  the  meaning  of  the  concept
of  matter  and  the  idea  of  the  part  played  by  mechanism  in
biology  must  be  seriously  affected  by  such  acceptance.  It
is  clear  that  the  full  significance  of  the  great  dominant  idea
of  Evolution  and  its  effect  on  the  ordering  of  our  ultimate
world-view  are  not  yet  fully  realised,  and  that  we  are  in
effect  endeavouring  simultaneously  to  go  forward  with  two
inconsistent  sets  of  ideas,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  idea
of  Evolution  (not  yet  adequately  realised)  and  the  pre-
Evolution  physical  ideas  (not  yet  quite  abandoned).  This
is,  however,  sheer  confusion,  and  a  clarification  of  our
ideas  and  the  realisation  of  new  view-points  have  become
necessary.

Let  me  now  leave  the  general  fact  of  Evolution  as  bearing
on  our  world-view  and  call  attention  to  another  and  some¬
what  similar  case  which  arises  in  Darwin’s  theory  of
Descent.  In  that  theory  Natural  Selection  is  usually  but
erroneously  taken  to  be  a  purely  mechanical  factor.  It  is
understood  to  operate  as  an  external  cause,  eliminating


12


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


the  unfit  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  leaving  the
fit  in  possession  of  the  field  to  reproduce  their  kind  and  to
continue  the  story  of  Evolution.  Natural  Selection,  from
whatever  cause  arising  and  in  whatever  way  operating,  is
on  this  view  taken  to  be  merely  a  mechanical  cause  or  factor,
just  as  is  a  hailstorm  which  kills  plants  and  animals  with
hailstones,  or  a  drought  which  kills  them  from  want  of  water.
Whether  the  destruction  arises  from  physical  mechanical
causes  like  storms  or  drought  or  lightning,  or  whether  it
arises  from  the  action  of  living  agencies  such  as  enemies
or  disease  or  the  like,  makes  no  difference  to  the  result,  which
is  in  either  case  the  same.  A  broad  generalised  statistical
view  of  the  causes  of  elimination  has  been  taken  and
Natural  Selection  as  a  whole  has  on  this  view  assumed  the
appearance  of  a  mere  external  mechanical  factor.  On  this
view  of  Natural  Selection,  therefore,  Darwin’s  theory  of
Evolution  has  come  powerfully  to  reinforce  the  generally
prevalent  mechanical  position.  The  effect  has  been  just
the  opposite  to  what  one  might  have  expected  from  a  great
biological  advance.  The  kingdom  of  life,  instead  of
fighting  for  its  own  rights  and  prerogatives,  has  tamely
and  blindly  surrendered  to  the  claims  of  physical  force
and  actually  joined  hands  with  it  and  contributed  to
its  supremacy.  The  acceptance  of  Darwinism,  therefore,
so  far  from  stemming  the  tide  of  mechanical  ideas,  has
actually  furthered  and  assisted  it,  and  raised  it  to  full
flood.  Through  a  misconception  of  the  nature  of  Natural
Selection  the  mechanical  ideas  have  invaded  the  domain  of
life,  where  opposition  might  have  been  expected,  and  through
the  conquest  and  occupation  of  that  domain  the  mechanical
position,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  confined  to  the
material  physical  sphere,  has  been  extended  and  powerfully
consolidated.  This  result  was  due,  as  I  say,  to  the  general¬
ised  statistical  concept  of  Natural  Selection,  irrespective  of
whether  it  was  due  to  organic  or  inorganic  causes.

There  is,  however,  one  form  of  Selection  which  cannot  be
thus  indiscriminately  dealt  with.  It  arises  not  only  from
organic  causes,  but  still  more  narrowly  and  quite  indisput-


I  FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS  13

ably  from  psychical  or  mental  causes.  Darwin  called  it  Sex¬
ual  Selection,  and  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  A.  R.  Wallace
and  others  not  only  attributed  great  importance  to  it,  but
as  time  went  on  and  he  saw  his  great  vision  more  clearly,
he  gave  it  an  ever-growing  emphasis  in  his  theory  of  Descent.
Natural  Selection  operates  on  the  unfit  by  destroying  them
or  killing  them  off;  Sexual  Selection,  on  the  contrary,  has  a
more  limited  operation  and  applies  only  in  respect  of  males,
whose  reproduction  it  handicaps,  limits  or  prevents.  In
other  words  it  is  a  struggle  among  males  for  the  possession
of  females,  and  in  this  struggle  males  are  assisted  not  only
by  their  superior  strength  or  fighting  powers,  but  also  by
their  superior  power  of  song  or  beauty  or  scent  or  general
attractiveness  or  excitiveness  to  females.  It  is  clear  that  the
real  motive  power  of  this  form  of  selection  is  mostly  biolog¬
ical  and  psychical.  The  female  is  excited  and  attracted  by
superior  fighting  force  or  superior  artistic  endowments
among  males  competing  for  her  favour.  And  when  one  con¬
siders  the  degree  of  perfection  to  which  the  male  forms  have
attained  largely  under  this  stimulus  of  the  female  sex  in¬
stinct,  one  is  struck  with  amazement  at  the  emotional  sensi¬
tiveness  thus  implied  on  the  part  of  female  insects,  birds,  and
beasts,  and  at  the  wonderful  subtlety  and  fineness  of  the
emotional  discrimination  which  has  resulted  from  it.  The
beauty  of  form  and  colour  which  characterises,  for  instance,
the  peacock’s  feathers  are  such  that  even  our  human  eye  can
scarcely  do  justice  to  it.  And  yet  on  the  principle  of  Sexual
Selection  that  perfection  of  beauty  is  due  to  the  amazing
emotional  sensitiveness  and  appreciation  of  the  peahen,
which  through  countless  generations  must  have  been
attracted  by  the  minute  superiority  of  the  one  male  over
others  in  this  respect.  And  the  same  applies  in  regard  to
the  wonderful  power  of  song  among  male  birds  and
all  the  other  secondary  male  characters.  The  psychical
emotional  powers  implied  on  the  part  of  the  female  on
this  theory  are  so  wonderful  as  to  be  almost  unintelligible,
in  many  respects  they  are  superhuman,  and  would  appear
to  throw  an  astonishing  light  on  the  unconscious  psychical


CHAP.


14  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION

developments  of  what  we  are  pleased  to  call  the  lower
creatures.  If  secondary  sexual  characters  with  all  their
perfection  of  form  and  colour  did  originate  and  develop
under  the  stimulus  of  Sexual  Selection,  we  shall  have  to
revise  our  views  radically  as  to  the  psychical  sensitiveness
and  endowments  of  large  classes  of  these  lower  animals.
If,  for  instance,  the  human  female  showed  the  same  sensitive
judgment  and  discrimination  as  the  female  bird  or  insect
shows  a  sensitive  sex  instinct,  what  supermen  we  sorry  males
in  time  would  become!  I  am  afraid,  however,  that  the
theory  of  Sexual  Selection  does  not  tell  the  whole  story,
and  that  there  is  more  in  the  sexual  situation  than  appears
from  that  theory.  I  shall  refer  to  the  subject  again
in  Chapter  VIII.  But  for  my  present  purpose  it  is
only  necessary  to  emphasise  that  this  form  of  selection  is
not  mechanical  but  psychical.  If  Sexual  Selection  plays
the  great  part  in  organic  Evolution  which  Darwin,  Weis-
mann  and  many  other  great  biologists  assign  to  it,  we  can
only  conclude  that  to  that  extent  at  any  rate  the  motive  force
in  Evolution  is  psychical  and  not  mechanical.

I  would  go  further  and,  in  opposition  to  current  views,
I  would  contend  that  even  Natural  Selection,  in  so  far  as  it
is  a  struggle  among  animal  and  plant  forms  and  not  merely
the  pressure  or  agelong  effect  of  the  inorganic  environment,
is  fundamentally  psychical.  The  advance  takes  place  gen¬
erally  because  the  more  fit  organism  deliberately  for
its  own  purposes  destroys  the  less  fit  organism.  In  its
essence  the  organic  struggle  creates  a  psychical  situation  just
as  much  as  war  among  humans  is  a  psychical  situation.
And  it  is  only  because  we  abstract  from  the  situation  its
real  character  of  animal  struggle  and  view  the  total  statistical
effect  of  innumerable  situations  as  itself  a  sort  of  personified
operative  force  in  the  form  of  Natural  Selection,  that  the
appearance  of  a  mechanical  external  factor  is  created,
operating  on  Evolution  from  the  outside  and  determining
its  course  mechanically.  Looked  at  as  a  whole,  and  at  a
distance  in  which  all  concrete  cases  are  blurred  in  the  general
view,  the  struggle  for  existence  among  animals  and  plants


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


i5


seems  to  operate  blindly  and  mechanically  without  any  view
to  that  improvement  of  species  which  results.  But  this
general  struggle  is  actually  composed  of  infinite  little  con¬
crete  struggles  in  which  the  fit  deliberately  destroy  the  unfit.
And  the  trend  of  the  struggle  is  towards  organic  progress
actually  because  of  the  character  of  the  little  concrete  strug¬
gles.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  the  striving,  struggling  indi¬
vidual  in  nature  intends  to  improve  its  species.  But  it  does
fight  for  itself  or  its  family  or  its  tribe;  and  in  so  far  as  it  is
more  “  fit  ”  than  its  beaten  opponent  it  is  in  effect  fighting
the  battle  of  organic  progress.  The  psychical  purposive
character  of  the  little  concrete  struggles  imparts  a  psycho¬
logical  purposive  character  to  the  generalised  factor  of  Nat¬
ural  Selection.  In  fact  the  current  view  of  Natural  Selection
is  a  very  striking  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  a  so-called
mechanical  force  or  cause  is  gratuitously  constituted  by
abstraction  and  generalisation  and  statistical  summation
from  elements  which  in  their  individual  character  and
isolation  are  undoubtedly  psychical  and  purposive.  And
this  only  shows  how  careful  we  must  be  to  scrutinise
concrete  details  and  not  to  rest  satisfied  with  large  general¬
isations,  if  we  would  know  what  really  happens  in  nature.
Abstraction  and  generalisation,  however  useful  and  neces¬
sary  for  scientific  purposes,  do  largely  deprive  real  events
of  their  true  characters,  which  are  vital  to  a  correct
understanding  of  reality.

To  sum  up,  therefore:  apart  from  the  influence  of  the
physical  environment,  the  motive  and  directive  forces  of
organic  Descent  in  the  form  of  Natural  and  Sexual  Selection
are  psychical  and  not  merely  mechanical.  And  this  result
of  the  special  Darwinian  theory  is  therefore  in  complete
accord  with  the  more  general  considerations  which  we
derived  from  the  analysis  of  Evolution  in  general.  Both  in
Evolution  as  a  whole  and  in  Darwin’s  more  special  theory  of
organic  Descent,  life  and  mind  are  no  mere  shadows  or  un¬
real  accompaniments  of  some  real  mechanical  process;  they
are  there  in  their  own  right  as  true  operative  factors,  and
play  a  real  and  unmistakable  part  in  determining  both  the


i6


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


advance  and  its  specific  direction.  From  the  point  of  view  of
Evolution  each  of  them  must  be  looked  upon  as  essentially
a  real  vera  causa.  This  does  not  affect  what  I  have  already
said  about  the  vagueness  and  unsatisfactoriness  of  their
present  concepts  and  the  necessity  of  looking  for  more  defi¬
nite  and  adequate  concepts.  All  I  mean  to  say  is  that
the  things  they  stand  for  are  real  factors  in  nature  and  not
mere  words  or  appearances.  In  the  sequel  an  effort  will  be
made  to  give  greater  definiteness  to  these  concepts,  and  to
determine  the  nature  and  character  of  the  activity  of  these
factors.  Here  it  must  suffice  to  emphasise  that  the  nature
of  Evolution  has  been  obscured  by  mechanistic  conceptions,
and  that  erroneous  views  as  to  the  character  and  operation
of  causation  have  contributed  to  this  misunderstanding.
And  it  may  be  useful,  before  concluding  this  introductory
chapter,  to  add  a  few  remarks  on  this  subject,  to  which  I
have  already  briefly  referred  above.

The  science  of  the  nineteenth  century  was  like  its  philo¬
sophy,  its  morals  and  its  civilisation  in  general,  distinguished
by  a  certain  hardness,  primness  and  precise  limitation  and
demarcation  of  ideas.  Vagueness,  indefinite  and  blurred
outlines,  anything  savouring  of  mysticism,  was  abhorrent  to
that  great  age  of  limited  exactitude.  The  rigid  categories  of
physics  were  applied  to  the  indefinite  and  hazy  phenomena
of  life  and  mind.  Concepts  were  in  logic  as  well  as  in  science
narrowed  down  to  their  most  luminous  points,  and  the  rest
of  their  contents  treated  as  non-existent.  Situations  were
not  envisaged  as  a  whole  of  clear  and  vague  obscure  ele¬
ments  alike,  but  were  analysed  merely  into  their  clear,  out¬
standing,  luminous  points.  A  “  cause,”  for  instance,  was  not
taken  as  a  whole  situation  which  at  a  certain  stage  insensibly
passes  into  another  situation,  called  the  effect.  No,  the
most  outstanding  feature  in  the  first  situation  was  isolated
and  abstracted  and  treated  as  the  cause  of  the  most  out¬
standing  and  striking  feature  of  the  next  situation,  which
was  called  the  effect.  Everything  between  this  cause  and
this  effect  was  blotted  out,  and  the  two  sharp  ideas  or  rather
situations  of  cause  and  effect  were  made  to  confront  each


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


i7


other  in  every  case  of  causation  like  two  opposing  forces.
This  logical  precision  immediately  had  the  effect  of  making
it  impossible  to  understand  how  the  one  passed  into  the
other  in  actual  causation.  The  efficient  activity,  which
had  of  old  been  construed  on  the  analogy  of  our  muscular
activity,  was  therefore  resorted  to  in  order  to  supply  the
explanation.  As  the  muscular  movement  produces  ex¬
ternal  action,  so  material  cause  was  supposed  to  produce
a  material  effect.  Even  then  the  mind  found  it  difficult
to  realise  the  passage  from  the  one  to  the  other.  Every
causation  seemed  to  imply  some  action  at  a  distance,
unless  cause  and  effect  were  in  absolute  contact.  But  we
know  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  contact  even  in
the  elements  of  the  most  closely  packed  situation.  Hence
causation  of  this  rigid  type  really  became  unintelligible.
Not  even  the  old  fiction  of  an  ether  which  embraced  all
material  things,  and  as  a  vehicle  made  transmission  of  influ¬
ence  from  one  to  the  other  possible,  seemed  able  to  overcome
the  contradictions  into  which  thought  had  landed  itself
through  its  hard  and  narrow  concepts  of  cause  and  effect.
And  in  fact  there  is  no  way  out  of  the  impasse  but  by  retrac¬
ing  our  steps  and  recognising  that  these  concepts  are  partial
and  misleading  abstractions.  We  have  to  return  to  the  fluid¬
ity  and  plasticity  of  nature  and  experience  in  order  to  find
the  concepts  of  reality.  When  we  do  this  we  find  that  round
every  luminous  point  in  experience  there  is  a  gradual  shading
off  into  haziness  and  obscurity.  A  “  concept  ”  is  not  merely
its  clear  luminous  centre,  but  embraces  a  surrounding  sphere
of  meaning  or  influence  of  smaller  or  larger  dimensions,  in
which  the  luminosity  tails  off  and  grows  fainter  until  it  dis¬
appears.  Similarly  a  “  thing  ”  is  not  merely  that  which  pre¬
sents  itself  as  such  in  clearest  definite  outline,  but  this  central
area  is  surrounded  by  a  zone  of  intuitions  and  influences
which  shades  off  into  the  region  of  the  indefinite.  The  hard
abrupt  contours  of  our  ordinary  conceptional  system  do  not
apply  to  reality  and  make  reality  inexplicable,  not  only  in
the  case  of  causation,  but  in  all  cases  of  relations  between
things,  qualities,  and  ideas.  Conceive  of  a  cause  as  a  centre


i8


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


with  a  zone  of  activity  or  influence  surrounding  it  and  shad¬
ing  gradually  off  into  indefiniteness.  Next  conceive  of  an
effect  as  similarly  surrounded.  It  is  easy  in  that  way  to
understand  their  interaction,  and  to  see  that  cause  and  effect
are  interlocked,  and  embrace  and  influence  each  other
through  the  interpenetration  of  their  two  fields.  In  fact  the
conception  of  Fields  of  force  which  has  become  customary  in
Electro-Magnetism  is  only  a  special  case  of  phenomenon
which  is  quite  universal  in  the  realms  of  thought  and  reality
alike.  Every  “  thing  ”  has  its  field,  like  itself,  only  more
attenuated;  every  concept  has  likewise  its  field.  It  is  in
these  fields  and  these  fields  only  that  things  really  happen.
It  is  the  intermingling  of  fields  which  is  creative  or  causal
in  nature  as  well  as  in  life.  The  hard  secluded  concrete
thing  or  concept  is  barren,  and  but  for  its  field  it
could  never  come  into  real  contact  or  into  active  or  creative
relations  with  any  other  thing  or  concept.  Things,  ideas,
animals,  plants,  persons:  all  these,  like  physical  forces,  have
their  fields,  and  but  for  their  fields  they  would  be  unintelli¬
gible,  their  activities  would  be  impossible,  and  their  relations
barren  and  sterile.  The  abstract  intelligence,  in  isolating
things  or  ideas,  and  constituting  them  apart  from  their
fields,  and  treating  the  latter  as  non-existent,  has  made  the
real  world  of  matter  and  of  life  quite  unintelligible  and
inexplicable.  The  world  is  thus  in  abstraction  constituted
of  entities  which  are  absolutely  discontinuous,  with  nothing
between  them  to  bridge  the  impassable  gulfs,  little  or  great,
which  separate  them  from  each  other.  The  world  becomes
to  us  a  mere  collection  of  disjecta  membra,  drained  of  all
union  or  mutual  relations,  dead,  barren,  inactive,  unintelli¬
gible.  And  in  order  once  more  to  bring  relations  into  this
scrap  heap  of  disconnected  entities,  the  mind  has  to  conjure
up  spirits,  influences,  forces  and  what  not  from  the  vasty
deep  of  its  own  imagination.  And  all  this  is  due  to  the
initial  mistake  of  enclosing  things  or  ideas  or  persons  in  hard
contours  which  are  purely  artificial  and  are  not  in  accord¬
ance  with  the  natural  shading-off  continuities  which  are  or
should  be  well  known  to  science  and  philosophy  alike.  One


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


s


19


pf  the  most  salutary  reforms  in  thought  which  could  be
effected  would  be  for .  people  to  accustom  themselves  to
the  ideal  of  fields,  and  to  look  upon  every  concrete  thing
or  person  or  even  abstract  idea  as  merely  a  centre,  sur¬
rounded  by  zones  or  aurae  or  spheres  of  the  same  nature
as  the  centre,  only  more  attenuated  and  shading  off  into
indefiniteness.

There  is  one  more  remark  I  wish  to  make  in  regard  to  the
activity  of  the  abstract  intelligence  in  construing  our  actual
experience.  I  have  already  shown  how  in  a  special
case  this  abstract  activity  has  converted  the  psychical
factor  of  Natural  Selection  into  the  semblance  of  a
mechanical  force.  The  risk  of  error  is,  however,  much
greater  than  that  particular  instance  may  serve  to
indicate.  One  may  say  that  the  analytical  character  of
thought  has  a  far-reaching  effect  in  obscuring  the  nature
of  reality,  which  has  to  be  carefully  guarded  against.  In
order  to  understand  and  explore  any  concrete  situation,
we  analyse  it  into  its  factors  or  elements,  whose  separate
operation  and  effects  are  then  studied,  in  isolation  so  to  say.
This  procedure  is  not  only  quite  legitimate,  but  the  only  one
possible,  if  we  wish  to  understand  and  investigate  the  com¬
plex  groupings  of  nature.  It  is  the  analytical  method  which
science  has  applied  with  such  outstanding  success;  and  but
for  this  analysis  of  a  complex  phenomenon  or  situation  into
its  separate  elements  and  the  study  of  these  in  isolation,  it
is  fair  to  assume  that  very  little  progress  would  have  been
possible  in  the  understanding  of  Nature  with  all  her  obscure
processes.  When  the  isolated  elements  or  factors  of  the
complex  situation  have  been  separately  studied,  they  are
recombined  in  order  to  reconstitute  the  original  situation.
Two  sources  of  error  here  become  possible.  In  the  first
place,  in  the  original  analysis  something  may  have  escaped,
so  that  in  the  reconstruction  we  have  no  longer  all  the
original  elements  present,  but  something  less.  I  have
already  shown  how  “  fields  ”  escape  in  the  idea  of  things
and  even  in  concepts.  The  same  happens  in  regard  to  the
elements  into  which  a  situation  is  analysed.  And  it  is  cer-


20


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


tain  that  in  every  case  of  analysis  and  reconstitution  of  a
situation  something  escapes,  which  makes  the  artificial  situ¬
ation  as  reconstructed  different  from  the  original  situation
which  was  to  be  explored  and  explained.  An  element  of
more  or  less  error  has  entered.  This  may  be  called  the  error
of  analysis.

In  the  second  place,  we  are  apt  after  the  analysis  and
investigation  of  the  isolated  elements  or  factors  to  look  upon
them  as  the  natural  factors  of  the  situation,  and  upon  the
situation  itself  as  a  sort  of  result  brought  about  by  them.
The  analytical  elements  thus  become  the  real  operative
entities,  while  the  situation  or  phenomenon  to  be  explained
becomes  their  product  or  resultant.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
just  the  opposite  is  the  case.  We  started  in  nature  with  the
complex  situation  or  sensible  phenomenon  as  the  reality  to
be  explained.  The  analytical  elements  or  factors  were
merely  the  result  of  analysis,  and  might  even  be  merely  ab¬
stractions.  But  because  they  are  simpler  and  admit  of  closer
scrutiny  and  experiment,  we  have  come  to  look  upon  them  as
real  or  constitutive,  and  upon  the  situation  from  which  they
were  abstracted  or  analysed  as  artificial  or  constituted.  Thus
it  has  come  about  that  in  physical  science,  for  instance,  the
elements  of  matter  or  force  into  which  bodies  have  been
analysed  have  tended  to  become  the  reals.  Thus  scientific
entities  like  electrons  and  protons,  and  the  physical
energies  or  forces  which  they  represent,  are  taken  to  be  the
real  entities  in  nature,  and  sensible  matter  or  bodies  as
something  derivative  and  merely  resulting  from  their
activities.  The  abstract  thus  becomes  the  real,  the  concrete
is  relegated  to  a  secondary  position.  This  inversion  of
reality  is  very  much  the  same  procedure  as  was  condemned
in  the  case  of  the  scholastic  and  other  philosophers  who
attributed  reality  to  universals  instead  of  to  concrete
particulars.  This  may  be  called  the  error  of  abstraction
or  generalisation.  Against  both  these  forms  of  error  we
have  to  guard,  if  we  wish  faithfully  to  interpret  Nature
as  we  experience  her.

Our  object  in  studying  and  interpreting  Nature  is  to  be


I


FUNDAMENTAL  CONCEPTS


21


faithful  to  our  experience  of  her.  We  do  not  want  to
recreate  Nature  in  our  own  image,  and  as  far  as  possible  we
wish  to  eliminate  errors  of  observation  or  construction  which
are  due  to  us  as  observers.  We  do  not  wish  to  spread  Nature
on  a  sort  of  Procrustes  bed  of  our  concepts  and  cut  off  here
and  there  what  appears  surplus  or  unnecessary  or  even  non¬
existent  to  our  subjective  standards.  Our  experience  is
largely  fluid  and  plastic,  with  little  that  is  rigid  and  with
much  that  is  indefinite  about  it.  We  should  as  far  as
possible  withstand  the  temptation  to  pour  this  plastic  expe¬
rience  into  the  moulds  of  our  hard  and  narrow  precon¬
ceived  notions,  and  even  at  the  risk  of  failing  to  explain
all  that  we  experience  we  should  be  modest  and  loyal  in
the  handling  of  that  experience.  In  that  way  a  good  deal
of  what  we  have  hitherto  felt  certain  may  once  more
become  uncertain;  the  solid  and  recognised  landmarks  may
once  more  become  blurred  or  shifting;  the  stable  results
of  the  nineteenth-century  science  may  once  more  become
unstable  and  uncertain.  But  the  way  will  be  open  for  the
truer  constructions  of  the  future,  and  the  foundations  of
our  future  science  will  be  more  deeply  and  securely  laid.

In  the  following  chapters  a  modest  effort  will  be  made  to
apply  the  above  ideas  and  principles  to  a  new  interpretation
of  Nature,  including,  as  it  does,  Matter,  Life  and  Mind.
Matter,  Life  and  Mind,  so  far  from  being  discontinuous  and
disparate,  will  appear  as  a  more  or  less  connected  progres¬
sive  series  of  the  same  great  Process.  And  this  Process  will
be  shown  to  underlie  and  explain  the  characters  of  all  three,
and  to  give  to  Evolution,  both  inorganic  and  organic,  a  fun¬
damental  continuity  which  it  does  not  seem  to  possess  ac¬
cording  to  current  scientific  and  philosophical  ideas.


CHAPTER  II


THE  REFORMED  CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME

Summary. — It  is  not  only  in  organic  Evolution  that  the  old
fixed  concepts  and  counters  of  thought  are  breaking  down.  Recent
advances  in  physical  science  have  extended  the  revolution  to  the
domain  of  the  inorganic;  the  fixity  of  the  atom  has  followed  that
of  species  into  the  limbo  of  the  obsolete.  In  many  directions  new
concepts,  more  in  harmony  with  the  fluid  creative  process  of
nature,  are  called  for.

We  begin  with  the  new  concepts  of  Space  and  Time,  which  in
the  system  of  Relativity  are  taking  the  place  of  the  old  Newtonian
concepts  still  commonly  accepted.  The  new  ideas  of  Space  and
Time  arose  from  researches  in  the  higher  mathematics  and  physics,
and  were  primarily  concerned  with  the  relative  character  of  all
actual  motion  in  the  universe,  and  the  mathematical  and  physical
consequences  of  this  relativity.  Thus  according  to  the  mathe¬
matical  physicists  to  a  moving  observer  a  moving  body  appears  to
contract  or  to  be  shorter  than  it  would  be  to  a  stationary  observer,
and  the  faster  either  of  them  moves  the  greater  the  contraction
becomes.  Time  varies  similarly,  but  in  the  opposite  direction;
while  the  space  of  the  moving  body  appears  to  contract,  its  time
appears  to  expand,  so  that  it  takes  a  longer  time  to  pass  a  point
than  it  would  do  if  viewed  by  a  stationary  observer.  This  joint
and  inseparable  variation  of  Space  and  Time  was  not  only  most
important  *in  itself,  but  led  directly  to  the  revolutionary  concep¬
tion  that  neither  of  them  existed  independently,  but  that  together
they  form  the  Space-Time  medium  of  the  real  physical  world.
From  this  point  of  view  bodies  and  things  as  merely  spatial  are
not  real  but  abstractions,  while  events,  which  involve  both  Space
and  Time,  Action  in  Space-Time,  are  real  and  form  the  units  of
reality.  The  deposition  of  the  old  Space  and  Time  and  their
replacement  by  Space-Time  have  been  tested  in  the  most  search¬
ing  way  both  in  the  immense  world  of  astronomy  and  in  the  most
minute  world  of  the  atom,  and  in  both  cases  the  new  concepts
have  been  found  to  work  satisfactorily.

The  variation  of  Space  and  Time  has  led  to  the  further  conclu¬
sion  that  in  a  world  of  relative  motion  such  as  ours  all  standards  of
measurement  and  all  clocks  of  Time  are  themselves  variable  and


22


CHAP,  n  CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME


23


give  no  constant  results.  Applying  the  conclusion  to  gravitation
and  the  rotational  movements  of  the  universe,  we  find  that  the
Space-Time  medium  of  the  universe  is  curved  and  warped  and  not
of  the  homogeneous  character  which  was  attributed  to  Space  and
Time  according  to  the  old  ideas.  In  all  gravitational  fields  events
happen  in  curves  and  follow  the  fundamental  curves  of  the  Space-
Time  universe.  The  result  is  that  the  entire  universe  acquires  a
definite  structural  character,  and  is  not  a  diffuse  homogeneity  as
was  formerly  supposed.  According  to  the  new  Space-Time  con¬
cept,  structure,  definite  organised  structure,  becomes  the  essential
characteristic  of  the  physical  universe,  and  this  structural  char¬
acter  accounts  for  many  hitherto  inexplicable  phenomena.

In  the  preceding  chapter  I  have  tried  to  explain  how  the
acceptance  of  the  theory  of  Evolution  must  inevitably  and
profoundly  affect  our  views  as  regards  the  nature  of  matter.
In  this  chapter  I  proceed  to  inquire  what  bearing  recent
far-reaching  physical  researches  and  speculations  have  on
this  position.  Our  problem  is  to  break  away  from  the  hard
and  narrow  conceptions  of  the  Victorian  age,  to  see  Nature
once  more  in  her  fluid  and  creative  plasticity,  and  to  formu¬
late  our  conceptions  afresh  from  this  deeper  point  of  view.
A  great  change  has  come  over  our  views  of  Nature,  a  change
great  enough  in  the  end  to  amount  to  one  of  the  fundamental
revolutions  in  human  thought.  But  we  are  still  in  the
process  of  that  change,  and  it  is  therefore  difficult  for  us  to
realise  its  full  significance.  Three  dates  stand  out  in  bold
relief  as  inaugurating  that  change:  1859,  when  Darwin’s
Origin  of  Species  was  published;  1896,  when  Becquerel  dis¬
covered  Radioactivity;  and  1915,  when  Einstein  published
his  General  Theory  of  Relativity.  Round  these  three  great
events  other  discoveries  of  profound  interest  have  taken
and  are  still  taking  place;  and  in  the  result  our  entire  view¬
points  and  standpoints  as  regards  Nature  and  reality  are
undergoing  a  fundamental  change  which  must  in  the  end
affect  every  province  of  human  thought  and  conduct.  The
fixity  of  organic  species  is  gone;  the  fixity  of  inorganic
elements  is  going.  The  position  is  once  more  becoming
fluid,  the  old  rigid  order  is  visibly  dissolving,  the  fixed  land¬
marks  and  beacon-points  by  which  former  generations


24


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


steered  their  course  in  science  are  becoming  submerged.  And
the  task  awaits  the  future  out  of  this  fluid  situation  and
these  instabilities  once  more  to  build  a  stable  world  of  ideas,
which  will  be  in  closer  harmony  with  the  reality  around  us
and  within  us.  One  of  the  aspects  of  Darwin’s  Theory  has
already  briefly  engaged  our  attention  in  the  last  chapter,  and
other  aspects  of  it  will  be  considered  in  Chapter  VIII.  In  the
present  chapter  reference  must  be  made  to  Einstein’s  Gen¬
eral  Theory  of  Relativity  and  the  bearing  it  has  on  our  ideas
of  space  and  time  as  the  framework  in  which  events  are  lo¬
cated,  and  the  medium  in  which  Evolution  takes  place.  The
resulting  view  of  the  universe  as  structural,  and  of  the  ele¬
ment  of  structure  as  fundamental  to  the  universe  and  all  its
forms,  is  important  for  the  subject  and  the  argument  of  this
work.

People  become  frightened  when  they  are  invited  to  con¬
sider  Einstein’s  theory.  Its  refined  abstractions,  its  abstruse
mathematical  form,  its  complete  novelty  and  reversal  of
ordinary  common-sense  view-points  make  it  a  terror  to  the
uninitiated.  And  yet  I  believe  the  Einstein  view-point  can
be  quite  simply  and  intelligibly  put.  Indeed  it  must  be  so
put  if  it  is  ever  to  become  part  and  parcel  of  ordinary
educated  thought.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  simple
and  clear  view-point  itself,  and  the  recondite  mathematical
processes  by  which  it  was  reached,  and  the  technical  mathe¬
matical  form  in  which  it  is  expressed,  and  from  which  for
all  ordinary  purposes  it  can  be  separated.  The  understand¬
ing  and  appreciation  of  the  Relativity  view-point  are  not
dependent  on  a  knowledge  of  the  process  by  which  Einstein
reached  that  view-point.  The  result  is  quite  distinct  from
the  process.  It  is  like  groping  our  way  through  a  long,  dark,
rough  tunnel,  and  at  the  end  emerging  into  the  clear  daylight
beyond:  it  is  not  necessary  for  the  appreciation  of  the  new
view  that  one  should  plunge  back  into  the  dark  tunnel.
Besides,  I  must  frankly  state  my  own  opinion  that  the
Einstein  theory,  as  distinguished  from  the  broad  view-point
attained,  has  not  yet  found  its  final  expression.  All  great
truths  are  in  their  essence  simple;  and  the  absence  of  sim-


II


CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME


25


plicity  of  statement  only  shows  that  the  ultimate  form
has  not  yet  been  reached.  The  day  may  yet  come  when  the
ten  recondite  Einstein  equations  of  gravitation  may  appear
as  but  the  scaffolding  of  the  simpler  structure  yet  to  arise,
the  naturalness  and  inevitableness  of  which  will  be  as  evi¬
dent  to  every  educated  person  as  the  heliocentric  conception
of  Copernicus  has  become.

The  Einstein  theory  arose  originally  from  mathematics,
and  a  brief  reference  to  this  mathematical  origin  will  be
useful.  Galileo  and  Newton  were  the  fathers  of  the  modern
classical  mechanics;  they  (and  especially  Newton)  formu¬
lated  the  laws  of  moving  bodies  in  an  exact  mathematical
science.  Now  the  germ  of  the  new  Relativity  mechanics  is
the  almost  obvious  fact  that  the  motion  of  a  body  is  never
absolute,  but  is  always  relative  to  some  other  body  or  point.
If  this  body  or  point  of  reference  is  stationary,  Newton’s
laws  of  motion  apply  completely,  and  the  geometry  of
Euclid  also  applies,  so  that  the  movements  of  bodies  can  be
represented  by  geometrical  figures.  Such  bodies  are  said
to  move  in  Euclidean  space,  which  is  the  same  and  homo¬
geneous  all  through  and  in  all  directions.  Now  since  New¬
ton’s  time  a  great  deal  of  attention  has  been  given  to  the
case  where  the  body  of  reference  or  the  observer  is  not
stationary  but  is  also  in  motion.  This  case  is  important,
because  it  is  actually  that  of  all  bodies  in  our  universe,  in
which  all  observers  or  points  of  reference  are  themselves  in
motion.  A  point  on  the  earth,  for  instance,  rotates  with  a
certain  velocity  round  the  centre  of  the  earth,  while  the  earth
again  rotates  with  another  velocity  round  the  sun.  The  sun
itself  is  not  stationary  but  moving  with  reference  to  some
star,  which  is  itself  in  motion  with  reference  to  some  other
moving  centre  of  reference.  It  is  this  case  of  the  moving
observer  or  point  of  reference  with  which  Einstein’s  theory
deals,  and  it  is  therefore  clear  that  this  theory  faces  the
problem  of  motion  as  it  actually  exists  in  the  universe.  The
impression  of  rest  or  stationariness  to  us  as  observers  in  the
universe  is  a  mere  illusion,  and  the  great  service  of  Einstein
was  to  explore  this  illusion  and  to  show  in  exact  mathemat-


26


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


ical  form  to  what  extent  it  affects  our  vision  and  judgment  of
movement  in  the  world.  Let  us  therefore  take  the  case  of
moving  observers.  Now  when  a  moving  object  (say  a  train
in  motion)  is  viewed  by  an  observer  in  motion  (say  an
observer  in  a  motor-car  moving  on  a  road  parallel  to  the
train),  certain  curious  results  have  been  worked  out  by  the
mathematicians,  of  which  the  following  are  two  important
samples:

(A)  The  train  appears  a  little  shorter  than  it  would  to  a
stationary  observer.

(B)  The  time  taken  by  the  train  to  pass  a  point  appears  a
little  longer  (or  the  train  appears  to  move  somewhat  more
slowly)  than  it  would  to  a  stationary  observer.

In  other  words,  to  a  moving  observer  the  length  or  the
space  occupied  by  a  moving  body  is  smaller  in  the  direction
of  its  motion  than  it  would  appear  to  a  stationary  observer;
and  similarly  the  time  taken  by  the  observed  body  to  pass
a  point  will  be  longer.  And  the  faster  the  observer
or  observed  body  moves,  the  more  the  space  and  time
of  the  observed  body  will  vary  for  him,  compared  to  what
they  would  do  if  he  were  at  rest.  These  two  variations  of
space  and  time  are  joint  variations,  happening  simultane¬
ously  but  in  an  opposite  direction,  the  one  becoming  less
in  proportion  as  the  other  becomes  more  to  the  moving
observer.  Space  contracts  and  time  expands  in  inverse
proportions  according  to  the  rate  of  motion  of  a  moving
body  of  reference  or  a  moving  observer.  One  may  gen¬
eralise  this  result  and  say  that  so  long  as  several
observers  move  at  different  rates  but  uniformly  and
in  straight  lines  with  regard  to  each  other,  the  velocity
or  speed  of  the  moving  body  which  they  are  observing
appears  the  same  to  all  of  them,  as  the  proportional
co-variations  of  their  respective  spaces  and  times  cancel  each
other  out,  so  to  say.  This  is  a  popular  way  of  stating  the
main  principle  of  Einstein’s  Special  Theory  of  Relativity,
first  published  in  1905,  in  rigorous  mathematical  form.  It
explained  the  fact,  which  had  been  repeatedly  confirmed  by


n


CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME


27

the  most  accurate  experiments,  that  the  velocity  of  light  is
always  the  same,  whatever  the  velocity  of  its  source,  and
however  great  may  be  the  difference  in  velocities  of  the
moving  observers  who  are  trying  to  measure  it.  An
observer  moving  away  from  a  flash  of  light  at  a  rate  which  is
half  that  of  light  will  see  the  flash  at  the  same  time  as  a
stationary  observer,  and  not  later  as  one  might  suppose.
The  reason  is  that  the  time  and  space  measures  of  the  mov¬
ing  observer  have  changed  jointly  so  as  to  neutralise  the
results  which  his  motion  might  have  on  his  observation.

The  two  salient  facts  to  bear  in  mind  as  a  result  of  the
above  are:  that  to  moving  observers  clocks  and  standards
of  measurement  in  motion  are  no  longer  absolute  but  vary
according  to  the  rates  of  motion  of  these  observers  or
of  the  clocks  or  standards,  and  that  there  is  this  curious
joint  and  opposite  variation  of  the  space  and  time
measures  of  moving  observers  or  bodies.  In  fact  separately
Space  and  Time  must  be  mere  abstractions,  as  in  all  actual
movements  they  are  always  found  in  inseparable  conjoint
action.

From  this  co-variation  of  Space  and  Time  it  is  but  a  step
to  Minkowski’s  great  idea,  first  formulated  in  1908,  that  in
natural  events  Space  and  Time  are  not  independent  factors,
and  that  in  the  mathematical  representation  of  events  the
correct  way  is  to  introduce  time  as  a  fourth  dimension,  not
of  space,  but  of  the  Space-Time  continuum  in  which  events
really  take  place.  Time  is,  of  course,  in  many  ways  unlike
space  and  is  not  another  dimension  of  it,  but  this  inseparable
co-variation  in  all  events  which  happen  in  nature  makes  it
both  feasible  and  proper  that  we  should  substitute  the  real
Space-Time  continuum  of  events  for  the  old  abstract  three-
dimensional  space  of  bodies  or  points  in  space.  In  passing
it  may  here  be  pointed  out  that  the  old  notion  of  the  sepa¬
rate  reality  of  space  and  of  time  involved  both  the  errors  of
analysis  and  of  abstraction  to  which  attention  was  drawn  in
the  last  chapter,  and  Minkowski’s  brilliant  idea  has  simply
brought  us  back  to  the  natural  fact  as  it  occurs  in  experience,
where  nothing  ever  happens  in  space  alone  or  in  time  alone,


28


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


but  always  in  both  together,  and  where  objects  are  not  ob¬
served  by  themselves,  but  always  as  elements  or  items  in  the
stream  of  perceived  events.  Nay  more,  it  can  be  easily  shown
that  the  very  ideas  of  Space  and  Time  interpenetrate  each
other  and  are  dependent  on  each  other.  Succession  or  the
time-series,  and  co-existence  or  the  space-series,  are  neces¬
sary  to  each  other  and  would  not  be  even  intelligible  apart
from  each  other.  For  the  succession  (time)  would  perish  at
each  step  and  would  not  even  form  a  series,  unless  it  had  en¬
duringness  or  co-existence  (space).  And  similarly  the  co¬
existence  (space)  would  stop  at  its  first  step  and  would  not  be
spread  out  or  extended  unless  it  had  also  succession  (time).

To  Einstein  this  concept  of  a  Space-Time  continuum
proved  most  welcome  and  fruitful,  and  he  proceeded  to
apply  it  to  the  explanation  of  all  movements  in  the  universe,
not  only  to  uniform  and  rectilinear  motions  which  take  place
in  uniform  Euclidean  space,  but  also  to  rotating  and  accele¬
rated  motions  which  take  place  in  a  gravitational  field  of  a
non-Euclidean  character.

His  first  step  was  to  illustrate,  by  purely  theoretical
considerations,  the  fact  that  a  body  under  the  influence  of  a
constant  force,  and  therefore  moving  with  a  constantly  in¬
creasing  acceleration,  would  to  an  observer  situated  on  it
behave  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  a  body  acted  on  by
gravitation.  Thus  suppose  a  man  enclosed  in  a  cage  so  that
he  cannot  observe  any  other  body  and  cannot  notice  his  own
motion.  And  suppose  this  cage  suspended  in  distant  space
where  there  is  no  gravitation.  And  suppose  further  that
this  cage  is  drawn  upward  with  a  constant  force,  so  that  it
moves  faster  and  faster  with  a  constantly  increasing  accel¬
eration.  In  truth  the  case  is  therefore  one  of  acceleration.
But  by  the  enclosed  observer  this  motion  and  acceleration  of
the  cage  and  himself  will  not  be  noticed.  He  would  only  feel
like  being  pulled  down  by  his  own  weight.  If  he  loses  any
object  from  his  hand,  it  will  fall  to  the  bottom  of  the  cage
like  a  stone  dropped  on  the  earth.  What  is  more,  the  rate
at  which  the  object  drops  is  the  same,  whatever  its  figure  or
size  or  amount  of  material.  The  fact  italicised  is  distinctive


n  CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME  29

of  gravitation.  In  other  words,  the  man  in  the  cage  will
think  that  he  and  the  cage  and  the  object  therein  are  all
acted  upon  by  gravitation.  What  is  really  due  to  accelera¬
tion  appears  to  be  a  case  purely  and  simply  of  gravitation.
Thus  we  see  acceleration  and  gravitation  are  really  the  same
phenomena  and  only  different  in  appearance  to  observers.
Acceleration  and  gravitation  are,  in  fact,  equivalent  expres¬
sions.  Einstein’s  closed  cage  may  yet  become  as  historic
as  Newton’s  falling  apple.

Now  take  rotation,  which  is  simply  a  special  case  of
acceleration.  And  let  us  imagine  an  observer  situated  on  a
rotating  or  revolving  plane  circular  disc  and  proceeding  to
measure  the  area  of  the  disc  and  the  rate  at  which  it  is
revolving.  He  has  two  identical  clocks,  one  of  which  he  puts
near  the  centre  of  the  disc  and  the  other  near  the  circum¬
ference  in  order  to  take  some  time  measurements.  When  he
proceeds  to  take  the  time  of  the  clock  near  the  centre  he
finds  that  it  moves  more  slowly  than  when  he  proceeds  to
read  the  clock  placed  near  the  circumference.  We  have  al¬
ready  seen  why  this  is  so.  The  motion  of  the  disc  at  the
centre  is  nil,  and  its  motion  at  the  circumference  quite
marked,  and  the  times  of  identical  clocks  at  these  two  points
will  therefore  vary  to  the  moving  observer.  And  similarly
the  rate  of  any  identical  clock  will  vary  according  to  the  dis¬
tance  of  its  position  on  the  surface  of  the  disc  from  the  cen¬
tre,  as  the  motions  of  all  points  on  the  disc  will  differ  accord¬
ing  to  their  distance  from  the  centre.  He  then  proceeds  to
apply  identical  measuring  rods  and  finds  the  same  continual
variation.  He  finds  that  the  identical  measuring  rods  vary
in  length  according  to  their  position  on  the  disc;  one  placed
on  the  circumference  is  shorter  than  one  placed  near  the
centre.  And  the  differing  lengths  of  the  rods  will  measure
up  different  spaces.  The  observer  will  become  utterly
confused,  and  will  finally  conclude  that  the  spaces  on  the
disc  are  not  the  same  everywhere  and  in  all  directions,  but
appear  to  vary  in  all  directions  and  to  be  twisted,  warped,
and  curved.  Or,  as  we  would  say,  the  space  of  the  disc  is
not  straight-line  homogeneous  uniform  Euclidean  space,  but


30


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


curved  and  non-Euclidean.  Taking  the  variations  of  the
spaces  and  times  on  the  rotating  disc  together,  we  conclude
that  the  disc  is  not  a  Euclidean  space  but  a  non-Euclidean
Space-Time  continuum.

As  we  have  seen  that  the  phenomena  of  acceleration
(including  rotation)  and  gravitation  are  equivalent,  these
considerations  in  reference  to  the  rotating  disc  apply  also  to
every  gravitational  body.  We  know  that  gravitation  acts
at  a  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  gravitational  body;
in  fact  every  such  body  is  surrounded  by  a  gravitational
field  far  larger  than  itself.  Therefore  the  non-Euclidean
characters  will  also  distinguish  the  Space-Time  continuum
in  this  field.  In  other  words,  movements  and  happenings  in
this  field  will  not  follow  the  law  of  a  uniform  time  and  a
homogeneous  identical  space  in  all  directions.  They  will
take  place  in  curves,  exactly  as  on  our  rotating  disc.  A  body
falling  in  space  through  such  a  field  will  on  entering
it  and  while  in  it,  follow  not  a  straight  path,  but
the  curve  which  coincides  most  closely  with  its  original
straight  path;  a  ray  of  light  passing  through  the  field  will
similarly  follow  the  nearest  curve  instead  of  a  straight  line.
And  indeed  any  physical  event  within  that  field  will,  in  so
far  as  it  is  of  a  translational  character,  follow  the  curve  on
which  it  happens  to  take  place.  These  deductions  from
theory  have  been  experimentally  verified  in  the  most  impor¬
tant  particulars.

According  to  this  theory  the  mysterious  “attractive  ”
power  of  matter,  which  is  called  gravitation,  assumes  quite
a  different  character.  The  apparent  attraction  is  simply
due  to  the  movements  in  the  universe  of  masses  charged
with  energy,  which  (except  as  pushes  and  pulls  on  our
bodies)  we  ourselves  do  not  particularly  notice  as  we  happen
to  partake  of  the  same  movements  as  the  observed  phenom¬
ena.  This,  however,  does  not  make  of  gravitation  an  unreal¬
ity,  due  to  the  subjective  vagaries  of  the  observer.  Gravita¬
tion,  as  we  have  seen,  now  becomes  the  curves  of  the  real
Space-Time  world;  it  marks  the  inevitable  paths  which  all
events  must  follow  in  the  physical  universe.  So  far  from


n


CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME


3i


being  subjective  or  merely  relative  to  the  observer,  gravi¬
tation  becomes  the  very  structure  of  the  real  world  and  con¬
notes  the  stratification  which  characterises  the  vast  fields  of
the  Space-Time  continuum.  Our  whole  conception  of  the
universe  is  altered.  Instead  of  conceiving  the  universe  as
consisting  of  material  bodies  floating  in  a  medium  of  uniform
homogeneous  space,  we  now  look  upon  the  vast  variable
masses  of  “  matter  ”  associated  with  high-speed  energies  as
developing  huge  “  fields  ”  called  Space— Time,  in  which
the  curves  of  the  lines  can  be  calculated  and  the  course  of
events  happening  in  them  can  be  predicted.  For  events
follow  the  curves  and  their  future  course  can  be  calculated,
once  their  position  on  the  curves  is  determined.  The
physics  of  Nature  thus  becomes  in  part  an  annexe
of  the  geometry  of  Space-Time,  and  a  new  power  is
placed  in  the  hands  of  man,  limited  only  by  the  limitations
of  his  mathematical  insight  and  genius.  The  distance  be¬
tween  mind  and  matter  is  immeasurably  reduced,  and  matter
appears  to  become  plastic  to  the  moulding  power  of  mind.
The  concept  of  the  “  field  ”  becomes  all-important  in  science
and  in  thought.  The  “  field  ”  of  matter  is  simply  the  curved
structure  of  the  real  Space-Time,  which  extends  far  beyond
sensible  matter  itself.  Throughout  its  vast  “  fields  ”  the
universe  assumes  a  form  not  very  much  unlike  the  curved
contours  and  unevennesses  which  we  associate  with  the
physical  appearance  of  this  globe.  The  contours  of  the
unseen  universe  of  our  field  which  surrounds  us  follow  very
much  the  lines  which  meet  our  eye  on  sea  and  land.  But
these  lines  are  not  mere  empty  form.  They  are  not  mere
curves  of  beauty;  they  are  real  and  causal,  for  they
determine  the  course  of  events  in  the  universe.  The
peripheries  of  rotating  bodies  are  such  curves,  the  planets
move  round  the  suns  in  such  curves;  light  is  propagated
along  such  curves;  in  fact  these  curves  are  the  path¬
ways  of  the  physical  universe  which  all  physical  events
must  follow.  The  inmost  nature  of  the  universe  is  active
Energy  or  Action  and  involves  the  interplay  of  tre¬
mendous  activities,  whose  result  is  expressed  in  these


32


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


curves;  and  these  curves  are  nothing  but  the  actual
orientation  or  direction  of  events  in  the  Space-Time
framework  of  the  universe.

What  is  or  would  be  the  situation  beyond  the  material
universe  and  its  vast  fields?  There  we  pass  beyond  the
bounds  of  gravitation,  where  there  is  neither  rotation
nor  acceleration,  where  “  bodies  ”  (if  such  astral  abstrac¬
tions  could  be  imagined)  persist  in  their  state  of  rest  or
of  uniform  motion  in  a  straight  line  according  to  Newton’s
First  Law.  There  Space-Time,  if  it  could  be  imagined  to
exist,  would  not  be  curved,  but  would  be  homogeneous  and
continuous,  and  would  be  exactly  the  form  of  empty  noth¬
ingness.  In  fact,  homogeneous  Euclidean  Space-Time
beyond  all  real  fields  is  simply  a  limiting  conception  of
thought  and  would  correspond  to  nothing  that  we  have  any
knowledge  of  in  our  universe.

It  may  be  interesting,  in  conclusion,  to  point  out  the
difference  between  this  conception  of  Space-Time  in  the
Relativity  Theory,  and  the  conceptions  of  Space  and  Time
formulated  by  Newton  and  Kant.  For  Newton  both  Space
and  Time  were  absolutes;  that  is  to  say,  were  real  invariable
permanent  characters  of  things  and  events.  They  were  each
homogeneous  and  continuous  and  therefore  adequately
expressible  by  the  geometry  of  Euclid.  There  was  nothing
subjective  about  them.  For  Kant,  who  in  other  respects
profoundly  admired  the  Newtonian  system,  the  great  prob¬
lem  of  knowledge  was  how  to  determine  the  relative  contri¬
butions  made  to  our  knowledge  of  the  world  by  the  subjec¬
tive  and  objective  factors  respectively,  and  especially  how
much  and  what  the  mind  brought  into  the  common  pool  of
knowledge  and  experience.  His  answer  in  effect  was  that  the
action  of  the  mind  was  creative  in  experience  and  that
it  contributed  to  our  knowledge — (a)  the  elements  of  Space
and  Time  which  are  nothing  but  the  mind’s  own  sensuous
forms  of  intuition  or  perception  imposed  on  the  materials
of  sense  and  experience,  and  (d)  the  general  conceptual  sys¬
tem  of  knowledge  which  follows  from  the  categories  of  the
Understanding,  and  (c)  certain  ultimate  regulative  princi-


II


CONCEPTS  OF  SPACE  AND  TIME


33


pies  of  the  human  Reason.  According  to  this  view,  there¬
fore,  Space  and  Time  are  nothing  but  the  necessary  forms
of  man’s  sensuous  perception;  they  do  not  exist  in  external
reality,  but  are  imposed  by  the  mind  on  all  objects  of  sense.
While  accepting  the  homogeneous  universal  Euclidean  char¬
acters  which  Newton  ascribed  to  Space  and  Time,  Kant
denied  that  they  were  characters  of  things  or  events.  If  these
characters  belonged  to  things,  Kant  failed  to  understand  how
the  a  priori  synthetic  character  of  mathematical  knowledge
was  possible,  and  he  could  only  explain  this  fact  by  making
the  sensuous  form  of  things  a  subjective  contribution  of  the
mind  itself.  The  universal  forms  of  Space  and  Time  in
knowledge  were  due,  not  to  the  things  or  the  world  to  which
they  seemed  to  belong,  but  purely  and  simply  to  the  per¬
ceiving  mind  which  invested  all  things  with  them.

In  contradistinction  to  both  these  theories,  Space  and
Time  in  the  theory  of  Relativity  as  conjoint  co-ordinate
forms  belong  both  to  the  mind  and  to  things;  and  the  whole
effort  of  Einstein  was  to  separate  the  subjective  appearance
from  the  objective  reality,  to  separate  the  relative,  variable
and  disturbing  contribution  made  by  the  observing  mind
from  the  real  permanent  Space-Time  factor  which  is  inher¬
ent  in  the  physical  universe.  If  the  confirmation  of  theory
by  facts  means  anything  it  must  be  admitted  that  Einstein
has  been  singularly  successful  in  his  analysis  and  evaluation
of  these  two  subjective  and  objective  aspects  of  the  Space-
Time  concept.  That  Space  and  Time  were  not,  on  the  one
hand,  merely  subjective  conditions  of  experience  as  Kant
held,  nor,  on  the  other,  merely  objectively  given  elements
for  experience  as  Newton  held,  but  that  they  were  both
subjective  and  objective  contributions  to  experience,  might
have  been  the  discovery  of  a  sound  psychology  or  episte¬
mology.  But  that  these  two  factors  of  Space  and  Time  have
been  fused  into  one  synthesis,  from  which  both  the  subjec¬
tive  and  objective  elements  have  been  properly  sorted  out
and  isolated  and  valued  and  rigorously  determined,  is  an
achievement  of  the  most  outstanding  importance  not  only
for  science  but  also  for  philosophy.  It  is  unnecessary  to


34


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.  II


point  out  that  in  the  Theory  of  Relativity  Space  and  Time
are  not  metaphysical  conceptions  or  forms.  The  infinite
homogeneous  Space  and  Time  which  to  Kant  were  mental
presuppositions  and  preconditions  of  all  sensuous  experi¬
ence,  and  to  Leibniz  the  pre-established  permanent  uni¬
versal  order  of  co-existence  and  succession  among  things,  are
to  Einstein  mere  limiting  pseudo-concepts,  metaphysical  ab¬
stractions  without  relation  to  our  real  experience.  In  our
experience  Space  and  Time  are  given  elements  just  as  colour,
weight,  and  the  rest.  The  task  of  science  is  to  co-ordinate
these  elements  in  an  intelligible  form,  and  in  doing  so  Ein¬
stein  has  simply  explored  them  as  if  they  were  real  physical
experience  like  the  rest.  The  result  is  the  elimination  of
certain  historic  errors  from  the  concepts  of  Space  and  Time,
and  the  determination  of  their  physical  qualities  in  line
with  the  rest  of  our  physical  experience  and  concepts.  The
Space-Time  continuum,  instead  of  being  a  vague,  homo¬
geneous,  formless,  metaphysical  concept,  becomes  a  part  of
physical  reality,  becomes  the  “  field  ”  of  the  material  world,
with  a  definite  structure  of  its  own.  Structure,  real  differ¬
entiated  structure,  becomes  the  inmost  form  of  the  real
Space-Time  world.  The  close  bearing  of  this  on  the  main
argument  of  this  work  will  appear  from  the  following
chapters.


CHAPTER  III


THE  REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER

Summary. — Coming  now  from  the  Space-Time  continuum  to
Matter  we  find  the  feature  of  structure  much  more  conspicuous
and  important.  The  physical  and  chemical  constitution  of  matter
is  almost  entirely  a  matter  of  structure.  Chemistry  has  traced
matter  to  its  ultimate  units  or  atoms,  and  to  the  combination  of
these  into  molecules  and  substances  according  to  structural
schemes  dependent  on  the  placing  and  spacing  of  the  different  units
in  the  various  chemical  combinations.  The  New  Physics  has  car¬
ried  the  process  a  step  further  back  by  analysing  atoms  into  their
constituent  electrons  and  protons,  or  units  of  negative  and  positive
electricity.  These  units  are  so  arranged  structurally  as  to  ap¬
proximate  to  the  form  of  more  or  less  complicated  solar  systems,
with  central  positive  nuclei  and  revolving  planetary  electrons.
The  explanation  of  the  physical*  and  chemical  properties  of  matter
has  been  traced  to  the  structural  arrangements  in  these  atomic
systems  and  the  number  and  changes  in  position  of  their  various
units.  Matter  is  thus  a  structure  of  energy  units  revolving  with
immense  velocities  in  Space-Time,  and  the  various  elements  arise
from  the  number  and  arrangement  of  the  units  in  an  atom;  as
these  can  be  varied,  the  transmutation  of  elements  becomes  pos¬
sible,  as  in  Radioactivity.  The  peculiar  serial  character  of  the
Periodic  Table  of  the  elements  is  thus  due  to  the  number  of  units
and  their  architecture  in  the  atoms.  Atomic  Weights  and  Atomic
Numbers  reflect  this  inner  arithmetical  character  of  the  atoms.

The  states  of  matter,  as  gaseous,  liquid  or  solid,  are  also  the
results  of  the  residual  surface  forces  in  atoms  and  molecules,  due
to  their  inner  structure.  Crystal  structure  is  another  result  of
inner  atomic  structure.  But  perhaps  the  most  remarkable  state  of
matter  is  a  combination  of  the  other  states;  this  is  called  the  col¬
loid  state,  in  which  very  minute  particles  of  one  material  are
dispersed  throughout  another.  This  colloid  state  is  much  more
universal  than  commonly  thought,  and  is  specially  important  be¬
cause  the  protoplasm  of  cells  is  organised  in  this  state.  The
minuteness  of  the  dispersed  particles  means  the  exposure  of  a
maximum  surface  area  compared  to  their  mass.  These  surfaces
bring  into  play  the  surface  forces  and  show  peculiar  affinities  or

35


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


36


selective  properties  of  various  kinds,  and  in  this  way  certain  chem¬
ical  and  physical  reactions  are  facilitated  at  these  surfaces,  which
make  them  useful  in  the  industries  as  well  as  in  the  processes  of
organic  life.  In  fact,  some  reactions  in  the  colloid  state  approxi¬
mate  strangely  to  the  biological  type.

From  the  above  analysis  of  the  structural  energetic  constitution
of  matter  certain  conclusions  can  be  drawn  which  very  much  nar¬
row  the  gulf  between  matter  and  life.

In  the  first  place,  the  old  view  of  matter  as  inert  and  passive  dis¬
appears  completely.  Matter  like  life  is  intensely  active,  indeed  is
Action  in  the  technical  physical  sense;  the  difference  is  not  be¬
tween  deadness  and  activity,  but  between  two  different  kinds  of
activity.  Through  their  common  activities  the  fields  of  matter  and
life  thus  overlap  and  intermingle,  and  absolute  separation  dis¬
appears.

In  the  second  place,  Radioactivity  in  matter  plays  a  somewhat
analogous  role  to  Organic  Descent  in  life.  Both  render  fluid  the
old  fixed  entities  and  forms;  although  the  difference  between  them
must  not  be  minimised.  Especially  must  it  be  recognised  that
Radioactivity  is  regressive,  while  Organic  Descent  is  progressive.
But  this  may  be  due  to  the  extreme  age  of  matter  as  compared
with  the  youth  of  life  in  the  history  of  the  earth.

In  the  third  place,  the  Periodic  Table  of  Chemistry  has  a  dis¬
tinct  resemblance  to  the  Systems  of  Botany  and  Zoology;  the  con¬
cepts  of  families,  genera  and  species  could  be  applied  to  both.
This  shows  that  the  characters  of  activity,  plasticity  and  prob¬
ably  of  development  and  genetic  relationships  apply  to  both  the
organic  and  inorganic  domains.

In  the  fourth  place,  the  structural  character  of  matter  indicates
that  it  is  also  creative,  not  of  its  own  stuff,  but  of  the  forms,  ar¬
rangements  and  patterns  which  constitute  all  its  value  in  the  phys¬
ical  sphere.  Just  as  life  and  mind  are  creative  of  values  through
the  selective  combinations  and  forms  which  they  bring  about,  so
matter  also,  instead  of  being  dispersive,  diffusive  and  structureless,
effects  through  its  inner  activities  and  forces  structural  groupings
and  combinations  which  are  valuable,  not  merely  to  humans,  but  in
the  order  of  the  universe.  But  for  its  dynamic  structural  creative
character  matter  could  not  have  been  the  mother  of  the  universe.

In  the  fifth  place,  matter  in  its  colloid  state  in  protoplasm  dis¬
closes  properties  and  manufactures  substances,  such  as  chlorophyll
and  haemoglobin,  which  are  necessary  for  the  functions  of  life,  and
which  go  far  toward  bridging  the  great  gap  between  the  two.  In
its  colloid  state  we  thus  see  matter  reaching  up  to  the  very
threshold  of  life.  A  great  leap  may  have  taken  place  across  what
remained  as  a  gap.  A  great  “mutation”  may  have  occurred.  But
as  life  probably  began  on  a  much  lower  level  than  the  lowest


in  REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER  37

forms  we  know  to-day,  the  mutation  may  after  all  not  have  been
so  great.  In  any  case  a  close  scrutiny  of  the  nature  of  matter,
as  revealed  by  the  New  Physics,  and  especially  colloid  chemistry,
brings  it  very  near  to  the  concept  of  life.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  how  recent  advances  in
our  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of  matter  have  empha¬
sised  the  importance  of  this  same  feature  of  structure  in  the
physical  universe.  Chemistry  had  for*a  century  been  explor¬
ing  with  great  success  the  structure  and  constitution  of
matter,  but  the  New  Physics  of  Radioactivity  has  during
the  last  twenty  years  proved  a  most  powerful  aid  to  Chem¬
istry  and  led  to  discoveries  which  are  little  short  of  revolu¬
tionary.  To  Chemistry  was  due  the  analysis  of  matter  into  a
certain  number  of  elements,  each  with  its  own  physical  and
chemical  properties;  the  discovery  of  the  atom  as  the  ulti¬
mate  unit  of  each  element  of  matter;  the  union  of  atoms  of
each  element  into  simple  molecules  of  that  element,  and  the
union  of  atoms  of  various  elements  into  compound  molecules.
The  combinations  of  elements  in  definite  quantitative  pro¬
portions  was  explained  as  the  union  of  one  or  more  of  the
atoms  of  these  elements  with  each  other.  From  this  it  might
be  inferred  that  the  combinations  of  Chemistry  were  like  the
combinations  of  Arithmetic,  and  that  the  whole  numbers  of
Arithmetic  might  properly  represent  the  atoms  of  Chemistry
and  their  combinations  into  compounds.  This  inference  has,
however,  only  been  actually  verified  by  the  recent  physical
discoveries.  It  was  not  only  the  fact  of  numerical  or
quantitative  structure  that  was  important  to  Chemistry;
the  spatial  or  positional  structure  of  matter,  the  order  of
placing  and  spacing  of  the  atoms  in  the  chemical  substance,
the  architecture  of  matter  became  almost  equally  important,
and  in  many  cases  the  properties  of  a  substance  could  only
be  explained  on  the  basis  of  its  real  or  supposed  inner
structure  and  configuration.  Thus  molecules  of  carbon
could  be  either  coal  or  graphite  or  diamond,  and  this  great
dissimilarity  in  the  same  chemical  substance  was  explained
as  the  result  of  the  difference  of  structure  in  the  placing
and  spacing  of  the  atoms  in  the  carbon  molecule.  Sulphur


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


38


and  many  other  elements  show  a  similar  polymorphous  or,
as  it  is  called,  allotropic  character.  It  was,  however,  when
chemists  had  to  explain  the  different  characters  of  quite
distinct  chemical  compounds,  which  yet  had  the  same
chemical  composition,  that  the  importance  of  “  structure  ”
and  constitution  became  most  highly  accentuated.  Such
compounds  are  called  isomers.  So  important  is  structure
to  matter  that  without  it  one  may  safely  say  that
organic  chemistry  becomes  unintelligible.  The  more
complex  the  composition  of  substances  (as  in  organic
chemistry),  the  larger  the  number  of  permutations  and
combinations  that  are  possible  in  the  relative  positions  and
placings  of  atoms  or  groups  of  atoms  in  the  make-up  of
matter,  the  more  important  does  the  phenomenon  of
isomerism  become,  and  the  greater  is  the  part  played  by
structure  and  configuration  in  the  building  up  of  matter.
The  chemical  formula  is  no  longer  sufficient,  it  is  a  mere
abstract  notational  shorthand  which  may  be  thoroughly
misleading  in  the  absence  of  a  diagrammatic  representation
of  the  constitution  or  structure  of  the  compound  substance.
The  crystal  forms  of  solids  illustrate  not  only  the  structural
character  of  chemical  substances,  but  also  the  invariable  way
in  which  the  same  substance  follows  the  same  pattern  of
structure.  To  Chemistry  structure,  or  the  proper  representa¬
tion  of  relative  positions  of  atoms  or  their  groups  in  the
three  dimensions  of  space,  has  become  indispensable.  And
the  New  Physics  has  now  gone  a  step  further  and -shown  that
this  minute  structure  of  the  chemical  atom  and  compound
is  not  static  in  space,  but  dynamic  and  intensely  active  in
that  Space-Time  continuum  which  we  have  already  found
dominant  in  the  relations  of  astronomical  bodies  and
events.  Space-Time  prevails  at  both  ends  of  physical
infinity  and  everywhere  between.

To  Chemistry  the  atom  was  a  hard  indivisible  unit,  the
constitution  of  which  (if  there  was  any)  could  not  be
known;  nor  could  it  explain  chemical  affinity  or  why  atoms
combined  into  molecules;  nor  could  it  explain  the  strange
serial  character  of  the  Periodic  Law  in  reference  to  the


in


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


39


atomic  weights  and  the  properties  of  atoms.  These  triumphs
were  reserved  for  the  New  Physics,  and  they  have  traced
structure  back  into  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  atom.  The
discovery  of  Radioactivity  by  Becquerel  in  1896  at  Paris
was  the  first  indication  that  the  atom  was  not  indivisible  and
could  break  up  spontaneously  in  nature.  The  discovery  in
the  previous  year  of  the  X-rays  by  Rontgen  for  the  first  time
revealed  the  existence  of  invisible  rays  whose  wave-length
was  as  small  as  atoms,  and  the  elaboration  of  the  spectrum
of  these  rays  has  provided  an  instrument  of  incredible  power
and  accuracy  in  the  investigation  of  the  almost  infinitesi¬
mally  small  phenomena  of  atomic  structure.  Then  followed
in  1899  the  isolation  by  Sir  J.  J.  Thomson  of  the  ultimate
unit  of  negative  electricity  in  the  electron;  and  in  the  fol¬
lowing  year  Max  Planck  of  Berlin  University  discovered
what  came  to  be  known  as  the  quantum,  the  unit  of  radiant
action  emitted  by  all  radiant  bodies  or  even  dark  bodies.  The
application  of  these  new  ideas  and  means  of  investigation  by
a  number  of  brilliant  researchers  has  led  to  the  elucidation
of  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  atom  of  matter  in  the
theory  which  is  specially  associated  with  the  names  of  Sir
Ernest  Rutherford  and  Professor  Niels  Bohr.  Without  en¬
tering  into  details  which  do  not  concern  us,  and  simply  to
illustrate  the  element  of  “  structure  ”  in  the  atom  with  which
we  are  dealing,  I  shall  summarise  the  salient  points  in  this
theory.  According  to  it,  an  atom  is  an  electrical  constella¬
tion  somewhat  like  our  gravitational  solar  system;  the  centre
of  the  system  being  a  minute  very  massive  nucleus  positively
electrified,  round  which  revolve  equally  minute  electrons  or
negative  particles  of  very  small  mass — so  small  that  in  the
Hydrogen  atom,  for  instance,  the  nucleus  has  1835  times  the
mass  of  the  electron.  The  electrons  revolve  at  various  rates
in  their  different  orbits,  all  of  which  can  be  measured
through  their  X-ray  spectrum;  and  an  electron  can  suddenly
and  all  at  once  jump  from  one  orbit  to  another,  increasing  its
orbit  when  it  receives  one  or  more  quanta  of  radiation  from
some  outside  body,  or  decreasing  its  orbit  and  taking  one
nearer  the  central  nucleus,  and  in  the  act  of  doing  so  releas-


40


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


ing  one  or  more  quanta  of  radiation.  It  is  these  quanta  of
radiation,  released  when  the  electron  jumps  to  a  narrower
orbit  in  the  atom,  that  account  for  the  light  which  comes
from  the  sun  and  the  stars,  and  in  fact  all  radiant  bodies;
and  it  is  the  definite  quanta  of  radiation  so  emitted  which
account  for  the  peculiar  spectrum  of  the  elements  in  the
spectroscope.  Why  atomic  light  should  be  emitted  in  these
definite  amounts  or  quanta  is  not  yet  known,  but  it  is  known
that  the  quanta  follow  a  scale  somewhat  similar  to  the  notes
in  music,  and  we  may  therefore  think  of  light  as  the  music  of
the  spheres,  in  which  the  total  harmony  or  light  effect  is
made  up  of  definite  discontinuous  notes  instead  of  continu¬
ous  variations  of  light.  The  wonderful  thing  is  that  in
regard  to  all  these  matters  we  have  the  most  minute  and
accurate  knowledge:  the  amount  of  a  quantum;  the  mass,
velocity  and  orbits  of  an  electron;  the  mass  and  velocity  of
rotation  of  a  nucleus,  and  the  total  sphere  of  an  atom,  with
its  small  nucleus  and  electrons  and  vast  empty  spaces,  com¬
parable  to  the  empty  spaces  in  our  solar  system.  The  elec¬
tron  is  by  now  very  well  known,  and  indeed  all  electric  cur¬
rents  are  nothing  but  streams  of  free  electrons.  But  of  the
corresponding  positive  unit  which  is  called  a  proton  next  to
nothing  is  known,  as  the  proton  has  never  yet  been  isolated.
Now  the  nucleus  of  an  atom  may  be  simple  or  complex;  it
may  be  a  proton,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Hydrogen  atom,  or  it
may  consist  of  several  protons,  some  of  which,  again,  may  be
neutralised  by  closely  associated  electrons,  and  some  remain
unneutralised,  so  that  the  nucleus  as  a  whole  always  remains
positively  electrified.  In  the  Hydrogen  atom  there  is  one
proton  in  the  nucleus,  and  hence  there  is  one  electron  revolv¬
ing  round  it.  In  the  Helium  atom,  again,  there  is  a
nucleus  of  four  protons,  two  of  which  have  electrons  in  as¬
sociation  with  them,  and  two  not;  the  nucleus,  therefore,
has  two  positive  units,  to  which  correspond  two  electrons
which  revolve  round  the  nucleus  in  the  atom.  The  com¬
bination  of  four  protons  and  two  electrons  in  the  Helium
nucleus  appears  to  persist  in  other  nuclei,  so  that  the  nuclei
of  the  other  elements  appear  to  be  a  combination  of  simple


ill  REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER  41

(Hydrogen)  and  complex  (Helium)  nuclei.  The  number  of
revolving  electrons  in  an  element  always  corresponds  to  the
number  of  unsatisfied  positive  units  in  the  nucleus,  which
is  called  the  atomic  number  of  the  element,  and  which  is
always  an  integer;  and  thus  the  atomic  numbers  of
the  elements  run  from  1  in  the  case  of  Hydrogen  to  2  in
the  case  of  Helium,  3  in  the  case  of  Carbon,  and  so  on  to
92  in  the  case  of  Uranium,  the  heaviest  of  all  the  known
elements.  Of  these  92  possible  elements,  5  or  6  have  not  yet
been  isolated,  although  their  atomic  numbers  and  weights
and  positions  in  the  Periodic  Table  and  their  approximate
properties  are  known.1  Atomic  weights  are  in  every  case
integers,  the  apparent  exceptions  being  cases  where  we
have  to  do  with  isotopes  or  elements  of  which  the
atoms  are  not  all  identically  the  same  but  slightly  dif¬
ferent  in  their  electron  contents.  Thus  the  New  Physics
has  incidentally  explained  the  mystery  of  the  Periodic
Table.

The  mystery  of  the  atom  has  now  largely  narrowed  down
to  the  nucleus,  which  consists  of  an  inner  revolving  system
of  protons  of  which  comparatively  little  is  known  except
that  they  rotate  round  their  centre  with  an  enormous  velocity
— probably  not  much  less  than  that  of  light — and  that  the
quantum  law  as  well  as  the  mass  law  of  Relativity  holds
with  regard  to  them.  As  space  or  volume  contracts  with
velocity  in  Space-Time,  the  mass  of  the  nucleus  increases
with  high  speeds  out  of  all  proportion  to  its  size,  and
the  positive  nucleus  of  the  atom  is  therefore  its  virtual  mass,
the  rest  of  the  atom  being  either  empty  space  or  very  light
insubstantial  electrons.  Owing  to  its  massiveness  the  nucleus
of  protons  is  therefore  coming  to  be  identified  with  matter,
as  if  matter  were  ultimately  only  high-speed  densely  massed
positive  electricity.  The  proton  may  thus  yet  prove  to  be
the  fundamental  unit  of  matter.  The  significance  of  this
view  is  that  it  reduces  matter  simply  to  a  form  of  energy,

1  If  the  claims  to  the  recent  discoveries  of  Hafnium,  Masurium,
and  Rhenium  are  allowed  only  a  couple  of  further  elements  await
discovery.


42


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


or  rather  Action,  and  therefore  still  further  simplifies  the
scheme  of  the  universe.

There  is  another  fact  which  shows  the  intimate  relation
between  energy  on  the  one  hand  and  structure  or  mass  on
the  other.  The  mass  or  atomic  weight  of  the  free  Hydrogen
atom  has  been  determined  as  1.0077.  In  the  Helium
nucleus,  as  we  have  seen,  there  are  four  protons  or  Hydrogen
nuclei,  but  here  their  mass  only  appears  as  one.  In  other
words,  the  free  Hydrogen  atoms  or  protons  (they  are  practi¬
cally  identical  as  regards  mass)  suffer  a  diminution  of  mass
when  they  are  concentrated  into  the  Helium  nucleus,  as  if
in  this  nucleus,  which  is  itself  an  inner  constellation  system,
the  protons  and  electrons  are  so  close  as  to  jam  each  other,
and  therefore  move  more  slowly  and  thereby  decrease  their
mass  or  matter.  When  the  Helium  nucleus  is  again  split  up
into  Hydrogen  protons,  this  loss  of  mass  would  be  recover¬
able  in  the  form  of  energy,  which,  small  as  it  is  in  the
Helium  nucleus,  must  be  enormous  in  the  world,  as  in  all
matter  the  nuclei  are  composed  either  of  Hydrogen  pro¬
tons  or  Helium  protons  (their  compressed  form)  or  both.
Should  this  energy  ever  become  economically  available,  the
greatest  potential  source  of  energy  in  the  universe  will  be
opened  up  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.

This  would  involve  the  artificial  breaking  up  of  matter,
and  this  is  the  phenomenon  which  we  actually  witness  in
a  natural  spontaneous  form  in  Radioactivity.  In  Radio¬
activity  the  nuclei  of  the  heavier  elements  (Uranium,
Thorium,  and  Radium)  spontaneously  break  up  and  eject
Helium  at  an  invariable  slow  rate,  which  is  regular
enough  to  be  a  geological  clock,  now  being  used  as  a
measure  to  calculate  the  age  of  the  oldest  rock-formations
of  the  earth.1  Thus  the  Periodic  Table  shows  that  the
expulsion  of  three  Helium  atoms  from  Uranium  will  con¬
vert  it  through  Thorium  into  Radium;  the  expulsion  of
one  more  Helium  atom  will  convert  Radium  into  an

1  The  age  of  these  oldest  formations,  the  Algonkian  mountains  of
Canada,  has  thus  been  calculated  as  1400  million  years.  Thus  on  this
basis  we  obtain  the  lowest  limit  for  the  age  of  the  earth.


Ill


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


43


element  called  Radium  Emanation;  and  so  on  until
eight  Helium  atoms  have  been  expelled,  when  Lead  will  be
reached.  If  the  process  of  expulsion  could  be  continued,
Mercury  will  next  be  reached,  and  next  after  that  Gold.
The  alchemists  were  then  not  so  far  out  when  they  guessed
that  Mercury  could  be  transmuted  into  gold!  Unfortunately
(or  rather  I  should  say  fortunately  as  a  citizen  of  the
greatest  gold-producing  country)  this  spontaneous  break¬
up  of  matter  has  not  yet  been  observed  to  proceed  beyond
lead.  And  the  artificial  break-up  of  matter  in  the  labora¬
tory  has  only  just  begun  in  the  experiments  of  Sir  Ernest
Rutherford,  who  by  bombarding  Nitrogen  gas  with  a.
particles  from  Radium  C  has  succeeded  in  splitting  the
Nitrogen  atom  into  Hydrogen  atoms  and  a  residual  apparent
combination  of  Helium  nuclei  which  might  result  in  Carbon
according  to  the  Periodic  Table,  but  which  is  more  likely  to
split  up  into  Helium  atoms.  To  what  extent  this  artificial
destruction  of  the  elements  is  possible,  and  whether,  if
possible,  it  would  be  economically  feasible,  are  questions  for
the  future  to  answer.

We  have  seen  that  the  positive  charges  of  the  nucleus  have
to  be  balanced  by  the  corresponding  number  of  negative
electrons  grouped  in  their  orbits  round  the  nucleus.  On  the
number  and  grouping  of  these  planetary  electrons  the  exter¬
nal  physical  and  chemical  properties  of  the  atom  will  depend.
If  the  orbits  followed  impose  a  strain  on  the  equilibrium  of
the  atom,  a  quantum  adjustment  to  a  different  orbit  will  be
made.  If  the  number  of  electrons  and  their  orbit  distribu¬
tions  produce  complete  equilibrium  the  atom  will  be  very
stable  internally  and  inert  or  inactive  externally;  it  will
belong  to  one  of  the  inert  group  (Helium,  Argon,  Neon,
Krypton).  On  either  side  of  this  inert  group  of  elements  in
the  Periodic  Table  we  find  elements  whose  atoms  have  one
electron  too  many  or  too  few;  in  other  words,  they  are  not
internally  in  equilibrium  and  have  a  negative  or  positive
charge  unsatisfied;  they  will  therefore  combine  with  any
other  element  which  has  an  opposite  charge  unsatisfied.  At
another  remove  from  the  inert  elements  in  the  Periodic  Table


44


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


we  find  elements  with  two  negative  or  positive  charges  un¬
satisfied,  which  will  again  combine  with  another  element
which  has  two  opposite  charges  unsatisfied.  And  so  on  to
the  elements  which  have  three,  four  or  five  charges  un¬
satisfied.  In  this  way  both  chemical  affinity  and  the  valency
(monovalency,  divalency,  etc.)  of  the  elements  are  accounted
for.  In  every  case  the  external  properties  of  the  element
are  simply  the  expression  of  its  internal  structure  and  its
condition  of  stable  or  unstable  equilibrium  in  respect  of  its
inner  elements.

Not  only  the  combination  of  atoms  into  molecules,  but  the
formation  of  the  most  complex  compounds  rests  on  this  con¬
dition  of  unstable  equilibrium  due  to  unsatisfied  negative  or
positive  charges  in  the  combining  elements.  The  compound,
instead  of  being  a  single  system  of  the  solar  type,  is  a  far
more  complex  affair,  and  represents  the  case  where  suns  with
their  attendant  planets  again  revolve  round  a  greater  central
sun,  or  where  several  solar  systems  are  linked  together  exter¬
nally  and  not  by  a  common  centre.  In  either  case  the  dis¬
tribution  and  equilibrium  of  the  moving  internal  electric
units  determine  the  structure  of  the  substance  as  matter  as
well  as  its  physical  and  chemical  properties,  while  the  move¬
ments  of  the  substance  as  a  whole  and  of  its  parts  relatively
to  each  other  create  the  gravitational  field  or  curved  Space-
Time  system  which  forms  the  medium  and  the  field  of  the
substance.  There  is  thus  structure  through  and  through,
not  only  in  matter  or  the  energies  which  in  their  extreme
concentration  and  velocity  assume  the  massive  form  of
matter,  but  also  in  the  field  which  surrounds  this  matter.

The  gaseous,  liquid  and  solid  forms  of  matter  are  also  the
result  of  this  inner  condition  of  electrical  stability  in  the
atom  and  molecule.  If  the  positive  and  negative  charges  are
quite  equal  and  properly  distributed  the  result,  as  we  have
seen,  is  an  inert  element.  And  this  element  will  also  be  a
'gas,  as  the  inner  satisfaction  of  the  charges  and  balance  of
^the  system  will  make  it  inactive  or  inert  externally.  All
gases  are  states  of  matter  where  the  inner  balance  of  equili¬
brium  in  the  atoms  and  molecules  is  such  that  there  is  no


Ill


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


45


residual  force  to  work  externally;  the  atoms  (in  inert  ele¬
ments)  and  molecules  (in  others)  therefore  move  freely
and  unhampered.  If  the  inner  balance  of  charges  is  not
quite  complete,  there  will  be  some  external  residual  force  as
between  the  molecules,  and  the  liquid  state  will  result.  If
this  inner  satisfaction  is  lessened  still  further,  the  resultant
external  strain  among  the  molecules  will  increase,  they  will
attract  each  other  still  more  strongly  and  tend  to  closer
aggregation,  and  thus  the  solid  form  will  appear.  The
negative  or  positive  electrical  condition  of  the  gas,  liquid  or
solid  will  be  an  index  of  the  still  unsatisfied  charges  residing
in  the  substance  in  that  state.  The  free  and  unhampered
movement  of  atoms  in  an  inert  gaseous  element  and  of
molecules  in  other  gases  makes  the  question  of  the  particular
forms  of  such  elements  or  gases  immaterial;  they  have  as
gases  no  particular  form.  In  the  case  of  liquids,  however,
the  resultant  residual  forces  of  the  atoms  and  molecules  will,
as  is  the  case  in  electrical  bodies,  act  mostly  at  the  surface,
where  the  resulting  force  between  the  molecules  of  the  sur¬
face  layer,  or  the  surface  tension,  as  it  is  called,  will  give  a
particular  form  or  shape  to  the  liquid  (as  in  a  drop  of  water).
The  molecules  inside  a  liquid  appear  to  be  stratified  into
layers  loosely  superimposed  on  each  other.  And  in  the  case
of  solids  the  still  larger  residual  force  will  result  in  arranging
the  molecules  in  a  definite  crystal  structure  on  the  pattern
of  a  lattice,  which  is  the  special  and  specific  form  of  solid
chemical  substances.  Crystal  structure  is  to  solid  com¬
pounds  what  the  planetary  structure  is  to  the  atom — not  only
a  specific  ordering  of  inner  units,  but  the  index  and  source
of  all  external  properties  and  activities.  One  of  the  most
interesting  recent  discoveries  is  that  in  crystals  there  is  a  unit
body  or  minute  structure  consisting  of  two  or  more  molecules
which  is  of  atomic  or  radicle  character  in  that  it  always  acts
as  a  unit  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  crystal.

Besides  the  gaseous,  liquid,  and  solid  phases  of  matter  just
discussed  there  is  a  fourth,  to  which  in  recent  years  an  ever-
increasing  amount  of  attention  has  been  and  is  being  devoted.
This  is  the  colloid  state,  in  which  one  substance  is  dispersed


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


46

throughout  another  in  very  minute  particles  which  are  yet
larger  than  molecules.  Originally  substances  were  divided
into  colloids  and  non-colloids;  but  more  recently  it  has  been
shown  that  non-colloids  (like  mineral  salts)  can  under  cer¬
tain  conditions  be  reduced  to  the  colloid  state.  And  now  this
division  has  been  abandoned,  and  the  colloid  state  is  recog¬
nised  as  a  fourth  form  of  material  aggregation  applying  to
substances  generally  under  certain  conditions.  Much  of  the
earth  and  the  air  exists  in  the  colloid  state;  but  the  colloid
state  is  specially  important  because  it  seems  to  be  distinctive
of  all  life-forms — the  protoplasm  of  all  organic  cells  being
organised  in  the  colloid  state.  The  protoplasm  of  the  cells
contains  solid  substances  in  most  minute  form  dispersed
throughout  its  jelly-like  fluid,  and  this  colloid  state  seems  to
link  the  inorganic  with  the  organic  elements  in  the  cell.

Owing  to  their  minute  size,  particles  in  the  colloid  state
expose  the  maximum  surface  area  in  comparison  with  their
mass;  and  the  colloid  state  in  consequence  brings  into  action
the  play  of  surface  energies  more  than  any  other  phase  of
matter.  In  all  forms  of  aggregation  the  surface  molecules
of  matter  are  specially  orientated;  the  active  sides  of  the
molecules  being  turned  inwards,  and  the  outer  surface  thus
consisting  of  the  weak  ends  of  these  molecules.  This
orientation  affects  the  surface  tensions,  chemical  behaviour
and  energies  of  the  surface  molecules ;  and  as  colloids  expose
a  maximum  of  such  surfaces  they  show  properties  which  are
of  a  distinctive  character.  Thus  at  these  surfaces  loose
unstable  combinations  with  other  special  substances  are
easily  formed,  and  colloids  appear  in  consequence  to  have  a
peculiar  and  almost  mysterious  selective  action  for  other  sub¬
stances.  The  phenomenon  is  called  “  adsorption  ”;  the  se¬
lected  substances  being  adsorbed  at  the  colloid  surfaces.  Col¬
loids  are  thus  used  in  many  industrial  processes  to  separate
other  substances  from  each  other,  to  remove  impurities,  and
in  other  ways  to  act  as  a  selective  separator  of  mixed  sub¬
stances.  They  also  act  as  catalysts;  that  is  to  say,  at  their
surfaces  chemical  actions  take  place  and  combinations  are
effected  which  otherwise  would  not  be  brought  about.  The


Ill


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


47


colloid  surface  is  apparently  a  special  field  of  force  or  influ¬
ence,  in  which  other  chemical  or  physical  reactions  besides
selective  adsorption  are  facilitated.  The  enzymes,  for  in¬
stance,  in  the  protoplasm  of  the  cell  are  complex  chemical
substances  in  very  minute  colloid  form,  with  the  surface
molecules  or  radicles  specially  orientated  so  as  to  facilitate
in  a  most  marvellous  way  the  chemical  and  physical  pro¬
cesses  which  are  necessary  for  the  organic  activities  of  life.
But  enzymes  are  very  particular  in  their  action,  and  each
particular  process  has  its  own  particular  enzyme  to  bring  it
about.  Thus  enzymes  transform  the  sugar  or  sugar-like  con¬
tents  of  certain  plants  into  alcohol;  but  each  plant  has  its
own  enzyme,  which  will  only  operate  on  the  material  of  that
plant.  Similarly  chlorophyll  is  a  complex  chemical  compound
probably  in  colloidal  dispersion  in  the  protoplasm  of  leaf
cells  and  other  green  cells,  and  its  colloidal  surfaces  are
“  fields  ”  in  which  the  energy  of  sunlight  can  synthesise  the
carbon  dioxide  of  the  air  into  organic  compounds  which  ulti¬
mately  take  the  form  of  sugar,  starch  and  cellulose.  No  lab¬
oratory  has  ever  been  able  to  make  sunlight  perform  this
wonder;  but  the  colloidal  surface  “  field  ”  of  chlorophyll
can  do  it,  and  in  that  way  provide  for  the  sustenance  of  all
organic  life  on  this  globe.

The  marvellous  behaviour  of  matter  at  its  surfaces  in  the
colloid  state,  and  especially  its  mysterious  “  selective  ”
power,  has  raised  the  hope  that  here  the  bridge  may  yet  be
found  between  the  inorganic  and  the  organic.  Thus  Dr.  S.
F.  Armstrong  says :  “Enough  has  been  said  to  show  how  the
conception  of  an  orientated  active  structure  at  the  surface
of  a  colloid  aggregate  might  endow  it  with  selective  power  of
so  fine  a  nature  as  almost  to  merit  the  description  of  intelli¬
gence;  the  further  prosecution  of  research  on  these  lines
may  well  serve  to  bridge  the  gap  between  us  and  the  full
understanding  of  vital  activity.” 1

It  has  been  usual  to  distinguish  “  physical  ”  from
“  chemical  ”  combination.  The  New  Physics  has,  however,
made  it  clear  that  there  are  two  types  of  chemical  change,

1  Chemistry  in  the  Twentieth  Century,  p.  17.


48  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

involving  two  types  of  chemical  combination  and  structure.
The  one  type,  which  prevails  among  the  salts,  acids,  and
bases  of  inorganic  chemistry,  is  a  much  looser,  less  rigid
combination  or  union  than  the  other,  which  prevails  among
the  carbon  compounds  of  organic  chemistry.  Thus  common
salt,  which  is  a  combination  of  sodium  and  chlorine,  is  now
understood  to  be  a  more  or  less  loose  aggregation  of  free
positive  sodium  atoms  or  ions  held  in  equilibrium  by  an
equal  number  of  free  negative  chlorine  atoms  or  ions;  the
equilibrium  being  fairly  stable,  without  any  actual  union
of  the  atoms  such  as  was  assumed  by  orthodox  chemists.
In  organic  compounds,  however,  the  linkage  of  the  constit¬
uent  atoms  is  real,  and  the  compound  is  not  a  system  of  free
ions  in  equilibrium,  but  a  real  combination  or  fixed  structure
of  the  atoms  concerned.  Organic  compounds  thus  display  an
advance  in  respect  of  chemical  structure  in  substances.
While  in  inorganic  salts  and  similar  substances  the  looser
arrangement  of  the  atoms  or  ions  approximates  to  the
type  of  “  physical”  combination,  in  organic  substances,
on  the  other  hand,  the  chemical  union  is  more  thorough
and  intense,  and  leads  to  a  closer  structural  character,
linked  together  by  common  electrons.  In  this  connection
it  is  important  to  remember  that  organic  compounds  are
the  mechanisms  of  life:  we  may  therefore  say  that  as  we
approach  life  we  witness  a  more  intense  element  of  structure
in  chemical  compounds.

Life  may  have  arisen  in — at  least  it  now  uses  as  its
mechanisms — chemical  substances  of  a  subtler  structure  than
that  which  characterises  inorganic  compounds.

In  connection  with  the  explanation  of  the  structure  of  the
atom  given  above  the  question  arises  whether  the  structure
of  the  atom  is  really  as  above  indicated,  or  whether  we  have
merely  to  do  with  a  hypothesis  to  explain  the  known  facts.
The  question  is  important,  because  it  raises  one  instance  of
the  general  method  of  scientific  explanation.  Science  deals
with  sensible  phenomena  and  tries  to  co-ordinate  them  in
accordance  with  known  physical  laws,  and  in  doing  so  has
often  to  interpret  the  sensible  phenomena  in  a  particular  way


in


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


49


in  order  to  effect  the  necessary  intelligible  co-ordination.
Thus,  in  the  case  of  the  atom,  its  existence  as  a  fact  is  no
longer  disputed,  but  its  structure  on  the  model  of  a  planetary
system  is  no  more  than  an  inference  from  well-grounded
sensible  phenomena;  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  say  for
certain  that  the  above  is  the  actual  structure  of  the  atom.
The  sensible  phenomena  are  quite  different  from  the  inferred
structure,  but  they  are  quite  definite,  and  have  been  most
minutely  measured  or  calculated.  The  electron  and  the
nucleus  have  not  been  observed,  but  certain  light  effects,
which  they  accurately  express,  have  been  observed,  and  from
these  effects  their  mass  and  other  properties  have  been  cal¬
culated.  The  sensible  phenomena  actually  observed  include
light  effects,  which  are  explained  on  the  hypothesis  of  their
transmission  in  particular  wave-lengths;  these  explanations
accord  with  the  observed  effects,  and  again  form  the  basis
of  the  supposed  velocities,  rotations  and  orbits  of  the  elec¬
trons  and  nuclei,  which  are  not  directly  observed  but  calcu¬
lated  with  extraordinary  minuteness  and  accuracy  on  the
basis  of  the  observed  light  effects.  Similarly  the  light  from
the  atom  comes  in  definite  observed  quantities,  which  it  has
hitherto  only  been  possible  to  interpret  intelligently  as  sud¬
den  changes  in  the  orbits  of  the  rotating  electrons.  The  ob¬
served  phenomena  are  light  effects  of  various  definite  quali¬
ties  and  quantities ;  the  rest  is  theory  or  hypothesis,  in  which
the  elements  of  quality  and  quantity  in  the  sensible  phenom¬
ena  are  so  minutely  analysed  and  translated  into  elements  of
time  and  space  as  to  result  in  the  structure  of  the  atom  above
given.  And  this  structure  is  then  tested  by  all  the  phe¬
nomena  which  call  for  explanation,  and  it  is  only  finally
accepted  when  it  affords  a  complete  explanation  of  them  all.
The  electrons,  the  nucleus,  the  revolutions  of  the  electrons
round  the  nucleus,  the  sudden  leaps  of  the  electrons  from  one
orbit  to  the  other:  these  are  not  observed  realities  or  sensible
phenomena,  but  they  all  rest  on  a  basis  of  sensible  light
effects,  which  have  been  most  meticulously  determined  and
tested  by  reference  to  other  observed  phenomena.  They  are
therefore  not  sensible  realities  but  scientific  realities.  They


So


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


are  not  directly  observed,  but  deduced  from  observations.
They  are  the  reflection,  so  to  say,  of  the  sensible  phenomena
in  the  human  mind  with  its  particular  conceptual  equipment.
And  if  they  are  not  the  actual  forms  of  nature,  they  are  so
close  to  them  and  measure  and  represent  them  so  com¬
pletely,  that  for  us  humans  they  are  accepted  as  true  and
correct,  that  is,  in  experimental  accord  with  the  deliverances
of  our  senses.  Thus  the  apparently  unrelated  and  unintelli¬
gible  data  of  sense  in  a  particular  case  are  converted  by  the
mind  into  the  structure  of  the  atom;  and  the  atoms  with  all
their  inner  units  and  arrangements  become  the  conceptual  or
scientific  entities  which  correspond  to,  reproduce,  and  repre¬
sent  the  data  of  sense.  In  other  words,  the  conceptual  or
scientific  order  arises  on  the  basis  of  the  sensible  order,  and
as  long  as  the  two  are  in  complete  accord  we  accept  them
both  together  as  the  explanation  of  Nature.  While  thus
according  complete  respect  to  both  orders,  we  should  always
bear  in  mind  that  the  sensible  order  is  the  governing  factor  to
which  the  conceptual  order  has  to  conform.  As  long  as  it
does  so  conform  we  accept  it,  not  as  sensible  reality,  but  as
an  accurate  measure  and  expression  and  completion  of  sensi¬
ble  reality.  The  hypothetical  structure  of  the  atom  repro-  *
duces  and  expresses  the  observed  facts;  without  such  struc¬
ture  the  observed  facts  are  unintelligible  and  inexplicable.
We  therefore  accept  the  structure  as  a  true  and  accurate
explanation  of  the  observed  facts,  even  though  it  has  not
been  directly  observed  as  a  structure.

I  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  few  general  reflections  on
the  nature  of  matter  which  will  serve  to  emphasise  and
interpret  the  results  of  the  foregoing  discussion.

As  indicated  in  the  first  chapter,  the  object  of  this  work  is
to  make  a  modest  contribution  towards  the  reform  of  the
fundamental  concepts  of  matter,  life  and  mind,  to  assist  in
breaking  down  the  apparently  impassable  gulfs  between
them,  and  to  interpret  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  present  them
as  successive  more  or  less  continuous  forms  and  phases  of
one  great  process,  or  as  related  progressive  elements  in  one
total  coherent  reality.  In  pursuance  of  that  general  object


hi  REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER  51

my  aim  in  this  chapter  is  to  pave  the  way  for  a  reform  of  the
concept  of  matter,  to  break  down  the  old  concept  of  matter
as  something  inert,  passive,  barren,  dead,  as  something  with
absolute  contours  and  nothing  beyond,  as  something  present¬
ing  an  impassable  barrier  to  the  kingdoms  of  life  and  mind
beyond.  This  cannot  be  done  by  general  philosophical
reflections  on  the  nature  of  matter  as  an  object  of  thought,
nor  by  launching  a  general  invective  against  it,  but  only  by  a
careful  consideration  of  the  concept  of  matter  by  the  light
of  all  the  available  physical  knowledge.  This  must  be  my
excuse  for  having  referred  to  the  Relativity  Theory  and  the
New  Physics  at  some  length.  Certain  general  results  emerge
from  our  discussion  which  have  an  important  bearing  on  the
concept  of  matter.

In  the  first  place,  the  old  concept  of  matter  as  dead,  pas¬
sive,  inert  is  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  recent  develop¬
ments  of  physical  science.  The  old  contradictory  notion  of
dead  matter  as  the  vehicle  and  carrier  of  life  must  disappear
in  the  light  of  our  new  knowledge.  The  difference  between
matter  and  life  is  no  longer  measured  by  the  distance  between
deadness  or  absolute  passivity  on  the  one  hand,  and  activity
on  the  other — a  distance  so  great  as  to  constitute  an  impass¬
able  gulf  in  thought.  The  difference  between  them  is  merely
a  difference  in  the  character  of  their  activities.  So  far  from
matter  being  pure  inertia  or  passivity,  it  is  in  reality  a  mass
of  seething,  palpitating  energies  and  activities.  Its  very
dead-weight  simply  means  the  push  of  inner  activities.  Its
inertia,  which  is  apparently  its  most  distinctive  quality  and
has  been  consecrated  by  Newton  in  his  First  Law,  has  re¬
ceived  its  death-blow  at  the  hands  of  Einstein.  From  the
new  point  of  view  the  inertia  of  matter  is  simply  the  result  of
the  movement  of  Nature’s  internal  energies;  its  apparent  pas¬
sivity  is  merely  the  other  side  of  its  real  activity.  Matter
itself  is  nothing  but  concentrated  structural  energy,  energy
stereotyped  into  structure.  As  space  contracts  with  velocity,
so  mass  or  the  inertia  of  matter  increases  through  that  con¬
traction,  and  both  the  mass  of  matter  and  its  quality  of
inertia  or  passiveness  are  therefore  mere  variable  dependent


52  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

aspects  of  Nature’s  high-speed  energies.  From  this  point
of  view  matter  is  but  a  form  of  energy,  concentrated  by  its
exceeding  velocity,  and  structured  to  appear  massive  or
substantial.  The  very  nature  of  the  physical  universe  is
activity  or  Action.  The  Law  of  the  Quantum  rules  all.

The  repercussion  of  all  this  on  the  old  concept  of  matter
is  deadly.  Once  the  new  point  of  view  is  thoroughly  realised
and  assimilated  into  popular  thought,  the  bugbear  of  matter
will  cease  to  trouble  our  peace.  We  shall  no  longer  continue
to  stare  at  a  hopeless  irreconcilable  contradiction  in  expe¬
rience.  With  the  dissolution  of  the  old  traditional  concept
of  matter  the  dead-weight  of  its  utter  passivity  will  dis¬
appear  from  men’s  minds,  and  one  of  the  greatest  partition
walls  in  knowledge  will  fall  down.  The  contacts  with  life
may  still  be  very  difficult  to  establish.  But  at  any  rate  the
impassable  gulf  will  have  disappeared.  With  the  contours
of  matter  razed,  its  field  will  itself  point  the  way  for  the
transition  to  the  kingdom  of  life  beyond.  For  the  fields  of
matter  and  life  will  overlap,  intermingle,  and  interpenetrate
each  other,  the  fruitful  contacts  will  be  established,  and  the
enriched  and  broadened  concepts  of  matter  and  life  will
appear  as  what  they  are — different  phases  in  the  evolution
of  an  essential  unity.  The  breakdown  of  the  old  concept  of
matter  will  have  prepared  the  way  for  a  great  advance
towards  a  new  synthetic  world-conception.

In  the  second  place,  another  advance  of  the  New  Physics
has  perhaps  even  greater  significance  in  effecting  a  rap¬
prochement  between  matter  and  life.  I  refer  to  the  effect  of
Radioactivity  in  destroying  the  permanence  of  the  natural
elements,  and  in  explaining  the  genesis  of  the  elements  from
one  another.  Radioactivity  has  done  a  somewhat  similar
work  for  matter  as  Darwin’s  theory  of  Organic  Descent  did
for  life  two  generations  ago.  The  fixity  of  the  types  of  mat¬
ter  has  followed  the  fixity  of  the  types  of  life  to  the  limbo  of
the  obsolete.  Of  course  there  are  marked  differences  in  the
operation  of  Radioactivity  and  Organic  Descent.  In  one
respect  Radioactivity  has  not  proved  as  powerful  a  factor
as  Organic  Descent,  for  it  holds  out  no  promise  of  the  crea-


Ill


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


S3


lion  of  new  species  or  elements  beyond  those  already  known.
The  Periodic  Table  does  indeed  indicate  the  vacant  places
for  half  a  dozen  more  guests  yet  to  arrive.  But  the  number
of  elements  is  definitely  and  narrowly  limited,  and  we  have
no  reason  to  look  forward  to  any  large  increase  beyond  those
already  known.  In  another  important  respect  Radioactivity
differs  from  Organic  Descent.  Organic  Descent  professes
to  show  how  new  and  future  species  arise  through  variation
and  selection  from  those  already  existing.  Radioactivity
operates  in  the  opposite  direction  and  indicates  how  by
elimination  of  certain  unit  constituents  from  a  complex
element  there  may  be  established  a  regress  to  another
simpler  known  element.  In  the  time-series  Organic  Descent
professes  to  move  forward,  while  the  process  of  Radio¬
activity  appears  to  be  backward,  or  to  retrace  evolutionary
steps  taken  in  the  past.  In  still  another  respect  Radio¬
activity  appears  to  be  even  more  effective  than  Organic
Descent,  for  it  exhibits  before  our  eyes  the  process  of  the
transmutation  of  elements,  while  it  is  not  yet  definitely
established  that  any  natural  species  has  yet  been  raised  in
the  laboratory  or  will  ever  be  raised  in  any  period  of  time
short  of  geological  periods.  In  a  final  respect  there  is  a
striking  similarity  between  the  two  factors  in  that  they  both
appear  to  proceed  by  definite  substantial  increments  or
decrements  in  effecting  transmutations.  Radioactivity  expels
definite  numbers  of  Helium  nuclei  as  steps  in  the  transmuta¬
tion  of  elements.  According  to  De  Vries  and  others  the
process  of  advance  from  old  to  new  species  or  varieties  is  by
way  of  definite  marked  mutations,  and  not  by  the  slow  sum¬
mation  of  minute  discontinuous  variations.  And  the  present-
day  Geneticists  emphasise  this  similarity  still  more  by  iden¬
tifying  all  organic  variations  with  differences  of  chromo¬
somes  or  genes  in  the  nuclei  of  varying  or  mutating  species.

The  above  differences  in  the  operation  of  the  two  factors
of  Radioactivity  and  Organic  Descent  arise  partly  no  doubt
from  inherent  differences  between  matter  and  life,  but  also
partly  from  other  possible  differences  in  their  circumstances
of  a  less  fundamental  character.  Thus  life  is  a  mere  child  on


54  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

this  globe  and  is  yet  in  the  heyday  of  its  growth  and  increase.
As  yet  it  recognises  no  limit  or  barrier  in  its  first  flush  of
youth.  It  spends  with  a  lavish  prodigality,  which  is  in  strik¬
ing  contrast  to  the  frugality  and  conservatism  of  matter,
for  which  the  laws  of  Conservation  and  of  Least  Action  have
become  the  last  word  of  wisdom  and  the  unbroken  rule  of
action.  But  then  matter  is  old,  old  as  the  beginning,  so  old
that  its  wrinkles  are  the  fundamental  curves  of  the  Space-
Time  universe.  Life  has  only  just  begun,  since  the  yester¬
day  of  Eozoic  times,  in  the  upbuilding  of  its  new  forms
and  types,  and  in  this  task  it  can  proceed  for  millions  of
years  to  come.  Matter,  on  the  contrary,  had  completed
its  active  race  probably  more  than  a  thousand  million  years
before  life  began.  It  had  built  up  slowly  and  laboriously
in  nebular  and  solar  heat,  and  amid  conditions  beyond  the
possibility  of  our  knowledge  or  imagination,  the  elements
from  their  simplest  to  their  most  complex  forms,  and  from
these  again  substances  and  compounds  in  rising  complexity
until  at  last  protoplasm  was  reached.  And  in  the  favouring
bosom  of  protoplasm  life  could  be  nurtured  from  its  simple
chemical  beginnings  and  launched  on  its  great  career,  most
of  which  is  still  before  it.  The  work  of  matter  is  done;  in
the  great  Space-Time  curve  it  is  now  regressing  from  the
more  complex  to  the  simpler  types  or  elements,  just  as  in
organic  Evolution  we  see  a  tendency  for  the  most  highly
evolved  and  differentiated  types  to  hark  back  for  stability
to  simpler  and  stronger  types.  Radioactivity  is  doing  to¬
day  what  Organic  Descent  (when  it  will  indeed  have  become
a  descent)  will  do  in  the  fullness  of  its  time,  when  Life’s
spirit  of  adventure  will  have  abated,  and  its  aim  will  be
safety  and  conservation  rather  than  progress.

When  all  allowance  has  been  made  for  the  differences  in
character  and  operation  of  Radioactivity  and  Organic
Descent,  there  still  remains  a  striking  and  unmistakable
similarity  between  them.  And  between  the  Periodic  Table
of  Chemistry  on  the  one  hand  and  Systematic  Botany  and
Zoology  on  the  other  there  remains  something  very  much
like  a  family  resemblance.  The  concepts  of  orders,  genera


hi  REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER  55

and  species  could  be  applied  to  both;  and  in  both  cases  there
is  a  fluidity  and  plasticity  of  types  which  proves  that,
although  they  are  in  different  kingdoms,  yet  they  are  in  the
same  world  of  forms  and  geneses.  One  rises  from  a  study  of
the  Periodic  Table  and  the  New  Physics  with  the  feeling  that
matter  can  quite  justifiably  claim  some  distant  relationship
with  life,  and  that  life  need  not  be  quite  ashamed  of  the
rock  whence  she  was  hewn.

The  intimate  character  of  structure  which  the  material
universe  and  its  field  discloses  justifies  another  general
observation  as  bearing  on  the  concept  of  matter.  We  have
already  seen  that,  properly  understood,  the  ideas  of  activity,
plasticity  and  development  apply  to  matter  in  a  sense  not
entirely  dissimilar  to  that  in  which  they  apply  to  life.  I
am  going  to  make  a  more  daring  suggestion  and  to  indicate
that  in  another  even  more  important  respect  matter  approxi¬
mates  to  life.  The  structure  of  matter  indicates  that  matter
is  also  in  a  sense  creative — creative,  that  is  to  say,  not  of  its
own  stuff,  but  of  the  forms,  arrangements  and  patterns
which  constitute  all  its  value  in  the  physical  sphere.  It  is
creative  in  a  sense  analogous  to  that  in  which  we  call  life  or
mind  creative  of  values.  Remember  that  according  to  the
new  point  of  view  we  have  not  to  judge  of  matter  from  the
outside  and  as  indifferent  external  spectators.  We  have  to
identify  ourselves  with  the  point  of  view  of  matter,  so  to
speak.  We  have  humbly  to  get  into  that  closed  cage;  we
have  to  take  our  post  on  that  plane  circular  rotating  disc.
We  have  to  interpret  matter  from  the  inside,  from  a  point  of
view  which  is  that  of  matter  and  not  remote  from  and  indif¬
ferent  to  it.  And  from  that  intimate  angle  matter  is  seen  to
create  its  structures  and  patterns  and  values  very  much  as
life  or  mind  does  on  another  much  higher  plane.  Hitherto
the  idea  of  creativeness  has  been  confined  to  the  organic
and  mental  aspects  of  the  universe.  Those  who  have  called
the  universe  creative  have  implicitly  referred  to  the  activity
of  life  and  mind  in  creating  new  arrangements,  meanings
and  values.  It  has  not  been  suggested  that,  from  another
point  of  view,  the  physical  universe  is  also  creative.  The


56  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

principles  of  the  conservation  of  matter  and  energy  have
effectively  barred  any  such  idea.  Novelty,  originativeness
and  creativeness  are  quite  inconsistent  with  the  ordinary
point  of  view  and  the  popular  ideas  of  matter  as  well  as  the
more  rigid  mechanistic  conceptions  of  science.  Nobody ,

however,  could  have  followed  the  above  exposition  of
the  structural  character  of  matter  without  beginning  to
appreciate  that  in  its  evolution  or  creation  of  the  forms,
structures  and  types  which  characterise  it  from  beginning
to  end,  matter  or  the  physical  element  in  the  universe  is  in
a  sense  as  truly  creative  as  is  organism  or  mind.  The
“  values  ”  of  matter  or  the  physical  universe  arise  purely
from  these  structures  and  forms.  If  the  stuff  of  matter  or
energy  or  action  were  not  definitely  structural  but  diffuse
throughout  space,  the  entropy  of  the  universe  would  be  abso¬
lute,  and  its  value  for  this  cosmos  from  all  points  of  view
would  be  nil.  The  efficiency,  utility  and  beauty,  in  short
the  values  of  matter,  arise  from  the  structures  which  are  the
outcome  and  the  expression  of  its  own  inherent  activities.
In  a  very  real  sense  the  idea  of  value  applies  as  truly  and
effectively  in  the  domain  of  the  physical  as  in  that
of  the  biological  or  the  psychical.  In  both  cases  value  is
a  quality  of  the  forms  and  combinations  which  are  brought
about.  Whether  they  are  structures  resulting  from  the
activities  of  matter,  or  works  of  art  or  genius  resulting
from  the  activities  of  the  mind,  makes  no  real  difference  to
the  application  of  the  ideas  of  creativeness  and  value  in  either
case.  Once  we  get  rid  of  the  notion  of  the  world  as  consisting
of  dead  matter,  into  which  activity  has  been  introduced  from
some  external  or  alien  source;  once  we  come  to  look  upon
matter  not  only  as  active,  but  as  self -active,  as  active  with  its
own  activities,  as  indeed  nothing  else  but  Action,  our  whole
conception  of  the  physical  order  is  revolutionised,  and  the
great  barriers  between  the  physical  and  the  organic  begin  to
shrink  and  to  shrivel.  Organism  has  by  its  inner  activities
and  the  influences  of  the  environment  evolved  its  own  forms
and  types,  and  this  great  life-process  is  still  going  on  before
our  eyes.  As  I  have  already  suggested,  a  similar  evolution


Ill


REFORMED  CONCEPT  OF  MATTER


57


of  material  structures  and  elemental  types  may  have  gone
on  during  the  practically  infinite  period  of  past  time.  And
it  may  even  be  that,  although  new  elements  will  no  more  be
evolved,  derived  structures  are  still  being  created  under
suitable  conditions.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  for  instance,
that  under  novel  laboratory  conditions,  new  substances  are
continually  being  synthetically  produced.  The  whole
romance  of  the  Aniline  dyes  is  a  tribute  to  the  still  active
“  creativeness  ”  of  matter  under  the  proper  external  con¬
ditions.

These  considerations,  in  so  far  as  they  have  any  force,
must  influence  our  concept  of  matter  and  tend  towards  reduc¬
ing  the  utter  heterogeneity  which  marks  our  traditional  con¬
cepts  of  matter  and  life.  Of  course  a  great  difference
remains  between  these  two  concepts,  between  the  chemical
compound  on  the  one  side  and  the  organic  cell  on  the  other.
It  would  be  futile  to  attempt  to  argue  away  this  difference.
It  is  and  remains  great,  but  its  character  has  been  funda¬
mentally  transformed.  We  may  put  the  conclusion  of  our
discussion  in  this  way.  In  organic  Evolution  we  come  across
mutations — not  absolute  breaks  with  the  past,  but  sudden
long  steps  of  advance  on  the  past,  where  one  species  or
variety  leaps  forward  from  and  in  advance  of  another.  In.
the  advance  from  matter  to  life  there  is  a  leap  forward,  not
as  between  species,  but  as  between  kingdoms.  And  we  may
conclude  by  saying  that,  instead  of  the  old  impassable  gulf
between  matter  and  life,  between  the  chemical  compound  and
the  cell,  we  have  found  on  closer  scrutiny  only  a  mutation —
the  greatest  mutation  of  all  undoubtedly  in  the  whole  range
of  science,  but  essentially  nothing  more  than  a  mutation.
They  present  the  faint  lineaments  of  a  family  resemblance,
and  as  science  advances  and  our  philosophy  looks  more
deeply,  the  resemblance  will  become  clearer  and  more  un¬
mistakable.

Lastly,  we  have  seen  that  matter  in  its  colloidal  state  dis¬
closes  properties  and  shows  a  behaviour  which  seem  in  some
way  to  anticipate  the  processes  and  activities  of  life  in  its
most  primitive  forms.  In  any  case  it  begins  to  lay  the  basis


58  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap,  hi

of  those  physical  and  chemical  reactions  which  are  specially
required  for  vital  activities.  It  shows  a  certain  power  of
selectiveness,  which  may  be  related  to  chemical  affinity,  but
which  seems  to  have  a  farther  reach  and  to  partake  of  the
character  of  life.  It  begins  to  manufacture  substances,  such
as  chlorophyll  and  haemoglobin,  which  are  the  special
mechanisms  of  life,  and  without  which  life  as  we  know
it  could  not  be.  These  substances  are  the  links  which
connect  material  structure  with  the  life  structures  which
are  to  follow  in  the  course  of  Evolution.  They  are  them¬
selves  inorganic  chemical  substances,  but  they  are  the  spe¬
cial  instruments  and  the  very  basis  of  life,  so  to  say.  At
their  colloidal  surfaces  the  energies  of  Nature  are  utilised
to  convert  the  inorganic  material  of  Nature  into  the  most
complex  organic  substances  required  for  the  sustenance  of
life;  and  the  conversion  is  brought  about  by  processes  which,
however  simple  and  direct  apparently,  have  hitherto  defied
all  attempts  at  imitation  in  our  most  highly  equipped  labora¬
tories.  We  therefore  see  matter  in  this  colloidal  state
reaching  up  to  the  very  threshold  of  life,  so  to  speak.  A  gap
remains;  a  great  leap  may  have  taken  place  across  it.  But
beyond  a  doubt  some  forms  of  matter  in  their  colloidal  state
are  fairly  close  to  life  in  their  properties.  And  it  may  even
be  that  life  began  with  much  more  primitive  forms  and
structures  than  any  of  which  we  have  knowledge  to-day.
Thus  the  gap  may  not  have  been  so  wide  nor  the  leap  so
great  as  would  appear  to  us  to-day.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM

Summary . — The  cell  is  the  second  fundamental  structure  of  the
universe.  It  is  possible  that  both  before  and  after  the  origin  of
atoms  and  cells,  as  well  as  in  between,  other  structures  arose  in  the
course  of  cosmic  Evolution.  If  so,  they  have  passed  away,  and  we
have  now  only  these  two  permanent  survivals  which  we  can
scrutinize  for  clues  as  to  the  basic  character  of  the  universe.

In  the  study  of  animate  nature  Evolution  or  Organic  Descent  has
till  recently  attracted  most  attention.  But  more  recently  the  study
of  the  structure  and  functions  of  the  cell  has  come  rapidly  to  the
front  and  now  probably  forms  the  principal  centre  of  interest  in
Biology.

That  all  plants  and  animals  consist  of  cells;  that  cells  contain
certain  peculiar  bodies  called  nuclei ;  that  all  higher  organisms  arise
from  cell-fusions  in  which  the  nuclei  play  a  prominent  part — all
these  facts  have  been  discovered  only  in  comparatively  recent
years;  and  our  knowledge  of  cells  is  therefore  still  in  its  earliest
stage.  But  Cytology  is  now,  with  much-improved  methods  and
appliances,  making  rapid  strides,  and  great  discoveries  are  confi¬
dently  looked  forward  to.

Besides  the  nucleus  the  cell  consists  principally  of  a  rapidly
circulating  jelly-like  fluid,  enclosed  in  a  more  or  less  well-marked
wall  or  membrane  of  a  permeable  character;  and  the  fluid  contains
numerous  exceedingly  complex  chemical  compounds  in  solution  or
in  the  colloid  state.  The  structure  of  a  cell  is  therefore  most  com¬
plex,  and  in  fact  comparatively  little  is  yet  definitely  known  about
it.  Its  functions  are  even  more  mysterious,  for  they  include  prac¬
tically  all  the  activities  which  we  see  in  developed  organisms —
birth,  growth,  breathing,  feeding,  digestion,  self-healing,  reproduc¬
tion,  and  death.  Its  most  distinctive  function  is  metabolism,
which  means  that  it  thoroughly  alters  and  transforms  all  food
materials  before  assimilating  them ;  that  all  its  apparently  physical
activities  are  of  this  transformative  metabolic  character  instead  of
being  simple  mechanical  operations.  It  appears  to  form  complex
chemical  compounds,  called  enzymes,  which  in  their  colloid  state
enable  these  distinctive  radical  transformations  to  be  effected.
The  apparently  simple  physical  processes  such  as  osmosis  in  the

59


6o


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


cell  are  really  much  more  complicated,  as  they  are  effected  through
enzyme  action,  which  is  a  physico-chemical  mechanism  distinctive
of  organisms.  The  laboratory  attempts  to  repeat  organic  processes
throw,  therefore,  little  light  on  the  exact  nature  of  these  processes.

The  origin  of  the  cell  is  the  origin  of  life  and  is  still  a  profound
mystery.  However,  the  reproduction  of  cells  seems  to  admit^us  to
the  inner  secrets  of  life,  and  the  cell-divisions  which  precede  cell-
fusions  in  reproduction  have  an  extraordinary  semblance  to  elec¬
trical  situations,  and  seem  somehow  to  connect  the  electrical
structure  of  the  atom  with  a  possible  electrical  origin  of  the  cell.  It
is  now,  however,  impossible  to  follow  up  this  clear  semblance
further,  as  the  original  electrical  processes  have  probably  become
overlaid  with  other  developments  which  have  transformed  them.

Judging  from  the  action  of  sunlight  in  the  growth  of  plants  it  is
not  improbable  that  the  cell  of  life  arose  when  the  sun  was  both
warmer  and  richer  in  chemically  active  rays,  and  when  the  waters
of  the  earth  still  contained  many  substances  in  solution  and  colloid
dispersal.  The  adhesion  of  cells  to  each  other  would  account  for
the  origin  and  development  of  multi-cellular  organisms;  and  the
divisions  of  cells,  which  we  now  see  in  growth  and  reproduction,
may  have  arisen  originally  from  the  breakdown  of  cells  or  groups
which  had  become  too  complex  to  be  stable.

The  reproduction  of  plants  and  animals,  including  the  reduction
division  of  the  sexual  cells,  follows  largely  the  same  plan;  and  it  is
therefore  probable  that  this  wonderful  organic  mechanism  was
evolved  before  the  bifurcation  of  life  into  the  plant  and  animal
forms  took  place,  and  thus  dates  back  to  the  early  beginnings  of
life  on  this  globe.  The  plant  type  arose  from  its  dependence  for
food  on  air  and  earth,  which  was  consistent  with  fixed  positions;
while  animals,  needing  organic  foods,  required  mobility,  and  in
consequence  developed  a  motor  system  with  a  nervous  system  to
work  it,  and  ultimately  a  brain  to  direct  and  control  it.

The  cell  differs  from  the  atom  or  molecule  in  its  far  greater  com¬
plexity  of  structure  and  function,  in  the  differentiation  and  special¬
isation  of  its  parts  and  organs,  and  in  the  system  of  co-operation
among  all  its  parts  which  makes  them  function  for  the  whole.  This
co-operative  system  exists  not  only  in  the  single  cell  but  among  the
multitudinous  cells  of  organisms.  The  system  of  organic  regulation
and  co-ordination  among  an  indefinitely  large  number  of  parts
which  makes  all  the  parts  function  together  for  certain  purposes  is
a  great  advance  on  the  system  of  physical  equilibrium  in  atoms  and
compounds,  and  is  yet  quite  distinct  from  the  control  which^^ft  a
later  stage  of  Evolution,  Mind  comes  to  exercise  in  animals  and
humans.  Mind  as  we  know  it  must  therefore  not  be  ascribed  to  the
cell  or  the  lower  organisms;  but  organic  regulation  seems  on  that
lower  level  to  be  even  more  effective  than  Mind  is  at  a  later  stage.


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM


61


This  organic  regulation  and  synthesis  of  functions  is  seen  not
only  in  all  the  ordinary  functions  of  organisms,  but  more  especially
in  their  capacity  for  self-restoration  in  case  of  mutilation.  In  such
phenomena  there  seems  to  be  something  more  in  actual  operation
than  merely  the  parts;  the  parts  appear  to  play  a  common  part  and
to  carry  out  some  common  purpose  or  to  act  for  the  common  well¬
being.  They  seem  to  respond  to  some  central  pressure.  There  seems
to  be  a  central  regulator.  We  have  seen  a  factor  in  matter  making
for  structure;  we  now  see  a  factor  in  organism  making  for  central
regulation  and  co-ordination  of  all  parts.  We  are  evidently  in  the
presence  of  some  inner  factor  in  Evolution  which  requires  identifi¬
cation  and  description.  That  will  be  attempted  in  the  next  chapter.

The  atom  and  the  cell  are  the  two  fundamental  structures
in  the  universe  that  we  at  present  know  of — the  atom  being
the  unit  of  the  world  of  matter,  the  cell  the  unit  of  the  world
of  life.  In  the  last  chapter  we  considered  the  structure  of
the  atom  and  showed  how  the  external  properties  of  the
atom  were  the  expression  and  resultant  of  its  internal  ener¬
gies  and  their  structural  grouping  inside  the  atom.  We
saw  the  atom  as  a  little  complex  world  of  its  own,  under¬
lying  the  outward  properties  as  well  as  the  field  of  that
little  world.  We  now  pass  on  to  consider  the  vastly  more
complicated  little  world  of  the  cell  and  its  field.  In  the
science  of  life  the  two  most  significant  conceptions  are
Evolution  and  the  Cell,  the  one  being  the  unit  structure
and  the  other  the  general  character  and  trend  of  the  activi¬
ties  or  functions  of  life.  Round  the  investigation  and
development  of  these  two  governing  conceptions  most  of
the  progress  and  interest  in  biological  science  since  the
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century  have  centred;  and  the
results  hitherto  obtained  have  been  most  important,  and
practically  revolutionary  for  our  entire  world-conception.
And  the  end  is  by  no  means  in  sight  yet.  In  the  first
chapter  we  saw  that  there  were  still  deep-seated  misunder¬
standings  of  the  nature  of  Evolution,  and  that  a  proper
appreciation  of  Evolution  would  mean  a  recasting  not  only
of  biological  concepts  but  also,  and  above  all,  of  our  concept
of  matter.  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  cell  as  the  other  and
no  doubt  the  real  governing  factor  of  the  situation  of  life,


62  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

and  see  what  light  it  throws  on  the  nature  and  concept
of  life.

A  few  introductory  words  in  regard  to  the  history  of  our
knowledge  of  the  cell  may  not  be  out  of  place  here.  It  will
be  seen  that  accurate  information  even  of  what  little  we  do
know  about  the  cell  is  of  very  recent  date,  and  that  we  are
only  at  the  beginning  of  what  may  yet  prove  a  great  story.

In  the  second  half  of  the  seventeenth  century  Robert
Hooke  observed  with  the  crude  microscope  then  in  use  that
cork  and  other  vegetable  substances  had  a  vesicular  appear¬
ance  and  he  called  the  apparent  cavities  “  cells.”  A  few
years  later  Grew  and  Malpighi  independently  observed  in
plant  tissues  these  same  cavities  filled  with  fluid  and  sur¬
rounded  with  firm  walls,  as  well  as  what  appeared  to  them  to
be  tubes  likewise  with  walls  and  filled  with  fluid.  Towards
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  Treviranus  showed  that
these  tubes  were  cells  placed  in  a  row  and  elongated  in  the
direction  of  the  row  and  with  the  partitions  between  them
lost.  Then  followed  in  1831  Robert  Brown’s  great  discovery
of  the  nucleus  in  the  cell  in  plants,  and  in  1838  Schleiden’s
elucidation  of  the  great  part  which  the  cell  with  its  nucleus
plays  in  the  structure  of  plants,  and  shortly  afterwards  the
application  by  Schwann  of  the  new  knowledge  of  the  cell  to
the  structure  of  animals  also.  Both  Schleiden  and  Schwann
attached  great  importance  to  the  cell  wall  and  looked  upon
the  cells  as  having  crystallised  out  of  some  mother  substance.
The  contents  of  the  cells  Schleiden  called  vaguely  “  vegetable
slime  and  it  was  not  till  about  the  middle  of  the  nine¬
teenth  century  that  the  great  German  biologist  von  Mohl
correctly  explained  the  contents  of  both  vegetable  and
animal  cells  as  nucleated  masses  of  what  he  called  “  proto¬
plasm,”  which  was  not  a  chemical  crystallisation  from  other
substances,  but  always  came  into  being  as  the  offspring  or
daughter  cells  from  other  pre-existing  cells.  Hence  arose  the
formula:  omnis  cellula  e  cellula.  This  paved  the  way  to  the
correct  understanding  of  sexual  fertilisation  as  the  union  of
two  cells,  the  discovery  of  cell-divisions,  and  the  part  played
by  the  nucleus  with  its  chromosomes  in  these  divisions,  and


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM


63

of  the  origin  of  embryos  through  repeated  cell-divisions.  And
finally  a  concentrated  effort  was  made  by  many  investigators
in  many  countries  to  discover  in  cell  divisions  and  fusions,
and  especially  in  the  part  played  by  the  nucleus,  the  physical
mechanism  of  heredity.  During  this  century  the  re-discov¬
ery  of  Mendelism  by  De  Vries  and  others,  and  the  rise  of  the
new  science  of  Genetics,  have  led  to  redoubled  efforts  to  find
the  explanation  of  the  many  peculiar  phenomena  of  heredity
in  an  analysis  of  the  parts  played  by  the  nucleus  and  the
other  elements  in  the  protoplasm  of  the  cell,  and  at  present
experimental  cytology  is  being  vigorously  prosecuted  with
numerous  improved  methods  and  appliances.

Let  us  now  consider  the  structure  of  the  cell  and  the  part
it  plays  in  organisms.  I  shall  only  summarise  its  most
general  and  outstanding  features,  with  a  view  to  illustrating
the  considerations  and  speculations  which  will  be  advanced
later.  I  am  trying  to  find  concepts  for  vital  phenomena,
which  will  be  coherent  not  only  with  those  phenomena  but
also  with  wider  aspects  of  knowledge  and  reality,  and  a
reference  to  the  scientific  facts  and  results  is  therefore
necessary.  The  time  is  past  when  a  philosophy  of  life  could
be  evolved  without  a  knowledge  of  or  reference  to  the
scientific  facts  and  view-points.

All  plants  and  animals  consist  of  cells,  these  cells  being
again  usually  composed  of  various  chemical  substances,  some
of  which  have  a  very  complex  constitution.  The  number  of
cells  in  an  organism  varies  according  to  its  size  and  com¬
plexity,  some  of  the  lowest,  most  primitive  organisms  being
unicellular  or  composed  of  comparatively  few  cells,  while  at
the  other  end  the  higher  plants  and  animals  may  contain
untold  millions  of  cells.  The  human  brain  alone  is  estimated
to  have  about  9000  million  cells!  These  cells  again  are  of
a  most  diverse  character,  the  cells  which  build  up  the  various
parts  and  organs  of  the  body  being  different  from  each  other.
Thus  the  cells  of  the  nerves  and  the  bones  and  the
muscles  and  indeed  of  all  parts  of  the  animal  organism  differ
markedly  from  each  other,  and  the  number  of  the  different
kinds  of  cells  that  go  to  the  making  up  of  a  body  may  be


64


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


indefinitely  large.  All  these  almost  innumerable  cells  of  all
kinds  and  degrees  of  differentiation  and  complexity  are
arranged  in  a  stable,  orderly  structure  in  the  plant  or  animal
body;  and  this  structure  is  not  stationary  but  in  continual
movement  and  development.  The  structural  order  which  we
have  seen  characterising  the  inorganic  element  or  compound
is  even  more  characteristic  of  the  vastly  more  complex  organ¬
ic  body  with  its  continuous  mobility  and  transformations.

A  plant  or  an  animal  can  be  considered  from  the  point  of
view  of  its  structure  or  its  functions,  that  is  to  say,  the
activities  performed  by  the  structure  as  a  whole  or  the  parts
of  which  it  is  composed.  Viewing  it  merely  as  a  structure
we  see  the  same  orderly  combination  and  arrangement  of
parts  as  in  the  inorganic  body,  only  the  constituent  parts
and  the  structural  arrangements  are  far  more  complex  than
in  the  inorganic  body.  In  water,  for  instance,  or  any  other
chemical  compound,  all  molecules  are  more  or  less  the  same,
and  the  body  consists  simply  of  a  repetition  of  the  funda¬
mental  molecule,  and  the  structures  in  which  the  molecules
are  arranged  are  likewise  of  a  repetitive  character;  while  in
an  organic  body  there  may  be  an  indefinite  number  and
variety  of  cells,  and  the  varieties  of  arrangements  and
structures  according  to  which  these  cells  are  combined  in  the
several  parts  and  organs  of  the  body  may  also  be  indefinite
in  number.

But  the  difference  between  inorganic  and  organic  bodies
lies  not  only  in  their  structures,  but  even  more  in  their
functions,  especially  the  functions  of  the  organic  cells,  to
which  there  is  apparently  nothing  corresponding  in  the
inorganic  world.  About  these  cells  we  at  present  know
comparatively  little  except  that  their  functions  and  activities
are  the  basis  of  the  functions  and  activities  of  the  organisms
which  they  compose,  all  being  co-ordinated  into  a  single
system  of  a  new  type  called  “  life.”  In  the  march  of  Evolu¬
tion  from  the  inorganic  to  the  organic  the  cell  is  the  real
innovation,  to  which  nothing  corresponding  in  the  inorganic
has  yet  been  discovered.  To  use  a  metaphor,  the  cell  is  the
point  where  matter  or  energy  aroused  itself  from  its  slumbers


IV  THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  65

and  became  active  from  within,  with  activities  and  func¬
tions  which  reveal  its  inner  character  and  nature,  so  to  say.
It  is  a  new  structure  in  which  energy  becomes  or  is  trans¬
formed  into  a  new  form  of  activity,  becomes  functional,
becomes  in  some  inexplicable  way  endowed  with  a  power
of  self-help  and  self-control,  with  special  characters  of
selectiveness  and  reproduction,  which  constitute  a  unique
departure  in  the  universe.

Let  us  summarise  briefly  some  of  the  points  that  are  known
of  the  structure  and  the  functions  of  the  cell;  and  as  the
plant  cell  is  simpler  than  the  animal  cell  let  us  take  that  as
the  type.  It.  consists  of  chemically  very  complex  substances
called  in  the  aggregate  protoplasm,  which  is  the  physico¬
chemical  basis  of  all  forms  of  life.  Comparatively  little  is
known  of  its  composition  or  chemical  structure.  In  the  plant
cell  (less  so  in  the  animal  cell)  it  secretes  a  containing  wall
or  membrane  for  itself  from  which  the  cell  derives  its  name.
Inside  the  wall  the  protoplasm  appears  as  a  jelly-like  fluid
and  consists  principally  of  a  small  nucleus,  which  contains
certain  chromatin  bodies  of  a  rich  protein  character,  and  of  a
larger  body  of  cytoplasm  surrounding  the  nucleus  and
reticular  in  structure,  that  is  to  say,  consisting  of  a  network
of  spaces  which  contain  various  cell-saps  and  solutions  and
even  minute  particles  of  crystals  and  other  inorganic  bodies.
The  whole  constitutes  a  colloidal  system,  as  we  saw  in  the
last  chapter.  The  cell  walls  are  semi-permeable,  admitting
of  the  osmosis  through  them  of  certain  substances  and  not
of  others,  so  that  suitable  food  and  other  substances  can  be
passed  through  the  cell  walls  from  one  cell  to  another.  There
is  a  constant  circulation  and  agitation  of  the  cell  fluid,  which
gives  it  the  appearance  of  a  stream,  and  is  much  more  than
the  usual  promiscuous  Brownian  movement  in  inorganic
colloidal  mixtures.  The  movement  of  protoplasm,  whether
it  is  Brownian  or  something  different,  has  much  more  of  the
character  of  definite  specific  direction;  and  this  is  probably
only  an  expression  of  that  selectiveness  and  directiveness
which  are  inherent  and  universal  characteristics  of  all  life-
forms.  Although  little  is  definitely  known  of  the  details  of


66


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


cell-structure,  the  functions  it  performs  are  so  many-sided,
delicate,  and  complex  that  one  may  safely  say  that  the  cell
must  have  an  immensely  complex  organisation,  and  that  the
details  of  its  constitution  may  never  be  fully  known  or  even
adequately  pictured  by  the  human  mind.  It  represents,  at
the  one  end  of  the  scale  of  existence,  a  minute  detailed  com¬
plexity  which  is  in  some  sense  comparable  to  the  wonders
of  the  astronomical  universe  at  the  other  end.  And  all  this
intricate  and  complex  little  system  is  maintained  in  a  state
of  active,  moving  equilibrium;  it  is  dynamic  through  and
through  and  incessantly  active  in  all  its  details,  and  its
almost  innumerable  activities  are  finely  adjusted  to  each
other  and  co-ordinated  into  a  harmonious  process,  which  not
only  maintains  its  balanced  functioning  for  its  individual
life,  but  increases  and  improves  it  in  the  duration  of  innu¬
merable  generations.  Looking  at  this  baffling  mystery  of
active,  continually  changing  and  developing  organisation,
with  its  continuous  delicate  readjustments  of  innumerable
moving  parts  into  one  co-ordinated  forward  movement,  we
find  that  ordinary  physical  categories  of  description  fail  us.
We  feel  in  the  presence  of  an  entirely  new  phenomenon,
which  we  call  life,  and  we  may  even  feel  tempted  to  go
further  and  to  say  that  the  cell  has  not  only  life  but  also
mind.  To  do  so  would,  however,  be  going  too  far,  as  I  shall
explain  later.

To  appreciate  the  position  more  fully  let  us  look  at  some
of  the  functions  of  the  cell.  It  is  very  difficult  to  realise  it,
and  yet  it  is  the  fact,  that  the  little  microscopic  or  ultra-
microscopic  cell  probably  does  all  or  most  that  the  plant  or
animal  is  known  to  do.  It  literally  breathes  or  respires;
it  takes  in,  manipulates,  digests  and  assimilates  its  food;  it
reproduces  its  kind;  it  grows,  decays  and  dies;  it  heals
itself  when  sick  and  restores  itself  when  a  breakage  takes
place.  It  develops  special  means  and  mechanisms  to  assist
it  in  carrying  out  these  operations,  and  it  co-ordinates  and
regulates  all  its  manifold  activities  in  a  way  which  implies
some  wonderful  central  control  of  all  these  functions.  Let
us  look  at  these  operations  with  a  little  more  detail.


IV  THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  67

Unlike  any  other  substance  in  nature,  the  protoplasm  of
the  cell  is  vitally  active  and  is  in  an  incessant  process  of  real
creative  change;  parts  are  continually  being  destroyed  and
replaced  by  new  protoplasm  which  is  continually  being
formed.  No  other  substance  has  this  power  of  making  its
own  material,  so  to  say.  A  crystal,  for  instance,  builds  itself
up  from  its  own  material  already  existing  in  solution  without
any  change  being  made  in  its  constitution.  The  crystal
serves  merely  as  an  attractive  centre  round  which  its
material,  already  present  in  dissolved  form,  may  be
deposited  in  solid  form.  With  protoplasm  the  process  of
growth  or  renewal  is  quite  different.  The  material  taken
in  is  entirely  altered  and  recombined  into  the  substance  of
which  the  protoplasm  is  composed,  and  this  material,  so
altered  and  transformed,  is  then  by  some  yet  unknown
process  taken  up  and  assimilated  into  the  protoplasm  or
living  substance  of  the  cell.  This  complete  transformation
and  this  mysterious  assimilation  of  its  material  is  one  of
the  most  unique  functions  of  the  cell,  and  its  far-reaching
significance  will  later  on  be  more  particularly  stressed.

The  technical  name  for  this  complete  transformation  which
the  cell  effects  in  the  material  it  takes  in  is  metabolism,  and
it  may  therefore  be  said  that  metabolism  is  the  process  which
above  everything  distinguishes  living  from  non-living  matter.
The  cell  is  not  a  static  or  stationary  organism;  it  is  for  ever
being  built  up  by  new  material  which  it  transforms  into  its
substances,  and  it  is  for  ever  being  broken  down  through
the  new  cell  substances  which  it  forms  and  gives  off  in  order
to  build  up  the  various  parts  of  the  complete  plant.  And  the
activity  by  which  the  material  is  taken  in  in  one  form,  then
transformed  and  assimilated  into  the  substance  of  the  cell,
and  then  again  given  off  as  different  cell  substances  for  the
building  up  of  the  various  parts  of  the  plant — this  activity,
while  apparently  a  series  of  chemical  and  physical  processes,
implies  a  co-ordinated  system  which  is  unlike  anything  seen
in  the  purely  physical  or  chemical  domain.  The  physical
and  chemical  changes  seem  to  be  merely  the  mechanisms  or
instrumentalities  used  by  a  deeper  organic  process,  which


68


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


means  and  does  much  more  than  the  physical  or  chemical
details  which  we  can  identify.  Not  only  is  there  control  and
organisation  of  these  details,  but  the  physico-chemical
agencies  themselves  are  of  a  new  type.  For  instance,
oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide  appear  to  be  taken  in  through  the
stomata  of  the  leaves,  but  this  is  not  merely  a  case  of  ordi¬
nary  osmosis.  Again,  liquid  materials  in  the  form  of  dis¬
solved  salts  or  other  inorganic  substances  are  taken  in
through  the  roots,  but  this  also  is  not  a  case  of  ordinary  phys¬
ical  osmosis.  Again,  these  liquids  rise  in  the  plant  cells  as  if
it  were  merely  a  case  of  surface  tension  or  capillary  action.
But  as  a  matter  of  fact  these  are  all  cases  of  metabolism  in
which  subtle  changes  take  place  in  the  protoplasm,  changes
whose  details  are  no  doubt  apparently  all  of  a  physico-chem¬
ical  character,  but  whose  distinctive  character  lies  not  only
in  these  details  but  in  the  new  system  of  control  in  which
they  are  organised  and  regulated.  The  theory  which  has
been  developed  to  account  for  the  physico-chemical  reactions
which  take  place  in  all  organic  change  and  functioning  is
based  on  the  assumption  of  very  complex  substances  of  the
nature  of  ferments  or  enzymes  being  formed  and  acting  in
the  protoplasm.  It  is,  for  instance,  through  the  agency  of
the  enzymes  in  the  protoplasm  that  all  the  secretions  are
formed  which  build  up  the  different  parts  of  the  plant.
Thus  also  the  transformation  of  the  carbon  dioxide  in  the
green  cells  of  the  leaves  into  starch  is  not  a  chemical  change
of  the  ordinary  type,  but  is  effected  in  the  presence  of
colloidal  catalysts  like  chlorophyll  and  other  enzymes,  at
whose  surfaces  sunlight  can  transform  the  carbon  dioxide
so  as  to  form  successively  formaldehyde,  dextrose,  maltose,
and  finally  soluble  and  insoluble  starch.  Mere  physical
and  chemical  reactions  have  been  identified.  But  it  is  quite
possible  that  there  is  much  more,  and  that  the  organic
process  behind  them  is  much  more  complicated  and
characteristic.  Again,  both  respiration  and  metabolism
are  processes  effected  through  enzyme  action  at  colloid
surfaces  instead  of  being  of  the  ordinary  mechanical  char¬
acter.  The  enzymes  are  thus  conceived  as  being  cat-


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  69

alytic  agents  existing  in  colloidal  form  in  the  cells  and
as  having  at  their  surfaces  or  in  their  “  fields  ”  the  power
of  transforming  other  substances  in  the  presence  of  the
energy  of  sunlight  or  electricity.  They  do  this  according
to  the  well-known  chemical  and  physical  laws,  without
themselves  being  thereby  used  up  or  transformed.  The
cell  has  the  power  to  build  up  or  secrete  these  complex
enzyme  compounds;  with  the  help  of  these,  again,  it  manu¬
factures  other  complex  substances  necessary  for  the  plant  or
animal  life.  It  carries  on  many  other  functions  beyond
these  manufacturing  processes.  Throughout  it  seems  to  fol¬
low  simple  physical  and  chemical  rules  but  on  a  new  plan.
All  this  will  serve  to  emphasise  how  vastly  complicated
cell  structures  and  activities  must  be.  A  large  number  of
the  most  complicated  processes  are  carried  on,  scarcely  one
of  which  the  best-equipped  laboratory  in  the  world  can
perform,  and  all  are  carried  on  by  a  little  cell  which  is
microscopic  or  smaller  in  size!

During  recent  years  resolute  attempts  have  been  made  to
repeat  under  artificial  laboratory  conditions  what  takes  place
in  the  living  plants,  and  certain  very  interesting  results
have  been  obtained.  Thus  an  attempt  has  been  made  by
Professor  Baly  and  others  to  imitate  photo-synthesis  in  the
laboratory.  Light  of  a  short  wave-length  from  a  mercury
vapour  lamp  was  made  to  act  on  water  and  carbon  dioxide,
and  as  a  result  formaldehyde  was  obtained  and,  as  in  the
green  leaf,  oxygen  was  set  free:  C02  +  H20  =  CH20  +  02.
Light  with  a  somewhat  longer  wave-length  was  made  to
turn  this  formaldehyde  into  simple  sugars.1  However  inter¬
esting  and  valuable  these  and  similar  results  are,  it  is  prob¬
able  if  not  certain  that  they  have  only  a  distant  resemblance
to  what  takes  place  in  the  organic  process,  where  the  physical
factors  of  sunlight  and  electrical  change  acting  in  the  field
of  colloid  chlorophyll  are  quite  different,  and  the  chemical
results  are  brought  about  by  mainly  different  processes.
From  a  scientific  point  of  view,  however,  the  laboratory  work

1  It  is  claimed  that  sunlight  has  quite  recently  been  successfully  substituted
for  artificial  light  in  these  experiments.


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


70


is  of  undoubted  interest  and  importance,  for  the  further  it  is
prosecuted  and  the  greater  the  success  in  the  synthetic
formation  of  organic  substances,  the  easier  it  will  become
to  differentiate  clearly  and  unmistakably  between  the
organic  and  the  mechanical  laboratory  processes.

The  origin  of  the  cell  is  the  origin  of  life,  and  we  know
nothing  definite  about  it.  But  the  question  arises  whether
sufficient  is  not  known  about  the  cell  and  organic  develop¬
ment  to  justify  us  in  trying  to  form  some  general  idea  as  to
its  possible  origin.  And  here  we  find  one  set  of  phenomena
which  throw  a  special  light  on  the  nature  and  development
of  organisms  and  perhaps  also  on  their  origins.  The
phenomena  of  reproduction  seem  to  hold  the  very  secret  of
life,  and  moreover,  bring  us  close  to  the  secret  of  matter.
And  this  secret  common  to  both,  jealously  guarded  and
preserved  throughout  the  whole  range  of  terrestrial  evolution,
shows  a  continuity  unique  in  science,  which  brings  together
some  of  the  apparently  most  diverse  facts  which  confront  us
in  the  world  of  life.  How  well  the  secret  has  been  guarded
and  kept  and  shielded  from  all  outside  influences  is  evi¬
denced  by  the  extraordinary  fact  that  though  plant  and
animal  life  must  have  diverged  near  the  beginning  of  things,
and  must  through  many  millions  of  years  have  been
moving  further  apart  in  the  history  of  this  globe,  yet  the
methods  of  reproduction  in  plants  and  animals  are  still  very
much  alike.  The  romance  of  the  reproduction  of  a  flowering
plant,  which  is  one  of  the  most  wonderful  in  the  world,  is
practically  the  same,  down  to  many  details,  as  that  of  the
reproduction  of  one  of  the  higher  animals.  It  is  very  much
the  same  in  the  simplest,  most  primitive  alga  as  in  the  other
members  of  the  rising  plant  series — the  ferns,  the  cycads,  the
conifers  and  the  flowering  plants.  When  we  go  a  step
further  back  into  the  past  and  come  to  the  case  of  unicellular
organisms,  which  reproduce  themselves  not  by  cell-fusions
but  by  cell-division,  we  come  to  the  situation,  or  something
very  close  to  the  situation,  which  must  have  arisen  when
matter  first  organised  itself  into  life.  For  what  do  we  see?
The  cell  when  it  proceeds  to  divide  into  two,  assumes  the


iv  THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  71

appearance  of  an  electrical  and  polar  system;  its  nuclear
material  arranges  itself  in  parallel  bodies  or  chromosomes
like  an  electrical  arrangement;  its  centrosome  (if  any)  splits
up,  as  if  under  some  unbearable  electrical  strain,  just  as  is
the  case  in  Radioactivity,  and  two  polar  bodies  are  formed
from  it  at  opposite  sides  of  the  nucleus,  from  which  lines  of
force  proceed  throughout  the  now  disintegrating  nucleus  and
cell;  the  nuclear  bodies  of  the  breaking-up  cell  divide  them¬
selves  equally  between  the  two  polar  bodies,  and  aggregate
and  concentrate  towards  them  until  finally  the  separation
between  the  two  systems  is  complete  and  the  material  of
the  nucleus  and  cell  has  split  into  two.  The  division  of  the
cell  into  two  cells  is  complete.  It  is  apparent  from  this
summary  statement  how  the  cell  in  division  approximates
to  the  character  of  the  atom  of  matter  described  in  the  last
chapter.  Were  they  not  in  the  beginning  both  electrical
systems  with  their  nuclei,  their  fields  and  their  cataclysmic
behaviour?  In  the  cell  the  original  electrical  character  of
the  division  has  become  overlaid  with  and  obscured  by
other  factors  so  that  the  electrical  character  is  no  longer
recognisable,  except  in  the  general  appearance  and  scheme
of  division.  But  originally  it  possibly  was  electrical,  as
it  still  is  in  appearance.  Arguing  back  from  the  analogy
of  cell-division  to  the  probable  original  rise  of  the  cell
from  inorganic  matter,  we  may  imagine  the  building  up
of  very  complex  organic  or  hydrocarbon  compounds
under  favourable  external  conditions,  in  which  the  influence
of  sunlight  and  other  forms  of  electrical  energy  played
an  important  part,  just  as  sunlight  in  the  presence  of
chlorophyll  still  plays  a  foremost  part  in  the  production
of  new  cells  and  organic  substances  in  plant-life.  We  know
that  millions  of  years  ago,  when  life  arose,  the  sun  was
much  hotter  than  it  is  to-day,  and  sunlight  contained
much  more  of  the  chemically  active  rays  which  facilitate
organic  changes.  The  peculiar  electrical  energy  of  the
sun  may  therefore  have  played  a  decisive  part  in  the
origin  of  life.  In  other  words,  the  part  which  electrical
changes  appear  to  play  in  the  process  of  cell-division  may


72  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

be  somewhat  analogous  to  the  part  they  probably  played  in
the  original  rise  of  the  cell.  The  basic  electrical  structure
of  matter  would  thus  be  paralleled  by  the  more  complex
electrical  origin  of  the  cell.  Reproduction  of  the  most
primitive  forms  takes  place  in  a  fluid  medium,  and  all
protoplasm  still  has  a  fluid  jelly-like  consistency.  It  is
therefore  probable  that  the  most  "primitive  forms  of  proto¬
plasm  might  have  arisen  under  favourable  conditions  of
sunlight  and  warmth  when  the  warm  watef  still  contained
much  of  the  crust  in  solution  or  dispersed  in  small  particles
in  colloidal  form,  and  thus  presented  conditions  favourable
for  the  selective  formation  of  complex  substances,  such  as
the  predecessors  of  the  present  forms  of  protoplasm.  Recent
advances  in  bio-chemistry  have  led  to  the  isolation  and
discovery  in  the  animal  body  of  very  complex  substances
(such  as  glutathione)  whose  external  surfaces  absorb  free
Oxygen  and  whose  interior  undergoes  the  opposite  change
of  setting  free  this  Oxygen  and  absorbing  Hydrogen  for  the
building  up  of  higher  structures.  Thus  a  continual  chemical
process  is  set  going  which  is  at  the  same  time  an  electri¬
cal  current  from  without  inwards,  transmitting  the  electrical
energy  of  sunlight  contained  in  the  Oxygen  of  the  air  to
the  interior  cell  substances,  where  the  Oxygen  is  deprived
of  its  energy  and  set  free,  and  where  with  this  energy
complex  compounds  are  built  up  which  again  store  the
energy  required  for  the  nutrition  and  other  functions  of  the
living  organism.  The  chemical  electrical  system  which
forms  the  fundamental  mechanism  of  life  in  the  last  resort
simply  uses  the  energy  of  sunlight,  stored  in  the  free  Oxygen
of  the  air,  for  building  from  it  the  body  of  life;  and  there  is
thus  the  closest  connection  between  sunlight  and  life-
structures.  In  that  connection,  without  a  doubt,  the  origin
of  life  must  be  sought.  The  cell  structure  having  once  been
evolved  from  pre-cell  structure,  probably  by  way  of  pro¬
longed  trial  and  error  or  “  natural  selection  ”  extending  over
long  periods  of  time,  its  multiplication  or  reproduction  would
take  place  through  the  part  that  electrical  tension  would
play.  Thus  the  complex  unstable  electrical  structure  or


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM


73


organic  substance,  whose  internal  equilibrium  would  pass
through  various  crises  and  changes  in  its  “  development,”
would  finally  tend  to  break  up  and  under  certain  conditions
proceed  to  divide.  This  original  haphazard  division  would
gradually  become  stabilised  and  standardised,  so  to  speak,
until  cell-division  becomes  the  regular  basis  not  only  of  all
growth  but  also  of  all  reproductive  processes  in  both  plant
and  animal.

At  first  there  could  have  been  no  essential  difference
between  growth  and  reproduction  of  cells.  By  division
one  cell  was  formed  from  another,  and  might  either  remain
in  association  with  the  old  cell,  as  is  the  case  in  all  multi¬
cellular  organisms  (growth),  or  it  might  separate  from  the
old  cell  and  develop  on  its  own  as  an  independent  organism
(reproduction).  This  simple  division  still  remains  the  pro¬
cess  of  growth  in  all  organisms  without  distinction,  and  it
remains  the  process  of  reproduction  in  all  unicellular  and  the
lowest  forms  of  multicellular  organisms.  In  less  primitive,
more  developed  multicellular  organisms  the  process  of  repro¬
duction  has,  however,  become  more  complex,  and  has  altered
to  the  union  or  fusion  of  two  specialised  cells  to  form  a
new  cell;  and  in  such  cases  another  scheme,  involving  a
double  set  of  divisions,  has  taken  the  place  of  the  simple
division.  While  one  of  these  simply  halves  the  total
contents  of  the  old  cell  as  between  the  two  new  cells,  the
other  or  reduction  division  separates  out  the  individual  ele¬
ments  in  the  contents  so  that  each  of  the  two  new  cells
has  half  of  these  elements  ( e.g .  the  chromosomes  of  the
nucleus).  This  halving  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  continual
and  cumulative  doubling  of  cell  elements  in  the  repeated
reproduction  of  the  same  type  of  organism,  and  to  keep  the
contents  of  cells  of  similar  organisms  constant.  The  two
cells,  thus  reduced  in  all  respects  to  half  the  original  cells,
then  unite  to  form  the  new  cell,  which  has  once  more  the
full  complement  of  cell  elements.  This  reduction  division  in
reproduction  is  common  to  both  plants  and  animals  above
the  most  undeveloped  types,  and  we  therefore  seem  to  have
some  justification  for  the  most  remarkable  conclusion  that


74


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


this  phase  of  reproduction  must  have  developed  before  the
separation  of  plant  and  animal  forms  took  place.  It  forms
also  the  basis  for  that  alternation  of  generations  which  is
one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  phenomena  of  life.
Thus  all  organisms  which  are  reproduced  through  cell-fusion
have  a  generation  in  which  the  cells  have  the  single  contents
(after  the  reduction  division)  and  another  in  which  the  cells
have  the  double  contents  (before  the  reduction  division).  In
the  higher  forms  of  plants  and  animals  the  generation  of  the
single-content  cell,  or  the  gametophyte  generation  as  it  is
called,  is  reduced  to  a  very  subordinate  role  and  a  short
life,  as  it  covers  the  short  period  of  the  gametes  or  conjugat¬
ing  cells  (the  ripe  sperm-cells  and  ova)  in  flowering  plants
and  in  the  more  developed  animals.  The  generation  of  the
double-contents  cell,  or  the  sporophyte  generation  as  it  is
called,  has  become  dominant  and  appears  as  the  developed
plant  or  animal  which  we  see  in  nature  to-day.  But  in  some
divisions  of  plants  the  gametophyte  generation  is  still  of
some  prominence.  Thus  the  moss  plant  is  the  gametophyte
generation,  the  sporophyte  generation  appearing  as  a  sub¬
ordinate  parasitic  form.  And  in  the  ferns,  where  the  sporo¬
phyte  is  the  dominant  form,  the  gametophyte  appears  as  a
distinct  plant  which  is  in  some  cases  a  perennial.  And  its
relation  to  the  fern  was  quite  unknown  until  about  the
middle  of  the  nineteenth  century.

This  generation  of  the  single-content  cell,  or  the  gameto¬
phyte  in  the  developed  plants  and  animals  of  to-day,  is
interesting  because  it  probably  illustrates  the  well-known
principle  that  ontogeny  repeats  phylogeny,  that  is  to  say,
that  the  history  of  the  individual  organism  recapitulates  in
its  earlier  or  embryonic  stages  of  development  the  various
phases  of  development  through  which  its  types  of  ancestors
have  evolved  in  the  past.  Thus  the  gametophyte  generation
is  a  reminder  of  that  earlier,  simpler,  more  primitive  phase  in
plant  evolution  when  the  more  complex  sporophyte  genera¬
tion,  which  is  dominant  to-day,  had  not  yet  been  evolved
through  cell-fusion  in  reproduction.  And  it  is  even  possible
that  the  form  of  the  present  gametophyte  may  throw  light


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM


75

on  the  particular  descent  of  plant  forms.  Thus  the  gameto-
phyte  of  the  fern  is  a  flat  thallus-like  plant  which  both  in
form  and  character  reminds  one  of  an  alga.  And  it  is  quite
possible  that  this  form  of  the  fern  may  give  the  clue  of  its
origin  from  some  alga-like  progenitor  in  the  far-distant  past.
May  we  not  say  that  the  prothallus  of  the  fern  appears  to
connect  the  alga  and  the  fern,  and  thus  to  bridge  widely
separated  epochs  of  the  past  in  the  evolution  of  plant  forms?
I  suggest  the  idea  merely  for  further  investigation.

From  speculations  as  to  the  origin  of  the  cell  we  pass  on
to  consider  the  differentiations  which  have  taken  place
among  cells  generally,  and  the  particular  differentiation  of
cells  which  has  led  to  the  divergence  between  plant  and
animal  forms.  It  is  commonly  thought  that  the  animal
forms  are  a  later  development  and  advance  on  the  earlier
plant  forms.  This  idea  is  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the
animal  there  has  been  the  special  development  of  the  new
factor  of  mind  which,  rapidly  rising  through  the  higher  ani¬
mals,  has  reached  its  highest  level  in  the  human  individual.
But  although  animal  forms  may  have  developed  farther
and  come  to  attain  to  much  higher  levels  than  the  plant
forms,  the  question  of  origins  stands  on  a  different  foot¬
ing.  And  the  evidence  points  rather  to  a  common
origin  and  to  the  earliest  cells  of  life  having  been  common
to  both  plants  and  animals.  Thus  the  lowest  forms  of  cell
life  are  even  now  practically  indistinguishable  into  plant
and  animal.  And  it  is  probable  that  this  common  phase,
prior  to  differentiation  into  plant  and  animal  forms,  must
have  lasted  a  very  long  time  and  have  been  marked  by
considerable  advances  in  the  development  of  the  common
cells,  especially  in  view  of  the  probable  fact,  already  noted,
that  sexual  reproduction  of  a  fairly  advanced  type  had
probably  been  reached  before  the  bifurcation  took  place
and  plants  and  animals  were  launched  on  their  separate
careers.  What  advance  in  cell  development  had  been
reached  before  this  bifurcation  it  is  impossible  to  say,  as
only  the  very  lowest  unicellular  organisms  of  a  common
character  still  survive,  and  the  geological  record  has  no


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


76


evidence  to  give.  Differentiation  in  cells  must  have  com¬
menced  as  soon  as  the  daughter  cells  began  to  adhere  to
the  parent  cell  and  multicellular  organisms  were  formed.
In  the  unicellular  Pleurococcus,  which  is  about  the  simplest
plant  form  known,  noticed  as  the  green  slime  on  the  damp
bark  of  trees  or  wooden  posts,  we  see  the  beginnings  of
this  process  of  cell  aggregation,  as  daughter  cells  adhere  to
the  parent  cell  until  several  divisions  have  taken  place  and
only  then  separate  into  individual  cells.  The  Pleurococcus
cell  is  globular,  but  during  this  attachment  the  cells  are
flattened  at  the  surfaces  of  contact.  In  the  multicellular
organisms  a  layer  of  cuticle  covers  the  outer  cell  walls  in
contact  with  the  air  and  retards  the  loss  of  water.  Step  by
step  other  differentiations  appear,  and  the  plant  body
becomes  more  complex  as  we  advance  from  alga  to  fern,
and  from  fern  to  the  higher  seed-bearing  plants.  The
differentiations  into  various  organs,  such  as  the  root,  stem,
leaf  and  reproductive  organs,  are  simply  means  towards  the
division  of  physiological  labour.  Thus  in  cells  away  from
the  light  photo-synthesis  is  impossible,  and  they  become
dependent  on  the  outer  green  cells;  similarly  the  roots  under¬
ground  become  dependent  for  starch  on  the  green  cells  and
in  return  absorb  dissolved  salts  for  supply  to  the  rest  of  the
plant.  The  water  requirements  render  necessary  the  fibro-
vascular  cell  system,  while  the  reproductive  functions  become
confined  to  special  organs.  All  this  differentiation  means
more  organisation  and  a  more  elaborate  structure  of  the
plant.  In  addition  to  this  division  of  labour  the  struggle
for  existence  tests  the  structure  in  other  directions,  and
means  more  modification  in  response  to  the  stress  of  the
struggle  and  the  stimulus  of  the  environment  generally.
As  a  result  the  plant  structure  comes  to  be  elaborated  and
adapted  to  the  inner  and  external  demands  upon  it,  and  to
assume  the  forms  which  are  known  to  us.

Besides  this  general  differentiation  and  organisation,
there  are  special  causes  which  have  brought  about  the
divergence  of  plant  and  animal  forms.  A  consideration  of
these  matters  falls  outside  the  scope  of  our  task.  Generally
it  may  be  said  that  plant-life  has  been  determined  and


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM


77


stereotyped  through  the  two  processes  of  photo-synthesis
and  osmosis,  the  second  of  which  has  enabled  it  to  get  water
and  mineral  salts  direct  from  the  soil,  and  the  first  of  which
has  enabled  it  by  the  help  of  chlorophyll  to  utilise  the  energy
of  sunlight  for  making  sugars,  starch  and  cellulose  from  the
carbon  dioxide  of  the  air.  The  plant,  being  thus  dependent
for  its  food  solely  on  the  soil  and  the  air,  could  afford  to
remain  stationary  and  mostly  fixed  in  the  soil;  while  animal
forms,  which  are  dependent  on  organic  foods,  have  had  to  be
mobile  in  order  to  look  for  and  find  the  necessary  plant  or
animal  substances  on  which  to  live.  The  struggle  for  food
has  been  a  much  harder  one  for  animals,  which  have  in
consequence  not  only  to  be  mobile  and  'develop  a  complex
motor  system,  but  also  to  evolve  in  the  nervous  system  a
special  co-ordinating  mechanism  with  which  to  work  the
motor  system.  This  mechanism,  again,  has  led  to  unique
developments  in  the  direction  of  sensitiveness  and  con¬
sciousness,  which  in  the  case  of  man  have  come  to  over¬
shadow  all  that  has  gone  before.  But  mind  is  a  later
development,  the  discussion  of  which  should  not  be  raised  in
connection  with  the  cell.  The  primitive  cell  of  life  is  on  the
way  to  Mind,  but  Mind  at  this  stage  is  still  far  off,  and  those
who  ascribe  Mind  or  even  potential  Mind  to  the  cell  open  the
door  to  the  most  serious  confusions.  The  cell  undoubtedly
presents  a  great  mystery.  And  there  is  a  strong  temptation
to  ascribe  its  surprising  activities  to  an  inner  mentality  or
organic  psychism.  But  even  the  most  highly  evolved  human
intelligence  finds  it  difficult  to  understand  all  that  goes  on  in
the  cell.  If  psychism  is  the  key,*we  should  have  to  ascribe
to  the  cell  so  large  a  measure  of  mentality  as  to  reduce  the
whole  supposition  of  psychism  to  absurdity.  The  cell  has
not  yet  mind.  Mind  as  we  know  it,  or  anything  at  all
resembling  it,  is  a  much  later  development  in  the  process  of
organic  Evolution,  as  will  be  shown  in  Chapter  IX.

Enough  has  been  said  about  the  structure  and  the  func¬
tions  of  the  cell  to  give  a  rough  general  idea  of  what  the  cell
is.  Let  us  now  pass  on  to  consider  the  inter-relations  of  ele¬
ments  in  the  cell,  and  among  cells  in  the  same  organism,  and
especially  the  aspect  of  co-ordination  in  and  among  cells.


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


78

In  the  first  place  I  ask:  Is  the  cell  and  are  cells  in  an  organ¬
ism  a  co-operative  system,  in  which  the  parts  and  their
functions  are  so  ordered  and  arranged  that  they  co-operate
for  common  purposes,  and  do  not  merely  subserve  the  sepa¬
rate  ends  of  the  individual  parts?

There  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  answer.  The  whole
meaning  and  significance  of  Metabolism  is  that  the  activities
of  the  cell  are  not  self-centred  or  self-regarding.  The  cell
functions  for  other  cells  and  for  the  plant  as  a  whole.  One
element  in  the  cell  functions  for  other  elements  and  for  the
whole  cell  organism.  The  secretions  formed  in  one  cell  are
intended  to  build  up  other  cells  or  to  serve  the  plant  as  a
whole.  The  fibro-vascular  cells  carry  liquid  food  from  one
part  of  the  plant  to  the  other  parts.  The  carbohydrates
formed  in  the  green  cells  are  transmitted  and  stored  as  food
for  all  the  other  cells;  the  woody  substances  secreted  from
them  are  meant  to  strengthen  other  cells  and  the  plant  as
a  whole  against  the  forces  of  the  environment;  the  aroma
and  bloom  which  are  secreted  from  them  are  meant  to
render  attractive  and  adorn  other  parts  of  the  plant  with  a
view  to  the  preservation  of  the  plant  species  as  a  whole.
Indeed,  all  the  processes  of  Metabolism  go  to  prove  that
the  plant  is  one  vast  co-operative  system,  in  which  the  indi¬
vidual  cells  in  their  continuous  functions  and  labours  make
their  contribution  to  the  common  effort,  and  work  so  that
other  cells  or  the  plant  itself  0:.*  the  species  to  which  it
belongs  may  live.  The  cell  in  its  normal  structure  and  func¬
tions  is  the  very  type  of  co-operative  action.

So  far  I  believe  we  are  still  on  firm  ground  in  our  descrip¬
tion  of  cell  activities,  and  the  co-operative  character  of
organic  functioning  will  be  generally  admitted.  Can  we  go
further  and  characterise  this  co-operation  more  closely?
What  is  the  nature  of  this  cell  or  organic  co-operation?  Is  it
spontaneous  or  controlled?  And  if  controlled,  is  it  controlled
internally  or  externally?  Let  me  repeat  the  question  in
another  form.  Are  the  cells  and  the  organs  which  they  form
in  the  same  plant  or  animal  free  and  independent,  so  that  the
co-operation  which  we  observe  in  their  functioning  is  a  mere
accidental  result  of  their  individual  uncontrolled  reactions


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  79

and  behaviour?  Or  is  there  some  co-ordinating  factor  which
influences  the  cells  and  their  organs  in  some  specific  direc¬
tion,  and  thus  co-ordinates  and  unifies  their  functions  and
produces  the  co-operation  we  observe?  And  if  the  cells  are
not  independent  agents  in  the  make-up  of  the  organism  but
are  under  some  form  of  unifying  influence  or  control,  is  their
apparent  co-operation  due  to  an  external  factor,  like  Natural
Selection  as  commonly  understood?  Or  is  there  some
internal  element  of  co-ordination,  the  influence  of  which  is
felt  by  the  different  cells,  and  in  response  to  which  they
react,  so  that  their  functions  proceed  generally  on  the  lines
of  a  plan  or  pattern  given  by  the  nature  of  the  particular
organism?  In  either  case  there  would  be  co-operation  on
the  basis  of  co-ordination,  but  in  the  one  case  there  would
be  an  external,  and  in  the  other  an  internal,  factor  at  work
in  this  co-ordination.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  issue  here
raised  as  between  the  cells  inside  the  organism  is  analogous
to  that  which  Darwinism  has  raised  as  between  separate
organisms  in  their  struggle  for  existence.  The  answer,  so
far  as  the  struggle  among  organisms  is  concerned,  will  be
discussed  in  Chapter  VIII.  And  the  results  there  reached
will  probably  apply  also  to  the  case  of  the  cell  or  the  cells
in  an  organism  which  is  here  raised.  The  subject  is  not
free  from  controversy,  and  in  this  chapter  I  wish  to  avoid
controversy  and  simply  to  describe  the  facts  in  the  ordinary
language  of  metaphor  which  I  trust  will  not  prove  mis¬
leading.  And  looking  at  the  facts  in  an  unprejudiced
way,  and  without  a  bias  in  favour  of  any  particular
theory,  one  cannot  help  being  struck  by  the  way  in
which  the  cells  in  an  organism  not  only  co-operate,  but
co-operate  in  a  specific  direction  towards  the  fulfilment
and  maintenance  of  the  type  of  the  particular  organism
which  they  constitute.  At  this  stage  we  have  to  steer  clear
of  all  ideas  of  plan,  purpose  or  teleology  in  the  organic
procedure.  But,  even  so,  the  impression  is  irresistible  that
cell  activities  are  co-operative,  that  they  are  inherently  or
through  selective  development  co-ordinated  in  a  specific
direction,  and  that  the  impress  of  the  whole  which  forms  the
organism  is  clearly  stamped  on  all  the  details.  The  case


8o


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


is  utterly  unlike  that  of  physical  forces,  which  are  alike,
which  are  repetitions  of  each  other,  and  which  can  be  added
or  subtracted  or  otherwise  expressed  arithmetically.  The  cells
are  different,  they  are  differentiated  in  definite  directions,
and  the  totality  of  differentiations  fits  into  a  plan  or  scheme,
the  fulfilment  of  which  constitutes  the  complete  organism.
There  are  no  repetitions,  there  is  uniqueness  everywhere,
and  the  various  unique  entities  and  their  functions  fit  into
each  other  more  or  less  so  as  to  produce  an  organic  whole,
unlike  any  other  organism.  And  in  some  indefinable  way  this
whole  is  not  an  artificial  result  of  its  part;  it  is  itself  an  action
factor  like  its  parts,  and  it  appears  to  be  in  definite  relation
with  them,  influenced  by  them  and  again  influencing  them,
and  through  this  continuous  interaction  of  parts  and  whole
maintaining  the  moving  equilibrium  which  is  the  organism.

Look,  for  instance,  at  the  way  in  which  organisms  behave
when  some  cells  or  organs,  necessary  for  their  maintenance,
are  removed  or  injured.  It  is  well  known  that  many  plants
and  animals  have  the  power  of  restitution  in  case  of  damage
or  mutilation.  The  newt  forms  a  new  leg  in  the  place  of  the
severed  limb.  The  plant  supplies  the  place  of  the  severed
branch  with  another.  The  regeneration  may  be  effected
from  different  organs  and  by  different  organs.  Thus  if  the
crystalline  lens  is  removed  from  the  eye  of  a  Triton,  the  iris
will  regenerate  a  new  lens,  although  the  lens  and  the  iris
in  this  case  have  been  evolved  from  quite  different  parts.
Numerous  similar  curious  facts  of  restoration  could  be
mentioned.  The  broken  whole  in  organic  nature  restores
itself  or  is  restored  by  the  undamaged  parts.  The  cells  of
the  remaining  parts  set  themselves  the  novel  task  of  restoring
the  missing  parts.  The  power  to  do  this  varies  with  various
plants  or  animals,  and  varies  also  with  the  different  parts  in
the  same  plant  or  animal.  Generally  one  may  say  that  the
more  highly  differentiated  and  specialised  an  organism  or  a
cell  is,  the  smaller  is  its  plasticity,  or  the  power  of  the  remain¬
ing  cells  to  restore  the  whole  in  case  of  injury  or  mutilation.
But  the  fact  that  the  power  exists  in  numerous  cases  is  a
proof  that  not  only  can  the  cells  through  reproduction  build
up  the  original  organism  according  to  its  specific  type,  but


IV


THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  81

also  that  when  this  type  is  damaged,  the  remaining  cells  or
some  of  them  can  restore  it,  and  recomplete  the  whole.  The
normal  power  of  the  cells  to  build  up  an  organism  in  repro¬
duction  according  to  type  is  one  thing,  and  it  is  marvellous
enough  even  though  one  looks  upon  it  as  merely  a  case  of
inherited  routine.  But  the  abnormal  power  to  do  this  in
the  very  unusual  case,  so  far  removed  from  all  idea  of
routine,  where  the  type  is  broken  down  is  something
different,  and  shows  how  effective  the  power  of  the  organism
as  a  whole  is,  and  how  strong  the  tendency  towards  the  whole
is  even  in  the  individual  cells.  The  damage  creates  a  need,
and  the  need  stimulates  the  remaining  parts  to  perform  the
functions  of  the  damaged  parts  or  to  restore  them  in  whole
or  in  part.  The  very  nature  of  the  cells  is  to  function  as  parts
of  a  whole,  and  when  the  whole  is  broken  down  an  unusual
extra  task  automatically  arises  for  them  to  restore  the  breach,
and  their  dormant  powers  are  aroused  to  action.  And  this
happens,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  simply  as  a  matter  of  interior
economy  and  domestic  regulation  in  the  organism  itself  and
without  previous  education  for  the  new  role.  The  inter¬
action  between  the  organism  and  its  cells  is  indeed  most
subtle  and  intimate,  both  seem  to  be  active  factors  in  the
maintenance  of  the  whole  and  in  the  restoration  of  any  parts
that  may  be  missing  and  necessary  for  the  whole.  So  inti¬
mate  is  their  interaction  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say
where  the  influence  of  the  one  ends  and  the  other  begins.

The  aspect  of  co-ordination  or  subordination  of  parts  to
the  whole  is  also  most  significantly  illustrated  by  the
phenomena  of  reproduction  which  I  have  already  referred  to
in  another  connection.  Reproduction  not  only  carries  us
back  to  the  past  and  its  riddles,  but  also  forward  to  the
future,  and  it  is  the  reproductive  system  of  organisms  that
we  must  scan  most  closely  if  we  wish  to  understand  this
aspect  of  organic  activities.  For  in  reproduction  the  cell  or
the  organism  clearly  appears  to  look  beyond  itself,  its
functions  become  transcendent,  as  far  as  it  is  itself  con¬
cerned;  its  efforts  and  energies  are  bent  on  objects  and
purposes  beyond  itself.  In  fact,  in  reproduction  the  cell  or
the  organism  bears  clear  testimony  to  the  fact  that  it  is  not


82


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


itself  alone,  and  that  it  is  part  of  a  larger  whole  of  life
towards  the  fulfilment  of  which  its  most  fundamental
functions  are  directed.  As  an  illustration  of  the  co¬
ordinated  inter-relations  of  parts  and  whole  in  organism,
nothing  can  therefore  be  more  significant  and  important
than  the  facts  of  organic  reproduction.  Here  more  than
anywhere  else  the  importance  of  the  whole  as  an  operative
factor  appears,  not  merely  the  immediate  whole  or  individual
organism,  but  also  the  transcendent  whole  or  the  type
which  has  to  be  reproduced  and  maintained  at  all  costs.
Throughout  the  entire  range  of  organic  nature  one  is
impressed  with  the  essential  selflessness,  the  disregard  of
self,  and  the  transcendence  of  self  in  the  reproductive  pro¬
cess,  which  harnesses  the  individual  to  the  purposes  of  the
race,  exhausts  its  reserves  of  strength,  and  often  costs  it  its
life.  On  that  process  is  stamped,  as  on  the  very  heart  of
nature,  the  principle  of  sacrifice,  of  the  subordination  of
part  to  the  whole,  of  the  individual  to  the  race  or  type.

The  preceding  analysis  will  have  enabled  us  to  realise  that
the  plant  or  the  animal  is  a  whole  consisting  of  millions
of  parts  in  the  form  of  cells  of  all  kinds,  while  the  cells  again
are  smaller  wholes  of  indefinite  complexity  and  marvellous
activities.  All  these  parts  are  co-ordinated  and  arranged
down  to  the  most  minute  details,  and  function  with  the
most  complete  collaboration  in  support  of  each  other  and
the  whole  organism.  The  organism  is  indeed  a  little  living
world  in  which  law  and  order  reign,  and  in  which  every
part  collaborates  with  every  other  part,  and  subserves  the
common  purposes  of  the  whole,  as  a  rule  with  the  most  per¬
fect  regularity.  It  is  this  perfect  community  of  functions  and
unity  of  action  in  a  system  consisting  of  innumerable  parts
and  the  most  complex  structural  arrangements  that  makes
the  organism  such  a  striking  type  of  a  whole.  We  have
seen  structural  order  as  the  characteristic  of  inorganic  mat¬
ter;  we  now  see  active  co-operation  and  unity  of  action  super-
added  as  the  characteristic  of  the  organism.  We  admire  the
order  and  co-operation  of  a  beehive  or  a  community  of  ants;
in  the  organism  we  see  a  more  perfect  order  and  a  more
wonderful  co-operation  in  a  situation  which  is  perhaps  not


IV  THE  CELL  AND  THE  ORGANISM  83

much  less  complex  than  either.  And  just  as  the  individual
bee  or  ant  lives  its  own  life  and  is  not  lost  in  the  joint
venture  of  the  hive  or  nest,  so  the  individual  cell  lives  its
own  life  and  specialises  and  perfects  itself  in  the  organism
which  it  helps  to  form  and  to  serve  without  loss  or  sacrifice
of  its  own  identity.  The  organism  embraces  innumerable
smaller  organic  units  whose  identity  is  not  swallowed  up
in  it,  is  expressed  and  not  suppressed  by  it.  The  large
organism  does  not  only  mean  the  union  and  co-operative
harmony  of  its  smaller  units,  but  also  as  a  rule  the  more
perfect  individuation  and  specialised  development  of  these
units  in  the  harmony  of  the  whole.  The  plant  or  animal
body  is  a  social  community,  but  a  community  which  allows
a  substantial  development  to  its  individual  members.  And
its  nature  and  structure  are  such  that  it  can  only  perfect
itself  through  the  differentiation  and  development  of  the
members  which  compose  it.  But  while  this  is  so,  while  (as
we  shall  see  more  clearly  in  the  sequel)  individuation  is
fundamental  in  nature,  we  have  to  recognise  that  co¬
operation  plays  a  no  less  important  and  fundamental  part.
An  organism  is  fundamentally  a  society  in  which  innumerable
members  co-operate  in  mutual  help  in  a  spirit  of  the  most
effective  disinterested  service  and  loyalty  to  each  other.
Co-operation  and  mutual  help  are  written  large  on  the  face
of  Nature.  Nay,  more,  if  cell  structure  and  function  can
teach  us  anything;  they  are  imprinted  deep  on  the  nature
of  the  universe,  they  are  the  very  meaning  and  soul  of
Nature.  We  may  travel  far  through  the  realms  of  Evolution,
but  nowhere  shall  we  find  a  more  perfect  co-operation  or  a
more  beautiful  illustration  of  mutual  help  of  one  part  for
another,  and  of  all  parts  for  the  whole,  as  well  as  of  the
whole  for  all  its  parts,  than  in  the  little  insignificant  cell,
which  seems  to  hold  the  very  secret  of  the  universe.
Anticipating  the  language  of  later  developments,  we  may
say  that  in  the  cell  there  is  implicit  an  ideal  of  harmonious
co-operation,  of  unselfish  mutual  service,  of  loyalty  and
duty  of  each  to  all  such  as  in  our  later  more  highly  evolved
human  associations  we  can  only  aspire  to  and  strive  for.
When  there  was  achieved  the  marvellous  and  mysterious


84


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.  IV


stable  constellation  of  electrical  units  in  the  atom,  a
miracle  was  wrought  which  saved  the  world  of  matter  from
utter  chaos  and  chance.  But  a  far  greater  miracle  was
wrought  when  from  the  atomic  and  the  molecular  order  there
was  evolved  a  still  deeper  and  subtler  order  in  the  inner  co¬
operative  creative  harmony  of  the  cell.  These  two  funda¬
mental  structures  are  the  great  abiding  achievements  in  the
course  of  Evolution,  before  the  advent  of  Mind,  and  though
many  other  experiments  were  made  before  and  in  between
these  successes,  they  proved  unstable  and  were  discarded
and  abandoned,  and  are  now  searched  for  in  vain.  We
have  to  scrutinise  these  abiding  peaks  of  achievement
if  we  wish  to  understand  the  real  nature  of  the  Evolutionary
process,  and  if  we  wish  to  form  an  idea  of  the  nature
of  the  ground  in  between  these  permanent  structures
which  has  been  washed  away  in  the  endless  lapse  of  time.
And  when  we  find  the  two  to  be  not  utterly  different  but
expressions  of  a  somewhat  similar  inner  progressive  tendency
of  nature,  and  when  we  find  later,  on  the  mental  and  spiritual
levels  of  development,  still  clearer  expressions  of  a  similar
tendency,  we  shall  be  justified  in  concluding  that  we  are  face
to  face  with  something  real  and  causal  in  the  form  of  a
natural  operative  factor  of  a  fundamental  and  universal
character.  The  impression  becomes  so  strong  that  it
is  not  so  much  a  matter  of  speculation  as  a  recognition  of
clear  simple  facts  before  us.  The  permanent  structures
in  Nature  have  been  and  are  still  being  patiently  investi¬
gated  for  us  by  Science.  As  I  said  in  the  last  chapter,  they
present  more  than  a  faint  family  resemblance  and  enable  us
to  recognise  the  unity  which  underlies  them  all  and  to  draw
certain  conclusions  as  to  the  origin  of  this  unity.  They  point
strongly  in  the  direction  of  some  inner  natural  factor  in
Evolution  of  which  they  are  the  expression.  The  evidence
in  favour  of  such  a  natural  factor  of  a  creative  synthetic
ordering  character  has  been  accumulating  in  this  and  the
two  preceding  chapters;  it  requires  isolation,  identification
and  exact  formulation,  if  that  were  possible.  And  in  the
next  chapter  a  preliminary  attempt  at  such  an  identification
and  formulation  will  be  made.


CHAPTER  V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM

Summary. — The  close  approach  to  each  other  of  the  concepts  of
matter,  life  and  mind,  and  their  partial  overflow  of  each  other’s
domain,  raises  the  further  question  whether  back  of  them  there  is
not  a  fundamental  principle  of  which  they  are  the  progressive
outcome.  That  is  the  central  problem  of  this  work.

Two  conceptions  of  genesis  or  development  have  prevailed.  The
one  regards  all  reality  as  given  in  form  and  substance  at  the  begin¬
ning,  either  actually  or  implicitly,  and  the  subsequent  history  as
merely  the  unfolding,  explication,  evolutio,  of  this  implicit  content.
This  view  puts  creation  in  the  past  and  makes  it  predetermine  the
whole  future;  all  fresh  initiative,  novelty  or  creativeness  is  conse¬
quently  banned  from  a  universe  so  created  or  evolved.  The  other
view  posits  a  minimum  of  the  given  at  the  beginning,  and  makes
the  process  of  Evolution  creative  of  reality.  Evolution  on  this
view  is  really  creative  and  not  merely  explicative  of  what  was  given
before;  it  involves  the  creative  rise  not  only  of  new  forms  or  group¬
ings,  but  even  of  new  materials  in  the  process  of  Evolution.  This
is  the  view  of  Evolution  to-day  commonly  held,  and  it  marks  a
revolution  in  thought.  It  releases  the  present  and  the  future  from
the  bondage  of  the  past,  and  makes  freedom  an  inherent  character
of  the  universe.

Creative  Evolution  involves  both  general  principles  or  tendencies
and  concrete  forms  or  structures;  philosophy  studies  the  former,
while  science  has  more  exclusively  concentrated  on  the  latter.  Yet
both  are  necessary  to  reality;  and  any  universal  formula  of  Evolu¬
tion  must  include  both  the  general  activity  or  tendency  and  the
concrete  particular  structure,  as  one  cannot  be  deduced  from  the
other.  Bergson  made  an  attempt  to  deduce  Evolution  with  all  its
multitudinous  forms  from  homogeneous,  pure,  undifferentiated
Duration.  This  was,  however,  not  possible,  and  he  had  to  call  in  the
practical  spatialising  Intellect  to  infect  Duration  in  order  to  make
her  productive;  he  thus  made  the  Intellect  play  a  one-sided  and,
at  the  same  time,  excessive  role  in  the  shaping  of  the  forms  of  the
universe.  It  would  be  a  better  procedure  to  take  some  natural
unit  or  sample  section  of  Nature  for  our  starting-point,  and  thus
to  keep  as  close  to  her  and  her  concreteness  as  possible.  The  last

85


86


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


two  chapters  give  us  a  clue  where  to  look  for  a  beginning.  Both
matter  and  life  consist  of  unit  structures  whose  ordered  grouping
produces  natural  wholes  which  we  call  bodies  or  organisms.  This
character  of  “wholeness”  meets  us  everywhere  and  points  to  some¬
thing  fundamental  in  the  universe.  Holism  (from  6Xos  =  whole)
is  the  term  here  coined  for  this  fundamental  factor  operative  to¬
wards  the  creation  of  wholes  in  the  universe.  Its  character  is
both  general  and  specific  or  concrete,  and  it  satisfies  our  double
requirement  for  a  natural  evolutionary  starting-point.

Wholes  are  not  mere  artificial  constructions  of  thought;  they
point  to  something  real  in  the  universe,  and  Holism  is  a  real  oper¬
ative  factor,  a  vera  causa.  There  is  behind  Evolution  no  mere
vague  creative  impulse  or  Man  vital,  but  something  quite  definite
and  specific  in  its  operation,  and  thus  productive  of  the  real  con¬
crete  character  of  cosmic  Evolution.

The  idea  of  wholes  and  wholeness  should  therefore  not  be  con¬
fined  to  the  biological  domain ;  it  covers  both  inorganic  substances
and  the  highest  manifestations  of  the  human  spirit.  Taking  a
plant  or  an  animal  as  a  type  of  a  whole,  we  notice  the  fundamental
holistic  characters  as  a  unity  of  parts  which  is  so  close  and  intense
as  to  be  more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts;  which  not  only  gives  a
particular  conformation  or  structure  to  the  parts  but  so  relates
and  determines  them  in  their  synthesis  that  their  functions  are
altered;  the  synthesis  affects  and  determines  the  parts,  so  that  they
function  towards  the  “whole”;  and  the  whole  and  the  parts  there¬
fore  reciprocally  influence  and  determine  each  other,  and  appear
more  or  less  to  merge  their  individual  characters:  the  whole  is  in
the  parts  and  the  parts  are  in  the  whole,  and  this  synthesis  of
whole  and  parts  is  reflected  in  the  holistic  character  of  the  func¬
tions  of  the  parts  as  well  as  of  the  whole.

There  is  a  progressive  grading  of  this  holistic  synthesis  in  Na¬
ture,  so  that  we  pass  from  (a)  mere  physical  mixtures,  where  the
structure  is  almost  negligible,  and  the  parts  largely  preserve  their
separate  characters  and  activities  or  functions,  to  ( b )  chemical
compounds,  where  the  structure  is  more  synthetic  and  the  activi¬
ties  and  functions  of  the  parts  are  strongly  influenced  by  the  new
structure  and  can  only  with  difficulty  be  traced  to  the  individual
parts;  and,  again,  to  (c)  organisms,  where  a  still  more  intense
synthesis  of  elements  has  been  effected,  which  impresses  the  parts
or  organs  far  more  intimately  with  a  unified  character,  and  a  sys¬
tem  of  central  control,  regulation  and  co-ordination  of  all  the
parts  and  organs  arises;  and  from  organism,  again  on  to  ( d )  Minds
or  psychical  organs,  where  the  Central  Control  acquires  con¬
sciousness  and  a  freedom  and  creative  power  of  the  most  far-
reaching  character;  and  finally  to  ( e )  Personality,  which  is  the
highest,  most  evolved  whole  among  the  structures  of  the  universe,


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  87

and  becomes  a  new  orientative,  originative  centre  of  reality.  All
through  this  progressive  series  the  character  of  wholeness  deepens;
Holism  is  not  only  creative  but  self-creative,  and  its  final  struc¬
tures  are  far  more  holistic  than  its  initial  structures.  Natural
wholes  are  always  composed  of  parts;  in  fact  the  whole  is  not
something  additional  to  the  parts,  but  is  just  the  parts  in  their
synthesis,  which  may  be  physico-chemical  or  organic  or  psychical
or  personal.  As  Holism  is  a  process  of  creative  synthesis,  the  re¬
sulting  wholes  are  not  static  but  dynamic,  evolutionary,  creative.
Hence  Evolution  has  an  ever-deepening  inward  spiritual  holistic
character;  and  the  wholes  of  Evolution  and  the  evolutionary  pro¬
cess  itself  can  only  be  understood  in  reference  to  this  fundamental
character  of  wholeness.  This  is  a  universe  of  whole-making.  The
explanation  of  Nature  can  therefore  not  be  purely  mechanical;
and  the  mechanistic  concept  of  Nature  has  its  place  and  justifica¬
tion  only  in  the  wider  setting  of  Holism.  In  its  organic  applica¬
tion,  in  particular,  the  “whole”  will  be  found  a  much  more  useful
term  in  science  than  “life,”  and  will  render  the  prevailing  mecha¬
nistic  interpretation  largely  unnecessary.

A  natural  whole  has  its  “field,”  and  the  concept  of  fields  will  be
found  most  important  in  this  connection  also.  Just  as  a  “thing”
is  really  a  synthesised  “event”  in  the  system  of  Relativity,  so  an
organism  is  really  a  unified,  synthesised  section  of  history,  which
includes  not  only  its  present  but  much  of  its  past  and  even  its
future.  An  organism  can  only  be  explained  by  reference  to  its
past  and  its  future  as  well  as  its  present;  the  central  structure  is
not  sufficient  and  literally  has  not  enough  in  it  to  go  round  in
the  way  of  explanation;  the  conception  of  the  field  therefore  be¬
comes  necessary  and  will  be  found  fruitful  in  biology  and  psychol¬
ogy  no  less  than  in  physics.

In  this  chapter  we  approach  the  central  problem  of  our
inquiry.  In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  seen  the  con¬
cept  of  matter  coming  closer  to  the  concept  of  life;  we  have
seen  the  concept  of  life,  in  the  cell,  and  in  organism,  and  in
Evolution  generally,  tending  towards  the  concept  of  mind.
We  have  seen  these  three  fundamental  concepts,  at  first
apparently  so  utterly  unlike  and  so  far  apart,  approaching
each  other  and  overflowing  each  other  in  the  real  structures
and  evolution  of  the  universe.  The  question  now  arises
whether  there  is  not  something  still  more  fundamental  in  the
universe,  something  of  which  they  are  but  the  developing
forms  and  phases,  something  out  of  which  they  crystallise


88


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


at  the  various  onward  stages  of  its  progress.  And  if  there  is
this  more  fundamental  principle,  can  it  be  formulated  into
a  definite  concept,  and  will  it  account  for  the  specific  concrete
character  of  our  universe?  That  is  our  problem,  in  the
consideration  of  which  a  commencement  will  be  made  in  this
chapter.

Throughout  the  history  of  human  thought  there  have  been
two  ultimate  points  of  departure  in  the  explanation  of  the
universe,  two  contrasted  fundamental  mental  attitudes  or
view-points  from  which  the  universe  has  been  envisaged
and  accounted  for.  According  to  the  one  view  everything
is,  in  one  way  or  another,  given  at  the  beginning;  according
to  the  other  a  minimum  is  assumed  at  the  beginning,  and
the  universe  is  a  progressive  creation  or  evolution  from  this
minimum  starting-point.  On  the  first  view  it  makes  no
difference  whether  the  original  creation  was  complete  in  all
details  or  whether  merely  its  logical  or  metaphysical  scheme
was  complete,  while  the  contents  were  only  implicitly
given.  In  either  case  there  can  be  nothing  new  in  the
course  of  the  subsequent  history  of  the  world.  If  the
original  creation  was  complete  and  final,  all  subsequent
events  and  changes  can  only  be  rearrangements,  reshufflings
of  the  original  groupings:  both  the  material  elements  and
their  principles  or  forms  of  arrangement  are  there  as  original
data,  and  determine  all  subsequent  events  and  arrangements.
If,  again,  the  metaphysical  scheme  or  structure  of  the
universe  must  be  taken  as  given,  the  evolution  of  the  universe
is  merely  a  logical  development  in  compliance  with  this
scheme;  or  in  other  words,  the  logical  development  of  the
scheme  will  give  us  the  material  universe  as  a  result.  The
development  of  Hegel’s  Idea  is  just  such  an  attempt  at  a
logical  unfolding  of  the  universe.  In  both  cases  the  explana¬
tion  of  the  universe  is  in  the  past,  at  the  beginning:  that
beginning  rules  all  and  predetermines  all.  The  past  is  the
efficient  cause  of  the  future,  and  no  new  creation,  nothing
essentially  new,  can  arise  in  the  future.  The  full  volume  of
reality  was  there  at  the  beginning  and  continues  to  roll  on,
changing  its  forms  and  appearances  by  the  way,  but  making


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  89

no  fresh  addition  to  the  original  current.  All  real  novelty
and  initiative,  all  real  freedom  of  choice  and  development
disappear  from  the  universe.  The  process  of  the  world
becomes  at  most  an  explication,  an  unfolding  of  what  was
implicitly  given,  and  not  a  creative  evolution  of  new  forms.
This  view-point  has  been  dominant  in  Western  science  and
philosophy  from  its  early  beginnings  until  quite  recently.  In
physical  science  it  fits  in  naturally  with  the  orthodox  laws
of  conservation,  which  preclude  either  the  creation  or  the  de¬
struction  of  energy,  mass  or  momentum.  And  in  proportion
as  mechanistic  ideas  have  prevailed  in  science  and  philoso¬
phy,  all  change  has  come  to  mean  merely  mechanical  re¬
arrangements  without  any  substantial  addition  to  or  subtrac¬
tion  from  the  sum  total  of  reality.  Those  thinkers,  again,  who
(like  Leibniz)  did  not  subscribe  to  the  mechanistic  formula
were  led  by  their  theological  standpoints  to  look  upon  reality
as  completed  in  the  past,  and  to  leave  to  the  future  the  merely
subordinate  role  of  unfolding,  evolving,  explicating  what  was
virtually  contained  in  that  past.  This,  therefore,  is  the  very
limited  sense  in  which  the  term  development  or  evolution  as
used  by  them  must  be  understood.  Where  they  believed  in  a
dynamic  progressive  universe,  they  meant  merely  a  universe
which  was  progressively  unfolding  what  was  implicitly
contained  in  the  past.  The  view-point  of  Evolution  as
creative,  of  a  real  progressive  creation  still  going  forward
in  the  universe  instead  of  having  been  completed  in  the  past,
of  the  sum  of  reality  not  as  constant  but  as  progressively
increasing  in  the  course  of  evolution,  is  a  new  departure  of
the  nineteenth  century,  and  it  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most
significant  departures  in  the  whole  range  of  human  thought.
Not  only  has  the  old  static  view  of  reality  with  its  fixed
elements  and  species  disappeared,  the  new  dynamic  view  of
Evolution  does  not  merely  negate  the  old  static  view,  it  has
gone  much  further.  Evolution  is  not  merely  a  process  of
change,  of  regrouping  of  the  old  into  new  forms;  it  is
creative,  its  new  forms  are  not  merely  fashioned  out  of  the
old  materials;  it  creates  both  new  materials  and  new  forms
from  the  synthesis  of  the  new  with  the  old  materials.  The


9°


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


creativeness  of  matter  is,  as  we  saw,  confined  to  the  aspect
of  structure  and  to  the  refashioning  of  new  structures  out  of
the  pre-existing  material  units:  in  that  sense  matter  has
only  a  limited  though  real  creativeness.  When  we  come  to
organisms  we  find  a  very  much  larger  measure  of  creative¬
ness  in  Evolution.  For  it  is  admitted  that  the  new  qualities
or  characters  which  give  rise  to  new  varieties  or  species  are
really  new  in  the  sense  that  they  have  not  been  there  before
and  are  not  mere  reshufflings  of  characters  which  were  there
before.  New  characters  are  created,  and  on  the  basis  of
them  new  varietal  or  specific  forms  of  a  stable  kind  arise.
A  still  larger  measure  of  creativeness  applies  to  mind  both
in  its  intellectual  and  in  its  ethical  aspects;  thought  is  cre¬
ative  in  all  its  activities  from  the  simplest  sensation  up  to
the  most  complex  judgment;  and  the  ethical  or  practical
reason  is  creative  of  values,  moral,  spiritual  and  religious
values,  in  the  fullest  sense.  Hence  arises  the  view  of  Evolu¬
tion  as  creative  of  the  new,  as  an  epigenesis  instead  of  an
explication,  as  displaying  novelty  and  initiative,  as  opening
up  new  paths  and  rendering  possible  new  choices  in  the  for¬
ward  march,  as  creating  freedom  for  the  future  and  in  a  very
real  sense  breaking  the  bondage  of  the  past  and  its  fixed
predeterminations.

The  view-point  of  creative  Evolution  is  to-day  embraced
by  scientists  and  philosophers  generally,  and  this  consensus
between  them  in  a  matter  of  cardinal  importance  con¬
stitutes  a  most  promising  situation  for  the  future,  and  may
lead  to  far  more  fruitful  co-operation  between  science  and
philosophy  than  we  have  known  for  a  hundred  years.
Let  me  point  to  one  important  direction  in  which  this
co-operation  is  called  for.

In  their  actual  procedure  philosophers  have  occupied
themselves  with  general  principles,  while  scientists,  except
in  the  domain  of  Mathematics  pure  and  applied,  mostly
occupy  themselves  with  the  investigation  of  concrete
things,  bodies,  organisms  and  the  like.  Scientists  have
more  and  more  buried  themselves  in  details,  exploring
facts  to  their  minutest  details,  and  looking  to  ever  greater


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


9i


specialisation  to  give  the  clues  to  the  unsolved  problems.
More  than  ever  before  they  are  occupying  themselves  with
the  problems  of  structure,  the  structure  of  matter  and  the
physical  universe,  the  structure  of  cells  and  organisms  as
explaining  the  systems  of  life,  the  structure  of  the  nervous
system  and  the  brain  with  a  view  to  understanding  the
movement  of  Evolution  in  its  higher  reaches.  While  science
is  thus  preoccupied  with  the  details  of  structure,  philosophy
continues  very  much  on  the  old  lines  of  exploring  general
points  of  view,  general  principles  and  tendencies  and  con¬
cepts.  Philosophy,  in  endeavouring  to  demarcate  a  province
of  her  own  and  distinct  from  the  special  regions  ruled  by
science,  is  more  and  more  confining  herself  to  general  view¬
points  and  ultimate  concepts  and  principles,  and  thus  runs
the  risk  of  getting  further  away  from  science  instead  of
drawing  closer  to  it.  The  result  of  this  divorce  is  lamentable
in  the  extreme.  For  science,  divorced  from  the  view¬
points  and  principles  which  philosophy  embraces,  structure
becomes  merely  mechanism.  For  philosophy,  divorced  from
the  actual  concrete  structural  facts  which  science  studies,
the  general  principles  remain  in  the  air,  and  never  generate
this  specific  concrete  sensible  world  which  is  there  to
explain  and  understand.  But  the  real  world  is  neither  a
mere  principle  nor  a  mere  structure,  neither  a  dis¬
embodied  soul  nor  a  soulless  mechanism.  The  creative
Evolution  which  both  scientist  and  philosopher  embrace
works  as  a  general  principle  or  tendency  in  and  through
particular  concrete  specific  forms.  Evolution  is  thus
structure  plus  principle,  interpenetrating  each  other,
reacting  on  and  vitalising  each  other.  Individuation  and
universality  are  equally  characteristic  of  Evolution.  The
universal  realises  itself,  not  in  idle  self-contemplation,  not  in
isolation  from  the  actual,  but  in  and  through  individual
bodies,  in  particular  things  and  facts.  The  temple  of  the
Spirit  is  the  structure  of  matter;  the  universal  dwells  in  the
concrete  particular;  neither  is  real  nor  true  apart  from
the  other.  All  this  sounds  like  truisms  and  platitudes.
But  if  there  is  any  force  in  this  position  it  comes  to


92  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

this,  that  the  pursuit  of  the  separate  paths  of  science  and
philosophy  will  not  bring  us  to  our  goal.  Their  roads  must
be  made  to  converge.  Concepts  must  be  developed  which
will  include  the  material  and  the  view-points  of  both  science
and  philosophy.  The  pathway  of  the  real  is  neither  abstract
general  principles  nor  the  wilderness  of  details;  and  if  we
wish  to  understand  Evolution,  we  must  develop  concepts
adequate  to  its  actual  process,  concepts  which  will  be  repre¬
sentative  of  its  real  characters  of  concreteness  and  uni¬
versality.  In  other  words,  we  must  construct  a  conceptual
model  which  will  as  accurately  as  possible  reproduce  what
actually  goes  on  in  the  process  of  cosmic  Evolution,  our
main  concern  being  to  make  our  explanation  of  Nature’s
process  as  true  to  actual  observed  facts  as  possible.  Abstract
principles  alone  cannot  carry  us  to  the  understanding  of  the
concrete  procedure  of  Evolution.  Structures  by  themselves,
again,  cannot  generalise  themselves  into  a  universal  process
such  as  Evolution.  Mere  structure  is  not  enough,  because
it  misses  the  generic,  the  universal  in  reality.  General
principles  or  tendencies  are  not  enough,  because  they  are
not  concrete  such  as  natural  reality  is.  The  two  must  be
blended  in  a  new  concept.  And  it  may  be  found  that  the
new  concept  is  actually  not  a  blend  of  them,  but  the  original
unity  from  which  they  have  been  dissociated,  and  that  the
synthesis  produces  more  than  a  mere  concept,  reveals  in  fact
an  operative  causal  principle  of  fundamental  significance.

To  illustrate  how  philosophers  operate  with  general  prin¬
ciples  or  tendencies  which  refuse  to  produce  particularity,
and  therefore  fail  to  explain  the  concrete  character  of  reality,
let  us  glance  for  a  moment  at  Bergson’s  system.  Any  other
would  have  served  perhaps  equally  well,  but  Bergson  has  the
great  merit  of  being  the  most  influential  and  brilliant
exponent  of  the  philosophy  of  Evolution  in  our  time,  and  a
reference  to  his  work  will  therefore  keep  us  close  to  our  own
subject  matter.  Bergson  singles  out  the  principle  of
Duration  as  both  ultimate  and  all-embracing  and  as  thus
capable  of  both  generating  and  explaining  reality.  He
reaches  the  concept  of  Duration  by  going  back  into  the


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


93


depths  of  subjective  experience  until  he  comes  to  the  point
where  we  feel  ourselves  most  intimately  within  our  own  life.
He  divests  this  experience  of  all  elements  of  change  or  differ¬
entiated  features,  all  subjective  and  objective  items  of  ex¬
perience  are  eliminated,  and  there  remains  the  bare  flow
or  passage  of  the  inner  life.  This  is  Duration;  this  homo¬
geneous  flow  or  passage  is  for  him  the  creative  principle  in
the  universe.  It  underlies  and  generates  our  idea  of  time.
But  time  is  not  pure  Duration,  it  has  become  infected  with
the  Intellect,  and  instead  of  being  a  continuous  enduring
process  it  has  become  a  summation  of  units,  or  points,  or
small  unit  lengths  of  happening.  In  other  words,  time  has
become  spatialised,  analytical  and  arithmetical  in  character
in  proportion  as  it  has  become  divorced  from  its  original
pure  form  as  uniform  flow  or  process  or  Duration.  This  crea¬
tive  Duration  is  the  tap-root  not  only  of  time,  but  also  of
Evolution,  and  is  the  source  of  all  the  multiplicity  of  forms
and  activities  which  we  see  in  the  universe.  Bergson’s
Creative  Evolution  is  an  attempt  to  show  how  this  funda¬
mental  principle  beginning  as  nothing  but  bare  flow  or  pas¬
sage  builds  up  the  concrete  universe  within  us  and  around  us.
To  him  belongs  the  signal  merit  of  having  elucidated  the
concept  of  Time  more  clearly  than  has  been  done  before
in  philosophy.  The  theory  of  Evolution  has  made  the
aspect  of  time  in  the  universe  more  important  than  ever
before,  and  Bergson  has  rescued  the  concept  of  time  from
the  confusions  in  which  it  had  become  entangled,  not  only
in  our  empirical  experience,  but  even  in  our  scientific  and
philosophic  ideas.  But  while  freely  conceding  this  great
merit  to  Bergson  I  must  confess  that  I  fail  to  see  how  from
pure  Duration  he  has  produced  concrete  reality.  It  simply
cannot  be  done.  From  bare,  undifferentiated,  homogeneous
unity  you  cannot  reach  out  to  multiplicity.  You  may  call
pure  Duration  creative,  but  it  will  create  nothing  until  it  is
mixed  with  something  very  different  from  itself.  And
indeed  Bergson  has  had  to  summon  to  his  rescue  another
principle,  which  he  has  invested  with  all  the  characters  of
which  he  had  so  carefully  deprived  Duration.  This  is  the


94


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


Intellect.  The  Intellect  is  practical,  differential,  analytical,
selective,  purposive;  it  is  at  once  the  principle  and  the
instrument  of  action;  it  can  analyse  the  material  before  it
and  choose  what  is  useful  for  its  purpose.  It  is  spatial,  it
converts  pure  Duration  into  impure  Time.  Nor  is  Time  its
only  offspring.  From  its  marriage  with  pure  Duration  the
Intellect  has  produced  all  the  sensible  forms  in  the  universe.
Bodies  and  things  are  simply  our  lines  of  action  on  matter.
The  practical  Intellect  selects  what  it  wants  for  action  and
ignores  or  simply  does  not  notice  the  rest.  The  sensible
qualities  it  distinguishes  are  those  which  attract  its  attention
by  their  practical  usefulness  or  serviceableness  for  its  pur¬
poses.  The  forms  of  bodies  and  things  are  therefore  merely
the  result  of  this  selective  action  on  matter.1  Structure  is
the  creature  of  Intellect;  in  fact  in  its  forms  the  sensible
universe  is  an  intellect-made  universe.  The  result  is  a  hope¬
lessly  lop-sided  affair,  and  but  for  Instinct  and  Intuition —
another  twin  of  this  marriage  who  partake  more  of  the  pure
and  gentle  character  of  the  maternal  Duration — reality  and
truth  in  the  universe  would  be  distorted  beyond  recognition.
Such  is  a  very  summary  statement  of  the  essential  point  in
Bergsonism,  at  least  as  I  understand  it.  For  my  present
purpose  I  have  only  two  criticisms  to  make.  In  the  first
place,  as  already  indicated,  the  principle  of  pure  Duration
fails  either  to  generate  or  to  explain  impure  concrete  reality.
In  the  second  place,  there  is  far  more  in  structure  than  the
mere  creation  of  the  Intellect.  Admitting  the  practical  in¬
strumental  selective  character  of  the  Intellect,  it  would  yet
be  a  profound  mistake  to  make  it  the  sole  cause  of  the  forms
and  structures  of  sensible  bodies  or  things.  The  Intellect  is
not  creative  in  that  fundamental  sense.  To  make  of  Intellect
what  Kant  made  of  Space  and  Time — the  forms  imposed
ab  extra  on  sensible  reality  by  the  activity  of  the  mind —
would  be  a  travesty  of  psychology  and  nature  alike.  Intel¬
lect  selects  and  orders,  but  not  arbitrarily;  it  is  itself  merely
an  element  in  a  greater,  more  universal  order.  Structure
is  the  creature  of  experience,  and  experience  is  an  interaction

1  Creative  Evolution,  p.  102.


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


95


of  the  subjective  and  objective  factors  so  intimate  and  un¬
analysable  that  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  much  of  the  result
is  due  to  one  factor  and  how  much  to  the  other.  Structure
is  as  much  objective  as  subjective  in  its  psychological  origin.
To  put  the  forms,  structures,  the  order  of  Nature  to  the
sole  account  of  the  Intellect  or  subjective  factor  in  experi¬
ence  is  most  seriously  misleading  and  is  subjective  Idealism
in  its  most  dangerous  form.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  pre¬
ceding  chapters,  structure  or  something  in  the  nature  of
structure  is  inherent  in  the  objective  order  of  Nature,  just
as  we  shall  hereafter  see  that  it  is  inherent  in  the  orders  of
life  and  mind.

Where  Bergson  seems  to  me  to  have  gone  wrong  is  his
impoverishment  of  the  creative  principle  by  reducing  it  to
the  bare  empty  form  of  Duration.  In  order  after  that  false
step  to  set  his  Creation  going  it  was  inevitable  that  another
mistake  should  be  made,  and  that  a  relatively  subordinate
factor,  like  the  Intellect,  should  be  overloaded  with  im¬
portance.  Thus  the  Intellect,  which  is  a  sort  of  Machiavelli
or  Mephistopheles  in  the  Bergsonian  system,  has  a  role  as¬
signed  to  it  which  is  accentuated  both  unduly  and  in  a  one¬
sided  manner.  In  order  to  understand  Nature  we  have  to
proceed  more  modestly  and  in  closer  touch  with  our  ordinary
observation  of  her  ways.

Let  me  try  to  make  my  point  clear  by  stating  it  in  another
way.  I  wish  to  get  as  near  as  possible  to  what  one  might
call  Nature’s  point  of  view  in  our  explanation  of  her.  To
understand  Nature  we  must  take  one  of  her  own  units,  and
not  an  abstract  one  of  our  own  making.  We  must  as  it  were
take  a  small  sample  section  of  Nature  which  will  include  as
one  and  indivisible  both  the  element  of  activity  or  principle
and  the  element  of  structure  or  concreteness  in  her.  Our  con¬
cept  must  correspond  to  such  a  section  as  our  starting-point,
and  we  must  then  proceed  to  apply  it  as  a  sort  of  standard
with  which  to  measure  up  the  whole  range  of  Evolution.
In  this  way  we  shall  try  to  explain  Nature  by  reference  to
herself  and  her  own  standards,  so  to  say,  instead  of  by
reference  to  intellectual  abstractions  of  our  own  devising.


96  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

It  may  be  objected  that  in  taking  such  a  small  section  or
unit  of  Nature  as  our  starting-point  I  am  implicitly  assuming
all  that  follows;  that  I  am  taking  a  small  section  of  the
evolved  in  order  to  explain  Evolution,1  and  am  therefore
begging  the  question,  and  that  I  shall  be  only  finding  here¬
after  what  I  have  posited  at  the  beginning.  This,  however,
is  not  so.  The  criticism  would  have  force  if  Evolution
were  merely  explicative  and  not  creative;  and  if  my  natural
unit  would  by  mere  unfolding  produce  all  the  rest  in  the
course  of  time.  We  have,  however,  seen  that  Evolution  is
creative;  the  evolution  of  an  assumed  unit  factor  would
therefore  by  no  means  unfold  the  implicit  contents  of  that
factor,  but  would  proceed  creatively,  and  would  in  the  end
far  transcend  the  elementary  unit  which  was  the  starting-
point.  Let  us  therefore  proceed  in  the  way  I  propose  and  try
to  reach  a  concept  of  Nature  and  her  progress  which  will
not  be  imposed  on  her  from  without,  but  which  will  keep  as
close  as  possible  to  her  own  natural  units,  structures  or
standards,  so  far  as  we  have  experience  of  them.

At  this  stage  we  return  to  the  difficult  question  which  was
raised  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  We  are  trying  to
dig  down  to  the  very  roots  of  reality  and  to  raise  an  issue  the
solving  of  which  will  be  no  light  task.  The  issue  has  indeed
become  inevitable  as  the  result  of  the  preceding  chapters.

In  Chapters  II  and  III  we  found  the  physical  properties
of  matter  were  geometrically,  that  is  in  a  sense  mentally,
determinable.  We  found  also  that  matter,  instead  of  the
inertness,  fixity  and  conservatism  traditionally  associated
with  it,  was  in  reality  plastic,  mobile  and  transmutable
in  its  types,  and  in  a  sense  creative  of  its  forms  and
values.

How  have  we  to  understand  this?  Is  life  or  mind  im¬
plicit  in  matter,  and  are  the  characters  just  referred  to  an
appeal  of  the  human  mind  to  the  mind  imprisoned  in  matter?
Has  Science  gone  so  far  in  her  long  search  for  truth  that  at
last  mind  greets  mind  in  the  inner  nature  of  things?  Have

1  Bergson’s  criticism  of  Herbert  Spencer;  see  Creative  Evolution,  p.
xiv.


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


v


97


the  rescuers  reached  the  imprisoned  in  the  long  dark  tunnel
of  Nature?

Again,  in  Chapter  IV  we  found  in  the  organism  and  even
in  the  cell  a  perfectly  adjusted  system  of  co-operation  so
closely  approaching  the  social  in  character,  a  complicated
system  of  controls  so  closely  approaching  the  mental  in
character,  as  once  more  to  raise  the  question  of  mind  on  a
really  extensive  scale  implicit  in  Nature.  As  we  find  life
on  the  one  hand  encroaching  on  the  domain  of  matter,  so
again  we  find  mind  encroaching  far  beyond  its  own  proper
domain  on  that  usually  assigned  to  life.  Is  life  implicit
mind,  mind  asleep  and  almost  waking?  Is  life  latent  in
matter,  and  is  Mind  latent  in  life?

What  is  the  answer  to  these  questions,  and  how  have  we
to  conceive  matter,  life  and  mind  to  explain  this  overflow
into  each  other’s  domain?  Is  it  possible  to  have  a  concept
which  will  embrace  all  these  facts  as  phases  of  its  own
creative  development?  Is  it  possible  to  develop  the  concept
of  a  principle  which  is  successively  physical,  biological  and
mental  in  its  developing  phases,  in  other  words,  of  which
matter,  life  and  mind  are  the  manifestation?  Is  it  possible
to  have  a  fundamental  concept  of  Evolution,  of  which
matter,  life  and  mind  would  be  the  successive  stages?

This  is  the  sort  of  question  which  naturally  arises  as  a
result  of  the  point  which  we  have  reached  in  our  discussion.
And  the  answer  which  one  ventures  to  bring  forward  must
have  reference  not  only  to  fundamental  principles,  but  also
to  that  requisite  of  concrete  character  which  we  have  just
now  seen  to  be  essential  in  any  solution  which  professes  to
be  true  to  nature.

The  last  two  chapters  have  not  only  raised  the  question
but  prepared  the  way  for  the  answer  which  will  be  given  in
the  sequel.  We  there  saw  that  reality  is  not  diffuse  and
dispersive;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  aggregative,  ordered,
structural.  Both  matter  and  life  consist,  in  the  atom  and  the
cell,  of  unit  structures  whose  ordered  grouping  produces  the
natural  wholes  which  we  call  bodies  or  organisms.  This
character  or  feature  of  “wholeness”  which  we  found  in  the


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


98

case  of  matter  and  life  has  a  far  more  general  application
and  points  to  something  fundamental  in  the  universe,  funda¬
mental  in  the  sense  that  it  is  practically  universal,  that  it
is  a  real  operative  factor,  and  that  its  shaping  influence  is
felt  ever  more  deeply  and  widely  with  the  advance  of
Evolution.  Holism  is  the  term  here  coined  (from  6\os  =
whole)  to  designate  this  fundamental  factor  operative
towards  the  making  or  creation  of  wholes  in  the  universe.
Let  us  first  try  to  get  some  general  idea  of  what  Holism
is  and  what  “wholes”  are;  thereafter  I  shall  try  to  define
these  terms  more  closely.

We  are  all  familiar  in  the  domain  of  life  with  what  is  here
called  wholes.  Every  organism,  every  plant  or  animal,  is  a
whole,  with  a  certain  internal  organisation  and  a  measure
of  self-direction,  and  an  individual  specific  character  of  its
own.  This  is  true  of  the  lowest  micro-organism  no  less  than
of  the  most  highly  developed  and  complex  human  per¬
sonality.  What  is  not  generally  recognised  is  that  the  con¬
ception  of  wholes  covers  a  much  wider  field  than  that  of
life,  that  its  beginnings  are  traceable  already  in  the  inorganic
order  of  Nature,  and  that  beyond  the  ordinary  domain
of  biology  it  applies  in  a  sense  to  human  associations  like
the  State,  and  to  the  creations  of  the  human  spirit  in
all  its  greatest  and  most  significant  activities.  Not  only  are
plants  and  animals  wholes,  but  in  a  certain  limited  sense  the
natural  collocations  of  matter  in  the  universe  are  wholes;
atoms,  molecules  and  chemical  compounds  are  limited
wholes;  while  in  another  closely  related  sense  human
characters,  works  of  art  and  the  great  ideals  of  the  higher
life  are  or  partake  of  the  character  of  wholes.  In  popular
use  the  word  “whole”  is  often  made  to  cover  some  of  these
higher  creations.  A  poem  or  a  picture,  for  instance,  is
praised  because  it  is  a  “whole,”  because  it  is  not  a  mere
artificial  construction,  but  an  organic  whole,  in  which  all  the
parts  appear  in  a  subtle  indefinable  way  to  subserve  and
carry  out  the  main  purpose  or  idea.  Artistic  creations  are,  in
fact,  mainly  judged  and  appraised  by  the  extent  to  which
they  realise  the  character  of  wholes.  But  there  is  much


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


99


more  in  the  term  “whole”  than  is  covered  by  its  popular
use.  In  the  view  here  presented  “wholes”  are  basic  to  the
character  of  the  universe,  and  Holism,  as  the  operative
factor  in  the  evolution  of  wholes,  is  the  ultimate  principle
of  the  universe.

The  creation  of  wholes,  and  ever  more  highly  organised
wholes,  and  of  wholeness  generally  as  characteristic  of
existence,  is  an  inherent  character  of  the  universe.
There  is  not  a  mere  vague  indefinite  creative  energy
or  tendency  at  work  in  the  world.  This  energy  or
tendency  has  specific  characters,  the  most  fundamental
of  which  is  whole-making.  And  the  progressive  develop¬
ment  of  the  resulting  wholes  at  all  stages — from  the  most
inchoate,  imperfect,  inorganic  wholes  to  the  most  highly
developed  and  organised — is  what  we  call  Evolution.  The
whole-making,  holistic  tendency,  or  Holism,  operating
in  and  through  particular  wholes,  is  seen  at  all  stages
of  existence,  and  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  bio¬
logical  domain  to  which  science  has  hitherto  restricted
it.  With  its  roots  in  the  inorganic,  this  universal  tendency
attains  clear  expression  in  the  organic  biological  world,  and
reaches  its  highest  expressions  and  results  on  the  mental  and
spiritual  planes  of  existence.  Wholes  of  various  grades
are  the  real  units  of  Nature.  Wholeness  is  the  most
characteristic  expression  of  the  nature  of  the  universe  in
its  forward  movement  in  time.  It  marks  the  line  of  evolu¬
tionary  progress.  And  Holism  is  the  inner  driving  force
behind  that  progress.

It  is  evident  that  if  this  view  is  correct,  very  important
results  must  follow  for  our  conceptions  of  knowledge  and  life.
Wholes  are  not  mere  artificial  constructions  of  thought,
they  point  to  something  real  in  the  universe;  and  Holism
as  the  creative  principle  behind  them  is  a  real  vera  causa .
It  is  the  motive  force  behind  Evolution.  We  thus  have
behind  Evolution  not  a  mere  vague  and  indefinable  creative
impulse  or  elan  vital ,  the  bare  idea  of  passage  or  duration
without  any  quality  or  character,  and  to  which  no
value  or  character  could  be  attached,  but  something  quite


100  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

definite.  Holism  is  a  specific  tendency,  with  a  definite
character,  and  creative  of  all  characters  in  the  universe,  and
thus  fruitful  of  results  and  explanations  in  regard  to  the
whole  course  of  cosmic  development.

It  is  possible  that  some  may  think  I  have  pressed  the
claims  of  Holism  and  the  whole  too  far;  that  they  are  not
real  operative  factors,  but  only  useful  methodological  con¬
cepts  or  categories  of  research  and  explanation.  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  whole  is  a  useful  and  powerful  concept  under
which  to  range  the  phenomena  of  life  especially.  But  to
my  mind  there  is  clearly  something  more  in  the  idea.  The
whole  as  a  real  character  is  writ  large  on  the  face  of  Nature.
It  is  dominant  in  biology;  it  is  everywhere  noticeable  in
the  higher  mental  and  spiritual  developments;  and  science,
if  it  had  not  been  so  largely  analytical  and  mechanical,
would  long  ago  have  seen  and  read  it  in  inorganic
nature  also.  The  whole  as  an  operative  factor  requires
careful  exploration.  That  there  are  wholes  in  Nature
seems  to  me  incontestable.  That  they  cover  a  very
much  wider  field  than  is  generally  thought  and  are  of
fundamental  significance  is  the  view  here  presented.  But  the
idea  of  the  whole  is  one  of  the  neglected  matters  of  science
and  to  a  large  extent  of  philosophy  also.  It  is  curious  that,
while  the  general  view-point  of  philosophy  is  necessarily
largely  holistic,  it  has  never  made  real  use  of  the  idea  of  the
whole.  The  idea  runs  indeed  as  a  thread  all  through
philosophy,  but  mostly  in  a  vague  intangible  way.  The
only  definite  application  of  the  idea  has  been  made  by  the
Absolutists,  who  have  applied  the  expression  of  “the  whole”
to  the  all  of  existence,  to  the  cosmic  whole,  to  the  tout
ensemble  of  the  universe,  considered  as  a  unity  or  a  being.
This  particular  use  of  the  idea  does  not  interest  us  at
this  stage  of  this  inquiry.  The  great  whole  may  be  the
ultimate  terminus,  but  it  is  not  the  line  which  we  are  follow¬
ing.  It  is  the  small  natural  centres  of  wholeness  which  we
are  going  to  study,  and  the  principle  of  which  they  are  the
expression.  And  I  should  have  thought  that  the  matter
would  be  of  profound  interest  to  philosophers  and  scientists


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


IOI


alike.  But  no  real  use  has  been  made  of  this  great  concept
even  by  philosophers,  while  by  scientists  it  has  been  steadily
neglected  or  ignored  under  the  iron  rule  of  the  mechanistic
regime.  And  yet  the  stone  rejected  by  the  builders  may
become  the  corner-stone  of  the  building.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  the  idea  of  a  whole  more
closely;  and  let  us  once  more  begin  with  natural  biological
wholes,  such  as  plants  or  animals.  An  organism,  like  a
plant  or  animal,  is  a  natural  whole.  It  is  self-acting  and
self-moving.  Its  principle  of  movement  or  action  is  not
external  to  itself  but  internal.  It  is  not  actuated  or  moved
by  some  external  principle  or  force,  like  a  machine  or  an
artificial  construction.  The  source  of  its  activity  is  internal
and  of  a  piece  with  itself,  is  indeed  itself.  It  consists  of
parts,  but  its  parts  are  not  merely  put  together.  Their
togetherness  is  not  mechanical,  but  rests  on  a  different  basis.
The  organism  consists  of  parts,  but  it  is  more  than  the  sum
of  its  parts,  and  if  these  parts  are  taken  to  pieces  the  organ¬
ism  is  destroyed  and  cannot  be  reconstituted  by  again  put¬
ting  together  the  severed  parts.  These  parts  are  in  active
relations  to  each  other,  which  vary  with  the  parts  and  the
organisms;  but  in  no  case  is  there  anything  inactive  or  inert
about  the  relations  of  these  parts  to  each  other  or  to  the
whole  organism.  The  organism  further  has  the  power  of
maintaining  itself  by  taking  in  other  parts,  such  as  food,  but
again,  as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  it  does  so  not  by  mere
mechanical  addition,  but  by  a  complete  transformation,  as¬
similation  and  appropriation  into  its  own  peculiar  system
of  the  material  so  taken  in.  Moreover,  the  organism  is
creative  in  that  it  is  capable,  under  certain  conditions,  of
reproducing  itself  in  closely  similar  wholes.

This  rough  summary  is  sufficient  to  indicate  the  main
general  characters  of  biological  wholes.  When  we  reach
the  more  advanced  levels  of  development  in  the  higher
animals  and  man,  we  are  confronted  with  additional
characters  of  a  psychological  nature,  such  as  intelligence,
will,  consciousness,  central  control  and  direction  of  a  more
or  less  voluntary  and  deliberate  kind.  For  our  present


102


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


purpose  of  a  preliminary  survey  in  this  chapter  we  need  not
consider  these  characters  more  closely.  But  it  is  necessary
that  we  should  form  a  clearer  conception  of  the  differences
which  distinguish  a  whole  in  the  above  sense  from  something
which  is  not  a  whole.

In  the  first  place,  I  wish  to  emphasise  that  a  whole  accord¬
ing  to  the  view  here  presented  is  not  simple,  but  composite
and  consists  of  parts.  Natural  wholes  such  as  organisms
are  not  simple  but  complex  or  composite,  consisting  of  many
parts  in  active  relation  and  interaction  of  one  kind  or
another,  and  the  parts  may  be  themselves  lesser  wholes,
such  as  cells  in  an  organism.  Wholes  are  composites
and  not  simples.  The  idea  of  a  whole  as  a  simple  unique
individual  entity  is  a  metaphysical  view  which  we  have
to  guard  against.  Philosophy  has  elaborated  the  concept
of  a  unique  whole  which  is  really  an  absolute,  indestruc¬
tible  and  unchangeable.  Plato  in  the  Phcedo,  for  instance,
presented  the  human  soul  as  such  a  whole,  and  from  its
indivisibility  derived  an  argument  in  favour  of  its  im¬
mortality.  What  is  simple,  indivisible  and  ultimate  must
necessarily  also  be  indestructible.  Natural  wholes  accord¬
ing  to  my  view,  however,  are  not  such  simple  indivisible
entities,  which  are  really  philosophic  abstractions.

Then,  again,  the  philosophic  conception  leaves  no  room
for  change,  movement  or  development  of  a  whole.  The
whole  or  absolute  of  philosophy  is  necessarily  static.  The
simple  unique  ultimate  whole  cannot  change  or  develop.
It  is  what  it  is  unchangeably.  It  negatives  the  idea  of
Evolution  which  is  essential  to  the  conception  of  wholes  as
here  presented.  The  view  of  the  universe  as  a  whole  or  an
absolute  in  the  philosophic  sense  leaves  no  room  for  progress
or  development,  and  is  in  conflict  with  all  the  teachings  of
experience  and  all  the  most  significant  results  of  science.
The  parts  indeed  may  move  and  change,  their  relations
inter  se  may  show  a  flux  to  which  the  name  of  development
may  be  given.  But  it  will  not  be  real  creative  development.
The  absolute  whole  of  philosophy  is  immutable,  withdrawn
in  itself,  and  unlike  anything  of  which  we  have  experience


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT.  OF  HOLISM  103

in  this  world.  The  idea  of  Evolution  as  creative  is  the  very
antithesis  of  this  static  absoluteness.  -  And  this  idea  must  be
decisive  for  us.  Anything  which  militates  against  the  idea
of  the  universe  as  progress  and  creative  must  be  discarded
by  us.  The  creative  whole  or  Holism  must  not  be  confused
with  the  philosophic  whole  or  absolute.

Having  warned  against  a  philosophical  misconception,
let  me  proceed  to  guard  against  a  still  more  dangerous
scientific  misconception.  The  mechanical  view  of  the
universe  which  has  been,  and  to  a  large  extent  still  is,
dominant  in  science  is  in  one  degree  or  another  at  variance
with  the  conception  here  brought  forward.

The  whole  is  not  a  mere  mechanical  system.  It  consists
indeed  of  parts,  but  it  is  more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts,
which  a  purely  mechanical  system  necessarily  is.  The
essence  of  a  mechanical  system  is  the  absence  of  all  inward¬
ness,  of  all  inner  tendencies  and  relations  and  activities  of
the  system  or  its  parts.  All  action  in  a  mechanical  system
is  external,  being  either  the  external  action  of  the  mechanical
body  on  some  other  body,  or  the  external  action  of  the  latter
on  the  former.  And  similarly  when  the  parts  of  the  body
or  system  are  considered,  the  only  action  of  which  they  are
capable  is  their  external  action  on  each  other  or  on  the  body
generally.  There  is  no  inwardness  of  action  or  function
either  on  the  part  of  the  body  or  its  parts.  Such  is  a
mechanical  body,  and  only  such  bodies  have  been  assumed
to  exist  on  the  mechanistic  hypothesis.  A  whole,  which  is
more  than  the  sum  of  its  parts,  has  something  internal,  some
inwardness  of  structure  and  function,  some  specific
inner  relations,  some  internality  of  character  or  nature,
which  constitutes  that  more.  And  it  is  for  us  in  this
inquiry  to  try  to  elucidate  what  that  more  is.  The
point  to  grasp  at  this  stage  is  that,  while  the  mechanical
theory  assumes  only  external  action  as  alone  capable  of
mathematical  treatment,  and  banishes  all  inner  action,
relation  or  function,  the  theory  of  the  whole,  on  the
contrary,  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  in  addition  to
external  action  between  bodies,  there  is  also  an  additional


104


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


interior  element  or  action  of  bodies  which  are  wholes,  and
that  this  element  or  action  is  of  a  specific  ascertainable
character.

Wholes  are  therefore  composites  which  have  an  internal
structure,  function  or  character  which  clearly  differentiates
them  from  mere  mechanical  additions  or  constructions,  such
as  science  assumes  on  the  mechanical  hypothesis.  And  this
internal  element  which  transforms  a  mere  mechanical
addition  or  sum  into  a  whole  shows  a  progressive  develop¬
ment  in  Nature.  Wholes  are  dynamic,  organic,  evolu¬
tionary,  creative.  The  mere  idea  of  creativeness  should  be
enough  to  negative  the  purely  mechanical  conception  of  the
universe.

It  is  very  important  to  recognise  that  the  whole  is  not
something  additional  to  the  parts:  it  is  the  parts  in  a  definite
structural  arrangement  and  with  mutual  activities  that
constitute  the  whole.  The  structure  and  the  activities
differ  in  character  according  to  the  stage  of  development  of
the  whole;  but  the  whole  is  just  this  specific  structure  of
parts  with  their  appropriate  activities  and  functions.  Thus
water  as  a  chemical  compound  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  whole
in  a  limited  sense,  an  incipient  whole,  differing  qualitatively
from  its  uncompounded  elements  Hydrogen  and  Oxygen
in  a  mere  state  of  mixture;  it  is  a  new  specific  structure
with  new  physical  and  chemical  properties.  The  whole  as  a
biological  organism  is  an  immensely  more  complex  structure
with  vastly  more  complex  activities  and  functions  than  a
mere  chemical  compound.  But  it  must  not  be  conceived
as  something  over  and  above  its  parts  in  their  structural
synthesis,  including  the  unique  activities  and  functions
which  accompany  this  synthesis.  It  is  the  very  essence  of
the  concept  of  the  whole  that  the  parts  are  together  in  a
unique  specific  combination,  in  a  specific  internal  related¬
ness,  in  a  creative  synthesis  which  differentiates  it  from
all  other  forms  of  combination  or  togetherness.  The
combination  of  the  elements  into  this  structure  is  in  a
sense  creative,  that  is  to  say,  creative  of  new  structure
and  new  properties  and  functions.  These  properties  and


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  105

functions  have  themselves  a  creative  or  holistic  char¬
acter,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  sequel.  At  the  start  the
fact  of  structure  is  all-important  in  wholes,  but  as  we  ascend
the  scale  of  wholes,  we  see  structure  becoming  secondary  to
function,  we  see  function  becoming  the  dominant  feature  of
the  whole,  we  see  it  as  a  correlation  of  all  the  activities  of
the  structure  and  effecting  new  syntheses  which  are  more
and  more  of  a  creative  character.

There  is  a  creative  activity,  progress  and  development  of
wholes,  and  the  successive  phases  of  this  creative  Evolution
are  marked  by  the  development  of  ever  more  complex  and
significant  wholes.  Thus  there  arises  a  progressive  scale  of
wholes,  rising  from  the  material  bodies  of  inorganic  nature
through  the  plant  and  animal  kingdoms  to  man  and  the
great  ideal  and  artistic  creations  of  the  spiritual  world.
However  much  the  wholes  may  increase  in  complexity  and
fruitful  significance  as  we  go  upward,  the  fundamental
activity  which  produces  these  results  retains  its  specific
holistic  character  all  through.  At  first,  according  to  our
present  knowledge,  it  appears  only  as  a  definite  material
structure  of  energy  units,  as  a  specific  synthesis  or  arrange¬
ment  of  material  parts,  for  instance,  in  a  chemical  compound
or  a  crystal.  We  have  already  seen  how  this  structure
approaches  in  several  respects  the  more  holistic  characters
of  life,  and  it  may  well  be  that  the  future  progress  of  science
will  add  greatly  to  our  evidence  on  this  point.  But  even  as
it  is  now  known,  the  specific  structure  and  character  of  the
chemical  compound  makes  it  a  sort  of  whole,  quite  distinct
from  mere  physical  or  mechanical  mixtures.  As  we  proceed
in  the  rise  of  Nature  we  see  in  plants  how  this  specific  struc¬
ture,  this  synthesis  and  arrangement  of  parts  and  characters,
assumes  a  new  co-operative  character — the  character  of
groups  of  related  activities  which  are  all  co-ordinated  into
intimate  relations  and  functions  so  as  to  preserve  the  plant
and  maintain  its  activities  as  a  whole.  As  we  proceed  to
animals  we  find  not  only  this  intimate  structural  synthesis
of  parts  and  characters  on  a  co-operative  basis  and  with
co-ordinated  functions,  but  in  the  emergence  of  the  central


106  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

nervous  system  or  brain  we  see  a  new  element  of  control
and  direction,  which  transforms  the  whole  system,  makes
its  co-operation  more  complex  and  efficient  and  gives  it  an
entirely  new  range  of  meaning  and  activity.  When  we  come
to  the  human  stage  we  find  the  highest  flowering  of  this
central  control  in  the  human  personality.  We  find  a  range
of  values  and  activities  undreamt  of  at  the  earlier  stages.
And  we  find  these  values  and  activities  themselves  tending
to  become  wholes  in  the  higher  ranges  of  spiritual  and  artistic
production.  The  wholeness  which  was  only  structural,
inchoate,  partial  at  the  beginning  of  the  scale  of  Nature,
here  becomes  to  a  large  extent  dominant  and  all-pervasive.
Holism,  which  on  the  lower  levels  was  working  against
almost  insuperable  obstructions  and  difficulties,  here
emerges  in  a  sense  victorious.  It  is  as  yet  only  a  very
partial  victory.  Even  the  most  complete  human  person¬
ality  and  the  most  perfect  artistic  creation  are  still  full  of
imperfections,  and  are  still  only  an  approximation  to  the
ideal  wholeness.  And  Holism,  standing  on  that  high  level
of  attainment  in  the  human,  points  the  way  to  the  future,
and  shows  that  in  wholeness,  in  the  creation  of  ever  more
perfect  wholes,  lies  the  inner  meaning  and  trend  of  the
universe.  It  is  as  if  the  Great  Creative  Spirit  hath  said:
“Behold,  I  make  all  things  whole.”

The  stages  in  which  Holism  expresses  itself  and  creates
wholes  in  the  progressive  phases  of  reality  may  therefore
be  roughly  and  provisionally  summarised  as  follows:

1.  Definite  material  structure  or  synthesis  of  parts  in
natural  bodies  but  with  no  more  internal  activity
known  at  present  than  that  of  mere  physical  or  chemical
forces  or  energies:  e.g.  in  a  chemical  compound.

2.  Functional  structure  in  living  bodies,  where  the
parts  in  this  specific  synthesis  become  actively  co¬
operative  and  function  jointly  for  the  maintenance  of
the  body:  e.g.  in  a  plant.

3.  This  specific  co-operative  activity  becomes  co¬
ordinated  or  regulated  by  some  marked  central  control


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  107

which  is  still  mostly  implicit  and  unconscious:  e.g.
in  an  animal.

4.  The  central  control  becomes  conscious  and  cul¬
minates  in  Personality;  at  the  same  time  it  emerges
in  more  composite  holistic  groups  in  Society.

5.  In  human  associations  this  central  control  be¬
comes  super-individual  in  the  State  and  similar  group
organisations.

6.  Finally,  there  emerge  the  ideal  wholes,  or  Holistic
Ideals,  or  Absolute  Values,  disengaged  and  set  free  from
human  personality,  operating  as  creative  factors  on  their
own  account  in  the  upbuilding  of  a  spiritual  world.
Such  are  the  Ideals  of  Truth,  Beauty  and  Goodness,
which  lay  the  foundations  of  a  new  order  in  the  universe.

Through  all  these  stages  we  see  the  ever-deepening  nature
of  the  Whole  as  a  specific  structural  synthesis  of  parts  with
inner  activities  of  its  own  which  co-operate  and  function  in
harmony,  either  naturally  or  instinctively  or  consciously.
The  parts  so  co-operate  and  co-function  towards  a  definite
inherent  inner  end  of  purpose  that  together  they  constitute
and  form  a  whole  more  or  less  of  a  distinctive  character,
with  an  identity  and  an  ever-increasing  measure  of  individu¬
ality  of  its  own.  And  the  whole  thus  formed  is  creative  at
all  stages,  even  at  the  first,  although  this  is  only  an  inchoate,
immature  stage.  We  thus  arrive  at  the  conception  of  a
universe  which  is  not  a  collection  of  accidents  externally
put  together  like  an  artificial  patchwork,  but  which  is
synthetic,  structural,  active,  vital  and  creative  in  increasing
measure  all  through,  the  progressive  development  of  which
is  shaped  by  one  unique  holistic  activity  operative  from  the
humblest  inorganic  beginnings  to  the  most  exalted  creations
and  ideals  of  the  human  and  of  the  universal  Spirit.

We  find  thus  a  great  unifying  creative  tendency  of  a
specific  holistic  character  in  the  universe,  operating  through
and  sustaining  the  forces  and  activities  of  nature  and  life  and
mind,  and  giving  ever  more  of  a  distinctive  holistic  character
to  the  universe.  This  creative  tendency  or  principle  we  call


108  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

Holism.  Holism  in  all  its  endless  forms  is  the  principle
which  works  up  the  raw  material  or  unorganised  energy
units  of  the  world,  utilises,  assimilates  and  organises  them,
endows  them  with  specific  structure  and  character  and
individuality,  and  finally  with  personality,  and  creates
beauty  and  truth  and  value  from  them.  And  it  does  all
this  through  a  definite  method  of  whole-making,  which  it
pursues  with  ever-increasing  intensity  from  the  beginning
to  the  end,  through  things  and  plants  and  beasts  and  men.
Thus  it  is  that  a  scale  of  wholes  forms  the  ladder  of  Evolu¬
tion.  It  is  through  a  continuous  and  universal  process  of
whole-making  that  reality  rises  step  by  step,  until  from  the
poor  empty,  worthless  stuff  of  its  humble  beginnings  it
builds  the  spiritual  world  beyond  our  greatest  dreams.

The  concept  of  the  whole  as  a  means  of  tracing  the  evolu¬
tion  of  reality  has  several  advantages.  In  the  first  place,
as  the  whole  is  at  once  both  structural  and  expressive  of  an
inner  general  principle  or  tendency,  its  concept  is  as  it  were
a  working  model  of  the  natural  wholes  we  find  in  the  uni¬
verse,  and  is  as  near  as  we  could  get  to  that  concrete  char¬
acter  of  reality  to  which  we  should  have  the  closest  regard.
The  concept  of  Holism  and  the  whole  is  as  nearly  as  possible
a  replica  of  Nature’s  observed  process,  and  its  application
will  prevent  us  from  appearing  to  run  the  stuff  of  reality
into  a  mould  alien  to  Nature.  It  will,  therefore,  enable  us
to  explain  Nature  from  herself,  so  to  say,  and  by  her  own
standards.  In  this  way  justice  can  be  done  to  the  concrete
character  of  natural  phenomena.

In  the  second  place  the  fundamental  concept  of  Holism
will  bring  us  nearer  to  that  unitary  or  monistic  conception
of  the  universe  which  is  the  immanent  ideal  of  all  scientific
and  philosophic  explanation.  At  the  same  time  it  will
enable  us  to  bridge  the  chasms  and  to  resolve  the  antin¬
omies  which  divide  the  concepts  of  matter,  life  and  mind
inter  se.  Their  absolute  separateness  as  concepts  is  over¬
come  and  their  actual  overlapping  (in  the  way  we  have  seen)
is  explained,  by  viewing  them  as  phases  of  the  development
of  a  more  fundamental  activity  in  the  universe.  The  concept


V


GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM


109


of  Holism,  so  to  say,  dissolves  the  heterogeneous  concepts
of  matter,  life  and  mind,  and  then  recrystallises  them  out  as
polymorphous  forms  of  itself.  The  monism  which  results
is  not  static  or  barren,  as  monism  necessarily  is  in  the
philosophy  of  Absolutism,  but  progressive,  creative  and
pluralistic  in  accordance  with  the  demands  of  scientific
theory.  We  shall  thus  be  prepared  to  find  more  of  life  in
matter,  and  more  of  mind  in  life,  because  the  hard-and-fast
demarcations  between  them  have  fallen  away.  While  accept¬
ing  these  terms  (matter,  life  and  mind)  as  generally  and
roughly  marking  off  the  main  divisions  of  reality,  we  shall
not  be  tempted  to  force  their  application  too  far,  and  we
shall  be  prepared  for  such  limits  to  their  extensions  as
science  may  show  to  be  necessary.

In  the  third  place,  a  very  real  advantage  will  accrue  from
the  substitution  of  a  more  definite  concept  for  the  vague
and  unsatisfactory  idea  of  life.  The  vagueness  and  indefi¬
niteness  of  the  idea  of  life  has  proved  a  serious  stumbling-
block  and  has  largely  influenced  biologists  to  look  for  the
way  out  in  the  direction  of  mechanism.  The  concept  of
life  has  no  definite  content  which  makes  it  of  any  scientific
value.  Its  value  is  roughly  to  demarcate  an  area  from
other  areas;  it  is  a  name  for  a  class  of  phenomena  which
differ  generally  from  other  classes.  As  such  it  will  remain
useful  in  Science,  in  addition  to  its  popular  use,  which  of
course  no  amount  of  criticism  will  ever  affect.  The  term
“matter”  will  remain  in  popular  use  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  Science  may  completely  change  its  meaning;  its
connotation  may  be  revolutionised  while  it  remains  in  use
to  denote  a  class  of  sensible  phenomena  for  which  there  is
no  other  equally  convenient  name.  Similarly  with  the  use
of  the  term  “  life.”  It  will  remain  useful  to  denote  a  class
of  phenomena,  without  it  remaining  or  being  useful  in
describing  them,  which  will  have  to  be  done  through  more
rigorous  concepts.  The  concept  of  life  is  too  vague  to  be
definable  and  pinned  down  to  a  definite  content;  at  the
same  time,  and  perhaps  for  that  very  reason,  it  is  liable  to
be  hypostatised  into  a  substance  or  a  force  apart  from  the


no


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


organism  which  it  denotes.  It  is  this  abuse,  in  addition  to
its  indefiniteness,  which  has  led  to  its  abandonment  by  the
great  majority  of  biologists  who  have  preferred  to  see  in  life
nothing  but  a  specific  type  of  mechanism.  I  suggest  that
the  substitution,  for  scientific  and  philosophic  purposes,  of
the  concept  of  the  whole  for  life  would  give  far  more  preci¬
sion  to  the  underlying  idea.  Thus  a  definite  concept,  whose
properties  could  be  investigated  and  defined,  would  take
the  place  of  a  vague  expression,  already  ruined  by  popular
use  and  abuse.  A  living  organism  is  not  an  organism  plus
life,  as  if  life  were  something  different  and  additional  to  it;
it  is  just  the  organism  in  its  unique  character  as  a  whole,
which  can  be  closely  defined.  The  sense  in  which  it  differs
from  a  chemical  compound  considered  as  a  whole  is  also
capable  of  accurate  definition;  and  thus  it  is  quite  unneces¬
sary  to  resort  to  the  dubious  concept  of  mechanism  in  order
to  describe  the  living  organism  or,  as  I  prefer  to  call  it,  the
holistic  organism.  The  concept  of  the  whole  enables  us  to
use  a  technical  scientific  terminology,  which  is  not  vitiated
by  popular  usage,  and  which  is  capable  of  accurate  definition
and  description.

The  substitution  of  the  concept  or  the  category  of  the
whole  for  that  of  life  will  probably  be  found  a  solvent  for
many  of  the  most  perplexing  problems  in  biology  as  well  as
the  philosophy  of  life.  The  whole  connects  not  only  with
the  physical  on  the  one  side  and  the  psychical  on  the  other,
thus  maintaining  the  contacts  of  Nature;  it  brings  to  bear  a
perfectly  definite  and  intelligible  concept  on  the  phenomena
of  “life,”  for  which  hitherto  no  other  definite  category  has
been  found  except  the  other  misleading  and  misplaced  one
of  mechanism.

In  the  foregoing  I  have  tried  to  give  some  preliminary
and  introductory  sketch  of  the  concept  of  the  whole,  which
will  be  further  developed  and  filled  in  as  this  inquiry  pro¬
ceeds.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  I  have  omitted  reference  to
an  important  feature  in  that  concept  which  I  must  now  pro¬
ceed  to  mention  and  explain.  I  have  stated  that  by  the  whole
I  mean,  not  the  All-Whole  of  Absolutist  philosophy,  but  the


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  ni

whole  as  exemplified  and  operative  in  small  natural  centres
or  empirical  wholes  such  as  we  observe  in  Nature.  I  must
now  add  that  by  the  whole  I  mean  this  whole  plus  its  field,
its  field  not  as  something  different  and  additional  to  it,  but
as  the  continuation  of  it  beyond  the  sensible  contours  of
experience.  I  have  before  drawn  attention  to  the  vital
importance  of  this  concept,  and  I  now  proceed  to  explain
and  emphasise  this  point  more  fully.

Perhaps  the  most  important  contribution  which  the  Theory
of  Relativity  has  made  to  our  understanding  of  reality  is  the
integration  of  time  with  our  spatial  conceptions  of  the
sensible  world.  We  are  too  prone  to  look  at  things  merely
in  their  spatial  relations,  to  consider  them  merely  as  objects
in  space.  They  are  just  as  much  events  in  time,  coming
from  the  past,  enduring  through  the  present,  and  reaching
out  into  the  future.  As  we  have  seen,  they  are  not  static
but  dynamic  in  their  inmost  structure,  they  are  moving  and
active  in  Space-Time;  and  indeed  their  active  energy  is
their  very  essence,  much  more  than  the  mere  static  spatial
appearance  which  they  present  to  the  observer.  As  merely
extended,  spatial  and  external,  objects  are  barren  abstract
concepts  and  not  the  sections  of  concrete  reality  which  we
know  them  to  be.  It  is  the  time-factor  that  makes  all  the
difference;  Time  integrated  with  Space  is  active  and  creative,
and  productive  of  reality.  The  sensible  objects  and  things
of  which  we  are  aware  in  Nature  are  active  energy  systems
in  Space-Time;  they  are  events  even  more  than  objects
and  things;  they  are  concentrated  centres  of  happening  in
the  physical  sense  just  as,  at  a  higher  stage  of  evolution,  we
find  minds  as  active  concentrated  centres  of  experience.
To  understand  Nature  properly  it  is  essential  that  we  should
habituate  ourselves  to  look  upon  material  bodies  or  things
literally  as  events,  as  centres  of  happening,  and  upon  the
time  element  in  them  as  being  no  less  important  than  the
sensible  space  element.  The  limitation  of  objects  or  things
to  their  space  relations  or  aspects  obscures  and  distorts  their
real  character  for  us  and  has  to  be  got  rid  of  at  all  costs.

The  effect  of  another  serious  limiting  factor  in  our  sensible


1 1 2


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


experience  has  to  be  recognised  and  eliminated.  I  have
already  referred  to  Bergson’s  description  of  the  intelligence
as  a  selective,  discriminative,  eliminative,  limiting  factor
in  our  experience  of  the  world.  But  the  trouble  really  goes
deeper  than  that.  Not  only  our  intellect  but  our  senses
also  show  the  same  tendency  and  defects.  All  our  senses  are
definitely  limited  and  reveal  to  us  directly  only  a  limited
narrow  range  of  the  properties  of  things.  It  is  one  of  the
main  tasks  of  Science  to  construct  instruments  which  will
supplement  the  limitations  of  our  senses.  An  object  just
visible  to  the  naked  eye  presents  a  very  different  appearance
when  seen  through  a  powerful  microscope.  The  microscope,
the  telescope,  the  spectroscope,  micro-photography,  the
X-ray  spectrum  with  its  revelation  of  the  constitution  of
the  atom — all  these  and  many  more  are  devices  to  extend
our  senses  beyond  their  limited  natural  range.  The  com¬
bined  effect  of  our  limited  sensibility  and  the  practical
selective  character  of  our  intelligence  accounts  in  part  for
the  fact  that  things  appear  to  us  limited  in  size  and  form,
with  definite  contours  and  margins  and  surfaces  beyond
which  they  do  not  go  and  come  to  a  dead  stop.  This  dead
stop  is  an  illusion  largely  due  to  the  defects  of  our  natural
apparatus  of  observation.  The  activities  which  constitute
the  thing  go  beyond  the  sensible  contours.  The  material
part  which  we  popularly  call  the  thing  is  merely  the  con¬
centrated  sensible  focus  which  discloses  itself  to  our  limited
sensibility  and  selective  intelligence;  beyond  that  it  is  the
dark  “field”  which  is  formed  by  the  activities  and  properties
of  the  thing  beyond  its  sensible  focal  centre.  We  have  seen
in  Chapter  III  how  the  inner  structure  of  matter  results  in
certain  physical  and  chemical  properties  which  constitute
its  field.  The  field  is  as  much  an  integral  part  of  matter  as
the  sensible  part  which  it  surrounds.  Anything  coming
within  that  field  will  be  affected  by  it;  the  field  shows  the
same  properties  as  the  thing.  The  field  may  be  viewed  either
as  activities  or  as  structure — as  elements  of  force  or  as
curves.  Indeed  from  many  points  of  view  structure  and
function,  curve  and  force  are  convertible  terms  for  the  pur-


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  113

pose  of  describing  physical  effects.  The  essential  point  is  that
the  physical  field  is  an  extension  of  the  active  energy  system
of  the  thing  beyond  its  sensible  outlines,  an  extension  which
shows  the  same  properties  and  has  the  same  effects  on  other
things  within  that  field  as  the  thing  itself,  though  with  ever-
diminishing  force  or  strength  as  the  field  recedes  from  the
thing.  I  have  already  explained  how  this  concept  of  the
field  renders  intelligible  the  phenomena  of  physical  action
at  a  distance  as  well  as  of  physical  causation.  So  far  a
body  acts  or  is  acted  upon  by  external  bodies  this  process
takes  place  in  its  field  and  nowhere  else.  In  their  fields
bodies  interpenetrate  each  other  and  thus  secure  that  con¬
tinuity  between  them  which  supplies  the  bridge  for  the  pas¬
sage  of  change  between  them.

So  much  for  purely  physical  fields.  In  the  consideration
of  organisms  as  wholes  the  question  of  the  field  becomes
much  more  important  than  in  the  case  of  physical  bodies.
What  is  the  field  of  an  organism?  Many  will  be  tempted  to
reply  offhand  that  it  is  its  environment.  That  answer  will,
however,  be  too  wide  and  may  be  seriously  misleading.  The
environment  is  a  confused  complex  concept,  and  there  is
much  more  in  it  than  belongs  to  the  field  of  a  particular
organism.  The  field  of  an  organism  is  its  extension  beyond
its  sensible  limits,  it  is  the  more  there  is  in  the  organism
beyond  these  limits.  To  get  to  the  field  of  an  organism
we  have  to  answer  this  question:  In  order  fully  to  under¬
stand  the  nature,  functions  and  activities  of  an  organism,
what  more  is  necessary  to  its  concept  beyond  its  sensible
data?  An  organism  appears  a  mystery  because  the  sensible
data  are  insufficient  to  account  for  its  character  and  proper¬
ties.  Biologists  dissect  and  ransack  its  sensible  structure
to  find  there  the  physical  basis  and  explanation  of  its  activi¬
ties;  but  in  doing  so  they  put  a  weight  upon  that  struc¬
ture  which  is  often  more  than  it  can  bear.  For  the  fact
is  that  the  sensible  structure  i^  not  the  whole  structure,  and
is  too  narrow  a  base  for  the  superstructure  of  organic
activities  which  seem  to  grow  from  out  of  the  sensible
structure.  For  the  full  explanation  of  these  activities  we


1 14  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

have  to  search  another  part  of  the  structure  which  is  not
sensible  and  has  on  that  account  been  ignored  hitherto;  I
refer  to  the  field.  Biologists  have  tried  to  find  in  the  or¬
ganic  structure  physical  elements  or  mechanisms  to  account
for  all  the  properties  and  functions  of  the  organism.  But
there  are  literally  not  sufficient  sensible  elements  to  go
round;  the  infinity  of  variations  which  take  place  in  organic
life  vastly  transcend  the  apparent  structural  organisation.
A  minute  speck  of  protoplasm  is  supposed  to  carry  in  its
structure,  on  a  sort  of  point  to  point  correspondence,  the
hereditary  experience  of  the  race  for  untold  millions  of  years,
and  this  structure  is  in  addition  required  to  account  for  much
more  besides  in  the  individual  life.  The  industry  and  in¬
genuity  which  have  been  displayed  in  this  search  for  the
inner  mechanisms  are  above  praise,  but  beyond  a  certain
point  the  search  is  certain  to  be  vain;  results  become  mere
guess-work,  and  the  very  existence  of  the  structures  and
mechanisms  sought  for  is  more  than  problematic.  The
concept  of  the  field  overcomes  this  difficulty.  According
to  this  view  the  sensible  structure  is  a  narrow  concentrated
sensible  focus  beyond  which  is  indefinitely  extended  an  in¬
sensible  structural  field  as  the  carrier  of  organic  properties.
And  the  question  arises  how  we  have  to  conceive  this  field
and  what  there  is  in  it.  What  has  been  said  of  the  Time
factor  in  the  physical  field  applies  with  tenfold  more  force
here.  The  organism  much  more  than  the  physical  body  is
an  historic  event,  a  focus  of  happening,  a  gateway  through
which  the  infinite  stream  of  change  flows  ceaselessly.  The
sensible  organism  is  only  a  point,  a  sort  of  transit  station
which  stands  for  an  infinite  past  of  development,  for  the
history  and  experience  of  untold  millions  of  ancestors,  and  in
a  vague  indefinite  way  for  the  future  which  will  include
an  indefinite  number  of  descendants.  The  past,  the  pres¬
ent,  the  future  all  meet  in  that  little  structural  centre,  that
little  wayside  station  on  the  infinite  trail  of  life.  But  they
only  meet  there,  without  its  being  able  to  contain  them
all.  From  that  centre  radiates  off  a  field  of  ever-decreas¬
ing  intensity  of  structure  or  force,  which  represents  what


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  115

has  endured  of  that  past,  and  what  is  vaguely  anticipated
of  the  future.  The  organism  and  its  field  is  one  continuous
structure  which,  beginning  with  an  articulated  sensible  cen¬
tral  area,  gradually  shades  off  into  indefiniteness.  In  this
continuum  is  contained  all  of  the  past  which  has  been  con¬
served  and  still  operates  to  influence  the  present  and  the
future  of  the  organism;  in  it  also  is  contained  all  that  the
organism  is  and  does  in  the  present;  and  finally,  in  it  is
contained  all  that  the  organism  vaguely  points  to  in  its  own
future  development  and  that  of  its  offspring.  In  other
words,  the  organism  and  its  field,  or  the  organism  as  a
whole  ’  the  holistic  organism — contains  its  past  and  much
of  its  future  in  its  present.  These  elements  are  in  it  as  active
factors,  the  future  and  the  past  interacting  with  the  present.
The  whole  is  there,  carrying  all  its  time  with  it,  but  clear
and  definite  only  for  a  small  central  area,  and  beyond  that
more  and  more  fading  away  in  respect  of  the  dim  past  and
the  dimmer  future.  And  this  time  is  not  the  abstract  time
of  mechanics,  but  real  creative  passage  or  duration  in  the
Bergsonian  sense. .  The  biological  whole  is  fully  explained
not  merely  in  the  light  of  its  past  and  its  present  but  also  of
its  future.  The  force  which  it  exerts  in  its  field  is  the  ex¬
pression  of  its  total  time  factor.  It  is  impossible  to  over¬
estimate  the  importance  of  this  time  factor  in  the  develop¬
ment  and  consequently  in  the  explanation  of  organism.  An
organism  is  a  continuous  autogenesis:  behind  it  is  its  phy-
logeny,  which  it  partially  repeats  in  its  individual  history,
and  which  in  any  case  is  a  powerful  factor  in  its  individual
development;  before  it,  again,  is  the  future  to  which  it
points,  not  only  as  general  orientation  of  coming  develop¬
ment,  but  more  specially  as  the  realisation  of  the  potentiali¬
ties  which  it  holds  as  the  seeds  of  the  future.  The  pull  of
the  future  is  almost  as  much  upon  it  as  the  push  of  the  past,
and  both  are  essential  to  the  character,  functions  and  activi¬
ties  which  it  displays  in  the  present.  But  without  the  con¬
cept  and  the  imagery  of  the  field,  which  contains  both  the
future  and  the  past  in  the  whole,  it  would  be  difficult  to
render  the  presence  and  the  operation  of  the  future  as  a


1x6  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

factor  in  organic  activity  and  development  intelligible.  The
current  view  of  structure  restricts  it  entirely  to  the  past
and  explains  it  as  a  product  of  the  past,  and  therefore  fails
to  give  a  complete  view  of  it.  It  is  unnecessary  at  this  stage
to  explore  other  factors  in  the  field  of  organism,  as  we
shall  have  to  make  further  use  of  the  concept  of  the  field
when  we  come  to  consider  the  principles  of  organic  Evolu¬
tion  in  Chapter  VIII.  Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that
in  biology,  perhaps  even  more  than  in  physics,  the  concept
may  prove  helpful  in  the  elucidation  of  phenomena  which  it
is  almost  impossible  to  explain  on  the  narrow  and  confined
basis  of  the  existing  organic  concepts.

In  explaining  the  important  topics  with  which  this  chap¬
ter  deals  I  do  not  know  in  how  far  I  have  succeeded  in  mak¬
ing  my  meaning  clear.  Nor  do  I  feel  sure  that  the  ideas
here  developed  have  been  presented  in  their  best  or  final
form.  It  is  quite  possible  that  in  more  expert  hands  they
may  prove  capable  of  better  statement  and  more  skilful
development.  I  trust,  however,  that  what  seems  unclear
and  doubtful  at  this  stage  will  become  both  intelligible  and
acceptable  in  the  following  chapters,  where  the  concepts  of
this  chapter  will  be  further  developed  and  applied  in  the
explanation  of  organic  and  psychic  Evolution.

Let  me  conclude  with  a  word  on  nomenclature,  intended
to  prevent  ambiguity  and  misconception  in  the  sequel.  Ac¬
cording  to  the  view  expounded  in  this  chapter  the  whole
in  each  individual  case  is  the  centre  and  creative  source
of  reality.  It  is  the  real  factor  from  which  the  rest  in  each
case  follows.  But  there  is  an  infinity  of  such  wholes  com¬
prising  all  the  grades  of  existence  in  the  universe;  and  it
becomes  necessary  to  have  a  general  term  which  will  include
and  cover  all  wholes  as  such  under  one  concept.  For  this
the  term  Holism  has  been  coined;  Holism  thus  comprises
all  wholes  in  the  universe.  It  is  thus  both  a  concept  and  a
factor:  a  concept  as  standing  for  all  wholes,  a  factor
because  the  wholes  it  denotes  are  the  real  factors  in  the  uni¬
verse.  We  speak  of  matter  as  including  all  particles  of
matter  in  the  universe:  in  the  same  way  we  shall  speak  of


v  GENERAL  CONCEPT  OF  HOLISM  1x7

Holism  as  including  all  wholes  which  are  the  ultimate  crea¬
tive  centres  of  reality  in  the  world.

Difficulty  may  arise  because  Holism  will  sometimes  also
be  used  in  another  sense,  to  denote  a  theory  of  the  uni¬
verse.  Thus  while  matter  and  spirit  are  taken  as  real  or
substantive  factors,  and  material-ism  and  spiritual-ism  or
ideal-ism  as  concepts  or  theories  in  reference  to  them  re¬
spectively,  it  would  by  analogy  not  be  improper  to  use  the
term  Hol-ism  to  express  the  view  that  the  ultimate  reality
of  the  universe  is  neither  matter  nor  spirit  but  wholes  as
defined  in  this  book.  And  sometimes  Holism  will  be  used  in
that  wider  sense  as  a  theory  of  reality.  But  its  primary  and
proper  use  is  to  denote  the  totality  of  wholes  which  operate
as  real  factors  and  give  to  reality  its  dynamic  evolutionary
creative  character.  No  confusion  need  arise  if  these  two
distinct  applications  of  the  term  are  borne  in  mind.


CHAPTER  VI


SOME  FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES  OF  HOLISM

Summary, — Avoiding  as  far  as  possible  philosophical  categories
and  confining  ourselves  to  scientific  view-points,  we  shall  now  try
to  consider  more  closely  the  concept  of  the  whole  and  the  results
flowing  from  it.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  concept  of  the
whole  means  not  a  general  tendency  but  a  type  of  structure,  a
scheme  or  framework,  which,  however,  can  only  be  filled  with  con¬
crete  details  by  actual  experience.  A  whole  is  then  a  synthesis  or
structure  of  parts  in  which  the  synthesis  becomes  ever  closer  so  as
materially  to  affect  the  character  of  the  functions  or  activities
which  become  correspondingly  more  unified  (or  holistic).  It  is,
however,  important  to  realise  that  the  whole  is  not  some  tertium
quid  over  and  above  the  parts  which  compose  it;  it  is  the  parts
in  their  intimate  union,  and  the  new  reactions  which  result  from
that  union.  But  in  that  union  the  parts  themselves  are  more  or
less  affected  and  altered  towards  the  type  represented  by  the
union,  so  that  the  whole  is  evidenced  in  a  change  of  parts  as  well
as  a  change  of  resulting  functions.

The  whole  thus  appears  as  a  marked  power  of  regulation  and
co-ordination  in  respect  of  both  the  structure  and  the  functioning
of  the  parts.  This  is  probably  the  most  striking  feature  of  organ-
isms — that  they  involve  a  balanced  correlation  of  organs  and
functions.  All  the  various  activities  of  the  several  parts  and
organs  seem  directed  to  central  ends;  there  is  thus  co-operation
and  unified  action  of  the  organism  as  a  whole  instead  of  the
separate  mechanical  activities  of  the  parts.  The  whole  thus
becomes  synonymous  with  unified  (or  holistic)  action.

This  intense  synthesis  and  unification  in  the  action  of  a  whole
involves  a  corresponding  transformation  of  concepts  and  categories.
Thus  while  in  a  mechanical  aggregate  each  part  acts  as  a  separate
cause,  and  the  resultant  activity  is  a  sum  of  the  component  activ¬
ities;  in  organic  activity  or  the  activity  of  the  whole  this  separate
action  or  causation  disappears  in  a  real  synthesis  or  unity  which
makes  the  components  unrecognisable  in  the  unified  result.  Yet
even  here  we  must  realise  that  the  whole  does  not  act  as  a  sep¬
arate  cause,  distinct  from  its  parts,  no  more  than  it  is  itself  some¬
thing  additional  over  and  above  its  parts.  Holism  is  of  the  parts

Il8


chap,  vi  FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES  119

and  acts  through  the  parts,  but  the  parts  in  their  new  relation  of
intimate  synthesis  which  gives  them  their  unified  action.

The  whole,  therefore,  completely  transforms  the  concept  of
Causality.  When  an  external  cause  acts  on  a  whole,  the  resultant
effect  is  not  merely  traceable  to  the  cause,  but  has  become  trans¬
formed  in  the  process.  The  whole  seems  to  absorb  and  metabolise
the  external  stimulus  and  to  assimilate  it  into  its  own  activity;  and
the  resultant  response  is  no  longer  the  passive  effect  of  the  stim¬
ulus  or  cause,  but  appears  as  the  activity  of  the  whole.  This
holistic  transformation  of  causality  takes  place  in  all  organic
stimuli  and  responses.  The  cause  or  stimulus  applied  does  not
issue  in  its  own  passive  effect,  but  in  an  active  response  which
seems  more  clearly  traceable  to  the  organism  or  whole  itself.  In
fact  the  physical  category  of  “cause”  undergoes  a  far-reaching
change  in  its  application  to  organisms  or  wholes  generally.  The
whole  appears  as  the  real  cause  of  the  response,  and  not  the  ex¬
ternal  stimulus,  which  seems  to  play  the  quite  minor  role  of  a
mere  excitant  or  condition.

The  most  important  result  of  the  idea  of  the  whole  is,  however,
the  appearance  of  the  concept  of  Creativeness.  It  is  the  synthesis’
involved  in  the  concept  of  the  whole  which  is  the  source  of  crea¬
tiveness  in  Nature.  Nature  is  creative,  Evolution  is  creative,  just
in  proportion  as  it  consists  of  wholes  which  bring  about  new  struc¬
tural  groupings  and  syntheses.  The  whole  involves  these  new
structural  groupings  out  of  the  old  materials;  and  thus  arises  the
“creativeness”  of  Evolution,  as  well  as  the  novelty  and  initiative
which  we  see  in  organic  Nature.  The  concept  of  creativeness
which  flows  from  that  of  the  whole  has  the  most  far-reaching
effects  in  its  application  to  Nature.  Once  we  grasp  firmly  the
fact  that  Nature  and  Evolution  are  really  creative,  we  are  out  of
the  bonds  of  the  old  crude  mechanical  ideas,  and  we  enter  an
altogether  new  zone  of  ideas  and  categories.  But  the  important
point  for  our  purpose  is  that  “creativeness”  is  simply  a  deduction
from  the  concept  of  the  whole  and  is  characteristic  of  the  order
of  wholes  in  the  universe.  It  is  wholes  and  wholes  only  that  are
creative.  The  formula  omne  vivum  e  vivo  could  therefore  be
generalised  and  applied  to  wholes  generally.  This  creativeness
issues  not  only  in  the  origin  of  new  organic  species,  but  also  in
the  great  Values  which  are  the  creations  of  the  whole  on  the
spiritual  level.

From  this  it  is  clear  how  also  the  concept  of  Freedom  is  rooted
at  of  the  whole,  organic  or  other.  For  the  external  causation
is  absorbed  and  transformed  by  the  subtle  metabolism  of  the
whole  into  something  of  itself;  otherness  becomes  selfness;  the
pressure  of  the  external  is  transformed  into  the  action  of  itself.
Necessity  or  external  determination  is  transformed  into  self-deter-


120


CHAP.


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION

mination  or  Freedom.  And  as  the  series  of  wholes  progresses  the
element  of  Freedom  increases  in  the  universe,  until  finally  at  the
human  stage  Freedom  takes  conscious  control  of  itself  and  begins
to  create  the  free  ethical  world  of  the  spirit.  Holism  thus  becomes
basic  to  the  entire  universe  of  organic  progress  and  free  creative
advance,  to  the  Values  and  Ideals  which  ultimately  give  life  all
of  worth  it  has,  and  to  the  Freedom  which  is  the  condition  of
all  spiritual  as  well  as  organic  progress.

But  Holism  is  seen  not  only  in  the  advance, _  in  the  changes  and
variations  for  ever  going  forward.  It  is  seen  just  as  much  in  the
stability  of  the  great  Types.  The  new  always  arrives  in  the  bosom
of  the  pre-existing  structure,  and  at  its  prompting  and  largely
in  harmony  with  it.  Its  novelty  is  small  compared  to  its  essential
conservatism.  Variation  is  infinitesimal  compared  to  Heredity.
It  is  this  fundamental  unity  or  unitariness  and  wholeness  in  or¬
ganisms  and  organic  Evolution  generally  which  seems  to  explain
their  essential  stability  as  well  as  the  regulation  and  co-ordination
of  the  whole  process, — its  conservative  self-control — if  one  may

use  a  metaphor.  .

The  chapter  concludes  with  a  summary  of  the  functions  which
Holism  exercises  in  the  shaping  of  Evolution.

In  the  last  chapter  the  ideas  of  the  whole  and  Holism
were  sketched  in  a  general  and  preliminary  way.  Before
we  proceed  to  test  the  working  value  of  the  new  ideas  it
will  be  necessary  to  explore  somewhat  more  deeply  into
them.  It  is  the  vagueness  of  the  concept  of  Life  which
makes  it  unsatisfactory  for  scientific  purposes,  and  we
should  make  certain  that  the  concept  of  the  whole,  which
is  intended  to  make  it  definite  for  scientific  purposes,  be
made  as  clear  as  possible.

Let  me  here  say  a  word  about  the  method  we  are  pur¬
suing.  Hitherto  we  have  as  closely  as  possible  followed
the  results  of  science;  we  have  studied  the  fundamental
structures  of  physical  and  biological  science  in  the  atom
and  the  cell,  and  endeavoured  to  frame  a  concept  of  the
whole  on  the  basis  of  those  structures.  I  propose  to  con¬
tinue  to  pursue  this  course,  and  to  explore  and  build  up
the  concept  of  the  whole  from  the  results  of  the  analysis
of  Nature.  We  shall  try  to  understand  what  is  involved
and  implied  in  the  processes  of  the  small  centres  of  unity
in  Nature,  and  derive  as  much  aid  and  illumination  from


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


12  I


them  as  possible;  in  that  way  we  shall  try  to  proceed  as
a  matter  of  method  from  the  apparently  simple  to  the  com¬
plex.  We  nre  trying  to  build  up  a  natural  concept  of  the
whole,  and  for  that  as  'well  as  other  reasons  we  are  avoid¬
ing  a  recourse  to  philosophical  considerations.  The  temp¬
tation  is  very  strong  /or  investigators  when  they  approach
the  domains  of  lif?  and  ipind,  so  different  apparently  from
that  of  physical  science,  t-3  abandon  the  scientific  categories
of  research  for  phiiaso'phical  categories,  and  to  seek  for
an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  life  in  concepts  which
sound  strange  and  alien  to  science.  No  wonder  that  most
biologists,  frightened  by  this  procedure  and  by  this  appeal
to  ideas  and  methods  of  which  they  are  traditionally  sus¬
picious,  react  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  seek  refuge
in  purely  mechanical  ideas  and  explanations  of  the  phe¬
nomena  of  life.  At  first  sight  the  concept  of  the  whole  may
appear  to  wear  a  metaphysical  garb;  but  whatever  its  occa¬
sional  use  in  other  connections,  the  intention  here  is  to
eschew  metaphysics  and  to  hammer  out  a  concept  wffiich
will  supply  a  real  and  deeply  felt  want  in  the  explanation
of  organic  processes,  and  which  will  at  the  same  time  give
expression  to  the  natural  affiliations  of  the  phenomena  of
life  with  those  of  matter  on  the  one  hand  and  of  mind  on
the  other.  We  shall  follow  the  scientific  clues  as  far  as  is
in  any  way  possible  in  the  carrying  out  of  this  intention.
Above  all  it  is  necessary  to  make  the  concept  of  the  whole
as  simple,  clear  and  definite  as  possible.

Let  me  repeat  what  was  said  in  the  last  chapter:  the
whole  is  not  a  general  principle  or  tendency;  it  is  a  struc¬
ture  or  schema.  A  natural  body  or  organism  can  be  an¬
alysed  into  two  factors:  the  form,  structure  or  schema,  and
the  concrete  characters  or  qualities  which  fill  up  that  form
or  structure.  For  these  concrete  characters  or  qualities  we
have  in  every  case  to  rely  on  experience;  the  redness,  hard¬
ness,  wetness  or  smell  of  a  thing  or  the  characters  of  an
animal  can  only  be  learnt  from  obser\jation  or  experience
in  any  particular  case.  But  the  form  or  structure  involves
features  which  can  be  most  conveniently  generalised  into


SOUTHERN  CALIFORNIA  SCHOOt
OF  THEOLOGY  LIBRARY


122


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


concepts,  and  if  these  concepts  are  clear  and  definite,  re¬
sults  can  again  be  deduced  from  them  which- make  them
most  useful  as  counters  of  thought  and  explanation.  The
generalised  concepts  of  space  and  time  as  developed,  not
so  much  by  the  philosophers  as  by  the  mathematicians,  have
these  qualities  of  clearness  and  definiteness  which  make
them  specially  fruitful  for  investigating  the  structure  of
the  physical  world,  as  we  have  seein  in  tbe  discussion  of  the
Theory  of  Relativity.  And  similarly  the  concept  of  the
whole,  if  clearly  apprehended  and  firmly  held,  may  be¬
come  a  powerful  means  of  exploring  the  intricate  phe¬
nomena  of  life  and  mind.  The  concept  of  the  whole  is  a
generalised  structure,  an  abstract  schema,  a  framework
to  be  filled  in  in  any  particular  case;  and  it  is  this  struc¬
tural  or  schematic  character  which  brings  it  close  to  that
concrete  character  which  distinguishes  all  natural  objects
in  the  world  of  experience.  For  the  sake  of  clearness  let
us  proceed  to  analyse  the  fundamental  characters  of  a
whole  as  we  see  it  exemplified  in,  say,  a  simple  organism.

A  whole  is  a  synthesis  or  unity  of  parts,  so  close  that  it
affects  the  activities  and  interactions  of  those  parts,  im¬
presses  on  them  a  special  character,  and  makes  them  differ¬
ent  from  what  they  would  have  been  in  a  combination  de¬
void  of  such  unity  or  synthesis.  That  is  the  fundamental
element  in  the  concept  of  the  whole.  It  is  a  complex  of
parts,  but  so  close  and  intimate,  so  unified  that  the  char¬
acters  and  relations  and  activities  of  the  parts  are  affected
and  changed  by  the  synthesis.  The  analogy  of  a  physical
mixture  and  a  chemical  compound  is  very  useful  and  in¬
structive  in  this  connection,  and  we  have  already  seen  that
in  a  real  though  limited  sense  a  chemical  compound  is  a
whole.  A  whole  is  not  some  tertium  quid  over  and  above
the  parts  which  compose  it;  it  is  these  parts  in  their  in¬
timate  union  and  the  new  reactions  and  functions  which
result  from  that  union.  It  is  a  new  structure  of  those
parts,  with  the  altered  activities  and  functions  which  flow
from  this  structure.  The  parts  are  not  lost  or  destroyed  in
the  new  structure  into  which  they  enter;  the  atoms  or


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


123


molecules  persist  in  the  new  compound,  just  as  the  cells
persist  in  the  organism.  But  their  independent  functions
and  activities  are,  just  as  themselves,  grouped,  related,
correlated  and  unified  in  the  structural  whole.  To  the
structural  unity  of  the  parts  in  the  whole  corresponds  an
equally  and  perhaps  even  more  significant  functional  unity
or  correlation  of  activities.  Just  as  in  dynamics  a  body
subject  to  pulls  in  various  directions  moves  with  one  result¬
ant  velocity  in  one  definite  direction,  so  the  functions  and
the  activities  of  the  parts  in  the  whole  are  all  co-ordinated
and  unified  into  one  complex  character  which  belongs  or
appears  to  belong  to  the  whole  as  such.  With  this  differ¬
ence,  again  (just  as  in  the  difference  between  a  physical
mixture  and  a  chemical  compound),  that  the  resultant
function  is  not  a  mere  addition  and  composition  of  the
unaltered  composing  functional  elements,  but  the  change
involves  both  the  elements  and  their  final  result.  Thus
taking  x  to  represent  a  mixture  and  xx  to  represent  a  whole,
we  cannot  say  that  a  +  b+  c  +  d  =  x  (mixture)  in  the
one  case  and  =  (whole)  in  the  other;  but  in  the  synthesis
which  results  in  x1  the  functions  of  the  parts  themselves
are  changed  into  alt  bx,  c1}  d1}  so  that  corresponding  to
the  formula  of  mixture  a  +  b  -\-  c  d  =  x  we  have  the
holistic  formula  ai  +  61  +  c^.  +  dx  =  xx.  It  is  most  im¬
portant  to  realise  this  point;  both  the  individual  functions
of  the  parts  (cells,  organs,  etc.)  and  their  composition  or
correlation  in  the  complex  are  affected  and  altered  by  the
synthesis  which  is  the  whole.  Not  only  does  the  synthesis
of  the  parts  influence  and  indeed  constitute  the  whole;
the  whole  in  its  turn  impresses  its  character  on  each  indi¬
vidual  part,  which  feels  its  influence  in  the  most  real  and
intimate  manner.  The  whole-ward  tendency  and  activity
of  the  parts  is  most  deeply  characteristic  of  the  nature  of
the  whole.  This,  then,  is  the  primary  and  most  important
element  in  the  concept  of  the  whole:  the  synthetic  unity
of  structure  and  its  functions  which  affects  the  parts  and
their  functions  or  activities  without  their  loss  or  destruc¬
tion.  The  unity,  although  so  close  and  intimate  and  so


124


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


deeply  affecting  the  parts  and  their  functions,  is  not  such  as
to  merge  the  parts  completely,  but  to  leave  them  a  latitude
which  varies  with  individual  wholes  at  the  same  state  of
development,  and  still  more  at  different  stages  of  develop¬
ment.  To  this  latter  point  we  shall  revert  hereafter.

From  this  fundamental  unity  of  the  parts  which  consti¬
tute  the  whole,  and  the  intimate  reciprocal  influence  which
parts  and  whole  exert  on  each  other,  follow  certain  results
of  great  importance  for  our  general  concept  of  the  whole.

In  the  first  place,  unity  of  action,  which  is  characteristic
of  the  whole,  shows  itself  in  the  marked  power  of  regulation
and  correlation  which  the  whole  appears  to  possess  in  re¬
spect  of  its  parts.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  striking  fea¬
ture  of  organic  wholes;  however  complex  they  are,  a  certain
balanced  correlation  of  functions  is  maintained.  If  there
is  any  disturbance  among  the  parts  which  upsets  the
routine  of  the  whole,  then  either  this  disturbance  is  elimi¬
nated  by  the  co-operative  effort  of  many  or  all  the  parts,
or  the  functions  of  the  other  parts  are  so  readjusted  that
a  new  balance  and  routine  is  established.  The  synthetic
unity  of  the  whole  produces  synthetic  or  holistic  action
throughout  the  whole;  the  activities  and  functions  of  the
parts  also  become  holistic,  so  that  in  addition  to  their  ordi¬
nary  routine  they  have  a  whole-ward  aspect  or  tendency
which  becomes  active  whenever  the  balance  of  the  whole
is  disturbed.  It  is  this  holistic  character  distinguishing
the  activity  and  functions  not  only  of  the  whole  but  also
of  its  parts  which  underlies  the  remarkable  phenomena  of
co-operation  among  cells  to  which  attention  was  drawn  in
the  fourth  chapter.  The  co-operation  is  not  so  much  the
interaction  of  independent  units  as  in  truth  and  really  the
pressure  of  the  whole  on  the  parts.  Indeed  the  entire  func¬
tion  or  system  of  the  organism  is  holistic;  the  synthetic
unity  of  the  whole  is  so  deeply  stamped  on  the  parts  and
reflected  in  the  activities  of  the  parts,  that  they  all  appear
to  “play  up”  to  each  other,  and  to  co-operate  in  maintaining
or,  in  case  of  disturbance,  restoring  the  balance  of  equi¬
librium  of  activities  which  is  characteristic  of  the  particular


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


125


whole.  From  the  synthetic  unity  of  the  whole  follows  the
holistic  action  of  all  its  parts,  as  well  as  the  characteristic
power  of  correlating  and  regulating  which  the  whole  seems
to  exert  in  respect  of  the  parts.  All  these  properties  really
flow  from  the  idea  and  nature  of  the  whole;  once  this  idea
is  clearly  realised,  the  true  principle  of  organic  explanation
is  found,  and  the  application  of  the  ideas  and  methods  of
mechanism  or  vitalism  becomes  superfluous,  as  we  shall  see
later.

In  order  to  assist  us  in  rendering  clear  our  ideas  of  the
whole  and  holistic  action,  as  distinguished  from  those  of  a
mechanical  aggregate  and  mechanical  action,  let  us  consider
a  material  system  in  dynamic  equilibrium,  which  has  many
analogies  to  the  ideas  we  are  exploring.  The  character  of
such  a  system  is  that  within  certain  limits  it  will  maintain
its  equilibrium  against  disturbance  and  interference.  If  it
meets  with  any  disturbance,  such  as  an  external  impact
or  any  interference  with  its  internal  movements,  its  equi¬
librium  will  for  a  moment  be  disturbed;  but  immediately
readjustments  will  take  place,  the  effects  of  the  disturbance
will  become  distributed  throughout  the  system,  new  positions
of  the  parts  and  new  movements  of  these  parts  will  result,
with  the  effect  that  a  fresh  equilibrium  is  established,  and
the  system,  with  a  somewhat  altered  arrangement  of  parts
and  movements,  will  once  more  be  in  dynamic  equilibrium.
When  we  pass  from  this  physical  system  to  an  organic
whole  a  transformation  of  ideas  takes  place:  the  system
becomes  a  synthesis  qualitatively  different  from  the  system,
a  synthesis  so  intense  that  a  new  unity  arises  and  a  different
order  of  ideas  becomes  necessary  for  its  explanation.  To
the  mechanical  readjustment  of  the  parts  correspond  the
regulation  and  correlation  which  the  organic  whole  exercises
in  respect  of  its  parts;  with  this  difference,  again,  that
while  the  new  mechanical  equilibrium  is  the  exact  mathe¬
matical  resultant  of  the  component  forces,  in  the  organic
whole,  parts  and  whole  reciprocally  influence  and  alter
each  other  instead  of  merely  the  parts  making  up  the  whole,
and  in  the  end  it  is  practically  impossible  to  say  where  the


126


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


whole  ends  and  the  parts  begin,  so  intimate  is  their  inter¬
action  and  so  profound  their  mutual  influence.  In  fact  so
intense  is  the  union  that  the  differentiation  into  parts  and
whole  becomes  in  practice  impossible,  and  the  whole  seems
to  be  in  each  part,  just  as  the  parts  are  in  the  whole.  There
is  an  intensification  of  synthesis  or  unity,  as  we  rise  from
the  mechanical  composition  to  the  chemical  compound,  and
from  this  again  to  the  organic  whole;  an  intensification
which  is  already  qualitatively  different  as  between  the  first
two,  but  which  becomes  entirely  sui  generis  in  the  last.  To
mistake  the  unity  of  the  whole  for  the  mere  mechanical
system  of  dynamics,  and  the  holistic  action  which  shows
itself  in  organic  regulation,  correlation  and  co-operative
interaction  for  the  readjustment  of  forces  and  self-mainte¬
nance  of  equilibrium  in  the  dynamic  system,  is  to  confound
two  quite  different  orders  of  ideas  and  facts.  The  whole
differs  essentially  from  the  mechanical  system;  the  holistic
action  or  function  differs  even  more  essentially  from  the
“action”  or  “reaction”  of  dynamics,  and  from  the  meaning
of  those  terms  as  used  in  Newton’s  Laws  of  Motion  and  still
current  in  the  physical  science  of  to-day.

In  other  directions  too  the  nature  of  the  whole  brings
about  this  intensive  transformation  of  concepts.  Let  us
take  the  idea  of  cause  and  see  how  it  is  affected  by  the  con¬
cept  of  the  whole.  The  causal  idea  is  quite  an  interest¬
ing  test  to  apply  to  the  whole,  and  it  will  help  to  elucidate
the  point  we  are  dealing  with,  as  well  as  some  other  points
that  concern  the  nature  of  the  whole.  The  question,  for
instance,  whether  the  whole  is  something  different  from
and  additional  to  its  parts  is  paralleled  by  the  question
whether  the  whole  acts  as  a  cause  as  distinct  from  its  parts ;
in  other  words,  is  the  causality  of  the  whole  exhausted  by
the  causal  operation  of  its  parts,  or  is  there  something  over
and  above  the  influence  of  the  parts  which  must  be  attributed
to  the  whole  as  such?  I  have  already  explained  that  the
whole  is  nothing  but  the  specific  synthesis  of  the  parts  and
not  something  additional  to  them.  Similarly  the  causality
of  the  whole  is  not  an  additional  factor,  but  simply  the


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


127


causality  of  the  parts  in  their  intimate  synthesis  in  the
whole.  In  mechanical  composites  each  element  in  opera¬
tion  or  action  has  its  own  effect  and  is  a  separate  cause;
and  the  final  result  is  the  resultant  blending  of  all  these
separate  effects.  In  the  whole,  as  we  have  seen,  there  is
not  this  individual  separate  action  of  the  parts;  there  is  a
synthesis  which  makes  the  elements  or  parts  act  as  one  or
holistically;  and  the  action  or  function  is  an  inseparable
holistic  unity  just  in  proportion  as  the  synthesis  is  a  whole
or  realises  the  character  of  wholeness.  It  is  in  this  sense,
and  in  this  sense  only,  that  the  whole  is  a  cause;  it  is  a
cause  not  apart  from  its  parts,  but  solely  through  their
synthesis  in  action.  The  whole  fuses  the  action  of  its  ele¬
ments  into  a  real  synthesis,  into  a  unity  which  makes  the
result  quite  different  from  what  it  would  have  been  as  the
separate  activities  of  the  parts.  The  structural  synthesis
of  the  whole  results  in  a  similar  synthesis  of  activity  or
function.  Just  as  the  whole  as  a  structural  unity,  and  only
as  such,  is  something  different,  something  new  compared
with  its  parts  in  their  separateness  or  isolation,  so  too  its
action  is  radically  different  from  the  blending  of  their  sepa¬
rate  actions.

Thus  the  causality  of  the  whole  is  explained,  and  from
this  explanation  one  can  appreciate  how  immensely  com¬
plicated  the  action  or  functioning  of  an  organism  must  be.
When  a  stimulus  is  applied  to  an  organism  a  whole  is  set
in  motion,  and  the  response  which  results  is  not  merely
an  affair  of  the  original  stimulus,  but  of  the  entire  whole
in  all  its  unique  complication  of  parts  and  functions  which
has  been  set  in  motion.  The  comparatively  simple,  isolable
phenomenon  of  causation  as  observed  in  the  interaction  of
material  bodies  undergoes  a  complete  and  radical  trans¬
formation  when  observed  in  the  case  of  an  organism;  and
the  difference  is  not  a  mystery,  but  is  deducible  from  the
nature  of  the  whole  as  exemplified  by  an  organism.  I  shall
return  to  this  matter  and  just  now  pass  on  to  another
important  result  of  the  nature  of  a  whole.

In  the  preceding  chapters  I  have  more  than  once  used


128


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


the  word  “creative.”  I  have  called  the  whole  “creative”;
I  have  called  Evolution  “creative”;  I  have  even  applied
the  term  to  matter  in  its  structural  characterisation.  It
is  important  to  see  in  what  sense  wholes,  or  Evolution
generally,  or  even  matter  is  called  “creative,”  and  the  fore¬
going  discussion  will  have  prepared  us  for  the  explanation
which  follows.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  the  word  “crea¬
tion”  is  unintelligible  and  falls  outside  the  scope  of  an  in¬
telligible  science  or  philosophy.  I  refer  to  absolute  crea¬
tion — creation,  that  is  to  say,  out  of  nothing.  Absolute
creation  just  as  absolute  annihilation  cannot  be  compre¬
hended  by  the  human  mind.  E  nihilo  nihil  jit  is  a  funda¬
mental  principle  of  thought  as  well  as  of  Nature.  But
there  is  another  form  of  creation  which  is  not  only  intelli¬
gible  but  follows  directly  from  the  explanation  of  holistic
action  which  I  have  already  given.  Holistic  action  is  cre¬
ative,  and  is  the  only  form  of  creation  or  creativeness
which  is  intelligible  to  us.  Here  again  the  distinction  be¬
tween  mere  physical  mixtures  and  chemical  compounds
illustrates  the  difference  between  what  is  and  what  is  not
creative.  A  mere  mechanical  aggregate  is  nothing  new,  and
is  no  more  than  the  sum  of  the  mixed  ingredients,  while
the  chemical  compound  is  new  in  the  sense  that  out  of  the
constituent  materials  another  qualitatively  different  sub¬
stance  has  been  made.  A  new  structure  has  been  formed
in  the  chemical  compound.  In  the  same  way  a  new  struc¬
ture  and  substance  is  made  in  the  atom  out  of  the  quali¬
tatively  different  electrons  and  protons.  It  was  on  this
account  and  in  this  sense  that  we  called  matter  creative;
creative,  that  is  to  say,  of  structures  and  substances  different
from  their  constituent  elements  or  parts.

It  is,  however,  when  we  come  to  consider  organisms  that
we  see  the  whole  creative  in  a  full  and  proper  sense.  In
thought  we  distinguish  between  the  deductive  and  the  in¬
ductive — between  the  deduction  of  the  particular  from  the
general,  the  drawing  out,  unfolding,  or  explicating  what  is
given,  and  the  reverse  inductive  process,  the  integration
or  synthesis  of  the  given  parts  or  elements  into  a  new,


VI  FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES  129

more  complex  content.  The  action  of  organisms  proceeds
on  the  analogy  of  induction.  We  have  seen  how  the  char¬
acteristic  feature  of  organic  process  is  metabolism,  the
transformation  of  the  given  materials  into  something  quite
new,  of  the  inorganic  into  the  organic,  of  the  organic  mate¬
rial  of  one  kind  into  that  of  an  entirely  different  kind.  Crea-
ative  synthesis  is  the  inmost  nature  and  character  of  all
organic  actions  and  functions.

But  it  is  not  in  metabolism  only  that  this  creative  trans¬
formation  is  exemplified;  perhaps  the  phenomena  of  growth
and  development  afford  even  more  characteristic  and  sig¬
nificant  examples  of  the  creative  syn thesis  which  is  the
clearest  expression  of  the  nature  of  Holism.  Creation  is
stamped  on  the  face  of  organic  nature;  the  differences
which  separate  individuals  into  species,  genera,  orders  and
so  forth  are  real  differences  which  were  either  originally
created  in  one  great  creative  Act  at  the  beginning,  or  were
creatively  evolved  in  the  gradual  process  of  organic  descent,
so  that  the  Process  is  creative.  Everywhere  we  meet  the
new,  which  is  irreducible  to  the  old  elements  from  which
it  seems  to  have  sprung;  the  qualities  and  characters  on
which  new  stable  varieties  or  species  are  founded  cannot
be  explained  on  the  basis  of  known  pre-existing  qualities
or  characters.  And  even  where  it  is  possible  to  recognise
certain  of  the  old  elements  in  the  new,  the  new  is  some¬
thing  different  and  contains  something  more  than  the  old
elements.  We  may  say  that  the  creative  synthesis  consists
in  the  making  of  a  new  arrangement  of  old  elements,  that
the  old  elements  have  been  fixed  in  a  new  structure  which
has  different  qualities  from  the  old  pre-existing  structure;
in  this  case  it  would  only  be  the  synthesis  which  is  really
new.  But  to  my  mind  if  we  take  big  stretches  of  organic
descent  and  compare  the  main  great  Types  which  distinguish
the  Vegetable  and  Animal  kingdoms,  we  must  inevitably
come  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  more  than  this  in  the
creative  process  of  evolution.  Compare  a  protozoon  with  a
vertebrate  animal,  or  one  of  the  higher  animals  with  man,
and  it  surely  becomes  foolish  to  say  that  the  elementary


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


130


units  are  the  same  in  both  cases,  and  only  their  arrange¬
ment  or  synthesis  into  structures  is  different.  Mere  re¬
arrangement  of  supposed  unalterable  pre-existing  elements,
mere  reshufflings  of  the  old  cards,  will  give  us  a  sort  of
chemistry  of  Evolution,  but  not  the  vast  range  of  real  ef¬
fective  development  which  we  know.  The  process  of  crea¬
tive  Evolution  is  not  a  mechanical  rearrangement  of  old
material;  it  involves  the  qualitatively  new  at  every  stage,
from  the  most  minute  elements  to  the  most  complex  struc¬
ture.  It  is  not  merely  the  structure  which  is  new  and  dif¬
ferent  from  what  has  gone  before,  some  of  the  materials
are  also  new;  the  details  of  the  new  structure  also  involve
new  smaller  structures  along  with  the  old  inherited  struc¬
tures;  and  in  the  final  analysis  (if  that  were  possible)  we
would  find  among  the  elementary  units  also  new  ones  in
addition  to  the  old  ones  carried  forward  in  the  process  of
descent.  There  is  the  creation  of  the  new  variety  or  species
(the  new  structure) ;  there  is  the  creation  of  new  unit  char¬
acters  (parts  of  the  structure)  which  justify  the  new
species  or  variety;  and  there  is  behind  the  new  unit  char¬
acters  not  mere  rearrangements  of  elements  of  old  char¬
acter  units,  but  an  integration  of  new  materials  or  quality
elements  with  the  old  elements  in  the  formation  of  the
new  unit  characters.  The  process  is  creative  of  the  new
at  every  step  and  at  every  stage,  and  in  the  smallest  qual¬
ity  elements  no  less  than  in  the  large  or  total  structures.
Starting  from  imaginary  elements  a,  b,  c,  d,  we  find  in
organic  advance  in  no  case  a  mere  structural  regrouping
of  these  elements  only,  but  everywhere  an  element  of  quali¬
tative  newness,  x,  incorporated  along  with  the  old  elements
into  the  new  structure.  In  every  advance  we  would  find
not  merely  a  new  structure  but  also  an  x  in  one  form  or
another.  I  have  used  the  concept  of  units  or  elements
for  the  purpose  of  illustration;  but  really  the  creative  pro¬
cess  of  Evolution  is  holistic,  and  in  the  last  resort  un¬
analysable  into  definite  units;  the  blending  of  inherited
with  new  structures  and  characters  is  so  close  that  no
dissociation  is  possible,  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  where


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


131

the  old  elements  end  and  the  new  begin.  But  beyond  any
manner  of  doubt  in  the  advance  the  new  is  there  along
with  the  old  in  such  a  way  that  we  can  only  understand  the
process,  as  a  whole  and  its  minutest  detail,  as  a  real  creative
one.

It  may  be  argued  that  my  view  of  organic  creativeness
as  meaning,  not  merely  new  grouping  or  structures  but  also
new  character  units  and  quality  elements,  brings  us  back
to  that  conception  of  absolute  creation  which  I  have  already
declared  to  be  unintelligible.  Is  it  not  better  then,  it  may
be  asked,  to  fall  back  on  the  idea  of  potentiality  rather
than  creativeness,  and  to  conceive  the  organic  advance  as
the  rendering  actual  what  was  implicit  and  potential  in  the
organism  in  the  beginning?  In  this  way  new  characters
which  emerge  in  the  course  of  organic  descent  would  not
be  taken  as  absolutely  new,  but  as  the  appearance  or  emerg¬
ence  of  potential  characters  which  were  there  all  along  in
the  ancestors  of  the  new  organism.  My  answer  would  be
that  the  concept  of  potentiality  is  quite  useful  but  not
applicable  here;  the  formation  of  the  new  is  usually  a  very
long  process  which  may  occupy  an  indefinite  number  of
generations  before  its  actual  emergence  in  a  new  sensible
character  or  species.  During  this  process  of  subsensible
growth  or  incubation  the  character  may  be  fairly  described
as  potential  in  the  ancestors  of  the  new  species.  But  to
go  further  and  to  say  that  the  new  is  there  in  potential
form  from  the  very  beginning  is  to  fall  back  into  the  pre¬
formation  view  of  Evolution  which  we  have  already  in  the
last  chapter  discarded  as  making  a  farce  of  all  real  organic
advance.  Potentiality  presupposes  that  the  real  creative
work  is  already  done,  and  that  the  slow  finishing  touches
alone  remain  to  be  put  on.  We  have  simply  to  face  the
facts  of  Nature  frankly  as  we  find  them;  and  to  my  mind
there  is  no  doubt,  however  hard  it  is  to  picture  to  ourselves
the  underlying  idea  of  creation,  that  the  emergence  of  the
really  new,  in  other  words,  the  creativeness  of  the  evolu¬
tionary  process,  is  the  only  view  which  is  in  harmony  with
our  scientific  knowledge.  Real  creativeness  is  a  funda-


132


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


mental  characteristic  of  holistic  structure  and  action.  It
necessarily  means  such  integration  of  structures  and  activi¬
ties  as  results  in  new  characters  not  there  before  and  which
cannot  be  reduced  to  pre-existing  elements.  Holistic  action,
therefore,  necessarily  issues  in  real  progress  and  creative
Evolution.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  concept  of  creativeness  raises
a  fundamental  issue  in  respect  both  of  reality  and  knowl¬
edge.  If  there  is  this  evolution  or  making  not  only  of  new
wholes  or  structures,  but  also  of  new  quality  elements  there¬
in,  the  whole  fabric  of  Mechanism  as  ordinarily  under¬
stood  is  shaken  to  its  foundations.  The  iron  rule  of  the
past  is  broken;  the  future  is  not  a  mere  rehearsal  of  the
past;  in  many  cases  the  new  effect  is  more  than  its  pre¬
existing  cause.  The  universe  ceases  to  be  a  hide-bound,
cast-iron,  completely  closed  system  from  which  real  progress
and  freedom  are  excluded.  It  is  open  in  one  direction,
the  direction  in  which  time  is  moving;  the  future  faces  an
open  gateway,  and  the  universe  is  the  highway  of  the  cre¬
ative  movement,  of  that  great  march  in  which  all  the  units
and  formations  of  Reality  take  their  part  and  advance
towards  a  fuller  measure  of  Wholeness.  The  freedom  is
limited,  the  movement  is  slow,  the  character  of  the  universe
is  essentially  conservative.  But  at  any  rate  conservatism
is  not  the  last  word  that  can  be  said  about  it.  It  does  not
go  like  a  clock,  completely  manufactured,  and  once  for  all
wound  up  at  the  beginning  to  mark  a  time  fixed  and  pre¬
determined  for  it.  It  is  slowly  making  itself,  it  is  slowly
winding  itself  up,  it  is  slowly  making  its  own  time.  It  is
a  slow,  tentative,  perhaps  in  details  a  somewhat  blundering
process;  but  it  is  real  and  creative;  the  new  successful
effort  is  for  ever  issuing  out  of  the  old  mistakes,  and  a
slow  advance  is  being  laboriously  recorded  and  continuously
maintained.  This  figurative  language,  although  perhaps
somewhat  highly  coloured,  is  really  no  exaggeration.
“Creativeness”  is  the  key-word,  and  it  is  also  the  key  posi¬
tion  in  the  great  battle  which  is  now  being  fought  out  be¬
tween  the  nineteenth-century  and  the  twentieth-century


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


133


conceptions  of  the  nature  and  trend  of  the  universe,  between
Mechanism  as  ordinarily  understood  and  what  is  here  called
Holism.  Those  who  wish  to  defend  the  old  position  of
Mechanism  (and  they  are  still  the  great  majority  in  the
army  of  Science)  will  have  to  concentrate  their  forces  at
this  point.  If  the  concept  of  creativeness,  of  the  emergent
new  in  the  Evolution  of  the  universe,  really  wins  through,
Mechanism  as  a  scientific  and  philosophical  category  will
be  reduced  to  very  modest  proportions.

The  creativeness  of  Evolution  at  all  stages  has  indeed  the
most  profound  effect  on  our  views  of  Nature  and  her  order
and  on  all  our  methods  of  explaining  her  processes.  To
illustrate  this  let  us  revert  once  more  to  the  oft-quoted
difference  between  a  mere  physical  mixture  and  a  chemical
compound.  The  mixture  is,  like  the  compound,  a  structure,
much  looser,  of  course,  than  the  compound,  but  still  a
structure  of  sorts.  But  the  compound  differs  from  it  in
being  a  radically  different  structure,  a  new  structure  has
emerged  in  the  compound,  a  creative  element  has  entered
into  the  process  which  was  not  there  before.  And  the  result
is  a  complete  difference  in  all  the  pertinent  phenomena  of
the  two.  Even  our  very  categories  of  description  have  to
undergo  a  corresponding  transformation.  If  we  tried  to
describe  the  properties  and  actions  of  a  chemical  com¬
pound  on  the  same  principles  as  those  of  a  mechanical
mixture,  we  would  go  grievously  wrong,  and  the  real  facts
would  be  hopelessly  distorted.  The  creative  element  which
has  entered  into  the  chemical  compound  in  its  passage  from
a  mere  physical  mixture,  the  new  structure  which  has  re¬
sulted  from  the  change,  requires  new  concepts  and  principles
of  description.  And  this  is  freely  admitted  by  chemists  and
physicists  alike.  The  case  for  new  categories  of  description
becomes  far  stronger  at  the  next  creative  advance,  where
chemical  structure  is  transformed  into  organic  structure.
In  both  cases  Holism  is  at  work  and  produces  a  new  struc¬
ture;  in  the  organic  structure  the  creative  advance  is  ad¬
mittedly  far  greater  than  in  the  chemical  compound.  The
concentration  and  intensification  of  structure  which  we


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


134


call  the  whole  in  the  organism  is  comparatively  far
greater  and  higher  than  the  similar  phenomenon  in  the
chemical  compound  as  compared  to  the  mere  mixture.
Something  indisputably  new  has  been  produced;  there  has
been  creation;  a  new  structure  has  arisen  which  has  its
own  categories  of  description;  and  to  apply  mere  chemical
and  physical  concepts  of  action  and  description  to  this  new
structure  is  to  ignore  the  creative  advance  which  has  taken
place  and  to  confound  two  entirely  different,  however
closely  related,  structures  and  stages  of  Evolution.  The
physico-chemical  view  and  explanation  of  organism  there¬
fore  rests  on  a  fundamental  misconception  and  on  a  denial
or  disregard  of  the  creative  element  in  natural  Evolution.
There  is  the  physical  description  of  the  mixture;  there  is
the  chemical  description  of  the  compound;  and  there  is
what  I  call  the  holistic  description  of  the  organism,  which
recognises  the  qualitative  newness  and  sui  generis  nature
of  the  structure  which  bears  the  characters  of  what  we  call
life.  The  apparent  materials  may  even  be  the  same  in  all
three  cases;  but  the  character  and  intensity  of  their  union
in  each  case  varies  in  such  a  way  that  entirely  different
structures  with  entirely  different  characters  result.  There  is
a  rising  element  of  wholeness  in  all  three  structures,  and  the
holistic  character  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  third  or
organic  structure.  But  its  wholeness  is  much  more  marked
and  pronounced  than  that  of  the  other  two;  it  is,  in  fact,
the  very  type  and  exemplar  of  a  whole;  and  a  purely
physico-chemical  explanation  of  its  nature  and  functions
cannot  possibly  do  justice  to  this  unique  holistic  character.
This  is  but  another  way  of  affirming  the  creative  character
of  the  advance  from  the  mere  physical  mixture  to  the
chemical  structure,  and  still  more  in  the  advance  from  the
chemical  to  the  organic  structure  in  Nature.  The  creative
advance  is  the  fact,  to  which  our  conceptual  theories  of
explanation  have  to  conform.  The  creativeness  consists
in  the  progressive  advance  in  respect  of  the  character  of
wholeness  which  distinguishes  the  three  stages  of  structure;
and  the  advance  is  in  a  geometrical  rather  than  an  arith-


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


135

metical  progression,  if  one  may  be  allowed  a  mathematical
analogy.  The  physical  and  chemical  categories  still  apply,
but  they  are  not  sufficient,  and  have  to  be  supplemented
by  the  holistic  categories  which  correspond  to  and  express
the  greater  and  qualitatively  more  intense  holism  which
characterises  the  organism  as  distinguished  from  the  mixture
or  the  compound.

Let  me  here  point  out  that  it  is  not  all  causation  which
is  creative;  much  of  the  causation  in  the  universe  is  purely
mechanical  and  produces  nothing  new.  Only  wholes  are
creative;  only  the  causality  of  wholes  produces  effects  which
are  really  new.  It  is  conceivable,  it  is  even  possible,  that
out  of  free  scattered  protons  and  electrons  new  atoms,  say
of  Hydrogen,  new  physical  structures  may  be  synthetically
built  up,  just  as  it  is  conceivable  and  probable  that  organic
wholes  or  life  structures  have  arisen  from  purely  inorganic
materials.  That  would  mean  the  creation  of  matter  or  the
spontaneous  generation  of  life — both  still  unrealised  possi¬
bilities  from  an  experimental  point  of  view.  Structure  in
fact  and  in  Nature  arises  from  pre-existing  structures
whether  in  the  organic  or  inorganic  domain.  Omne  vivum  e
vivo  is  a  formula  which  applies  to  all  wholes  and  not  merely
organic  wholes.  Only  wholes  produce  wholes,  and  only  in
wholes  does  the  new  emerge;  wholes  form  the  pathway  of
creative  reality;  only  the  causality  of  wholes  is  creative  of
the  new.

This  is  so  because  of  what  I  have  already  pointed  out
above  when  discussing  how  a  whole  transforms  a  “cause”
or  stimulus  applied  to  it  into  something  quite  different  from
what  it  was  before.  If  an  external  “cause”  is  applied  to
an  organism  or  living  body  it  will  become  internalised  and
transformed,  and  will  be  experienced  as  a  stimulus,  which
in  its  turn  will  be  followed  by  a  response.  The  response  is
not  the  mere  mechanical  effect  of  the  cause,  and  this  is  due
to  the  complete  transformation  which  the  latter  has  under¬
gone.  In  the  moment  which  elapses  between  stimulus  and
response  a  miracle  is  performed;  a  vast  series  of  organic
changes  is  set  going  of  which  comparatively  little  is  known


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


136


as  yet.  The  inorganic  becomes  organic,  the  alien  stuff  of
the  environment  is  recreated  into  the  stuff  of  the  living
organism.  The  organic  changes  which  take  place  are
assumed  to  have  their  physical  and  chemical  equivalents;
but  even  if  that  is  so,  they  are  much  more  than  the  mere
physico-chemical  tale  they  tell.  The  stimulus  has  been
transformed  and  absorbed  and  become  a  series  of  states
of  the  organism;  the  organism  has  made  the  stimulus  its
own,  as  it  were.  And  as  a  result  the  response  is  not  the
mere  passive  effect  of  the  stimulus,  but  is  the  free  and
spontaneous  movement  of  the  organism  itself  under  the
influence  of  the  appropriate  stimulus.  The  passive  external
stimulus  has  been  recreated  into  an  active,  free  response
of  the  organism.  Anything  passing  through  the  organic
whole  thereby  becomes  completely  changed.  Any  action
issuing  from  it  has  the  stamp  of  the  whole  upon  it.  The
procedure  is  transformative,  synthetic,  recreative,  holistic,
and  the  result  is  “new”  in  one  degree  or  another.

From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  if  the  concept  of  causation
is  to  be  retained  in  connection  with  organic  or  psychical
activities,  it  will  have  to  be  substantially  recast.  The  re¬
sultant  activity  of  an  organism  under  a  stimulus  is  never
the  effect  of  that  stimulus,  as  it  would  be  in  the  case  of
mechanical  action,  but  always  of  the  stimulus  as  trans¬
formed  by  the  organism;  the  organism  appears  as  the
dominant  element  in  the  causal  concept,  and  the  stimulus
appears  in  a  minor  role.  The  more  active  the  state  of  the
organism,  and  the  more  thorough  its  reaction  to  the  stimulus,
the  less  is  the  influence  of  the  stimulus  on  the  response,
which  appears  as  the  free  and  almost  original  action  of  the
organism.  The  organic  response  is  often  so  great  compared
to  the  stimulus,  it  is  so  out  of  all  proportion  to  it  and  so
transcends  it  in  every  way,  that  the  organism  appears  clearly
as  the  real  cause,  and  the  stimulus  merely  as  a  minor  condi¬
tion  or  excitation.

It  is  thus  seen  that  organism  is  a  new  system,  with  its
own  activities  and  laws  and  categories  of  action  and  descrip¬
tion.  It  is  a  new  centre,  with  a  large  measure  of  inde-


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


i37


pendence  of  the  environment.  This  does  not  mean  that
the  environment  does  not  influence  it,  but  it  means  that
the  environment  influences  it  only  indirectly  and  after  a
more  or  less  complete  transformation  and  metabolism  of
such  influence.  Vis-a-vis  the  environment  the  organism  is
something  new,  something  sui  generis,  which  does  not  pas¬
sively  accept  and  reproduce  the  influence  of  the  environ¬
ment,  but  utilises  and  appropriates  it  for  its  own  purposes
and  in  its  own  ways,  as  if  it  were  some  superior  arbiter
and  disposer  of  the  whole  situation.  The  concepts  of
dominion,  of  mastery,  of  creation  which  the  orthodox  view
places  at  the  beginning  of  things  are  now  distributed  and
assigned  to  all  organisms,  whose  inmost  nature  it  is  only
possible  to  express  through  these  concepts.  In  other  words,
organism  is  not  an  effect  of  external  causes;  nor  are  its
states  and  characters  effects  of  external  causes;  it  is  in  a
large  measure  its  own  cause — causa  sui — and  the  cause
of  its  own  states  and  functions.  External  environmental
influences  are  merely  the  rough  material  with  which  it
works  and  builds  up  its  own  system.  And  in  the  act  of
building  the  material  is  itself  more  or  less  completely
changed  into  the  character  of  the  structure  built.  I  say
“more  or  less,”  because  this  character  of  creative  mastery
and  transformation  which  organism  displays  in  respect  of
external  influences  and  materials  is  itself  of  a  progressive
character.  In  the  lower  organisms  there  is  much  more  of
passive  acceptance  and  response  than  in  the  higher;  and
the  whole  process  of  Evolution  is  largely  a  continuous  growth
towards  organic  independence  and  self-regulation;  in  other
words,  towards  wholeness.  The  concept  of  wholeness
contains  and  explains  all  the  distinguishing  organic  attributes
in  their  various  grades  throughout  the  wide  range  of  organic
Evolution.

Thus  it  is  that  the  creative  element  in  Evolution,  the
emergent  new,  is  associated  with  the  nature  and  action  of
wholes,  and  is  confined  to  them.  Not  only  is  the  activity
of  wholes  holistic  and  creative,  as  yet  it  is  the  only  creative
activity  of  which  we  have  knowledge.


138  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

From  this  discussion  it  is  clear  how  the  concept  of  Free¬
dom  is  rooted  in  that  of  the  organic  whole.  The  whole  is
free,  the  parts  are  bound:  such  would  be  a  formula  of
metaphysics.  For  beyond  the  whole  there  is  nothing  ex¬
ternal  to  determine  it,  and  it  is  therefore  free;  while  the  parts
are  necessarily  bound  by  their  relation  to  the  whole  and
to  each  other  in  the  whole.  But  we  are  not  concerned  with
metaphysical  wholes,  but  with  those  of  reality,  such  as
organisms.  And  we  have  seen  how  the  functioning  of  an
organic  whole  releases  it  from  the  domination,  the  causation
of  the  external,  and  conduces  to  its  freedom.  The  external
causation,  the  stimulus  which  operates  on  it  ab  extra,  is
transformed  by  its  subtle  metabolism  into  something  of
itself;  otherness  becomes  selfness;  the  pressure  of  the  ex¬
ternal  or  the  other  is  transformed  into  the  action  of  itself.
The  organism  is  largely  detached  from  its  surroundings  and
centres  in  itself.  Necessity  is  transformed  into  freedom.
The  causal  chain  of  physics  becomes  the  new  badge  of
freedom.  The  whole,  therefore,  even  in  its  most  humble
organic  forms,  lays  the  foundations  of  the  new  world  of
freedom.  We  can  arrive  at  the  same  result  by  another
process  of  reasoning,  based  on  the  creative  activity  of
Holism.  Under  the  physical  system  the  effect  equals  the
cause,  and  is  therefore  completely  determined  by  the  cause,
Causa  =  effectum.  But  we  have  seen  how  this  formula
disappears  before  creative  Holism;  how  the  effect  comes  to
contain  the  new  and  therefore  to  transcend  its  cause.  The
element  of  newness,  of  novelty  in  the  holistic  order  of  the
world,  means  a  release  from  the  complete  bondage  of  matter
and  its  causality  and  necessity.  It  means  a  certain  latitude
for  expansion  and  growth.  It  widens  the  range  of  possi¬
bilities;  the  strait  and  narrow  path  of  physics  becomes
the  prospect  which  ultimately  widens  into  the  great  horizons
of  life  and  mind.  Freedom  broadens  out  into  a  world  of
opportunities.  The  animal  finds  that  it  is  no  longer  im¬
prisoned  in  its  cell  like  the  plant;  it  begins  to  move  about.
Gradually  it  learns  the  great  lessons  of  direction  and  self-
direction.  The  great  Experiment  of  life  assumes  ever-


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


i39


widening  degrees  of  freedom,  until  finally  at  the  human
stage  freedom  takes  conscious  control  of  itself  and  begins
to  create  the  free  ethical  world  of  the  Spirit.  With  that
development  we  shall  deal  at  a  later  stage  of  this  work.
Here  it  must  suffice  to  have  pointed  out  the  humble  begin¬
nings  of  freedom.  And  even  at  this  stage  it  is  important
to  bear  in  mind  that  the  domain  of  life  is  largely  distin¬
guished  from  that  of  matter  and  energy  by  its  greater  de¬
grees  of  freedom.  Scientists  speak  of  the  degrees  of  freedom
even  in  an  inorganic  situation.  And  by  this  they  mean  the
element  of  contingency  which  seems  inseparable  even  from
the  purely  physical  order.  The  causal  chain  of  Nature,
the  necessity  which  characterises  the  procession  of  physical
events,  does  not  exclude  elements  of  chance  or  contingency.
An  event  may  happen  in  this  way  or  that  way;  there  are
alternatives  between  which  only  the  actual  fact  can  decide.
To  these  possibilities  or  alternatives  the  phrase  “degrees
of  freedom”  is  applied.  But  in  the  domain  of  life  it  acquires
an  added  meaning,  or  rather,  let  me  say,  a  real  meaning.
Life  is  not  entirely  bound,  even  in  its  most  primitive  forms.
Hence  its  trials  and  experiments,  its  variations,  its  novelties
and  its  creativeness,  which  become  ever  more  accentuated
in  its  progress.  Evolution  traces  the  grand  line  of  escape
from  the  prison  of  matter  to  the  full  freedom  of  the  Spirit.
It  is  clear  that  the  beginnings  of  freedom  are  laid  far  back
in  the  early  dawn  of  life  itself,  if  not  earlier.

The  above  discussion  of  unified  organic  functioning,  or
unity  of  action,  causation,  creation  and  freedom  will  suffice
to  indicate  how  the  whole  as  factor  and  concept  involves  a
transformation  of  physical  actions  and  categories.  They
have  been  selected  as  samples  of  holistic  functions  and  cate¬
gories  and  are  not  intended  to  be  in  any  sense  an  exhaustive
enumeration  of  such  functions  and  categories.  A  full  list
would,  for  instance,  include  “individuality”  and  “purposive¬
ness”  as  essential  features,  functions  and  categories  of
wholes.  They  are,  however,  referred  to  in  Chapter  IX  in
connection  with  Mind  as  an  organ  of  Holism.  At  this
stage  it  is  only  necessary  to  make  the  briefest  reference  to


140


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


them.  Thus  with  regard  to  the  character  and  category  of
individuality  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  here  that  in¬
dividuality  is  distinctive  of  wholes.  Wholes  are  not  arbi¬
trarily  divisible  and  the  divided  parts  are  not  arbitrarily
interchangeable.  Every  whole  has  a  real  character,  a
unique  identity  and  an  irreversible  orientation  which  dis¬
tinguishes  it  from  everything  else  and  is  the  very  essence
of  wholeness.  And  this  character  of  individuality  rises
with  the  rise  of  wholes  in  the  scale  of  Evolution,  and
acquires  decisive  importance  at  the  ultimate  level  of  human
Personality.  Purposiveness,  again,  is  a  special  form  of  that
unified  organic  action  which  has  already  been  discussed.
It  means  a  correlation  and  unification  of  actions  towards
an  end,  whether  this  is  consciously  conceived  or  appre¬
hended  or  not.  On  the  animal  plane  and  especially  on  the
psychical  level  of  Evolution  it  is  quite  distinctive  of  wholes.
In  an  exhaustive  treatment  of  holistic  characters  and  cate¬
gories  individuality  and  purposiveness  would  have  no  less
important  a  place  than  those  above  discussed.

Let  us  now  pass  on  to  consider  organism  as  a  centre  of
internal  regulation,  adjustment  and  co-ordination  of  its  own
functions  and  activities.  The  phenomena  that  meet  us
here  are  indeed  most  wonderful.  No  cunningly  devised
machine  of  human  contrivance  can  rival  or  even  approach
in  delicacy  of  co-ordination  or  fineness  as  well  as  complexity
of  adjustment  the  organic  wholes  we  see  in  Nature.  Pro¬
fessor  Haldane  has  described  the  wonderful  combination  of
processes  which  go  to  make  up  the  physiology  of  breathing  1
— a  combination  which  is  marvellous  enough  under  normal
conditions,  but  which  becomes  far  more  so  when  we  see  how
curiously  breathing  adjusts  itself  to  abnormal  conditions,  to
situations  artificially  brought  about,  which  it  has  probably
never  had  to  face  in  all  time.  No  “experience”  or  hered¬
itary  “memory”  can  guide  it  here;  and  yet  it  rises  to  the
occasion  every  time,  within  a  wonderfully  wide  range  of
adaptability  and  plasticity.  Practically  every  major  physio¬
logical  function  shows  the  same  power  of  co-ordination  of

1  Organism  and  Environment,  1917.


Vi  FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES  141

various  organs  and  activities,  and  the  same  delicacy  and
ingenuity  of  adjustment  to  novel  situations.  Any  one  of
the  functional  elements  involved  would  be  a  wonder  in
itself;  but  when  the  co-ordinated  combination  of  all  is
studied;  when,  moreover,  the  great  variety  of  adjustments
of  this  combination  to  unusual  situations  is  considered,  the
marvel  becomes  baffling  to  our  human  intelligence.  The
most  delicate  processes,  involving  vast  numbers  of  co¬
operating  factors,  happen  not  clumsily  or  slowly,  but  most
finely  and  as  it  were  in  less  than  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.

What  guides  and  controls  such  a  complex  physiological
process?  Intelligence  such  as  we  know  it  is  clearly  not
equal  to  the  task;  nor  have  we  any  reason  to  ascribe  intelli¬
gence  to  organic  processes.  The  assumption  of  a  vital  force
explains  nothing,  as  our  problem  concerns  something  far
more  subtle  and  directive  than  force.  Again,  to  look  upon
it  as  a  marvellous  self-working  mechanism  does  not  meet
the  real  situation,  which  is  more  than  one  of  mechanism,
however  marvellous.  The  theory  of  Evolution  presupposes
an  original  start  from  simple  beginnings,  which  have  multi¬
plied,  evolved  and  become  complex  in  the  course  of  Evolu¬
tion.  The  pure  chance  presupposed  by  Mechanists  has
never  ruled  the  world.  There  has  never  been  a  blind  sort¬
ing  out  of  possibilities  according  to  the  laws  of  probability;
and  if  there  had  been,  the  chances  against  the  present
organic  situation  in  the  world  would  have  been  infinite.  Not
thus  has  the  new  arisen  and  gone  forward.  The  new  has
always  arisen  in  the  bosom  of  the  old,  and  under  its  aegis
and  influence.  Not  blind  chance  or  contingency  but  the
existing  state  of  affairs  has  always  shaped  the  course  and
direction  of  Evolution.  The  new  arises  from  the  old  and
largely  at  its  prompting,  and  thus  in  harmony  with  it.  Its
novelty  is  very  small  compared  to  its  essential  conservatism.
Variation  is  infinitesimal  compared  to  Heredity.  It  is  this
fundamental  character  of  unity,  unitariness  and  wholeness
as  distinct  from  mechanical  aggregation  of  parts,  which
seems  to  me  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  organic  regula¬
tion  and  co-ordination.  Organisms,  of  course,  contain  a


142  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

great  deal  of  mechanism;  the  detailed  processes  and  func¬
tions  are  largely  carried  out  by  what  one  might  call  organic
mechanisms,  structures,  with  particular  functions  assigned
to  them.  But  the  unification  of  the  whole  system  and  its
self-regulating  character;  its  plasticity  of  co-ordination  and
adjustment  under  all  the  situations  of  the  environment  which
it  has  to  face  and  to  which  it  has  to  adapt  itself ;  its  creative
movement  in  time,  so  different  from  what  one  would  expect
on  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics;  the  unique  facts  of
growth,  restitution  and  reproduction,  which  not  even  a
strained  application  of  the  mechanistic  scheme  would  fit — •
these  are  facts  and  features  which  Holism  alone  can  properly
justify  and  explain.

It  may  be  convenient  if,  before  concluding  this  chapter,
I  give  a  summary  of  the  various  functions  which  are  here
assigned  to  Holism  in  the  shaping  of  reality.

(A)  i.  In  the  first  place,  Holism  is  a  creative  factor,
and  as  such  shows  itself  in  the  upbuilding  and  differentia¬
tion  of  organic  structures  and  their  functions.  These  may
be  modifications  or  variations  or  mutations.  They  may
be  ordinary  specific  differences  such  as  explain  the  origin  of
different  species.  These  differences  may  include  new  organs
and  structures,  or  merely  the  general  complexifying  of
existing  structures  which  makes  organisms  as  a  whole  more
complex.  All  these  aspects  of  Holism  are  discussed  in
Chapter  VIII.

2.  This  creative  Holism  is,  of  course,  responsible  for
the  whole  course  of  Evolution,  inorganic  as  well  as  organic.
All  the  great  main  types  of  existence  are  therefore  due  to
it,  such  as  the  atom,  molecule,  cell,  organism,  the  great
groups  of  plant  types,  the  great  groups  of  animal  types,
and  finally  the  human  type.  Creative  Holism  is  thus  re¬
sponsible  for  all  the  great  divisions  of  Science.  The  cur¬
sory  discussion  of  these  aspects  of  Holism  is  spread  over
various  chapters.

(B)  i.  In  the  second  place,  apart  from  the  detailed
structural  and  functional  differentiations  above  referred  to,
Holism  is  a  general  organising,  co-ordinating  or  regulating


VI


FUNCTIONS  AND  CATEGORIES


143


factor  in  organisms  over  which  it  exercises  a  measure  of
guidance,  direction  and  control.  The  nature  of  this  regula¬
tive  or  controlling  activity  is  discussed  in  this  chapter,  and
the  difficulties  it  gives  rise  to  in  its  relation  to  the  body
or  the  energy  system  generally  are  discussed  in  Chapters
VII  and  X.

2.  This  regulation  and  control  is  exercised  over  the
structures  and  functions  of  organisms  generally,  but  some¬
times  special  holistic  organs  are  evolved,  which  seem  spe¬
cially  destined  to  assist  in  the  exercise  of  this  regulation
and  control.  Such  special  holistic  organs  are  the  ductless
glands  which  pour  regulative  secretions  into  the  general
system,  the  nervous  system,  and  especially  the  brain  with
its  correlate  mind.  These  and  other  holistic  organs  are
special  aids  to  Holism  in  its  regulative  activity.  Various
aspects  of  these  holistic  organs  are  discussed  in  different
chapters.

(C)  In  the  third  place,  in  order  to  express  and  explain
these  activities  of  Holism  at  the  different  grades  of  Evolu¬
tion  and  at  the  various  levels  of  differentiation  of  types
and  structures,  categories  of  the  Whole  or  holistic  categories
are  necessary,  some  of  which  have  been  discussed  in  this
chapter  and  others  are  dealt  with  in  other  chapters.  Thus
arise  the  physical,  chemical,  organic,  psychical  and  personal
categories,  which  are  all  expressive  of  holistic  activity  at
its  various  levels  and  reducible  to  terms  of  Holism.

Holism  thus  appears  in  this  scheme  as  the  fundamental
activity  of  the  universe  from  which  all  others  are  derived;
and  the  concept  of  Holism  is  the  ultimate  category  of
description  and  explanation  from  which  likewise  all  other
categories  are  derived.  Holism  therefore  constitutes  the
ultimate  view-point  from  which  to  orientate  our  survey  of
all  the  various  forms  and  departments  of  reality.

(D)  There  is  one  more  aspect  of  creative  Holism  which
I  must  for  the  sake  of  completeness  mention,  although  its
exposition  falls  outside  the  plan  of  this  work.  We  have
seen  that  Holism  is  creative  of  all  structures,  inorganic  as
well  as  organic.  Thus  all  the  types  of  structure  in  the


144


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.  VI


worlds  of  matter  and  life  are  its  work.  But  more;  as  we
proceed  upward  in  the  course  of  Evolution  we  find  Holism
the  source  of  all  values.  Love,  Beauty,  Goodness,  Truth:
they  are  all  of  the  whole;  the  whole  is  their  source,  and  in
the  whole  alone  they  find  their  last  satisfying  explanation.
Holism  not  only  prescribes  the  law  in  the  world  of  struc¬
tures,  forms  and  organisms;  it  is  the  very  ground  and
principle  of  the  ideal  world  of  the  spirit.  It  is  in  the
sphere  of  spiritual  values  that  Holism  finds  its  clearest
embodiment  in  fact,  and  its  most  decisive  vindication  as  an
ultimate  category  of  explanation.  Its  creativeness  will  no¬
where  be  found  more  fruitful  than  in  that  last  and  highest
reach  of  its  evolution.  Here  it  would  be  premature  to  do
more  than  merely  refer  to  this  aspect  of  creative  Holism.
The  exposition  of  its  creative  activity  in  shaping  the  great
Ideals  of  the  Whole  is,  however,  too  large  a  task  to  be  under¬
taken  in  this  introductory  work.


CHAPTER  VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM

Summary . — The  discussion  in  the  last  two  chapters  has  disclosed
a  grading-up  of  such  structures  as  can  in  any  way  be  called  holis¬
tic;  beginning  with  the  physico-chemical  structures,  into  which
physical  and  chemical  relations  enter;  passing  on  to  bio-chemical
structures  or  organisms,  into  which  those  relations  plus  something
new,  usually  called  life,  enter;  and  culminating  in  psycho-physical
structures,  in  which  all  three  relations  enter,  together  with  the
new  elements  of  mind  and  personality.  In  this  grading-up  the
earlier  structures  are  not  destroyed  but  become  the  basis  of  later,
more  evolved  synthetic  holistic  structures;  the  character  of  whole¬
ness  increases  with  the  series  and  the  elements  of  newness,  varia¬
tion  and  creativeness  become  more  marked.

Mechanism  is  a  type  of  structure  where  the  working  parts  main¬
tain  their  identity  and  produce  their  effects  individually,  so  that
the  activity  of  the  structure  is,  at  least  theoretically,  the  mathe¬
matical  result  of  the  individual  activities  of  the  parts.  With  the
two  concepts  of  Mechanism  and  Holism  before  us  we  can  see  how
the  natural  wholes  of  the  universe  fall  under  both  concepts.  There
is  a  measure  of  Mechanism  everywhere,  and  there  is  a  measure  of
Holism  everywhere;  but  the  Holism  gains  on  the  Mechanism  in
the  course  of  Evolution,  it  becomes  more  and  more  as  Mechanism
becomes  less  and  less  with  the  advance.  Holism  is  the  more  fun¬
damental  activity,  and  we  may  therefore  say  that  Mechanism  is
an  earlier,  cruder  form  of  Holism;  the  more  Holism  there  is  in
structure,  the  less  there  is  of  the  mechanistic  character,  until
finally  in  Mind  and  Personality  the  mechanistic  concept  ceases  to
be  of  any  practical  use.

What  is  the  relation  between  the  earlier  (mechanistic)  and  the
later  (holistic)  elements  in  composite  structures,  such  as  bio¬
chemical  and  psycho-physical  wholes?  How  can  the  material  and
the  immaterial  influence  or  act  on  each  other?  This  is  still  one  of
the  great  unsolved  problems  of  philosophy,  and  science  finds  it  no
less  embarrassing.  The  tendency  for  science  has  as  a  rule  been  to
look  upon  the  earlier  physico-chemical  structures  as  dominant,  and
upon  the  later  holistic  elements  of  life  and  mind  as  essentially
unreal  or  as  having  only  an  apparent  reality.  Science  looks  upon

i45


i46  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

the  physical  realm  as  a  closed  system  dependent  only  on  physical
laws,  which  leave  no  opening  anywhere  for  the  active  intervention
of  non-material  entities  like  life  and  mind.  On  this  view  the  ac¬
tivity  and  causality  of  life  and  mind  are  therefore  at  bottom  essen¬
tially  illusory.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  have  to  be  guided  by
our  clear  and  unequivocal  experience  and  consciousness,  nothing
can  be  more  certain  than  that  our  human  volition  issues  in  active
movements  and  external  actions.  Besides,  if  life  and  mind  were
merely  ineffective  illusions,  how  could  they  have  arisen  and  grown
in  the  struggle  of  existence?  While  science  denies  reality  to  life
and  mind,  the  other  side  retorts  by  erecting  them  into  vital  and
mental  forces  with  a  substantiality  of  their  own.  Thus  arises  the
counter-hypothesis  of  Vitalism.  Both  views  as  a  matter  of  fact
are  one-sided  and  misleading;  the  mechanistic  view  by  ignoring
the  essentially  holistic  element  in  organic  or  psychical  wholes;  the
vitalistic  view  by  misconceiving  the  vital  or  psychic  element  in
such  wholes.  The  fundamental  mistake  is  the  severance  of  essen¬
tial  elements  in  a  whole  and  their  hypostasis  into  independent
interacting  entities  or  substances.  Thus  body  and  mind  wrongly
come  to  be  considered  as  two  separate  interacting  substances. .

In  reply  to  mechanistic  Science  it  can  be  shown  that  the  holistic
factors  of  life  and  mind  do  not  interfere  with  the  closed  physical
system,  and  that  a  proper  understanding  of  the  laws  of  Thermo¬
dynamics  permits  of  the  immanent  activity  of  a  factor  of  Selec¬
tiveness  and  Self-direction,  such  as  life  or  mind,  without  any
derogation  from  those  laws.

Again,  in  reply  to  the  Vitalists,  who  invent  Entelechy  or  some
other  substantive  entity  for  the  system  of  life  and  mind,  it  can  be
shown  that  no  such  deus  ex  machina  is  necessary;  that  the  funda¬
mental  concept  of  Holism  suffices  to  explain  the  creative,  directive,
controlling  activity  of  organic  and  psychic  wholes;  and  that  the
attributes  of  life  and  mind  are  inherent  in  the  concept  of  wholes,
and  in  organisms  and  humans  as  wholes.  We  thus  get  rid  of  the
notion  of  separate  interacting  entities  and  view  organisms  and
humans  as  wholes,  which  involve  both  the  earlier  mechanistic  and
the  later  holistic  phases  of  Holism.  As  we  have  seen  Mechanism
to  be  but  an  earlier,  cruder  phase  of  Holism,  the  problem  essen¬
tially  disappears.  A  thorough  grasp  of  the  concept  of  wholes  and
its  consistent  application  to  organisms  and  humans  are  thus  a
solvent  for  the  perennial  Body-and-Mind  problem.  We  thus  en¬
visage  the  physico-chemical  structures  of  Nature  as  the  begin¬
nings  or  earlier  phases  of  Holism,  and  “life”  as  a  more  developed
phase  of  the  same  inner  activity.  Life  is  not  a  new  agent,  with  the
mission  of  interfering  with  the  structures  of  matter;  it  involves  no
disturbance  of  the  prior  structures  on  which  it  is  based.  Holism
has  advanced  only  one  step  further;  there  is  a  deeper  structure,


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


i47


more  selectiveness,  more  direction,  more  control.  But  the  new  is
a  creative  continuation  of  the  old  and  not  a  denial  of  or  going  back
on  it.  Holism  as  an  active  creative  process  means  the  movement
of  the  universe  towards  ever  more  and  deeper  wholeness.  This  is
the  essential  process,  and  all  organic  and  psychic  activities  and  re¬
lations  have  to  be  understood  as  elements  and  forms  of  this
process.  No  explanation  is  possible  which  ignores  this  active
creative  inner  whole  at  the  heart  of  all  organic  or  psychic  struc¬
tures;  in  the  light  of  this  whole  all  apparent  contradictions  dis¬
appear.  This  point  is  further  considered  in  Chapter  X.

The  fact  of  Evolution  shows  that  Holism  determines  the  course
and  the  character  of  the  advance.  Thus  Holism  is  pulling  all  the
evolving  structures  faintly  but  perceptibly  in  the  direction  of
greater  creative  synthetic  fullness  of  characters  and  meanings,  in
other  words,  towards  more  wholeness.  The  inner  trend  of  the
universe,  registered  in  its  very  constitution,  is  directed  away  from
the  merely  mechanical  towards  the  holistic  type  as  its  immanent
ideal.

How  Holism  operates  in  organic  Evolution  will  appear  from  the
next  chapter.

At  various  points  in  the  preceding  chapters  I  have  ap¬
peared  to  contrast  Holism  with  Mechanism  and  to  treat
them  as  opposed  processes  and  points  of  view.  We  shall
now  have  to  consider  their  relations  more  closely,  as  a
proper  understanding  of  these  relations  will  be  found  to
underlie  some  of  the  greatest  problems  both  of  science  and
of  thought.  We  shall  see  that  Mechanism  and  Holism  are
not  necessarily  opposed;  that  both  ideas  have  their  proper
scope  and  sphere  of  usefulness,  but  that  Holism  is  the  more
fundamental  concept  and  in  its  most  far-reaching  reactions
transforms,  transcends  and  absorbs  the  concept  of  Mechan¬
ism.  A  proper  view  of  their  interactions  and  inter-relations
and  of  the  leading  and  more  fundamental  role  of  Holism
in  comparison  with  Mechanism  is  in  my  opinion  important
for  science  no  less  than  for  philosophy.

Let  me,  even  at  the  risk  of  reiteration,  return  to  what
has  repeatedly  been  said  before.  For  me  the  great  problem
of  knowledge,  indeed  the  great  mystery  of  reality,  is  just
this:  how  do  elements  or  factors  a  and  b  come  together,
combine  and  coalesce  to  form  a  new  unity  or  entity  x  differ¬
ent  from  both  of  them?  To  my  mind  this  simple  formula  of


i48  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

synthesis  sums  up  all  the  fundamental  problems  of  matter
and  life  and  mind.  The  answer  to  this  question  will  in
some  measure  supply  the  key  to  all  or  most  of  our  great
problems.  My  answer  has  already  been  given;  it  is  in  one
word  Holism.  But  it  is  necessary  to  show  how  the  answer
works  in  detail,  and  what  its  relations  are  to  the  current
and  popular  view-points  which  still  dominate  our  science
and  philosophy.  Science  and  philosophy  alike  are  vast
structures,  laboriously  built  up  on  the  basis  of  certain  fun¬
damental  concepts.  The  attempt  I  am  making  is  to  intro¬
duce  into  these  elaborate  systems  a  new  basic  concept,  per¬
haps  more  fundamental  than  any  of  them.  And  it  will  be
clear  that  such  an  attempt  must  be  a  most  difficult  and
hazardous  one;  it  involves  far-reaching  readjustments  of
settled  points  of  view,  the  reopening  of  questions  long  looked
upon  as  answered  and  done  with,  the  envisaging  of  many
old  problems  from  a  new  and  novel  point  of  view.  To  insert
the  spear-point  of  the  new  concept  into  these  vast  closed
settled  systems  may  at  first  sight  appear  a  revolutionary,  an
iconoclastic  procedure.  But  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  show
that  this  is  not  really  so,  that  at  any  rate  to  begin  with  the
concept  of  Holism  will  fit  constructively  into  the  work  of
the  past,  whatever  its  ultimate  effects  may  be  in  the  reshap¬
ing  of  these  systems  on  the  new  basis;  that  in  relation  to  the
old  concepts  it  appears  in  the  field  not  as  an  enemy  but  as  a
friend  and  ally  in  the  great  battle  of  knowledge,  and  that
it  will  help  materially  in  the  solution  of  problems  which  are
practically  insoluble  on  the  lines  of  the  old  concepts.  The
concept  of  Holism  is  brought  forward  as  a  reinforcement
at  a  critical  point  in  the  battle,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  help  to
bring  victory.  But  I  do  not  conceal  the  further  hope  that
in  its  ulterior  effects  it  will  lead  to  a  recasting  of  much  of
the  situation  of  knowledge  as  at  present  envisaged,  and  will
render  obsolete  and  replace  much  that  is  at  present  con¬
sidered  valuable  if  not  fundamental  both  in  science  and
philosophy.

How  then  does  the  concept  of  Holism  fit  into  that  of
Mechanism  without  directly  negativing  it,  but  with  the


vn


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


149


ultimate  effect  of  transforming  and  transcending  it?  Let  us
return  to  consider  our  formula  once  more  from  this  point
of  view.  We  have  to  consider  how  elements  or  entities
a  and  b  produce  the  new  unity  or  entity  x  different  from
both;  and  how  this  involves  the  concepts  of  Holism  and
Mechanism.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity  I  take  as  an  illustra¬
tion  for  discussion  the  case  where  only  two  elements  enter
into  the  new  entity,  although  usually  the  number  of  com¬
ponent  elements  is  much  larger;  the  illustration  will  cover
all  cases  irrespective  of  the  actual  number  of  such  elements.
I  also  assume  that  the  concept  of  Holism  has  been  suffi¬
ciently  defined  and  explained  in  the  two  preceding  chapters
to  make  its  relation  to  the  concept  of  Mechanism  clear
without  further  definition.  I  need  only  repeat  that  the
concept  of  Mechanism  involves  a  system  or  combination  of
parts  in  relation  to  each  other,  of  such  a  character  that
these  parts  do  not  lose  their  identity  or  substantial  independ¬
ence  in  the  combined  role  they  play  in  the  system.  The
system  consists  of  the  parts  maintained  in  their  identity,
and  its  action  is  the  resultant  of  the  independent  activities
of  all  these  parts.  The  parts  remain,  and  the  activity  of  the
system  is  the  mathematical  summation  of  their  activities.
That  is  in  essence  the  idea  of  Mechanism — a  system  or  com¬
bination  whose  action  can  be  mathematically  calculated  from
those  of  its  component  parts.

Now  let  us  test  the  application  of  the  concepts  of  Holism
and  Mechanism  to  possible  combinations  or  systems  into
which  the  elements  or  parts  a  and  b  enter  as  components.
What  are  these  systems  in  Nature  of  which  we  have  knowl¬
edge,  and  how  do  they  exemplify  our  two  concepts?  We
find  the  following  possible  situations:

( 1 )  Elements  a  and  b  are  material  elements  in  the  loosest
possible  mixture  without  any  active  relation  to  each  other;
this  is  the  case  of  a  mere  mechanical  mixture,  in  which  there
is  no  combination  of  any  sort  whatever  and  nothing  new
arises,  and  to  which  neither  of  our  two  concepts  can  be
usefully  applied.  The  mixture  is  arbitrary  or  mechanical
in  the  vaguest  sense,  but  is  not  and  cannot  be  called  a


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


150

mechanism,  and  it  is  the  negation  of  the  idea  of  a  whole.
Mere  juxtaposition  in  space  and  time  is  the  only  description
which  could  be  applied  to  such  a  situation,  which  must
necessarily  be  a  rare  one  in  Nature.

(2)  Elements  a  and  b  are  material  elements  in  active
physical  relation  to  each  other  in  the  combination  or  system,
and  this  relation  affects  the  characters  of  the  combination.
The  relation  may  be  one  of  gravity  or  electricity  or  magnet¬
ism  or  any  other  of  the  forces  by  which  matter  acts  on  mat¬
ter.  In  such  a  case  the  resultant  system  is  physical,  and
may  be  properly  called  a  mechanism.  There  is  combination
of  parts,  which  do  not  lose  their  identity,  and  whose  indi¬
vidual  actions  are  summed  up  and  expressed  in  the  action  of
the  system.  The  ordinary  physical  categories  apply  to  such
a  system.

(3)  Elements  a  and  b  are  material  elements  which  enter
into  chemical  relation  to  each  other,  and  without  losing
their  identity  form  a  system  which  is  in  substance  new  and
different  from  the  component  elements.  This  is  a  chemical
combination  of  a  substantially  different  character  from  the
physical  combination  mentioned  under  (2),  which  calls  for
other  categories  of  explanation  besides  the  purely  physical
ones.  As  the  parts  still  retain  their  identity  and  individual
action,  the  concept  of  Mechanism  applies  to  their  combina¬
tion;  but  it  is  evidently  a  different  kind  of  mechanism  in
which  a  higher  degree  and  intensity  of  union  of  the  parts
are  displayed  which  affect  the  character  and  nature  of  the
resultant  entity  x.  It  is,  of  course,  true  that  the  New
Physics  is  rapidly  assimilating  chemical  categories  of  ex¬
planation  to  physical  categories,  but  a  real  difference  in  the
results  remains;  in  character  a  chemical  mechanism. is  sub¬
stantially  different  from  a  mere  physical  mechanism,  al¬
though  ultimately  the  underlying  forces  of  union  may  be
proved  to  be  the  same  in  both  cases.  Material  substances
in  Nature  arise  from  the  combination  of  both  forms  of  union
or  synthesis;  hence  all  material  substances  are  properly
called  physico-chemical  mechanisms.

(4)  Elements  a  and  b  enter  into  a  combination  which


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


151

transforms  one  or  both  of  them  so  completely  that  its  or
their  identity  is  lost  and  irrecoverable;  the  resultant  entity
x  cannot  be  explained  as  the  result  of  their  separate  and
individual  influences  and  activities;  and  the  merger  of  ele¬
ments  is  far  more  complete  than  in  the  preceding  case  (3).
If  this  were  a  complete  statement  of  the  facts  the  concept
of  Mechanism  would  not  apply  here,  and  it  would  be  a  case
of  Holism  pure  and  simple.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  the
energy  contents  of  the  elements  appear  to  be  at  any  rate
quantitatively  reproduced  in  the  new  entity  x;  and  besides,
x,  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  material  system,  still  seems  to  conform
to  a  mechanistic  type  and  arrangement  of  parts.  In  both
these  respects,  therefore,  the  concept  of  Mechanism  may
still  be  partly  applied  to  x.  But  x  is  a  mechanism  of  an
entirely  new  type,  quite  unlike  the  preceding  case  (3).  It  is
called  a  bio-chemical  mechanism.  But  it  is  a  mechanism
only  in  certain  respects,  and  to  a  limited  extent,  and  of  a
novel  character  which  necessitates  new  categories  of  action
and  explanation.  Beyond  that  it  ceases  to  be  a  mechanism
and  appears  to  conform  to  the  idea  of  Holism  in  all  other
respects.  This  is  the  case  where  cell  a  takes  in  food  b,  which
it  transforms  into  its  own  system  according  to  a  metabolism
which  differs  in  material  respects  from  the  ordinary  me¬
chanical  phenomena  of  physics  and  chemistry.  This  is  also
the  case  where  cell  a  unites  with  cell  b  to  form  a  new  entity,
in  which  both  a  and  b  disappear  finally  and  irrevocably,  and
whose  character  and  behaviour  cannot  be  traced  mathe¬
matically  or  mechanically  to  those  of  a  and  b.  The  cases
falling  under  (4)  therefore  display  a  mixture  of  Mechanism
and  Holism,  the  relations  of  which  it  remains  for  us  to  study
in  this  chapter.  They  form  the  province  of  life,  and  at  one
end  of  the  vast  ladder  of  life  they  are  much  more  mechanistic
and  at  the  other  much  more  holistic  in  character.  They  are
the  bio-chemical  wholes  which  we  shall  discuss  just  now.

(5)  The  new  entity  x  arising  under  (4)  as  a  mixed
mechanistic-holistic  type  enters  into  combination  with  a  new
factor  of  an  immaterial  psychic  character,  called  Mind;  and
this,  the  human  type,  effects  a  complete  merger  of  the


152


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


biological  and  psychic  elements,  with  an  interaction  so  close
and  intimate  that  the  psychic  element  can  only  be  properly
looked  upon  as  an  outgrowth  or  development  of  the  bio¬
logical  characters.  In  other  words,  the  holistic  element
which  entered  into  x  at  stage  (4)  now  becomes  inextricably
blended  with  another  even  more  pronouncedly  holistic  ele¬
ment;  and  the  result  is  a  still  further  approximation  to
the  full  holistic  type.  In  fact  man  is  only  mechanistic  in
respect  of  his  physical  bodily  organism;  the  true  personality
which  arises  from  the  blending  of  the  biological  and  psychic
elements  into  one  unique  whole  is  the  highest  and  fullest
expression  of  Holism  which  Nature  has  yet  realised.  If  we
apply  mechanical  characters  to  man’s  mental  or  spiritual
world,  that  is  only  by  way  of  analogy  from  lower  forms  of
experience,  and  not  because  his  spiritual  structure  is  in  any
way  of  a  mechanistic  type.  Man  is  based  on  both  worlds;
while  he  has  one  foot  planted  on  the  mechanistic  plane,  his
other  is  firmly  planted  on  the  holistic  plane,  with  a  distinct
lean-over  towards  the  latter.  Essentially  he  is  a  spiritual
and  holistic  being,  not  a  mechanistic  type,  with  sui  generis
categories  of  the  mental  and  ethical  orders.  But  his  physio¬
logical  basis  gives  him  partly  a  mechanistic  character.  He
is  thus  what  is  called  a  psycho-physical  whole.  This  will  be
more  fully  elaborated  in  its  proper  connection  later  on  in  this
work.

This  rough  summary  of  the  main  phases  and  stages  of
synthetic  development  through  which  inorganic  and  organic
Evolution  has  passed  will  suffice  to  make  clear  two  points
which  I  wish  to  emphasise :

In  the  first  place,  Mechanism  as  applied  to  types  of  evolu¬
tion  is  an  elastic  concept,  capable  of  much  refinement  in  its
application  to  ever  higher  forms  and  types.  The  mecha¬
nism  envisaged  from  the  point  of  view  of  chemistry  is
different  from  that  of  physics,  while  again  the  mechanism  of
the  cell  and  of  simple  organisms  is  a  vastly  different  affair
from  that  of  chemistry,  and  even  so  is  stretched  to  a  limit
beyond  which  it  ceases  in  many  respects  legitimately  to
apply.  We  have  different  levels  of  Mechanism,  with  their


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


iS3


appropriate  concepts  and  categories  of  structure  and  func¬
tion.  When  we  reach  the  human  stage  in  its  full  develop¬
ment  in  personality,  we  pass  beyond  the  limits  of  all
possible  mechanistic  concepts  and  categories  and  we  find
ourselves  in  the  domain  of  Holism.  Mechanism  is  thus  a
matter  of  degree.

In  the  second  place,  Holism  is  also  a  matter  of  degree.  It
begins,  as  we  have  seen,  as  structure;  and  in  its  earlier
phases  as  structure  it  is  scarcely  different  from  Mechanism.
Indeed  we  may  look  upon  Mechanism  as  incipient  Holism,
as  a  crude  early  phase  of  Holism.  In  proportion  as  Holism
realises  its  inwardness  more  fully  and  clearly  in  the  develop¬
ment  of  any  structure;  in  proportion  as  its  inward  unity  and
synthesis  replace  the  separateness  and  externality  of  the
parts,  Mechanism  makes  way  for  Holism  in  the  fuller  sense.
But  its  realisation  is  a  matter  of  degree,  and  there  will
probably  always  remain  some  residuary  feature  of  Mecha¬
nism,  which  will  to  some  small  extent  justify  the  resort  to
mechanistic  concepts  and  categories,  even  where  the  most
developed  and  refined  Holism  is  concerned.

It  follows  from  the  above  that  science  is  not  at  fault  when
for  heuristic  purposes  it  applies  mechanistic  methods  and
concepts  to  either  the  inorganic  or  the  biological  sciences.
Up  to  a  certain  point  the  resort  to  such  methods  and  con¬
cepts  is  fully  justified,  and  their  clearness  and  narrowing  of
issues  are  especially  useful  for  purposes  of  analysis  and
research.  It  is  only  when  the  larger  holistic  considerations
behind  the  mechanisms  are  ignored,  or  when  mechanistic
concepts  are  pressed  too  far  in  their  application  to  essentially
holistic  structures  and  functions,  that  the  process  becomes
harmful  and  misleading.

It  will  be  noticed  that  in  the  synthetic  grading-up  of  the
Mechanistic-Holistic  process  of  Evolution,  the  lower  unit
always  becomes  the  basis  of  the  next  higher  unit,  becomes  as
it  were  the  stepping-stone  to  the  next  stage.  Thus  the
earlier  simpler  structure  of  the  atom  becomes  the  unit  for
the  molecule;  the  molecule  for  the  crystal;  the  complex
of  molecules  for  the  cell;  the  complex  of  cells  for  the  higher


1 54


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


organism;  while  the  still  more  complex  groups  of  cells
become  the  units  for  the  higher  psychic  or  personal  struc¬
tures.  Thus  stated  the  process  seems  to  be  merely  a  regular
mechanical,  rhythmic  series  based  on  the  mixture  of  previous
elements.  But  such  a  conclusion  would  be  most  misleading.
The  process  is  not  mechanical  but  essentially  creative;  at
each  stage  something  new  arises  from  the  mixture,  inter¬
action  and  fusion  of  the  component  elements.  But  while
this  newness,  this  creative  novelty  arises  everywhere,  it  is
at  two  stages  in  particular  that  something  utterly  new  and
wholly  different  in  kind  and  nature  arises  from  the  union  of
the  pre-existing  elements;  those  are  the  stages  where  so-
called  life  and  mind  appear;  the  stages  where  bio-chemical
and  psycho-physical  wholes  make  their  appearance.  These
are  the  two  great  saltus  or  mutations  in  Evolution;  and  it  is
in  connection  with  them  that  the  great  problems  of  life  and
mind  arise.  They  are  the  structures  in  Nature  which  do  not
exemplify  pure  Mechanism  on  the  one  hand  or  pure  Holism
on  the  other;  they  are  double  structures  apparently  exempli¬
fying  both  at  the  same  time  and,  what  is  worse,  in  a  some¬
what  disharmonious  manner.  The  attempt  to  harmonise
them,  to  smooth  away  their  discrepancies  and  to  reconcile
the  contradictory  results  to  which  they  lead,  has  taxed
the  resources  of  our  science  and  philosophy  to  the  utmost;
nor  can  it  be  said  that  the  results  hitherto  attained  are  in
any  sense  satisfactory.  But  that  should  never  discourage
us  from  renewing  the  search  for  solutions  which  is  given  by
the  very  nature  of  the  human  spirit.

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  it  can  be  shown  that  the  problems,
difficulties  and  contradictions  which  arise  in  connection
with  these  bro-chemical  and  psycho-physical  wholes  are  due
to  fundamental  misconceptions,  and  that  the  application  of
the  category  of  Holism  to  living  bodies  and  human  per¬
sonalities  will  transform  the  situation  and  help  towards  a
solution  of  the  apparent  contradictions.  Let  us  broadly
state  the  problem  as  it  presents  itself  from  the  point  of  view
of  physical  science  and  of  human  psychology  respectively.

Now  science  looks  upon  the  physico-chemical  order,  upon


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


155

physical  nature,  as  it  is  commonly  understood,  as  a  closed
system,  complete  in  itself.  The  chain  of  .physical  causation
is  complete,  and  there  is  no  need  or  place  for  anything  of  a
non-physical  character.  There  is  a  complete  system  of
equations  as  between  the  past  and  the  future.  Effect  equals
cause;  and  there  is  no  necessity  or  place  for  any  tertium  quid.
Necessity  and  determination  characterise  the  order  of  Na¬
ture,  the  laws  of  Thermodynamics  supply  a  test  of  its  work¬
ing  character.  Where  then  do  life  and  mind  come  in?  What
is  their  function  and  their  relation  to  this  physical  order?
What  difference  can  they  make  to  this  complete,  closed,
self-sufficing  system?  If  they  have  any  effect,  it  can  only
be  by  interfering  with  the  inevitable  chain  of  physical
causation  and  thus  breaking  the  laws  of  energy.  If  life  or
will  or  mind  has  any  practical  effect,  that  would  mean  an
interference  with  physical  causes,  with  the  fixed  and  deter¬
mined  energy  equations.  But  no  such  interference  can  be
detected  in  any  direction;  the  causal  physical  chain  remains
unbroken;  the  laws  of  energy  are  unalterable.  We  are
therefore  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  life  and  mind  have
no  real  effect  and  are  of  no  avail  in  the  world.  If  they  were,
the  fundamental  laws  of  Nature  would  be  upset.  Such  is
the  view-point  of  physical  science.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  just  as  firmly  persuaded
by  the  most  clear  and  unequivocal  deliverances  of  our
consciousness  that  we  can  choose,  that  we  can  direct  our
attention  and  action  to  definite  purposes;  that  our  willing
is  effective ;  that  we  can  will  to  perform  an  act,  and  perform
it  accordingly;  that  our  bodily  organs  respond  to  the  act  of
will  in  spite  of  all  the  energy  equations;  that  within  limits
we  can  do  what  we  will  to  do.  Unless  our  consciousness
and  our  senses  quite  deceive  us,  this  seems  to  be  as  plain  and
self-evident  as  anything  in  our  experience.  And  thus  we
are  landed  in  self-contradictions.  On  the  one  hand,  the
unbreakable  chain  of  natural  causation  and  the  laws  of
energy;  on  the  other,  our  indubitable  consciousness  of  the
effectiveness  of  our  power  of  free  self-directed  action.  How
is  the  contradiction  to  be  overcome?  We  are  not  concerned


156  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

with  the  hoary  old  philosophical  conundrum  of  free-will,
but  the  issue  is  the  very  live  and  real  one  of  the  fundamental
veracity  of  our  clear  conscious  experience.  If  in  the  last
resort  we  cannot  believe  our  consciousness  and  senses,  we
had  better  give  up  the  problem  of  knowledge  altogether.

In  this  dilemma  it  seems  to  me  that  only  one  course
remains  open  for  us,  and  that  is  to  accept  the  direct  deliver¬
ance  of  our  senses  at  its  face  value.  If  we  cannot  trust
our  consciousness  when  it  produces  clear,  direct  and
immediate  testimony  to  our  power  of  self-direction  and
action,  how  can  we  rely  on  it  when  it  proceeds  by  way
of  inference  to  build  up  a  vast  construction  such  as  the
universal  causality  of  Nature?  If  we  cannot  trust  our
experience  where  it  is  perfectly  clear  and  unequivocal,  it
is  useless  to  attempt  to  proceed  any  further  in  our  search
for  truth.  But  then  the  question  at  once  arises,  how  our
minds  can  act  on  Nature  without  breaking  the  causal  chain
of  Nature.  How  is  the  link  of  Mind  inserted  into  that
closed  chain?  It  is  unnecessary  to  discuss  at  length  the
answers  which  philosophers  and  scientists  have  attempted
in  reply  to  these  questions.  Science  on  the  whole  tends  to
accept  the  physical  view  of  natural  necessity  and  to  look
upon  mind  as  ineffective,  as  an  epiphenomenon  which  does
not  avail  to  alter  the  course  of  Nature.  It  is  forced  to  this
view  in  spite  of  the  difficulty  which  thereby  arises  of  explain¬
ing  how  this  useless  and  ineffective  organ  of  mind  could
have  arisen  in  the  grim  struggle  for  existence;  what  biological
function  it  performs  and  what  survival  or  other  value  it
possesses.  But  that  question  need  not  detain  us  here.
Nor  need  we  consider  the  theories  of  psycho-physical
parallelism  and  pre-established  harmony  and  such  like,  to
which  philosophers  have  been  driven  in  their  distress  in
order  to  explain  the  apparent  miracle  of  the  adjusted
co-working  of  body  and  mind.  There  is  no  doubt  that
none  of  these  views  can  be  looked  upon  as  satisfactory.
And  the  necessity  remains  for  further  exploration.  Instead
of  rummaging  in  the  scrap-heap  of  philosophy,  let  us  rather
explore  some  new  way  out  amid  these  historic  problems


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


157


and  difficulties  of  thought.  Perhaps  our  basic  categories
have  been  faulty  or  inadequate;  perhaps  the  facts  are  all
right,  and  it  is  only  our  way  of  envisaging  them,  our  view¬
points  and  fundamental  concepts,  that  play  us  false.  The
difficulties  may  be  of  our  own  making,  and  should  therefore
be  of  our  own  un-making  and  solving.  Anybody  who  has
carefully  followed  our  account  of  Holism  in  the  two  pre¬
ceding  chapters  will  at  once  appreciate  the  line  of  thought
which  it  naturally  suggests  as  the  way  out  of  these  diffi¬
culties.  The  radical  mistake  made  by  both  science  and
popular  opinion  is  the  severance  of  an  indivisible  whole
into  two  interacting  entities  or  substances,  the  view  of  life
and  mind  as  separate  entities  from  the  body.  Life  and
mind  are  not  new  entities  which  interact  with  the  physico¬
chemical  entities  or  structures.  It  is  the  assumption  of
these  entities  and  of  their  interaction  with  physico-chemical
entities  of  a  different  order  which  produces  the  contradic¬
tions  for  thought  and  the  problems  for  experience.  The
assumption  of  these  entities  is  based  on  a  false  view  of
reality;  it  leads  again  to  an  assumed  interaction  which
does  not  exist  in  fact.  Between  them  these  two  assump¬
tions  distort  our  whole  perspective  in  experience  and  conjure
up  for  thought  a  number  of  contradictions  which  experience
shows  not  to  exist  in  fact.  Thought  fails  to  understand
how  mind  and  body  interact  in  a  human  person;  and  yet
we  see  the  phenomenon  before  our  eyes  all  the  time.
Thought  fails  to  understand  how  the  immaterial  entity  or
force  of  life  can  influence  a  physico-chemical  structure  which
obeys  simply  and  solely  the  laws  of  energy.  And  yet  we
see  the  phenomenon  in  a  living  organism  all  the  time  before
our  eyes.  It  seems  inevitable  that  our  experience  must  be
right  and  our  categories  of  thought  must  be  wrong  or
inadequate,  and  that  the  insoluble  puzzles  which  arise
must  be  due  to  a  misreading  of  the  facts.  But,  I  shall  be
answered,  if  life  and  mind  are  fictitious  and  assumed
entities,  which  do  not  exist  in  fact,  we  are  back  again  in
the  old  crude,  crass  materialism,  and  the  Evolution  of
which  life  and  mind  are  the  main  products  and  organs


158  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

becomes  a  mere  hallucination.  No,  I  reply,  it  is  not  the
reality  of  life  and  mind  that  is  denied,  but  their  construc¬
tion  as  entities  of  a  character  and  kind  to  interact  with
other  entities.  It  is  the  false  constructions  of  life  and
mind  and  their  erection  into  independent  entities  which  is
the  source  of  the  trouble  and  ought  to  be  demolished.  A
true  view  of  the  facts  not  only  will  do  justice  to  life  and
mind,  but  will  remove  the  problem  which  a  false  view  has
artificially  created.  And  Holism  is  brought  forward  as  a
view-point,  a  category  and  an  activity  which  reproduces
reality  and  renders  the  facts  intelligible  without  distortion
or  contradiction.  Current  views  of  life  and  mind  are  wrong;
and  it  is  partly  to  correct  these  errors  that  the  wide  concept
of  Holism,  which  includes,  underlies  and  transcends  them
both,  is  introduced.  Our  views  of  immaterial  things  have
been  in  process  of  evolution  for  thousands  of  years,  and
the  process  is  far  from  complete  yet.  Remember  the  view
of  the  soul,  held  by  the  Homeric  Greeks,  as  a  pale  copy  of
the  body;  and  indeed  the  present  popular  notion  of  ghosts
scarcely  yet  differs  from  this  view.  Remember  the  con¬
troversy  among  the  early  Christians,  of  which  there  is  an
echo  in  St.  Paul’s  great  chapter  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  (i  Cor.  xv.  35-50) — whether  it  is  the  corporeal
body  or  a  spiritual  body  corresponding  to  it  which  would
be  raised  to  immortality.  We  still  construe  life,  mind  and
the  soul  according  to  physical  analogies  or  material  cate¬
gories.  Let  anybody  sit  down  and  try  to  form  for  himself
an  idea  of  the  soul’s  disembodied  existence,  and  he  will
convince  himself  how  difficult  it  is  to  get  away  from  physical
analogies,  from  the  pale  copies  of  earthly  existences,  not
very  much  different  from  the  shades  which  wander  through
the  cold  Homeric  Hades.  We  conceive  spiritual  things  very
much  on  the  lines  of  material  things;  though  conceived  as
on  different  planes  they  are  not  too  far  apart,  not  too
different  from  each  other  to  be  able  to  act  on  each  other
and  influence  each  other.  It  is  these  conceptions  of  life
and  mind  as  semi-physical  entities,  reminiscent  and  redolent
of  the  past,  which  at  bottom  underlie  many  of  the  great


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  159

problems  of  thought.  We  have  really  outgrown  them;
and  in  a  sense  they  survive  as  anachronisms  and  disturbing
factors  in  a  world  which  in  most  other  respects  has  made
the  most  revolutionary  advances  in  knowledge.  They
should  be  reformed  and  brought  into  line  with  the  advanced
front  which  is  at  present  held  on  the  battle-field  of  science.

The  vague,  popular,  ghost-like  concept  of  life  is  stereo¬
typed  and  rendered  definite  by  the  scientific  concept  of
Vitalism;  for  our  purpose  we  may  take  the  two  as
equivalent.  Now  what  is  Vitalism?  It  is  nothing  but  a
pale  copy  of  physical  force.  According  to  the  Vitalists  or
the  Vitalistic  hypothesis,  a  living  body  is  conceived  as  a
material  system  in  which  the  physico-chemical  forces  are
supplemented  by  a  new  force,  not  of  the  same  character
as  they,  but  still  sufficiently  like  them  to  act  on  them  and
to  be  acted  on  by  them.  The  Vitalistic  hypothesis  is  right
in  so  far  as  it  considers  physico-chemical  agencies,  con¬
siderations  and  categories  as  insufficient  to  explain  the
phenomena  of  living  bodies.  But  it  is  wrong  when  it
proceeds  to  assume  the  existence  and  the  interaction  with
them  of  a  new  so-called  vital  force,  which  may  or  may  not
affect  their  quantitative  relations,  which  may  or  may  not
quantitatively  add  to  or  subtract  from  them,  but  which
somehow  has  the  power  to  control  or  otherwise  affect  the
manner  in  which  they  are  working.  A  living  organism
appears  to  have  the  power  to  direct  its  energies  to  some
definite  end,  and  it  will  make  all  sorts  of  experiments,  of
trial-and-error  co-ordinations  of  its  bodily  movements,  until
it  successfully  achieves  that  end.  The  specific  power  of
directing  its  energies  to  certain  definite  ends  or  objects  or
with  a  certain  measure  of  purpose  seems  to  be  characteristic
of  all  living  things  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest.  This
capacity  of  direction  may  be  conscious  or  unconscious;  it
may  be  reflex  or  instinctive  or  deliberate  and  intentional;
but  as  a  phenomenon  and  a  fact  of  universal  observation
it  is  beyond  dispute.  It  is  the  explanation  of  the  phe¬
nomenon  and  the  fact  which  is  in  dispute  as  well  as  its  rela¬
tion  to  the  physical-energy  system  which  it  seems  to  influence


i6o


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


or  direct.  And  Vitalism  is  a  theory  which  attributes  this
power  of  inner  direction  or  control  to  a  new  sort  of  force
which  distinguishes  living  from  non-living  bodies.  It  is,
of  course,  true  that  with  many  of  the  older  biologists  Vitalism
was  more  a  standpoint  than  a  theory;  more  an  attitude  of
protest  against  the  supposed  adequacy  and  sufficiency  of
mechanistic  or  physico-chemical  explanation  of  living
bodies,  than  a  definite  assumption  of  a  new  vital  force.
They  realised  that  there  was  something  more  in  the  living
organism  than  what  could  be  accounted  for  on  the  action
of  purely  physical  and  chemical  forces.  In  this  standpoint
they  were  no  doubt  right;  and  in  this  vague  negative
sense  there  is  not  only  no  harm,  but  positive  value  in  the
Vitalistic  standpoint.  But  with  some  of  the  more  recent
biologists  the  Vitalistic  standpoint  has  crystallised  into  a  defi¬
nite  hypothesis  which  assumes  a  specific  life-force.  And  it  is
against  this  hypothesis  that  our  argument  will  be  directed.

It  follows  from  what  has  already  been  said  that  the  very
conception  of  such  a  “force”  is  an  anachronism,  an  assimi¬
lation  of  the  concept  of  life  to  ideas  and  view-points  which
are  or  should  be  obsolete.  It  is  a  question  whether  the
concept  of  force  has  any  validity  at  all  in  physics;  whether
the  dynamical  notion  of  force  is  more  than  a  mere  mathe¬
matical  notation  or  terminology  with  nothing  in  physical
reality  behind  it.  There  is  a  tendency  among  physicists  to
discard  the  idea  of  force  as  unnecessary  and  misleading  and
to  restrict  themselves  to  the  concept  of  energy.  Whether
they  are  right  or  not,  it  is  at  any  rate  clear  that  the  idea
of  force  can  only  have  an  application,  if  it  has  any  at  all,
in  the  material  physico-chemical  order.  When  it  is  extended
to  the  province  of  life,  it  becomes  illegitimate  and  only
serves  to  materialise  what  is  in  its  essence  non-material
and  spiritual.  The  concept  of  life  is  already  deeply  tainted
in  this  and  other  ways;  and  that  is  one  of  the  reasons  why
I  have  proposed  for  purposes  of  scientific  thought  and
reasoning  to  discard  this  vague  and  abused  term,  and  to
substitute  instead  the  notion  of  Holism,  which  can  at  any
rate  be  made  clear  and  definite,  and  is  not  vitiated  by


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  161

popular  associations  and  accretions.  The  Vitalistic  hypo¬
thesis  moves  in  the  opposite  direction;  by  constituting  a
life-force  on  the  analogy  of  physico-chemical  forces,  it  tends
to  materialise  life,  to  hypostatise  it  into  a  definite  entity,
and  in  this  form  to  set  it  over  against  the  material  body
in  which  it  has  its  seat.  Not  only  is  life  constituted  into  an
entity  interacting  with  other  material  entities,  but  its
non-material,  spiritual  character  is  reduced  to  the  level  of
a  force  among  other  forces,  different  from  them  indeed,  but
not  so  different  as  not  to  influence  them  or  to  be  influenced
by  them.  Life  as  Vitalism  or  vital  force  is  considered  a
real  entity,  and  its  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  living
organism  become  the  source  of  serious  difficulties  and
contradictions.

I  have  above  briefly  stated  the  naturalistic  scheme  of
science  and  its  sharp  opposition  to  and  contradictions  of
the  claims  of  life  and  mind  as  ordinarily  understood.  That
opposition  and  those  contradictions  arise  from  fundamental
misconceptions  which  have  their  origins  in  the  naive  dualism
of  our  ordinary  views  of  life  and  mind.  Body-and-soul  is
the  model  or  scheme  on  which  both  thought  and  science
are  based.  There  is  an  anima  dwelling  in  a  corpus,  one
entity  living  in  close  symbiosis  with  another,  and  the  two
profoundly  influencing  each  other.  As  Descartes  formulated
it,  there  is  the  res  cogitans  in  the  res  extensa;  there  are  two
distinct  separate  res  or  entities,  and  the  difficulties  and
contradictions  arise  from  their  mutual  assumed  interaction.
The  theory  of  Vitalism  or  the  vital  force  seems  simply  to
repeat  and  to  emphasise  this  dualism.  But  if  we  wish  to
overcome  these  difficulties  and  contradictions  we  have  to
probe  more  deeply  than  these  popular  views.  We  must
get  down  to  the  tap-root  from  which  the  two  apparent
entities  or  substances  must  have  grown.  The  subject  is
most  difficult  and  uncertain;  but  I  may  be  allowed  to  put
it  in  the  following  form.

“Selectiveness,”  as  was  pointed  out  in  Chapter  III,
seems  an  inherent  and  fundamental  property  of  matter.
Electro-magnetism  is  a  striking  instance  of  that  pheno-


1 62  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

menon;  so  is  the  very  constitution  of  matter,  whose  ultimate
forms  of  structure  depend  on  inherent  affinities  and  selec-
tivities  of  still  smaller  structures  or  units.  So  is  the
behaviour  of  matter  in  the  colloidal  state.  In  the  selective¬
ness  of  matter  we  seem  to  meet  with  an  ultimate  property
for  which  no  accounting  on  further  more  ultimate  grounds
is  possible.

Now  selectiveness  is  likewise  the  fundamental  property
of  all  organism;  it  is  indeed  the  most  primitive  property
of  life.  Perhaps  it  is  the  very  point  where  the  organic  and
inorganic  were  still  one  and  began  to  diverge.  A  cell  shows
selective  power  or  selectivity  in  all  its  processes,  such  as
the  assimilation  of  its  food  and  the  rejection  of  what  is
not  suitable  for  its  nourishment.  An  organism  shows  this
selective  power  in  all  its  movements  as  well  as  in  its  nutri¬
tion.  There  is  a  selection  of  ends  and  an  adjustment  of
its  movements  to  the  attainment  of  those  ends.  If  the
adjustment  is  wrong,  if  mistaken  or  abortive  movements
are  made,  the  experiment  is  repeated  until  the  object  is
attained — the  food  is  reached,  the  danger  is  avoided,  or
the  enemy  is  routed.  This  primitive  power  of  selection  or
selectivity  is  not  yet  choice  or  will  as  seen  in  the  higher
phases  of  organic  development,  but  it  is  the  tap-root  of
choice  or  will.  One  form  of  this  selective  power  is  self-
direction,  which  is  equally  characteristic  of  organisms.
Life  has  a  power  of  self-direction,  of  selecting  to  go  in  one
direction  rather  than  in  another,  of  taking  the  path  which
leads  to  the  attainment  of  its  unconscious  or  consciously
realised  object.  This  power  of  self-direction  is  clearly  only
a  particular  form  or  species  of  the  more  general  power  of
selectivity.

Perhaps  I  may  in  passing  be  allowed  to  make  another
venturesome  suggestion;  and  that  is,  that  selectivity  is
an  inherently  holistic  attribute  or  quality.  A  natural  whole
as  a  small  limited  centre  of  unity  has  a  definite  structure
which  necessarily  limits  its  functioning  to  certain  ways  or
modes  and  no  others.  All  possibilities  are  not  open  to  it;
it  has  only  more  or  less  limited  degrees  of  freedom  for  its


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  163

activities;  it  has  to  confine  itself  to  these  and  implicitly
to  reject  all  others.  Anticipating  later  stages  of  develop¬
ment,  one  may  say  that  its  choice  is  limited;  in  other
words,  selective  action  is  essential  for  it.  What  is  perfectly
clear  at  later,  more  mature  phases  of  Evolution  already
exists  in  undeveloped  immature  form  in  the  most  primitive
organisms.  There  is  a  primitive  stage  of  organic  function¬
ing  when  concepts  like  will,  choice  or  purpose  are  clearly
not  yet  applicable,  but  their  root  already  exists  in  a  sort
of  organic  selectivity  or  power  of  self-direction  and  self¬
orientation.  This  primitive  organic  power  of  selection  is
probably  not  far  removed  from  the  inorganic  property
which  I  have  called  by  the  same  name.  Apparently  the
conflict  has  not  yet  arisen  here.

Let  us  next  consider  the  most  universal  generalisations
or  laws  of  matter  and  energy.  I  refer  to  the  two  laws  of
Thermodynamics,  the  first  of  which  affirms  the  universal
principle  of  conservation  or  constancy  of  the  amount  of
energy  in  a  closed  physical  system;  while  the  second  affirms
the  universal  principle  of  the  dissipation  or  degradation  of
energy.  It  is  these  two  supreme  generalisations  which
seem  to  come  into  irreconcilable  conflict  with  the  principles
and  properties  of  life  and  mind,  and  therefore  call  for  a
careful  analysis.  Now  when  bodies  and  souls  (including
life  and  mind)  are  taken  as  separate  entities  in  interaction
with  each  other,  the  simplest  way  of  expressing  the  observed
facts  is  to  say  that  life  or  mind  has  a  directive  power  over
the  body.  It  was  Descartes  who  first  suggested  that  life
or  mind  might  have  the  power  (to  use  the  language  of  later
scientific  developments)  of  directing  the  energies  in  a  body
without  affecting  their  amount,  and  therefore  without  a
breach  of  the  first  law  of  Thermodynamics.  According  to
this  view  life  or  mind  in  an  organism  would  direct  the
energies  of  the  body  without  either  creating  or  destroying
any  of  these  energies.  We  have  already  seen  that  this
power  of  self-direction  is  characteristic  of  life;  and  the
suggestion  was  that  the  exercise  of  this  power,  while  not
interfering  with  the  laws  of  matter,  would  explain  the


1 64  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

influence  of  life  or  mind  over  the  body.  Leibniz,  however,
pointed  out  in  answer  to  Descartes  that  force  (as  energy
was  then  called)  is  not  only  quantitative  but  also  directional
in  character.  And  the  second  law  of  motion  according  to
Newton  made  this  perfectly  clear.  The  direction  in  which
a  force  is  acting  can  be  altered  only  by  another  force,  and
this  change  of  direction  would  therefore  involve  an  expendi¬
ture  of  force  or  energy.  If,  therefore,  the  mind  has  a
directive  influence  over  the  body,  it  can  exercise  this  only
by  way  of  adding  to  or  subtracting  from  the  energy  of  the
body  considered  as  a  closed  system,  and  would  therefore  be
in  conflict  with  the  first  law  of  Thermodynamics.  Now
in  the  body  as  a  closed  system  experiment  or  observation
has  never  yet  shown  any  such  addition  or  subtraction  of
energy.  The  energy  put  into  a  living  body  by  way  of  food,
heat  or  otherwise  is  always,  within  the  limits  of  error,
equalled  by  the  energy  of  the  work  done,  the  heat  pro¬
duced,  and  the  waste  products  thrown  off.  As  an  energy
system  the  living  body  is  unaffected  by  life  or  mind  or  any
other  factor  of  a  non-physical  character.  There  can,  there¬
fore,  be  no  such  direction  of  the  energy  of  a  living  organism
by  life  or  mind  as  is  assumed;  and  if  there  were,  the  effect
would  at  once  be  detected  in  an  alteration  of  the  amount
of  energy  in  the  body.  The  first  law  of  Thermodynamics,
therefore,  seems  to  negative  this  assumed  power  of  direction
of  life  or  mind  over  the  body,  and  seems  to  be  fatal  to  any
view  of  directive  interaction  between  the  two.  Either  the
first  law  must  be  given  up,  or  life  and  mind  are  nullities:
such  are  the  fatal  horns  of  the  dilemma  on  which  we  are
impaled.  But  the  surrender  of  the  first  law  is  not  to  be
thought  of.  Although  not  exactly  proved  in  a  rigorous
mathematical  sense,  it  is  a  norm  of  science  which  works
successfully  in  practice  and  which  has  never  been  known
to  be  contradicted  by  any  actual  observations.  It  may  be
that  in  view  of  the  recent  discoveries  of  the  New  Physics,
which  associates  the  concepts  of  energy  and  mass  very
closely,  the  law  may  have  to  be  expanded  so  as  to
include  both  the  energy  and  mass  of  any  closed  system.


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  165

But  the  surrender  of  the  law  would  bring  the  whole
structure  of  science  toppling  down.  Nor,  on  the  other
hand,  is  the  nullity  of  life  or  mind  for  a  moment  to  be
conceded.  As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  sense  of
effective  choice,  willing  and  self-direction  is  the  clearest,
most  indubitable  deliverance  of  consciousness  we  have,  and
its  denial  must  necessarily  destroy  the  very  foundations  on
which  experience  and  knowledge  are  built.  Besides,  if  Life
and  Mind  are  nullities,  then  the  Evolution  which  produced
them  must  be  a  farce;  but  this  is  totally  inadmissible.  A
way  out  of  this'  dilemma  must  therefore  be  found.  But  let
us  first  look  at  the  second  law  of  Thermodynamics.

The  second  law  affirms  the  principle  of  the  universal
dissipation  or  degradation  of  energy.  It  likens  energy  to
water;  as  water  constantly  tends  to  run  down  from  a
higher  to  a  lower  level,  so  the  potential  of  energy  constantly
tends  to  run  down,  and  the  energy  tends  to  lose  its  efficiency
and  availability.  While  the  energy  of  a  closed  system
therefore  remains  constant  in  amount,  it  changes  in  char¬
acter,  it  becomes  dissipated  or  degraded  and  less  efficient
and  useful.  And  this  principle  is  apparently  of  universal
application  in  the  physical  world.  When  any  phenomenon
seems  to  contradict  it,  that  phenomenon  will  in  the  end  be
found  to  be  based  on  faulty  observation.

But  living  bodies  seem  to  contradict  it.  In  a  living  body
the  potentials  of  energy  and  efficiency  are  rising  instead  of
falling.  In  living  bodies  complex  substances  are  for  ever
being  built  up  with  a  high  energy  efficiency;  and  the  break¬
ing  down  of  these  substances  in  the  processes  of  life  supplies
the  energy  which  the  living  body  requires  for  its  proper
functioning.  These  complex  chemical  compounds  with  high
energy  efficiency  have  been  called  the  high  explosives  which
are  necessary  for  the  battle  of  life.  And  it  is  the  essential
function  of  living  bodies  through  their  subtle  metabolism
to  manufacture  these  high  explosives  whose  breaking  down
liberates  the  energy  which  life  needs  for  its  functions  and
processes.  The  process  of  organic  Evolution  marks  a  con¬
tinuous  rise  in  the  complexity  of  the  organic  substances


i66


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


produced  and  the  level  of  the  energy  potentials  reached.
Living  bodies  and  Evolution  generally,  therefore,  seem  to
run  counter  to  the  stream  of  natural  tendency  as  expressed
in  the  second  law  of  Thermodynamics.  The  systems  of
life  and  mind  seem  to  be  in  contradiction  to  both  the  great
principles  of  physical  science.  Is  a  reconciliation  possible?

Clerk-Maxwell,  one  of  the  heroic  figures  of  nineteenth-
century  physics,  was  the  first  to  suggest  an  idea  which  may
open  up  a  possible  clue  to  the  solution  of  the  problem.
He  pointed  out  that  the  laws  of  energy  were  statistical  in
character;  they  regarded  bodies,  systems  and  their  energies
en  masse,  and  their  principles  apply  to  these  energies
taken  statistically  and  on  an  average.  When,  therefore,  the
energy  of  a  physical  system  is  spoken  of,  the  average  of
its  particular  energies  considered  together  and  as  a  whole
is  referred  to.  In  this  sense,  for  instance,  the  principle  of
the  degradation  of  energy  held  true,  but  in  no  other  sense.
And  he  illustrated  his  meaning  by  taking  as  an  instance
a  volume  of  gas  with  a  certain  ascertainable  total  kinetic
energy.  In  this  volume  the  molecules  of  the  gas  would
have  different  energies  according  to  their  rates  of  motion.
In  accordance  with  the  formula  E  =  y2mv2,  the  energy  of
a  particle  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  its  velocity.  Now
some  molecules  would  be  pushed  forward  by  the  impact  of
other  molecules  in  their  line  of  motion  and  would  therefore
have  their  motion  accelerated;  others,  again,  would  suffer
impacts  contrary  to  their  line  of  motion  and  would  be
slowed  down.  And,  as  a  fact,  the  molecules  constituting
the  volume  of  gas  would  have  all  sorts  and  rates  of  motion
and  consequent  differences  of  energy.  Now,  if  without
introducing  any  additional  energy  into  such  a  system,
some  sifting  and  sorting  out  and  grading  of  the  different
molecules  according  to  their  velocities  could  take  place,  we
could  have  an  assortment  of  molecules  with  a  higher  energy
than  the  average  of  the  gas,  while  the  balance  would  have
an  energy  below  the  average.  In  other  words,  by  sorting
out  instead  of  merely  averaging  we  could  have  bodies  with
a  higher  energy  potential  or  efficiency  than  the  average  of


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


167


the  mass  from  which  they  have  been  separated  or  segre¬
gated.  And  this  higher  energy  potential  would  not  be  due
to  the  imparting  of  any  additional  energy  from  the  outside.
Clerk-Maxwell  imagined  some  demon  manipulating  an
aperture  inside  the  volume  of  gas  to  effect  this  sorting  and
grading,  and  thus  producing  a  result  in  apparent  conflict
with  the  principle  of  the  second  law,  which  affirms  the
constant  degradation  of  energy.  His  point  was  to  make
clear  that  the  second  law  referred  merely  to  a  statistical
average  and  was  correct  only  in  that  limited  sense.

But  it  is  obvious  that  his  limitation  of  the  law  has  a
far-reaching  significance,  and  his  illustration  points  the  way
to  the  reconciliation  of  the  systems  of  life  and  mind  with
that  of  physical  energy.  What  if  life  and  mind  were  con¬
ceived  as  demons  of  the  Maxwell  type?  We  have  already
seen  that  their  most  essential  function  is  selection  and
self-direction.  The  sifting,  sorting  out  and  grading  which
Clerk-Maxwell  ascribes  to  his  hypothetical  demon  is  the
very  function  of  life  and  mind.  Through  this  selective
activity  all  collision  with  the  second  law  is  avoided,  which
is  true  of  statistical  averages  only.  And  we  may  go  further
and  show  that  the  self-direction  which  is  inherent  in  life
and  mind  involves  no  fresh  creation  of  force  or  energy  in  its
application  to  matter,  as  Leibniz  held,  and  constitutes  no
infringement  of  the  first  law,  as  is  commonly  assumed.
The  same  argument  which  holds  for  selection  (of  molecules
with  a  particular  speed)  in  reference  to  the  second  law  holds
also  for  direction  of  molecules  in  reference  to  the  first  law.
The  supposed  demon,  dealing  with  our  volume  of  gas  would
select  molecules,  not  of  a  certain  velocity,  but  moving  in  a
certain  direction,  molecules  with  a  certain  orientation,  in
preference  to  others,  and  could  thus  obtain  a  body  moving
in  a  certain  direction  without  the  expenditure  of  any
additional  energy  in  bringing  about  this  change  of  direction.
Change  of  direction  need  not,  therefore,  involve  any  change
in  the  energy  situation,  as  Leibniz  held  and  as  is  commonly
assumed.  It  is  only  when  bodies  are  considered  as  a  whole
and  as  averages,  and  without  reference  to  their  detailed


1 68  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

structures  and  arrangements,  that  the  difficulties  arise  and
the  physical  system  seems  to  come  into  conflict  with  the
systems  of  life  and  mind.

If  my  reasoning  is  correct  the  result  is  most  important.
It  suggests  and  indicates  the  way  in  which,  in  bio-chemical
and  psycho-physical  wholes,  Life  the  selector  and  Mind  the
director  may  exercise  their  essential  functions  in  bodies
without  coming  into  conflict  with  the  laws  of  energy  as
ordinarily  understood.  The  detailed  method  and  mechanism
of  interaction  is  not  yet  explained,  but  at  least  the  possibility
of  conflict  is  eliminated;  we  see  that  these  two  systems  may
function  in  harmony  and  without  violation  of  fundamental
physical  principles  on  the  one  hand  or  the  stultification
and  nullification  of  life  and  mind  on  the  other.  The  possi¬
bility  of  harmonious  functioning  is  established;  the  actuality
of  the  process  and  its  details  remains  for  further  discussion.

Let  me  once  more  state  the  issue  raised  by  physical
science  in  connection  with  life  and  mind  and  see  how  the
result  we  have  now  reached  meets  that  issue.  Taking  for
granted  that  the  statistical  laws  of  energy  apply  fully  to
all  purely  physical  systems,  the  following  questions  arise:

1.  Do  they  also  apply  to  systems,  such  as  living  organisms
or  conscious  personalities,  which  are  not  purely  physical
systems?

2.  Further,  in  such  mixed  systems,  is  the  effect  of  the
non-physical  factor,  life  or  mind,  on  the  physical  part  of
the  system  such  that  the  laws  of  energy  do  no  longer  fully
apply  to  this  part?  In  other  words  do  life  and  mind  dis¬
turb,  deflect  and  alter  thfc  application  of  the  principles  of
energy  to  the  physical  part  in  such  mixed  systems  as
living  bodies  or  conscious  personalities?

The  answer  to  the  first  question  is  in  the  affirmative  and
to  the  second  question  in  the  negative.  The  laws  of  energy
hold  for  the  physical  mechanisms  of  organisms  and  persons
no  less  than  for  purely  physical  systems;  and  the  influences
of  life  and  mind,  whatever  they  may  be  in  other  directions,
do  not  invalidate  the  application  of  these  laws  to  bodies  or
persons  in  so  far  as  they  are  physical  systems  or  mechanisms.


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  169

The  laws  of  life  and  mind  are  not  in  conflict  with  the  laws
of  energy.  An  organism  is  more  than  a  physical  structure;
but  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  physical  structure  it  obeys  the  laws
of  energy  just  as  if  it  were  nothing  but  a  physical  structure.

The  result  is  important,  because  it  does  justice  to  both
the  physical  and  the  non-physical  aspects  of  bio-chemical
and  psycho-physical  wholes.  Ordinarily  in  the  grand  tug-
of-war  between  the  two  aspects  in  these  mixed  systems,
the  palm  of  victory  is  awarded  to  one  or  the  other,  accord¬
ing  to  the  naturalistic  or  spiritualistic  leanings  of  the
judges.  According  to  those  who  adopt  the  standpoint  of
physical  science,  the  laws  of  energy  apply  to  the  mixed
system,  even  to  the  extent  of  reducing  life  and  mind  to
the  role  of  impotent  semblances  or  mere  empty  simulacra
on  the  scene  of  existence.  Again,  according  to  the  spiritualist
view,  the  factors  of  life  and  mind  are  real  and  operative,
not  only  on  their  own  proper  level  and  in  their  own  domain,
but  to  the  extent  of  qualifying  and  modifying1  even  the
mechanical  relations  of  the  bodily  or  physical  structure,
and  thus  affecting  the  application  of  the  laws  of  energy  to
it.  The  first  conclusion  (Naturalism)  is  contradicted  by
our  direct  consciousness,  the  second  (Spiritualism)  by  the
experimental  results  of  observations  on  living  bodies.  The
reasoning  we  have  followed  so  far  on  the  suggestion  of  one
of  the  greatest  masters  of  physical  science,  has  indicated
to  us  how  life  and  mind  may  discharge  their  essential
functions  without  impinging  on  the  universal  laws  of
energy,  which  are  the  very  foundation  of  the  whole  system
of  science.  The  higher  structures  of  life  and  mind  do  not
mean  the  annihilation  of  the  lower  structures  of  energy.
Here  again,  as  we  have  seen  before  in  the  general  process  of
creative  Evolution,  the  lower  becomes  the  unit  for  the  next
higher;  there  is  a  grading  of  the  advance  without  a  destruc¬
tion  of  the  steps  or  grades  constituting  the  advance.  The
higher  structure  is  based  on  the  lower  structure  without
the  absorption  and  disappearance  of  the  latter  in  the  pro¬
cess.  Thus  mind  structures  presuppose  life  structures,  and

1  Hobhouse:  Development  and  Purpose,  pp.  326,  329.


170


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


life  structures  presuppose  energy  structures,  which  are
themselves  graded  according  to  the  various  forms  of  physical
and  chemical  grouping.

The  via  media,  the  way  of  reconciliation  between  the
mistaken  extremes,  which  we  have  followed,  is  often  missed
by  others  because  they  are  misled  by  hypostatising  body
and  mind  as  two  distinct  entities  or  substances  or  res,  as
Descartes  called  them.  These  two  entities  or  substances
are  then  brought  to  interact  by  way  of  external  relations,
which  are  naturally  of  a  mechanical  character,  as  all  external
relations  are.  This  interaction  by  way  of  externality
reduces  mind  to  the  level  of  body  and  thus  ends  by  a
practical  denial  of  mind.  This  mistake  is  then  corrected  by
the  opposite  mistake  of  an  attack  on  the  body  or  the  physical
order.  Thus  the  Naturalistic  and  Spiritualistic  fallacies
arise.  Here  these  mistakes  have  been  avoided  by  our
refusal  to  look  at  the  two  physical  and  non-physical  systems
as  distinct  entities  coming  into  external  relations.  Clerk-
Maxwell’s  suggestion  has  taken  us  right  into  the  inner
structure  of  the  gas,  and  has  shown  us  an  inner  selective
process  at  work  which  is  by  no  means  merely  mechanical,
and  which  has  resulted  in  the  segregation  of  a  new  structure
from  the  old  in  a  way  which  constitutes  an  apparent,  but
merely  an  apparent,  and  no  real  breach  of  the  universal
laws  of  energy.  The  fable  of  the  selective  demon  contains
a  real  truth,  and  points  to  the  nature  of  the  activity  of  life
and  mind  in  bodily  structure.  But  at  best  the  fable  is
but  a  crude  and  rough  version  of  a  matter  which  requires
much  more  careful  exploration.  And  we  therefore  proceed
now  to  consider  in  closer  detail  the  nature  of  the  bio¬
chemical  and  psycho-physical  unities  or  wholes,  and  the
relations  between  the  two  mixed  systems  which  they  include
in  their  wholeness  or  unity.  The  best  vindication  of  Holism
as  a  category  of  explanation  would  be  the  light  it  could
throw  on  the  mode  of  union  of  the  two  systems,  on  the
way  in  which  body  and  life,  life  and  mind  constitute  unities
or  wholes  such  as  we  know  in  experience.

Life  the  selector,  and  Mind  the  director,  how  do  they


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


171

operate,  what  is  the  mechanism  which  interlocks  them  and
makes  them  one  with  the  physical?  What  fundamental
conception  can  we  form  of  the  physical,  the  vital,  the
psychical  which  will  represent  in  thought  the  unities  which
they  are  and  form  in  fact?  Life  starts  from  the  simplest
almost  purely  mechanical  forms  in  the  vegetable  kingdom
and  passes  upward  until  it  flowers  into  the  marvels  of
organisation  of  structure  and  function,  of  beauty  of  form
and  activity,  which  we  see  in  the  plant  and  animal  kingdoms.
And  it  probably  had  an  immensely  long  history  of  develop¬
ment  before  it  attained  even  the  lowest  forms  now  known
to  us.  But  all  through,  the  fundamental  function  of  selec¬
tion,  of  selective  taking  and  leaving,  has  distinguished  it.
Mind  again,  by  selecting  the  selected,  has  initiated  the
power  of  direction  which  has  gradually  evolved  into  the
new  world  of  the  free  spirit.  How  can  we  envisage  the
physical,  the  vital,  the  psychical  as  together  forming  unities
and  wholes  as  they  do  in  fact?

Naturalism  answers  this  question,  as  we  have  seen,  by
making  life  and  mind  the  mere  unreal  accompaniments,
the  reflexes  or  shadows,  of  the  real  mechanistic  physico¬
chemical  system.  A  solution  which  in  effect  rules  out  half
of  the  world  of  reality  as  revealed  in  our  experience  cannot
be  accepted  as  satisfactory  and  need  not  detain  us  here.
Vitalism  again  puts  forward  a  theory  of  its  own  which  we
may  examine  for  a  moment.  We  shall  take  it  in  the  form
presented  by  Professor  Hans  Driesch,  who  has  elaborated
a  special  form  of  the  Vitalist  theory  with  an  imposing
apparatus  of  proofs.  This  is  the  theory  of  Entelechy.
Driesch  supposes  a  non-mechanical  agent  at  work  in  psycho¬
physical  systems  which  has  the  power  of  suspending  their
action  in  particular  respects,  thus  enabling  them  to  store
up  and  retain  their  energies,  and  which  again  relaxes  its
suspensory  power  and  thereby  allows  their  energies  to  be  set
free  and  their  action  to  proceed  when  the  situation  of  life
requires  it.  Where  this  controlling  action  on  the  part  of
the  mysterious  Entelechy  comes  from,  Driesch  does  not
profess  to  know.  It  evidently  corresponds  somewhat  to


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


172


Maxwell’s  mythical  demon.  But  its  power  is  more  closely
defined  as  checking  action,  when  action  would  mean  mere
dissipation  of  energy,  and  releasing  the  check  when  neces¬
sary,  and  thus  setting  free  the  stored-up  energy  of  the  system
to  produce  the  effects,  such  as  we  see  in  the  organic  world.
This  relaxing  action  of  Entelechy  is  non-energetic;  it  is
not  the  removal  of  some  mechanical  obstacle,  as  such
removal  would  involve  some  expenditure  of  energy,  however
small.  The  releasing  action  of  Ertelechy  is  entirely  an
action  sui  generis,  just  as  the  susper  ding  action  is.  Driesch
considers  that  this  assumed  action  of  Entelechy  is  the  only
possible  way  in  which  the  causal  relation  between  the
mechanical  and  the  non-mechanical  world  can  be  made
intelligible  without  sacrificing  the  fact  that  organic  life
is  limited  by  matter.1  Entelechy  is  obviously  little  more
than  another  name  for  life;  life  being  conceived  as  a  real
agent,  a  real  operative  factor  inside  the  physico-chemical
system  which  we  call  the  body,  and  with  a  real  power  of
action  upon  it.  But  as  Entelechy  is  expressly  a  non¬
mechanical,  non-energetic  agent,  the  mystery  of  the  action
of  this  non-mechanical  agent  on  the  mechanical  physical
body  remains  entirely  unexplained.  I  fail  to  see  how  the
concept  of  Entelechy  takes  us  much  further  than  the  fable
of  Maxwell’s  demon  does.  Something  like  selection,  the
suspension  of  action  and  its  relaxation,  may  probably  take
place.  But  the  difficulty  remains  of  conceiving  how  this
is  brought  about  and  operates.  The  introduction  of  the
concept  of  Entelechy  does  not  really  help  us.  We  have
still  to  see  whether  there  is  anything  in  the  physico-chemical
situation  which  throws  any  light  on  the  mystery,  and
whether  it  is  possible  to  avoid  the  appearance  on  the  scene
of  a  deus  ex  machina,  such  as  Entelechy  undoubtedly  is.
I  shall  therefore  proceed  to  inquire  what  light  the  concept
of  Holism,  as  it  has  been  expounded  in  previous  chapters,
throws  on  this  problem  of  the  nature  of  “life,”  and  of  its
action  on  the  physico-chemical  system  which  constitutes  its
body  in  any  living  organism.  It  is  unnecessary  to  point

1  Problem  of  Individuality,  pp.  38-40.


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  173

out  that  we  are  in  a  region  of  speculation,  where  no  theories
can  be  brought  to  the  test  of  decisive  experiment  or  proof.
All  that  we  can  hope  to  achieve  is  to  render  intelligible
what  is  in  itself  a  great  mystery  to  thought;  to  supply
some  possible  explanation  even  if  it  is  not  the  real  one;
to  suggest  a  scheme  of  a  possible  modus  operandi  which
the  imagination  can  visualise  to  itself.  More  than  a  possible
explanation  I  do  not  pretend  to  give.

Science  has  made  clear,  as  we  have  seen  in  previous
chapters,  that  the  physico-chemical  system  is  a  structure,
a  structure  composed  of  elements  in  more  or  less  of  equili¬
brium.  Such  is  the  atom  of  matter,  such  the  molecule  and
all  chemical  compounds  which  form  the  substance  of  living
bodies.  The  equilibrium  of  the  structure  is  also  only
approximate;  were  it  complete,  little  room  would  be  left
for  change;  the  physical  world  would  be  a  stereotyped
system  of  fixed  stable  forms,  and  little  or  no  room  would
be  left  for  those  changes  and  developments  which  make
Nature  a  great  system  of  events,  a  great  history  moving
onward  through  Space-Time.  The  fundamental  structures
of  Nature  are  thus  in  somewhat  unstable  equilibrium.
A  change  in  equilibrium  does  not  mean  an  alteration
in  the  position  and  activity  of  one  element  of  the  structure
only;  there  is  a  redistribution  which  affects  all  the  elements.
It  is  the  very  nature  of  the  structure  in  changing  its  equili¬
brium  to  distribute  the  change  over  all  its  component
elements.  No  demon  is  at  work  among  these  elements  to
transpose  them,  to  rearrange  them,  and  to  vary  their
functions  slightly  so  as  to  produce  the  new  balance  or
equilibrium  of  the  whole.  It  is  an  inherent  character  of
the  physico-chemical  structure  as  such,  and  is  explicable
on  purely  physical  and  chemical  principles  which  do  not
call  for  the  intervention  of  an  extraordinary  agent.  Another
peculiar  feature  about  the  change  in  equilibrium  in  a
physico-chemical  structure  is  that  it  is  never  such  as  to
produce  a  perfect  new  equilibrium;  the  new  is  merely
approximate  just  as  the  old  equilibrium  was.  We  may
say  that  the  change  is  from  too  little  to  too  much.  A


174


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


structure  remains  unchanged  in  spite  of  a  small  change
in  its  inner  equilibrium;  hence  the  inner  instability  must
pass  certain  limits  before  the  readjustment  in  equilibrium
takes  place.  The  instance  of  a  supersaturated  solution  is
a  case  in  point,  where  the  solidification  or  crystallisation
lags  behind  the  conditions  which  bring  it  about.  When
the  change  does  come,  it  again  proceeds  too  far;  it  swings
beyond  the  necessities  of  the  case;  it  passes  the  limits  of
perfect  equilibrium  on  to  the  other  side,  so  to  say.  From
too  little  adjustment  it  passes  to  too  much  adjustment,  and
again  there  is  a  condition  of  instability  which  has  to  be
righted  by  a  swing  back  in  due  course.  Thence  arises  the
rhythmic  character  of  natural  change,  which  links  it  on  to
the  rhythm  of  the  life-processes,  and  shows  that  they  spring
from  the  same  source  in  the  inner  nature  of  things.  Hence
probably  arise  also  the  definite  quantitative  increments  of
change  which  the  New  Physics  reveals.

This  mysterious  tendency  to  equilibrium  or  inner  stability
shows  the  inner  holistic  character  even  of  physico-chemical
structures.  There  is  an  internal  balance  which  preserves
the  type,  a  -push-on  when  the  structure  is  endangered  from
one  quarter,  a  pull-up  when  it  is  endangered  from  another.
These  inner  pushes  and  pulls  are  not  the  work  of  extraneous
demons,  but  represent  the  inner  holistic  nature  even  of
natural  physical  things  in  their  total  make-up.  And  the
pushes  and  pulls  are  adjusted  into  a  great  rhythmic  process
which  becomes  the  law  of  life  in  the  next  higher  grade
of  structures.  We  may  call  the  structure  a  mechanism
and  its  action  mechanical.  But  both  ideas  are  but  a  super¬
ficial  view  of  the  real  facts,  which  are  so  remarkable  as
to  be  almost  as  mysterious  as  the  similar  though  more
complicated  phenomena  which  meet  us  in  the  structures  of
life.  Not  laissez-faire,  not  utter  Chance  and  Hazard,  but
control  or  governance  meets  us  in  the  inner  courts  even
of  physical  nature.

I  envisage  the  physico-chemical  structures  of  Nature  as
the  beginnings  and  earlier  phases  of  Holism,  and  “life”
as  a  more  developed  phase  of  the  same  inner  activity.


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  17$

Life  is  not  a  new  agent,  with  the  mission  of  interfering
with  the  structure  of  matter;  the  control  which  it  appears
to  establish  is  not  a  disturbance  and  upsetting  of  the
natural  order.  It  is  itself  a  structure,  based  on  the  lower
structures  of  the  physico-chemical  order;  and  the  control
it  introduces  is  nothing  but  an  extension  and  develop¬
ment  of  the  natural  physical  control  which,  as  we
have  just  seen,  is  already  in  operation  in  the  lower
structures  for  the  maintenance  of  inner  stability.  Life
is  a  new  structure  of  the  physico-chemical  structures
of  Nature.  It  is  not  there  to  cancel  them,  to  upset  or
destroy  them,  but  to  introduce  a  still  deeper,  more
fundamental  element  of  structure  into  Nature.  And  the
structures  of  the  lower  order  are  necessary  to  it.  With¬
out  matter  no  life,  without  the  physico-chemical  structures
no  structure  of  life.  The  one  is  a  stepping-stone  to  the
other;  nay,  more,  is  an  essential  element  in  the  other;
the  physico-chemical  structures  become  the  elements  in  the
new  complex  structure  of  life.  No  cancellation,  no  annihila¬
tion,  no  repudiation  of  the  past;  but  only  more  intensive
organisation  of  the  pre-existing  factors  into  the  new  creative
structure  of  life.

The  new  structure  of  life  differs  from  the  physico-chemical
structures  which  are  its  material,  its  constituent  elements;
the  difference  is  most  important  and  far-reaching,  but
does  not  amount  to  antagonism.  A  deeper  harmony  is
introduced;  the  earlier,  cruder  notes  of  the  physico¬
chemical  order  become  a  new  music  of  being.  There
is  an  element  of  newness,  of  structural  and  functional
newness,  introduced,  but  the  new  does  not  conceal
or  annul  the  old.  The  structural  march  of  Holism
has  proceeded  only  one  step,  one  great  step  forward;  but
the  system  and  character  of  its  advance  remain  funda¬
mentally  the  same.  The  new  is  a  greater  complication,  a
deeper  intensification;  there  is  more  selectiveness,  more
direction,  more  control;  there  is  more  of  the  whole,  of  the
character  of  wholeness,  in  the  new  structure  than  in  the
old.  But  there  is  no  switching  off  from  the  old  to  the


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


176


new;  the  one  is  a  continuation  of  the  other,  a  continuation
indeed  of  a  novel  and  creative  character,  but  not  a  denial  of
and  a  going  back  on  the  other.

Thus  life  is  a  structure  like  matter;  and  a  structure  in
a  similar  state  of  unstable  equilibrium.  The  change  of
equilibrium  has  the  same  rhythmic  character;  only  this
character  is  far  more  noticeable  and  pervasive  than  the
similar  phenomenon  in  matter.  The  rhythmic  oscillation
becomes  the  distinguishing  mark  of  the  functions  of  the
life-structures.  The  pulsations,  the  rhythmic  flow  of  the
functions  of  cells  form  the  law  of  life,  and  incidentally
become  the  basis  of  the  new  element  of  music  in  life;
they  give  to  music  that  primordial  fundamental  character
which  takes  us  back  to  the  very  beginnings  of  life  on
this  globe,  and  makes  music  the  deep  appeal  of  all  the
long  ages  to  emotions  the  most  primitive  as  well  as  the
most  highly  evolved.  The  rhythm  of  equilibrium  shows
the  close  linkage  between  the  physical  structures  and  the
life-structures.  And  its  music  links  all  life  together  through
all  the  ages.

The  equilibrium  of  the  life-structure  also  gives  us  the
origin  of  the  idea  of  life  as  the  selector,  the  suspensor  and
relaxor  of  the  activities  of  the  new  structures.  In  any
change  in  the  equilibrium  of  the  physico-chemical  structure
there  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the  distribution  of  the  change
over  all  the  component  elements;  there  is  the  new  arrange¬
ment  and  alignment  of  elements  and  their  activities  which
conduce  most  effectively  to  the  balance  of  the  whole.  This
is  exactly  what  happens  in  the  rhythmic  change  of  the  life-
equilibrium.  In  the  movements  of  that  change,  elements
are  rearranged,  functions  are  readjusted  with  a  view  to  the
conservation  and  activity  of  the  whole.  Selection  and
direction  and  control  are  inherent  activities.  No  extraneous
factor  does  this;  no  mysterious  stranger  needs  to  be  intro¬
duced  from  some  alien  world  to  work  the  mechanisms.
It  is  the  very  nature  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  new  structure
thus  to  direct  and  regulate — thus  to  transpose  and  distribute
the  factors  of  equilibrium  among  its  component  elements,


VII


MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM


177


thus  to  rearrange  and  readjust  and  interchange  elements
of  structure  and  function  so  as  to  constitute  its  new  balance
of  structure  and  function,  and  to  preserve  it  as  a  whole.
The  selective  regulative  nature,  character  and  activity  of
life  arise  from  the  very  nature  and  process  of  the  equili¬
brium  in  the  new  structures  which  we  associate  with  life.
The  conception  of  Entelechy  is  therefore  not  necessary.
The  regulative  equilibrium  of  the  new  structures  which  we
call  organisms  is  sufficient.  This  equilibrium  oscillates
between  certain  limits,  and  within  these  limits  the  structure
maintains  its  balance  of  parts  and  activities  inside  the
physical  system  of  Nature.  Beyond  those  limits  it  is,  of
course,  destroyed,  and  the  structure  of  life  is  therefore
most  closely  and  intimately  associated  with  the  conditions
and  properties  of  its  material  medium.  It  is  not  an  inde¬
pendent  entity,  self-created  and  free  from  the  trammels
of  matter.  It  is  a  complex  structure  of  the  simpler  struc¬
tures  of  matter,  and  therefore  dependent  on  those  structures
and  their  laws.  But  within  certain  limits  it  creates  internally
its  own  adjustments  as  a  structure  and  is  to  that  extent
free  from  matter.  It  is  more  of  a  whole,  it  has  a  measure
of  freedom,  and  in  its  self-maintenance  and  dynamic  stability
it  shows  a  power  of  internal  regulation  and  co-ordination
which  is  quite  beyond  the  range  of  the  lower  physical
structures.  Take,  for  instance,  the  manner  in  which  the
bodily  temperature  is  maintained  under  all  sorts  of  con¬
ditions  through  a  most  minute  and  delicate  co-operation
of  a  vast  number  of  physiological  factors  and  mechanisms.
Professor  Haldane  has  very  ably  dealt  with  this  aspect  of
the  matter  and  has  shown  with  great  force  that  Physiology
demands  imperatively  new  categories  of  explanation,  and
can  no  longer  rest  content  with  the  crude  conceptions  of
mechanism  which  have  so  far  been  prevalent.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  his  argument  must  not  blind  us  to  the  funda¬
mental  similarities  between  inorganic  and  organic  structures.
Organic  structures  do  but  repeat  on  a  higher  plane  of  organ¬
isation  and  with  an  added  element  of  newness,  inherent
in  Holism,  that  process  of  self-adjusted,  self-regulated


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


I78


equilibrium  and  of  inner  self-control  which  equally  character¬
ises  inorganic  structures.

I  have  to  make  one  more  assumption  in  regard  to  the
character  of  the  new  structures  of  life  and  their  change  of
equilibrium.  Evolution  is  a  fact  of  observation  and  experi¬
ence;  and  it  shows  a  persistent  trend.  From  matter  to
life,  from  life  to  more  life  and  to  higher  life;  from  higher
life  to  mind,  from  mind  to  more  and  higher  mind,  and  to
spirit  in  its  highest  creative  manifestations.  There  is  a
process  with  a  persistent  trend,  which  cannot  possibly  be
the  mere  result  of  accident.  If  it  were  all  a  matter  of
chance  and  contingency,  the  odds  would  be  infinitely  more
in  favour  of  chaos  than  of  this  persistent  trend  of  intensi¬
fying  structure  and  order.  The  creative  process  of  Holism
consists  in  the  intensification  of  structures,  in  small  elements
of  newness  appearing  in  existing  structures  until  the  basis
is  thereby  laid  for  a  new  departure  in  structure;  but  still
on  the  basis  of  the  pre-existing  structures,  and  so  to  say  in
line  with  the  pre-existing  structures.  Matter  and  energy
were  probably  such  departures  in  structure  from  pre¬
existing  structures  which  have  now  passed  away  and  are
unknown  to  us.  Similarly  life  is  a  new  departure  in  struc¬
ture,  but  still  in  harmony  and  more  or  less  in  line  with
matter,  whose  laws  are  only  in  appearance  and  not  in
reality  opposed  to  the  processes  of  life.  Life,  again,  repre¬
sents  a  rising  scale  of  structure  until  the  foundations  have
been  prepared  for  a  new  departure  in  structure  in  the  form
of  Psychism  or  mind;  and  mind  is  on  the  whole  in  harmony
with  life  and  in  line  with  it.  There  is  thus  a  persistent
trend  in  the  evolution  of  structures  and  of  the  forms  and
types  of  existence:  how  is  this  to  be  accounted  for  on
our  theory  of  the  dynamic  self-controlled  equilibrium  of
structures?

I  can  answer  this  question  only  by  the  assumption  of  a
persistent  overbalance  of  the  equilibria  of  existence  in  a  more
or  less  definite  inner  direction  or  with  a  more  or  less  definite
orientation.  In  other  words,  the  rhythm  of  change  in
equilibrium  is  not  perfectly  reciprocal,  but  the  oscillation


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  179

always  tends  to  be  somewhat  more  in  one  direction  than  the
return  swing  in  the  other  direction.  Thus  there  is  an  in¬
finitesimal  overbalance  or  tendency  to  increased  over¬
balance  in  the  one  direction.  And  this  is  the  direction  in
which  the  dynamic  equilibrium  is  therefore  continuously
moving,  and  which  determines  the  persistent  trend  of
Evolution.  Why  should  there  be  this  difference?  Why
are  the  oscillations  of  equilibrium  not  equal  and  opposite?
I  can  only  make  the  further  assumption,  in  keeping  with
the  spirit  of  our  whole  subject,  that  all  structures  are
under  the  fundamental  influence  of  Holism,  which  is  faintly
but  perceptibly  pulling  all  structures  in  its  direction.  The
trend  of  this  slight  overbalance  of  equilibrium  is  thus  to¬
wards  Holism,  towards  a  structural  character  which  will  ever
more  approximate  towards  wholeness.  In  other  words,
the  inner  trend  of  the  universe,  registered  in  its  very  con¬
stitution,  is  directed  away  from  the  merely  mechanical
towards  the  holistic  character  and  towards  the  realization
of  Holism  as  its  immanent  ideal.  The  nature  of  the  universe
points  to  something  deeper,  to  something  beyond  itself.
The  persistent  overbalance  in  its  equilibrium  shows  that
it  is  not  self-sufficing.  It  has  a  trend;  it  has  a  list.  It
has  an  immanent  Telos.  It  belongs  to  or  is  making  for
some  greater  whole.  And  the  pull  of  this  greater  whole  is
enregistered  in  its  inmost  structures.  I  only  mention  this
subject  in  passing,  without  waiting  to  develop  it  more  fully
at  this  stage.

At  the  conclusion  of  my  argument  I  shall  be  asked  how
the  result  bears  on  the  problem  of  Mechanism  and  Holism
with  which  I  began  this  chapter.  Life  has  been  shown  to
be  a  structure,  or  structure-like,  or  best  represented  by  the
imagery  of  a  structure,  just  as  matter  is.  Life  has  appeared
as  a  continuation  on  a  higher  plane  of  the  sort  of  structure
which  matter  is  on  a  lower  plane — a  higher  structure  of
the  same  material,  and  therefore  at  bottom  not  something
utterly  alien  to  and  different  from  it.  And  I  shall  be  asked,
“Is  Mechanism  then  final?  Is  life  only  a  more  refined
mechanism,  a  mechanism  of  a  higher  type,  but  still  a


180  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

mechanism?  And  is  Mind  a  still  more  refined  mechanism?
If  not,  then  where  in  the  progress  of  my  argument
does  the  Mechanism  come  to  an  end  and  the  Holism
begin?  Where  is  the  great  break,  the  great  rift  between
the  material  and  the  non-material  which  experience
reveals?  Or  is  experience  at  fault  in  accentuating  this
great  break  or  rift?”  In  answering  these  questions  I
shall  not  go  back  to  the  preceding  argument,  but
I  shall  briefly  state  my  general  impression,  my  standpoint
in  this  matter,  which  is  both  the  source  and  the  outcome
of  the  preceding  argument.  Mechanism  is  not  final.  It  is
not  all  Mechanism  at  the  beginning,  nor  is  it  all  Holism  at
the  end.  If  the  two  have  to  be  distinguished  we  may  say
that  they  vary  in  inverse  proportions  with  the  forward
march  of  Evolution.  But  the  deeper  view  does  not
distinguish  them,  and  discloses  the  fundamental  unity.
Mechanism,  as  I  have  said,  is  a  phase,  an  earlier  immature
phase  of  Holism;  just  as  life  is  an  intermediate  phase,  and
mind  is  a  later  phase;  while  other  phases  are  probably  in
store  for  the  experience  of  the  higher  race  which  will
succeed  the  human  in  the  future.  Holism  is  a  mediating
concept;  it  is  the  reality  which  underlies  all  the  phases.
And  in  the  self-fulfilment  of  Holism,  one  phase  passes
into  another.  And  the  past  phases  endure,  though  in
ever  diminishing  degree,  in  the  newer  phases.  Hence
I  have  adopted  the  imagery  of  the  structures,  ever  more
complex  structures  embracing  the  same  material  as  the
earlier  structures,  together  with  these  earlier  structures
which  are  the  units  of  the  later  structures.  I  have  adopted
this  structural  imagery  because  thought  is  relational  or
structural,  and  therefore  more  easily  grasps  elements  of
structure  than  mere  abstract  principles  or  tendencies;  and
because  in  its  interpretation  of  the  physical  world  thought
has  already  adopted  the  imagery  of  structures.  I  have
therefore  represented  Holism  as  structural  at  all  its  known
phases,  and  have  distinguished  the  phases  as  differences  of,
and  advances  in,  structure.  But  structure  does  not  mean
Mechanism.  Mechanism  is  but  one  form  of  structure.


VII  MECHANISM  AND  HOLISM  181

The  structure  of  mind  is  not  mechanistic,  nor  is  that  of  life.
The  fact  is  that  there  is  an  insensible  passage  of  change
from  the  earlier  to  the  later,  but  that  the  change  is  never
complete  and  that  something  of  the  earlier  mechanistic
phases  survives  in  the  later  spiritual  phases,  which  are
essentially  non-mechanistic.  The  passage  is  a  creative  one
at  all  stages,  elements  of  the  new  are  continually  appearing,
but  on  the  whole  so  minute  as  to  escape  notice.  It  is  only
at  certain  stages  that  the  new  appears  to  be  not  only
sensible  but  striking.  And  here  our  experience  seems  to
have  magnified  the  change  by  hypostatising  the  new  into
a  distinct  substance  or  entity,  and  placing  it  in  opposition
to  the  old  according  to  a  fundamental  polar  tendency  or
polarity  in  all  thought  and  experience.  In  measuring  and
reading-off  reality  we  must  make  allowance  for  the  small
eccentricities  of  our  instrument  of  thought,  and  we  need
not  on  that  account  discredit  the  instrument  itself.
If  we  make  the  small  allowances  necessary  within  the
margin  of  essential  error,  we  find  the  breaks  and  gaps
and  hypostatised  distinctions  are  smoothed  out  and
accounted  for,  and  there  remains  one  great  fundamental
Process  creatively  flowing  forward  and  giving  to  all  the
manifold  and  diversified  forms  of  existence  the  unity
which  is  theirs  by  inalienable  birthright.  That  Process
is  not  a  mere  ideal;  it  is  already,  in  some  measure,
a  fact,  accounting  for  all  the  particular  facts  and  things
of  the  actual  universe.  It  is  Holism,  and  it  should  not  be
confused  with  the  many  other  things  which  are  its  legitimate
or  (where  thought  errs)  its  illegitimate  offspring.


CHAPTER  VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


Summary . — Darwin’s  conception  of  Organic  Descent  and  his
formulation  of  its  laws  were  the  beginning  of  one  of  the  most  far-
reaching  revolutions  in  human  thought.  Holism  gives  a  new  view
of  one  of  the  Darwinian  factors,  and  extends  the  scope  of  Evolu¬
tion  beyond  the  purely  organic  domain.

Darwin  traced  Organic  Descent  to  the  interwoven  effects  of  two
factors:  an  inner  creative  factor,  Variation,  operating  sponta¬
neously  and  somewhat  mysteriously  inside  organisms  and  modify¬
ing  their  hereditary  structures  and  functions  in  very  slight  degrees;
and  an  external  factor,  Natural  Selection,  which  operates  selec¬
tively  on  these  slight  variations,  weeding  out  those  organisms
whose  variations  were  less  suitable  to  their  environment,  and
leaving  the  organisms  with  suitable  variations  to  multiply  and
develop.  By  continuous  summation  of  small  useful  variations
through  many  generations  definite  specific  characters  would  in
time  be  achieved  and  new  species  arise.

Darwin  laid  most  stress  on  the  factor  of  Natural  Selection;  on
Variation  he  was  vague  and  hesitating,  but  there  is  little  doubt
that  he  included  not  only  inborn  variations  but  individually  ac¬
quired  modifications  among  the  elements  which  ultimately  become
specific  characters.  Thus  all  the  multitudinous  forms  of  life
would  in  the  end  be  moulded  by  both  factors  into  very  close  con¬
formity  and  adaptation  to  their  conditions  of  life.

The  great  Darwinian  conception  has  been  somewhat  blurred  by
later  developments,  in  which  attention  has  been  concentrated  on
the  factor  of  Variation  rather  than  on  Natural  Selection.  First
Weismann  denied  the  transmissibility  of  acquired  characters,  and
thus  made  it  difficult  to  understand  how  organisms  through  their
experience  and  habits  of  life  become  gradually  fitted  and  adapted
to  their  environment.  Then  De  Vries  eliminated  all  small  varia¬
tions  from  the  account  and  attributed  all  specific  advance  to  large
well-marked  “mutations”  occurring  very  occasionally.  This  made
it  still  more  difficult  to  understand  slow  age-long  adaptation,  for
instance,  to  habitats  and  ecological  conditions.  Finally,  the  Men-
delians  or  Geneticists  have  developed  the  conception  that  in  or¬
ganisms  there  are  well-marked  stable  unit-characters  whose  com-

182


chap,  viii  DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


183

binations  in  crossing  follow  a  certain  definite  law;  and  the  experi¬
mental  Evolution  and  Cytology  of  to-day  consist  mostly  in  tracing
these  unit-characters  and  their  manipulations  in  breeding  and  in
the  laboratory.  The  idea  of  more  or  less  mechanical  combinations
thus  takes  the  place  of  the  idea  of  creative  variations,  which  under¬
lay  the  Darwinian  conception,  and  it  becomes  most  difficult  to
understand  how  the  new  variation  arises,  and  how  it  is  that  Evolu¬
tion  is  really  progressive  and  creative,  and  not  a  more  or  less
stationary  regime  of  casual  character  combinations.

These  later  developments  take  too  narrow  a  view  of  Evolution
as  a  whole  and  therefore  tend  to  become  one-sided  and  to  over¬
emphasise  certain  aspects  of  the  whole  process.  They  are,  how¬
ever,  right  in  their  emphasis  on  the  inner  creative  factor  which  is
the  real  positive  motive  force  of  Evolution.  The  real  secret  is  in
the  cell,  in  the  germ-cell  or  fertilised  ovum  rather  than  in  the
external  situation,  important  as  that  is.  That  is  the  inner  seat  of
Holism,  which  is  the  real  source  of  all  variation  and  Evolution.

There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  variation  is  influenced  directly
by  external  ecological  conditions,  which  show  themselves  in  the
general  characters  of  plant  formations  and  societies,  for  instance.
And  there  can  likewise  be  little  doubt  that  acquired  characters  in
the  long  run  reach  down  to  the  hereditary  germ-cell  and  become
transmissible  variations.  While  these  variations  are  still  small  and
without  survival  value  the  acquired  characters  and  animal  routine
shield  and  nurse  them  until  they  are  strong  and  developed  enough
to  confer  survival  value  on  their  organisms.  Modifications  thus
are  the  rough  material  of  variations;  and  to  that  extent  Weismann
was  wrong,  and  Darwin — and  further  back,  even  Lamarck — right.

There  is,  however,  a  further  complication  which  cannot  be  dealt
with  on  purely  Darwinian  principles.  Modifications  and  varia¬
tions  do  not  come  singly  but  in  complexes,  involving  many  minor
and  consequential  modifications  and  variations.  Are  they  all  indi¬
vidually  “selected”  even  before  they  have  any  survival  value  or
strength?  These  difficulties  force  us  to  look  deeper,  to  abandon
the  idea  of  the  individual  selection  of  variations,  and  to  look  upon
the  advance  as  not  being  that  of  a  single  variation  or  variations
but  of  the  organism  as  a  whole.  It  is  the  organism  that  advances
on  a  certain  more  or  less  limited  front;  the  “variation”  is  only
the  most  conspicuous  point  of  advance,  but  there  is  a  whole  curve
of  advance  involving  many  other  minor  points.  In  other  words,
the  advance  is  holistic  and  the  variation  is  only  the  most  striking
item  of  a  whole  series.  And  the  progress  and  survival  of  the
variation  are  an  equally  holistic  affair.  The  organism  is  simply
maintaining  its  own  advance  in  the  variation;  the  variation  issues
from  it  and  is  in  conformity  with  its  whole  trend  and  movement;
the  variation  is  not  single  and  unsupported,  but  behind  it  is  the


184  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

whole  force  of  the  organism  of  whose  inner  movement  the  variation
is  but  the  most  tangible  expression.  It  is  thus  the  organism  as  a
whole  which  in  the  first  instance  “selects”  the  winning  variation
or  series,  and  confers  on  it  support  and  survival  value.  “Holistic
Selection”  is  therefore  in  operation  at  the  birth  and  through  the
early  nursing  stage  of  the  variation,  and  it  is  only  at  its  maturity
that  Natural  Selection  takes  over,  and  the  variation  begins  to
fend  for  itself,  so  to  say.

Holism  must  likewise  be  called  in  to  explain  organic  co-ordina¬
tion.  It  is,  for  instance,  impossible  without  it  satisfactorily  to  ex¬
plain  all  the  innumerable  co-ordinations  and  co-adaptations  in
structure  and  functions  which  constitute  the  action  of  a  living
organism.  No  merely  mechanical  explanation  of  co-ordinated
animal  movements  or  action  has  even  been  given.  The  animal  acts
as  a  whole,  with  a  unity  and  effectiveness  of  action  which  is  no
mere  mechanical  composition  of  its  movements.  Holism  not
merely  as  a  concept,  but  as  a  real  factor,  is  necessary  to  account
for  this  unique  unity  of  organic  or  psychic  action.

Holism  is  not  merely  creative  of  variations,  but  just  as  much
repressive  of  variations.  It  is  as  often  inhibitive  as  creative;  it
holds  in  check  certain  features  while  it  releases  and  pushes  forward
others.  Thus  the  balanced  whole  of  the  Type  is  achieved.  This
repressive  aspect  of  progress  is  neglected  by  Darwinism,  but  it  is
just  as  real  as  the  active  variation.  Both  together  underlie  the
types  and  structures  of  life.  This  repressive  tendency,  already
fully  at  work  on  the  organic  level,  becomes  much  more  conspicuous
on  the  psychical  level,  where  it  operates  as  ethical  restraint,  so
essential  in  the  formation  of  the  Personality  as  a  moral  whole.

From  the  holistic  point  of  view  it  can  be  shown  that  the  inner
and  outer  factors  in  Evolution  lie  much  closer  together  than  is
commonly  thought,  and  the  grandeur  of  the  Darwinian  vision,
instead  of  being  dimmed,  stands  out  in  even  greater  fullness.

Finally,  Beauty  in  Nature  is  holistic,  is  of  the  whole,  comes  from
Holism,  and  is  explicable  on  no  other  principle.  Holism  thus  ac¬
counts  not  only  for  the  origin  of  forms  and  types,  but  also  for  their
Values,  which  far  transcend  the  survival  values  necessary  merely
for  the  utilitarian  purposes  of  Nature.


Newton’s  Law  of  Gravitation  is  perhaps  the  most  strik¬
ing  instance  in  the  whole  history  of  science  of  one  simple
generalisation  bringing  within  its  sweep  the  widest  array
of  physical  facts.  The  new  heliocentric  point  of  view  had
already  become  generally  accepted  when  this  law  was
formulated,  but  vast  masses  of  facts  remained  which  could


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


185

not  be  co-ordinated,  and  required  explanation  from  the
new  point  of  view.  The  Law  of  the  Inverse  Square,  as  laid
down  by  Newton,  was  completely  effective.  The  phenomena
of  falling  bodies  on  this  earth,  the  motions  of  all  terrestrial
bodies,  the  movements  of  the  solar  system  and  of  the
starry  universe  as  a  whole,  many  of  the  phenomena  of
physics  as  known  and  understood  at  that  time — all  seemed
to  find  their  correct  place  and  explanation  under  this
all-embracing  formula.

Newton  did  not  pretend  to  understand  or  explain  gravi¬
tation  itself,  and  his  lifelong  meditations  on  this  profound
problem  afforded  him  no  clue  as  to  the  nature  of  gravitation.
But  the  law  of  its  action,  the  phenomena  which  happen  on
its  assumption,  he  formulated  with  a  simplicity  and  effective¬
ness  which  made  it  another  instance  of  Columbus’  egg.
In  the  way  of  all  human  matters  the  law  itself  came  to  be
looked  upon  as  more  than  a  law,  as  an  explanation,  indeed
as  an  operative  factor  explaining  all  the  phenomena  which
it  covers.  And  it  is  only  in  our  own  day  that  gravitation
in  this  sense  has  been  shattered,  and  its  law  as  formulated
by  Newton  has  come  to  have  a  restricted  application.
Relativity  has  dethroned  gravitation,  and  for  the  moment
Einstein’s  Ten  Equations  rule  the  universe,  where  before
the  equation  of  the  inverse  square  was  the  only  and
unquestioned  code.

Immanuel  Kant,  himself  one  of  the  great  kings  and
legislators  of  thought,  looked  upon  the  Newtonian  system
as  final;  he  raised  the  vision  of  some  future  Newton  who
would  discover  and  formulate  the  laws  of  life,  as  Newton
had  laid  down  the  laws  of  motion  and  of  matter.  Beyond
all  doubt  Darwin  fulfilled  that  vision,  not  perhaps  in  the
sense  intended  by  Kant,  yet  in  a  way  which  has  made  him
perhaps  an  even  more  epoch-making  figure  than  Newton.
Newton  proved  epoch-making  for  science,  while  Darwin
has  become  epoch-making  in  a  far  more  fundamental
sense.  He  has  changed  our  whole  human  orientation
of  knowledge  and  belief,  he  has  given  a  new  direction  to
our  outlook,  our  efforts  and  aspirations,  and  has  probably


i86


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


meant  a  greater  difference  for  human  thought  and  action
than  any  other  single  thinker.  But  even  he  is  not  final.
He  even  less  than  Newton  is  final.  He  has  pointed  the
great  way,  and  on  that  way  we  are  already  travelling  beyond
his  great  vision.

Let  me  first  state  Darwin’s  law,  which  was  just  as  simple
as  Newton’s,  and  much  more  easily  intelligible.  Among
living  beings  there  is  a  tendency  to  vary  and  over-multiply;
in  consequence,  a  struggle  for  survival  becomes  inevitable,
and  in  this  struggle  for  existence  the  fittest  survive.  This
explains  the  origin  of  species  and  all  organic  differences  in
the  world.  The  tendency  to  variations  is  a  fact  patent  to
everyone;  so  is  the  over-multiplication  of  individuals  under
favourable  conditions  and  in  the  absence  of  external
restraints;  the  resulting  struggle  which  Darwin  calls
Natural  Selection  is  well  known  to  everyone  who  has  the
least  knowledge  of  animate  Nature.  These  are  the  simple
bricks  of  fact  with  which  the  Darwinian  theory  is  con¬
structed.  Surely  as  striking  a  case  of  Columbus’  egg  as
was  ever  presented.  The  genius  of  the  Master  was  shown
by  the  vastness  of  the  structure  he  produced  from  these
simple  materials  of  common-sense  and  common  experience.
From  these  simple  commonplace  facts  he  explained  the
infinite  variety  of  the  forms  of  life  which  occupy  the  earth,
their  geographical  distribution  both  in  the  past  and  in  the
present  over  the  face  of  the  globe,  and  the  marvellous  close¬
ness  of  their  adaptation  to  the  physical  and  other  conditions
among  which  they  live — adaptation  to  land  and  sea,  to
fresh  and  to  salt  water,  to  conditions  of  soil  and  climate
embracing  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold,  to  the  widest
range  of  wet,  arid  and  desert  conditions,  and  to  all  the
innumerable  facts  and  situations  which  lead  to  the  inter¬
weaving  of  the  mysterious  web  of  life.

The  whole  Darwinian  theory  is  summarised  in  the  last
sentences  of  the  Origin  of  Species  with  a  simplicity
and  beauty  of  statement  worthy  of  the  simple  but  pro¬
found  genius  of  the  Master,  and  they  raise  before  us
in  a  few  touches  the  great  Darwinian  vision.  They  have


VIII  DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM  187

often  been  quoted,  but  will  bear  re-quotation  here,  and
for  all  time:

“  It  is  interesting  to  contemplate  a  tangled  bank,
clothed  with  many  plants  of  many  kinds,  with  birds
singing  on  the  bushes,  with  various  insects  flitting
about,  and  with  worms  crawling  through  the  damp
earth,  and  to  reflect  that  these  elaborately  constructed
forms,  so  different  from  each  other,  and  dependent
upon  each  other  in  so  complex  a  manner,  have  all  been
produced  by  laws  acting  around  us.  These  laws,
taken  in  the  largest  sense,  being  Growth  with  Repro¬
duction;  Inheritance  which  is  almost  implied  by
reproduction;  Variability  from  the  indirect  and  direct
action  of  the  conditions  of  life,  and  from  use  and
disuse;  a  Ratio  of  Increase  so  high  as  to  lead  to  a
struggle  for  life,  and  as  a  consequence  to  Natural
Selection,  entailing  Divergence  of  Character  and  the
extinction  of  less-improved  forms.  Thus,  from  the
war  of  Nature,  from  famine  and  death,  the  most  exalted
object  which  we  are  capable  of  conceiving,  namely,
the  production  of  the  higher  animals,  directly  follows.
There  is  grandeur  in  this  view  of  life,  with  its  several
powers,  having  been  originally  breathed  by  the  Creator
into  a  few  forms  or  into  one;  and  that,  whilst  this
planet  has  gone  cycling  on  according  to  the  fixed  law
of  gravity,  from  so  simple  a  beginning  endless  forms
most  beautiful  and  most  wonderful  have  been  and  are
being  evolved.”

I  am  free  to  confess  that  there  are  few  passages  in  the
great  literature  of  the  world  which  affect  me  more  deeply
than  these  concluding  words  of  Darwin’s  great  book.  They
have  a  force  and  a  beauty  out  of  all  proportion  to  their
simple  unadorned  phrasing.  They  are  the  expression  of
a  great  selfless  soul,  who  sought  truth  utterly  and  fearlessly,
and  was  in  the  end  vouchsafed  a  vision  of  the  truth  which
perhaps  has  never  been  surpassed  in  its  fullness  and
grandeur.


i88


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


Darwin  assumed  two  operative  factors  in  the  organic
world:  (i)  Variation  in  the  reproduction  and  inheritance
of  living  beings,  and  (2)  Natural  Selection,  or  the  survival
of  the  fittest,  as  Herbert  Spencer  called  it.  Darwin’s  name
is  principally  associated  with  the  second  factor,  with  which
his  works  mostly  deal,  and  which  he  elaborated  with  an
unrivalled  wealth  of  detail.  He  devoted  much  less  attention
to  Variation,  and  indeed  used  it  chiefly  as  a  peg  on  which
to  hang  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  species  through  Natural
Selection.  Variation  was  to  him  a  mysterious  fact  for
Natural  Selection  to  work  on.  But  its  spontaneous  un¬
controlled  character  puzzled  him.  He  found  no  helpful
imagery  to  explain  the  puzzle.  He  suggested  the  theory
of  Pangenesis,  which  showed  great  insight,  but  it  has  not
been  adopted  by  his  successors.  The  germ-cell  theory,
which  supplied  a  mechanism  for  heredity  and  variation
alike,  was  a  later  discovery.  The  science  of  Genetics  has
mainly  arisen  since  his  day.  Not  only  were  his  views  on
variation  meagre  and  vague,  but  such  views  as  he  had  have
not  been  adopted  by  later  Darwinians.  Thus  in  the  passage
just  quoted  he  attributes  variation  to  the  “direct  and
indirect  action  of  the  conditions  of  life,’’  and  to  “use  and
disuse.”  Most  Darwinians  to-day  hold  very  pronounced
views  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  deny  that  these  are  the
sources  of  Variation.  At  present  there  seem  to  be  indica¬
tions  of  a  reaction,  of  a  return  to  Darwin  and  even  to  La¬
marck,  and  a  tendency  to  look  more  favourably  upon  the
views  of  Darwin  on  this  important  point.  But  the  fact  is
that  Darwin  is  on  the  whole  vague  on  the  subject  of  Varia¬
tion,  and  concentrated  all  his  strength  on  the  other  principle
of  Natural  Selection  and  its  effects  in  shaping  the  organic
world.

However  this  may  be,  there  is  no  doubt  that  both  Varia¬
tion  and  Natural  Selection  are  essential  elements  in  the
Darwinian  theory.  Darwinism,  in  fact,  implies  two  factors:
an  internal  factor,  operating  mysteriously  in  the  inmost
nature  and  constitution  of  living  organisms,  and  an  external
factor  working  along  independent  lines  on  the  results


vm


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM  189

achieved  by  the  internal  factor.  The  inner  factor,  Varia¬
tion,  is  positive  and  creative,  producing  all  the  variations
which  are  the  raw  material  for  progress.  The  exter¬
nal  factor,  Natural  Selection,  is  essentially  negative  and
destructive,  eliminating  the  harmful  or  less  fit  or  use¬
ful  variations,  and  leaving  the  more  fit  or  useful,  varia¬
tions  free  play  to  continue  and  multiply,  and  in  this
process  fitting  and  adapting  the  individual  to  the  char¬
acter  of  its  environment.  As  De  Vries  has  phrased  it,
the  inner  factor  explains  the  arrival,  and  the.  external
factor  the  survival,  of  the  fit  or  useful  variation  or
organism.

Darwin’s  over-emphasis  of  the  second  or  external  factor
had  one  very  unfortunate  result:  it  directly  and  powerfully
reinforced  and  exaggerated  the  mechanistic  conception  of
the  universe.  The  vera  causa  of  organic  change  and  progress
appeared  to  be  Natural  Selection,  an  external  factor  oper¬
ating  on  organisms  ab  extra,  in  the  same  way  as  physical  or
dynamical  forces  are  impressed  on  bodies  or  their  parts
from  the  outside.  Mechanical  analogies  began  to  be  applied,
and  Evolution  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  mechanics  of
organic  development — Entwicklungsmechanik,  as  it  has
been  called  by  Wilhelm  Roux.  The  whole  tendency  of
Darwinism  has  therefore  been  vastly  to  add  to  the  domi¬
nance  of  the  mechanistic  hypothesis,  which  has  through  it
come  to  extend  its  sway  from  the  kingdom  of  matter  to
that  of  life.  What  is  more,  the  simplicity  of  the  Darwinian
theory  has  helped  to  make,  not  only  Evolution,  but  the
mechanical  view  of  Evolution,  common  property.  The  mys¬
tery  of  progress  seemed  to  become  quite  simple  and  intelli¬
gible  on  this  theory.  It  all  depended  on  the  survival  of  the
fittest,  and  the  survival  of  the  fittest  was  so  simple  and  clear
an  idea,  and  one  too  so  deeply  rooted  in  our  ordinary  empiri¬
cal  experience,  that  it  seemed  all  a  matter  of  course  which
had  only  to  be  pointed  out  by  Darwin  to  be  accepted  by
everybody.  The  difficult  part  of  the  theory,  the  aspect  of  it
which  even  to  Darwin  had  remained  a  mystery,  the  inner
creative  factor  of  Variation,  was  ignored  while  Darwinism


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


190

was  in  the  course  of  being  generally  accepted,  and  accepted
in  the  mechanical  sense.

This  was  the  first  phase  of  Darwinism,  the  phase  during
which  Natural  Selection  was  chiefly  stressed  and  was  the
dominant  note  in  the  theory.  Then  came  the  second  phase,
when  attention  began  to  be  given  to  the  other  factor  of
Variation.  With  this  Neo-Darwinian  phase  the  name  of
Weismann  is  for  ever  honourably  associated.  Many  great
labourers  there  have  been  in  this  field,  but  the  name  of
Weismann  will  ever  stand  out  pre-eminent  as  the  biologist
who,  whatever  his  mistakes  in  detail,  initiated  and  developed
the  exploration  of  the  germ-cell  as  the  source  of  Variation
in  Evolution.  Weismann  turned  the  gaze  of  Evolutionists
from  the  outside  to  the  inside  of  the  process,  from  the
apparent  mechanism  of  external  interaction  and  clash  to
the  mystery  of  the  inner  process.  And  what  he  taught  was
not  only  most  surprising,  but  remains  one  of  the  most
significant  and  important  truths  in  the  whole  range  of
biology.  I  shall  deal  with  this  matter  just  now.  But  be¬
fore  doing  so  I  wish  to  point  out  that  Weismann  and  his
fellow-workers  were  handicapped  in  their  labours  by  the
mechanical  view  of  Evolution  which  had  already  become  a
fixed  dogma  in  the  earlier  stage  of  Darwinism.  If  any¬
where,  the  mechanistic  conception  should  have  received  its
quietus  in  the  domain  of  Variation,  in  the  exploration  of
the  inner  process  or  factor  of  Evolution.  Unfortunately
Weismann  and  several  of  the  most  prominent  biologists  who
developed  this  second  phase  of  Darwinism  arrived  at  their
task  not  only  as  convinced  Darwinians,  but  as  mechanistic
Darwinians.

The  great  battle  in  which  Darwinism  had  won  was  tacitly
considered  a  victory  for  the  mechanical  view  of  it.  And  thus
the  whole  problem  of  Variation,  as  viewed  by  these  leading
Neo-Darwinians,  came  to  be  one  of  investigating  or  finding
the  mechanism  of  Variation.  Their  services  have  been
great,  and  the  route  they  have  opened  up  will  in  the  years
to  come  lead  to  even  greater  results.  But  there  is  no  doubt
that  the  mechanistic  conception  has  been  a  grave  handicap


VIII  DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM  19 1

to  them,  and  that  many  of  their  errors  are  directly  traceable
to  its  disturbing  and  distorting  influence.  In  the  first
chapter  I  tried  to  show  how  erroneous  the  conception  of
Natural  Selection  as  a  purely  mechanical  factor  in  Evolu¬
tion  was.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  that
the  purely  mechanistic  conception  of  Variation  is  just  as
arbitrary  and  misleading.

The  root  of  Weismann’s  difficulties  lies  in  his  mechanistic
conception  of  the  germ-cell.  The  cell,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter
IV,  in  its  metabolism  already  shows  many  of  the  functions
and  activities  which  we  associate  with  the  complete  indi¬
vidual  organism.  It  is  itself  a  holistic  individual,  with  the
most  marvellous  selective  and  regulative  powers,  reminding
us  (on  a  much  lower  plane)  of  what  at  a  later  stage  of
Evolution  appears  as  the  psychical  factor.  This  applies  to
the  germ-cell  even  more  than  to  the  ordinary  body-cells.
The  germ-cell  has  its  “field,”  and  the  field  of  the  germ-cell
is  much  more  important  than  is  ordinarily  thought.  Experi¬
mental  Evolutionists  seek  more  in  the  actual  structure  of
the  germ-cell  than  is  there.  There  is  much  more  in  the
inheritance  of  the  germ-cell  than  can  be  identified  by  an
analysis  of  its  structure.  And  this  more  is  in  its  field,  which
represents  that  part  of  the  germ-cell  which  has  not  yet  been
crystallised  and  hardened  into  sensible  structure.  Much  of
its  past  and  its  future  is  in  its  field;  in  its  field  the  creative
adjustments  are  begun  which  are  ultimately  translated  and
incorporated  into  its  structure.  Here  as  elsewhere  the  field
is  the  area  of  becoming,  of  creativeness,  the  growing  sur¬
face  of  the  structure.  To  confine  our  view  of  the  germ¬
cell  to  its  apparent  structure  is  simply  to  atomise  our  con¬
ceptions  on  chemical  analogies,  and  to  narrow  them  unduly
to  the  neglect  of  very  important  features  in  the  functions
and  activities  of  the  germ-cell,  and  to  compel  us  in  the  end
to  adopt  that  mechanical  view  which  is  the  negation  of  its
inmost  nature  as  a  living  holistic  individual  unity.  In  this
chapter  I  shall  endeavour  to  show  how  the  concept  of
Holism  acts  as  a  solvent  for  the  difficulties  created  by  the
mechanistic  conception  of  Variation.


192


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


The  alterations  in  the  Darwinian  scheme  introduced  by
Darwin’s  successors  have  had  a  profound  effect  on  that
scheme  as  a  whole;  so  much  so  that  it  is  to-day  difficult  to
say  how  much  of  Darwin’s  great  vision  still  survives.  In
order  to  realise  this,  it  would  be  advisable  to  compare  Dar¬
win’s  general  ideas  of  the  facts  of  Variation  with  the  modi¬
fications  introduced  by  his  successors.

In  Darwin’s  view,  it  was  not  only  the  operation  of  Natu¬
ral  Selection  that  was  moulding  living  things  in  conformity
with  their  environment,  by  eliminating  those  that  were  less
suited  to  the  conditions  of  the  environment.  Variation
was  also  bearing  its  share  in  this  process  of  assimilating
and  adapting  them  to  the  environment.  The  close  fitting
of  species  to  their  habitats  and  environmental  conditions
which  is  so  distinctive  of  animate  Nature  was,  according
to  him,  the  combined  effect  both  of  Natural  Selection  and
Variation.

In  order  to  ensure  clearness  in  what  follows  we  have  to
distinguish  between  various  forms  of  so-called  “variation”
in  living  things.  In  the  first  place,  we  have  modifications,
which  are  due  to  the  functional  activities  and  experiences
of  the  individual  in  its  own  life,  and  not  to  inheritance  from
parents  or  ancestors.  The  effects  on  the  bodily  organism
or  on  particular  organs  of  their  use  or  disuse  in  any  definite
way  would  be  such  modifications.  An  animal  changes  its
mode  of  life  and  in  consequence  ceases  to  use  certain  organs,
or  begins  to  use  them  in  a  new  way  or  for  a  new  purpose.
Such  disuse  tends  to  the  atrophy  of  these  organs,  just  as
such  new  or  increased  use  would  develop  them.  Such
atrophy  or  development  respectively  in  the  bodily  organism
is  a  modification.  All  changes  or  characteristics  acquired
during  the  individual  life  are  modifications.

In  the  second  place  we  have  variations,  which  are  small
changes  passing  by  inheritance,  and  not  due  to  the  develop¬
ments  or  acquisitions  of  the  individual  life.  A  small  altera¬
tion  from  the  type  which  an  animal  has  inherited  from  its
parents  is  a  variation,  in  contradistinction  to  a  modification
which  has  been  brought  about  in  its  own  lifetime.  In  the


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


193


third  place,  a  large  very  marked  inherited  change  is  called
a  mutation.  Any  inherited  change  large  and  marked  enough
to  constitute  a  new  variety  or  species  is  a  mutation.

Now  I  think  it  is  beyond  question  that  according  to
Darwin’s  view  all  three  forms  of  change — modifications,
variations  and  mutations — were  useful  and  operative  in
the  ultimate  production  of  new  species.  Modifications  due
to  individual  use  or  disuse  he  certainly  pressed  into  the
service  of  his  scheme  of  Evolution;  and  although  it  is  not
quite  clear  how  far  other  modifications  were  similarly  treated
by  him,  it  follows  from  the  above  quotation  as  well  as  from
other  passages  in  his  works  that  variations  due  “to  the
indirect  or  direct  action  of  the  conditions  of  life,”  in  other
words,  alterations  affecting  the  individual  life,  could,  to  an
extent  never  clearly  defined  by  him,  avail  for  the  production
of  new  species.  As  regards  mutations,  while  he  gave  reasons
for  disbelieving  in  great  and  sudden  changes  as  the  ordinary
rule  of  evolution,  it  can  certainly  not  be  said  that  he  excluded
them.  His  view  was  that  the  slow  and  gradual  summation
of  small  modifications  and  variations  continuously  conserved
or  kept  going  by  Natural  Selection  would,  and  in  fact  did,
in  the  course  of  many  generations  amount  to  a  sufficiently
large  and  marked  change  to  constitute  a  new  type  or  species.
The  continuous  summation  of  the  effects  of  use  and  disuse
and  the  other  conditions  of  life,  as  well  as  the  accidental
inherited  variations  which  were  of  a  more  mysterious  origin,
would  necessarily  co-operate  with  Natural  Selection  in
bringing  about  the  close  adaptation  of  the  species  to  its
environment.  The  result  was  the  vast  and  intricate  system
of  adaptations  and  co-adaptations,  of  harmonious  adjustment
between  Nature  and  organic  life,  ramifying  through  the
infinite  details  of  the  web  of  life  which  we  see  in  Nature.
Thus  Evolution  was  explained,  thus  all  the  fine  adjustments
and  adaptations  in  Nature  were  explained.  Only  a  very
long  time  was  required  for  the  infinitesimal  calculus  of
Natural  Selection  to  produce  the  various  results,  and  that
requirement  was  conceded  by  the  astronomers  and  geologists.
Darwin’s  view  seemed  very  well  to  fit  in  with  the  fossil


194  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

record  as  well  as  with  the  facts  of  geographical  distribution,
which  he  looked  upon  as  the  keystone  to  the  laws  of  life.
No  wonder  that  the  appeal  of  Darwin’s  theory  proved
irresistible  and  its  effect  crushing  on  all  the  older  points  of
view.  The  triumph  of  Darwin’s  splendid  vision  of  Evolution
seemed  complete.

Then  the  second  phase  of  Darwinism  began,  with  the
detailed  search  for  the  methods  and  mechanism  of  Variation
and  with  the  venue  shifted  from  the  ample  range  of  Nature
to  the  research  laboratory  of  Genetics.  First  Weismann
negatived  the  inheritance  of  acquired  characters,  and  of
modifications  due  to  use  or  disuse  or  other  environmental
conditions  operating  on  the  individual  life.  Only  the
accidental  germinal  variations,  and  none  of  the  moulding
effects  of  the  environment  on  the  individual,  could  avail  in
the  building  up  of  the  new  species.  Then  De  Vries  came
forward  and  largely  eliminated  small  ordinary  variations
from  the  account,  and  thus  practically  confined  progress  to
mutations.  Finally,  the  experimental  Mendelians  or  Gene¬
ticists  appeared,  and  through  their  researches  and  experi¬
ments  appeared  to  confine  Evolution  to  the  interchange,
the  combinations  and  permutations  of  definite  existing  unit
characters.  The  combined  effect  of  these  three  advances
on  the  Darwinian  theory  might  appear  largely  destructive
of  Darwinism  itself.  If,  following  the  Mendelians,  we
hold  that  the  interchange  of  definite  pre-existing  unit  char¬
acters  is  all  there  is  in  the  process  of  Evolution,  advance
becomes  impossible  and  creative  Evolution  disappears.
If,  according  to  De  Vries,  accidental  mutation  is  in  a  large
measure  all  there  is  for  Natural  Selection  to  work  on,  the
advance  becomes  indeed  a  most  precarious  affair,  instead
of  that  steady,  continuous,  delicate  process  which  has  been
going  on  through  the  geological  ages.  If,  according  to  Weis¬
mann,  modifications  from  use  and  disuse  and  similar  causes
have  no  survival  value  and  are  inoperative  in  the  forma¬
tions  of  new  species,  it  becomes  most  difficult  to  under¬
stand  the  universal  close-fitting  adaptations  of  species  to
their  conditions  of  life.  For  there  is  nothing  in  common


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


195


between  the  accidental  variations  and  Natural  Selection,
and  there  is  no  clear  reason  why  or  how  this  clash  should
not  produce  chaos  and  disaster,  rather  than  the  harmonies
and  adjustments  which  actually  characterise  the  relations
of  animate  and  inanimate  Nature.  Darwin’s  theory,  even
if  it  were  wrong  in  its  details,  certainly  served  to  explain
and  render  intelligible  the  broad  facts  of  the  order,  ad¬
justment  and  progress  observable  in  animate  Nature.  His
successors’  theories,  even  where  they  are  correct  in  de¬
tail,  fail  to  explain  these  facts,  and  make  of  the  world  of
life  as  a  whole  an  unintelligible  and  in  some  respects  an  in¬
credible  affair.

It  would,  however,  be  a  serious  mistake  to  look  upon  the
more  recent  developments  in  the  nascent  science  of  Genetics
as  covering  the  whole  wide  field  of  the  Darwinian  theory.
So  far  as  I  know,  they  have  no  such  scope,  nor  are  they  so
intended  or  understood  by  those  who  are  responsible  for
the  very  important  researches  in  Genetics  now  being  success¬
fully  carried  on  in  biological  laboratories.  These  researches
are  intended  to  follow  up  a  special  line  which  was  first
opened  up  by  the  experiments  of  the  Abbot  Mendel  of
Briinn  in  the  time  of  Darwin.  They  occupy  a  very  restricted
area  of  the  whole  field  of  organic  Evolution,  and  are  really
concerned  only  with  the  elucidation  of  the  special  set  of
problems  arising  from  the  crossing  or  hybridising  of  races,
varieties  or  definitely  distinct  variations.  Those  problems
centre  around  the  important  question  how  biological  char¬
acters  already  in  existence,  whether  patent  or  masked,  be¬
have  when  brought  into  contact  with  each  other.  Mendel
found  that  certain  existing  characters  behaved  as  firm  and
stable  units,  very  much  as  atoms  or  molecules  do  in  chemical
combination,  and  he  also  discovered  the  law  of  the  propor¬
tions  in  which  these  unit  characters  are  reproduced  in  the
offspring.  Thus  if  individuals  of  dominant  character  a  are
crossed  with  individuals  having  recessive  character  b,  then
in  the  second  filial  generation  the  numbers  of  individuals
respectively  with  a  characters,  and  b  characters,  and  mixed
a  and  b  characters  are  given  by  the  algebraic  formula


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


196

{a  +  b)2  —  a2  +  2 ab  +  b2.  In  other  words,  25  per  cent,
of  the  second  generation  will  be  pure  a’s  and  pure  V s
respectively,  and  50  per  cent,  will  represent  individuals
with  mixed  qualities,  which  on  being  again  crossed  with
each  other  will  again  produce  pure  a’s  and  V s  and  mixed
ab’s  in  the  same  algebraic  proportions;  and  so  on  apparently
ad  infinitum.  His  researches  have  been  amply  confirmed
by  later  inquiries,  and  they  have  also  established  that  not
only  do  these  unit  characters  behave  as  fixed  and  stable
entities,  but,  very  much  in  the  manner  of  radicle  groups  in
Chemistry,  groups  of  such  unit  characters  also  sometimes
behave  as  stable  combinations,  and  enter  into  combination
with  other  unit  characters  as  persistent  unities.  This  is  all
very  remarkable  and  interesting,  and  has  important  bearings
on  the  practical  improvement  of  breeds  and  races  of  animals,
and  on  the  beginnings  of  the  new  science  of  Eugenics.  But
for  our  present  purpose  it  is  merely  necessary  for  me  to
point  out  that  Mendelism  or  Genetics  deals  with  the  manip¬
ulation  of  existing  characters,  and  not  with  their  origin,
genesis  or  creation.  The  main  question  before  organic
Evolution,  how  specific  characters  are  produced  which  have
not  existed  before,  is  not  directly  touched  by  Mendelism.
The  problem  of  the  creativeness  of  Evolution  in  the  origin  of
species,  and  in  organic  progress  generally,  lies  beyond  the
province  of  Mendelism.  Mendelism  deals  with  results  al¬
ready  achieved  by  Evolution,  and  not  with  the  creative
process  by  which  they  are  achieved.  No  doubt  it  may  and
in  due  course  will  incidentally  throw  important  sidelights
on  the  mysterious  creative  process;  but  it  will  probably
be  no  more  than  sidelights.  In  other  words,  Mendelism  is
not  the  real  method  or  path  of  organic  Evolution,  but  at
best  only  an  important  side-track.  This  is  not  intended
as  a  reflection  on  the  science  of  Genetics,  but  only  to  place
it  in  a  proper  perspective  in  the  whole  field  of  organic
Evolution.

Having  ruled  out  Mendelism,  can  we  accept  De  Vries’s
Mutation  as  the  ordinary  method  of  creative  Evolution?
Mutation  takes  place  when  specific  or  varietal  characters


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


197


appear,  not  as  the  result  of  a  slow  age-long  summation  of
small  variations,  but  at  one  bound,  with  a  great  leap  of  one
generation  to  the  next.  An  individual  of  species  X  produces
offspring  which  constitute  a  stable  variety  or  a  new  species
Y.  De  Vries  saw  this  happening  in  the  case  of  cultivated
(Enothera  lamarckiana  growing  wild  in  a  potato-field  at
Hilversum  in  Holland.  Other  instances  have  been  observed
by  other  investigators.  It  is  objected  that  De  Vries’s
(Enothera  was  perhaps  a  cultivated  artificial  hybrid,  with
mixed  qualities,  like  the  ab’s  of  the  Mendelians,  and  that
all  he  observed  was  the  emergence  of  pure  qualities  from
this  mixture;  in  other  words,  not  the  emergence  of  new
characters  but  the  setting  free  and  unmasking  of  concealed
or  latent  characters  already  existing.  Other  criticisms  also
have  been  levelled  at  the  Mutation  theory  which  it  is  not
necessary  for  our  purpose  to  consider  here.  In  spite  of
these  criticisms  it  is  practically  certain  that  mutations  do
take  place  in  the  course  of  Evolution.  But  while  they  almost
certainly  happen  on  special  occasions,  they  are  not  common
and  do  not  constitute  the  ordinary  method  of  organic  Evo¬
lution.  On  rare  occasions  there  is  a  saltus,  a  creative  leap
forward  from  one  generation  to  another.  A  species  having
long  balanced  itself  precariously  on  the  edge  of  a  great
change  suddenly  makes  the  jump,  secures  a  foothold  on  the
edge  of  the  other  side,  and  marks  the  beginning  of  a  new
variety  or  species.  But  it  can  at  best  only  be  an  exceptional
if  not  rare  effort  on  the  part  of  Nature.  These  sudden  long
jumps  can  only  be  very  occasional,  and  not  the  normal
course  or  procedure  in  the  origin  of  species.  Otherwise  we
would  certainly  see  more  of  them,  and  they  would  not  be
the  subject  of  doubt  or  dispute.  The  rarity  of  their  observa¬
tion  points  to  the  rarity  of  their  occurrence.  And  they
must  be  largely  confined  to  cultivated  artificial  species  or
varieties  which  are  more  unstable  and  violently  variable
than  natural  species  or  varieties.  Mutation  in  wild  nature
is  an  occasional  and  exceptional  occurrence,  and  is  not  the
ordinary  procedure  of  Evolution.

Having  thus  ruled  out  both  Mendelism  and  De  Vries’s


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


198

Mutation  as  the  usual  method  of  creative  Evolution,  we
now  come  back  to  the  earlier  Germ-cell  theory  of  Weismann,
who  initiated  it  and  through  it  the  second  phase  of  Dar¬
winism,  and  thus  became,  and  still  remains,  the  second  most
important  figure  in  the  history  of  Darwinism.  His  great
and  essential  service  consisted  in  this,  that  he  found  the
real  source  of  Evolution  in  the  inner  factor  of  Variation,
and  that  he  traced  this  factor  to  its  seat  in  the  germ-cells
of  the  organism.  Not  the  outward  mechanical  struggle  and
clash  of  organisms,  but  the  penetralia  of  their  deeply  hidden
and  sheltered  germ-cells  were  the  mysterious,  spontaneous,
independent  and  original  source  of  all  organic  development
and  of  the  origin  of  species.  Of  course  this  theory  became
possible  only  by  reason  of  the  rapid  advance  in  the  knowl¬
edge  of  the  cells,  and  especially  of  the  part  they  play  in
reproduction.  But  on  the  basis  of  that  new  knowledge  the
theory  became  quite  simple  and  indeed  inevitable.  The
body-cells  of  advanced  organisms  have  no  part  or  lot
in  reproduction,  and  the  seat  of  all  organic  variations
must  therefore  be  looked  for  in  the  reproductive  cells
of  the  parents.  All  organic  progress  was  thus  traced
back  to  the  inmost  nature  of  the  organism  itself,  and
not  to  the  environment  or  any  mere  external  factor.
This  is  the  essential  truth  in  the  hypothesis  of  Weismann,
and  this  constitutes  his  real  and  lasting  contribution  to
the  theory  of  Evolution.  The  mysterious  Variation  which
forms  the  inner  factor  of  Evolution  has  its  seat  and  source
in  the  fructified  ovum  or  germ-cell  from  which  the  new  life
begins.  There  and  nowhere  else  take  place  the  great  play
and  inter-play  of  forces,  tendencies  and  influences  which
shape  the  destinies  of  life  in  organic  development.  This  is
not  the  whole  story,  but  it  is  important;  it  is  indeed
fundamental.

Weismann  drew  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  individual
and  the  race,  between  the  body-cells  which  constitute  the
one  and  the  germ-cells  which  are  the  carriers  of  the  other.
According  to  him  the  race  or  species  is  continued  unbroken
in  the  substance  of  the  germ-cells,  which  flow  on  as  a  con-


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


199


tinuous  stream  from  one  generation  to  the  next.  From  these
racial  germ-cells  are  differentiated  the  body-cells  in  the
individual  life,  both  in  its  ante-natal  and  post-natal  stages.
After  the  differentiation  has  taken  place  in  the  fructified
ovum,  there  is,  according  to  him,  practically  no  connection
between  the  germ-cells  and  the  resulting  body-cells  which
build  up  the  individual,  except  in  so  far  as  the  former  are
nourished  through  the  latter.  The  individual  becomes
separated  from  the  race  factor,  and  becomes  an  inde¬
pendent  growth  from  it,  becomes,  so  to  say,  an  excrescence
or  epiphyte  on  the  race,  which  continues  in  the  germ-cells
uninfluenced  by  the  fate  or  the  development  of  the  indi¬
vidual.  This  complete  severance  and  independence  of  the
individual  from  the  germinal  constitution  from  which  it
has  sprung  is  a  distinctive  tenet  of  Weismannism.  It  em¬
bodies  a  profound  truth,  which  we  recognise  in  the  free¬
dom  and  independence  of  individuality.  But  at  the  same
time  it  makes  the  severance  of  the  racial  and  individual
elements  in  the  whole  too  great,  and  it  ignores  important
reciprocal  influences  between  them  which  maintain  a  cer¬
tain  balance  between  individual  and  racial  development.  To
these  points  we  shall  have  occasion  to  return.  Here  it  is
instructive  to  note  that  for  Weismann  the  sharp  distinction
between  the  individual  and  the  germ-cells,  from  which  it
sprang  and  which  it  carries  forward  for  the  race,  was  based
on  his  view  of  the  nature  and  constitution  of  these  germ-
cells.  These  cells  contained  the  hereditary  constitution  of
the  race  or  species,  and  in  so  far  registered  the  past,  and
made  the  past  an  operative  factor  in  the  present.  They
also  embodied  the  mechanism  of  variation  and  thus  linked
the  future  with  the  past  in  the  continuity  of  the  race.  In
a  way,  therefore,  the  germ-cells,  uninfluenced  by  the
ephemeral  and  accidental  influences  of  the  individual  life,
contained  in  their  wonderful  constitution  not  only  the  pres¬
ent  but  also  the  past  and  in  a  measure  the  future  of  the  race.
They  were  eternal,  self-contained  units,  carrying  their  future
and  their  past  in  themselves,  uninfluenced  by  the  accidents
of  their  environment.  The  individual  was  a  mere  bit  of


200


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


bread  cast  on  the  waters  of  destiny,  to  be  lost  utterly,  or
to  be  found  after  many  days.  But  the  past  and  the  future
of  the  race  dwelt  sublime  and  secure  in  the  eternal  sanctuary
of  the  germ-cell.

Such  was  the  great  Weismann  conception,  which  in  effect
largely  withdrew  creative  Evolution  from  the  arena  of  exter¬
nal  conflict  and  the  mechanical  struggle  for  existence,  and
located  its  origins  in  the  secluded  depths  of  the  inner  world
of  the  germ-cell.  And  this  great  conception  was  based  on
Weismann’s  view  of  the  mechanism  of  the  germ-cell,  on
which  a  great  deal  of  light  has  since  been  thrown  by  experi¬
mental  research  and  observation.

Without  going  into  details  we  may  just  note  that  the
chromosomes  of  the  dividing  nucleus  have  been  identified
as  on  the  whole  the  carriers  of  the  hereditary  characters  of
organisms;  these  characters  have  to  some  extent  been  cor¬
related  with  distinct  chromosomes,  and  the  number,  shape,
size  and  other  differences  of  chromosomes  in  the  nucleus
of  the  germ-cell  are  therefore  taken  to  be  the  physical
basis  of  the  characters  which  distinguish  the  species.  It
has  been  found  necessary  to  go  further  and  to  assume  in
the  chromosomes  themselves  active  elements  or  factors  or
genes  which  are  productive  of  organic  characters.  These
researches  and  speculations  are  still  in  their  initial  stages,
but  they  are  important  and  have  this  advantage,  that  the
results  of  intercrossing  and  hybridising  in  producing  a
change  of  characters  can  be  studied  in  conjunction  with  the
simultaneous  change  in  number  and  form  of  chromosomes.
In  the  prosecution  of  experimental  Evolution  the  parallelism
of  cell  structure  and  of  variation  in  organic  characters  thus
supplies  a  double  weapon  of  attack.

While  the  germ-cell  as  the  mechanism  of  heredity  is  easily
understood,  the  question  still  remains  how  it  operates  as
the  sole  and  independent  cause  of  Variation.  The  inter¬
mixture  of  chromosomes  from  two  separate  individuals  in
sexual  reproduction,  and  the  changes  in  the  chromosome
contents  of  the  reproductive  cells  in  their  previous  meiotic
division,  undoubtedly  provide  the  occasion  for  a  great  inter-


vin


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


201


mixture  of  parental  elements  and  are  thus  potent  sources
of  Variation.  But  Variation  operates  even  apart  from  and
in  the  absence  of  sexual  reproduction  and  the  related  meiotic
divisions  of  the  germ-cells.  And  the  question  remains
whether  the  individual  life  is,  in  fact,  so  isolated  from  the
germ-cell  that  it  has  no  influence  on  the  latter  and  the
resulting  offspring.  On  this  isolation  Weismann  was  par¬
ticularly  insistent,  and  in  the  popular  mind  his  teaching  is
identified  with  the  doctrine  that  acquired  characters  are
not  transmissible.  The  principle  of  the  non-transmissibility
of  organic  modifications  (as  above  defined)  rests  on  empiri¬
cal  experience,  as  no  clear  and  indisputable  case  of  the  pass¬
ing  of  such  individual  modifications  to  the  offspring  has  been
recorded  or  observed.  Weismann’s  germ-cell  theory  was
intended  to  supply  the  scientific  basis  for  this  negative  re¬
sult;  but  in  the  end  he  so  completely  isolated  the  germ¬
cell  from  the  rest  of  the  individual  organism  that  he  came
to  consider  it  practically  impossible  that  modifications
could  become  hereditary,  or  that  somatic  cells  could
in  any  way,  except  through  nourishment,  influence  the
germ-cells.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  in  adopting  this  extreme
standpoint  Weismann  went  too  far.  He  not  only  cut  clean
away  from  the  Darwinian  tradition,  but  also,  in  fact,  made
it  impossible  to  understand  the  double  fact  of  progress  and
adaptation;  in  other  words,  to  understand  how  the  experi¬
ence  of  the  race,  which  after  all  is  only  accumulated  indi¬
vidual  experience,  helps  to  promote  development,  and  to
mould  it  in  congruity  with  the  environment.  Unless  the
“trial  and  error”  experiments  of  individuals  produce  some
racial  result;  if,  in  other  words,  every  individual  throughout
the  ages  has  to  begin  to  learn  once  more  at  the  beginning,
organic  progress  becomes  unintelligible,  if  not  impossible.
The  extreme  isolation  and  independence  which  Weismann
attributed  to  the  germ-cell  therefore  led  to  a  further  hypoth¬
esis  intended  to  give  the  individual  some  sort  of  indirect
influence  in  shaping  racial  evolution.  He  assumed  that  a
struggle  for  existence  took  place  among  the  elements  or


202


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


genes  inside  the  nucleus  of  the  germ-cell  for  the  food  that
came  from  the  body-cells,  that  Natural  Selection  was  thus
already  at  work  inside  the  germ-cell,  and  that  it  was  the
vigorous,  well-fed  surviving  genes  that  shaped  the  course
of  the  resulting  variation  in  the  direction  to  which  the
individual  had  thus  contributed.  In  this  way  the  body-
cells  and  the  individual  modifications  of  the  parent  might
have  some  vague  and  indirect  influence  on  the  germ-cells
and  their  offspring.  This  arbitrary  and  unsatisfactory
hypothesis  has  found  no  favour  and  probably  amounts  to
no  more  than  a  confession  of  failure  on  the  part  of  Weis-
mann  to  maintain  his  doctrine  in  its  extreme  form.  To
transfer  the  venue  of  the  struggle  of  existence  from  an  arena
where  we  can  watch  and  observe  it  among  organisms  to  the
inner  arcana  of  the  germ-cells,  where  it  is  beyond  observation
and  where  its  operation,  if  any,  is  pure  guesswork,  is  not  a
helpful  hypothesis,  and  can  only  be  a  last  desperate  resort
of  a  theory  in  distress.  Weismann  no  doubt  felt  the  difficulty
keenly,  but  he  saw  no  way  out  of  it,  and  his  hypothesis  of
Germinal  Selection  was  no  way  out.

The  dilemma  is  indeed  a  most  formidable  one,  not  only
for  Weismann  but  also  for  all  current  views  of  Darwinism.
On  the  one  hand,  there  is  the  negative  evidence,  the  absence
of  any  clear  and  incontrovertible  case  where  mere  individual
modifications  have  been  transmitted  to  offspring.  On  the
other  hand,  there  are  the  very  numerous  cases  where  the
disappearance  of  certain  characters  can  only  be  satisfactorily
explained  on  the  assumption  that  modifications  due  to
disuse  of  an  organ  have  become  hereditary.  Again,  there
are  the  still  more  numerous  cases  where  parts  of  the  body
have  been  constantly  used  in  certain  ways  and  have  finally
become  specialised  organs  with  which  animals  are  now  born
ready-made.  There  is  also  the  class  of  cases  mentioned
by  Herbert  Spencer  in  his  controversy  with  Weismann  and
never  satisfactorily  answered,  where,  for  instance,  the
sensitiveness  of  the  finger  or  tongue  (now  hereditary)  is
compared  with  the  much  smaller  sensitiveness  of  the  back
or  other  parts  of  the  body,  which  have  never  been  used  as


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


203


an  organ  of  touch  or  taste.  Above  all,  there  is  the  difficulty,
one  might  almost  say  the  impossibility,  of  understanding
organic  Evolution,  if  its  advance  depends  upon  mere  for¬
tuitous  variations  in  reproduction,  and  remains  uninfluenced
by  the  work,  the  experience,  the  learning  through  trial  and
error  and  the  consequent  modifications  of  the  individuals
which  compose  a  race  or  species.  While  it  is  admitted
and  intelligible  that  mere  artificial  and  singular  modifica¬
tions,  such  as  cutting  off  the  tails  of  dogs  or  sheep  continu¬
ously  for  thousands  of  years,  will  have  no  germinal  and  no
hereditary  effect,  the  case  may  apparently  be  quite  different
with  modifications  which  are  due  to  the  frequent  or  constant
activity  of  the  animal,  and  which  register  the  routine  of
its  life.  Such  modifications  are  far  more  intimate  to  the
animal  organism,  and  may  in  the  course  of  time  produce
such  a  deep  impression  on  the  body-cells  as  to  penetrate  to
and  reach  even  the  germ-cells,  and  register  a  change  there
which  leads  thereafter  to  hereditary  and  apparently  spon¬
taneous  variation.

Apart  from  Weismann’s  extreme  doctrine  of  germinal
isolation,  which  even  he  by  implication  appears  to  have
found  untenable,  there  is  nothing  in  principle  directly  nega¬
tiving  such  an  assumption,  and  it  does  render  intelligible
the  progressive  evolution  and  specialisation  of  bodily  organs
which  on  any  other  assumption  it  is  most  difficult  to  under¬
stand.  The  absence  of  direct  experimental  evidence  in  sup¬
port  of  this  view  is  not  a  fatal  objection.  The  laboratory
of  Nature  is  very  different  from  that  of  experimental  re¬
search.  Life  has  not  been  made  in  the  latter  but  was  made
in  the  former.  The  slow  intimate  operations  extending  over
thousands  and  even  millions  of  years,  such  as  brought  about
most  of  the  organic  species  of  which  we  know,  are  not
on  a  par  with  our  latter-day  researches  in  experimental
evolution.  With  all  our  chemical  knowledge  we  can  yet
never  hope  to  rival  in  our  laboratories  the  results  which
Nature  has  through  the  countless  ages  achieved,  say,  in
the  crucible  of  the  geological  record.  Still  less  can  we
hope  to  achieve  through  biological  experiments  in  the  labora-


204  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

tory  what  her  silent  processes  have  amounted  to  through
millions  of  years.

If  we  set  aside  this  negative  and  really  irrelevant  evidence,
and  also  reject  Weismann’s  extreme  doctrine  of  germinal
isolation,  we  find  nothing  in  theory  or  fact  to  preclude  us
from  viewing  modifications  as  having  an  influence  through
more  or  less  long  biological  periods  on  the  germ-cells.  On
the  hypothesis  of  the  “field”  which  we  have  found  useful
before,  we  may  consider  these  somatic  modifications  as  in
the  first  instance  influencing  the  field  of  the  germ-cells,
and  only  later  and  in  the  course  of  time  becoming  incor¬
porated  from  the  field  into  the  hereditary  structure  of  the
germ-cell.

We  come  thus  in  effect  to  look  upon  modifications  as  partly
the  material  from  which  variations  have  been  formed.
Modifications  due  to  constant  use  or  disuse,  or  to  per¬
manent  changes  in  the  conditions  of  physical  environment,
influence  in  the  first  instance  the  field  of  the  germ-cell,
and  are  thus  the  earlier  phase  of  the  later  hereditary  struc¬
tural  variations.  In  fact  we  may  say  that  modifications
are  to  variations  what  variations  are  to  specific  characters.
Throughout  organic  Nature  we  find  this  grand  calculus  at
work,  adding  up  and  conserving  whatever  in  the  experience
and  development  of  the  individual  is  of  survival  value  to
the  race,  and  carrying  on  this  organic  summation  with  a
fineness  and  delicacy  surpassing  that  of  any  mere  mechani¬
cal  calculus.  What  is  not  incorporated  into  the  hereditary
structure  remains  conserved  in  the  invisible  “field”  until
it  is  finally  accentuated  enough  to  become  so  incorporated.
Nothing  of  value  is  lost — traces  and  residua  of  organic
reactions,  reflexes  and  tropisms,  instincts  and  intelligence,
all  are  conserved  or  registered  in  the  field  until  in  the  lapse
of  time  they  are  ready  to  become  part  of  the  physical
structure.  There  is  no  reason,  except  our  ignorance  of  the
facts,  why  modifications  should  not  thus  to  a  large  extent
be  the  conditions  precedent  of  variations.  Only  in  this  way
can  we  explain  why  the  trend  of  Variation  is  on  the  whole
in  harmony  with  the  experience  and  the  past  of  animate


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


205


Nature,  why  Evolution  makes  steps  in  advance  on  the  road
on  which  it  is  already  moving,  instead  of  making  incalculable
twists  and  turns,  as  it  might  do  if  its  course  was  merely  de¬
pendent  on  purely  accidental,  arbitrary  and  unmotivated
variations.

That  modifications  of  a  certain  intimate  bodily  character,
and  continued  through  many  generations,  may  in  the  end
influence  the  germ-cells  and  even  modify  their  hereditary
structure  is  easier  for  us  to  appreciate  than  it  was  for  Weis-
mann.  It  is  only  recently  that  we  have  learnt  to  understand
the  important  functions  which  the  hormones  given  off  by
the  ductless  glands  perform  in  the  regulation  and  balance
of  our  whole  animal  economy.  We  now  know  that  the
germ-cells,  so  far  from  being  independent  of  the  developed
system  of  body-cells,  have  even  apart  from  their  reproduc¬
tive  functions  a  most  intimate  regulative  effect  in  co-ordi¬
nating  the  functioning  of  the  bodily  system  as  a  whole.  If
there  is  this  open  door  between  them,  there  is  no  reason  why
there  may  not  be  the  reverse  influence  of  the  body-cells  on
the  germ-cells.1

This  question  of  the  way  in  which  non-hereditary  modi¬
fications  are  conserved  brings  us  to  another  difficulty
which  Evolutionists  have  found  it  very  hard  to  explain  on
the  accepted  Darwinian  principles.  I  refer  to  the  natural
selection  of  small  variations.  How  can  small  variations
be  selected  and  conserved  in  the  struggle  of  existence  until
they  are  marked  enough  to  become  specific?  To  begin

1  From  this  point  of  view  the  recent  experiments  of  Professor  Pavlov
on  the  associative  memory  of  white  mice  are  interesting.  An  electric
bell  was  rung  while  the  mice  were  feeding.  It  was  found  that  a  firm
association  was  built  up  after  this  process  had  been  repeated  300  times;
that  is  to  say,  after  that  the  mice  looked  for  their  food  whenever  the
bell  was  rung.  For  the  children  of  these  mice  a  less  arduous  lesson
was  necessary:  after  150  rings  the  association  was  established.  For
the  grandchildren  only  30  rings  were  necessary;  while  for  the
great-grandchildren  (the  third  filial  generation)  only  five  rings  were
necessary  to  establish  the  association.  In  other  words,  the  acquired
experience  of  the  parents  made  the  acquisition  of  similar  experience
progressively  easier  for  their  offspring.  The  results  of  these  experiments
are  not  generally  accepted.  If  these  experiments  are  widely  corroborated
they  will  throw  a  new  and  most  important  light  on  the  nature  of
Evolution  as  progressive  facilitation  of  experience;  in  other  words,  on  the
hereditary  character  of  educability  or  psychic  experience.


206


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


with,  they  are  so  small  that  it  is  difficult  to  understand  that
they  have  any  survival  value  at  all.  Take  an  organ  which
is  being  differentiated  from  the  rest  of  the  body-cells.  At  the
beginning  any  variation  must  be  utterly  insignificant  and
practically  valueless  in  the  struggle  for  life,  and  Natural
Selection  has  really  nothing  to  work  on.  How  then  could
an  animal  with  such  a  minute  variation  be  selected  as  being
more  adapted  to  its  environment?  It  is  this  awkward  ques¬
tion  which  has  led  to  the  hypothesis  that  very  marked
varieties  or  mutations  alone  are  selected.  Various  more  or
less  ingenious  attempts  have  been  made  to  answer  this  ques¬
tion,  but  to  my  mind  they  are  all  more  or  less  unsatisfactory.
The  result  is  that  we  cannot  understand  how  the  Darwinian
machinery  of  Natural  Selection  is  set  in  motion  in  any
particular  case.  Once  individuals  with  marked  specific  or
varietal  differences  exist  in  superabundance,  we  can  under¬
stand  why  the  struggle  for  existence  between  them  will
take  place  and  Natural  Selection  become  operative.  But
on  Darwinian  principles  as  ordinarily  understood  these
marked  differences  between  individuals  can  arise  only  from
a  prior  selection  as  between  variations  so  minute  that  there
is  apparently  nothing  sufficiently  substantive  for  Natural
Selection  to  work  on.  In  other  words,  Natural  Selection
will  move  all  right  when  once  set  in  motion,  but  Darwinism
fails  to  set  it  in  motion.

In  my  view  the  difficulty  can  be  satisfactorily  removed
only  by  the  principle  of  Holism,  as  I  shall  just  now  proceed
to  explain.  In  the  meantime,  however,  I  wish  to  point  out
how  my  suggestion  that  the  modifications  influence  the
field  of  germ-cells  and  prepare  the  way  for  variations  can
prove  helpful  to  Darwinism  in  its  plight.  According  to  that
suggestion  the  small  initial  variation  does  not  stand  by  itself,
and  on  its  own  merits,  so  to  speak.  It  appears  powerfully
supported  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  Individual  use  and
practice  for  very  many  generations  are  on  its  side.  It  does
not  appear  as  a  stray,  helpless  infant  in  a  hostile  world.  It
appears  in  a  friendly,  one  might  say,  in  a  prepared  universe.
It  has  a  stalwart  nurse  in  the  use  and  routine  of  the  indi-


vra


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


207


vidual  in  whom  it  appears.  It  is  protected,  shielded  and
in  its  struggle  reinforced,  by  this  constant  use  and  routine.
A  small  variation  in  the  direction  of  a  nascent  organ,  for
instance,  finds  itself  in  line  with  the  traditional  use  of
generations  of  individuals  which  powerfully  support  it  in
the  struggle  with  contrary  variations.  Under  the  shelter  of
this  use  it  develops  and  beats  its  competitors,  until  in  the
end  it  can  fend  for  itself  and  engage  in  the  struggle  on  its
own  account.

This  explanation  applies  not  only  to  variations  in  develop¬
ing  organs  which  are  supported  by  use  and  practice  on  the
part  of  a  long  line  of  individuals.  It  applies  also  to  cases
where  permanent  changes  in  the  physical  conditions  impress
themselves  continuously  on  the  organism.  The  growth
forms  of  plants,  for  instance,  under  particular  ecological
conditions  are  such  as  almost  to  render  necessary  the  view
that  ecological  modifications,  due  to  the  direct,  silent,  long-
continued  pressure  of  the  environment,  finally  become  varia¬
tions.  The  sameness  or  close  resemblance  of  the  growth
forms  under  the  same  physical  conditions,  as  seen,  for  in¬
stance,  in  the  general  characters  of  formations  and  associa¬
tions  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  are  probably  in  a  measure
due  to  the  age-long  operation  of  ecological  factors  which
have  impressed  themselves  on  plant  development  and  have
produced  modifications  which  finally  have  become  varia¬
tions.1  The  resulting  general  features  of  formations  and

1  While  this  book  was  going  through  the  press  I  was  much  inter¬
ested  to  see  this  view  corroborated  by  certain  observations  of  Professor
F.  0.  Bower  in  Evolution  in  the  Light  of  Modern  Knowledge  (p.  206).
After  discussing  the  evolutionary  structures  of  ferns  he  continues:  “It
would  seem  a  natural  interpretation  of  the  facts  that  the  characters
(under  discussion),  acquired  by  a  direct  impress  upon  a  succession
of  individual  lives,  should  have  been  imposed  hereditarily  upon
each  race.  Naturally  the  reply  may  be  made  that  probably  muta¬
tions  favourable  to  the  perpetuation  of  the  imposed  character  may
have  made  that  character  permanent.  If  we  grant  that,  do
we  not  thereby  simply  admit  that  the  distinction  between  fluctuat¬
ing  variations  and  notations  is  not  absolute?  In  other  words,  that
fluctuating  variations  repeatedly  imposed  upon  successive  generations  are
liable  to  become  mutations?  It  is  difficult  to  see  any  other  rational
explanation  of  the  wide-reaching  facts  of  homoplastic  adaptation,  such
as  are  shown  with  exceptional  profusion  in  the  ancient  class  of  the  ferns,
and  are  evident  in  plants  at  large.”  (In  this  quotation  fluctuating


208


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


associations  are  no  doubt  in  part  due  to  Natural  Selection,
but  in  part  the  physical  environment  has  probably  exercised
a  direct  pressure  all  its  own  and  produced  an  effect  which
has  powerfully  reinforced  the  results  of  Natural  Selection.
The  hereditary  variation  ultimately  appears,  but  it  does  so
not  accidentally  or  from  the  blue,  but  from  the  long-
continued  stimulus  of  environmental  conditions  which  have
influenced  and  affected  the  field  of  the  germ-cell.

While  some  variations  thus  have  their  roots  in  the
traditional  use  and  practice  of  individuals  or  in  the  condi¬
tions  of  the  physical  environment,  and  can  survive  under
the  protection  thus  afforded  them,  many  variations  cannot
be  thus  accounted  for,  and  probably  originate  in  what  ap¬
pears  to  us  as  a  spontaneous,  independent,  more  or  less
sudden  and  accidental  manner.  The  mode  of  their  selec¬
tion  and  survival  has  still  to  be  accounted  for.  Before
doing  so  it  is  advisable  to  mention  a  third  set  of  difficulties
which  Darwinism  encounters  in  its  explanation  of  organic
Evolution.  I  refer  to  the  phenomena  of  co-ordination
and  co-adaptation  of  organs  and  characters  which  it  is  al¬
most  impossible  to  account  for  satisfactorily  on  orthodox
Darwinian  lines.

I  have  hitherto  spoken  of  variations  as  if  they  came
singly  in  the  evolution  of  organisms.  But  they  do  appear
but  rarely  as  single  units.  Generally  they  appear  in  asso¬
ciated  groups.  A  small  variation  is  generally  found  to  be
accompanied  by  a  number  of  still  smaller  associated  varia¬
tions.  If  an  organ  varies,  the  associated  muscles,  nerves
and  other  body-cells  undergo  a  corresponding  variation.
The  evolution  of  the  horns  of  a  wild  beast,  for  instance,
means  minor  and  consequential  adjustments  to  its  head,
its  neck,  its  muscular  system,  the  development  of  the  fore¬
part  of  the  body,  and  its  relation  to  the  back  parts,  as
well  as  to  many  other  parts  and  details  of  its  body.  And

variations  correspond  to  what  has  above  been  called  modifications,  while
mutations  correspond  to  what  has  been  called  variations.)  The  experi¬
ments  of  Kammerer  and  Durkhen  on  animals  and  plants  would  seem
to  tend  in  the  same  direction.  But  they  require  further  corrobora¬
tion.


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


209


when  we  come  to  consider  the  question,  already  so  diffi¬
cult,  of  the  selection  of  a  small  variation  in  respect  of  such
a  horn,  we  are  confronted  with  the  still  more  hopeless  diffi¬
culty  of  having  at  the  same  time  to  account  for  many  other
minor  correlated  variations,  each  of  which  has  to  be  selected.
Besides  this,  there  is  their  joint  and  associated  use  or
functioning  which  has  also  to  be  accounted  for  as  a  factor
in  their  selection.  We  are  obviously  throwing  a  weight  on
the  principle  of  Natural  Selection  which  is  more  than  it
can  bear.  It  is  being  arbitrarily  and  artificially  applied
far  beyond  the  area  of  its  natural  and  proper  application.
And  here  it  is  where  Natural  Selection  breaks  down  com¬
pletely.  The  whole  body  is  a  system  of  co-ordinated  struc¬
tures  and  functions,  and  its  origin  and  development  can
be  represented  only  as  a  complex  movement  forward  in
time  of  a  mass  of  associated  variations  which  have  resulted
in  the  most  marvellous  co-adaptation  of  structures  and  co¬
ordinated  functions.  Before  the  problem  of  this  complex
yet  orderly  evolution,  Natural  Selection  stands  baffled.  It
can  deal  with  individuals  and  markedly  formed  and  de¬
veloped  characters,  but  not  with  their  delicately  adjusted
and  associated  infinitesimals.

The  fault,  however,  lies  not  so  much  with  Natural  Selec¬
tion,  as  with  our  fundamental  organic  conceptions.  Our
crude  uncritical  mechanistic  conceptions  are  the  real  source
of  the  difficulty,  and  Holism  appears  to  me  to  be  the  way
out.  The  root  of  the  error  lies  in  our  disregard  of  the  indi¬
vidual  organism  as  a  living  whole,  and  in  our  attempt  to  iso¬
late  characters  from  this  whole  and  study  them  separately,
as  if  they  were  mere  mechanical  components  of  this  whole.
The  fatal  mistake  involved  in  this  procedure  has  already
been  fully  exposed  in  previous  chapters.  The  whole  is  not  a
mechanical  aggregate  indifferent  to  and  without  influence
on  its  parts.  It  is  itself  an  active  factor  in  controlling  and
shaping  the  functions  of  its  parts.  The  parts  bear  the
impress  of  its  directive  influence,  without  and  apart  from
which  it  is  vain  to  speculate  on  their  characters  and  their
activities.  Whereas  mechanical  action  is  isolable  and  ad-


210


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


ditive,  so  that  the  total  activities  of  a  system  are  repre¬
sented  by  the  sum  of  all  the  individual  activities,  the  situa¬
tion  is  entirely  different  in  the  case  of  a  living  whole.  Here
all  action,  as  we  have  seen,  is  holistic,  not  only  that  of  the
whole  itself,  but  also  that  of  the  parts.  The  stamp  of  Holism
is  impressed  on  the  activities  of  the  parts  no  less  than  on  the
individual  whole  itself.  The  individual  and  its  parts  are
reciprocally  means  and  end  to  one  another;  neither  is  merely
self-regarding,  but  each  supports  the  other  in  the  moving
dynamic  equilibrium  which  is  called  life.  And  so  it  happens
that  the  central  control  of  the  whole  also  maintains  and
assists  the  parts,  and  the  functions  of  the  parts  are  ever
directed  towards  the  conservation  and  fulfilment  of  the
whole.  With  this  conception  of  living  unity  and  holistic
action  in  an  organism  before  us,  let  us  try  once  more  to  read
the  riddle  of  Variation  and  Natural  Selection  as  the  twin
factors  in  Evolution.

In  the  first  place  we  realise  that  each  individual  organism
is  a  unitary  system  whose  inmost  nature  is  its  own  balanced
self-maintenance  and  self-development  as  a  whole.  Hered¬
ity  is  but  the  expression  of  this  self-conservative  character.
The  organism  both  as  structure  and  field,  while  carrying
with  it  the  past  which  is  its  expressed  self,  also  carries  with
it  the  still  unrealised  future  which  flows  organically  from
that  past,  and  it  maintains  a  living,  moving  harmony  be¬
tween  the  two;  its  presently  existing  self  is  the  more  or
less  harmonious  realisation  of  the  organic  unity  of  its  past
and  its  future  in  its  present.  Variations  arise  as  the  ten¬
tacles  it  throws  out  under  environmental  stimulation
towards  the  future,  a  stretching  of  hands  dimly  and  uncon¬
sciously  towards  future  adjustment,  welfare  and  better¬
ment.  These  variations,  while  apparently  accidental  and
uncontrolled,  arise  from  the  stimulus  of  the  environ¬
ment  and  are  under  the  central  control  of  the  organism  as
a  whole.

Let  us  for  a  moment  consider  the  appearance  of  a  small
variation.  It  is  really  neither  spontaneous  nor  accidental.
It  is  the  expression  of  the  moving,  developing  organism  as


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


211


a  whole  in  a  particular  direction.  It  is  normally  conditioned
by  what  has  gone  before  in  the  history  of  the  organism  and
is  really  of  a  piece  with  the  organism  as  a  whole.  Nor  does
it  as  a  rule  appear  alone.  The  organism  as  a  whole  is  on
the  march,  and  while  the  variation  may  be  the  first  and
most  significant  indication  of  the  inner  movement,  the
advance  is  not  confined  to  a  single  point,  but  is  represented
by  a  curve  of  progress  on  which  other  minor  advances  are
registered  at  the  same  time.  Thus  variation  A  when
closely  scanned  will  be  seen  to  be  really  more  like  A  -f-  b  +
c  +  d,  where  b,  c  and  d  represent  minor  variations  which
adjust  A  in  various  respects  to  the  organism.  The  appar¬
ently  isolated  variation  is  seen  to  be  what  it  really  is,  an
advance  of  the  organism  as  a  whole  in  a  particular  direction,
a  holistic  as  distinguished  from  a  singular  and  mechanical
variation  or  change.  Mechanical  analogies  may  assist  us
to  understand  to  some  extent  what  happens.  A  mechanical
system  of  a  given  number  of  elements  in  equilibrium  is
given  a  push  or  blow  with  a  certain  force  in  a  certain  direc¬
tion.  When  it  has  recovered  from  the  push  or  blow  and
is  in  equilibrium  once  more,  it  will  be  found  that  the  change
is  not  merely  in  the  direction  in  which  the  force  was  applied,
but  that  all  the  other  elements  have  also  been  affected  and
have  undergone  adjustments  in  order  to  achieve  the  new
equilibrium.  The  same  happens,  only  much  more  intensely
and  intimately  and  organically,  in  the  case  of  a  change  in  a
living  whole.  Variation  A  necessarily  involves  a  number  of
collateral  adjustments  which  are  dependent  on  A,  and  are
not  independently  originated  or  conserved.  In  other  words,
holistic  variation  or  variation  of  a  whole  in  any  particular
respect  is  the  cause  and  carrier  of  minor  variations  which
are  not  independently  selected  or  conserved,  and  for  which
Natural  Selection  need  not,  therefore,  be  called  into  action,
It  is  really  the  whole  which  does  the  “selection”  in  the
exercise  of  its  central  control.  We  may  call  it  a  case  of
Holistic  Selection  as  distinguished  from  external  Natural
Selection.  Variation  A  of  the  whole,  which  is  the  expression
of  an  inner  urge  of  the  whole  and  is  therefore  supported  by


212


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


the  whole,  carries  with  it  the  minor  and  consequential  ad¬
justments  involved  in  variations  b,  c  and  d.

This  explains  one  of  the  main  difficulties  which  we  encoun¬
tered  above — the  question,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  selective
co-ordination  of  subsidiary  adjustments.  But  the  main
difficulty  remains  how  variation  A  itself  is  selected  after
its  appearance.  How  is  the  main  small  variation,  perhaps
too  insignificant  for  Natural  Selection  to  get  a  grip  on,
selected  and  conserved  in  the  holistic  system?  If  it  were
a  mere  accidental  appearance,  with  nothing  more  behind  it,
it  might  be  a  toss  up  whether  it  is  saved  or  lost,  and  generally
it  is  lost.  With  the  prodigality  of  life  itself,  organic  changes
are  scattered  broadcast  like  seeds,  and  most  of  them,  with
nothing  particular  in  the  urge  of  the  organism  behind  them
to  give  them  continuous  momentum,  perish  as  soon  as  they
are  born.  But  some  are  in  a  different  position;  they  are
in  the  main  direction  of  development,  they  are  on  the  road,
so  to  say,  on  which  the  organism  is  travelling;  they  have
the  whole  weight  of  the  organism  behind  them;  they  are
nursed  and  cared  for,  figuratively  speaking;  and  in  the  end
they  survive.  Once  more  a  case  of  Holistic  Selection  as
distinct  from  Natural  Selection.  And  sometimes  in  these
cases,  as  we  have  seen,  the  organism  has  long  before  the
appearance  of  the  variation  begun  to  move  in  its  direction.
The  functioning  of  the  organism  has  anticipated  its  future
structure.  It  has  for  many  generations  devoted  a  part  of  it¬
self  to  a  particular  use;  the  part  has  in  consequence  under¬
gone  modification;  from  an  undifferentiated  system  of  cells  it
has  been  modified  in  certain  respects  so  as  to  anticipate  an
organ.  When  finally  in  the  course  of  time  this  modification
is  superseded  by  and  merged  into  an  organic  variation,  it  is
in  direct  harmony  with  the  needs  and  the  practice  of  the
organism  as  a  whole;  the  practice  continues  along  with  the
variation  and  becomes  accentuated,  the  pressure  of  the
needs  of  the  organism  is  behind  the  variation  and  probably
increases;  and  the  variation,  covered  by  the  habitual
practice  of  the  organism,  and  urged  forward  by  the  organic
needs,  makes  headway  and  has  a  fair  chance  of  survival.


vm


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


213


It  has  a  distinct  advantage;  the  dice  are  loaded  in  its  favour
by  the  nature,  pressure  and  practice  of  the  organism  as  a
whole.  These  forces  behind  it  are  probably  strong  enough
to  keep  it  going,  though  only  at  the  very  slow  pace  at  which
all  biological  Evolution  moves.  Eventually,  when  it  has  de¬
veloped  enough  to  add  a  sensible  measure  of  strength  to  the
parent  organism,  it  will  reward  its  parent  for  its  secular  sup¬
port,  it  will  join  forces  with  it,  and  fight  a  victorious  battle
against  its  competitors.  At  this  stage  the  belated  force  of
Natural  Selection  has  arrived  on  the  scene.  But  not  earlier,
the  earlier  phases  having  depended  on  what  I  call  Holistic
Selection.

The  Holistic  Selection  which  acts  within  each  organism
in  respect  of  its  parts  inter  se  is  essentially  different  from
the  Natural  Selection  which  operates  between  different  or¬
ganisms,  which  is  more  appropriately  called  the  struggle
for  existence.  Holistic  Selection  is  much  more  subtle  in
its  operation,  and  is  much  more  social  and  friendly  in  its
activity;  it  puts  the  inner  resources  of  the  organism  behind
the  promising  variation,  however  weak  and  feeble  it  may
be  in  comparison  with  other  characters,  and  makes  it  win
through  powerful  backing  rather  than  through  the  ruthless
scrapping  of  the  less  desirable  variations.  In  the  organism
the  battle  is  not  always  to  the  strong,  nor  is  the  struggle  an
unregulated  scrimmage  in  which  the  most  virile  survive.
The  whole  is  all  the  time  on  the  scene  as  an  active  friendly
arbiter  and  regulator,  and  its  favours  go  to  those  variations
which  are  along  the  road  of  its  own  development,  efficiency
and  perfection.

The  continuous  Holistic  Selection  of  small  variations  may
be  compared  to  the  survival  of  obsolete  organs  in  an  organ¬
ism.  Both  are  carried  forward  by  the  organism  as  a  whole,
perhaps  for  millions  of  years,  without  being  in  either  case
directly  useful  to  the  organism.  The  whole,  if  one  may  say
so,  takes  long  views,  both  into  the  future  and  into  the  past;
and  mere  considerations  of  present  utility  do  not  weigh
very  heavily  with  it.  It  carries  its  infant  variation  with  it
in  the  same  way  that  it  carries  the  aged  and  dying  members


214


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


or  atrophying  organs.  Both  are  borne  along,  covered  and
shielded  by  the  main  characters  of  the  organism.  From  the
point  of  view  of  survival  value,  as  from  so  many  other
points  of  view,  the  whole  is  more  important  than  any  of  its
parts.  And  so  it  comes  that  the  organism  is  a  most  com¬
plicated  system,  a  present  living  unity  embodying  its  far¬
away  past  no  less  than  its  dim  distant  future.  The  whole
controls,  guides  and  conserves  all.  The  fate  of  any  par¬
ticular  part,  considered  by  itself  and  on  its  own  merits,
would  be  an  inexplicable  mystery,  and  might  be  expected
to  be  the  very  opposite  of  what  happens  in  practice.  When,
however,  it  is  viewed  from  its  position  and  function  in  the
whole,  the  mystery  is  explained;  we  see  how  different  the
laws  of  life  are  from  the  laws  of  mechanics,  and  how  wrong
it  is  to  apply  mechanistic  and  atomistic  conceptions  in  a
region  where  Holism  prevails.

To  understand  how  a  small  variation  is  favoured,  we  may
represent  an  organism  as  a  moving  developing  equilibrium,
which  is  never  perfectly  adjusted  because  it  has  a  persistent
slight  overbalance  in  the  direction  of  development.  Com¬
plete  equilibrium  is  never  attained,  and  would  be  fatal  if  it
were  attained,  as  it  would  mean  stagnation,  atrophy  and
death.  And  so  the  overbalance  in  a  certain  direction  or
with  a  definite  orientation  continues  indefinitely,  and  all
small  developments  and  adjustments  and  “variations”  which
have  that  specific  orientation  have  the  momentum  of  the
whole  behind  them  and  tend  to  survive  and  grow  while
others  in  other  directions  are  dropped  and  discarded.  One
may  accordingly  say  that  in  each  case  “the  whole”  is  a
co-worker  with  its  small  variations  which  will  eventually  be
useful;  that  as  an  active  factor  its  influence  is  on  the  side
of  such  small  variations,  and  that  with  this  inner  nurture
and  support  these  small  variations  are  practically  inde¬
pendent  of  external  support  for  their  survival  and  steady
evolution.

The  activity  of  the  whole  is  seen  not  only  in  the  main¬
tenance  and  evolution  of  the  small  variation  and  all  the
subordinate  adjustments  that  go  with  it,  but  also  and  espe-


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


215


daily  in  all  the  innumerable  co-ordinations  and  co-adap¬
tations  in  structure  and  function  which  constitute  a  living
organism.  I  believe  it  is  generally  admitted  that  this  phe¬
nomenon  of  organic  co-ordination  is  one  which  cannot
be  satisfactorily  explained  on  mechanical  principles.  The
functioning  of  an  animal  as  a  whole  has  something  unique
about  it,  and  the  term  “whole”  in  this  connection  is  no
mere  phrase  but  a  fact  of  vital  significance.  We  have
already  considered  the  matter  fully  in  Chapter  VI.  Here
we  shall  only  add  that  to  suppose  that  Natural  Selection  has
not  only  brought  about  the  separate  organs  of  animals  and
their  functions,  but  also  accounts  satisfactorily  for  their
adjustments  to  each  other  and  their  co-ordinated  activities
in  the  animal  behaviour,  is  to  suppose  what  certainly  has
never  been  and  cannot  be  explained  in  detail,  and  what
probably  is  in  conflict  with  the  facts  of  development.  Intel¬
ligent  and  purposive  action  of  a  human  or  other  animal
cannot  be  explained  on  mechanical  principles;  nor  can  in¬
stinctive  action,  not  even  reflex  or  organic  activities  and
functions  below  the  level  of  instinct  or  intelligence.  An
animal — even  of  the  lowest  type — makes  an  unconscious
effort  to  catch  food  or  beat  an  enemy,  and  in  the  process
performs  a  large  number  of  acts  which  are  all  effectively
co-ordinated  towards  the  attainment  of  its  object.  No
mechanical  explanation  of  this  process  of  co-ordinated  move¬
ments  has  ever  been  given.  The  animal  acts  as  a  whole,
with  a  unity  and  effectiveness  of  action  which  is  no  mere
mechanical  composition  of  its  movements.  The  concept  of
the  whole  is  the  only  category  that  will  explain  such  unity,
and  we  have  seen  good  reason  in  previous  chapters  to
go  further  and  to  infer  that  Holism  is  not  merely  a  cate¬
gory  or  concept,  but  a  fact  and  a  factor  of  far-reaching
significance.  Co-ordination  and  co-adaptation  in  organic
structure  and  behaviour  cannot  be  explained  on  any  other
ground.

So  far  we  have  considered  Holism  as  creative  of  varia¬
tions;  and  as  regulating  and  co-ordinating  groups  of  actual-
ised  variations  and  organic  characters  generally.  But  this


2l6


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


by  no  means  exhausts  the  function  of  Holism  in  organic  de¬
velopment.  It  is  not  only  productive  of  variation,  it  is  just
as  much  repressive  of  variation.  Holism  is  as  often  inhibi-
tive  as  creative;  it  keeps  back  certain  elements  at  the  same
time  that  it  pushes  forward  others,  and  in  this  way  secures
a  balanced  movement  and  progress  of  the  organic  whole.
When,  for  instance,  the  form  and  characteristics  of  a  gorilla
are  compared  with  the  human  type  it  becomes  clear  that  in
the  human  evolution  certain  tendencies  have  been  held
definitely  in  check,  and  the  utter  caricature  in  appearance,
which  would  have  resulted  from  unrestrained  development,
has  thus  been  prevented.  Nobody  who  ignores  this  negative
aspect  of  Evolution  can  possibly  understand  the  present
forms  of  animals,  compared  with  their  living  or  fossil  affilia¬
tions.  Tendencies  to  variation,  which  were  realised  in  the
case  of  Neanderthal  man,  have  been  more  or  less  severely
repressed  in  the  present  human  races.  If  there  had  been
unrestrained  evolution  of  all  potential  variations,  the  results
would  have  been  truly  dreadful  in  their  grotesqueness.  In
fact  we  find  at  work  in  organic  Evolution  an  influence  not
unlike  that  which  at  a  much  later  stage  we  recognise  as  the
ethical  control  of  feelings,  impulses  and  instinctive  move¬
ments  of  an  undesirable  character.  The  whole  in  personal¬
ity,  the  whole  in  its  ethical  flowering  in  the  human,  means
not  only  expression  of  certain  moral  qualities,  but  also  and
equally  repression  of  others.  Elements  and  tendencies
which  we  find  strongly  operative  in  our  instinctive  or  organic
nature  we  have  to  keep  in  check,  to  hold  down  severely,  and
to  prevent  from  emergence  in  our  characters  as  a  whole.
This  is  the  very  essence  of  Holism  in  its  mature  ethical
development.  There  is  something  very  similar  and  equally
fundamental  in  the  activity  of  Holism  in  the  earlier  purely
organic  phases  of  Evolution.  In  any  individual  organism
the  whole  is  in  control,  pushing  forward  some  tendencies
and  keeping  back  others,  expressing  some  variations  and
repressing  others,  and  through  all  maintaining  a  mobile  equi¬
librium  of  all  the  elements,  positive  and  negative,  that  are
uniquely  blended  in  the  individual.  Thus  it  is  that  if  we


vm


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


217


wish  to  understand  the  details  of  organic  Evolution  in  any
particular  case  we  should  look  for  the  repressions  no  less
than  for  the  variations;  it  is  the  combination  of  the  two
which  constitutes  Evolution.

I  shall  no  doubt  be  asked  what  experimental  verification
there  is  for  the  holistic  view  of  Evolution  here  set  forth.
My  answer  is  to  repeat  what  I  have  already  said:  that
natural  Evolution  as  distinguished  from  experimental  Evolu¬
tion  is  a  process,  not  of  the  hour  or  the  day,  but  of  geo¬
logical  time,  and  that  the  results,  matured  and  consolidated
through  immemorial  periods,  cannot  be  repeated  or  re¬
hearsed  by  short-dated  laboratory  experiments,  conducted
too  under  conditions  very  different  from  those  of  Nature.
These  experiments,  however  valuable  and  instructive  in
affording  subsidiary  clues  and  hints  of  the  natural  process,
do  not  by  any  means  exhaust  or  even  seriously  affect  the
real  problem  of  creative  Evolution;  and  a  correct  view  of
Evolution  must  have  regard  to  this  difference  and  be  based
on  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  natural  processes
rather  than  on  the  very  limited  data  yielded  by  our  labora¬
tory  experiments.  There  is  no  doubt  that  experimental
Evolution  has,  through  its  unavoidable  limitations,  greatly
blurred  the  great  Darwinian  vision  of  organic  Evolution,
and  instead  of  making  us  more  fully  realise  its  truth  and
effectiveness  and  grandeur  as  a  whole,  has  tended  to  deflect
our  attention  to  particular  problems  which  are  special  and
limited  enough  to  be  capable  of  laboratory  treatment.  The
special  and  exceptional  cases  of  Mutation  and  Hybridisa¬
tion  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  covering  the  entire  process
of  organic  Evolution.  My  endeavour  in  this  chapter  has
been,  through  a  re-examination  of  the  position  thus  created,
to  explore  and  reconnoitre  a  way  back  to  the  broader  and
wider  view  of  Evolution.  And  in  doing  so  I  have  sought
the  assistance  of  a  concept  which  we  have  found  at  work,
not  only  in  organic  Evolution,  but  in  all  organic  structures
and  processes  and  even,  to  a  limited  extent,  in  inorganic
Nature  itself.  I  shall  now  briefly  summarise  the  results
we  have  reached  in  this  chapter  in  order  thus  to  see  how


2 18  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

they  bear  on  the  wide  Darwinian  conception  from  which
we  started.

The  relative  importance  of  the  internal  and  external
factors  in  Evolution  has  materially  altered  since  Darwin’s
time.  Variation  has  become  much  more  important  than
Natural  Selection,  not  only  in  biological  studies  and  experi¬
mental  researches,  but  also  in  our  view  of  it  as  an  operative
factor  in  organic  Evolution.  While  remaining  a  substantial
and  important  factor  Natural  Selection  has  yielded  pride
of  place  to  Variation.  The  factor  of  intense  struggle  and
competition  in  Nature  on  which  Darwin,  following  the
Malthusian  clue,  laid  so  much  stress  is  now  seen  not  only
to  have  less  importance  relatively,  but  also  to  bear  a  some¬
what  different  character  from  what  it  had  in  Darwin’s  view.
The  struggle  for  existence  is,  like  Mutation,  an  exceptional
and  not  the  usual  procedure  of  organic  Nature.  This
world  is  at  bottom  a  friendly  universe,  in  which  organised
tolerant  co-existence  is  the  rule  and  destructive  warfare
the  exception,  resorted  to  only  when  the  balance  of  Nature
is  seriously  disturbed.  Normally  Natural  Selection  takes
the  form  of  comradeship,  of  social  co-operation  and  mu¬
tual  help.  Normally  also  the  organic  struggle  is  very
much  in  abeyance,  and  the  silent,  effortless,  constant  pres¬
sure  of  the  physical  and  organic  environment  exercises  a
very  powerful  influence.  The  young  science  of  Ecology
has  been  built  up  since  Darwin’s  time  and  is  based  on
the  recognition  of  this  fact,  that,  in  addition  to  the  opera¬
tion  of  Natural  Selection,  the  environment  has  a  silent,
assimilative,  transformative  influence  of  a  very  profound
and  enduring  character  on  all  organic  life.  In  the  subtle
ways  of  Nature,  sun  and  earth,  night  and  day,  and  all  the
things  of  earth  and  air  and  sea  mingle  silently  with  life,
sink  into  it  and  become  part  of  its  structure.  And  in  re¬
sponse  to  this  profound  stimulus  life  grows  and  evolves,
the  lesser  whole  in  harmony  with  the  greater  whole  of
Nature.

The  interaction  between  the  inner  and  the  outer  factors
in  Evolution  is  far  more  close  and  subtle  than  one  would


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


219


infer  from  Darwinism,  in  either  its  earlier  or  its  later  (Weis-
mann)  form.  It  is  not  merely  a  case  of  one  factor  creating
variations,  and  another  eliminating  some  of  these  creations
and  leaving  free  the  rest,  which  are  then  said  to  be  selected
for  perpetuation.  The  inner  creative  factor  in  a  measure
acts  directly  under  the  stimulus  of  the  external  factor,  and
the  variations  which  emerge  are  the  result  of  this  intimate
interaction.  The  isolation  of  the  inner  from  the  outer  factor,
which  was  so  much  emphasised  by  Weismann,  is,  in  spite
of  its  apparent  agreement  with  observation,  really  a  mis¬
taken  assumption,  based  on  the  neglect  of  the  factor  of  time
in  Evolution.  Environment  is  a  great  stimulus  of  varia¬
tion,  and  even  more  so  is  the  somatic  organism  itself,
which  is  closer  to  the  germ-cell  than  the  environment.

We  can  understand  the  process  of  organic  Evolution  only
if  we  assume  that,  deeply  as  the  germ-cell  carriers  of  Varia¬
tion  are  hid  from  external  contacts,  they  are  not  completely
or  for  ever  isolated  therefrom;  that  changes  due  to  habitual
behaviour  or  to  environmental  or  ecological  pressure  affect
the  “  field  ”  of  the  germ-cells,  and  if  sufficiently  long-con¬
tinued  and  intense,  sooner  or  later  penetrate  the  structures  of
these  germ-cells,  and  stimulate  and  set  in  motion  the  internal
factor  of  Variation.  The  response  comes  back  in  a  crisis  of
variation  or  mutation  which  permanently  alters  the  internal
hereditary  structure.  In  these  cases  the  inner  and  outer
factors  of  Evolution  do  not  operate  independently  and  by
opposed  and  contrasted  methods;  they  collaborate  in  the
closest  manner  as  the  stimulus  and  response  which  we  find
distinctive  of  all  organic  action.  From  this  external  factor,
which  operates  as  a  stimulus  of  organic  variation,  we  have
to  distinguish  Darwin’s  Natural  Selection,  which  is  another
external  factor  operative  not  in  connection  with  the  stimula¬
tion  of  variations,  but  in  connection  with  their  subsequent
elimination  or  destruction.  The  external  factors  in  Evolu¬
tion  are  therefore  according  to  this  view  twofold:  the
environmental  or  ecological  factor  which  to  some  extent
influences  or  induces  variation,  and  the  factor  of  organic
struggle  which  sets  in  motion  the  warfare  among  organisms


220  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

for  the  limited  goods  of  life,  which  Darwin  called  Natural
Selection.

But  it  is  only  in  certain  classes  of  cases  that  the  “  use  ”
factor  or  the  external  or  ecological  stimulus  of  variation
comes  into  action;  in  others  the  stimulus  of  variation  is
entirely  internal,  and  must  be  found  in  the  fresh  mix¬
ture  and  readjustment  of  the  chromatin  elements  of  the
germ-cell  nucleus  at  certain  critical  stages  in  the  evolutionary
process,  such  as  in  the  sexual  reproduction  of  some  organ¬
isms,  or  the  endomixis  and  rejuvenescence  which  occur  at
certain  stages  in  others.

This  internal  factor  in  Variation  and  Evolution  was
stressed,  and  rightly  stressed,  by  Weismann,  and  has
supplied  a  suggestive  clue  for  the  researches  in  Genetics
which  have  been  conducted  since  his  day.  But  the  view  of
this  factor  as  purely  mechanical  has  led  to  great  difficulties
in  detail,  and  has  made  it  impossible  to  understand  the
process  of  organic  Evolution  as  a  whole.  I  have  therefore
endeavoured  to  stress  the  contrary  view  of  this  inner  factor,
and  to  show  that  it  is  holistic  in  character  and  operation,
that  it  thus  solves  the  difficulties  which  the  mechanistic
hypothesis  has  created  for  itself,  and  that  it  leads  to  a
reconciliation  of  the  two  factors  operative  in  Evolution.
Holism  has  thus  once  more,  though  in  a  way  different  from
that  envisaged  by  Darwin,  brought  us  back  to  the  great
Darwinian  vision  of  universal  adaptation.

But  Holism  has  done  more;  it  has  enabled  us  to  realise
the  pervasive  creative  unity  which  makes  all  the  diverse
elements  of  existence  the  co-operative  members  and
inhabitants  of  an  essentially  friendly  universe.  Operating
as  the  inner  creative  factor  at  the  heart  of  things,  it  has  led
to  the  evolution  of  a  universe  in  which  all  the  factors  and
products,  organic  and  inorganic  alike,  are  not  alien  to  and
destructive  of  each  other,  but  are  capable  of  mutual  adapta¬
tion,  and  adjustment,  just  because  they  own  a  common
origin  and  have  an  indisputable,  though  often  scarcely
recognisable,  family  relationship.  This  is  not  to  assume  a
Pre-established  Harmony,  which  would  be  as  great  a  mistake


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


221


in  one  direction  as  the  contrary  and  more  usual  mechanistic
assumption — that  universal  adaptation  and  organic  co-ordi¬
nation  are  in  effect  the  accidental  results  of  utterly  uncon¬
nected  factors — would  be  in  the  other  direction.  The  true
conception  not  only  for  philosophy  but  also  for  science  is
that  of  parts  in  a  whole.  It  is  the  high  task  of  science  to
explore  the  mechanisms  of  adaptation  and  variation  in  all
their  details,  and  to  pursue  at  all  costs  the  chemistry  and
physics  of  the  cell,  of  which  we  still  know  so  little.  But
in  doing  so  it  must  also  explore  the  unifying,  regulating,
co-ordinating  activity  of  the  holistic  factor,  which  even
from  a  purely  scientific  point  of  view  is  just  as  important
as  the  study  of  the  special  mechanisms.  Above  all,  biological
science  must  ever  keep  before  itself  the  standpoint  of  the
whole,  without  and  apart  from  which  all  the  details — so
far  from  being  recognised  as  being  organic  to  each  other —
are  mere  loose  meaningless  items,  like  the  sands  of  the  sea¬
shore,  utterly  useless  for  the  understanding  of  that  unique
unity  which  constitutes  an  organic  individual.  The  whole
is  the  ultimate  category  not  only  of  organic  explanation,
but  also  of  organic  adaptation  and  evolution.  And  it  is
more  than  a  category;  as  the  creative  factor  of  inner
structural  and  functional  control  operative  in  all  existence,
it  is  the  ultimate  real  in  the  universe  and  the  creative  source
of  all  reality,  whether  organic  or  inorganic.  Nay,  more:
Holism  is  also  creative  of  all  values.  Take  the  case  of
organic  Beauty.  It  is  undeniable  that  Beauty  rests  on  a
holistic  basis.  Beauty  is  essentially  a  product  of  Holism
and  is  inexplicable  apart  from  it.  Beauty  is  of  the  whole;
Beauty  is  a  relation  of  parts  in  a  whole,  a  blending  of
elements  of  form  and  colour,  of  foreground  and  background,
of  expression  and  suggestion,  of  structure  and  function,  of
structure  and  field,  which  is  perceived  and  appreciated  as
harmonious  and  satisfying,  according  to  laws  which  it  is
for  Aesthetics  to  determine.

It  may  be  a  question  how  far  the  phenomena  of  repression
in  conjunction  with  expression  in  organic  Evolution,  of
regulated  development  as  a  whole,  of  beauty  and  of  similar


222


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


phenomena  can  be  properly  subsumed  under  the  Darwinian
factors.  Perhaps  it  is  better  to  recognise  that  there  is
something  wider  and  deeper  at  work  in  Evolution  than  the
factors  as  found  by  Darwin  and  his  successors,  something  of
which  those  factors  are  themselves  but  an  expression.
The  whole  is  itself  an  active  factor,  and  its  activity  as  such
explains  phenomena  which  it  is  difficult  if  not  impossible
to  account  for  in  any  other  way  without  very  forced  inter¬
pretations.  The  inner  sources  of  wealth  and  beauty  in
Nature  are  inexhaustible,  and  they  are  poured  forth  with
a  lavish  hand  in  the  creative  process  of  Evolution.  Not
merely  survival  values  on  Darwinian  lines  count;  on  the
foundation  of  variations  with  survival  value  is  raised  a
superstructure  of  development  which  far  transcends  that
narrow  basis.  Mind  in  its  marvellous  human  efflorescence
rests  no  doubt  on  a  basis  of  survival  value;  but  how  much
more  it  is  than  that!  The  glories  of  art  and  literature,  the
peace  of  the  mystic  religious  experience,  the  creative  Ideals
which  lift  this  life  beyond  the  limitations  of  its  lowly  origin
— all  these  experiences  and  developments  have  built  a  new
spiritual  world  on  the  humble  foundations  of  survival  values.
In  the  kingdom  of  life  is  visibly  arising  its  capital,  the  City
of  God.  Apart  from  the  great  human  development,  beauty
in  Nature  tells  the  same  tale.  The  song  of  birds,  with  its
primary  appeal  to  sex,  but  with  so  infinitely  much  more  in
it  than  the  mere  sex-appeal;  the  glorious  forms  and  colouring
of  birds  and  beasts  and  insects,  which  no  doubt  rise  in  and
from  the  struggle  for  existence,  but  finally  rise  above  it,
and  rob  it  of  all  its  sordidness  and  drabness;  above  all,  the
wonder  of  plants  and  flowers,  which  were  meant  for  the
eye  of  birds  and  insects,  but  which  contain  so  infinitely
much  more  than  the  eye  of  bird  or  insect  ever  beheld  or
ever  can  behold — it  is  everywhere  in  Nature  the  same.
Everywhere  we  see  the  great  overplus  of  the  whole.  So
little  is  asked;  so  much  more  is  given.  The  female  only
asks  for  a  sign  to  recognise  the  male,  and  to  help  her  to
select  him  and  stick  to  him  in  preference  to  others.  And
for  answer  she  gets  an  overpowering  revelation  of  beauty


VIII


DARWINISM  AND  HOLISM


223


out  of  all  proportion  to  her  modest  request.  The  peahen
has  no  discriminating  understanding  of  the  wondrous
colouring  of  the  peacock,  which  far  transcends  even  our
human  powers;  but  in  some  inscrutable  way  something  of
an  emotional  nature  in  her  takes  it  all  in  and  is  satisfied.
It  is  deep  calling  unto  deep;  it  is  the  whole  appealing  to  the
whole.  There  is  evidently  more  in  all  this  than  the  Dar¬
winian  factors  can  satisfactorily  explain,  and  it  would  be
both  foolish  and  unscientific  not  to  recognise  this  frankly.
To  me  the  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  that  the  inexhaustible
whole  is  itself  at  work,  that  Holism  is  an  active  factor
interacting  with  the  particular  Darwinian  factors,  that  not
only  its  aim  but  also  its  output  far  exceeds  the  immediate
present  utilities  and  needs  of  organic  Evolution,  and  that
its  bow  is  bent  for  the  distant  horizons,  far  beyond  all  human
power  of  vision  and  understanding.


CHAPTER  IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES

Summary . — Mind  is,  after  the  atom  and  the  cell,  the  third
great  fundamental  structure  of  Holism.  It  is  not  itself  a  real
whole,  but  a  holistic  structure,  a  holistic  organ,  especially  of
Personality  which  is  a  real  whole.

Psychology  treats  mind  in  man  and  the  higher  animals  as  a
factor  or  phenomenon  by  itself,  and  analyses  it  into  various  modes
of  activity,  such  as  consciousness,  attention,  conception,  feeling,
emotion  and  will.  In  this  work  Mind  is  viewed  from  a  different
angle;  it  is  a  form  of  Holism  and  it  is  studied  as  a  holistic  struc¬
ture,  with  a  definite  relation  to  other  earlier  holistic  structures.
It  has,  therefore,  a  much  wider  setting  and  performs  more  funda¬
mental  functions  in  the  order  of  the  universe  than  appears  from
Psychology.

Mind  springs  from  two  roots.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  con¬
tinuation,  on  a  much  higher  plane,  of  the  system  of  organic  regu¬
lation  and  co-ordination  which  characterises  Holism  in  organisms.

Mind  is  thus  the  direct  descendant  of  organic  regulation  and
carries  forward  the  same  task.  This  is  the  universalising  side  of
Mind,  and  appears  in  the  conceptual-rational  or  reasoning  activity,
which  co-ordinates  and  regulates  all  experience.  Its  physical  basis
is  the  brain  and  neural  system,  which  is  the  central  system  of
regulation  and  co-ordination  in  the  body.  It  is  thus  the  crowning
phase  of  the  regulative,  co-ordinative  process  of  Holism.

In  the  second  place,  Mind  is  a  development  of  an  “individual”
aspect  of  Holism  which  already  plays  a  subordinate  part  in  or¬
ganisms.  In  man  it  pushes  to  the  front  as  conscious  individuality
or  the  Self  of  the  Personality,  and  becomes  as  conspicuous  a
feature  of  developed  Holism  as  regulative  co-ordination,  if  not
more  so.  This  intense  element  of  individuality  is  the  principal
novelty  in  the  development  of  Mind,  the  real  revolutionary  de¬
parture  from  the  prior  system  of  regulative  routine,  and  in  Per¬
sonality  it  culminates  in  a  new  order  of  wholes  for  the  universe.
Mind  in  its  individual  aspect  is  thus  the  chief  means  whereby
organic  Holism  has  developed  into  human  Personality.

Mind  is  in  some  respects  as  old  as  life,  but  life  outran  it  in  the
race  of  Evolution.  Besides,  Mind  needed  life  as  a  nurse,  and  its
full  development  has  therefore  had  to  wait  for  that  of  life.  The

224


chap,  ix  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  225

extraordinary  self-regulation  of  organisms  must,  therefore,  not  be
put  to  the  credit  of  Mind,  which  was  essentially  a  later  develop¬
ment  of  Holism.

Mind  is  traceable  ultimately  to  inorganic  affinities  and  organic
selectivities.  The  “tension”  of  a  body  in  disequilibrium  gradually
became  covered  with  a  vague  “feeling”  of  discomfort,  which  had
survival  value;  instead  of  remaining  a  passive  state  it  became
active  as  ad-tension  or  attention,  and  ultimately  consciousness.
Interest  became  appreciable.  Simultaneously  the  active  individual
side  of  Mind  developed  as  conation,  seeking,  experiment;  and
from  this  double  basis  Mind  grew  with  phenomenal  rapidity  in
the  earlier  species  of  the  genus  Homo.

The  individual  self-conscious  conative  Mind  is  rightly  stressed
by  psychology  as  the  Subject  of  experience,  the  Self,  and  ulti¬
mately  the  Personality.  In  the  universal  system  of  order  this
individual  appears  as  a  disturbing  influence,  as  a  rebel  against
that  order.  But  the  rebel  fights  his  way  to  victory,  achieves  plas¬
ticity  and  freedom,  and  is  released  from  the  previous  regular  rou¬
tine  of  Holism.  Mind  thus  through  its  power  of  experience  and
knowledge  comes  to  master  its  own  conditions  of  life,  to  secure
freedom  and  to  control  the  regulative  system  into  which  it  has
been  born.  Freedom,  plasticity,  creativeness  become  the  keynotes
of  the  new  order  of  Mind.

This  is,  however,  only  one  side  of  mental  evolution.  Pari  passu
with  this  individual  development  the  universalising  conceptual-
rational  side  of  Mind  also  develops  rapidly;  its  regulative  Reason
makes  Mind  a  part  of  the  universal  order,  and  the  individual  and
universal  aspects  of  Mind  mutually  enrich  and  fructify  each  other,
and  on  the  level  of  human  Personality  result  in  the  creation  of  a
new  i<J,eal  world  of  spiritual  freedom.  This  union  of  the  “indi¬
vidual”  subjective  Mind  with  the  universal  or  rational  Mind  is
possible  because  the  individual  Mind  has  itself  arisen  in  the  hol¬
istic  regulative  bosom.  Pure  individualism  is  a  misleading  ab¬
straction;  the  individual  becomes  conscious  of  himself  only  in
society  and  from  knowing  others  like  himself;  his  very  capacity
for  conceptual  experience  results  mostly  from  the  use  of  the
social  instrument  of  language.  The  individual  springs  from  uni¬
versal  Holism,  and  all  his  experience  and  knowledge  ultimately
tend  towards  the  character  of  regulative  order  and  universality.
Thus  knowledge  assumes  in  the  first  instance  the  form  of  an
empirical  order,  as  a  system  of  common  sense.  Gradually  the
discrepancies  of  this  system  are  eliminated  and  knowledge  ap¬
proximates  to  science,  to  a  scientific  conceptual  order,  in  which
concepts  and  principles  beyond  empirical  experience  are  assumed
to  underlie  the  world  of  experience.  The  scientific  world-concep¬
tion  marks  the  triumph  of  the  universal  element  in  Mind,  but  only


226  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

on  the  basis  of  the  freedom  and  control  which  the  individual  mind
has  mainly  achieved.  Mind  as  an  organ  of  the  whole,  while  taking
its  place  in  the  universal  order,  has  emancipated  itself  from  the
earlier  routine  of  regulation  and  has  assumed  creative  control  of
its  own  conditions  of  life  and  development.  Thus  it  creates  its
own  environment  in  society,  language,  tradition,  writing,  literature,
etc.,  instead  of  being  dependent  on  an  alien  environment  as  on
the  organic  level.  Again,  Mind  frees  itself  from  the  intolerable
burden  of  organic  inheritance  by  inheriting  merely  the  widest,
most  plastic  capacity  to  learn,  and  letting  the  social  environment
and  tradition  carry  on  the  onerous  duty  of  recording  the  past.
While  the  animal  is  hidebound  with  its  own  hereditary  characters,
the  human  Personality  is  free  to  acquire  a  vast  experience  in  his
individual  life.

Mind  has  its  conscious  illuminated  area  and  its  subconscious
“field.”  In  this  field  the  forgotten  experience  of  the  individual
life  as  well  as  the  physiological  and  racial  inheritance  exercises  a
powerful  influence.  It  is  this  influence  that  proves  decisive  for
our  fundamental  bias,  our  temperament,  our  point  of  view,  and
our  individual  outlook  on  persons  and  things.  It  is  of  an  intensely
holistic  unanalysable  character ;  it  is  even  possible  that  our  neural
endowment  carries  with  it  more  in  the  way  of  sensation  and  intui¬
tion  than  appears  from  the  special  senses;  that  the  sensitive  basis
from  which  they  have  been  differentiated  has  continued  to  develop
pari  passu  with  them  and  to-day  forms  a  subtle  holistic  sense,  a
capacity  of  psychical  sensing  or  intellectual  intuition  which  ex¬
plains  our  holistic  sense  of  reality  as  well  as  other  obscure  phe¬
nomena,  such  as  telepathy.  So  much  for  the  influence  of  the  past.
The  future  also  becomes  a  potent  influence  on  Mind.  Through
its  dual  activity  of  conception  and  conation  Mind  forms  “pur¬
poses”  which  envisage  future  situations  in  experience  and  make  the
future  an  operative  factor  in  the  present.  Purpose  marks  the  lib¬
eration  of  Mind  from  the  domination  of  circumstances  and  indi¬
cates  its  free  creative  activity,  away  from  the  trammels  of  the
present  and  the  past.  Through  purpose  Mind  finally  escapes
from  the  house  of  bondage  into  the  free  realm  of  its  own  sover¬
eignty.  All  through  its  great  adventure  its  procedure  is  funda¬
mentally  holistic,  and  this  can  be  shown  by  reference  to  the  vari¬
ous  activities  of  Mind  as  analysed  by  psychology.  Free  creative
synthesis  appears  everywhere  in  mental  functioning,  and  not  least
in  the  region  of  Metaphysics,  Ethics,  Art  and  Religion,  which,
however,  fall  outside  the  scope  of  this  work.

In  previous  chapters  Mind  has  often  been  mentioned
as  a  factor  in  Evolution.  In  all  the  references  only  the


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


227


well-known  meanings  and  activities  of  Mind  have  been
assumed,  and  my  procedure  in  making  use  of  the  factor  of
Mind  in  anticipation  of  its  full  discussion  is  therefore  not
so  objectionable  as  it  might  appear  from  a  purely  theoretical
point  of  view.  The  successive  phases  of  the  whole  so  tele¬
scope  into  each  other  that  it  is  impossible  to  treat  each
phase  in  a  water-tight  compartment,  and  any  attempt  to
do  so  would  only  result  in  a  distorted  view  of  the  subject
as  a  whole.  In  dealing  with  matter  we  had  to  anticipate
the  coming  development  of  life;  in  dealing  with  life  we  had
to  anticipate  the  beginnings  of  the  future  development  of
Mind.  So  far  from  there  being  a  disadvantage  in  this
overflow  of  these  concepts  into  each  other’s  domain,  a  truer
picture  of  reality  results  from  such  a  treatment,  which
softens  the  contours  of  the  somewhat  too  hard  and  artificial
distinctions  popularly  drawn  between  them  and  helps  to
disclose  the  underlying  unity  which  pervades  them  all.
It  is,  however,  advisable  now  to  look  at  the  factor  of  Mind
more  closely,  to  define  its  characters,  and  to  study  its
functions  as  an  organ  and  expression  of  Holism.

It  will  be  readily  recognised  that  the  problem  of  Mind
is  not  for  us  the  same  as  it  is  for  the  psychologist.  Psychol¬
ogy  treats  of  the  mind  in  man  and  the  higher  animals  as
a  distinct  phenomenon  by  itself,  which  it  analyses  and
explores  in  its  various  elements,  and  which  it  studies  as  a
separate  department  or  rather  compartment  in  the  total
domain  of  science.  For  the  psychologist  the  question  of
boundaries  is,  therefore,  essential;  he  must  demarcate  his
area  of  Mind  from  other  areas  in  the  total  world  of  knowl¬
edge.  He  must  at  all  costs  vindicate  the  claims  of  psychol¬
ogy  as  a  separate  science,  distinct  from  the  rest.  And
having  with  more  or  less  success  differentiated  the  scope  of
his  science  from  those  of  other  sciences,  he  then  proceeds
to  explore  the  details  of  his  science  in  the  manner  which
is  well  known  to  us  from  the  methods  and  procedure  of  the
great  masters  of  psychology.  It  is  just  here  in  the  settle¬
ment  of  boundaries,  in  the  demarcation  of  the  domain  of
psychology  from  other  domains  in  science,  that  the  funda-


228


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


mental  difficulty  for  psychology  arises.  For  Mind  is  much
more  subtle,  pervasive  and  masterful  than  life  and  still
more  so  than  matter.  Its  “  field  ”  covers  and  penetrates
the  “  fields  ”  of  matter  and  life  in  a  way  which  makes  the
tracing  of  hard-and-fast  boundaries  very  difficult,  if  not
practically  impossible.  It  seems  to  impinge  in  all  directions
on  areas  already  apparently  securely  held  by  the  other
departments  of  natural  and  biological  science;  its  claims
are  contested  in  many  directions;  and  serious  doubts  arise
in  how  far  it  really  has  a  territory  of  its  own  distinct  from
other  territories  in  science.  The  nature  of  Mind  makes
this  difficulty  inherent  and  irremediable,  and  psychology  as
a  separate  science  will  always  have  to  remain  content  with
an  intensive  cultivation  of  its  central  area  only,  and  a
sharing  of  the  outer  marches  and  outlying  territories  with
the  natural  and  biological  sciences.  To  me  it  seems  that
such  a  condominium  of  the  debatable  area,  however
awkward  for  psychology,  is  by  no  means  an  unmixed  evil
for  science  in  general,  and  that  the  intimate  contact  of  the
different  view-points  and  methods  of  psychology  and  the
other  sciences  over  this  area  may  prove  fruitful  and  pro¬
ductive  of  great  advances  in  future.  This  is,  however,
remarked  by  the  way.  My  real  point  is  the  difference  in
the  treatment  of  mind  from  the  standpoints  of  psychology
and  of  Holism  respectively.  For  psychology  Mind  is  a
distinct  phenomenon  to  be  studied  by  itself.  For  Holism
Mind  is  but  a  phase,  though  a  culminating  phase,  of  its
universal  process.  The  question  of  boundaries,  so  funda¬
mental  for  the  psychologist,  does  not  exist  for  us.  From
our  point  of  view  that  is  a  mere  parochial  question;  for  us
Mind  is  not  merely  a  phenomenon  of  human  and  animal
psychology.  We  have  to  trace  the  connections  of  Mind
with  the  earlier  phases  of  matter  and  life;  we  have,  so  to
say,  to  lay  bare  the  foundations  of  Mind  in  the  order  of  the
universe.  Mind  as  an  expression  of  Holism,  Mind  as  an
organ  of  Holism:  that  is  our  problem.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  atom  and  the  cell  were
the  two  great  departures  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  universe,


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  229

the  two  great  abiding  peaks  of  achievement  in  the  march
of  creative  Holism,  which  have  in  turn  become  the  basis
and  fundamental  units  of  all  existence.  We  now  come  to
the  third,  which  in  the  order  of  the  universe  is  perhaps  as
great  a  departure,  and  from  our  human  point  of  view  even
more  significant  than  the  other  two.  In  Mind  we  reach
the  most  significant  factor  in  the  universe,  the  supreme
organ  which  controls  all  the  other  structures  and  mecha¬
nisms.  Mind  is  not  yet  the  master,  but  it  is  the  key  in  the
hands  of  the  master,  Personality.  It  unlocks  the  door
and  releases  the  new-born  spirit  from  the  bonds  and  shackles
and  dungeons  of  natural  necessity.  It  is  the  supreme
system  of  control,  and  it  holds  the  secret  of  freedom.
Through  the  opened  door,  and  the  mists  which  still  dim
the  eyes  of  the  emergent  spirit,  it  points  to  the  great  vistas
of  knowledge.  Mind  is  the  eye  with  which  the  universe
beholds  itself  and  knows  itself  divine.  In  Mind  Nature  at
last  emerges  from  the  deep  sleep  of  its  far-off  beginnings,
becomes  awake,  aware  and  conscious,  begins  to  know  her¬
self,  and  consciously,  instead  of  blindly  and  unconsciously,
to  reach  out  towards  freedom,  towards  welfare,  and  towards
the  goal  of  the  ultimate  Good.  Mind  is  thus  the  organ  of
control,  of  knowledge  and  of  values.  No  wonder  that  to
the  young  Socrates  it  came  as  a  great  spiritual  revelation
when  first  he  learned  from  Anaxagoras  that  not  matter  but
mind  was  the  ultimate  principle  of  the  universe.  It  is  at
any  rate  worthy  to  be  set  by  the  side  of  the  atom
and  the  cell  as  among  the  fundamental  advances  in  creative
Holism.

It  would  be  an  interesting  speculation  at  this  stage  to
pause  and  ask,  from  our  knowledge  of  the  previous  lines  of
advance  in  the  atom  and  the  cell,  what  the  next  step  was
to  be,  or  rather  in  what  direction  it  was  to  be.  In  what
way  precisely  does  Mind  fit  into  the  scheme  of  the  earlier
structures  and  mark  another  step  forward  in  the  great  line
of  holistic  advance?  An  answer  to  this  larger,  more
speculative  question  may  give  us  some  general  clue  to  the
nature  of  Mind  as  the  next  great  factor  or  phase  in  the


230


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


evolution  of  the  universe,  and  may  form  a  fitting  introduction
to  the  narrower,  more  practical  question  of  the  functions
and  activities  of  Mind  in  the  higher  animals  and  man.

Mind  is  an  advance  on  what  has  gone  before  in  two
directions.  And  it  is  the  peculiar  interaction  between  the
double  lines  of  advance,  the  intersection  of  the  two  curves
of  advance,  so  to  say,  that  produces  the  uniqueness  of  Mind
as  a  natural  phenomenon.  In  order  to  appreciate  this  we
have  to  grasp  the  point  which  has  been  reached  in  the
preceding  sketch  of  the  evolution  of  Holism.

We  have  seen  that  both  matter  and  life  are  structures,
and  that  the  advance  of  Evolution  consists  in  the  emergence
of  ever  more  complex  and  intensive  structures,  ever  more
complexly  and  highly  organised  wholes.  In  the  structures
of  matter  the  number  of  co-operative  elements  are  fewer
and  their  interactions  are  simpler,  so  that  it  is  still  possible
to  some  extent  to  trace  elementary  effects  to  their  separate
causes  and  sources  in  the  structure  itself.  Structure  is
dominant  and  its  functions  are  calculable  as  elements  of
structure.  As,  however,  we  proceed  from  physical  to
chemical  structures  the  fusion  and  unification  of  elements
and  functions  become  more  marked,  and  the  structures
become  at  the  same  time  more  complex.  When  we  come
to  the  structures  of  life  we  find  not  only  the  structural
elements  far  more  numerous  and  the  structures  far  more
complex,  but  also  the  organisation  much  more  intensive
and  unified  and  the  functions  much  more  single  and  unified,
individual  and  unanalysable.  In  a  tree  or  an  animal,  for
instance,  we  find  an  infinity  of  cells  and  cell-structures  of
all  degrees  of  specialisation  mutually  adapted  to  and  co¬
operating  with  each  other  for  the  maintenance  of  a  single
individual  whole  in  a  most  wonderful  way.  We  do  not
ascribe  this  co-operation  and  unity  of  action  to  some  pre¬
siding  intelligence  in  the  tree  or  animal.  In  organism  as
such  there  is  no  psychic  control;  and  yet  there  is  a  control
so  simple,  so  automatic,  so  effective  as  to  baffle  our  powers
of  understanding.  The  inner  co-ordination  and  self-regula¬
tion  in  organisms  which  is  the  organic  phase  of  Holism  is


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


231


indeed  something  marvellous,  almost  something  miraculous.
And  in  its  way  and  on  its  own  plane  nothing  more  wonderful
or  perfect  has  been  reached  in  the  evolution  of  the  universe.
Mind  with  its  uncertainties,  its  aberrations,  its  failures,
seems  a  mere  bungling  experiment  compared  with  this
massive  certainty  and  regularity.  The  irregularities  and
eccentricities  of  Mind  in  man  compare  very  unfavourably
with  the  unerring  precision  and  regularity  of  organic  activity
and  functioning  in  all  highly  developed  plants  and  animals.
Think  of  the  well-ordered  society  which  constitutes  a  big
animal  or  tree!  Compare  the  love-making  and  union  and
reproduction  in  plants  and  organisms  with  the  love-making
and  union  of  hearts  of  humans!  Compare  the  social
organisation  of  insects  with  our  social  disorganisation  and
anarchy,  our  painful  and  uncertain  social  experiments  and
expedients  even  in  the  most  highly  developed  human
societies!  No,  organism  has  nothing  to  learn  from  Mind
in  the  way  of  regulation,  co-ordination  or  inner  control  of
structures  and  functions.  The  self-balance  of  processes
and  activities  in  organism  surpasses  anything  our  ingenuity
can  understand  or  encompass.  It  is  by  reflections  such  as
these  that  the  impression  is  borne  in  upon  us  that  Mind  is
no  mere  continuation  and  development  of  the  organic
process,  but  largely  a  fresh  experiment  in  the  universe,  an
experiment  still  in  the  making,  and  by  no  means  in  every
respect  a  successful  one.  Mind,  in  fact,  is  a  new  structure
still  in  process  of  making,  and  not  a  direct  continuation  or
expansion  of  what  has  gone  before.  It  is  a  superstructure
on  the  basis  of  the  pre-existing  physical  and  physiological
structures,  and  it  carries  on  the  task  of  Evolution  on  some¬
what  new  lines  of  its  own,  and  initiated  by  itself.  It  has
not  appeared  suddenly  and  from  the  blue  at  any  particular
point,  though  its  advance  may  have  partaken  of  the  char¬
acter  of  a  mutation,  or  a  series  of  mutations.  Its  primordial
roots  probably  lay  in  the  beginnings  of  life  itself,  and  in
the  favouring  bosom  of  life  its  embryonic  structure.developed
until  in  time  it  could  appear  as  an  independent  factor,  with
a  steadily  growing  power  over  life  itself.  But  during  all


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


232


that  immense  formative  period  it  was  but  a  nursling  of
life  and  in  no  intelligible  sense  was  it  responsible  for  the
delicate,  complicated,  internal  self-ordering  of  the  life-
structures  which  must  be  attributed  to  another  prior  factor,
or  rather  to  a  prior  development  of  the  same  underlying
holistic  process  of  which  Mind  is  a  later  development.

Let  me  now  turn  to  the  consideration  of  the  double  lines
of  advance  along  which  Mind  emerges  and  pushes  forward
in  its  evolution.  In  the  discussion  of  cell-structures  in
Chapter  IV  we  noted  a  double  process  in  Holism,  one  of
which  is  the  regulative  universalising  process  of  structural
order  to  which  so  much  attention  has  been  paid  in  this
study,  and  the  second  of  which  I  called  individuation.
Let  me  here  say  a  few  words  about  the  latter  aspect  of
the  holistic  advance,  which  remained  of  a  somewhat  sub¬
ordinate  character  and  comparatively  minor  importance
until  the  appearance  of  Mind.  Holism,  as  its  very  idea
implies,  is  a  tendency  towards  unity,  a  blending  and  order¬
ing  of  multiple  elements  into  new  unities.  From  the  more  or
less  homogeneous  to  the  heterogeneous;  from  heterogeneous
multiplicity  again  to  greater,  more  advanced  harmony,  to
a  harmonious  co-operative  ordered  structural  unity;  such  a
formula  may  serve  as  a  rough-and-ready  description  of  the
holistic  process.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  process  of
Evolution  we  see  the  advance  from  material  systems  to
individual  organisms.  One  organism  is  not  merely  a  dupli¬
cate  of  another,  as  one  molecule  of  water  is  a  duplicate  of
another.  It  is  single  and  individual,  with  a  character  of
its  own.  And  the  element  of  separate  individuality  increases
as  the  differentiation  and  variation  increase  with  the
advance  of  Evolution.  Such  individual  differences  tend  to
increase,  and  at  the  same  time  their  blending  in  the  indi¬
vidual  tends  to  become  ever  more  unique.  This  tendency
towards  individuation  is  inherent  in  the  holistic  process
and  receives  an  immense  impetus  when  the  human  level
of  development  is  reached.  Here  for  the  first  time  indi¬
viduality  acquires  its  true  and  full  meaning.  Everyone
knows  what  is  meant  by  individuality  as  applied  to  humans.


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


233


Not  only  are  no  two  human  beings  alike;  their  separate
characteristic  individualities  are  what  is  most  distinctive
of  them  and  what  they  are  known  by  and  what  principally
determines  their  relations  in  life.  There  is  in  each  human
being  not  only  a  peculiar  blending  of  characters  but  also  a
sense  of  the  uniqueness  of  this  blending,  a  sense  of  separate
and  specific  selfhood  which  constitutes  his  or  her  very
essence.  Humans  are  not  mere  units  (as  material  bodies),
they  are  also  individuals;  they  are  not  merely  individuals
(like  organisms),  but  also  unique  selves.  Thus  is  the
fundamental  principle  of  individuation  finally  consummated
in  the  human.  The  human  being  is  a  conscious  self,  and
this  selfhood  becomes  in  turn  the  basis  of  his  Personality,
which  is  the  supreme  structure  yet  reached  in  Evolution
and  with  which  we  shall  deal  in  the  next  chapter.  It  is  a
striking  fact  that  in  the  holistic  advance  as  I  have  sketched
it  in  previous  chapters  the  dominant  note  and  feature  of
progress  is  order,  with  an  ever-increasing  measure  of  regula¬
tion  and  co-ordination  and  control  so  as  to  make  that  order
effective;  while  the  feature  of  individuation  is  comparatively
insignificant.  As  old  as  structural  order  itself  in  the
evolution  of  the  universe,  and  an  inseparable  accompani¬
ment  of  it  at  all  stages,  individuation  as  an  evolutionary
variation  remains  in  the  background,  so  to  say,  until  the
emergence  of  Mind  leads  to  a  rapid  and  indeed  phenomenal
outgrowth  of  this  hitherto  minor  feature.  The  appearance
of  Mind,  therefore,  especially  at  the  human  level  where  it
is  most  marked,  seems  to  constitute  a  break  in  the  even
and  regular  advance  of  Evolution,  and  to  mark  a  new
departure  of  a  very  far-reaching  character.  The  fact  is
that  in  and  with  Mind  a  significant  change  takes  place  in
the  relative  importance  of  the  two  fundamental  aspects
in  Holism.  While  the  aspect  of  order  and  regulation
continues  to  develop  and  grow,  the  other  aspect  of  indi¬
viduation  pushes  relatively  much  more  to  the  front,  and  in
the  latest  human  phase  of  evolution  not  only  assumes  a
dominant  importance  in  itself,  but  also  begins  to  exert  a
far-reaching  influence  on  the  other  feature  of  order  and


234


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


■regulation.  That  it  will  and  indeed  must  have  such  an
influence  is  at  once  intelligible  from  the  fact  that  at  bottom
individuation  and  regulation  are,  as  we  have  seen,  dual
aspects  of  the  same  inner  process  or  activity,  and  any
accentuation  of  the  “  individuation  ”  factor  must  at  once
react  on  the  other  “  regulation  ”  factor.  Thus  it  is  that
while  in  Nature  order  is  of  a  mechanical  character  and  in
the  world  of  life  is  of  an  automatic  character,  certain,
regular  and  unfailing;  in  man,  where  the  mental  factor  has
come  into  its  own,  it  is  neither  mechanical  nor  automatic,
but  of  a  new  plastic  variable  type  which  we  call  conscious
and  voluntary.  In  fact  the  whole  system  of  regulation  and
control  is  fundamentally  transformed;  new  mental  agencies
seem  to  be  at  work  and  new  categories  of  description  and
explanation  become  necessary.  The  appearance  of  Mind  has
meant,  not  only  an  epoch-making  development  of  the  feature
of  individuality,  but  also  and  in  consequence  a  new  system
of  regulation  and  control,  not  so  regular  and  automatic  and
effective  as  the  older  inorganic  and  organic  systems,  and
still  comparatively  vacillating,  irregular  and  uncertain  in
its  action,  but  vastly  more  comprehensive  and  with  a  power
which  promises  ultimately  to  give  a  complete  command
over  the  conditions  of  matter  and  life.  There  is  a  mastery
in  the  new  system  of  control  such  as  was  not  dreamt  of  at
earlier  stages  of  Evolution.  Organic  regulation,  however
vast,  elaborate  and  effective,  has  nothing  of  the  sheer
mastery  and  domination  and  free  creative  power  which
characterises  the  new  control.  Conscious  planning  on  the
mental  level  entirely  revolutionises  the  situation  and  sub¬
stitutes  freedom  and  action  for  the  fixed  automatic  behaviour
and  routine  of  the  biological  order.

These  general  remarks  will  serve  to  place  Mind  in  the
history  of  Evolution,  and  to  show  the  nature  of  its  relations
to  what  has  gone  before  and  what  is  to  follow.  It  marks
a  new  departure  not  only  in  the  feature  of  holistic  regulation
and  control,  to  which  so  much  attention  has  been  paid  in
the  foregoing  chapters,  but  also  and  far  more  specially  in
the  feature  of  individuation,  which  up  to  now  has  been  of


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


235


an  insignificant  character,  but  which  from  now  on  begins
to  assume  a  dominant  position,  and  to  give  a  new  direction
and  character  to  the  pre-existing  system  of  organic  regula¬
tion.  Mind  is  not  so  much  a  direct  continuation  of  the
holistic  advance  on  the  previous  lines  of  life  as  a  fresh
start,  with  a  new  factor  pushed  to  the  fore  in  the  process,
and  a  new  orientation  given  to  the  whole  movement.  It
marks  the  new  stage  of  intensive  individuation  which
becomes  Personality;  and  at  the  same  time  it  marks  the
new  system  of  control  which  culminates  in  conscious  rational
Purpose  as  a  function  of  Personality.  Mind  underlies  and
supports  both  these  great  closely  related  departures  in  the
process  of  Evolution.  Having  thus  indicated  the  general
function  and  activity  of  Mind  in  the  history  of  Evolution,
let  us  now  proceed  to  look  more  closely  at  its  nature  and
character.

Mind  has  its  earliest  beginnings  in  the  inorganic  structures
of  Nature  already.  Disturbance  of  the  equilibrium  of
physical  structures  leads,  as  we  have  seen,  to  a  state  of
tension,  and  a  tendency  to  compensation;  and  one  phase
of  this  tension  and  compensating  movement  is  seen  in  the
selective  action  which  matter  already  exercises,  and  which,
as  explained  in  Chapter  VII,  becomes  far  more  accentuated
in  the  subsequent  structures  of  life.  This  tension  with  its
selective  compensation  is  without  a  doubt  the  original
stimulus  and  source  of  Mind  as  well  as  of  life,  but  the
evolution  of  life  proceeded  far  more  rapidly,  and  completely
outstripped  Mind  in  the  race  which  followed.  Mind  as  a
matter  of  fact  needed  the  support  of  life  for  its  full  fruition,
and  was  therefore  dependent  on  the  prior  development  of
life.  In  the  course  of  the  subsequent  developments  this
tension  underwent  two  radical  changes  which  had  far-
reaching  effects,  as  they  led  directly  to  the  evolution  of
Mind.  In  the  first  place,  the  tension  in  the  life-structures
or  living  bodies  developed  (in  some  unknown  manner)  an
additional  intensity  which  took  the  form  of  a  vague  sense
of  irritation  or  discomfort  which  began  to  accompany  it.
In  other  words,  the  tension  or  strain  in  the  living  bodies


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


236

led  to  the  development  of  this  vague  sense  of  uneasiness
or  discomfort,  which  had  the  effect  of  strongly  reinforcing
and  stimulating  the  efforts  made  for  the  removal  of  the
strain.  The  successful  effort,  again,  was  accompanied  by
a  sense  of  ease  or  comfort  which  must  have  been  a  real
helpful  stimulus  and  have  had  considerable  survival  value
for  the  organisms  that  developed  it.  We  see  thus  that  the
tension  or  strain  came  to  be  accompanied  by  vague  feelings
which  radically  transformed  it  and  gave  a  different  meaning
and  value  to  it.  The  feeling  became  a  potent  force  working
behind  and  inside  the  organic  system  for  the  removal
of  the  tension  or  strain.  This  feeling  or  sense  of  comfort
or  discomfort  must  originally  have  been  of  the  vaguest
possible  character,  but  at  any  rate  it  was  a  beginning,  and
it  performed  a  useful  function  in  reinforcing  the  effort  or
rather  tendency  for  the  removal  of  the  strain  or  uneasiness.
It  marked  an  enormous  step  in  advance,  and  is  probably
still  exemplified  in  the  “  tropisms  ”  which  characterise
the  movements  of  the  most  primitive  plant  and  animal
organisms.

In  the  second  place,  the  tension  became  intensified  in
another  direction.  Instead  of  remaining  merely  a  passive
result  of  the  state  of  disequilibrium,  it  became  an  active
state  or  relation  between  the  structure  or  body  affected
and  the  cause  of  the  affection  or  discomfort.  The  passive
tension  became  an  active  ad-tension  or  attention,  and  in
this  transformation  we  reach  the  most  primitive,  most
characteristic  function  of  Mind.  The  living  organism  no
longer  suffers  passively,  blindly  and  in  darkness,  so  to  speak.
The  worm  turns  upon  the  source  of  its  torture.  The
organism  begins  to  attend  to  the  source  of  its  discomfort;
and  this  attention,  at  first  vague  and  diffused,  gradually
develops,  until  it  becomes  an  awareness  or  low  form  of
awareness  of  its  object,  and  consciousness  in  its  most
elementary  form  thus  appears.  In  its  most  primitive
form  it  showed  itself  at  quite  an  early  stage  in  animal
development,  probably  not  long  after  sensori-motor
mechanisms  had  been  evolved.


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


237


These  are  the  principal  steps  in  the  beginnings  of  Mind;
and  whatever  immemorial  periods  this  evolution  may  have
taken,  and  whatever  other  intermediate  phases  it  may  have
passed  through,  in  the  result  the  basis  of  Mind  was  well
and  truly  laid  in  the  rise  of  the  power  of  attention,  accom¬
panied  and  stimulated  by  feelings  of  comfort  or  discomfort,
and  by  a  certain  awareness  or  consciousness  of  the  object
to  which  attention  was  directed.  As  we  saw  in  Chapter  VI,
it  is  one  of  the  special  effects  of  Holism  to  transform
passivity  into  activity,  and  nowhere  has  that  transforma¬
tion  had  a  more  far-reaching  character  than  in  regard  to
the  origin  of  attention  as  an  active  response  on  the  part
of  organism  from  the  passive  state  of  tension  which
had  preceded  it.  In  this  transformation  we  see  not  only
the  origin  of  mental  activity  but  also  a  new  departure
in  the  system  of  power,  of  freedom  and  of  control
over  its  surroundings  with  which  Mind  is  specially
associated.

The  actual  steps  in  the  evolution  of  Mind,  in  so  far  as
they  can  be  traced  from  available  evidence,  need  not  be
discussed  here  in  detail.  No  doubt  we  have  to  start  with
sporadic  and  uncertain  variations  in  mere  organic  structural
functioning;  as  these  become  regular  and  stereotyped  they
assume  the  form,  first  of  tropisms  in  plants  and  animals,
and  then  of  reflexes  in  the  activity  of  special  organs  or  cells.
Then  in  the  case  of  animals  trains  of  reflexes  are  gradually
co-ordinated  into  regular  modes  of  activity  of  the  organism
as  a  whole,  called  instincts.  Sensori-motor  co-ordinations
are  effected,  by  which  the  passive  influences  and  effects
coming  from  the  outside  world  are  transformed  into  definite
modes  of  active  response  by  the  organism.  This  active
power  of  response  enables  the  organism  to  strive  more
effectively  for  the  satisfaction  of  its  needs,  endows  it  with
a  definite  conative  power,  so  to  say.  It  begins  to  strive,
to  seek,  to  experiment  and  explore.  The  original  reaction
of  inorganic,  and  then  of  organic,  selectiveness  has  become
a  real  function  and  capacity  of  conation.  The  originally
vague  and  diffused  feeling  increases  in  volume  and  intensity


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


238

and  propels  this  striving  or  conation  all  the  more  effectively.
The  awareness  or  consciousness  of  objects  becomes  clearer;
consciousness  becomes  a  real  illumination  of  outside  objects
which  before  were  dark  and  unknown.  It  becomes  the
torch  with  which  the  organism  explores  its  way  in  a  dark
and  somewhat  alien  world.  Consciousness  thus  increases
the  influence  of  the  environment  on  the  organism;  and  its
correlative  attention  pari  passu  increases  the  power  of
response  and  the  return  influence  which  the  organism  can
exercise  over  the  environment.  This  mental  activity  con¬
tinues  to  grow  in  its  double  inner  and  outer  aspects,  its
inner  capacity  of  attention  and  active  reaction,  and  its
outward-facing  capacity  of  assimilating  external  materials
in  the  form  of  awareness  or  consciousness  of  objects.  A
metabolism  of  a  higher  order  than  that  seen  on  the  biological
plane  sets  in;  a  new  psychological  structure  has  been
evolved;  and  Mind  starts  on  its  active  and  creative  career.
No  elaboration  of  the  steps  sketched  here  can  be  attempted,
and  the  details  must  be  studied  in  works  dealing  with
Biology  and  with  animal  and  human  Psychology.  We  are
concerned  with  the  underlying  processes  and  the  general
character  of  their  results.  Details  must  be  left  to  the
special  sciences.

I  have  traced  Mind  to  its  dual  source,  and  wish  now  to
draw  attention  to  the  consequent  duality  of  Mind  itself.
Holism  on  the  advanced  psychic  plane  discloses  two  distinct
though  interdependent  tendencies — the  one  individual,  the
other  universal — and  Mind  shows  both  these  contrasted
characters,  and  faces  in  both  apparently  opposed  directions.
Psychologically  the  duality  of  Mind  is  best  expressed  in  the
Subject-Object  relation  which  is  fundamental  for  Mind.
Consciousness  as  it  develops  splits  up  the  indefinite  mass  of
experience  into  two  definite  aspects:  the  self  or  Subject,
which  is  conscious  or  attending,  the  Object,  which  it  attends
to  or  is  conscious  of.  “The  Subject — conscious  of — an
Object  ”  is  thus  a  general  formula  for  all  experience  of  a
mental  character.  The  Subject  is  not  before  the  Object,
nor  the  Object  before  the  Subject,  but  both  arise  simul-


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  239

taneously  and  pari  passu  in  the  mental  activity  which  we
call  consciousness.  The  world  is  not  the  creature  and  result
of  the  Mind,  as  idealists  would  have  it;  nor  is  the  Mind
the  resultant  of  external  stimuli  on  the  brain,  as  the
materialists  would  have  it.  Experience  is  one;  and  experi¬
ence  as  it  becomes  conscious  differentiates  or  unfolds  itself
into  the  Subject-Object  relation.  They  are  the  double
aspects  of  experience  at  its  conscious  level,  and  reflect  but
the  duality  of  the  source  of  Mind  itself.  The  inmost  nature
and  essence  of  Mind  is  this  activity  which  appears  as  con¬
sciousness  and  the  Subject  and  Object  aspects  which  crystal¬
lise  out  of  it  in  experience.  They  are  at  bottom  and  in  real
truth  not  independents,  but  dependent  correlates  in  the
psychic  medium  called  consciousness.  A  clear  and  firm
realisation  of  this  fundamental  fact  is  basic  for  all  true
science  and  philosophy  alike.  We  saw  in  Chapter  VII
what  insoluble  problems  arise  for  both  science  and  thought
from  hypostatising  Mind  and  Body  as  independent  reals  or
substances.  Here  we  are  at  the  tap-root  of  this  source  of
error.  Mind-and-Body  is  but  a  particular  form  of  the
general  Subject-Object  situation.  They  are  not  inde¬
pendents,  they  are  interdependents;  they  are  poles  in  the
field  of  Mind;  they  are  elements  or  rather  aspects  of  the
same  reality  given  in  solution  in  experience  and  precipitated
from  it  by  consciousness — to  use  a  chemical  metaphor.
Out  of  this  fundamental  unity  Mind  in  the  larger  sense  has
elaborated  our  experience  of  both  the  inner  and  the  outer
worlds,  of  the  self  and  the  external  universe.  It  is  the
business  of  psychology  to  show  how  this  has  been  done,
and  to  trace  the  progressive  stages  in  this  constructive
process.  For  me  it  is  only  necessary  here  to  emphasise
that  no  correct  interpretation  of  experience  is  possible
unless  we  bear  in  mind  that  both  the  Subject  and  Object
aspects  are  absolutely  essential  to  it.  Subject  and  Object
are  held  together  in  experience  as  necessary  elements  in
the  unity  of  Holism  from  which  both  are  differentiated.
Neither  element  can  be  ignored  in  our  reading  and  explora¬
tion  of  experience.  The  Einstein  standpoint  of  Relativity


240


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


is  not  only  the  soundest  science,  it  is  fundamental  to
psychology.  The  world  in  experience  is  at  bottom  my
reading  of  the  world  in  which  I  am  the  centre  reference,
where  the  system  of  co-ordinates  of  measurement  is
my  private  system;  and  the  space,  time  and  experience
which  go  to  the  making  of  it  are  my  space,  time  and
experience.  Objectivity  and  universality  are  indeed
attainable,  but  only  from  a  subjective  and  individual
starting-point  and  centre  of  reference.  Individuation  is
bound  up  with  reality  on  the  psychic  plane.  What  has
been  looked  upon  as  a  reproach  to  psychology,  namely,  the
essentially  subjective  standpoint  which  rules  it,  the  self
which  it  discloses  as  central  to  all  our  experience  of
reality  now  appears  to  be  equally  necessary  for  all  the
other  sciences  as  well.  Natural  Science,  which  has  always
prided  itself  on  its  objectivity  and  freedom  from  all  sub¬
jective  consideration,  now  finds  that  after  all  psychology
has  been  right;  that  the  despised  subject  or  Self  or
psychology  not  only  is  a  real  factor  in  the  universe,  but
is  central  to  all  true  knowledge  of  it.  Here  at  last  natural
science  and  psychology  can  clasp  hands  and  together  in  true
partnership  go  forward  on  the  great  adventure  of  knowledge
which  is  their  common  task.  Their  separation  has  been  a
calamity  to  both;  their  reunion  will  prove  fruitful  beyond
our  fondest  dreams.  Einstein’s  great  achievement  is  but
the  first-fruits  of  that  reunion.

Let  us  for  a  moment  look  a  little  more  closely  at  this
individualistic  aspect  of  Holism  in  its  higher  developments.
We  have  seen  how  it  begins  as  physical  and  chemical  affini¬
ties  and  selectivities ;  later  on  in  the  region  of  life  we  saw  it
appearing  as  organic  selection  and  appetitiveness.  On  the
mental  level  again  it  emerges  as  a  certain  striving,  a  seeking,
a  conativeness,  which,  when  attention  has  risen  to  the
level  of  consciousness,  becomes  purposive.  Thereafter  the
individual  no  longer  floats  forward  on  inorganic  or  organic
drifts,  tendencies  and  appetites,  but  begins  to  direct  his
course  according  to  conscious  voluntary  purposes.  The
individual  makes  his  own  plans  and  no  longer  automatically


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


241


follows  Nature’s  plan.  Conscious  ends  emerge;  things  the
individual  strives  after  as  desirable  and  good  attract  him
more  than  the  unconscious  organic  urge  behind,  the  vis  a
tergo,  propels  him;  the  pulls  in  front  begin  to  dominate
the  pushes  behind.  The  desired  things  become  the
Values,  which  intelligence  illuminates  and  magnifies  and
emotions  suffuse  and  intensify  until  they  become  the
dominant  Ideals  of  action.  We  see  the  rise  not  only  of  new
mental  activities  but  of  new  categories  such  as  Purpose  and
Value,  which  were  not  possible  or  necessary  on  the  organic
level.  It  is  evident  that  these  new  activities,  such  as  at¬
tention,  consciousness,  intelligence,  emotion  and  will,  as
well  as  the  new  categories  which  accompany  them,  are  all
in  line  with  the  individuational  development  of  Holism,  and
mark  so  to  say  a  deviation  from  the  direct  line  of  organic
regulation  and  systematic  co-ordination  which  characterised
Holism  in  its  earlier  organic  development.  They  make  di¬
rectly  for  the  development  of  the  individual,  of  the  self,  of
the  Personality.  Holism  seems  for  the  moment  to  depart
from  its  vast  plan  of  extensive  co-ordination  and  harmonisa¬
tion  in  order  to  foster  little  centres  of  intensive  Wholeness
in  individuals,  to  place  the  little  wholes  before  the  great
Whole,  and  to  abandon  universality  for  individuality.  In
fact  the  largely  individualistic  nature  of  Mind  makes  it
apparently  a  deviation  from  the  universal  order.  Mind
appears  as  a  rebel  in  the  universe,  whose  self-centredness
and  purposeful  striving  might  and  largely  does  make  for
disharmony  and  disorder  rather  than  for  peace,  order  and
harmony.  Thus  the  great  Ethical  problem  arises;  thus  the
conflict  between  individual  ends  and  purposes  on  the  one
hand  and  universal  claims  and  rights  on  the  other  comes  to
the  surface  on  the  psychic  plane  of  Evolution.  Mind  the
rebel  has  appeared,  Self  the  anarchist  has  emerged,  and  the
ancient  order  of  the  universe  is  profoundly  disturbed.  The
new  psychic  individualistic  situation  applies*a  most  searching
test  to  the  foundations  of  the  holistic  universe.  The  war
in  heaven  has  broken  out,  the  archangels  have  revolted.
Who  will  win,  and  what  is  the  character  of  the  new  peace


242  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

going  to  be?  Such  is  the  question  which  we  now  proceed
to  consider.

The  first  and  most  important  point  to  make  is  that  we
should  not  be  misled  by  our  own  metaphors.  Individuation
is  but  an  aspect  and  no  more,  is  but  one  aspect  of  the  holistic
advance.  The  other,  universal,  aspect  remains  of  funda¬
mental  importance,  although  for  the  moment  it  may  be
and  probably  is  pushed  somewhat  into  the  background.
The  two  aspects  are  complementary  and  interdependent,
and  each  has  a  vital  grip  on  the  other.  The  individual  is
going  to  be  universalised,  the  universal  is  going  to  be  in¬
dividualised,  and  thus  from  both  directions  the  whole  is
going  to  be  enriched.  The  individual  development  is
necessary  for  the  advance.  Organic  regulation,  however
great  an  advance  on  inorganic  structural  order,  is  not
enough.  It  is  still  too  mechanical  and  rigid;  it  is  still  too  ex¬
ternal  in  character.  It  must  acquire  new  characters  of  inter-
nality;  there  must  be  more  self-regulation  and  less  external
regulation.  There  must  be  more  inner  intensive  mobility,
more  plasticity  and  less  rigid  regulation.  Plasticity,  free¬
dom,  creativeness  are  necessary  for  the  new  groupings  and
structures  which  are  to  arise  on  the  psychic  level.  The
higher  metabolism  of  mind  demands  more  freedom  from  the
routine  of  organic  regulation.  The  area  and  degrees  of
freedom  must  be  indefinitely  enlarged,  and  in  the  Self  a  new
organiser  of  victory  must  be  constituted.  That  is  the  one
side  of  the  dual  advance;  but  the  other  is  there  all  the  time
and  in  the  end  just  as  important.  Thus  there  must  also  be
a  higher  order,  a  more  developed  and  enriched  universality,
a  more  coherent  objectivity.  More  wholeness  not  only
means  a  deeper,  more  intensive  individuality  in  the  Self,
but  also  a  more  perfect  order  in  the  structure  of  Reality.
And  the  two  must  interpenetrate  each  other  and  mutually
transform  each  other  in  that  unity  which  is  the  whole.  And
that  is  exactly  what  happens  in  the  evolution  of  mind  in
man  and  animals,  and  in  the  development  of  mind  in  the
human  individual.  The  selfish  appetite  is  gradually  curbed
and  subdued  and  co-ordinated  with  other  motives;  the


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  243

conative  activity  is  not  merely  self-regarding  but  gradually
becomes  linked  with  the  interests  of  others,  and  finally
becomes  an  impersonal  endeavour  towards  the  Good.  A
new  era  of  adjustments  and  co-ordinations  sets  in,  and  the
individual  on  the  psychic  plane  pursues  the  double  task  of
self-protection  and  perfection  of  the  All.  And  the  two
mutually  and  reciprocally  influence  and  modify  each  other
and  shape  an  ideal  of  Good  which  incorporates  elements
from  both.  Holism  has  narrowed  itself  into  the  individual
only  thereby  to  advance  to  a  more  perfect  all-embracing
order.  The  apparent  retreat  to  the  individual  level  is
merely  for  the  purpose  of  a  greater  advance  towards  whole¬
ness.  The  newer,  deeper  Self  becomes  the  centre  for  a
fresh  ordering  and  harmony  of  the  universal.

The  possibility  for  this  great  transformation  is  given  in
the  very  nature  of  Mind;  for  Mind  is  not  merely  conative
and  purposive.  It  is  also  rational,  it  is  the  basis  of  the
Reason.  And  Reason  becomes  the  basis  of  the  new  order
in  the  universe.  It  is  not  only  the  principle  of  order  in  the
Self,  but  also  the  link  which  binds  the  Self  and  the  Not-self
into  a  whole.  Reason  is  the  organ  of  universality,  of  the
deeper,  more  intensive  universality  of  the  spirit.  Reason
is  largely  creative  of  the  new  structures  of  Reality  and
Truth.  In  the  Reason,  Mind,  instead  of  pursuing  its  in¬
dividualistic,  purposive  activity,  resumes  the  primeval
march  of  Holism  towards  more  regulation,  a  higher  co¬
ordination  and  a  greater  order.  Our  will  is  the  urge  towards
self-expression,  and  is  therefore  the  organ  of  individuality.
“Our  wills  are  ours  to  make  them  Thine.”  In  other  words,
our  will  is  individualistic  and  has  to  be  harmonised  and
through  effort  and  struggle  to  be  adjusted  to  higher  ethical
and  spiritual  ends  and  ideals.  But  our  Reason  is  in  its  very
essence  more  than  individual;  it  is  expressive  of  univer¬
sality;  it  is  a  part  of  that  Order  which  regulates  the  universe,
and  in  a  deep  sense  it  is  a  creative  factor  or  co-creator  of
that  Order.  Through  our  Reason  we  partake  of  universality
and  are  members  of  the  everlasting  Order  of  the  universal.

Mind  in  its  rational,  as  distinguished  from  its  purely


244


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


conative  activity,  is  in  the  direct  line  of  Evolution  from
organic  regulation:  psychic  reason  is  the  direct  descendant
of  organic  regulation.  This  would  appear  from  the  simple
fact  that  the  central  nervous  system  is  the  physiological
organ  of  regulation  and  co-ordination  in  the  living  body;
and  the  brain,  which  is  nothing  but  the  crowning  develop¬
ment  of  the  nervous  system,  is  again  the  organ  and  physio¬
logical  correlate  of  Mind.  In  other  words,  as  the  brain  is
merely  a  development  of  the  nervous  system,  so  the  Mind  is
nothing  but  a  development  of  prior  organic  regulation.
Mind  qua  Reason  is  thus  the  organising  principle,  the
principle  of  central  control  and  co-ordination,  and  carries  on
the  tradition  and  evolution  of  Holism  in  the  direct  line,  so
to  say.

And  in  the  entire  range  of  its  rational  activity  Mind  shows
the  same  synthetic  co-ordinating  character.  This  could
easily  be  proved  by  running  through  the  psychological
functions,  ranging  from  their  beginnings  in  attention  and
passing  through  sensation,  perception,  imagination,  concep¬
tion,  and  on  to  judgment  or  reasoning.  In  every  case  an
ordering  synthetic  activity  is  at  work  producing  structural
masses  of  experience  arranged  on  definite  ascertainable
principles  of  selection  and  grouping.  These  products  of  the
rational  activity  of  Mind  are  not  mere  artificial  aggregates,
mere  assemblages  of  psychological  items  arranged  according
to  mechanical  principles  or  so-called  laws  of  association  or
rules  of  logic.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  synthetic  unities
of  an  advanced  holistic  character.  A  percept  or  an  image
or  a  concept  is  a  holistic  unity,  built  up  out  of  a  mass  of
materials,  on  definite  principles  of  cohesion  and  co-ordina¬
tion.  So  too  is  a  judgment.  It  is  the  business  of  psychology
to  study  these  syntheses  and  their  structures,  and  the  prin¬
ciples  according  to  which  they  are  formed,  and  connected
with  each  other.  Mind  in  its  rational  activity  is  thus  syn¬
thetic  and  co-ordinative  through  and  through,  and  its  prod¬
ucts  are  synthetic,  organic  and  holistic  in  a  marked  degree.

Mind  the  organiser  transforms,  reorganises  and  reconsti¬
tutes  even  the  individualist  Self.  The  rebel  in  the  end  has


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  245

to  submit  and  swear  fealty  to  the  controlling  power.  Indeed
the  purely  individualist  Self  or  mere  individual  is  a  figment
of  abstraction.  For  the  Self  only  comes  to  realisation  and
consciousness  of  itself,  not  alone  and  in  individual  isolation
and  separateness,  but  in  society,  among  other  selves  with
whom  it  interacts  in  social  intercourse.  I  would  never
come  to  know  myself  and  be  conscious  of  my  separate  in¬
dividual  identity  were  it  not  that  I  become  aware  of  others
like  me:  consciousness  of  other  selves  is  necessary  for  con¬
sciousness  of  self  or  self-consciousness.  The  individual
has  therefore  a  social  origin  in  experience.  Nay,  more,  it
is  through  the  use  of  the  purely  social  instrument  of  language
that  I  rise  above  the  mere  immediacy  of  experience  and
immersion  in  the  current  of  my  experience.  Language
gives  names  to  the  items  of  my  experience,  and  thus  through
language  they  are  first  isolated  and  abstracted  from  the
continuous  body  of  my  experience.  Through  the  naming
power  of  language,  again,  several  items  of  experience  can  be
grouped  together  under  one  name,  which  becomes  distinctive
of  their  general  resemblances,  in  disregard  of  their  minor
differences.  In  other  words,  the  power  of  forming  general
concepts  becomes  possible  only  through  the  social  instrument
of  language.  Thus  the  entire  developed  apparatus  of  thought
with  which  I  measure  the  universe  and  garner  an  untold
wealth  of  personal  experience  is  not  my  individual  equipment
and  possession,  but  a  socially  developed  instrument  which  I
share  with  the  rest  of  my  fellows.  Nay,  my  very  self,  so
uniquely  individual  in  appearance,  is,  as  I  have  said,  largely
a  social  construction,  and  rounded  out  of  the  social  inter¬
course  and  psychical  interaction  with  my  fellows.  The
individual  Self  or  Personality  rests  not  on  its  individual
foundations  but  on  the  whole  universe.  Psychology  con¬
clusively  proves  that,  and  Holism  but  accentuates  it  by
tracing  the  individual  to  his  sources  in  the  whole.  The
individual  Self  is  not  singular,  springing  from  one  root,  so
to  say.  It  combines  an  infinity  of  elements  growing  out  of
the  individual  endowment  and  experience  on  the  one  hand
and  the  social  tradition  and  experience  on  the  other.  All


246  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

these  elements  are  fused  and  metabolised  into  a  holistic
unity  which  becomes  a  unique  centre  in  the  universe  and,
in  a  real  sense,  of  the  universe.  Nowhere  in  the  world  do
we  find  a  greater  intensity  of  the  holistic  effect  produced
than  in  the  individual  Self  or  Personality.  And  yet  even
there  it  is  by  no  means  complete,  for  the  individual  Per¬
sonality,  as  we  shall  see,  still  shows  a  discordance  of  elements
which  leads  to  most  of  the  great  problems  of  thought  and
conduct.  The  point  I  am  trying  to  make,  however,  is  that
the  apparently  individualist  Mind  is  in  reality  deeply  and
vitally  influenced  by  the  universal  Mind;  and  that  the  in¬
dividual  self  only  comes  to  its  own  through  the  rational
and  social  self  which  relates  it  organically  to  the  rest  of  the
universe.  It  is  rooted  in  and  dependent  on  the  greater  whole,
and  only  to  a  minor  extent  a  rebel  against  its  controlling
influence.  The  immense  power  of  Mind  is  shown  in  the  way
in  which,  out  of  the  simple  data  of  the  rudimentary  Self  and
its  experiences,  it  has  raised  the  noble  superstructure  of
the  human  Personality.  Mind  here  appears  as  the  great
creative  artist.  But  it  is  more  than  that;  for  its  work  is
no  mere  picture  of  reality,  but  is  reality  itself.  It  is  the
great  archetype  of  the  artist,  and  it  has  this  pure  creative
power  because  it  is  but  a  form,  a  phase  of  the  supreme
creative  activity  in  the  universe.

When  Mind  comes  to  apply  its  conceptual  system  to  its
experience  of  the  world,  we  see  the  same  synthetic  holistic
activity  at  work.  At  first  crude,  naive  experience  is  simply
taken  at  its  face  value,  and  from  it  a  rough  empirical  order
is  constructed  which  is  sufficiently  correct  for  all  ordinary
purposes,  and  may  fairly  be  called  the  world  of  common
sense.  Of  course  even  this  common-sense  empirical  order
will  vary  widely  at  different  levels  of  culture.  But  in  every
case  it  is  a  first  rough  approximation  and  a  grouping,  order¬
ing  and  arranging  of  experience  according  to  the  standards
and  the  needs  of  the  common  man  at  that  level  of  mental
culture.  It  is  a  more  or  less  faithful  reading  of  ordinary
experience,  and  although  it  contains  many  discrepancies  and
contradictions,  it  is  on  the  whole  a  more  or  less  connected,


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


IX


247


coherent  Weltanschauung  with  a  fair  correspondence  to  the
facts  of  direct  observation.

From  this  common-sense  world  of  experience  is  gradually-
evolved  a  more  correct  and  refined  system  of  experience.
Anomalies  are  gradually  eliminated  and  the  logical  rational
character  of  the  system  increases.  And  this  refinement
continues  until  in  the  scientific  conceptual  system  the
empirical  common-sense  order  is  completely  overhauled
and  reconstructed.  In  this  system  scientific  concepts  and
entities  corresponding  to  nothing  in  empirical  experience
become  of  fundamental  importance,  because  without  them
not  only  empirical  experience  but  also  the  more  refined
observations  of  Science  become  utterly  unintelligible.  The
matters  dealt  with  in  most  of  the  preceding  chapters  belong
to  the  scientific  conceptual  system,  as  they  base  the  world  of
experience  on  real  or  hypothetical  entities  and  factors
which,  although  they  lie  beyond  the  world  of  direct  experi¬
ence,  are  yet  necessary  for  the  rational  order  and  coherence
and  comprehension  of  the  facts  which  do  fall  within  the
range  of  ordinary  and  refined  scientific  experience.  In  this
system  not  only  is  the  seen  order  made  to  depend  on  an  un¬
seen  order  of  ideas  of  extraordinary  refinement,  but  the  im¬
mense  movements  and  changes  of  the  universe  are  referred
to  a  very  small  number  of  fundamental  principles  which  ap¬
pear  to  govern  all  happening  in  the  universe.  From  this
esoteric  system  to  which  Science  is  more  and  more  tending
have  been  removed  most  of  the  anomalies,  incoherences  and
discrepancies  of  the  empirical  order.  Many  final  difficulties
still  remain,  some  of  which  may  perhaps  never  be  eliminated.
But  on  the  whole  the  system  of  Science  is  rapidly  becoming
a  great  rational  body  of  experience  and  thought,  closely
articulated  in  all  its  details,  and  held  together  by  simple
principles  of  the  widest  sweep.  The  system  as  a  whole
represents  the  proudest  achievement  of  the  Mind  in  its
rational  activity  as  the  regulative  co-ordinating  principle
in  the  universe.  Mind  as  the  principle  of  the  rational
construction  of  the  universe  here  reaches  its  highest  ex¬
pression.  Professor  L.  T.  Hobhouse  in  his  great  work


248  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

on  Development  and  Purpose  has  with  a  master’s  hand
traced  the  development  and  interpretation  of  experience
from  its  humble  naive  beginnings  to  its  culmination  in
the  vast  conceptual  system  of  Science.  I  must  here  rest
content  with  the  preceding  summary  statement.  What
I  have  said  will,  however,  I  hope,  suffice  to  show  that
Mind  the  Rebel  is  only  one  aspect  of  holistic  activity;  and
that  Mind  the  Organiser,  Mind  the  Central  Control  in  our
experience  of  the  world  is  the  other  equally  true  comple¬
mentary  aspect.  Behind  both  aspects  is  that  inner  crea¬
tive  Holism  which  has  flowered  into  the  human  Mind  and
Personality  on  the  one  hand  and  into  the  grandeur  of
form  and  content  of  the  infinite  universe  on  the  other.
The  theory  of  Holism  thus  carries  the  scientific  system  of
experience  another  step  further,  and  tries  to  read  in  the
riddles  of  Science  still  deeper  and  more  ultimate  concepts
of  reality.

Mind  has  been  here  described  as  a  new  variation  or  muta¬
tion  or  series  of  mutations  in  holistic  Evolution,  in  some
respects  antithetic  to  and  at  variance  with  its  main  trend.
But  its  final  result  is  immensely  to  enrich  the  main  process.
Mind  has  made  all  the  difference  to  the  later  and  latest
stages  of  Evolution.  Without  Mind  the  organic  and  regu¬
lative  process  of  the  universe,  vast  and  magnificent  in  any
case,  would  have  been  at  best  but  a  tame  affair.  The
universe  would  have  moved  forward,  as  it  were  in  a  dream,
with  an  unearthly  regularity  and  majesty  of  movement.
Its  process  would  have  become  ever  more  complicated  and
ever  more  frictionless,  as  of  some  sublime  animated  machine,
great  beyond  all  power  of  conception.  All  elements  of
discord  and  disharmony  would  have  passed  away  from  its
vast  cosmic  routine.  But  it  would  have  gone  on  sublimely
unconscious  of  itself.  It  would  have  had  no  soul  or  souls;  it
would  have  harboured  no  passionate  exaltations;  no  poignant
regrets  or  bitter  sorrows  would  have  disturbed  its  profound
peace.  For  it  neither  the  great  lights  nor  the  deep  shadows.
Truth,  Beauty  and  Goodness  would  have  been  there,  but
unknown,  unseen,  unloved.  They  would  have  been  cold  and


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  249

passionless  like  the  distant  stars,  and  would  never  have
become  the  great  ideals  thrilling  and  inspiring  men  and
women  to  deathless  action.  Love  would  have  been  there,
but  not  the  immortal  emotion  which  mortals  call  by  that
name.  Into  that  great  dream-garden  of  Eden,  Mind  the
Disturber  has  entered,  and  with  Mind  sin  and  sorrow,  faith
and  love,  the  great  vision  of  knowledge,  and  the  conscious
effort  to  master  all  hampering  conditions  and  to  work  out
the  great  redemption.  To  the  music  of  the  universe  there
has  thus  been  added  a  new  note,  as  of  laughter  and  tears,
a  new  undertone  of  the  human,  which  transforms  and  en¬
riches  all  the  rest.  It  is  no  longer  a  song  of  the  Golden
Reign  of  the  Elder  Gods,  but  of  the  intertwining  of  the
Cosmos  with  human  Destiny,  of  the  suffering  which  has
become  consecrated  and  illuminated  by  the  great  visions,  of
the  magic  power  of  knowledge  to  work  out  new  enchant¬
ments  to  break  the  dumb  routine,  to  set  the  captive  spirit
free,  and  to  blaze  new  paths  to  the  immortal  Goal.  Mind  has
thus  added  an  infinity  of  light  and  shade  and  colour,  of  in¬
ward  character  and  conscious  content  to  the  great  process  in
and  from  which  it  has  emerged.  Without  Mind  the  universe
would  have  been  an  altogether  dull  affair,  however  unimagi¬
nably  grand  in  other  respects.  Even  its  aberrations  have
been  woven  into  the  new  harmonies;  its  eye  has  beheld  the
greater  lights,  and  knowledge  has  given  it  the  key  of  power
and  mastery  over  the  conditions  which  previously  towered
like  an  unscalable  mountain  escarpment  athwart  its  path
of  progress.

Let  us  dwell  for  a  moment  on  this  new  power  and  mastery
which  Mind  has  brought  on  the  scene.  Knowledge  is  power,
and  it  is  unnecessary  for  us  here  to  trace  in  detail  the  steps
by  which  the  present  power  and  mastery  of  Science  over
material  conditions  have  been  acquired.  Life  below  the
mental  level  strengthens  the  innate  capacity  to  react  to
external  influences  of  a  harmful  or  beneficial  nature  by
various  movements  which  lead  successively  to  the  tropisms,
reflexes  and  automatisms  of  the  lower  organisms.  When
Mind  appears  as  an  active  factor,  this  power  of  regulating


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


250

movements  is  greatly  enlarged  and  intensified,  until  we  see
the  sureness  and  delicacy  of  the  instinctive  reactions  which
characterise  all  Mind  in  its  subconscious  levels.  It  is,  how¬
ever,  when  consciousness  appears  that  an  immense  accession
to  this  power  of  control  is  brought  about.  Consciousness,  as
we  have  seen,  is  a  power  of  illuminating  objects  in  the  field  of
experience.  The  organism  through  this  power  of  illumina¬
tion  can  gradually  arrive  at  a  fair  knowledge  of  its  sur¬
roundings  in  so  far  as  they  are  harmful  or  beneficial  to  it.
Its  power  of  selection  is  thus  more  surely  guided,  and  it
learns  to  know  accurately  and  easily  what  to  avoid  and  what
to  welcome.  When  the  human  level  is  reached  a  revolution
in  the  conditions  of  knowledge  is  effected.  The  human
mind  can  make  its  own  combinations  and  correlations  from
the  materials  with  which  it  finds  itself  surrounded.  It
can,  therefore,  in  a  large  sense  make  or  mould  its  own  en¬
vironmental  conditions,  and  thus  eliminate  or  neutralise  hos¬
tile  influences  and  reinforce  favourable  conditions.  This  is
already  the  case  on  the  empirical  level  of  knowledge;  it  is
far  more  the  case  where  the  empirical  stage  has  been  passed
and  the  developed  scientific  stage  has  been  reached.  Here
the  mind  does  not  wait  on  events,  but  moulds  and  creates
events  through  its  control  of  the  appropriate  conditions.  In
this  way  the  development  of  the  several  sciences  has  meant
continuous  increase,  not  only  of  knowledge,  but  of  real  power
over  the  material  and  other  conditions  of  life.  Here  again
Mind  the  Organiser  or  Correlator  has  shown  its  creative
power  in  shaping  the  conditions  which  surround  its  activity.
Instead  of  being  the  slave  of  these  conditions  it  gains  a  more
or  less  complete  mastery  over  them.  It  can  at  will  bring
about  those  combinations  and  selections  which  will  assist
or  further  its  purpose,  and  it  can,  through  selective  manipu¬
lation  of  the  surrounding  conditions,  neutralise  or  cancel  out
any  which  are  unfavourable  to  the  execution  of  its  aims.
Knowledge  thus  becomes  an  efficient  instrument  of  the
will;  and  where  the  will  itself  is  nobly  trained,  guided
and  controlled,  the  individual  acquires  and  wields  an
almost  unlimited  power  for  Good.  Thus  is  freedom  at  last


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


251


achieved  over  the  dominance  of  the  conditions  of  life,  and
Mind  assumes  the  sovereignty  to  which  it  had  been
destined  from  the  beginning  as  the  successor  to  Life  and
Matter.

In  the  exercise  of  its  free  and  unhampered  right  of  self-
determination,  Mind  on  the  human  level  proceeds  to  create
to  a  large  extent  the  appropriate  conditions  for  its  own
development.  Instead  of  remaining  dependent  on  the  natu¬
ral  environment,  Mind  builds  up  a  vast  social  environ¬
ment  for  itself.  It  builds  up  a  far-reaching  social  structure
with  institutions  of  all  sorts  which  are  intended  to  develop
and  educate  the  human  groups  and  individuals,  intellectually
and  morally,  to  facilitate  intercourse  and  co-operation  among
them,  to  declare  and  safeguard  their  rights,  and  to  protect
them  against  the  hostile  influences  of  the  animate  or  inani¬
mate  environment  and  of  other  groups  of  humans.  Thus
language  arises  as  well  as  the  institutions  of  marriage  and
the  family,  of  religion,  law  and  government,  and  all  the  other
numerous  forms  into  which  social  beliefs  and  practices  are
embodied.  The  very  laws  of  organic  Evolution  seem  to  be
modified  by  this  great  transformation.  In  the  organic
sphere  we  saw  the  individual  adapting  itself  or  being  adapted
to  the  environment  as  the  imperative  condition  of  its  sur¬
vival.  Here  we  see  the  environment  being  more  and  more
adapted  to  the  individual.  The  individual  appears  as  the
creator,  the  environment  as  the  creature,  the  house  it  makes
for  its  habitation,  so  to  speak.  In  the  organic  sphere  we  saw
the  individual  inheritance  and  variations  incorporated  into
the  individual  organic  structure  and  thus  preserved  for  the
future.  Here  we  see  social  traditions  take  the  place  of  this
individual  structural  heredity.  The  human  individual  does
not  find  himself  over-burdened  with  an  impossible  structure,
with  a  load  of  inheritance  which  would  be  more  than  he  could
bear.  The  load  is  mainly  shifted  on  to  the  ampler  shoulders
of  the  social  tradition.  The  human  individual  has  the  good
luck  to  find  himself  born  into  an  environment  which  largely
performs  the  hereditary  function,  and  all  that  he  is  called
upon  to  do  is  to  assimilate  this  environment,  and  so  to  obtain


252


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


command  of  its  gathered  resources.  Language,  customs,
writing,  literature,  history,  knowledge  and  empirical  practice
are  all  storehouses  of  traditional  information  at  the  disposal
of  the  human  individual  who  learns  their  use.  Herediy  with
the  human  individual  comes  more  and  more  to  mean,  not  (as
in  the  case  of  animals)  the  predisposition  or  capacity  to  act
or  react  in  certain  definite  ways,  but  the  general  capacity  of
experience,  the  capacity  to  learn  or  acquire  in  the  individual
life  the  power  to  act  in  an  indefinite  number  of  ways.  In  the
human  inheritance  general  educability  takes  the  place  of
definite  specific  hereditary  functions.  Whereas  an  animal
is  born  with  the  ability  to  perform  a  certain  limited  number
of  functions,  the  human  individual  is  born  with  the  general
capacity  of  educability  or  being  educated  to  learn  an  indefi¬
nite  number  of  functions  in  his  lifetime.  The  animal  is  still
under  the  domination  of  his  physical  structure,  and  in  his
action  is  limited  to  the  functions  inherited  with  this  struc¬
ture,  with  a  very  limited  range  of  learning  new  actions.  The
human  individual,  on  the  contrary,  finds  himself  but  little
restricted  in  his  development  by  his  hereditary  structure,
and  finds  himself  blest  with  an  almost  unlimited  adaptability
and  capacity  for  experience  and  knowledge.  In  other  words,
the  inheritance  of  Mind  supersedes  the  organic  inheritance
more  and  more.  With  an  animal  definite  modes  of  function¬
ing  are  inherited;  with  the  human  individual  general  mental
plasticity  is  chiefly  inherited.  And  the  definite  specific  modes
of  functioning  which  an  animal  inherits  with  his  physiologi¬
cal  structure,  the  human  individual  learns  and  acquires  from
the  social  tradition  into  which  he  is  born.  Nothing  shows
more  clearly  the  revolution  which  the  appearance  of  Mind
has  wrought  than  this  far-reaching  transformation  which  it
has  effected  in  the  methods  and  procedure  of  organic  Evo¬
lution.  On  the  animal  plane  structure  still  largely  deter¬
mines  function,  but  on  the  human  plane  mental  plasticity  so
dominates  everything  else  in  the  inheritance  that  the  impor¬
tance  of  structure  is  completely  dwarfed,  and  it  appears  as
a  subordinate  factor  in  the  total  human  situation.  Even
so,  however,  it  retains  a  great  importance  which  often


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  253

comes  out  in  dark  and  unexpected  ways  in  the  individual
conduct.

The  advent  of  Mind  has  undoubtedly  meant  a  large  cor¬
related  development  of  structure,  especially  in  the  human
nervous  system  and  brain,  which  is,  of  course,  far  larger  and
more  complex  than  that  of  even  the  highest  anthropoid.
But  even  so  the  role  of  structure  is  comparatively  less
prominent  in  man  than  it  is  at  earlier  phases  of  organic  Evo¬
lution,  and  its  functions  have  not  only  been  fundamentally
transformed,  as  we  have  just  seen,  but  have  also  relatively
vastly  increased  in  significance.  So  much  so  indeed  that
structure  in  man  becomes  of  merely  secondary  importance,
while  its  mental  functions  become  all-important.  The  super¬
structure  of  Mind  is  immeasurably  greater  than  the  brain  or
neural  structure  on  which  it  rests,  and  is  something  of  a  quite
different  order,  which  marks  a  revolutionary  departure  from
the  organic  order  whence  it  originated.  Under  these  circum¬
stances  the  question  of  primacy  as  between  the  Mind  and  the
brain  is  deprived  of  all  real  importance.  It  is  not  a  question
of  origins  but  of  values,  to  which  there  can  be  but  one  an¬
swer.  By  whatever  standard  of  value  it  is  measured,  Mind
has  risen  above  its  physiological  source  as  high  as,  or  even
higher  than,  life  has  risen  above  its  inorganic  beginnings.

From  the  question  of  structure  we  pass  naturally  on  to
consider  the  “field”  of  Mind.  The  field  of  Mind  differs  in
character  from  the  field  of  matter  or  of  organism.  It  is
neither  physical  nor  physiological,  no  more  than  Mind  itself
is.  Mind  is  a  new  type  of  structure  of  the  immaterial  or
spiritual  kind,  and  so  also  is  its  field.  In  Mind  there  is  a
central  illuminated  area,  the  area  of  full  consciousness,  which
is  directly  open  to  inspection  and  observation.  Taking  this
area  as  the  central  structure  of  Mind,  the  “field”  of  Mind
then  comes  to  mean  that  area  of  its  functions  and  activities
which  falls  below  the  “threshold’’  of  consciousness,  which
remains  unilluminated  and  dark,  which  cannot,  therefore,  be
known  by  direct  inspection  and  which,  as  in  the  cases  of  the
other  fields,  can  only  be  ascertained  by  its  indirect  effects.
The  field  of  Mind  in  this  sense  has  been  the  subject  of  much


254


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


psychological  speculation  and  discussion,  and  we  may  there¬
fore  here  rest  content  with  a  very  summary  statement,  which
will  as  far  as  possible  be  confined  to  the  holistic  aspects  of
subconscious  mental  activity.

The  activities  of  Mind  below  the  level  of  consciousness  are
most  important  for  Mind  as  a  whole.  It  is  in  this  subcon¬
scious  area  or  field  of  its  activities  that  Mind  especially
feels  the  pressure  of  the  past  and  to  some  extent  the  pull
of  the  future.  The  time  factor  is  even  more  important
for  the  field  of  Mind  than  it  is  for  the  other  fields  pre¬
viously  considered.  The  central  structure  of  Mind  func¬
tions  in  the  full  blaze  of  consciousness  in  the  present;  but
it  is  surrounded  by  a  field  of  the  greatest  importance  where
the  past  and  the  future  respectively  hold  sway.  Mind,
therefore,  integrates  the  past  and  the  future  with  the  pres¬
ent;  mental  activity  is  a  synthesis  which  unifies  all  its  time
in  the  present  moment  of  functioning.  And  it  is  thus  en¬
abled  to  act  with  far  more  holistic  effect  than  either  matter
or  life  is  able  to  do.  Let  us  consider  for  a  moment  the
influence  which  the  past  and  the  future  exercise  on  the  pres¬
ent  in  mental  activity.

The  contribution  of  the  past  is  twofold.  In  the  first  place
there  is  the  experience  of  the  past  in  the  individual  life  which
has  fallen  into  the  background  of  the  Mind  and  is  no  longer
directly  remembered.  Yet  this  experience,  as  is  well  known,
has  a  most  powerful  influence  on  the  conscious  present  of  the
experiencing  subject.  Even  the  unremembered  past  experi¬
ence  is  not  dead,  but  alive  and  active  below  the  level  of  con¬
sciousness.  In  the  debating  chamber  of  the  present  it  may
not  speak,  but  it  votes,  and  its  silent  vote  is  often  decisive.
Mind  does  not  work  in  water-tight  compartments,  its  past
experience  is  integral  with  its  present  action.  Its  procedure
is  entirely  massive,  integral,  holistic.  Memory,  the  great
basic  bond  of  individuality,  binding  together  and  fusing  all
the  past  phases  and  experience  of  the  individual  with  the
present  into  one  unique  whole  which  is  himself,  operates
below  as  well  as  above  the  level  of  consciousness;  essen¬
tially  it  forgets  nothing  and  leaves  behind  nothing  of  the


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  255

past.  Remembered  or  unremembered,  the  past  exerts  its
full  force  on  the  present  experience.

The  second  contribution  of  the  past  comes  from  farther
back.  It  is  the  contribution  of  the  hereditary  structure  as
modified  by  ancestral  experience,  which  lies  behind  all  indi¬
vidual  experience.  And  in  many  ways  its  contribution  is
even  more  significant  than  that  of  past  individual  experience.
It  gives  us  our  fundamental  bias,  our  points  of  view,  our
temperament,  our  instinctive  reactions  and  our  particular
individual  ways  of  looking  at  persons  and  things.  There  is
in  each  human  individual  a  distinctive  basis  of  Personality
composed  of  these  elements  which  cannot  be  traced  to  indi¬
vidual  experience  and  which  is  given  by  his  hereditary  struc¬
ture  and  ancestral  past.  In  many  ways  it  is  the  most  im¬
portant  part  of  our  personal  make-up.  It  is  not  conscious
or  critical  or  rational  in  its  activity,  but  it  constitutes  the
permanent  background  of  the  Mind  and  the  Personality
behind  all  individual  experience  and  development.  Experi¬
ence,  reasoning,  criticism  usually  make  no  impression  on  it.
I  like  or  dislike  somebody  instinctively  and  at  first  sight,
and  nothing  thereafter  alters  my  attitude  to  him.  There  is
nothing  analytical  about  it,  and  its  action  is  purely  massive.
Generally  the  result  of  this  massive  hereditary  memory  could
be  best  described  as  a  “feel”  or  sensing,  an  intuitive  reading
or  subconscious  judgment  of  a  person  or  thing  or  situation,
which  cannot  be  further  analysed  to  any  good  purpose.
Great  wisdom  and  judgment  no  less  than  prejudices  and
passions  usually  have  their  source  in  that  distant  past  and
rest  on  no  analysable  evidence  in  the  individual  experience.
It  will  thus  be  seen  that  this  contribution  of  the  hereditary
past  is  also  decidedly  of  a  holistic  character.  The  import¬
ance  given  to  it  by  the  recent  development  of  Psycho¬
analysis  need  only  be  mentioned  here.

What  has  been  said  so  far  will  be  generally  admitted.
To  me,  however,  there  is  something  even  more  decidedly
holistic  in  the  hereditary  factor.  To  me  the  ordinary  senses
do  not  exhaust  the  possibilities  of  sensuous  intuition  in  the
human  mind.  These  senses  have  been  differentiated  and


256  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

evolved  out  of  a  common  pool;  but  the  pool  has  not  in  con¬
sequence  dried  up  and  ceased  to  be  the  ultimate  sensuous
source  of  Holism  in  the  human  Mind.  Is  it  a  far-fetched
idea  to  assume  that  behind  the  special  senses  and  their
evolution,  and  pari  passu  with  their  evolution,  the  mother
sense  from  which  they  were  evolved  has  also  silently  con¬
tinued  to  grow  and  evolve  as  the  binding,  uniting,  cementing
element  among  the  deliverances  of  the  special  senses?  There
is  a  subtle,  profound,  synthetic  activity  at  work  among  our
sensations  and  intuitions  which  cannot  be  ascribed  to  the
ordinary  conscious  activities  of  the  Mind.  All  the  wholes
we  see  in  life  as  persons  or  things  are  composed  of  contribu¬
tions  from  all  or  most  of  the  special  senses,  so  utterly  fused
with  each  other  that  disentanglement  becomes  practically
impossible.  And  these  uniquely  unitary  wholes  exist  for  us
from  the  early  beginnings  of  sensation  and  perception.  So,
for  instance,  the  unique  whole  of  the  mother  is  present  to
the  young  baby  from  the  early  weeks  of  its  life.  Is  there
not  some  subtle  fusing,  unifying  sense  at  work  pari  passu
with  the  several  differentiated  senses?  Is  there  not  a  sixth
sense,  the  sensus  communis  from  which  the  others  have  been
derived  without  exhausting  it,  and  whose  development
has  kept  pace  with  their  development?  Such  a  sense  would
not  be  particularly  noticed  as  its  activity  is  ordinarily  and
as  a  matter  of  course  apt  to  be  ascribed  to  and  apportioned
among  the  other  senses.  But  the  coherence  of  the  deliver¬
ances  of  the  several  senses  and  their  fusion  into  unitary
wholes  cannot  be  ascribed  to  some  assumed  attraction  for
each  other  on  their  part!  It  is  the  Mind  which  fuses  and
unites  them;  and  if  it  is  the  mind,  it  must  be  a  sensuous
element  or  factor  in  the  mind  over  and  above  these  special¬
ised  senses.  To  me  it  seems  a  simple  and  plausible  idea  that
there  is  in  the  mind  more  power  of  sensation  and  intuition
of  the  synthetic  type  than  is  to  be  found  in  or  between  the
special  senses.  Otherwise  I  find  the  unities  underlying  both
the  subjects  and  objects  of  experience  inexplicable.  I  am
not  sure  that  our  massive  sense  of  reality,  of  the  reality  of
the  external  world,  for  instance,  is  not  to  be  traced  in  a  large


IX  MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES  257

measure  to  the  influence  of  this  deeper  sense  behind  the
other  senses.

Psychologists  believe  in  a  general  sensibility  which  shows
itself  not  only  in  the  vague  internal  organic  sensations,  but
also  in  the  other  diffused  states  of  our  bodies  resulting
from  light  or  warmth  or  other  physical  conditions.  They
have,  however,  not  given  sufficient  attention  to  the  subject,
which  seems  to  me  of  great  importance  in  the  synthetic
make-up  of  Mind.

The  obscure  subject  of  Telepathy  seems  to  me  to  fall
within  the  “field”  of  Mind,  and  possibly  to  involve  a  form
of  sensuous  intuition  which  cannot  be  attributed  to  any  of
the  special  senses.  The  phenomena  of  Telepathy  are  mostly
associated  with  striking  experiences  or  topics  falling  within
the  area  of  conscious  thought  or  discussion.  It  is  possible,
therefore,  that  the  form  of  sense  which  becomes  active  in
Telepathy  is  closer  to  thought  than  the  ordinary  senses,
that  it  lies  between  thought  and  these  senses,  and  that  its
subtle  activity  reveals  the  thought  where  these  senses  cannot
do  so.  In  short,  it  may  be  in  the  nature  of  what  has  been
called  an  “  intellectual  intuition.”  Just  as  all  sensation  in¬
volves  thought,  so  all  thought  involves  obscure  diffused
sensation.  And  it  is  possible  that  in  this  area  of  obscure
sensation  at  the  bottom  or  on  the  fringe  of  thought  the
explanation  of  telepathic  sensation  may  lie.  And  subjects
who  have  this  form  of  sensitiveness  may  sense  the  thought
itself  or  other  conscious  experience  of  other  individuals
without  communication  in  the  ordinary  ways  of  the  senses.
This  sensitiveness  may  be  a  form  of  the  above-mentioned
universal  sensus  communis,  the  nature  and  functions  of
which  are  of  great  importance  for  the  mind  as  a  whole
and  are  well  worth  exploring  by  psychology.  Here  I  can
only  incidentally  mention  the  matter.

So  much  for  the  contribution  of  the  past  to  the  present
conscious  activity  of  Mind.  It  will  be  noticed  that  it  is  of  a
highly  synthetic  or  holistic  character  and  that,  whether  it
operates  as  subconscious  sensation  or  subconscious  judg¬
ment,  it  supplies  much  of  the  cement  which  Mind  requires
for  its  constructions  and  syntheses  on  the  conscious  level.


258  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

The  most  significant  element,  however,  in  the  “  field  ”
of  Mind  concerns  the  future,  and  makes  the  future  an
operative  factor  in  the  present  mental  activity.  Mind  does
this  through  purpose;  purpose  is  the  function  of  Mind  by
which  it  contemplates  some  future  desired  end  and  makes  the
idea  of  this  end  exert  its  full  force  in  the  present.  Thus  I
form  a  purpose  to  go  on  a  hunting  expedition  for  my  next
holiday,  and  this  purpose  forms  a  complex  synthesis  and
sets  going  a  whole  series  of  plans  and  actions  all  intended
to  give  effect  to  the  purpose.  Thus  in  purpose  the  future
as  an  object  in  my  mind  becomes  operative  in  the  present
and  sets  going  and  controls  a  long  train  of  acts  leading  up
to  the  execution  of  the  purpose.  The  conscious  purpose,
the  end  as  deliberately  envisaged  and  intended,  falls,  of
course,  within  the  conscious  inner  area  of  Mind;  but  numer¬
ous  subsidiary  elements  in  the  plan  would  operate  sub¬
consciously  and  thus  affect  only  the  field  of  Mind.

It  will  be  noticed  that  purpose  or  purposive  activity
involves  much  more  than  merely  the  influence  of  the  future
on  the  present.  Purpose  is  the  most  complete  proof  of  the
freedom  and  creative  power  of  the  mind  in  respect  of  its
material  and  other  conditions,  of  its  power  to  create  its  own
conditions  and  to  bring  about  its  own  situations  for  its  own
free  activities.  My  purposive  action  is  action  which  I  have
myself  planned,  which  is  not  impressed  on  me  or  dictated
to  me  by  external  necessity,  and  for  the  performance  of
which  I  take  my  own  self-chosen  measures.  Through  pur¬
pose  the  mind  becomes  at  last  master  in  its  own  house,  with
the  power  to  carry  out  its  own  wishes  and  shape  its  own
course,  uninfluenced  by  the  conditions  of  the  environment.

Again,  purposive  activity  is  peculiarly  holistic.  Elements
both  of  the  actual  past  and  of  anticipated  future  experience
are  fused  with  the  present  experience  into  one  individual
act,  which  as  a  conscious  object  of  the  mind  dominates  the
entire  situation  within  the  purview  of  the  purpose  or  plan.
It  involves  not  only  sensations  and  perceptions,  but  also
concepts  of  a  complex  character,  feelings  and  desires  in  re¬
spect  of  the  end  desired,  and  volitions  in  respect  of  the  act  in¬
tended;  and  all  these  elements  are  fused  and  blended  into


IX


MIND  AS  AN  ORGAN  OF  WHOLES


2  59


one  unique  purpose,  which  is  then  put  into  action  or  execu¬
tion.  Purpose  is  thus  probably  the  highest,  most  complex
manifestation  of  the  free,  creative,  holistic  activity  of  Mind.
Purpose  is  the  door  through  which  Mind  finally  escapes
from  the  house  of  bondage  and  enters  the  free  realm  of  its
own  sovereignty.  The  purposive  teleological  order  is  the
domain  of  the  free  creative  spirit,  in  which  the  ethical,
spiritual,  ideal  nature  of  Mind  has  free  scope  for  expansion
and  development.  The  realm  of  Ends,  as  Kant  has  called  it,
the  realm  of  the  great  Values  and  Ideals  is  the  destined  home
of  Mind.  And  Holism  it  is  that  has  guided  the  faltering  foot¬
steps  of  Mind  from  its  early  organic  responses  and  strivings
and  automatisms  through  the  most  amazing  adventures  and
developments  until  at  last  it  enters  into  its  own.

Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  further  remarks  on  the  holistic
aspect  of  mental  activity.

In  Chapters  VI,  VII  and  VIII  I  endeavoured  to  show,  I
trust  not  quite  in  vain,  how  Holism  as  a  concept  and  an
active  factor  can  be  made  fruitful  in  biology,  and  can  give
us  a  standpoint  and  method  of  dealing  with  the  problems  of
life  which  very  much  facilitates  the  proper  solutions.  The
problems  of  Mechanism,  of  Body  and  Mind,  of  Evolution,
and  many  others,  all  wear  a  different  and  more  tractable
form  when  viewed  from  the  standpoint  of  Holism.  I  think
I  may  fairly  claim  that  the  concept  and  function  of  Holism
will  prove  even  more  valuable  in  the  study  of  Mind,  its
activities  and  problems.  Mind  as  a  higher,  more  evolved
organ  of  Holism  will  naturally  exemplify  the  holistic  stand¬
point  more  fully  than  life  does.  And  the  holistic  concep¬
tion  of  mental  activity  appears  to  me  to  be  specially  helpful
and  to  steer  clear  of  most  of  the  errors  and  misconceptions
which  have  beset  that  difficult  subject.  The  holistic  con¬
ception  of  mental  functioning  explains  at  once  why  all  the
psychological  activities — from  attention  to  judgment,  and
not  only  in  intelligence  but  also  in  volition,  action  and
emotion — are  synthetic  in  character,  and  result  in  associa¬
tions,  syntheses,  groups,  things,  bodies  and  wholes.  It  was
the  unique  service  of  Kant  to  psychology  to  discover  the
presence  of  the  synthetic  judgment  at  work  already  in  the


26o


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.  IX


earliest  forms  of  sensation  and  intuition;  and  he  signalised
his  discovery  by  applying  to  the  subject  in  experience  the
truly  Olympian  name  of  the  “  synthetic  unity  of  appercep¬
tion.”  The  view  of  Mind  as  Holism  leads  straight  to  the
same  result,  and  quite  simply  and  without  the  necessity  to
resort  to  any  cumbrous  psychological  or  metaphysical
apparatus.  The  activity  of  Mind  at  all  stages  and  in  all
forms  is  holistic,  structural  and  synthetic,  and  its  products
show  the  same  characters.  The  discriminative,  selective,
ordering,  synthetic  character  which  mental  activity  shows
in  all  its  higher  operations  is  already  fully  present  in  its  early
beginnings,  and  flows  indeed  from  its  very  nature  as  Holism.
The  various  mental  functions  as  dealt  with  in  psychology,
therefore,  are  simply  so  many  examples  of  holistic  activity
on  the  mental  plane.  Analysis  and  discrimination  may
appear  to  be  unholistic,  but  even  they  are  but  means  to  an
end  in  the  synthetic  process;  the  analysed  and  discrimi¬
nated  elements  being  but  a  stepping-stone  to  more  effective
selective  syntheses  and  groupings.  It  would  be  both  interest¬
ing  and  useful  to  run  through  the  various  psychological
activities  and  to  show  how  they  all  exemplify  and  indeed
flow  from  the  nature  and  concept  of  Holism.  The  task  would
be  easy,  but  it  must  be  left  to  others.  In  this  sketch  of  the
subject  of  Holism  I  can  but  confine  myself  to  tracing  the
larger  outlines,  and  leave  particular  clues  to  be  followed  up
by  others  who  may  feel  interested  in  the  subject.

Equally  fruitful,  in  my  opinion,  will  the  application  of
Holism  prove  to  the  problems  of  metaphysics  and  the  other
higher  disciplines  of  Mind.  There  is  not  a  problem  of  Meta¬
physics,  of  Ethics,  of  Art  and  even  of  Religion  which  will  not
benefit  enormously  from  contact  with  the  concept  of  Holism.
Indeed  the  concept  and  standpoint  of  Holism  may  transform
many  of  their  fundamental  concepts  and  render  obsolete
much  of  the  somewhat  barren  analytical  speculations  which
are  still  current  in  philosophy.  In  this  place  I  must  be
content  with  this  reference  to  the  possibilities  which  lie
along  the  path  of  holistic  argument  and  research.  These
applications  of  the  concept  of  Holism  lie  beyond  the  scope
of  the  present  work.


CHAPTER  X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE

Summary. — Personality  is  the  latest  and  supreme  whole  which
has  arisen  in  the  holistic  series  of  Evolution.  It  is  a  new  structure
built  on  the  prior  structures  of  matter,  life  and  mind.  The  ten¬
dency  has  been  to  look  upon  it  as  a  unique  and  isolated  phenom¬
enon,  without  any  genetic  relations  with  the  rest  of  the  universe.
Our  treatment,  however,  shows  it  to  be  one  of  a  series,  to  be  the
culminating  phase  of  the  great  holistic  movement  in  the  universe.

Mind  is  its  most  important  and  conspicuous  constituent.  But
the  body  is  also  very  important  and  gives  the  intimate  flavour  of
humanity  to  Personality.  The  view  which  degrades  the  body  as
unworthy  of  the  Soul  or  Spirit  is  unnatural  and  owes  its  origin  to
morbid  religious  sentiments.  Science  has  come  to  the  rescue  of
the  body  and  thereby  rendered  magnificent  service  to  human
welfare.  The  ideal  Personality  only  arises  where  Mind  irradiates
Body  and  Body  nourishes  Mind,  and  the  two  are  one  in  their
mutual  transfigurement.

The  difficult  question  of  the  Body-and-Mind  relation,  already
referred  to  in  Chapter  VII,  arises  once  more  in  connection  with
Personality.  As  there  pointed  out,  the  root  of  the  difficulty  lies
in  the  separation  of  the  elements  of  Body  and  Mind  and  their
hypostasis  into  independent  entities.  They  are  not  independent
reals;  disembodied  Mind  and  disminded  Body  are  both  impossible
concepts,  as  either  has  meaning  and  function  only  in  relation  to
the  other.  The  popular  view  of  their  relation  as  one  of  mutual
“interaction”  is  not  correct,  as  Mind  does  not  so  much  act  on  Body
as  penetrate  it,  and  thus  act  through  or  inside  it.  “Peraction”  or
“intro-action”  would  be  preferable  to  “interaction”  as  a  descrip¬
tion  of  the  relation  of  Mind  to  Body.  The  extreme  difficulty  of
conceiving  how  two  such  disparate  entities  as  Mind  and  Body
can  influence  each  other  has  led  to  various  theories  of  their  inter¬
relation,  such  as — that  God  is  the  medium  and  agent  between
them  (Berkeley  and  Geulincx);  that  their  separate  action  is  in¬
wardly  brought  into  accord  by  a  Pre-established  Harmony  (Leib¬
niz)  ;  that  they  are  but  two  modes  of  action  of  the  one  underlying
Substance  (Spinoza).  The  fact  is  that  all  these  theories  have  an
element  of  truth;  the  real  explanation  being  that  Mind  and  Body
are  elements  in  the  whole  of  Personality;  and  that  this  whole  is

261


262


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


an  inner  creative,  recreative  and  transformative  activity,  which  ac¬
counts  for  all  that  happens  in  Personality  as  between  its  com¬
ponent  elements.  No  explanation  will  hold  water  which  ignores
the  most  important  factor  of  all  in  the  situation,  and  that  is  the
holistic  Personality  itself.  Holism  is  the  real  creative  agent,  and
not  the  entities  suggested  by  the  above  philosophers.

We  see  this  same  creative  Holism  in  Personality  when  we  come
to  consider  our  inheritance  from  our  parents  and  ancestors,  which
consists  of  a  definite  animal  body  slightly  differing  from  theirs,
and  a  mental  structure  somewhat  resembling  theirs.  My  Person¬
ality  itself,  however,  is  indisputably  mine,  and  is  not  inherited
from  them.  It  may  in  some  respects  resemble  theirs  but  its  very
essence  is  its  unique  individuality.  The  fact  here  too  is  that  Per¬
sonality  is  a  unique  creative  novelty  in  every  human  being,  and
that  no  explanation  which  ignores  this  creative  Holism  can  even
pretend  to  account  for  Personality.

For  psychology  and  epistomology  the  individual  Subject  is  the
centre  of  orientation  in  all  experience  and  reality;  it  is  the  Subject
of  Experience  to  which  all  the  rest  is  the  Object  of  Experience.
The  appearance  of  Personality,  therefore,  marks  a  new  and  funda¬
mental  departure  in  the  evolution  of  the  universe.  These  dis¬
ciplines  concentrate  on  the  Subject  as  the  centre  of  reference
for  experience  without,  however,  paying  sufficient  attention  to  the
nature  of  Personality  in  other  respects.  Ignoring  the  individual
uniqueness  of  the  Personality  in  each  case,  psychology  deals  with
the  average  or  generalised  individual;  and  then  only  from  the
purely  mental  point  of  view,  which  is  but  one  aspect  of  Person¬
ality.  The  result  is  that  psychology  does  not  materially  assist  us
in  the  study  of  Personality.  Personality  is,  in  fact,  largely  an
unexplored  subject  and  requires  a  discipline  to  itself  as  a  real
factor  in  the  universe.  “Characterology”  has  been  suggested  as  a
name  for  the  new  discipline,  but  there  are  objections  to  it,  and
Personology  is  suggested  as  a  better  name.  The  “Person”  is  a
concept  of  the  Roman  law,  not  of  Greek  philosophy,  and  the
hybrid  is  therefore  justified.

Personology  should  begin  by  studying  the  biographies  of  human
personalities  as  living  wholes  and  unities  in  the  successive  phases
of  their  development;  in  other  words,  synthetically,  rather  than
analytically  in  the  manner  of  psychology.  Through  such  scientific
studies  of  Personality  we  shall  obtain  the  materials  for  formulating
the  laws  of  personal  evolution  and  thus  lay  the  foundations  for  a
real  science  of  Biography.  We  shall  thus  also  obtain  the  basis
of  a  sound  theory  of  Personality  and  a  proper  science  of  Person¬
ology,  which,  as  the  synthetic  science  of  human  nature,  will  form
the  crown  of  all  the  sciences  and  become  the  basis  for  a  new  Ethic
and  Metaphysic  and  a  truer  spiritual  outlook.


x  PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  263

To  begin  with,  the  lives  for  such  holistic  study  should  be  care¬
fully  selected,  and  suggestions  are  made  on  this  point.  The  dis¬
cipline  of  Personology  may  thus  lead  to  the  solution  of  some  of
the  oldest  and  hardest  questions  that  have  troubled  the  heart  as
well  as  the  head  of  man.

We  may  begin  this  chapter  by  defining  human  Personality
roughly  in  the  language  which  we  have  adopted  throughout
the  preceding  discussion.  Personality  then  is  a  new  whole,
is  the  highest  and  completest  of  all  wholes,  is  the  most
recent  conspicuous  mutation  in  the  evolution  of  Holism,
is  a  creative  synthesis  in  which  the  earlier  series  of  material,
organic  and  psychical  wholes  are  incorporated  with  a  fresh
accession  or  emergence  of  Holism,  and  thus  a  new  unique
whole  of  a  higher  order  than  any  of  its  predecessors  arises.
In  Personality  we  reach  the  latest  and  highest  phase  of  Hol¬
ism  and  therefore  the  culminating  problem,  which  all  the
preceding  discussion  has  led  up  to.  Personality  is  the  su¬
preme  embodiment  of  Holism  both  in  its  individual  and  its
universal  tendencies.  It  is  the  final  synthesis  of  all  the
operative  factors  in  the  universe  into  unitary  wholes,  and
both  in  its  unity  and  its  complexity  it  constitutes  the  great
riddle  of  the  universe.  Best  known  of  all  subjects  of  knowl¬
edge  and  experience,  nearest  to  us  in  all  kinships  and  rela¬
tionships,  our  very  foundation  and  constitution,  self  of  our
very  selves,  it  is  yet  the  great  mystery,  the  most  elusive
phantom  in  the  whole  range  of  knowledge.  No  wonder
that  some  go  the  length  even  of  denying  its  existence,  and
look  upon  it  as  a  veritable  phantasm  of  the  mind.  And
yet  it  is  the  most  real  of  all  reals,  the  latest  and  fullest
expression  of  the  supreme  reality,  which  gives  reality  to
all  other  reals.  Its  uniqueness  and  its  incomparability
make  it  very  difficult  of  approach  by  the  usual  methods  of
scientific  procedure,  and  hence  it  has  been  avoided  by
science  completely,  and  by  psychology  and  philosophy  to
a  very  large  extent.  Perhaps  our  way  of  approach  to  it
is  a  more  hopeful  one.  At  any  rate  our  procedure  will
remove  the  impression  that  it  is  a  unique  and  isolated
phenomenon,  something  alone  and  by  itself,  a  sort  of  Mel-


264  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

chisedek  of  the  universe,  without  any  genetic  connections
or  contacts  with  the  rest  of  the  universe.  We  approach  it
as  one  of  a  series,  as  the  culminating  phase  of  a  graduated
movement  of  which  the  earlier  steps  have  been  already
explored.  It  thus  takes  its  proper  place  in  the  great  com¬
pany  of  the  universe,  and  is  no  longer  to  be  viewed  as  a
secluded  and  unapproachable  singularity.

Let  us  first  look  at  the  constituents  of  Personality.
Human  Personality  takes  up  into  itself  all  that  has  gone
before  in  the  cosmic  evolution  of  Holism.  It  is  not  only
mental  or  spiritual  but  also  organic  and  material.  It  is  a
new  whole  of  the  prior  wholes;  the  structures  of  matter,
life  and  mind  are  inseparably  blended  in  it,  and  it  is  more
than  any  or  all  of  them.  What  that  more  is  we  shall  con¬
sider  just  now;  in  the  meantime  let  us  look  at  its  constituents
and  their  relations  in  the  Personality.

The  most  characteristic  and  certainly  the  most  important
constituent  of  Personality  is  Mind.  Without  conscious
mind  on  the  human  level  Personality  could  not  be.  And
Personality  had  to  await  the  arrival  of  Mind,  the  develop¬
ment  of  the  organ  of  Mind,  before  it  could  start  on  its
unique  career.  Mind  has  been  the  wing  on  which  the
human  Personality  has  risen  into  the  empyrean.

The  vast  and  almost  overshadowing  importance  of  the
mental  or  spiritual  factor  must,  however,  not  blind  us  to
the  significance  of  the  other  factors,  which  constitute  the
body  or  the  physical  organism  of  the  human  person.  These
physical  organic  factors  are  not  only  essential,  but  they  also
contribute  most  important  features  to  the  human  Person¬
ality.  The  human  Personality  as  disembodied  spirit  and
devoid  of  its  physical  organism  would  indeed  be  some¬
thing  utterly  different  from  what  it  is.  Flesh  and  blood
may  not  be  as  important  as  the  soul  in  the  total  human
make-up,  but  they  are  essential  and  they  bring  something
into  the  pool  which  is  most  vital  and  precious.  So  much
so  that  the  expression  “flesh  and  blood”  has  become
almost  synonymous  with  humanity.  What  the  Greek  poet
has  called  “dear  flesh”  is  not  only  essential  to  human


x  PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  265

nature  but  gives  it  a  quite  peculiar  and  intimate  flavour
of  humanity.  Body  is  not  alien  and  opaque  but  indeed
transparent  to  spirit.  And  the  body  as  transfigured  by
spirit  in  man  is  worthy  to  be  the  foundation  of  the  most
noble  and  exalted  human  Personality.  The  contempt  for  the
body,  the  conventional  degradation  of  the  body  do  not  spring
from  a  true  view  of  human  nature.  The  natural  and  proper
tendency  is  to  look  upon  the  body  as  clean  and  wholesome,
to  rejoice  in  it  as  something  good  and  beautiful,  to  make
it  twin-sister  of  the  spirit  and  the  embodiment  of  joyous¬
ness  and  wholesome  pleasure.  That  view  of  the  body  finds
characteristic  expression  in  Greek  literature.  It  may  be  a
pagan  view,  but  in  reality  it  is  the  human  and  true  view.
It  led  to  respect  and  reverence  for  the  body,  and  the  culture
of  the  body  as  a  worthy  companion  of  the  spirit.  This
natural  and  wholesome  attitude  towards  the  body  was
poisoned  by  the  morbid,  diseased,  religious  spirit  of  a  later
time  which  heaped  contempt  and  degradation  on  the  body.
Degraded  religions  from  the  East,  born  amid  the  filth  and
squalor,  the  moral  and  social  decay  of  the  Oriental  world,
invaded  the  Roman  Empire  and  found  a  congenial  soil  in
the  moral  and  religious  confusion  which  had  set  in  among
Roman  society.  The  decline  of  the  Empire,  the  ruin  which
followed  the  barbaric  invasions,  the  slow  but  sure  decay  of
Roman  civilisation,  and  the  growing  spirit  of  dejection  and
despair  which  was  inevitable  under  these  calamities  made
men  turn  a  ready  ear  to  the  base  superstitions  of  the  East,
which  outraged  the  human  spirit  and  degraded  the  human
body  into  an  instrument  of  evil.  Even  the  pure  spirit  of
Christianity  succumbed  to  some  extent  to  this  perversion,
and  instead  of  the  body  being  regarded  as  “  the  Temple  of
the  Holy  Spirit”  it  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  fitter
tabernacle  for  the  devil.  Mediaeval  civilisation  succumbed
to  and  accentuated  this  horror  of  the  flesh;  the  monastic
ideal  with  its  monkish  practices  and  morbid  celibacies
bears  eloquent  testimony  to  the  great  fall  of  the  body.
The  flesh  became  synonymous  with  sin.  And  it  was  not
till  the  revolution  in  the  human  standpoint  brought  about


266


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


by  the  Renaissance  that  the  body  came  to  be  in  part  re¬
habilitated  and  once  more  to  be  looked  upon  with  some¬
thing  of  the  old  pagan  favour.  The  full  rehabilitation  is,
however,  coming  only  now  at  the  hands  of  science.  Science
is  building  up  a  new  world-attitude,  a  new  attitude  towards
Nature  and  all  things  natural,  which  is  totally  at  variance
with  this  morbid  and  unnatural  condemnation  of  the  flesh.
The  scientific  attitude  is  impartial  and  objective  and  leads
to  the  view  of  Nature  as  clean,  wholesome  and  worthy  of
the  respect  which  is  due  to  all  natural  facts.  Thus  a  new
spirit  of  respect  and  reverence  for  natural  things  and  pro¬
cesses  is  arising,  and  not  least  for  the  human  body — a  spirit
which  is  far  deeper  and  better  founded  than  the  old  happy-
go-lucky,  naive,  pagan  attitude  of  the  Greek  world.  It  is
not  a  naive  sentimental,  but  an  objective  scientific  attitude.
It  means  justice  and  fair-play  for  the  body,  as  against  all
theological  prejudices  and  theories  based  on  erroneous  views
of  human  nature.  And  it  completely  justifies  the  normal
attitude  which  regards  the  body  as  inseparable  from  the
spirit,  and  as  the  source  of  much  that  is  most  dear  and
precious  and  beautiful  and  intimate  in  human  existence.
Natural  relations  and  affinities,  instead  of  being  condemned,
receive  the  sanction  of  science,  and  under  the  powerful
patronage  and  protection  of  science  the  simple  human  can
once  more  hold  up  its  head  and  without  shame  or  regret
give  expression  to  the  spirit  of  glad  wholesome  enjoyment
which  naturally  wells  up  from  its  inner  depths.  The
rehabilitation  of  the  body  is  not  the  least  of  the  magnificent
services  which  science  has  rendered  to  human  welfare.
The  body  is  no  worse  than  the  spirit,  and  can  be  abused
just  as  the  spirit  can  be  perverted.  Holism  is  the  cure
and  remedy  alike  for  the  abuse  and  perversion.  It  is  the
severance  of  body  and  spirit  which  makes  the  ignoble  use
of  either  possible.  Together  and  in  that  unity  which
constitutes  the  whole  they  mutually  support,  enrich  and
ennoble  each  other.  It  is  the  division  in  their  ranks  which
leads  to  their  defeat  in  detail.  And  hence  it  is  that  Holism
is  not  only  a  theory  but  should  also  be  a  practice.  What


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


267

theory  points  out  as  true  becomes  here  an  ideal  for  life.
When  spirit  irradiates  body  and  body  gives  massive  nourish¬
ment  to  spirit,  the  ideal  of  the  creative  whole  as  the  antithesis
of  evil  is  realised  in  Personality.

The  language  we  have  just  used  seems  to  imply  some  form
of  active  inter-relation  between  the  elements  in  Personality.
We  seem  to  assume  that  body  and  mind  must  mutually
influence  each  other  in  the  whole  which  constitutes  Person¬
ality.  The  most  difficult  and  important  question,  therefore,
arises  how  such  mutual  influence  has  to  be  understood.
Do  body  and  mind  interact  with  each  other,  and  how  can
such  interaction  be  conceived  in  view  of  the  considerations
which  were  set  out  in  Chapter  VII?  The  difficulties  of
thought,  serious  as  they  are,  are  here  no  doubt  largely
increased  by  the  defects  of  language.  As  soon  as  the
“whole”  of  Personality  is  analysed  into  its  constituent
elements,  the  elements  by  the  defects  of  thought  and
language  alike  come  to  be  treated  as  different  things,  which
thereafter  can  be  brought  back  again  into  relation  with
each  other  only  by  way  of  an  assumed  mutual  interaction.
Thus  arise  the  division  and  separation  of  body  and  mind
which  form  the  very  source  of  the  evils  we  are  trying  to
counter  and  combat.  Thus  again,  on  the  basis  of  this  divi¬
sion,  the  separated  elements  come  to  be  hypostatised  into
separate  entities  or  substances  which  are  supposed  to  inter¬
act  with  each  other.  Our  perfectly  fair  and  justifiable  at¬
tempt  at  analysing  Personality  into  mind  and  body  has
landed  us  in  an  inextricable  confusion,  which  has  vexed  the
soul  of  philosophy  for  hundreds  of  years.  In  Chapter  VII
I  pointed  out  that  it  was  this  substantiation  or  hypostasis,  as
individual  reals,  of  elements  which  have  meaning  and  reality
only  as  elements  in  a  whole,  that  is  the  source  of  the  result¬
ing  conundrums.  The  holistic  view  of  Personality,  of
Personality  as  an  integral  whole,  and  not  as  a  compound
of  independently  real  substances,  is  the  only  solvent  for
these  difficulties  and  misunderstandings.

It  may,  however,  be  objected  that  this  holistic  view  with
its  implied  suppression  or  squashing  of  body  and  mind  and


268


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


the  disappearance  of  both  in  the  Personality  is  not  a  fair
and  honest  way  of  meeting  these  difficulties.  Surely,  it
will  be  urged,  body  is  a  real,  a  substance  on  its  own  merits,
and  not  a  mere  abstract  element  in  human  Personality.
It  will  be  pointed  out  that  at  an  earlier  stage  I  have  treated
organism  as  a  real  whole,  as  a  holistic  structure;  that  the
human  body  is  nothing  but  an  organism  and  that  it  is  not
fair  in  its  human  connection  to  condemn  organism  as  hav¬
ing  no  reality  of  its  own  apart  from  the  Person  to  whom
it  belongs.  I  have  stated  the  objection  because  it  opens
the  way  to  the  explanation  I  wish  to  suggest.  A  living
independent  organism  is  in  a  different  position  from  the
human  body.  The  human  body  is  organic,  but  cannot  be
considered  an  independent  organism,  living  in  a  sort  of
symbiosis  with  another  substance  called  mind.  Let  any¬
body  try  to  form  an  idea  of  a  human  body  divorced  from
all  mental  attributes  and  activities  and  supporting  an
independent  existence  of  its  own,  merely  as  an  organism.
It  would  not  be  the  human  body,  whose  every  organ  and
activity  has  a  mind-ward  aspect  and  implies  mental  func¬
tioning.  Subtract  mind,  and  the  residue  of  body  must
shrink  and  shrivel  into  an  unimaginable  scrap-heap  of  or¬
ganic  activities.  Similarly  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  mind
as  abstracted  from  the  body.  The  disembodied  soul  is  just
as  impossible  a  concept  as  the  disminded  body.  Thus  it  is
that  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Resurrection  has  pro¬
vided  the  risen  soul  with  a  “  spiritual  body  ” 1  the  linea¬
ments  of  which  can  only,  however,  be  discerned  by  the  eye
of  faith.

Assuming  then  that  body  and  mind  are  not  independent
reals  and  have  meaning  and  reality  only  as  elements  in  the
one  real  substantive  whole  of  Personality,  the  question
arises  how  we  have  to  conceive  or  understand  their  mutual
relations  as  elements  in  that  whole.  How  does  mind
influence  body  and  vice  versa  in  human  Personality?  All
language  implies  such  influence;  all  experience  implies  and
assumes  that  mind  has  an  influence  on  body,  and  body  on

1  x  Cor.  xv.  44.


x  PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  269

mind.  In  Chapter  VII  I  have  tried  to  show  that  such
influence  does  not  imply  a  violation  of  the  laws  of  physical
energy  on  the  one  hand,  and  does  not  necessitate  the  inter¬
vention  of  a  deus  ex  machina  like  Entelechy  on  the  other.
The  situation  is  entirely  holistic,  and  Holism  here  as  else¬
where  gives  the  basis  of  the  required  explanation.  Let  us
first  consider  the  alternative  views  which  have  been  held
on  the  subject.

(a)  The  popular  and,  I  believe,  still  the  common  view
among  philosophers  is  that  of  “  interaction  that  is  to
say,  that  body  and  mind  mutually  and  directly  act  on
each  other.  This  view,  if  rightly  understood,  does  not,  as
I  have  said,  come  into  conflict  with  natural  laws.  But  it
is  open  to  another  very  formidable  objection.  How  can
direct  action  of  the  physical  or  material  on  the  mental  or
spiritual  and  vice  versa  be  conceived?  The  two  supposed
interacting  factors  are  not  of  the  same  order  at  all;  in
what  way  the  one  can  “act”  on  the  other  seems  not  only
unintelligible  but  absolutely  inconceivable.

(b)  In  view  of  this  very  grave  objection,  as  well  as
other  objections,  many  thinkers  have  simply  adopted  the
view  that  the  physical  and  the  mental  are  two  parallel
series,  which  do  not  act  on  each  other  but  run  parallel  to
each  other,  without  any  attempt  to  explain  the  ground
of  this  psycho-physical  parallelism.  The  objection  to  this
is  that  one  series  does  seem  to  influence  the  other,  and
not  merely  to  run  parallel  to  it.  Our  consciousness  in
voluntary  action,  for  instance,  does  seem  to  reveal  most
clearly  that  our  mental  state  can  influence  external  actions
in  a  particular  direction.

(c)  Others,  again,  while  admitting  the  difficulty  of  con¬
ceiving  how  the  physical  and  the  mental  can  act  on  each
other,  have  introduced  a  mediating  concept  or  agency  to
help  the  difficulty  out.  Thus,  just  as  the  difficulty  of
conceiving  action  at  a  distance  has  been  mediated  by  the
conception  of  the  ether  of  space  as  a  medium  for  such
action,  so  a  supernatural  medium  has  been  assumed  to
render  possible  the  interaction  of  such  incommensurables


2  70


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


as  mind  and  body.  Leibniz  has  assumed  a  pre-established
Harmony  as  existing  between  them  and  in  other  respects  in
the  universe;  Berkeley  and  some  of  the  Cartesians  have
assumed  that  all  interaction  takes  place  in  God,  the  divine
medium  and  cause  of  all  happening  in  the  universe.

(i d )  Finally,  there  is  the  view,  of  which  Spinoza’s  may  be
taken  as  the  type,  that  the  universe  is  but  one  Substance,
of  which  both  the  physical  and  the  mental  series  are  particu¬
lar  and  related  modes  of  activity;  the  causality  which  con¬
nects  them  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  reside  in  the
underlying  Substance  which  unites  them  both.  This  view
is  not  entirely  unlike  the  immediately  preceding  one;  for
the  God  of  Berkeley  and  others  may  be  taken  to  corre¬
spond  to  the  divine  Substance  of  Spinoza’s  universe.

These  are  the  main  types  of  views  which  have  been  held  on
this,  perhaps  the  most  difficult  subject  in  all  philosophy;  and
to  me  all  of  them  seem  to  contain  some  elements  of  truth
and  value.  The  holistic  conception  will  not  only  assist  us
to  regard  this  subject  from  a  new  point  of  view,  but  it  will
do  justice  to  the  efforts  of  those  who  have  laboured  at  this
problem  before.

In  the  first  place,  then,  I  may  point  out  that  the  term
“  interaction  ”  does  not  seem  well-chosen  to  describe  the
relations  of  two  such  disparate  entities  as  the  physical
and  the  mental.  Interaction  seems  to  assume  a  common
platform  of  action,  action  on  more  or  less  the  same  level.
But  we  have  seen  that  the  structures  of  matter,  life  and
mind  are  on  quite  different  levels  of  organisation  and
inwardness.  The  one  acts  inside  the  other  and  through
the  other.  To  use  a  metaphor,  the  mesh  of  the  one  is
much  finer  than  that  of  the  other;  the  lower  is  transparent
to  the  higher  structure,  which  therefore  penetrates  it  and
represents  an  inner  activity  which  was  not  there  before.
Action  through  or  inside,  “  peraction  ”  or  “  intro-action,”
would  therefore  be  nearer  the  mark  than  “  interaction  ”
in  describing  the  action  of  elements  in  wholes  with  respect
to  each  other.  Mind  in  “  volition  ”  is  an  inner  self-
direction  of  the  structure  of  Body,  as  I  explained  in


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


271


Chapter  VII.  Body,  again,  in  giving  rise  to  mental
“  sensation,”  is  simply  performing  that  mutation  or  crea¬
tive  leap,  which  we  have  found  at  every  other  stage  of
Evolution.

In  the  second  place,  and  what  is  even  more  important,
the  whole  is  an  active  mediating  factor  in  whatever  action
takes  place  among  its  elements.  We  have  referred  in
previous  chapters  to  the  metabolic  transformative  activity
of  organic  wholes  in  respect  of  all  stimuli  or  materials
which  affect  them  from  the  outside.  The  organic  whole
itself  acts  creatively,  and  subtly  changes  all  alien  stimuli
or  material  into  its  own  form  and  structure.  It  is  the
very  nature  of  the  whole  in  each  particular  case  to  display
this  inner  creative,  recreative  and  transformative  activity.
We  see  it  not  only  in  the  organism  but  even  more  con¬
spicuously  in  psychic  wholes.  Thus  sensations  arise  from
bodily  states  or  affections.  Now  in  all  that  happens
between  the  elements  in  a  whole  this  subtle,  creative,
holistic  factor  intervenes.  Mind  and  body  as  elements  in
the  human  Personality  influence  each  other  because  of
their  co-presence  in  this  creative  whole  of  Personality.
|The  real  actor  is  the  Holism  in  and  of  which  they  are
but  parts  and  elements.  It  is  this  subtle  inner  meta-
boliser  or  creator  which  makes  all  the  difference.  It
is  not  so  much  a  case  of  mind  and  body  interacting;
rather  is  it  a  case  of  holistic  Personality  dominating
the  scene  where  both  of  them  but  humbly  serve  or
subserve.  It  is  the  Holism  in  which  they  both  “  live,
move  and  have  their  being”  that  is  the  real  explanation
of  whatever  happens  or  appears  to  happen  between
them.  It  is  the  Third,  which  is  greater  than  both  of
them,  that  really  counts  in  the  action  or  peraction.  To
me  this,  or  something  like  this,  is  the  last  word  in  the
relations  of  mind  and  body,  of  the  spiritual  and  the  physical.
It  may  sound  strange  and  mystic;  but  it  is  the  simple  fact
that  the  whole,  in  this  case  Personality,  makes  all  the
difference.  Just  as  Kant  at  last  gave  the  explanation  of
mental  activity  by  pointing  to  the  central  “  synthetic  unity


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


272


of  apperception,”  in  other  words,  to  the  holistic  Subject  as
the  pervading  dominating  factor,  so  here  all  action  of
whatever  kind,  which  happens  between  mind  and  body  in
human  Personality,  is  to  be  traced  to  and  ultimately
accounted  for  by  the  holistic  Personality  itself,  and  its
creative  shaping  of  all  that  happens  to  or  in  it.  Any
explanation  which  ignores  the  Personality  itself  must
necessarily  miss  the  mark.

We  now  see  what  is  the  real  explanation  of  Berkeley
and  Geulincx’s  appeal  to  God,  of  Leibniz’s  appeal  to  Pre-
established  Harmony,  and  of  Spinoza’s  appeal  to  Substance,
as  the  mediator  of  action  between  the  mind  and  the  body
in  man,  between  the  spiritual  and  the  physical  orders  in
the  universe.  The  whole  in  each  case  is  the  explanation;
the  whole  as  Personality  in  the  human  case,  the  whole  as

organism  in  the  situation  of  life  and  energy.  All  such

action  is  synthetic  and  holistic  in  its  very  essence,  and  no
explanation  which  ignores  the  whole  and  its  creative
metabolism  in  such  action  can  be  considered  satisfactory.

It  may  be  objected  that  this  “  explanation  ”  involves
an  even  greater  mystery  than  that  which  was  to  be  explained.
No  doubt  we  are  here  moving  in  a  world  of  mystery,  but  at
any  rate  the  mystery  is  now  rightly  placed.  We  have

traced  it  to  its  source  in  the  Holism  which  makes  and

guides  the  universe  and  all  its  unit  structures  great  and
small;  and  particularly  to  Personality  as  a  form  of  Holism.
Beyond  that  final  source  no  explanation  can  be  traced.  Per¬
sonality  is  a  mystery,  but  at  any  rate  we  can  attempt  to
locate  it  in  the  order  and  evolution  of  the  universe.  In  the
relations  of  mind  and  body  Personality  is  no  mere  indiffer¬
ent  spectator  or  passive  tertium  quid,  and  the  explanation  of
those  relations  must  in  the  last  resort  be  sought  in  the  crea¬
tive  activity  of  the  Personality  itself.  When  we  analyse
material  structure  into  its  elements,  we  can  practically  afford
to  ignore  everything  else  besides  those  elements  themselves,
because  the  traces  of  Holism  in  such  a  structure  are  so  faint
as  to  be  almost  imperceptible.  When,  however,  we  go  on  to
analyse  an  organic  whole  into  its  elements,  we  notice  at  once


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


2  73

that  there  must  be  something  more  besides  those  elements,
something  commonly  called  life  which  holds  all  those
elements  together  in  a  living  unity.  This  “  something
more  ”  we  have  identified  as  Holism,  and  we  have  explained
it  as  not  something  additional  quantitatively,  but  as  a
more  refined  and  intimate  structural  relation  of  the  elements
themselves.  When,  proceeding  yet  higher  or  deeper,  we
reach  psychic  wholes,  we  become  even  more  keenly  aware
of  the  presence  and  unmistakable  function,  the  free  creative
activity  of  this  holistic  something.  And  when,  finally,  we
reach  the  level  of  personal  wholes  which  include  all  these
earlier  less  complex  holistic  types,  we  find  all  explanations
of  action,  relation  and  interaction  among  the  elements
futile  and  hopeless,  which  ignore  this  deeper  relation,  this
holistic  setting,  this  active  creative  Holism  which  unites
all  the  elements  into  unique  wholes.  I  believe  that  previous
attempts  to  state  the  relations  of  body  and  mind  in  the
human  Personality  have  largely  failed  because  the  holistic
character  of  the  Personality  itself  as  the  dominating  factor
in  the  situation  has  been  tacitly  ignored.  It  is,  however,
unnecessary  to  labour  the  point  further  in  this  connection,
as  the  whole  trend  of  our  argument  in  this  work  goes  to
emphasise  the  importance  of  the  holistic  factor  in  all  reality,
and  a  jortiori  in  the  highest  reality  of  which  we  are  directly
conscious,  viz.  in  our  Personality.  Any  explanation  which
leaves  the  Personality  out  of  account  in  these  matters  is
simply  like  the  play  of  Hamlet  without  the  Prince  of
Denmark.

Let  us  now  approach  the  same  point  from  another  angle.
What  is  the  relation  of  this  Personality  to  our  inheritance
from  our  ancestors?  The  general  principles  of  organic
descent  were  discussed  in  Chapter  VIII,  and  an  attempt
was  there  made  to  show  the  intimate  activity  of  the  holistic
factor  in  all  organic  Evolution.  In  the  last  chapter,  again,
it  was  shown  how  psychic  Evolution  differed  from  organic
Evolution  in  general;  and  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
difference  was  principally  this,  that  while  in  organic  Evolu¬
tion  more  or  less  definite  specific  modes  of  reaction  to


274


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


stimuli  were  inherited,  in  psychic  Evolution,  on  the  other
hand,  a  general  plasticity  of  reaction  was  inherited,  an
indefinite  range  of  acquiring  experience,  a  vast  capacity  of
learning  in  the  individual  life  how  to  react  to  any  particular
stimulus  which  might  happen  to  come  along.  The  animal,
therefore,  appears  with  its  very  limited  range  of  faculties
ready  made,  so  to  say,  and  in  its  individual  life  learns  very
little  beyond  this  definite  endowment  for  specific  activities.
The  human  person,  on  the  contrary,  has  in  addition  to  its
organic  animal  inheritance  a  psychic  inheritance  which
endows  it  with  the  capacity  for  educability,  with  a  capacity
for  acquiring  new  experience  and  learning  new  ways  of
acting  and  reacting,  which  raises  it  infinitely  above  the
merely  animal  phase.  The  free,  creative,  holistic  activity  of
mind  appears  conspicuously  in  its  hereditary  transmission,
so  that  our  human  inheritance  does  not  fetter  us,  but  by
its  very  nature  confers  plasticity,  freedom  and  creativeness
upon  us.  What  we  inherit  is  not  a  ready-made  affair  but
a  wide  possibility  and  potency  of  moulding  ourselves  in
our  lives.  In  other  words,  what  above  all  is  inherited  is
freedom,  and  the  capacity  of  free  and  self-determined
action  and  development  in  our  individual  lives.  In  our
psychic  nature  we  are  thus  raised  above  the  bondage  of
organic  inheritance.

Now  what  does  this  imply?  Surely  this,  that  there  is
something  more  in  us  over  and  above  this  inherited  endow¬
ment.  The  freedom  must  belong  to  an  agent;  the  plasticity
implies  a  creative  moulder.  I  inherit  various  capacities,
but  my  own  Personality  itself  is  not  inherited,  but  is  uniquely
and  originally  mine.  I  inherit  a  definite  animal  body,
slightly  different  from  those  of  my  parents  and  ancestors;
I  likewise  inherit  a  mental  structure,  somewhat  resembling
theirs,  but  much  less  so  than  my  body  resembles  theirs.
But  over  and  above  this  organic  and  psychic  inheritance
there  is  an  individuality,  an  individual  personality,  which
makes  of  this  double  inheritance  a  uniquely  different  blend
and  composition.  The  flavour  of  each  human  person  is
uniquely  and  absolutely  individual.  However  similar  the


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


275


inheritance  may  be,  yet  I  am  a  new  person,  a  new  self-
consciousness,  a  personal  centre  absolutely  distinguished
from  those  who  gave  birth  to  me  and  transmitted  their
qualities  to  me.  The  unique  whole,  called  Personality,
is  not  inherited,  however  much  its  constituent  qualities  and
elements  have  been  inherited.  And  the  very  character  of
the  inheritance  implies  a  new  conscious  centre  to  which  they
belong,  a  centre  which  will  organise  them  freely  and  crea¬
tively  into  a  new  unity.  Freedom  and  plasticity  belong  not
to  the  experience  but  to  the  experiencer.  It  is  the  personal
self-conscious  centre  that  is  free  and  plastic  and  creative,
just  as  the  artist  is  free  and  creative,  and  not  the  pigments
with  which  he  works.

This  line  of  reasoning  leads  to  somewhat  curious  results.
It  will  be  asked  whether  there  is  then  a  fresh  creation  of
Personality  at  each  generation;  whether  human  Personality
is  original  and  underived  in  the  sense  that  it  is  newly  created
with  each  human  being.  On  the  holistic  theory  here  put
forward  there  seems  no  denying  this  “  creationism,”  as  it
has  been  called.  And  it  is  best  to  recognise  at  once  that
with  human  Personality  we  enter  a  domain  of  creationism,
a  domain  where,  far  more  than  elsewhere  in  nature,  creation
is  at  work.  We  have  called  Evolution  creative;  we  have
seen  how  creative  newness  enters  at  every  stage  of  the
evolutionary  advance.  As  the  process  advances  this  crea¬
tiveness  increases  and  intensifies,  until  in  the  origin  of  the
highest  known  structures,  that  is  to  say  in  human  Person¬
alities,  the  creativeness  rises  to  a  maximum  in  relation  to  the
inherited  materials  used  in  the  new  structures.  Our  very
conception  of  Personality  is  that  it  is  a  unique  creative
novelty  in  every  human  being.

From  this  it  must,  however,  not  be  inferred  that  the
phenomenon  of  Personality  should  be  a  most  uncertain  and
wildly  fluctuating  one;  that  having  no  roots  in  the  past  and
being  a  creative  novelty  on  each  separate  occasion,  it  might
be  expected  to  rise  and  fall  with  quite  incalculable  uncer¬
tainty.  Like  all  the  other  holistic  structures  of  Evolution,
Personality  shows  a  fair  average  constancy  and  probably  a


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


276

tendency  to  rise  slowly  throughout  the  generations.  And  this
is  only  natural  considering  the  general  constancy  of  the  in¬
herited  materials  which  go  towards  its  composition,  as  well
as  the  constancy  of  the  general  environment  in  any  nation  or
people.  But  it  does  show  much  more  individual  fluctuation
than  any  other  structures  in  the  whole  range  of  Evolution.
There  is  evidently  no  hereditary  character  in  Personality
as  such;  great  Personalities  arise  from  generations  of  the
commonplace;  and,  again,  the  great  Personality  may  be
followed  by  generations  of  the  undistinguished.  There  is
utter  uncertainty  in  detail,  which  goes  to  prove  that  with
Personality  we  are  in  the  region  of  contingency  and  unpre¬
dictability,  and  that  it  is  not  possible  to  formulate  for
Personality  a  law  of  sequence  in  the  generations.  In  fact
Personality  may  be  compared  to  biological  sports.  We
know  that  a  species  which  has  its  origin  in  some  great  sport
or  mutation  often  shows  a  markedly  fluctuating  character
and  continues  to  sport  and  to  show  great  variability  among
its  individuals  in  many  directions.  This  is  true  in  a  super¬
lative  degree  of  Personality,  whose  sportive  freedom  is
perhaps  its  most  marked  general  feature.  Still  even  so
there  is  on  an  average  a  fair  amount  of  regularity  and  con¬
stancy,  with  probably  a  slow  tendency  to  rise  in  the  scale
in  the  passage  of  the  generations.  Even  this  great  spiritual
sport  (as  we  may  call  it)  may  find  its  law  in  the  end.  But  at
present  it  is  still  utterly  individual  and  incalculable.  It
is,  however,  not  a  mere  passing  accident  or  freak  of  Evo¬
lution.  It  is  in  line  with  the  whole  trend  of  Evolution;  it
is  a  crowning  phase  of  all  that  has  gone  before,  and  if  to-day
it  is  still  vastly  variable  and  fluctuating,  that  is  so  because
of  its  youth,  because  it  has  had  no  time  yet  to  develop  firm
and  constant  characters;  because  it  is  a  whole  in  the  making
rather  than  a  whole  completely  achieved.  But  its  imma¬
turity  does  not  detract  from  either  its  merits  or  its  claims.
It  is  a  youthful  God  destined  to  complete  mastery  over  the
old  regular  Routine,  and  to  achieve  Freedom,  Creativeness
and  Value  on  a  scale  undreamt  of  by  us  of  to-day.

From  the  foregoing  it  will  be  seen  that  the  theory  of


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


277


Personality  as  a  real  factor  is  necessary  not  only  to  explain
the  synthetic  relations  of  the  constituent  elements  in  the
complex  human  being,  but  also  to  explain  the  peculiar
character  of  heredity  on  the  human  level.  Without  Person¬
ality  the  Body-and-Mind  relation  in  man  appears  inex¬
plicable;  without  Personality,  again,  man’s  independence
of  his  hereditary  bonds  and  fixtures  would  be  equally
inexplicable.  In  both  respects  a  far-reaching  holistic
factor  in  the  nature  of  Personality  is  at  work,  which  cannot
be  ignored  without  making  the  entire  human  situation  an
insoluble  puzzle.

There  is  a  third  point  of  view  which  lays  a  strong  emphasis
on  the  individual  holistic  factor  which  underlies  Personality.
That  is  the  point  of  view  of  Psychology  and  Epistomology
generally.  Both  these  great  disciplines  erect  the  human
Subject  into  a  new  centre  of  orientation  for  all  experience
of  reality.  From  the  purely  biological  point  of  view
Personality  is  merely  the  highest  term  of  a  rising  series;
but  it  is  not  a  new  and  unique  point  of  departure  in  the
universe.  Psychology  and  Epistomology,  however,  regard
Personality  from  this  radical  point  of  view.  To  them  it  is
the  Subject  of  experience  to  which  all  the  rest  is  the  Object
of  experience.  The  Personality  in  experience  as  the  subject
marches  right  to  the  centre  of  the  world-picture;  it  becomes
the  key  and  the  measure  of  all  things;  to  it  all  things
become  relative  in  experience.  In  the  new  universe  of
experience,  in  the  world  of  Spirit,  the  conscious  self  or  the
Personality  becomes  the  new  point  of  universal  reference;
the  co-ordinates  of  reference  are  its  co-ordinates,  as  we  saw
in  the  last  chapter;  and  without  this  personal  orientation
all  experience  becomes  inexplicable  and  all  reality  unintelli¬
gible.  We  may  indeed  say  that  as  soon  as  Personality
appears  on  the  scene,  the  whole  universe  becomes  reorgan¬
ised,  transformed  and  almost  recreated  round  it  as  the  new
centre;  the  universe  is  no  longer  the  same  as  it  was  before
Personality  but  undergoes  a  radical  change  in  the  subtle  pro¬
cess  of  human  experience.  Just  as  Personality  is  essentially
a  new  creation,  so  the  world  which  is  its  Object  in  experience


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


278


is  likewise  a  new  creation  out  of  the  old  materials.  The
appearance  of  Personality,  therefore,  marks  a  new  departure.
It  is  not  merely  an  addition  to  the  universe  but  involves
an  organic  transformation  of  it.  On  this  lofty  pedestal
psychology  and  philosophy  alike  place  the  personal  self  or
Personality;  and  surely  in  this  apparent  anthropomorphism
they  are  right.

But  it  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  they  have  fully
appreciated  the  implications  of  their  action.  Neither
psychology  nor  philosophy  has  made  much  of  the  Person¬
ality  except  to  look  upon  it  as  a  peg  on  which  to  hang  the
universe.  The  Personality  as  a  point  of  reference,  the
Personality  as  a  great  Signpost  in  the  universe  appears  to
them  all-important.  But  in  itself,  in  what  it  is,  in  what  its
uniqueness  consists,  they  have  not  taken  any  very  pro¬
found  interest.  Now  in  this  they  seem  to  me  to  have  missed
the  real  point,  and  in  consequence  they  have  failed  to
appreciate  the  real,  as  distinct  from  the  merely  formal
importance  of  the  factor  of  Personality  in  the  universe.

The  treatment  that  psychology  has  given  to  Personality
is  another  instance  of  this  failure  to  appreciate  its  real  and
unique  significance.  Psychology  as  a  scientific  discipline
deals  with  the  human  mind,  not  in  its  individual  uniqueness,
but  in  its  general  character  as  distinguishing  all  human
beings.  The  individual  within  the  purview  of  psychology
is  the  generalised  individual,  the  average  individual,  not  the
real  individual,  but  the  individual  which  is  the  creature  of
an  intellectual  abstraction.  In  its  treatment  psychology
is,  of  course,  only  following  the  general  procedure  of  Science,
which  is  not  concerned  with  the  individual  as  such,  but  with
the  common  characters  of  individuals,  with  the  specific
type  more  than  the  actual  individual.  Thus  if  Science  deals
with  a  plant  or  an  animal  it  may  be  any  individual  of  the
particular  species  under  consideration.  The  individual  dif¬
ferences  are  generally  considered  negligible,  and  one  indi¬
vidual  is  for  purposes  of  scientific  treatment  as  a  rule  the
same  as  any  other  individual.  Science  is  a  generalising
scheme  and  must  necessarily  ignore  individual  differences.


x  PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  279

Now  with  human  personalities,  the  individual  differences,
so  far  from  being  negligible,  are  all-important.  Each  human
individual  is  a  unique  personality;  not  only  is  personality
in  general  a  unique  phenomenon  in  the  world,  but  each
human  personality  is  unique  in  itself,  and  the  attempt  at
“averaging”  and  generalising  and  reaching  the  common
type  on  the  approved  scientific  lines  eliminates  what  is  the
very  essence  of  Personality,  namely,  its  unique  individual
character  in  each  case.  The  scientific  procedure  of
psychology,  inevitable  as  it  is  for  psychology  as  a  scientific
discipline,  is  not  very  suitable  in  respect  of  a  subject  so
specially  individual  as  Personality.  But  that  is  not  all.
Psychology  does  not  even  purport  to  deal  specially  with
Personality.  Its  subject  is  more  especially  mind,  mental
activity  in  its  wider  sense,  the  genesis  and  development  of
the  mental  functions  in  the  average  human  individual.
But,  as  we  have  seen,  mind  is  merely  one  particular  aspect
of  Personality.  The  contribution  towards  Personality  which
comes  from  the  organic  side  is  in  important  respects  ignored
by  psychology.  But  this  contribution  of  the  body  is  most
important;  we  know  from  practical  experience  in  our
personal  lives  how  important  bodily  functions  and  our
general  physiological  state  are  in  the  total  make-up  of  the
Personality.  Our  nervous  system,  our  digestive  system,
above  all  our  reproductive  system  have  the  most  far-reaching
reactions  on  our  Personality  as  a  whole.  A  little  more  iodine
in  the  thyroid  gland,  for  instance,  may  make  the  greatest
difference,  not  only  for  the  general  co-ordination  of  physio¬
logical  functions  and  bodily  development  as  a  whole,  but
for  the  mind  itself,  and  may  even  mean  all  the  difference
between  normal  and  deficient  mentality,  between  normal
and  stunted  Personality.  All  this  physiological  side  of
Personality,  important  as  it  is  in  its  effects,  simply  falls
outside  the  scope  of  psychology  and  is  assigned  to  other
branches  of  science.

The  result  of  this  limitation  of  the  province  of  psychology
is  that  even  the  mental  side  of  Personality  fails  to  be  prop¬
erly  explored  and  understood.  The  subconscious  Mind  is


28o


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


still  largely  an  unexplored  territory,  and  but  for  the  recent
pioneering  work  of  the  psycho-analysts  would  have  been
almost  entirely  unknown.  And  yet  it  will  be  generally
admitted  that  this  province  of  the  subconscious  is  most
important,  not  only  for  mental  science  itself,  but  more
especially  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Personality  in  any
particular  case.  For  most  minds,  perhaps  for  all  minds,
the  conscious  area  is  small  compared  with  the  subconscious
area;  and  beyond  the  subconscious  area  is  the  probably
still  larger  organic  or  physiological  area  of  the  nervous,
digestive,  endocrine  and  reproductive  systems,  which  all
concern  the  Personality  most  vitally  and  closely.  It  is
evident  that  the  present  demarcation  of  areas  between  the
various  sciences  makes  it  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  deal
adequately  with  so  large  and  embracive  a  subject  as  Person¬
ality.  Personality  is  deserving  of  having  a  discipline  to  itself
which  will  not  leave  it  merely  in  the  position  of  having  to
be  dealt  with  in  a  haphazard  and  incidental  way  by  a
number  of  other  distinct  disciplines.  Hitherto,  so  far
from  having  a  field  of  its  own  and  being  a  study  by  itself,
it  has  been  a  sort  of  nondescript  annex  of  psychology.  But,
as  we  have  seen,  the  province  of  psychology  is  much  too
narrow  and  limited  for  the  purpose  of  Personality;  and
both  its  method  and  procedure  as  a  scientific  discipline
fail  to  do  justice  to  the  uniquely  individual  character  of
the  Personality.

It  has  a  third  and  no  less  serious  drawback  as  a  basis  for
a  discipline  of  the  Personality.  The  procedure  of  psychology
is  largely  analytical;  it  involves  an  analysis  of  mental
functions  and  activities,  and  a  detailed  study  of  their  several
lines  of  development;  and  in  exceptional  cases  a  perfunctory
effort  is  finally  made  to  view  mind  or  character  as  a  whole.
But  mostly  the  last  part  is  either  avoided  altogether  or
attempted  in  such  a  half-hearted  manner  as  to  be  of  com¬
paratively  slight  value.  Take,  for  instance,  Professor
James  Ward’s  Psychological  Principles,  which  is  not  only  a
standard  work  but  embodies  and  expands  what  has  become
the  great  classic  in  psychology  in  the  English  language.  It


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


281


consists  of  eighteen  chapters,  the  first  four  of  which  are
devoted  to  a  general  analysis  and  description  of  mental
functions,  while  the  main  body  of  the  work,  consisting  of
twelve  chapters,  contains  a  detailed  discussion  of  the  various
forms  of  mental  activity,  such  as  sensation,  perception,
imagination,  memory,  feeling,  emotion,  and  action,  intellec¬
tion,  forms  of  synthesis  in  the  judgment,  intuition,  and  the
categories,  belief,  and  the  elements  of  conduct.  The  last
two  chapters  only  are  devoted  to  the  concrete  individual
and  characterology,  and  form  merely  a  distant  approach  to
the  subject  of  Personality.  No  one  will  deny  that  from  a
purely  psychological  point  of  view  the  method  and  procedure
of  Professor  Ward  are  both  proper  and  unexceptionable.
But  the  necessarily  analytical  character  of  psychology
largely  disqualifies  it  from  being  a  real  foundation  for  a
doctrine  of  Personality.  Psychology  has,  in  fact,  a  different
scope  and  aim  from  that  which  would  be  natural  and  proper
for  a  subject  like  Personality.  It  is  but  one  of  several
preparatory  studies  leading  up  to  the  subject  of  Personality
without  actually  grappling  with  it.

The  result  has  been  that  from  a  psychological  or  any  other
practical  point  of  view  very  little  attention  has  been  devoted
to  the  study  of  Personality.  Personality  has  been  the
concern  of  no  particular  branch  of  study,  and  it  still  awaits
a  proper  treatment  of  its  own  as  a  distinct  discipline  among
other  scientific  and  philosophical  disciplines.  Its  province
falls  within  the  large  debatable  territory  between  science
and  philosophy,  between  theory  and  practice,  which  has
been  very  little  explored  and  is  still  terra  incognita  to  all
intents  and  purposes.  Its  difficulties  are  immense;  from
that  wide  and  wild  No  Man’s  Land  between  science  and
philosophy  it  rises  like  some  forbidding  mountain  peak  into
the  heavens;  and  no  daring  mountaineer  has  yet  ventured
to  approach  it,  let  alone  to  scale  its  dizzy  heights.  But
beyond  a  doubt  it  is  going  to  occupy  a  foremost  place  in
the  attention  of  inquirers  in  future.  And  the  time  may
come  when  the  science  of  Personality  may  be  the  very
keystone  of  the  arch,  and  serve  to  complete  the  full  growing


282


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


circle  of  organised  human  knowledge.  That  time  is  not  yet;
but  I  may  venture  to  hope  that  the  assignment  of  a  proper
place  to  Personality  in  the  structural  Evolution  of  the  uni¬
verse,  such  as  has  been  attempted  in  this  study,  will  help
to  direct  attention  to  what  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  greatest
and  most  important  outstanding  problems  of  knowledge.

Professor  Ward  has  suggested  that  that  branch  of  psycho¬
logy  which  deals  with  concrete  individuals,  with  individuals
as  persons  endowed  with  character,  should  be  called
“Characterology.”  1  I  am  not  clear  that  Characterology
in  this  sense  would  be  the  same  as  the  Science  of  Personality
which  I  am  discussing.  The  term  “character”  seems  to  me
narrower  than  Personality,  and  to  refer  to  the  external
indicia  rather  than  the  inward  reality  which  the  term  Per¬
sonality  here  points  to.  And  in  any  case  Characterology
does  not  seem  suitable  as  a  name  for  the  Science  of  Person¬
ality.  For  these  and  other  reasons,  and  if  a  name  is  really
necessary,  I  would  suggest  Personology  as  the  name  for  the
Science  of  Personality,  which  will  not  be  a  mere  subdivision
of  psychology  but  an  independent  science  or  discipline  of
its  own,  with  its  roots  not  only  in  psychology  but  also  in  all
the  sciences  which  deal  with  the  human  mind  and  the  human
body.  As  I  have  just  pointed  out,  it  is  a  border  subject  be¬
tween  the  provinces  of  Science  and  Philosophy  and  will  show
the  influence  of  both  these  great  subdivisions  of  knowledge.

Prima  facie  Personology  seems  a  more  suitable  name  for
the  science  or  doctrine  of  Personality  than  the  cacophonous
mouthful  “Characterology.”  But  it  may  be  objected  that
Personology  is  a  Grseco-Latin  hybrid  and  unacceptable  as
such.  It  may,  however,  be  pointed  out  that  there  is  a
peculiar  reason  for  a  term  which  is  not  purely  Greek  but  calls
in  the  resources  of  the  Latin  language  also.  For  it  is  a
curious  fact  that  Greek  philosophy,  in  spite  of  its  brilliant
achievements  and  its  inspired  mintage  of  most  of  the  current
coin  of  philosophy,  never  rose  to  a  clear  grasp  of  the  idea  of
Personality.  Thus  it  is  that  there  is  no  term  in  Greek  to
express  the  notion  of  Personality.  Persona  is  a  Latin  term

1  Psychological  Principles,  p.  431.


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


283

and  a  Roman  idea  evolved,  like  so  many  other  juristic  ideas,
by  the  legal  genius  of  the  Romans,  which  was  in  its  way  as
remarkable  as  the  philosophical  genius  of  the  Greeks.
Persona  in  the  Roman  law  denoted  the  legal  status  of  the
individual  who  was  by  law  clothed  with  rights  and  duties
in  his  own  right;  the  individual  as  the  carrier  of  rights  and
duties  in  his  own  right  was  a  persona;  from  a  mere  individual
nonentity  he  became  in  law  a  persona  and  acquired  a  legal
personality.  Thus  in  the  classical  Roman  law  a  slave,  being
without  legal  rights,  was  a  human  without  persona.  The
developed  Roman  law  came  to  extend  the  concept  of  per¬
sonality  beyond  natural  individuals  to  non-corporeal  com¬
panies  and  societies  which  had  by  law  a  legal  entity  and
could  have  rights  and  duties.  Personality  thus  was  a  mat¬
ter  of  legal  status,  and  denoted  the  legal  dignity  and  im¬
portance  of  the  individual  or  the  group.  The  clear  juristic
concept  of  persona  was  a  very  good  basis  for  the  super¬
structure  of  the  psychic  ethical  Personality  which  has  been
built  upon  it.

To  the  evolution  of  the  modern  idea  of  Personality,
Christianity  made  the  most  notable  contribution  in  investing
the  human  being  as  such  with  a  character  of  sacredness,  of
spiritual  dignity  and  importance,  which  implied  a  far-
reaching  revolution  in  ethical  ideas.  The  Roman  legal
concept  thus  became  blended  with  the  moral  sacredness  and
inalienable  rights  of  human  beings  as  children  of  God;  and
philosophy  raised  the  enriched  term  to  the  dignity  and  status
of  a  high  philosophical  conception.  It  has  been  my  endea¬
vour  to  go  a  step  farther  and  to  trace  the  concept  of  Person¬
ality  to  its  real  relationships  in  the  order  of  the  universe,
to  show  it  not  merely  as  a  juristic  or  religious  or  philosophi¬
cal  concept,  but  as  a  real  factor  which  forms  the  culminating
phase  in  the  synthetic  creative  Evolution  of  the  universe.
The  Roman  traced  persona  to  the  authority  of  the  law.
The  Christian  traced  Personality  to  the  fatherhood  of  God
which  conferred  it  on  all  human  beings  as  a  sacred  birthright.
The  Philosopher  has  translated  this  religious  idea  into  the
universal  language  of  the  ethical  Reason.  Here  Personality


284


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


becomes  the  last  term  in  the  holistic  series,  a  reality  in  line
with  the  other  realities  which  mark  the  creative  forward
march  of  Holism.

Personality  has  thus  been  explained  above  as  personal
Holism,  as  the  whole  in  its  human  fullness  of  development.
Human  personal  development  thus  means  the  creative
synthetic  whole  in  control  of  all  special  functions  and
activities,  of  all  organs  and  their  functions.  The  activities
of  the  body  and  the  mind  do  not  embrace  the  whole  of
personal  development.  There  is  more  in  the  central  syn¬
thetic  Personality  than  an  analysis  of  psychological  and
physiological  functions  can  explain.  Just  as  in  the  special¬
ised  organs  of  sense,  the  underlying  basis  of  sensitivity,  the
original  sensus  communis,  develops  pari  passu  with  the  spe¬
cial  senses  and  co-ordinates  and  supplements  their  activities
in  the  sensuous  wholes  of  intuition,  so  also  the  central  holistic
Personality  develops  pari  passu  with  all  the  specialised  men¬
tal  and  bodily  functions,  and  produces  out  of  their  de¬
liverances  those  syntheses  and  unities  which  are  distinctive
of  personal  experience.  All  experience,  all  intuitions,  judg¬
ments,  actions,  beliefs  and  other  mental  acts  are  holistic
products  of  Personality.  There  is  no  internal  chemistry
which  binds  these  products  together  into  unities  other  than
Personality  itself.  In  Personality,  even  more  than  in  the
earlier  structures  of  Evolution,  the  whole  is  in  charge,  and
all  development  and  activity  can  be  properly  understood
only  when  viewed  as  being  of  a  holistic  character,  instead
of  being  the  separate  activities  of  special  organs,  or  the
separate  products  of  special  mental  functions.  Synthesis
and  unity  are  of  the  whole,  and  not  of  the  parts.  Holism
is  in  all  personal  activity,  and  is  the  only  basis  on  which  such
activity  can  be  properly  understood.

What  should  be  the  procedure  of  the  new  discipline  of
Personology?  It  should,  of  course,  take  cognisance  of  the
special  analytical  contributions  of  psychology  and  physiol¬
ogy)  anfl  of  all  the  other  human  sciences,  individual  and
social,  theoretical  and  practical.  But  it  should  do  more.
Following  the  course  above  indicated,  that  the  Personality


X


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  285

is  uniquely  individual  and  that  this  special  individual  char¬
acter  should  not  be  ignored,  it  should  study  the  biography  of
noted  personalities  as  expressions  of  the  developing  Person¬
ality  in  each  case.  Such  a  study  of  personal  biographies  will
not  only  have  the  advantage  of  bringing  out  the  individual
differences  among  personalities,  instead  of  blurring  all  differ¬
ences  in  a  generalised  composite  picture  of  Personality.  It
will  have  the  further  and  quite  priceless  advantage  of  study¬
ing  personalities  synthetically  as  living  unities  and  wholes
rather  than  in  the  analytical  manner  of  psychology  and  the
other  human  sciences.  In  biography  we  have  to  follow  the
development  of  a  person  as  a  whole,  as  a  living  biological
psychical  entity,  and  we  are  therefore  in  a  position  to  correct
the  one-sided  abstract  generalised  results  of  the  analytical
procedure  of  these  sciences.  The  study  of  biographies  as
examples  of  personal  Holism,  as  examples  of  the  develop¬
ment  of  Personality,  will  lead  to  very  interesting  and  impor¬
tant  results.

In  the  first  place,  we  shall  thus  get  the  materials  for  for¬
mulating  the  laws  of  personal  evolution.  In  the  second
place,  these  laws  will  form  the  foundation  for  a  new  science
of  Biography  which  will  take  the  place  of  the  empirical  un¬
satisfactory  patchwork  affair  which  biography  now  mostly  is.
In  the  third  place,  the  gradual  accumulation  of  biographical
facts  and  data  bearing  on  personal  evolution  not  only  will
lead  to  the  formulation  of  the  laws  of  this  evolution,  but  will
give  the  basis  for  a  sound  theory  of  Personality  and  a  proper
science  of  Personology.  Personology  as  the  science  of  Per¬
sonality,  as  the  synthetic  science  of  Human  Nature,  will  form
the  crown  of  all  the  sciences  and  in  turn  become  the  basis  of
a  new  Ethic,  a  new  Metaphysic,  and  of  a  truer  spiritual  out¬
look  than  we  can  possibly  have  in  the  ignorance  and  con¬
fusions  of  our  present  state  of  knowledge.  To  my  mind  the
basis  for  all  these  great  developments  can  only  be  laid  in  a
new  biographical  aim  and  method,  which  will  give  us  the
facts  which  are  vitally  necessary  for  any  sound  scientific  con¬
structions.

The  lives  for  this  scientific  study  as  examples  of  personal


286


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


holistic  evolution  will  have  to  be  carefully  selected,  if  effort
is  not  to  be  largely  wasted.  There  are  many  types  of  per¬
sonality  which  would  not  be  specially  suitable  for  studying
personal  evolution.  There  is,  for  instance,  the  type  which
does  not  seem  to  possess  an  inner  evolution.  Many  dis¬
tinguished  persons  appear  to  be  full  grown  in  early  manhood
and  thereafter  to  undergo  no  further  growth.  Their  develop¬
ment  reaches  maturity  early  in  life,  and  thereafter  appears
to  be  arrested.  I  may  mention  Carlyle  as  an  instance;  his
first  great  work,  Sartor  Resartus,  was  a  complete  and  final
exposition  of  his  inner  self,  and  no  further  development  of
his  inner  life  seems  to  have  taken  place  thereafter.  This
phenomenon  of  early  maturity  and  arrest  of  further  develop¬
ment  is  by  no  means  unusual.  We  meet  it  in  the  case  of
many  persons  in  our  circle  of  acquaintances  who  somehow
don’t  seem  to  grow,  but  to  stand  still  after  arriving  at  a
certain  comparatively  early  age.  We  meet  it  again  in  the
tragic  case  of  those  authors  who  write  a  famous  book  early
in  life  and  thereafter  can  do  no  more  than  repeat  themselves
with  less  and  less  freshness  and  ever-waning  originality.  All
these  instances  simply  point  to  arrested  development,  to  the
absence  of  a  capacity  for  inner  growth.  As  Personality  is
best  studied  in  its  genetic  development,  as  its  plastic  inward¬
ness  is  best  seen  in  the  successive  phases  it  assumes  in  a
continuously  growing,  expanding  human  being,  it  follows
that  the  exceptional  stationary  or  early  maturing  person¬
alities  afford  less  favourable  material  for  the  study  of  human
Personality  as  a  whole.

There  is  another  class  of  persons  unsuitable  for  our  pur¬
pose,  consisting  of  those  who  do  not  seem  to  have  much  of
an  inner  self  at  all,  whose  activities  and  interests  are  all  of
an  external  character,  who  live  not  the  inner  life  of  the
spirit  but  the  external  life  of  affairs.  We  often  notice  this
feature  in  the  lives  and  characters  of  public  men,  men  of
affairs,  administrators,  business  men  and  others,  whose
whole  mind  seems  to  be  absorbed  by  the  practical  interest
of  their  work.  In  them  the  capacity  for  the  inner  life  seems
to  have  shrivelled  and  atrophied  under  the  pressure  of


x  PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE  287

external  duties  and  activities.  They  may  be  able,  com¬
petent,  conscientious  men,  they  may  even  be  brilliant  men
of  affairs,  with  great  gifts  of  leadership.  They  may  be
striking  and  impressive  personalities  and  seem  to  be  specially
endowed  with  that  indefinable  attribute  of  Personality  for
which  we  are  searching.  And  yet  they  are  lacking  in  that
inwardness,  that  inner  spiritual  life  which  is  the  most  favour¬
able  medium  for  the  study  of  Personality.  Their  lives  are
generally  an  affair  of  externals,  of  incidents  and  achieve¬
ments,  sometimes  of  pomp  and  glory,  but  largely  devoid  of
real  deep  personal  interest.  Their  biographies  are  usually
dull  and  uninspiring,  and  the  record  and  recital  of  activities,
successes  and  failures  soon  palls  on  the  reader.  The  fact  is
that  the  real  indefinable  quality  of  true  Personality  is  inward
and  is  not  reflected  in  the  life  of  unrelieved  externality  which
such  people  live.  They  usually  carry  on  the  affairs  of  the
world  with  great  competence;  but  they  are  too  much  of
the  world.  What  is  worse,  they  often  consciously  suppress
the  life  of  the  spirit;  the  still  small  voice  is  no  asset  to  them
in  the  prosecution  of  their  worldly  affairs.  And  they  are
far  too  cautious  and  reserved  to  give  their  inner  selves  away
and  to  afford  the  outside  world  glimpses  into  the  world  of
real  motives  influencing  and  guiding  them.  For  them  any
self-revelation  would  be  something  to  be  shy  of,  would
be  like  wearing  their  hearts  on  their  sleeves.  The  result  is
that  the  inner  fires  are  securely  banked,  and  the  flame  of  the
spirit  can  only  fitfully  smoulder  under  the  ashes.  Even  if
there  is  a  strong  personal  life  in  such  cases  there  is  usually
no  record  of  it,  it  remains  entirely  private  and  personal,
and  often  unknown  even  to  the  inner  family  circle,  let  alone
the  scientific  student  who  is  dependent  on  written  records,
constituting  a  continuous  revelation  of  the  spirit,  for  the
reliability  of  his  conclusions.  They  may  be  and  often  are
people  of  outstanding  personality,  but  the  absence  of  the
inner  life  and  of  records  of  personal  development  make  them
unsuitable  material  for  the  study  of  the  problems  of  Person¬
ality  in  its  more  significant  aspects.

These  remarks  will  serve  to  explain  what  sort  of  lives  could


288


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


be  studied  to  best  advantage  in  the  exploration  of  the  secret
of  Personality.  We  should,  at  any  rate  to  begin  with,  select
the  biographies  of  people  who  had  real  inner  histories,  lives
of  the  spirit,  as  well  as  a  fair  capacity  of  continuous  develop¬
ment  during  their  lifetime.  And  among  these  the  most  help¬
ful  cases  would  be  those  where  the  written  record  is  fairly
full  in  the  form  of  writings  and  diaries,  and  where  there  was
no  undue  restraint  in  the  process  of  self-revelation  and  faith¬
ful  portrayal  of  the  inner  life  and  history.  On  the  whole,  the
lives  of  poets,  artists,  writers,  thinkers,  religious  and  social
innovators  will  be  found  the  most  suitable  for  purposes  of
holistic  study.  They  are  often  people  with  inner  lives  and
interesting  personalities,  with  an  inner  history  of  continuous
development;  and  wherever  their  experiences  have  been  more
or  less  faithfully  recorded,  the  materials  for  fruitful  study  are
present.  Sometimes  the  personal  record  is  missing,  and  in
such  cases  the  study  of  the  Personality  through  the  works  of
the  author  becomes  too  much  a  matter  of  inference  to  be
really  useful,  at  any  rate  in  the  earlier  stage  of  the  inquiry
into  Personality.  Such  a  case,  for  instance,  is  that  of
Shakespeare.  His  plays  reveal  behind  them  a  wonderful
Personality  endowed  with  the  highest  genius,  and  moving
forward  in  a  continuous  grand  crescendo  of  self-development
as  an  artist  from  beginning  to  end.  But  while  the  develop¬
ment  is  there,  the  Personality  itself  is  too  much  hidden
behind  the  dramatic  mask,  and  therefore  too  much  a  matter
of  inference  in  the  absence  of  proper  personal  records.  In
other  cases,  again,  the  personal  record  is  well  and  fully
known,  but  the  written  works  are  not  sufficiently  illuminating
as  a  true  index  of  the  growing  Personality.  For  a  man  often
reveals  himself  more  profoundly  in  his  master  products  than
in  his  diaries  or  correspondence  or  other  incidental  com¬
munications.  Milton’s  great  dictum  holds  for  all  time:  “A
good  book  is  the  precious  life-blood  of  a  master  spirit,
embalmed  and  treasured  up  on  purpose  to  a  life  beyond
life.”  There  is  nothing  trivial  in  Personality,  and  the  great¬
est,  most  serious  work  is  usually  the  most  faithful  index  to
the  Personality  behind.  Both  are,  in  fact,  required — the


PERSONALITY  AS  A  WHOLE


x


289


work  as  well  as  the  personal  record — for  a  full  understanding
of  any  particular  Personality.

From  a  series  of  biographical  studies,  such  as  I  propose,  it
will,  I  imagine,  become  clear  that  Personalities  follow  their
own  laws  of  inner  growth  and  development,  which  will,  while
conforming  to  a  general  plan,  show  very  considerable  di¬
versity  in  detail.  It  will  be  found  that  each  Personality
is  a  psychic  biological  organism,  an  individual  personal
whole,  with  its  own  curve  of  development,  and  its  own
series  of  phases  of  growth.  A  person  will  thus  be  found  to
be  very  different  at  different  stages  of  his  development,  but
all  the  stages  and  phases  will  be  bound  together  by  and  be
the  outcome  of  the  identical  inner  Personality.  A  com¬
parison  of  such  studies  of  individual  Personalities  will  then
give  the  curve  or  the  law  of  Personality,  and  reduce  to
rational  order  a  phenomenon  which  is  to-day  still  within  the
region  of  mystery.

As  the  key  to  all  the  highest  interests  of  the  human  race
Personality  seems  to  be  quite  the  most  important  and  fruit¬
ful  problem  to  which  the  thinkers  of  the  coming  generation
could  direct  their  attention.  In  Personality  will  probably  be
found  the  answer  to  some  of  the  hardest  and  oldest  questions
that  have  troubled  the  heart  as  well  as  the  head  of  man.
The  problem  of  Personality  seems  as  hard  as  it  is  important.
Not  without  reason  have  thinkers  throughout  the  ages  shied
off  from  it.  But  it  holds  precious  secrets  for  those  who  will
seriously  devote  themselves  to  the  new  science  or  discipline
of  Personology.


CHAPTER  XI


SOME  FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS  OF  PERSONALITY

Summary. — The  central  conception  of  Personality  is  that  of  a
whole;  it  is  the  most  holistic  entity  in  the  universe,  hence  no  other
category  will  do  justice  to  it,  and  certainly  not  mechanism.  Psy¬
chology  is  too  much  of  an  abstract  science  to  give  an  adequate
view  of  Personality,  though  even  psychology  is  dependent  on  the
theory  of  a  central  synthetic  activity  for  the  correct  construction
and  interpretation  of  mental  experience,  and  ignores  that  theory
at  its  peril.  The  suggestion  of  a  new  science  or  discipline  of  Per-
sonology  has  therefore  been  made  which  will  study  Personality
more  synthetically  and  concretely  than  is  possible  for  psychology.

As  an  active  living  whole,  Personality  is  fundamentally  an  organ
of  self-realisation;  the  object  of  a  whole  is  more  wholeness,  in
other  words,  more  of  its  creative  self,  more  self-realisation.  This
means  that  the  will  or  active  voluntary  nature  of  Personality  is  its
predominant  element,  and  the  intelligence  or  rational  activity  is
subordinate  and  instrumental — it  has  to  discover  and  co-ordinate
means  to  the  end  of  self-realisation.  Feeling  is  likewise  subordi¬
nate,  its  function  being  to  give  strength  and  impetus  to  the  will.
The  Personality  is  thus  a  more  or  less  balanced  whole  or  structure
of  various  tendencies  and  activities  maintained  in  progressive
harmony  by  the  holistic  unity  of  the  Personality  itself.  In  fact
Personality  resembles  an  organised  society  or  state  with  its  cen¬
tral  executive  and  legislative  authority  wielding  sway  over  its  in¬
dividual  members  in  the  interest  of  the  whole.  Kant  has  rightly
called  man  a  legislative  being.  Part  of  this  control  in  Personality
is  conscious,  most  of  it  is,  however,  subconscious.  This  control  is
still  largely  imperfect  and  immature  owing  to  the  extreme  youth
of  Personality  in  the  history  of  Evolution.  But  it  is  growing.
More  holistic  control  in  the  Personality  means  greater  strength  of
mind  and  character,  better  co-ordination  of  all  impulses  and
tendencies;  less  internal  friction  and  wear  and  tear  in  the  soul,
more  peace  of  mind,  and  finally  that  spiritual  purity,  integrity  and
wholeness  which  is  the  ideal  of  Personality.  The  Personality  has
the  same  self-healing  power  which  we  saw  already  in  the  case  of
the  mutilated  organism;  and  in  case  of  moral  or  other  aberration
it  usually  has  the  power  to  right  and  recover  itself  and  often
creatively  to  gather  strength  from  its  own  weakness  or  errors.

290


chap,  xi  FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


291


Personality  is  not  only  a  self-restorer;  it  is  a  supreme  spiritual
metaboliser;  it  absorbs  for  its  growth  a  vast  variety  of  experience
which  it  creatively  transmutes  and  assimilates  for  its  own  spiritual
nourishment.  As  metabolism  and  assimilation  are  fundamental
functions  of  all  organic  wholes,  the  Personality  takes  in  and  as¬
similates  all  the  social  and  other  influences  which  surround  it,  and
makes  them  all  contribute  towards  its  holistic  self-realisation.
Personalities  vary  greatly  in  their  capacity  for  holistic  assimila¬
tion,  some  easily  suffering  from  spiritual  indigestion,  while  great
minds  and  characters  can  absorb  a  vast  experience  which  only
serves  to  fructify  and  enrich  them  without  any  detriment  to  their
spiritual  wholeness  and  integrity.  Where  a  Personality  takes  in
alien  experience  which  it  cannot  assimilate  into  its  own  spiritual
substance,  such  experience  becomes  an  impurity  to  it;  “purity”  in
reference  to  Personality  meaning  the  absence  of  all  elements  alien,
heterogeneous  and  disharmonious  to  the  Personality.

The  holistic  categories  sketched  in  Chapter  VI  are  specially
characteristic  of  Personality  as  a  whole  par  excellence :  these  are
Creativeness,  Freedom  and  Wholeness  or  Purity.  Its  creativeness
refers  to  the  ideal  Values,  rational,  ethical,  artistic  and  religious,
which  it  creates  for  its  own  spiritual  environment  and  inner  guid¬
ance  and  illumination.  As  these,  however,  fall  outside  the  scope
of  this  work,  the  category  of  Creativeness  as  applying  to  Person¬
ality  will  not  be  further  considered  here.  But  something  must  be
said  about  Freedom  and  Wholeness  or  Purity.

The  essence  of  Personality  is  creative  freedom  in  respect  of  its
own  conditions  of  experience  and  development;  as  an  initiator,  me¬
taboliser  and  assimilator  it  has  practical  self-determination.  Again,
as  a  selector  and  co-ordinator  of  the  elements  in  the  situations  that
confront  it,  it  also  has  practical  freedom.  Its  very  nature  as  a
whole  confers  freedom  upon  it.  This  freedom  is  not  a  negation  of
the  physical  order  of  causality  but  arises  inside  that  order ;  holistic
freedom  is  a  continuous  organic  or  psychic  miracle  which  happens
between  cause  and  effect,  so  to  say,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  VI.
Freedom  is  thus  a  fact  in  the  universe,  and  is  not  a  mere  capricious
power  peculiar  to  the  will;  it  pertains  to  Personality  as  a  whole.
Freedom  means  holistic  self-determination,  and  as  such  it  becomes
one  of  the  great  ideals  of  Personality,  whose  self-realisation  is
dependent  on  its  inner  holistic  freedom.

As  regards  Wholeness  or  Purity,  it  is  essentially  identical  with
Freedom.  Purity  means  the  elimination  of  disharmonious  ele¬
ments  from  the  Personality.  It  means  the  harmonious  co-ordina¬
tion  of  the  higher  and  lower  elements  in  human  nature,  the  sub¬
limation  of  the  lower  into  the  higher,  and  thus  the  enrichment  of
the  higher  through  the  lower.  From  this  it  follows  that  moral
discipline  is  an  essential  part  in  the  culture  of  Personality.  Per-


292


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


sonality  is  a  spiritual  gymnast,  whose  object  is  the  freedom  and
harmony  of  the  inner  life  through  the  refinement  and  sublimation
of  the  cruder  features  in  the  Personality  and  their  subordination
and  co-ordination  in  the  growing  whole  of  Personality.  If  this
object  is  secured  by  the  Personality,  all  the  rest  will  be  added  unto
it:  peace,  joy,  blessedness,  goodness  and  all  the  great  prizes  of
life.  Wholeness  as  free  and  harmonious  self-realisation  thus  sums
up  the  summum  bonum  of  Holism.

In  the  preceding  chapter  we  have  viewed  the  Personality
as  a  whole,  as  a  form,  and  indeed  the  highest  form  of  Holism;
and  we  have  also  considered  some  of  the  difficulties  and
problems  which  arise  from  this  view  of  Personality  as  a
real  whole.  In  this  chapter  we  shall  consider  Personality
in  action,  in  its  operation  as  a  whole,  as  an  active  shaping
factor  in  the  life  of  the  human  individual.  Let  me,  however,
first  briefly  resume  what  was  said  about  the  holistic  char¬
acter  of  Personality,  especially  in  its  psychological  aspect.

In  Chapter  VII  I  tried  to  reconcile  the  conflicting  claims
of  Mechanism  and  Vitalism  in  the  larger  setting  of  Holism.
In  considering  the  behaviour  of  organisms  and  organic
control  generally,  it  may  still  be  a  question  whether  the
Mechanistic  or  the  Vitalistic  aspect  of  Holism  is  predomi¬
nant;  when,  however,  we  come  to  the  conscious  human  Per¬
sonality  the  question  loses  all  its  force  and  meaning.  For
there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  mechanistic  con¬
ception  is  not  competent  to  explain  or  even  describe  the  facts
of  human  Personality.  Psychology  itself  is  unintelligible
except  on  the  assumption  that  in  Mind  we  have  a,  central
synthetic  power  which  marshals  and  controls,  and  largely
determines  all  the  facts  and  functions  of  mental  life,  such  as
sensations,  perceptions,  conceptions,  conations  and  emotions.
Our  developed  consciousness  directly  reveals  an  identical
and  persistent  Self  which  refers  all  its  experiences  to  itself;
and,  as  we  have  seen,  but  for  such  a  personal  centre  and
unity  of  reference,  mental  life  and  experience  would  be
impossible  and  unintelligible.  This  personal  Self  underlies,
upholds,  directs  and  controls  all  our  experience  as  indi¬
viduals.  In  this  Self  we  behold,  not  only  what  is  deepest  and


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


293


most  central  in  ourselves  as  human  beings,  but  also  that
power  of  Holism  which  operates  blindly  as  life  and  organic
control  in  organisms;  nay,  more,  in  it  we  behold  the  cul¬
mination  of  that  fundamental  holistic  motive  power  of  the
universe,  the  beginnings  of  which  lie  far  back,  impersonal
and  embedded  in  the  inorganic  order  of  Nature,  but  which
gradually  disentangles  and  frees  itself,  until  in  the  Self  of
the  human  Personality  it  attains  its  highest  measure  of
freedom.  The  synthetic  organising  power  of  Holism,  start¬
ing  from  the  darkest  and  feeblest  beginnings  and  blindly
battling  with  all  sorts  of  refractory  situations  in  the  course
of  cosmic  Evolution,  gradually  evolves  and  wins  through
until  at  last  it  emerges  in  the  Self  with  luminous  and  radiant
self-consciousness.  Through  the  Self,  which  possesses  the
power  of  conscious  reflection  and  retrospection,  Holism  can
look  back  to  its  own  early  beginnings  and  review  its  own
progress  throughout  the  course  of  organic  and  inorganic
Evolution.  As  Nature  finally  learns  to  read  herself  with  the
human  eyes  which  are  her  own,  so  through  the  human  Self
which  is  the  highest  and  best  it  has  yet  come  to,  Holism  may
gaze  back  to  its  beginnings  and  scrutinise  what  would  other¬
wise  be  dark  and  unintelligible  for  ever.  And  thus  it  is  that
the  worm  of  Personality  comes  to  turn  to  the  light  of  the
Whole,  and  presumes  to  view  and  discuss  the  Whole,  of
which  it  forms  itself  but  a  part.

As  was  pointed  out  in  the  last  chapter,  the  procedure  of
psychology  is  largely  and  necessarily  analytical  and  cannot
therefore  do  justice  to  Personality  in  its  unique  wholeness.
For  this  a  new  discipline  is  required,  which  we  have  called
Personology,  and  whose  task  it  would  be  to  study  Personality
as  a  whole  and  to  trace  the  laws  and  phases  of  its  develop¬
ment  in  the  individual  life.  Such  a  study  would  be  of  the
greatest  interest  from  every  point  of  view,  as  it  would  en¬
visage  Personality  in  its  unique  wholeness  and  unity,  rather
than,  in  the  way  of  psychology,  as  a  series  of  separate  ab¬
stracted  activities.  Personology  would  study  the  Personal¬
ity  not  as  an  abstraction  or  bundle  of  psychological  abstrac¬
tions,  but  rather  as  a  vital  organism,  as  the  organic  psychic


294


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


whole  which  par  excellence  it  is;  and  such  a  study  should
lead  to  the  formulation  of  the  laws  of  the  growth  of  this
unique  whole,  which  would  be  not  only  of  profound  theoreti¬
cal  importance,  but  also  of  the  greatest  practical  value.  One
cannot  read  the  lives  of  the  great  Personalities  without
feeling  that  a  vast  field  for  first-class  scientific  and  philo¬
sophic  research  remains  still  unexplored,  and  that  discoveries
of  the  highest  importance  await  the  student  of  Personology.
Here  I  shall  confine  myself  to  a  few  indications  of  the  gen¬
eral  activity  of  Personality  as  a  whole.

As  a  whole,  as  the  individualising  power  and  activity  of
Holism,  the  Personality  is  fundamentally  an  organ  of  self-
realisatir*' .  As  in  the  case  of  the  growing  or  mutilated
organism  the  whole  manifests  itself  by  bearing  through  all
obstructions  and  overcoming  all  obstacles  in  its  efforts  to
realise  and  complete  itself  or  its  type  in  each  individual  case,
so  too  the  Personality  has,  as  its  central  end,  the  straighten¬
ing  out  of  all  difficulties  and  the  elimination  of  all  elements
which  militate  against  the  attainment  of  its  own  immanent
ideal.  In  essence  the  task  is  the  same  in  both  cases.  But
there  is  this  material  difference  in  objective,  that  whereas  in
the  case  of  organism  the  end  towards  which  the  whole  is
moving  is  the  completion  of  the  material  structure  and  its
functions,  in  the  case  of  Personality,  on  the  other  hand,  the
end  and  object  of  the  inner  whole  is  the  realisation  of  an  in¬
visible  spiritual  structure  or  character.  The  organism  is  still
mainly  material,  while  the  Personality  is  essentially  an  in¬
ward  ideal;  but  in  both  cases  the  shaping  power  of  the
inner  whole  strives  to  realise  its  end,  to  eliminate  what  is
alien  and  adventitious,  to  conserve  and  develop  what  is
pure  and  relevant  to  its  ideal,  and  so  to  reach  perfection,  of
visible  outward  structure  and  function  in  the  one  case,  of
inward  spiritual  grace  and  unity  in  the  other.

From  this  it  will  be  seen  that  apart  from  our  bodies  the
basis  of  that  complex  whole  which  we  call  the  Personality
is  our  voluntary  activity  or  the  will;  it  is  the  active,  self-
maintaining,  self-realising  power  of  the  Personality  in  us
which  underlies  and  directs  and  to  a  large  extent  condi-


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


295


tions  all  other  activities.  The  Intelligence  has  been  evolved
largely  though  not  entirely  as  an  instrument  of  the  will;
in  its  endeavour  to  realise  its  conscious  or  unconscious
ends  the  Personality  qua  will  has  developed  the  intel¬
lectual  or  thinking  power  as  a  subsidiary  activity  which
prescribes  the  means  by  which  that  realisation  has  to  be
effected.  The  power  of  Holism  in  us  moves  at  first  un¬
consciously  and  blindly,  as  in  other  organisms,  and  later
on  consciously  and  purposively  to  certain  ends  which  in¬
crease  in  complexity  and  difficulty  as  the  capacity  for
abstract  thinking  and  rational  co-ordination  progresses.
This  fundamental  movement  is  the  will,  whose  activity  is
dependent  not  only  on  the  primary  forms  of  feeling,  which
make  the  movement  slow  or  rapid  according  to  the  strength
and  volume  of  the  feelings,  but  also  on  the  growth  of  intelli¬
gence  which  adjusts  means  to  ends.  The  active  movement
to  satisfy  the  appetite  or  craving  of  hunger,  for  instance,
depends  largely  on  the  strength  of  the  promptings  of  hunger;
and  the  intelligence  of  the  hungry  animal  is  developed  and
sharpened  in  order  to  devise  ways  and  means  by  which  the
pangs  of  that  craving  may  be  alleviated  and  removed.  And
similarly  the  complex  impulse  which  makes  a  great  thinker,
artist  or  statesman  endeavour  through  long  years  to  execute
some  great  and  far-reaching  plan,  while  fundamentally  a
movement  of  his  active  voluntary  nature,  depends  for  its
strength  on  his  emotions,  and  for  the  correctness  of  execution
on  the  power  of  thought  and  judgment  and  insight  which
have  been  matured  in  the  personal  life.  The  conception  of
Personality,  as  an  active  movement  of  the  whole  in  each
individual,  seems,  therefore,  necessarily  to  lead  to  the
primacy  of  the  will  or  active  nature  of  the  mind,  and  to
the  instrumental  character  of  the  intellectual  or  thinking
power.  Personality  is  thus  a  balanced  whole  or  structure
of  various  tendencies  and  capacities  which  are  maintained
in  mutual  and  reciprocal  harmony  by  the  holistic  nature  of
the  Personality  itself.  As  the  whole  is  the  essence  of  Per¬
sonality,  so  wholeness  in  self-realisation  and  self-expression
is  its  essential  aim  and  object.


296  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

The  great  practical  problem  before  the  Personality  is
thus  to  effectuate  and  preserve  its  wholeness  through  the
harmonising  of  its  several  activities,  and  the  prevention
among  them  of  any  random  discord  or  sedition,  whereby  one
or  other  might  be  enabled  to  assume  ascendancy  over  the
rest  and  so  prepare  the  way  for  the  disintegration  and  de¬
struction  of  the  whole.  In  the  Personality  there  is  super-
added  to  the  unconscious  organic  control  a  whole  complex
machinery  of  conscious  purposive  action  which  is  intended
more  effectively  to  maintain  and  increase  this  highly  organ¬
ised  harmony  in  the  developing  individual.  The  machinery
of  conscious  purposive  control  becomes  highly  elaborate  and
almost  artificial.

In  fact  the  nature  of  the  Personality  is  distinguished  by
its  departure  from  the  processes  of  organic  nature  and  an
approximation  to  the  forms  of  action  which  are  character¬
istic  of  society.  Just  as  in  a  well-organised  society  or  state
there  is  a  central  legislative  and  executive  authority  which  is
for  certain  purposes  supreme  over  all  individuals  composing
that  society  or  state,  and  controls  their  activities  in  certain
definite  directions  deemed  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the
state,  so  the  human  Personality  is  distinguished  by  an  even
more  rigorous  inner  control  and  direction  of  the  personal
actions  to  certain  defined  or  definable  ends.  This  is  the
reason  why  Kant  has  called  man  a  legislative  being.  He  is
an  inward  kingdom  or  sovereignty,  whose  powers  and  ac¬
tions  are  directed,  not  by  some  external  agency,  but  by
an  inner  agency  which  is  none  other  than  the  activity  of  the
personal  whole  itself.  Much  of  this  control  and  direction  is
conscious  will,  but  far  more  is  unconscious  and  operates  in
the  subconscious  field  of  the  personal  life,  and  it  is  only  on
great  occasions  or  crises  that  light  comes  suddenly  to  be
thrown  on  this  inner  leading  in  the  personal  life,  and  the
individual  becomes  conscious  that  he  has  been  guided  or  led
along  paths  which  were  apparently  not  of  his  choosing,  but
which  nevertheless  were  the  outcome  of  the  mysterious  inner
self-direction  which  distinguishes  the  Personality.  The  ideal
personality  is  he  in  whom  this  inner  control  is  sufficiently


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


297


powerful,  whether  exercised  by  conscious  will  or  some  un¬
conscious  activity,  to  harmonise  all  the  discordant  elements
and  tendencies  of  the  personal  character  into  one  harmonious
whole,  and  to  restrain  all  wayward,  random  activities  which
are  in  conflict  with  that  harmony.  This  ideal  is  far  from
being  realised  universally  in  practice.  Personality  is  still  a
growing  factor  in  the  universe,  and  is  merely  in  its  infancy.
Its  history  is  marked  by  the  thousands  of  years,  whereas  that
of  organic  nature  is  marked  by  millions.  Personality  is  as
yet  but  an  inchoate  activity  of  the  whole,  but  nevertheless  its
character  is  already  distinct  and  well-marked;  and  its  future
evolution  is  the  largest  ray  of  hope  in  human,  if  not
terrestrial,  destiny.  Its  incomplete  imperfect  character  is
largely  responsible  for  the  interminable  disputes  and  differ¬
ences  among  philosophers  and  theologians  about  the  human
soul  and  human  destiny.  For  so  long  as  the  true  nature  of
Personality,  which  is  one  form  or  another  and  whether
consciously  or  unconsciously,  forms  the  ultimate  subject
matter  of  all  their  dogmas  and  speculations,  is  still  indefinite
and  undetermined,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that  they  will  be
agreed  as  to  the  fundamental  postulates,  or  the  proper
methods  to  be  followed,  or  the  correct  inferences  to  be  drawn
from  the  apparent  facts.  The  scientist  has  the  advantage
that  he  deals  with  older  well-marked  manifestations  of
reality  about  whose  definition  and  principal  characteristics
there  can  be  little  dispute.  But  philosophers,  whose  subject
matter  is  still  in  process  of  growth  and  inward  definition,  find
themselves  unable  to  agree  about  fundamentals  largely  be¬
cause  Nature  herself  is  not  yet  certain  about  these  funda¬
mentals.  However,  even  admittedly  inchoate  and  infantile
as  Personality  is,  it  is  already  sufficiently  developed  and  dis¬
tinct  to  enable  us  to  consider  its  fundamental  characteristics
and  their  bearings  on  the  interpretation  not  only  of  human
conduct  but  of  our  conception  of  the  universe  in  general.
And  its  fundamental  character  is  just  this  wholeness  which
justifies  us  in  saying  that  Personality  is  a  special  activity  or
form  of  the  Whole.  For  consider  for  a  moment  what  distin¬
guishes  the  formed  and  developed  personality  from  the  un-


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


298

formed  and  incomplete  personality;  the  strong  character
from  the  weak;  the  master  of  his  fate  from  him  who  is  blown
about  by  every  wave  of  impulse  or  opinion.  In  the  latter
case — the  case  of  the  weak,  or  flabby,  or  irresolute  person —
you  have  usually  the  same  elements  of  character  as  in  that  of
the  strong  man.  But  the  difference  is  that  while  in  the  case
of  the  strong  man  or  personality  all  these  elements  are  uni¬
fied  into  one  central  whole  which  shapes  and  directs  their
separate  activities,  in  the  case  of  the  weak  man  these  ele¬
ments  of  thought,  emotion,  will  and  passion  have  never  been
harmonised  or  fused  into  one  whole;  the  sovereign  legisla¬
tive  and  executive  authority  in  the  personality  has  never
been  properly  constituted  or  exerted,  or  is  so  weak  as  to  be
regularly  disobeyed  and  defied;  the  unorganised  and  unco¬
ordinated  factions  in  the  character  fight  for  their  own  hand
and  keep  up  a  constant  state  of  inner  warfare  in  the  person¬
ality,  with  the  result  that  the  stronger  passions  or  impulses
carry  the  day  and  ruin  the  character,  which  depends  on  a
harmonious  subordination  of  all  the  various  elements  of
character  under  one  supreme  ethical  authority.  The  inner
discord  may  even  proceed  the  length  of  apparent  dissocia¬
tion  of  the  personality  and  lead  to  the  singular  phenomenon
of  multiple  personality  in  the  same  individual.

In  proportion  as  a  personality  really  becomes  such,  it
acquires  more  of  the  character  of  wholeness;  body  and  mind,
intellect  and  heart,  will  and  emotions,  while  not  separately
repressed  but  on  the  contrary  fostered  and  developed,  are
yet  all  collectively  harmonised  and  blended  into  one  in¬
tegral  whole;  the  character  becomes  more  massive,  the
entire  man  becomes  more  of  a  piece;  and  the  will  or  con¬
scious  rational  direction,  which  is  not  a  separate  agency
hostile  to  these  individual  factors,  but  the  very  root  and
expression  of  their  joint  and  harmonious  action,  becomes
more  silently  and  smoothly  powerful;  the  wear  and  tear
of  internal  struggle  disappears;  the  friction  and  waste  which
accompany  the  warfare  in  the  soul  are  replaced  by  peace  and
unity  and  strength;  till  at  last  the  Personality  stands  forth
in  its  ideal  purity,  integrity  and  wholeness.  And  through


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


299


all  this  transformation  from  the  disorganised  atomic  state
to  the  full  realisation  of  unity  in  the  personal  character,  the
Personality  as  the  activity  of  Holism  in  the  human  individual
is  itself  the  creative  shaping  agency  which  directs  the  move¬
ment;  it  is  the  Personality  which  not  only  develops  all  the
separate  faculties  of  mind  and  soul,  but  concentrates
and  finally  unifies  their  activities;  the  various  mental  ele¬
ments  it  organises  and  fuses  into  one  luminous  personal
whole,  which  in  time  exercises  a  restraining  and  overshadow¬
ing  power  over  all  tendencies  and  impulses  harmful  to  the
whole,  and  directs  the  entire  current  of  being,  thinking  and
feeling  to  the  realisation  of  the  highest  ethical  and  spiritual
ends.

We  have  seen  in  earlier  chapters  how  in  case  of  mutilation
of  an  organism  some  central  control  often  avails  to  restore  or
repair  the  mutilated  organ.  In  the  same  way  the  Person¬
ality,  as  an  activity  of  Holism  in  the  individual,  repairs  any
breach  in  the  personal  character  and  restores  the  balance  dis¬
turbed  by  any  impairment  of  character.  The  Personality
appears  as  the  self-healer,  which  through  all  obstacles  and
impediments  endeavours  to  preserve  and  realise  its  own  type
or  ideal,  and  often  even  from  defeat  and  disaster  itself  to
wrest  the  accomplishment  of  the  ethical  ideal  at  which  it  is
consciously  or  unconsciously  aiming.  Not  seldom,  of  course,
the  Personality  finds  it  impossible  to  overcome  the  defeats  it
has  sustained  and  goes  under;  for  it  is  as  yet  weak  and
inchoate  as  a  function  of  Holism,  and  in  some  cases  it  is
weaker  than  in  others.  But  the  level  of  its  power  and
activity  is  gradually  rising;  more  and  more  it  is  gathering
the  unorganised  centrifugal  tendencies  of  the  individual
into  an  effective  central  control,  and  often  it  wins  even  in  the
most  discouraging  circumstances  those  moral  victories
which  form  the  great  landmarks  of  personal  and  human
progress.  From  the  depths  of  moral  and  spiritual  aberration
it  guides  the  weak  steps  of  the  wanderer  to  conscious  man¬
hood  and  moral  self-control.  As  the  organism  heals  itself
after  a  mutilation,  so  the  Personality  through  identically
the  same  functioning  of  Holism  saves  and  purifies  the  per-


300


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


sonal  character  often  even  by  means  of  the  sins  and  ex¬
cesses  of  which  it  has  been  guilty.  Thus  the  Personality
realises  itself  by  producing  unity  and  wholeness  in  the
personal  character;  and  when  through  its  own  weakness  the
character  is  degraded  and  a  course  of  conduct  embarked
on  which  constitutes  a  denial  of  that  fundamental  tendency
and  aspiration  towards  wholeness,  the  force  of  the  Person¬
ality  in  the  individual  is  often  strong  enough  to  rescue  the
individual  and  sometimes  even  through  a  more  or  less  violent
crisis  to  convert  him  to  sanity,  self-respect  and  moral  whole¬
ness.  The  moral  and  spiritual  implications  of  this  fact  lie
beyond  the  scope  of  this  work.

The  aberrations  of  the  individual  from  the  ethical  stand¬
ard  are  due  not  only  to  the  inner  weakness  of  the  personal
character  but  also  to  the  influence  of  the  environment.
From  the  consideration  of  the  internal  we  therefore  pass  on
to  discuss  the  external  relations  of  Personality.  And  here
the  first  point  to  note  is  that  in  so  far  as  the  individual  is  at
the  mercy  of  external  circumstances  and  forces,  the  situation
is  largely  of  a  mechanical  character.  We  have  seen  in
earlier  chapters  how  such  a  mechanical  situation  is  con¬
verted  into  an  organic  one.  The  organism  does  not  merely
passively  receive  the  force,  pressure  or  influence  of  the
environment;  it  appears  not  as  a  mere  passive  sufferer,  but
as  an  active  agent  in  the  drama  of  existence.  And  it  is
considered  an  organism  only  to  the  extent  to  which  it  exer¬
cises  this  active  function  of  assimilation  or  metabolism  of
the  material  which  it  receives  from  the  environment.  So
far  from  being  a  mere  channel  or  conduit  pipe  for  transmit¬
ting  the  inorganic  forces  and  energies  of  Nature,  it  disin¬
tegrates  all  the  materials  supplied  to  it,  and  transmutes  them
into  forms  which  are  serviceable  for  its  own  organic  pur¬
poses,  and  then  builds  these  materials  so  transmuted  into
the  stately  type  which  it  is  its  immanent  end  to  realise.  The
power  of  assimilation  is  essential  to  the  organism;  without
this  power  it  would  simply  be  flooded  with  its  surroundings,
and  instead  of  conquering  the  environment  and  victoriously
adjusting  itself  to  its  surroundings,  it  would  be  overcome  and


XI  FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS  301

disappear  as  an  organism.  Metabolism  and  assimilation  are
indeed  the  fundamental  activities  of  organic  wholes.

Now  all  this  is,  mutatis  mutandis,  even  truer  in  relation  to
the  Personality.  Any  element  of  a  foreign,  alien  or  hostile
character  introduced  into  the  Personality  creates  internal
friction,  clogs  its  working  and  may  even  end  in  completely
disorganising  and  disintegrating  it.  The  Personality,  like
the  organism,  is  dependent  for  its  continuance  on  a  supply
of  material,  intellectual,  social  and  such-like,  from  the  en¬
vironment.  But  this  foreign  material,  unless  properly
metabolised  and  assimilated  by  the  Personality,  may  injure
it  and  even  prove  fatal  to  it.  Just  as  organic  assimilation
is  essential  to  animal  growth,  so  intellectual,  moral  and  social
assimilation  on  the  part  of  the  Personality  becomes  the
central  fact  in  its  development  and  self-realisation.  The
capacity  for  this  assimilation  varies  greatly  in  individual
cases.  A  Goethe  could  absorb  and  assimilate  all  the  science
and  art  and  literature  and  take  part  in  much  of  the  practical
administrative  activities  of  his  time  and  place  without
finding  himself  oppressed  by  a  load  which  must  have  killed
a  lesser  man;  he  could,  as  he  has  described  in  the  character
of  Faust,  gather  up  into  himself  not  only  all  the  knowledge
of  his  day,  but  all  the  richness  and  variety  of  experience
which  makes  his  life  one  of  the  most  interesting  records  in
the  history  of  the  world;  he  could  drink  of  the  deepest
fountains  of  passion  and  arise  to  the  loftiest  heights  of  ideal
aspiration — he  could  do  all  this  and  not  only  preserve  his
spiritual  manhood  unimpaired,  but  actually  deepen  and
broaden  and  enrich  it  in  every  direction.  He  could  assimi¬
late  this  vast  mass  of  experience,  could  make  it  all  his
own,  and  make  it  all  contribute  to  that  splendour  and
magnificence  of  self-realisation  which  has  made  him  one  of
the  greatest  among  men.  A  lesser  Personality  would  have
gone  under;  either  could  not  have  acquired  so  much  knowl¬
edge  and  experience,  or  could  not  have  assimilated  it,  and
in  the  end  would  have  become  depersonalised,  a  mere
mechanical  acquirer  and  hoarder  at  the  cost  of  essential
unity  and  integrity.  As  soon  as  a  person  acquires  either


302


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


knowledge  or  experience  or  falls  under  social  or  other  in¬
fluences  in  a  mechanical  manner  without  assimilating  them,
he  injures  his  Personality;  he  overburdens  and  disorganises
himself;  he  surrenders  to  the  environment  that  in  him
which  is  and  should  ever  remain  a  pure  unconstrained  self¬
activity.  There  are  many  forms  which  this  enslavement  of
the  Personality  takes.  Looking  upon  the  Personality  as
merely  a  natural  activity  and  not  yet  in  an  ethical  or  religious
light,  we  find  that  it  is  sometimes  overloaded  and  gorged
with  knowledge  which  it  cannot  assimilate  and  digest,  and
the  person  degenerates  into  a  mere  gatherer  of  knowledge,
a  sort  of  intellectual  hoarder.  In  other  cases,  again,  it
accepts  the  social  influences  and  conventions  without  mas¬
tering  and  assimilating  them  and  develops  into  a  purely
conventional  character  in  which  the  spontaneity  of  the  inner
life  is  deadened  under  a  mass  of  social  conventions.  In  other
cases  it  acquires  power  which  it  is  beyond  its  capacity  to  use
wisely  and  well,  and  it  develops  a  proud,  cruel,  overbearing
or  tyrannical  character,  and  that  too  under  circumstances
which  would  have  built  up  a  strong  and  noble  Personality
in  a  case  where  the  assimilative,  controlling,  co-ordinating
power  was  greater.  Too  often,  alas!  it  simply  surrenders
itself  weakly  and  self-indulgently  to  outside  influences  or
temptations,  and  becomes  weak,  vicious  and  contemptible.
In  all  these  cases  the  Personality  succumbs  to  the  environ¬
ment,  to  external  influences  which  bear  on  it,  but  which  it
cannot  resist  or  master  and  make  its  own;  in  fact,  to  the
introduction  of  foreign  or  hostile  material  into  its  pure  inner
self-activity.  The  ideal  Personality  is  a  whole;  it  is  a  whole
in  the  sense  that  it  should  not  have  in  it  anything
which  is  not  of  a  piece  with  itself,  which  is  alien  or  external
to  itself.  Any  such  extraneous  or  adventitious  element  in  it
which  does  not  really  harmonise  with  it  prevents  it  to  that
extent  from  being  a  whole.  Now  as  the  Personality  is  a
self-realising  holistic  activity  in  us,  it  follows  that  its
immanent  end  and  ideal  is  to  realise  and  develop  itself  as  a
whole,  to  establish  and  secure  its  wholeness,  and  to  render
itself  proof  against  invasion  and  injury  from  all  extraneous


XI  FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS  303

and  hostile  influences.  It  cannot  do  this  by  cutting  itself  off
from  the  environment  on  which  it  is  dependent  for  the
material  which  it  requires  for  its  sustenance  and  self-realisa¬
tion.  It  can  do  this  only  by,  on  the  one  hand,  developing
and  strengthening  its  power  of  assimilating  and  making  an
integral  part  of  itself  all  the  materials  which  are  necessary
for  its  requirements,  and,  on  the  other,  rejecting  all  un¬
assimilated  extraneous  materials  which  come  to  it  without
being  incorporated  into  it  as  a  whole.  In  other  words,  it
aims  at  efficiency  and  purity — the  assimilation  or  making  its
own  of  whatever  is  required  for  its  self-development,  and  the
rejection  of  all  influences  or  materials  whioh  are  extraneous
to  its  wholeness,  which  would  be  alien  and  impure  to  that
wholeness.

The  term  “purity”  is  here  used  in  the  same  sense  in
which  the  German  “Reinheit”  is  often  used,  to  indicate
the  absence  of  matters  or  influences  which  are  alien  or  non-
homogeneous  or  extraneous  to  the  thing  in  question.  A
thing  is  called  pure  when  it  is  free  from  such  alien  or  ex¬
traneous  or  adventitious  elements  as  are  considered  destruc¬
tive  of  its  integrity  and  simple  transparency  or  homogeneity.
This  seems  to  be  the  fundamental  meaning  of  the  term
“purity.”  Its  moral  meaning  as  freedom  from  vice,  or
hygienic  application  as  cleanliness  or  freedom  from  dirt  are
essentially  derivative.  If  an  object  is  itself  and  nothing
but  itself,  without  the  adherence  of  any  adventitious  matter
foreign  to  it,  it  will  be  pure  or  clean  in  the  fundamental
sense.  If  a  person  keeps  out  of  his  nature  any  warring  or
jarring  elements  or  complications,  keeps  himself  free  of  all
moral  or  spiritual  entanglements,  and  is  nothing  but  himself
— whole,  simple,  integral  and  sincere — he  will  also  be  pure
in  the  vital  holistic  sense.  The  food  which  enters  the  or¬
ganism  as  alien  material  is  destroyed  as  such  in  the  process
of  metabolism  and  is  assimilated  as  blood  and  other  sub¬
stances  and  goes  to  feed  the  organic  system  and  to  form  an
essential  part  of  it.  And  similarly  the  Personality  through
perception,  intuition,  conception  and  emotion,  etc.,  assimi¬
lates  the  influences  of  its  environment  and  works  them  up


3°4


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


into  its  own  substance — its  inner  world  of  thought  and  will
and  emotion.  And  the  more  thoroughly  this  mental  or  per¬
sonal  assimilation  is  carried  out,  the  richer  and  more  distinc¬
tive  the  Personality  is.  The  wider  the  range  of  its  acquisi¬
tions,  the  more  powerful  and  thorough  the  intellectual  and
emotional  assimilation,  the  more  complex  and  the  grander  is
the  Personality.

Here  then  we  reach  the  central  idea  and  function  of  the
Personality.  Like  organism,  only  in  a  far  more  complex
and  developed  form,  it  is  a  whole,  with  an  interior  conscious
self-direction  of  all  its  component  functions;  with  a  power
of  acquisition  from  its  environment  which  is  not  mechanical,
but  really  transforms  all  the  acquired  material  into  trans¬
parent  unity  with  its  own  nature.  It  is  a  whole  which  in  its
unique  synthetic  processes  continuously  performs  that  great¬
est  of  all  miracles,  the  creative  transmutation  of  the  lower
into  the  higher  in  the  holistic  series.

And,  in  order  to  maintain  the  right  perspective,  let  us  not
forget  that  Personality  is  but  a  specialised  form  of  Holism,
this  Personality  in  all  its  uniqueness  is  still  but  a  function  of
Nature  in  the  wider  sense;  that  in  it  we  see  matter  itself
become  somehow  aglow  and  luminous  with  its  own  unsus¬
pected  immanent  fire;  that  as  Personality  transforms  the
material  into  the  spiritual,  so  regressively  a  deeper  view
discloses  Personality  itself  as  but  a  more  interior  function
of  that  Holism  which  has  been  slowly  evolving  since  the  be¬
ginning  of  the  universe.

In  fact  Personality  in  its  fundamental  activities  illustrates
all  those  functions  which  in  Chapter  VI  we  have  ascribed  to
wholes.  As  a  whole  it  is  creative,  it  is  free,  and  it  is  unified
in  the  highest  sense.  In  that  chapter  the  groundwork  of  the
holistic  categories  was  laid  down,  and  those  categories
themselves  were  derived  from  the  concept  and  nature  of
wholes.  Personality  is  the  highest  type  of  whole  which  we
have  knowledge  of,  and  we  should  therefore  expect  to  find
that  the  holistic  categories  of  Creativeness,  Freedom  and
Wholeness  will  apply  in  a  pre-eminent  degree  to  the  func¬
tions  and  activities  of  Personality.  I  shall  conclude  this


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


3°S


chapter  with  a  brief  statement  of  Freedom  and  Wholeness  or
Purity,  as  illustrated  by  Personality.  The  category  of  Cre¬
ativeness  in  its  full  application  to  Personality  is  best  illus¬
trated  by  the  appearance  of  the  great  artistic,  ethical  and
spiritual  Values  or  Ideals,  which  are  the  creations  of  Holism
on  the  personal  plane.  These  Values  and  the  higher  world
of  the  human  spirit  which  they  constitute  fall  beyond  the
scope  of  the  present  work,  which  is  concerned  more  with  the
laying  of  the  foundations  of  the  holistic  concept  than  with
the  erection  of  the  superstructure.  The  creative  Ideals  of
Holism  in  their  human  aspects,  although  they  give  better
illustrations  of  Holism  than  anything  we  have  discussed  in
this  work,  will  not  be  dealt  with  at  this  preliminary  stage.
I  therefore  proceed  to  discuss  Freedom  and  Purity  in  their
application  to  Personality.

The  creative  power  by  which  both  organism  and  Person¬
ality  metabolise  and  assimilate  extraneous  materials  raises
the  issue  of  Freedom  in  an  obvious  and  natural  way,  and  we
may  briefly  resume  here  what  has  been  said  before  as  to  the
rival  claims  of  Freedom  and  Mechanical  Necessity  in  their
application  to  organic  and  personal  wholes.  In  Chapter
VII  I  have  explained  in  what  sense  and  to  what  extent  the
categories  of  Mechanism  and  Necessity  apply  to  such  wholes.
That  to  a  certain  extent  they  are  mechanisms  falling  within
the  physical  laws  of  Necessity  is  clear;  but  only  to  a  certain
extent.  Beyond  that  Holism  appears  as  a  real  active  factor
in  each  such  whole,  controlling  and  directing  its  physico¬
chemical  energies  towards  definite  ends.

The  free  activity  of  Holism  in  the  organism  and  in  the
personality,  considered  merely  as  an  organism,  does  not
affect  the  mechanical  chain  of  natural  causation.  In  an
organism  the  same  combination  of  physical  causes  produces
the  same  total  of  physical  effects  as  in  any  other  system.
As  we  saw  in  Chapter  VII,  the  law  of  the  conservation  of
energy  holds  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  in  any  other  natural
system.  Holism  does  not  break  the  causal  chain;  it  does
not  override  the  laws  of  physical  causation.  The  laws  of
physics  and  chemistry  are  the  same,  whether  they  are  studied


3o6  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

in  the  growth  of  a  crystal  or  in  the  development  of  a  plant  or
animal.  To  that  extent  and  in  that  sense  Necessity  reigns
in  the  plant  or  animal  no  less  than  in  the  crystal.  But  that
does  not  exhaust  the  matter.  On  the  basis  of  these  natural
conditions  and  factors  Holism  proceeds  to  bring  about  re¬
sults  which  are  impossible  in  the  case  of  mere  mechanisms.
Holism  does  not  annihilate  its  form  of  space  when  it  proceeds
on  its  road  of  inward  development,  but  within  the  limits  and
limitations  of  the  spatial  external  form  it  proceeds  to  the
creation  of  a  new  inner  world.  In  the  same  way  Holism
accepts  its  own  well-known  natural  conditions  and  principles
of  action  when  it  comes  to  develop  inward  organic  or  per¬
sonal  wholes,  but  it  evokes  meanings  and  values  and  results
from  those  conditions  which  would  have  been  impossible  on
the  plane  of  the  merely  spatial  or  mechanical.  Holism,  while
in  no  sense  overriding  natural  factors  which  are  but  an  earlier
phase  of  its  own  activities,  develops  inside  and  through
those  factors  the  individual  wholes  of  organism  and
Personality.  Similar  causes  produce  similar  effects  under
similar  conditions:  that  is  a  statement  of  natural  law.  But
the  miracle  of  Holism  is  performed  in  that  infinitely  small
or  timeless,  spaceless  interval  which  elapses  between  cause
and  effect.  Hence  whereas  on  the  physico-chemical  plane
cause  A  is  followed  by  effect  B,  in  the  case  of  an  organism
the  operation  of  Holism  is  seen  in  that  cause  A  is  followed
not  only  by  effect  B,  but  also  by  a  new  non-mechanical
element  X  of  a  holistic  character  in  the  shape  of  what  is
ordinarily  called  life  or  sensation,  organic  or  mental  activity.
Organism  as  a  whole  is  not  merely  a  link  in  the  chain  of
natural  causation,  but  is  itself  an  absorber,  assimilator  and
transformer  of  causes  on  the  way  to  their  effects.  And  this
active  free  power  of  absorption,  assimilation  and  transforma¬
tion  is  evidenced  not  only  in  the  creative  appearance  of  the
new  vital  or  mental  element  X,  but  also  in  the  natural  sense
of  freedom  which  accompanies  this  activity  in  personal
consciousness.  A  causal  stimulus  applied  externally  to  an
organism  does  not  merely  result  in  some  mechanical  move-


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


307


ment,  but  between  the  stimulus  and  the  resulting  movement
a  whole  new  world  intervenes,  which  transforms  the  stimulus
into  the  state  of  the  organism,  and  makes  the  resulting
movement,  not  the  mere  mechanical  effect  of  that  cause,
but  the  free  action  of  the  organism.  The  organism  absorbs
the  cause  as  mere  material,  and  emits  the  movement  as  the
resulting  action  of  itself  as  the  real  cause.  This  trans¬
formation  not  only  is  seen  to  happen  in  the  case  of  the  lower
organisms,  but  is  revealed  and  interpreted  in  human  con¬
sciousness  as  what  actually  does  take  place.  Consciousness
interpolates  the  self  between  all  causal  stimulus  and  all  re¬
sulting  response,  and  reveals  the  self  as  the  free  creator  or
prompter  of  the  response  after  it  has  absorbed  the  stimulus.
Accordingly,  as  we  saw  in  Chapter  VI,  freedom  arises  cre¬
atively  inside  the  process  of  natural  causation.

The  spontaneous  self-activity  of  the  organism  in  the
assimilation  of  material  necessary  for  its  nutrition  and  de¬
velopment  shows  that  it  is  free  as  an  organic  whole;  while
the  assimilation  and  transformation  of  that  material  and  the
reference  of  any  resulting  movements  or  responses  to  the
organism  as  their  originating  and  determining  cause  show
that  freedom  or  self-determination  from  another  point  of
view.  There  is  no  such  spontaneity  nor  such  power  of
creative  assimilation  in  any  mere  mechanical  aggregate;  in
so  far  as  an  organism  is  a  whole,  it  is  also  a  free  self-deter¬
mining  agent  in  the  activity  which  dissolves  and  assimilates
extraneous  influences  or  materials  and  substitutes  freedom
for  causal  necessity.

We  thus  see  that  Freedom  has  its  roots  deep  down  in  the
foundations  and  constitution  of  the  universe.  It  is  a  pro¬
found  mistake  to  look  for  Freedom  only  in  the  human  will.
The  correct  and  fruitful  view  discloses  Freedom,  not  as  an
exceptional  development  in  the  universe,  as  an  attribute
merely  of  the  ’human  will,  but  as  itself  in  one  degree  or
another  the  grand  rule  of  the  universe,  as  the  free  self-
determined  activity  of  Holism  in  its  universal  process  of
self-realisation  in  Evolution,  and  as  the  fundamental  prin-


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


308


ciple  of  each  individual  whole  set  free  in  the  course  of  this
Evolution.  As  Holism  in  its  individuating  activity  evolves
and  sets  free  smaller  wholes,  these  wholes  are  themselves
in  ever-increasing  measures  set  free  from  external  deter¬
mination  and  acquire  an  ever  greater  measure  of  self-
determination  and  freedom  in  their  activities  and  develop¬
ment.  Holism  not  only  means  the  development  of  the
universe  on  holistic  lines,  the  realisation  of  ever  more
perfect  wholes,  and  the  assimilation,  transformation  and
absorption  of  non-holistic  material  or  relations.  It  means
also  the  ever-widening  reign  of  Freedom,  the  realisation
of  the  Ideal  of  Freedom  in  the  gradual  breaking  down  of
all  external  fetters,  and  the  gradually  increasing  inward
self-determination  of  the  universe  through  the  progres¬
sive  evolution  of  ever  higher  holistic  entities  in  the  universe.
This  free  holistic  activity  is  not  only  the  source  of  the  idea
of  causation  in  human  consciousness;  it  is  ultimately  the
only  source  of  efficient  action  or  causation  in  the  universe.
The  free  activity  of  Holism  or  a  whole  is  the  type  and
source  of  all  efficient  causation.  The  concept  of  neces¬
sity,  which  arises  in  connection  with  that  of  causation,  is
not  grounded  in  the  reality  of  things,  but  is  (as  Kant
showed)  a  mere  mental  expedient  for  joining  up  or  recon¬
necting  parts  of  the  whole  which  have  become  dissociated  or
severed  in  the  course  of  thought  or  experience.  The  syn¬
thetic  activity  of  mind,  in  producing  the  category  of  neces¬
sity,  is  simply  intended  to  recover  or  reconstitute  intellect¬
ually  that  whole  which  has  been  shattered  into  fragments  in
experience  and  thought;  and  as  mind  is  itself  but  part  of
the  larger  whole  of  Personality,  this  intention  can  only
be  carried  out  imperfectly.  In  the  whole  Freedom  and
Causation,  or  rather  efficient  action,  are  not  utterly
different;  their  antagonism  arises  only  in  the  application
of  consciousness  to  the  atomic  aspects  of  our  empirical
experiences.  Determinism  is  in  the  last  resort  based  on
free  holistic  self-determination.  We  may  sum  up  by
saying  that  'Holism  is  free,  and  in  so  far  as  Holism  has
realised  itself  in  the  universe,  in  so  far  as  the  universe  is  of


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


309


a  holistic  character  and  consists  of  holistic  entities,  to  that
extent  the  universe  and  these  entities  are  themselves  free.

But  Personality  is  the  highest  type  of  such  holistic  entities.
We  may  therefore  say  that  Personality  as  a  whole  is  free;
the  more  completely  it  realises  the  character  of  a  whole,  the
more  perfect  also  will  be  its  freedom  as  such.  The  freedom
of  the  Personality  is  simply  its  character  of  pure  self-activity,
untrammelled  by  external  influences,  its  character  of  spon¬
taneous  or  conscious  self-determination  by  virtue  of  which
all  its  actions  flow  from  the  pure  source  of  self  and  are  not
pressed  or  forced  on  it  by  unassimilated  external  conditions
or  causes  alien  to  itself,  and  which  have  not  been  trans¬
formed  into  unity  with  itself.  Sincere  self-expression  in
men  and  in  nations  thus  becomes  the  true  ideal  of  human
development  and  culture.

Freedom  is  thus  not  a  mere  abstract  formal  concept,  but
a  real  activity;  it  is  the  limits  within  which  Holism  moulds
and  develops  the  individual  Personality.  In  proportion  as
the  Personality  is  holistic,  it  is  rich  in  the  characters  of  self-
direction  and  self-determination;  in  other  words,  it  is  free.
Moral  Freedom  is  thus  a  form  of  the  holistic  activity  of
Personality.

It  will  be  seen  that  we  predicate  Freedom,  not  of  the  Will,
but  of  the  Personality  itself.  However  important  and  in¬
deed  fundamental  an  aspect  of  Personality  the  will  is,  yet
it  is  merely  an  aspect  and  not  the  whole  of  Personality.
Freedom  is  wider  than  the  will;  the  spontaneity  of  con¬
sciousness  itself,  and  of  the  mind  in  its  various  constructive
or  creative  activities,  shows  that  Freedom  is  not  limited  to
the  will,  but  characterises  also  other  forms  of  personal  activ¬
ity.  In  fact  Freedom  is  not  an  attribute  of  mere  parts  or
aspects  but  of  the  whole,  and  therefore  of  Personality  con¬
sidered  as  a  whole.

Most  important  of  all,  we  have  to  point  out  that  Freedom,
like  Personality  itself,  admits  of  degrees  in  its  personal
manifestations.  We  saw  earlier  in  this  chapter  that  Per¬
sonality,  at  the  present  stage  of  its  history,  is  not  yet  fully
developed;  that  it  is  imperfect  as  a  whole  even  in  the  highest


3io


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


individuals,  and  that  it  varies  in  degree  and  intensity  in  all
individuals.  The  power  of  perfect  self-direction,  assimila¬
tion  and  self-orientation  which  would  distinguish  a  perfect
personal  whole  is  only  imperfectly  realised  in  individual
cases;  and  in  the  same  way  there  is  a  corresponding  failure
to  realise  the  perfect  ideal  of  Freedom.

Now  in  proportion  as  the  Personality  fails  to  achieve  the
character  of  a  perfect  whole,  in  the  same  proportion  it  is
merely  mechanical  in  its  action,  and  therefore  in  the  same
proportion  it  becomes  externally  determined  or  un-free  in
its  actions.  The  result  is  that  the  Personality  is  partly  (so
far  as  it  is  a  whole)  free,  and  partly  bound  or  externally
determined — that  is  to  say,  in  so  far  as  it  is  or  behaves  like
a  mechanism.  Thus  the  fuller  and  more  complete  a  Person¬
ality  is  the  greater  its  power  of  central  self-control,  or  the
fuller  its  freedom.  Weak  characters  have  much  less  freedom
than  strong  characters.

Temptation  to  the  strong  Personality  finds  itself  en¬
meshed  in  the  transforming  power  of  a  great  system  of  cen¬
tral  control  which  will  actually  turn  it  into  a  stimulus  to  the
higher  life;  while  the  same  temptation  operating  on  a  weak
Personality  finds  little  to  withstand  its  force,  and  the  re¬
sultant  moral  lapse  is  almost  a  mechanical  equivalent  of  the
temptation.  Freedom  is  characteristic  of  the  Whole  just  as
Necessity  is  characteristic  of  Mechanism;  and  this  is  as  true
in  regard  to  the  moral  action  of  the  human  agent  as  in
abstract  theory.

In  what  sense  is  the  human  agent  free?  In  the  everlasting
controversy  as  to  the  freedom  of  the  will,  it  has  never  been
really  denied  that  the  will  determines  actions;  that  I  can
will  to  do  this  or  that  and  do  it  accordingly.  But  Necessi¬
tarians  and  Determinists  have  contended  that  this  will  is
itself  not  free,  but  determined  by  motives  and  conditions
like  all  other  natural  events;  that  it  is  itself  a  mere  link  in
the  causal  mechanical  chain;  and  that  the  consciousness  of
freedom  is  really  an  illusion.  Supporters  of  the  Free  Will
theory  have,  on  the  other  hand,  contended  that  volitions  are
free,  that  the  will  in  deciding  on  any  course  of  conduct  may


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


3”


act  irrespective  of  motives  or  external  conditions  operating
in  it;  and  that  this  indeterminism  is  borne  out  by  our  con¬
sciousness  of  freedom  of  choice  between  various  alternatives.
Against  this  view  there  is  not  only  the  scientific  evidence,
but  also  the  feeling  that  Freedom  in  this  sense  of  unmoti¬
vated  decision  would  be  an  exceptional  capricious  element
in  the  orderly  procedure  of  the  universe.  Capricious  indi¬
vidual  behaviour  seems  unworthy  of  such  a  world,  and  would
certainly  not  accord  with  Holism  such  as  we  see  it  in  the
course  of  cosmic  Evolution.  In  trying  to  arrive  at  the  cor¬
rect  view,  we  must  on  the  one  hand  discard  mere  physical
determinism  as  being  purely  mechanical  and  in  conflict  with
Holism  in  its  organic  and  personal  forms;  and  on  the  other
we  must  recognise  the  universal  orderly  character  of  Holism,
which  does  not  admit  of  particular  or  individual  caprice.
And 'in  this  way  we  arrive  at  the  idea  of  holistic,  as  dis¬
tinguished  from  physical  or  mechanical,  determinism.  The
Whole,  and  Personality  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  whole  expressive
of  the  individuating  activity  of  Holism,  are  not  and  cannot
be  mechanically  determined;  they  are  self-determined  in
their  characters  as  wholes.  In  other  words,  theirs  is  holistic
as  distinguished  from  mechanical  determination.  Freedom,
not  in  the  sense  of  individual  caprice  of  choice,  but  in  the
sense  of  self-determination  of  a  whole,  or  holistic  determin¬
ism,  is  an  inherent  character  of  Personality,  and  flows  from
the  very  nature  of  Holism.  In  so  far,  however,  as  any
human  being  is  deficient  in  Personality  his  actions  also  tend
to  be  a  mechanical  reflex  of  impulses  and  external  con¬
ditions,  and  to  that  extent  to  lose  the  character  of  true
freedom.

It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing  that  Freedom  is  not  merely
a  concept  but  becomes  an  ethical  and  personal  ideal.  Free¬
dom  is  the  full  measure  of  self-realisation  which  each  human
being  by  its  nature  aspires  to.  It  is  not  yet  a  firm  possession
of  Personality.  No  doubt  all  Personality  has  it  in  some
degree,  just  as  every  organism  has  it  in  a  lower,  more
primitive  form.  But  the  freedom  of  a  Personality  is  the
measure  of  its  development  and  self-realisation.  It  is  the


312


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


active  power  which  secures  the  imperial  legislative  authority
of  the  Personality,  not  only  over  its  own  rebellious  impulses
and  tendencies,  but  even  over  the  fleeting  evanescent  forms
of  thought  and  experience.  In  the  ideal  Personality  Liber-
tas  and  Imperium  are  identical.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  supreme
prize  to  be  contended  for  in  the  striving  of  each  human
being;  and  the  extent  of  its  inward  realisation  denotes  the
measure  of  the  victory  attained.  To  be  a  free  Personality
represents  the  highest  achievement  of  which  any  human
being  is  capable.  The  Whole  is  free;  and  to  realise  whole¬
ness  or  freedom  (they  are  correlative  expressions)  in  the
smaller  whole  of  individual  life  not  only  represents  the
highest  of  which  the  individual  is  capable,  but  expresses  also
what  is  at  once  the  deepest  and  the  highest  in  the  universal
movement  of  Holism.

So  much  in  regard  to  Freedom  as  the  form  and  measure
of  personal  development.

The  problem  of  Purity  is ‘at  bottom  identical  with  that  of
Freedom;  they  are  both  but  aspects  of  Wholeness.  But
while  Freedom  concerns  the  power  of  the  Personality  and
means  strength  as  against  weakness,  Purity  means  the  har¬
mony  of  the  Personality  through  the  elimination  of  alien
elements  and  the  co-ordination  of  all  the  personal  tendencies
in  one  harmonious  whole  of  the  spirit.  A  pure,  free,  homo¬
geneous  spirit  is  the  ideal  of  Personality.

So  long  as  disharmonies  exist  in  the  Personality  and
conflicts  arise  between  different  tendencies  in  it,  so  long  the
Personality  will  fall  below  its  ideal  of  a  pure  homogeneous
Whole.  That  ideal  will  be  attained  only  when  in  the  prog¬
ress  of  personal  development  harmony  and  internal  peace
have  been  secured.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  only
manner  in  which  this  peace  is  possible  is  by  the  elimination
or  absorption  of  all  the  lower  or  earlier  phases  of  personal
evolution  and  the  survival  of  the  later  higher  phases.  The
Ideal  Man  will  not  be  devoid  of  those  passions  and  emo¬
tions  which  ordinarily  war  against  the  higher  tendencies  and
aspirations  of  the  Personality.  But  in  the  Ideal  Man  they
will  not  cause  conflict  by  contending  for  a  dominating  posi-


XI


FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS


3i3


tion  in  the  Personality;  they  will  be  relegated  to  the  sub¬
ordinate  position  to  which  their  more  primitive  crude  char¬
acter  entitles  them.  In  the  Ideal  Man  the  discords  of  ethical
life  will  be  composed,  because  there  will  be  a  harmonious
correlation  of  higher  and  lower;  the  harmony  will  be  the
richer  in  proportion  to  the  variety  of  elements  which  have
been  conserved  and  will  thus  combine  to  produce  it.  It
takes  all  sorts  to  make  the  little  world  of  Personality.  The
unity  of  character  which  the  holistic  movement  aims  at  does
not  involve  the  destruction  of  the  lower  by  the  higher  ethical
factors,  but  the  clear  undisputed  hegemony  of  the  latter  over
the  former,  and  the  reduction  of  the  former  to  a  subordinate
or  servile  position  in  the  whole.  It  is  this  combination,  in
a  harmonious  form,  of  all  grades  of  ethical  evolution  in  the
ideal  Personality  which  will  make  it  truly  human,  while  at
the  same  time  it  will  be  expressive  of  the  universal  order.
To  secure  that  harmony  ought  to  be  the  supreme  aim  of  the
ethical  individual.

From  these  remarks  it  will  be  clear  how  important  a  part
moral  discipline  plays  in  the  furtherance  of  the  evolutionary
holistic  scheme.  The  life  of  the  moral  individual  does  not
drift  smoothly  on  like  that  of  the  happy  gods,  but  is  a  con¬
stant  gymnastic  effort  to  strengthen  the  higher  and  to  secure
its  dominance  over  the  lower  tendencies.  The  spiritual
sublimation  of  the  lower  into  the  higher  becomes  the  con¬
stant  unremitting  effort.  The  mechanical  operation  of
Natural  Selection  is  supplemented  on  the  ethical  plane  by
the  conscious  co-operation  of  those  powers  and  agencies
which  have  been  evolved  in  the  higher  evolutionary  pro¬
cesses.  The  contest  is  no  longer  left  to  be  carried  on  by  the
blind  activity  of  natural  forces  and  animal  instincts;  but
reason  and  conscience  take  a  deliberate  hand  in  the  great
issue  of  Holism.  The  progress  of  Holism  involves  that
mere  Naturalism  shall  be  superseded  or  at  least  sublimated
at  the  higher  stages  of  evolutionary  progress  into  the  deeper
holistic  factors  which  have  appeared  on  the  scene  in  Person¬
ality.  And  the  object  of  this  conscious  moral  discipline
should  not  be  the  ascetic  suppression  of  primitive  healthy


314


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


human  instincts,  but  their  refinement  and  sublimation,  their
subordination  and  co-ordination  in  the  growing  whole  of  the
Personality  under  the  hegemony  of  the  later  and  higher
ethical  factors.

While  moral  discipline  thus  plays  an  important  part  in
personal  evolution,  it  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that
Personality  should  go  on  for  ever  oppressed  by  an  over¬
powering  sense  of  Duty,  and  should  hear  for  ever  the  thun¬
dering  reverberations  of  the  Categorical  Imperative.  No
doubt  when  the  person  at  his  moral  awakening  or  some  other
moral  crisis  in  his  life,  first  hears  the  trumpet-call  of  Duty,
the  effect  is  tremendous.  But  the  thunder  should  die  away
into  the  still  small  voice  of  the  inner  life;  the  apparently
alien  forbidding  aspect  of  Duty  should  be  assimilated  into
the  quiet  normal  impulses  of  the  Personality;  moral
discipline  should  so  thoroughly  become  second  nature  to  the
ethical  warrior  that  its  effects  will  be  there  without  its
operation  being  felt.  The  Personality  should  reach  such  a
standard  of  purity  and  homogeneity  that  there  will  be  no
alien  stuff  in  it  to  offer  resistance  to  the  promptings  of
Conscience  or  Duty  or  to  cause  friction  or  disquietude  in  the
soul.  The  highly  developed  and  disciplined  Personality,
pure  and  homogeneous  in  itself,  and  in  harmony  with
universal  Holism,  and  thus  finely  responsive  to  all  things
true  and  good  and  fair  in  the  universe,  will  not  only  embody
the  ancient  Greek  ideal  of  au(f>po<rbp,r],  or  moderation  and
self-control,  but  will  also  come  to  realise  both  the  Stoic  and
the  Epicurean  ideal  of  arapa^ia,  or  tranquillity  of  soul,  and
finally  to  know  that  peace  of  God,  passing  all  understanding,
which  is  the  supreme  promise  of  the  Buddhist  no  less  than
of  the  Christian  religion.

The  ethical  message  of  Holism  to  man  is  summed  up  in
two  words:  Freedom  and  Purity.  And  from  what  we  have
just  seen  it  is  clear  that  these  two  grand  ethical  ideals  are
at  bottom  identical.  The  function  of  the  ideal  of  Freedom
is  to  secure  the  inward  self-determination  of  the  Personality,
its  riddance  of  all  alien  obstructive  elements,  and  thus  its
perfection  as  a  pure,  radiant,  transparent,  homogeneous


XI  FUNCTIONS  AND  IDEALS  315

self-activity.  In  other  words,  the  function  of  Freedom  is  to
attain  Purity  in  the  Personality.  And  similarly  the  function
of  the  ideal  of  Purity  is  to  afford  free  play  to  the  inward  self-
determination  and  self-activity  of  the  Personality  by  remov¬
ing  all  external  impediments,  all  stains  and  impurities,  all  vice,
cowardice,  intemperance  and  injustice,  all  evil  and  ugliness;
in  short,  all  elements  alien  to  the  nature  of  the  Personality,
and  thus  to  realise  the  Ideal  of  Freedom  in  the  Personality.

This  statement  differs  considerably  from  the  usual  ways
of  formulating  the  Summum  Bonum  or  Ethical  End.  The
Pleasure  of  the  Hedonist,  the  Good  of  the  Intuitionist,  and
all  the  other  abstract  formulations  of  the  Ethical  End  ap¬
pear  partial  and  one-sided  from  the  holistic  point  of  view.
The  end  of  Personality  does  not  lie  outside  it  but  is  given
inwardly.  As  Goethe  has  so  well  said  of  Life:  “Der  Zweck
des  Lebens  ist  das  Leben  selbst.”  Even  more  truly  one  may
say  that  the  Whole  knows  no  end  beyond  or  outside  itself.
The  object  of  the  holistic  movement  is  simply  the  Whole,
the  Self-realisation  and  perfection  of  the  Whole.  And  the
same  is  true  of  Personality  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  whole.  Its
object  is  to  achieve  self-realisation,  to  realise  its  wholeness,
to  attain  freedom  not  in  a  selfish,  egoistic  sense  but  in  the
universal  holistic  order.  Holistic  self-realisation  is  no
doubt  pleasurable  to  the  individual;  but  the  pleasure  is  a
mere  side  issue  and  by-product,  so  to  say,  of  the  striving
towards  wholeness  in  the  individual  life  and  character,  and
the  same  may  be  said  in  regard  to  all  the  other  particular
ends  and  aims  usually  considered  worthy  of  our  serious  en¬
deavour.  Learn  to  be  yourself  with  perfect  honesty,  integ¬
rity  and  sincerity;  let  universal  Holism  realise  its  highest
in  you  as  a  free  whole  of  Personality;  and  all  the  rest  will
be  added  unto  you — peace,  joy,  blessedness,  happiness,  good¬
ness  and  all  the  other  prizes  of  life.  Nay,  more:  the  great
evils  of  life — pain,  and  suffering,  and  sorrow — will  only  in
the  end  serve  to  accelerate  the  holistic  progress  of  the  Per¬
sonality,  will  be  assimilated  and  transformed  in  the  spiritual
alchemy  of  the  Personality  and  will  feed  the  flame  of  the
pure  and  free  soul.


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap,  xi


316

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  look  upon  the  ideal  of  personal
holistic  self-realisation  as  merely  egoistic.  No  doubt  in  some
cases  the  subjective  selfish  features  may  predominate;  but
earnest  men  will  always  find  that  to  gain  their  life  they  must
lose  it;  that  not  in  self  but  in  the  whole  (including  the  self)
lies  the  only  upward  road  to  the  sunlit  summits.  We
mostly  move  in  the  channels  worn  by  social  usage  or  con¬
vention  and  are  influenced  by  personal  and  social  impulses
such  as  ambition,  patriotism,  love  of  money  or  power.  But
Holism  is  deeper  than  any  of  these.  The  inner  call  of
Holism  is  to  none  of  these  things  in  themselves  and  for  their
own  sake,  but  to  its  own  victory  in  the  personal  life;  to  unity,
freedom  and  free  plastic  power  for  the  Personality;  to  active
moral  efficiency  and  the  suppression  of  harmful  elements
in  the  personal  life:  in  a  word,  to  the  wholeness  and
perfection  of  the  Personality.  The  response  to  that  call  in
the  personal  life  constitutes  the  great  inner  drama,  the  war¬
fare  in  the  Soul,  which  issues  either  in  the  attainment  of
Wholeness  and  Freedom  and  membership  in  the  immortal
Order  of  the  Whole,  or  otherwise  in  defeat,  enslavement  and
death.


CHAPTER  XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE

Summary . — The  fundamental,  seminal  character  of  the  concept
of  Holism  is  bound  to  affect  our  general  views  of  the  nature  of  the
universe,  our  Weltanschauung ,  and  this  chapter  deals  with  this
wider  aspect  of  Holism.

Holism  has  been  presented  in  the  foregoing  chapters  as  the  ulti¬
mate  synthetic,  ordering,  organising,  regulative  activity  in  the
universe  which  accounts  for  all  the  structural  groupings  and  syn¬
theses  in  it,  from  the  atom  and  the  physico-chemical  structures,
though  the  cell  and  organisms,  through  Mind  in  animals,  to  Per¬
sonality  in  man.  The  all-pervading  and  ever-increasing  character
of  synthetic  unity  or  wholeness  in  these  structures  leads  to  the
concept  of  Holism  as  the  fundamental  activity  underlying  and
co-ordinating  all  others,  and  to  the  view  of  the  universe  as  a
Holistic  Universe.

On  a  strict  and  narrow  view  Science  may  consider  the  concept
of  Holism  as  extra-scientific,  as  giving  a  metaphysical  and  not  a
scientific  explanation  of  things.  But  this  would  be  a  mistake  for
three  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  the  conclusion  to  which  Science
is  pointing,  namely,  that  the  whole  universe,  inorganic  as  well  as
organic,  is  the  expression  of  cosmic  Evolution,  necessitates  a
ground-plan  which  will  formulate  and  explain  this  vast  scientific
scheme  of  things.  Mere  pre-occupation  with  detailed  mechanisms
will  no  longer  suit  the  immensely  enlarged  scope  of  present-day
Science.  In  the  second  place,  Science  has  already  had  to  assume
such  ultra-scientific  entities  as,  for  instance,  the  ether  of  space,
as  necessary  to  give  a  coherent  explanation  even  of  purely  physical
phenomena.  And  the  correlation  of  the  physical,  and  organic,  and
psychical  in  one  vast  scheme  of  Evolution  similarly  necessitates
much  more  widely  operative  factors  than  have  been  hitherto  recog¬
nized.  Holism  is  far  more  necessary  for  cosmic  Evolution  than
was  the  ether  for  light  transmission.  In  the  third  place,  Holism
is  essentially  no  more  ultra-scientific  than  are  life  and  mind;  it  is
simply  a  wider  concept  than  either  and  is  the  genus  of  which  they
are  the  species.  And  it  enables  all  the  evolutionary  phenomena
of  Nature  to  be  co-ordinated  under  and  traced  to  the  same  opera¬
tive  factor.


3i7


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


318

The  New  Physics  has  traced  the  physical  universe  to  Action;
and  Relativity  has  led  to  the  concept  of  Space-Time  as  the
medium  for  this  Action.  Space-Time  means  structure  in  the
widest  sense,  and  thus  the  universe  as  we  know  it  starts  as  struc¬
tural  Action;  Action  which  is,  however,  not  confined  to  its  struc¬
tures,  but  continually  overflows  into  their  “fields”  and  becomes  the
basis  for  the  active  dynamic  Evolution  which  creatively  shapes
the  universe.  The  “creativeness”  of  evolutionary  Holism  and  its
procedure  by  way  of  small  increments  or  instalments  of  “creation”
are  its  most  fundamental  characters,  from  which  all  the  particular
forms  and  characteristics  of  the  universe  flow.

The  ignorance  or  neglect  of  these  two  fundamental  characters
accounts  for  the  elements  of  error  involved  in  certain  widely  held
world-conceptions,  such  as  Naturalism,  Idealism,  Monadism  and
Spiritual  Pluralism  or  Panpsychism.  Naturalism  is  wrong  where
it  fails  to  recognise  that  there  is  creative  Evolution,  and  that  real
new  entities  have  arisen  in  the  universe,  in  addition  to  the  physical
conditions  of  the  beginning.  Idealism  is  wrong  where  it  fails  to
recognise  that  the  Spirit  or  Psyche,  although  now  a  real  factor,  did
not  exist  either  explicitly  or  implicitly  at  the  beginning,  and  has
arisen  creatively  in  the  course  of  organic  Evolution.  The  Monad¬
ism  of  Leibniz  and  his  modern  sympathisers,  while  a  great  advance
in  that  it  recognises  the  inward  holistic  element  in  things  and  per¬
sons,  yet  goes  wrong  when  it  attributes  an  element  of  Mind  or
Spirit  to  physical  things  like  atoms  or  chemical  structures.  While
things  are  wholes  they  are  not  yet  souls;  and  the  view  of  the  uni¬
verse  as  a  Society  of  Spirits  ignores  the  fact  that  spirit  is  a  more
recent  creative  arrival  in  the  universe  and  cannot  be  retrospectively
antedated  to  the  earlier  material  phase.  Spiritual  Pluralism  is  a
modern  refinement  of  Monadism  and  similarly  subject  to  the  crit¬
icism  that  it  fails  to  recognize  the  really  creative  character  of
Evolution.

This  is  a  universe  of  whole-making,  not  of  soul-making  merely.
The  view  of  the  universe  as  purely  spiritual,  as  transparent  to  the
Spirit,  fails  to  account  for  its  dark  opaque  character  ethically  and
rationally;  for  its  accidental  and  contributory  features,  its  ele¬
ments  of  error,  sin  and  suffering,  which  will  not  be  conjured  away
by  an  essentially  poetic  world-view.  Holism  explains  both  the
realism  and  the  idealism  at  the  heart  of  things,  and  is  therefore  a
more  accurate  description  of  reality  than  any  of  these  more  or  less
partial  and  one-sided  world-views.

Nature  or  the  Universe  is  sometimes  metaphorically  spoken  of
as  a  Whole  or  The  Whole.  Sometimes  it  is  even  personified,  and
the  trend  of  Evolution  then  becomes  the  Purpose  of  some  tran¬
scendent  Mind.  All  this  is,  however,  unwarranted  by  the  facts  and
unnecessary  as  an  explanation  of  Evolution.  Holism  as  an  inner


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


3i9


evolving  principle  of  direction  and  control  in  all  Evolution  is
enough;  it  underlies  the  variations  which  arise  and  survive  in  the
right  direction,  and  it  creates  in  the  “field”  of  Nature  a  general
environment  of  internal  and  external  control.  The  “wholeness”  or
holistic  character  of  Nature  appears  mostly  in  this  field  or  en¬
vironment  of  Nature,  with  its  friendly  intimate  influences,  and  its
subtle  appeal  to  all  the  wholes  in  Nature,  and  especially  to  the
spiritual  in  us.  The  fact  is  that  the  Holism  in  Nature  is  very
close  to  us  and  a  real  support  in  all  our  striving  towards  better¬
ment.  Our  aspiration  is  its  inspiration,  and  it  is  thus  the  inner
guarantee  of  eventual  victory  in  spite  of  all  set-backs  and  defeats.

This  is  not  a  treatise  on  Philosophy;  not  even  on  the
philosophy  of  Nature;  not  even  on  the  philosophy  of  Evo¬
lution.  It  is  an  exploration  of  one  idea,  an  attempt  to
sketch  in  large  and  mostly  vague,  tentative  outline  the
meaning  and  the  consequences  of  one  particular  idea.  But
that  is  a  seminal  idea;  indeed  it  is  here  presented  as  more
than  an  idea,  as  a  fundamental  principle  operative  in  the
universe.  As  such  it  is  bound  to  affect  our  general  view  of
the  nature  of  the  universe.  I  therefore  come  in  this  con¬
cluding  chapter  to  consider  what  Holism  means  for  our
general  world-view,  our  Weltanschauung ,  and  as  briefly  as
possible  to  sum  up  the  bearing  which  the  argument  of  the
preceding  chapters  must  have  on  such  a  general  conception
of  the  universe.

Holism  has  been  our  theme — Holism  as  an  operative
factor  in  the  universe,  the  basic  concept  and  categories  of
action  of  which  can  be  more  or  less  definitely  formulated.
I  have  in  the  broadest  outline  sketched  the  progress  of
Holism  from  its  simple  mechanical  inorganic  beginnings  to
its  culmination  in  the  human  Personality.  All  through  we
have  seen  it  at  work  as  the  fundamental  synthetic,  ordering,
organising,  regulating  activity  in  the  universe,  operating
according  to  categories  which,  while  essentially  the  same
everywhere,  assume  ever  more  closely  unified  and  syn¬
thetic  forms  in  the  progressive  course  of  its  operation.
Appearing  at  first  as  the  chemical  affinities,  attractions
and  repulsions,  and  selective  groupings  which  lie  at  the
base  of  all  material  aggregations,  it  has  accounted  for


320


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


the  constitution  of  the  atom,  and  for  the  structural
organising  of  atoms  and  molecules  in  the  constitution
of  matter.  Next,  after  some  gaps  which  are  being  ener¬
getically  explored  by  biology  and  bio-chemistry,  and  still
operating  as  a  fundamental  synthetic  selective  activity,
it  has  emerged  on  a  much  higher  level  of  organisation
in  the  cell  of  life,  and  has  again  been  responsible  for  the
ordered  grouping  of  cells  in  the  life-structures  of  organisms,
both  of  the  plant  and  the  animal  type,  and  in  the  progressive
complexifying  of  these  structures  in  the  course  of  organic
Evolution.  The  synthetic  activity  in  these  organic  structures
has  been  so  far-reaching  that  the  independent  existence  of
the  original  unit  cells  has  sometimes  been  questioned,  and  the
organism  has  been  taken  as  the  synthetic  unit,  of  which  the
cell  is  but  a  defined  portion  of  nucleated  protoplasm.1  In
other  words,  the  organic  synthesis  of  cells  has  been  such  as
practically  to  lead  to  the  suppression  of  the  individual  cells
as  such.  Next,  in  the  higher  animals  and  especially  in  man,
Holism  has  emerged  in  the  new  mutation  or  series  of  muta¬
tions  of  Mind,  in  which  its  synthetic  co-ordinating  activity
has  risen  to  an  unheard-of  level,  has  turned  in  upon  itself
and  become  experience,  and  has  achieved  virtual  independ¬
ence  in  the  form  of  consciousness.  Finally,  it  has  organised
all  its  previous  structures,  including  mind,  in  a  supreme
structural  unity  in  Human  Personality,  which  has  assumed  a
dominating  position  over  all  the  other  structures  and  strata
of  existence,  and  has  in  a  sense  become  a  new  centre  and
arbiter  of  reality.  Thus  the  four  great  series  in  reality —
matter,  life,  mind  and  Personality — apparently  so  far  re¬
moved  from  each  other,  are  seen  to  be  but  steps  in  the  pro¬
gressive  evolution  of  one  and  the  same  fundamental  factor,
whose  pathway  is  the  universe  within  us  and  around  us.
Holism  constitutes  them  all,  connects  them  all  and,  so  far  as
explanations  are  at  all  possible,  explains  and  accounts  for
them  all.  Holism  is  matter  and  energy  at  one  stage;  it  is
organism  and  life  at  another  stage;  and  it  is  mind  and  Per¬
sonality  at  its  latest  stage.  And  all  its  protean  forms  can  in

1  Doncaster:  Introduction  to  Study  of  Cytology,  pp.  3-4.


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


321


a  measure  be  explained  in  terms  of  its  fundamental  char¬
acters  and  activities,  as  I  have  tried  to  show.  All  the  prob¬
lems  of  the  universe,  not  only  those  of  matter  and  life,  but
also  and  especially  those  of  mind  and  personality,  which  de¬
termine  human  nature  and  destiny,  can  in  the  last  resort  only
be  resolved — in  so  far  as  they  are  at  all  humanly  soluble —
by  reference  to  the  fundamental  concept  of  Holism.  For  this
reason  I  have  called  our  universe  “the  Holistic  universe,”
as  Holism  is  basic  to  its  constitution,  its  multitudinous  forms
and  its  processes,  its  history  in  the  past,  and  its  promise  and
potency  for  the  future.1

The  scientist,  viewing  my  claims  for  Holism  in  the  dry
light  of  Science,  might  perhaps  feel  tempted  to  demur  to
them.  He  might  object  that  Holism  is  a  mere  assumption
which  may  have  a  philosophical  or  metaphysical  value,  but
that  it  has  no  scientific  importance,  as  it  cannot  be  brought
to  the  test  of  actual  facts  and  experiments.  Holism  as  here
presented,  he  will  say,  is  not  a  matter  for  Science;  it  is  an
ultra-scientific  entity  or  concept.  It  falls  outside  the  scope

1  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  has  made  the  creative  or  emergent
character  of  Evolution  the  theme  of  his  book  on  “Emergent  Evolu¬
tion, ”  and  it  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  I  should  explain  my
relation  to  it.  The  fact  is  that  my  views  had  a  different  origin
from  his,  and  that  they  had  been  matured  and  the  whole  of  this
book  written  before  I  saw  his  interesting  and  suggestive  volume.
The  result  is  that,  in  spite  of  many  surprising  similarities  of  thought,
there  remains  an  essential  diversity  in  our  themes  as  well  as  in  our
emphasis  even  on  those  matters  on  which  we  apparently  agree.
To  him  emergence  of  the  new  in  the  evolution  of  the  universe  is  the
essential  fact;  to  me  there  is  something  more  fundamental — the  char¬
acter  of  the  wholeness,  the  tendency  to  wholes,  ever  more  intensive
and  effective  wholes,  which  is  basic  to  the  universe,  and  of  which
emergence  or  creativeness  is  but  one  feature,  however  important  it  is
in  other  respects.  Hence  he  lays  all  the  emphasis  on  the  feature  of
emergence,  while  I  stress  wholes  or  Holism  as  the  real  factor,
from  which  emergence  and  all  the  rest  follow.  To  me  the  holistic
aspect  of  the  universe  is  fundamental,  and  appears  to  be  the  key  position
both  for  the  science  and  for  the  philosophy  of  the  future.

Besides,  Professor  Lloyd  Morgan  makes  the  psychical  factor  the
correlate  at  all  stages  of  the  physical  factor,  thus  in  effect  getting
back  to  the  Spinozist  position  that  all  bodies,  even  inorganic  matter,
are  animata  in  their  several  degrees.  This  view  seems  to  be  a  rever¬
sion  to  the  preformation  type  of  Evolution  and  to  be  destructive  of
all  real  effective  “emergence.”  In  any  case  it  is  wholly  different  from
the  view  of  creative  advance  consistently  put  forward  in  this
book.


322


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


of  Science,  and  the  explanation  of  things  which  it  purports  to
give  is  not  a  scientific  explanation.  Even  assuming  that
there  is  such  an  activity  as  Holism  at  work  in  the  universe,
it  would  have  no  value  for  Science.  To  be  of  interest  to
Science,  it  must  make  a  difference  to  actual  facts  and  there¬
fore  be  capable  of  experimental  verification.  But  clearly
Holism,  owing  to  its  pervasiveness  and  universality,  cannot
be  so  tested.  As  its  presence  would  not  be  revealed  by  an
examination  of  the  particular  facts,  mechanisms  and  pheno¬
mena  with  which  Science  deals,  it  is  unnecessary  for  Science
to  take  any  further  interest  in  it.

I  hope  I  have  fairly  summarised  the  attitude  which
Science  might  perhaps  feel  impelled  to  adopt  towards  the
claims  I  have  put  forward  on  behalf  of  Holism.  And  I
would  reply  by  pointing  out  what  seems  to  me  to  be  the
weakness  or  rather  the  one-sidedness  and  partialness  in  this
strictly  scientific  attitude.  Science  seems  to  me  to  take  too
narrow  a  view  of  her  sphere  and  functions  when  she  confines
herself  merely  to  details,  to  the  investigation  and  description
of  the  detailed  mechanisms  and  processes  in  regard  to  mat¬
ters  falling  within  her  province.  A  description  of  analytical
'details,  however  true  so  far  as  it  goes,  is  not  yet  a  full  and
proper  account  of  the  thing  or  matter  to  be  described.  It
is  not  enough;  the  details  must  be  supplemented  by  a  de¬
scription  which  will  take  us  back  to  the  whole  embracing
those  details.  The  anatomy  and  physiology  of  a  plant  would
surely  not  be  sufficient  as  a  description  of  the  plant  itself.
No  description  of  the  parts  is  a  complete  description  of  the
whole  object;  it  is  only  a  partial  description,  and  falls  short
of  a  true  and  full  account  in  proportion  as  the  object  par¬
takes  of  the  character  of  a  whole;  where  the  object,  for  in¬
stance,  is  what  I  have  called  a  biological  or  psychical  whole.
We  may  say  generally  that  wherever  an  object  shows  struc¬
ture  or  organisation  (as  every  object  does)  a  full  descrip¬
tion  of  it  would  involve  at  the  very  least  an  account  of  this
structure  or  organisation  as  a  whole,  in  addition  to  its  de¬
tailed  mechanisms  and  functions.  And  where  many  objects
show  similar  or  related  structures,  a  proper  description  would


XII  THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE  323

involve  an  account  of  the  ground-plan  of  organisation  affect¬
ing  them  all.  Thus  in  regard  to  organic  and  inorganic  Evo¬
lution,  where  the  whole  world  of  matter  and  life  and  mind
can  be  grouped  into  progressive  series  of  structures  from  the
beginning  to  the  end,  a  scientific  account  of  the  universe
would  necessarily  involve  the  working  out  of  the  universal
ground-plan  which  expresses  this  Evolution.  And  it  can  but
add  to  the  value  of  such  a  ground-plan  that  it  is  not  merely
descriptive  but  also  attempts  to  be  self-explanatory.  A  plan
or  scheme  is  by  its  very  nature  not  properly  stated  unless  it
is  not  merely  described  but  also  explained  and  accounted  for
as  far  as  possible.  Now  I  ask,  what  else  is  Holism  but  such
an  attempted  ground-plan  of  the  universe,  which  is  of  a
self-explanatory  character,  a  ground-plan  which  makes  the
whole  scheme  the  progressive  operation  and  effect  of  a  given
cause?  It  may  be  objected  that  ultimate  causes  lie  beyond
the  purview  of  Science.  But  even  so  the  descriptive  ground-
plan  of  Holism  would  remain  and  would  challenge  serious
consideration  on  scientific  grounds.  To  me  the  issue  seems
quite  simple.  So  long  as  Science  eschewed  all  wider  view¬
points  (as  she  modestly  did  in  her  earlier  years)  and  confined
her  attention  to  particular  areas  of  facts,  such  as  are  em¬
braced  by  the  separate  sciences,  she  was  quite  entitled  to
look  upon  a  general  explanatory  ground-plan  of  Evolution
as  too  ambitious  for  her  and  as  falling  outside  her  proper
sphere.  But  once  she  abandons  this  sectional  standpoint
and  comes  to  look  upon  the  entire  universe  as  evolutionary
(as  she  now  does),  she  is  bound  to  examine  a  scheme  such  as
is  here  put  forward  on  its  merits  as  falling  within  her  uni¬
versal  province.

Science  has  been  compelled  in  other  instances  to  complete
and  support  her  account  of  detailed  processes  by  the
assumption  of  factors  which  lie  beyond  the  area  of  observa¬
tion,  but  without  which  the  detailed  processes  become  un¬
intelligible.  Thus  the  assumption  of  the  ether  of  space  was
resorted  to  as  the  basis  of  the  undulatory  theory  for  the
transmission  of  radiant  energy.  Although  ether  admittedly
lies  beyond  the  area  of  scientific  observation  and  experi-


324  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

ment,  and  no  test  however  delicate  has  ever  revealed  its
actual  existence,  it  was  long  accepted  as  one  of  the  con¬
ceptual  entities  which  were  necessary  to  complete  the
coherent  system  of  Science,  and  indeed  as  a  real  physical
element  in  the  universe.  It  is  true  that  ether  seems  to  have
fallen  on  evil  days  and  that  its  existence  or  conceptual  neces¬
sity  is  being  more  and  more  questioned  by  various  groups
of  physicists.  But  it  has  admirably  served  its  purpose
as  a  scientific  hypothesis,  and  the  legitimacy  of  such
a  hypothesis  was  never  questioned  by  even  the  most
rigid  school  of  scientists.  And  I  would  submit  that  the  case
for  Holism  is  much  stronger  than  that  for  ether  ever  was,  as
ether  was  meant  to  account  only  for  one  particular  group
of  phenomena  in  physics,  while  Holism  in  the  main  phases
of  its  development  is  necessary  to  account  for  the  facts  and
phenomena  of  Evolution,  both  organic  and  inorganic.  The
plain  fact  is  that,  as  our  intellectual  outlook  widens  and  the
intellectual  horizons  recede  more  and  more,  the  domain  of
Science  is  undergoing  an  ever  greater  expansion,  and  there¬
fore  the  formulation  of  new  principles  and  new  concepts
embodying  them  becomes  necessary  for  the  support  and
the  coherence  of  the  whole  vast  scheme  of  Science.  Science
is  thus  for  ever  encroaching  on  the  domain  of  philosophy  and
the  other  great  disciplines  of  the  Reason  or  the  Spirit,  and
it  becomes  ever  more  difficult  to  confine  her  activities  within
the  old  orthodox  limits.  Holism  no  doubt  breaks  new
ground;  it  is  here  intended  as  the  basis  of  a  new  Weltan¬
schauung  within  the  general  framework  of  Science;  it  is
meant  to  be  the  foundation  of  a  new  system  of  unity  and
inward  character  in  our  outlook  upon  the  universe  as  a
whole.  But  it  does  not  fall  outside  the  province  of  Science
in  the  larger  sense.  And  it  does  not  introduce  strange,  alien
concepts  into  the  sphere  of  Science.

I  would  also  point  out  that  the  scientific  objection  to
Holism  as  above  formulated  would,  in  fact,  be  identical  with
the  objection  which  mechanistic  Science  has  taken  to  life
and  mind  as  operative  factors  in  the  universe — an  objection
which  Science  is  feeling  herself  ever  more  strongly  compelled


XII


THE  HOUSTIC  UNIVERSE


32S


to  overrule.  The  difficulty  to  verify  Holism  in  the  detailed
mechanisms  and  functions  would  be  the  same  as  the
difficulty  to  verify  life  and  mind  as  operative  factors  in
organic  and  human  structures.  Holism  is  really  no  more
than  an  attempt  to  extend  the  system  of  life  and  mind,  with
the  necessary  modifications  and  qualifications,  to  inorganic
Evolution,  and  to  show  the  underlying  identity  of  this
system  at  all  the  stages  of  Evolution.  In  life  the  character
of  the  system  becomes  clear,  in  mind  still  more  so.
That  is  no  reason  to  look  upon  it  as  non-existent  in  the
case  of  matter.  The  facts  submitted  in  the  foregoing  chap¬
ters  disclose  a  more  or  less  connected,  graduated,  evolu¬
tionary  series  covering  the  phenomena  of  matter  no  less
than  of  life  and  mind.  Holism  is  a  concept  and  a  factor
which  formulates  and  accounts  for  the  fundamental  ground-
plan  of  this  series.  It  is  therefore  very  much  of  the  same
order  of  ideas  as  life  and  mind,  and  stands  or  falls  very
much  by  the  same  lines  of  reasoning  as  they.

The  graduated  serial  character  of  the  universe  has  led  to
the  theory  of  Evolution.  But  it  is  clear  that  that  serial
character  opens  up  still  greater  questions  of  sources  and
origins.  A  connected  graduated  system  of  facts  implies
not  only  a  particular  method  of  their  becoming,  such  as  the
theory  of  Evolution  formulates,  but  also  a  common  origin
and  a  common  propelling  force  or  activity  behind  the
system.  In  life  and  still  more  in  mind  we  get  clear  indica¬
tions  of  this  origin  and  this  activity.  All  that  remains  is  to
take  a  wider  view  and  to  bring  all  the  facts  and  pheno¬
mena  of  the  universe  within  the  scope  of  this  common
method  and  origin.  We  then  reach  the  concept  of  Holism
as  embracing  life  and  mind,  but  covering  a  much  wider  area
and  forming,  in  fact,  the  genus  of  which  they  are  the  species.
All  Evolution  then  becomes  the  manifestation  of  a  specific
fundamental,  universal  activity.

Having  thus  attempted  to  vindicate  Holism  as  a  proper
scientific  concept  in  the  wider  sense,  let  us  now  proceed  to
sketch  the  main  distinguishing  features  of  the  Holistic
universe,  in  other  words,  of  the  conception  of  the  universe


326  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

which  results  from  the  principles  discussed  in  the  foregoing
chapters.  The  final  net  result  is  that  this  is  a  whole¬
making  universe,  that  it  is  the  fundamental  character  of
this  universe  to  be  active  in  the  production  of  wholes,  of
ever  more  complete  and  advanced  wholes,  and  that  the
Evolution  of  the  universe,  inorganic  and  organic,  is  nothing
but  the  record  of  this  whole-making  activity  in  its  progres¬
sive  development.  Let  me  briefly  summarise  the  main
points  in  the  preceding  argument  which  lead  up  to  this
result.

We  have  seen  that  this  is  an  essentially  and  wholly  active
universe;  that  its  apparent  passiveness  as  matter  is  nothing
but  massed  energy,  and  that  activity  is  therefore  its  funda¬
mental  character.  Indeed,  energy  itself  is  too  narrow  and
metrical  a  term  to  do  justice  to  this  character  of  the  physical
universe  as  concrete  activity.  Activity  in  time,  energy  mul¬
tiplied  by  time,  Action  as  it  is  technically  called  in  physics,
is  the  physical  basis  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,  and  nothing
besides.  The  universe  is  a  flowing  stream  in  Space-Time,
and  its  reality  is  not  intelligible  apart  from  this  concept  of
activity.  So  much  the  new  Relativity  has  made  us  realise;
and  to  this  conclusion  the  profoundest  reflections  on  the
nature  of  the  universe  also  tend.  For  us,  constituted  as  we
are,  the  universe  starts  and  takes  its  origin  in  Action.  With
deeper  meaning  than  ever  before  we  realise  that  “  Im  An-
fang  war  die  That.”  It  is,  of  course,  conceivable  that  much
lies  beyond  and  back  of  this  beginning  as  it  appears  to  us.
It  may  be  that  the  universe  of  Action  has  itself  evolved
out  of  a  prior  order  which  lies  beyond  human  ken;  that
there  is  an  infinite  regress  of  celestial  Evolution  into  time
past;  and  that  the  physical  universe  as  it  now  appears
to  or  is  conceived  by  us  is  the  evolved  result  of  inconceivable
prior  developments.  We  do  not  know,  and  speculation
would  be  barren  and  futile.

The  physical  stuff  of  the  universe  is  therefore  really  and
truly  Action  and  nothing  else.  But  when  we  say  that,  when
we  make  activity  instead  of  matter  the  stuff  or  material  of
the  universe,  a  new  view-point  is  subtly  introduced.  For  the


xn  THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE  327

associations  of  matter  are  different  from  those  of  Action,  and
the  dethronement  of  matter  in  our  fundamental  physical
conception  of  the  universe  and  its  replacement  by  Action
must  profoundly  modify  our  general  outlook  and  view¬
points.  The  New  Physics  has  proved  a  solvent  for  some  of
the  most  ancient  and  hardest  concepts  of  traditional  human
experience  and  has  brought  a  rapprochement  and  recon¬
ciliation  between  the  material  and  organic  or  psychical
orders  within  measurable  distance.  I  must  refer  to  the
concluding  portion  of  the  third  chapter  for  a  statement  of
this  far-reaching  advance  which  has  been  made  by  Science
within  this  century.  That  is  the  contribution  of  the  New
Physics  to  the  new  outlook.

Action  in  Space-Time  is  necessarily  structural;  indeed
Space-Time  supplies  the  co-ordinates,  the  framework  of
the  Activity  which  is  the  ultimate  stuff  of  the  world.  Space-
Time  is  the  structure;  hence  Action  in  Space-Time,  in  the
first  phase  of  Holism,  is  purely  structural  and  mechanistic,
as  we  saw  in  Chapter  VII.  The  recognition  of  the  funda¬
mental  structural  character  not  only  of  matter  but  of  the
whole  universe  is  the  contribution  of  the  Relativity  theory
to  the  new  outlook.  The  physical  world  thus  becomes  at
bottom  structural  Action,  Activity  structuralised  in  bodies,
things,  events.  Thus  arises  the  apparent  material  universe
which  surrounds  us  and  in  our  bodies  forms  part  of  us.

What  is  the  next  step?  Action  does  not  come  to  a  stop
in  its  structures,  it  remains  Action,  it  remains  in  action.
In  other  words,  there  is  more  in  bodies,  things  and  events
than  is  contained  in  their  structures  or  material  forms.
All  things  overflow  their  own  structural  limits,  the  inner
Action  transcends  the  outer  structure,  and  there  is  thus  a
trend  in  things  beyond  themselves.  This  inner  trend  in
things  springs  from  their  very  essence  as  localised,  impris¬
oned  Action.  From  this  follow  two  important  conclusions.
The  first  is  the  concept  of  things  as  more  than  their  apparent
structures,  and  their  “  fields  ”  as  complementary  to  their
full  operation  and  understanding.  A  thing  does  not  come
to  a  stop  at  its  boundaries  or  bounding  surfaces.  It  is  over-


328  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

flowing  Action,  it  passes  beyond  its  bounds,  and  its  surround¬
ing  “  field  ”  is  therefore  essential  not  only  to  its  correct
appreciation  as  a  thing,  but  also  to  a  correct  understanding
of  things  in  general,  and  especially  of  the  ways  in  which  they
affect  each  other.  I  have  tried,  at  various  points  in  the  fore¬
going  discussion,  to  emphasise  the  great  importance  of  this
concept  of  “  fields  ”  not  only  for  physics  but  also  for  biology
and  philosophy.

The  second  and  more  important  conclusion  is  the  great
fact  and  concept  of  Evolution.  The  inner  character  of
the  universe  as  Action  expresses  itself  in  actuality  as  a
passage,  a  process,  a  passing  beyond  existing  forms  and
structures,  and  thus  the  way  is  opened  up  for  Evolution.
The  actual  character  of  Evolution  can,  of  course,  be  con¬
cluded  and  known  only  from  the  facts,  and  is  not  a  matter  of
logical  inference  deducible  from  the  nature  of  the  universe
as  Action.  But  if  activity  is  the  essence  of  the  universe  we
see  more  easily  why  the  universe  is  evolutionary  and
historical  rather  than  static  and  unchangeable.  There  is  a
passage,  a  process,  a  progress,  but  its  characters  can  only
be  determined  by  a  study  of  the  facts  of  the  passage.  It
may  turn  out  to  be  merely  a  movement  of  combinations  and
groupings;  or  it  may  turn  out  to  be  an  unfolding,  explica¬
tion  and  filling  out,  an  evolutio  in  the  stricter  sense;  or  it
may  turn  out  to  be  a  real  creative  Evolution  such  as  we  have
seen  it  to  be.  Real  Evolution  requires  other  concepts
besides  those  of  Action  and  structure;  and  these  concepts
can  only  be  derived  from  experience.  Thus  the  creative¬
ness  of  Evolution  is  a  conclusion  not  so  much  from  theory
as  from  the  empirical  facts.  And  the  exact  nature  of  this
creativeness  is  unknown  in  some  respects  and  remains  a
problem  for  the  future  to  solve.  A  still  wider  survey  and
closer  scrutiny  of  the  facts  lead  to  the  conception  of  Holism
which  accounts  not  only  for  the  structural  combinations  of
bodies,  things  and  events,  but  for  all  the  progressive  series  of
unities  and  syntheses  which  have  arisen  in  the  cosmic  process.

Assuming  that  Holism  and  the  nature  of  wholes  in  the
universe  have  been  sufficiently  explained  in  the  foregoing


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


329


chapters,  I  now  proceed  to  compare  the  world-view  to  which
Holism  leads  with  those  which  resemble  or  touch  it  at  various
points  and  yet  are  essentially  different  from  it.

The  Holistic  view  agrees  with  the  Naturalistic  con¬
ception  of  physical  science  in  giving  the  fullest  importance
to  the  physical  aspect  of  the  universe.  It  does  full  justice
to  the  structural  and  mechanistic  characters  of  Nature,  and
indeed  it  considers  Mechanism  simply  an  earlier  phase  of
Holism,  and  therefore  perfectly  legitimate  up  to  a  point.
It  affirms  the  validity  of  the  fundamental  laws  and  principles
of  physics  not  only  for  inorganic  bodies  but  also  for
organisms,  in  so  far  as  they  are  material.  It  represents
the  organic  order  as  arising  from  and  inside  the  inorganic
or  physical  order  without  in  any  way  derogating  from
it.  If  in  the  end  it  erects  on  the  physical  a  super¬
structure  which  is  more  and  more  ideal  and  spiritual,  that
does  not  mean  a  denial  of  the  physical.  The  idealism  of
Holism  does  not  deny  matter,  but  affirms  and  welcomes
and  affectionately  embraces  it.  If  Holism  begins  as  real¬
ism  and  ends  as  idealism,  it  does  not  spurn  or  deny  its
own  past;  in  Holism  both  realism  and  idealism  have
their  proper  place  and  function  and  indeed  find  their  justi¬
fication  and  reconciliation.  It  breaks  with  Naturalism  only
at  the  point  where  Naturalism  becomes  purely  materialistic,
and  in  effect  denies  the  creative  plasticity  of  Nature,  presents
Nature  as  an  anatomical  museum,  as  a  collection  of  dead  and
dried  disjecta  membra,  instead  of  the  interwoven  body  of
living,  creative,  progressive  unities  and  syntheses  which  she
essentially  is.  Naturalism  represents  the  universe  as  a  vast
reservoir  of  energy,  unalterable  in  amount  but  steadily
deteriorating  in  character,  subject  to  immutable  laws  and
fixed  equations  which  prevent  anything  essentially  new  from
ever  arising  or  having  arisen.  It  thus  negatives  the  concept
of  creative  Evolution  except  as  a  mere  figure  of  speech.
It  presents  life  and  mind  as  mere  wandering  insubstantial
shadows  on  the  shores  of  this  ocean  of  energy;  the  great
Mirage  of  Evolution  broods  over  the  waters;  and  Man
himself,  so  far  from  being  a  creative  factor  in  reality  as  a


33°


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


whole,  becomes  an  impotent  spectator  of  this  melancholy
scene,  wrapped  up  in  the  illusions  of  his  own  self-con¬
sciousness.  Such  a  view  of  the  universe  seems  to  me  hope¬
lessly  one-sided  and  distorted,  and  comes  into  direct  conflict
with  large  and  important  bodies  of  facts  of  experience  which
cannot  be  denied  or  reasoned  away.  To  me  the  rock  on
which  Naturalism  must  split  is  the  fact  of  creative  Evolution.
In  the  first  chapter  I  pointed  out  that  the  old  materialistic
Naturalism  is  inconsistent  with  a  clear  and  frank  recognition
of  the  great  fact  of  Evolution,  and  in  the  body  of  this  work
I  have  tried  to  drive  the  point  further  home.

Creativeness  is  the  key-word  and  the  key-position,  not
only  as  far  as  Naturalism  is  concerned,  but  also  as  regards
those  other  world-conceptions  which  are  most  hostile  to
Naturalism,  such  as  the  various  modern  forms  of  Spiritual
Idealism.  Naturalism  imposes  the  past  on  the  present  and
the  future;  Idealism,  again,  imposes  the  present  and  the
future  on  the  past.  Both  implicitly  deny  that  creative
Evolution  which  shows  the  universe  historically  as  a  gradual
transformation,  as  a  real  creative  process  moving  from  the
real  structures  of  the  past  to  the  real  structures  of  the
future;  and  therefore  as  a  system  which  in  its  historical
development  embraces  and  gives  justification  to  both  con¬
trasted  points  of  view.  To  view  the  ideal  or  spiritual
element  in  the  universe  as  the  dominant  factor  is  to  ignore
the  fact  that  the  universe  was  before  ever  the  ideal  or
spiritual  had  appeared  on  the  horizon;  that  the  ideal  or
spiritual  is  a  new  and  indeed  recent  creation  in  the  order  of
the  universe,  that  it  was  not  implicit  in  the  beginnings  and
has  not  been  reached  by  a  process  of  unfolding;  but  that
from  a  real  pre-existing  order  of  things  it  has  been  creatively
evolved  as  a  new  factor;  and  that  its  importance  to-day
should  not  be  retrospectively  antedated  to  a  time  when  the
world  existed  without  it.  Where  was  the  Spirit  when
the  warm  Silurian  seas  covered  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  the
lower  types  of  fishes  and  marine  creatures  still  formed  the
crest  of  the  evolutionary  wave?  Or  going  still  further
back,  where  was  the  Spirit  when  in  the  Pre-Cambrian


xn


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


33i


system  of  the  globe  the  first  convulsive  movements  threw
up  the  early  mountains  which  have  now  entirely  disappeared
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  when  the  living  forms,  if
any,  were  of  so  low  a  type  that  none  have  been  deciphered
yet  in  the  geological  record?  Where  was  the  Spirit  when  the
Solar  System  itself  was  still  a  diffuse  fiery  nebula?  The
evolutionary  facts  of  Science  are  beyond  dispute,  and  they
support  the  view  of  the  earth  as  existing  millions  of  years  be¬
fore  ever  the  psychical  or  spiritual  order  had  arisen;  and
what  is  true  of  the  earth  may  be  similarly  true  of  the  universe
as  a  whole.  The  fact  that  we  have  to  grasp  firmly  in  connec¬
tion  with  creative  Evolution  is  that,  while  the  spiritual  or
psychical  factor  is  a  real  element  in  the  universe,  it  is  a  com¬
paratively  recent  arrival  in  the  evolutionary  order  of  things;
that  the  universe  existed  untold  millions  of  years  before  its
arrival ;  and  that  it  is  just  as  wrong  for  Idealism  to  deny  the
world  before  the  appearance  of  Spirit,  as  it  is  for  Naturalism
to  deny  Spirit  when  eventually  it  did  appear  in  the  world.

Creative  Evolution  seems  to  move  forward  by  small  steps
or  instalments  or  increments  of  creativeness.  Why  there
should  be  this  discontinuity  rather  than  a  smooth  con¬
tinuous  advance  we  cannot  say;  we  can  but  note  the  fact,
which  seems  to  be  a  universal  phenomenon.  Not  only  does
matter  in  its  atomic  and  elemental  structure  show  this
minute  discontinuity,  but  the  electric  elements  in  the  atom,
and  in  the  electric  current  generally,  and  the  quanta  of  heat
and  radiant  energy  show  the  same  remarkable  feature.
Thus  the  unit  character  of  Action  and  Structure  is  repro¬
duced  in  the  unit  character  of  Evolution  and  of  nuclear
change  in  the  cell.  There  is  real  creation  as  distinct  from
mere  combinations  of  pre-existing  units  or  mere  unfolding
of  implicit  elements;  but  this  creation  is  not  consummated
in  one  supreme  creative  Act;  nor  is  it  evenly  and  uniformly
distributed  throughout  all  time.  Its  distribution  is  un¬
evenly  spread  in  minute  parcels  over  the  whole  almost
infinite  range  of  Evolution.  Evolution  thus  becomes  a
long-drawn-out  process  of  creation,  in  which  the  new  for
ever  arises  by  slow  and  minute  increments  from  the  old,  or


332


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


rather  by  way  of  the  old,  as  it  is  not  known  how  the  new
actually  arises  from  the  old.  As  I  have  explained  in  Chapter
VII,  Holism  is  the  presiding  genius  of  this  advance.  It  deter¬
mines  the  direction  of  the  advance,  and  it  incorporates  the
new  element  of  advance  synthetically  with  the  pre-existing
structure.  It  thus  harmonises  the  old  and  the  new  in  its
own  unity;  it  synthesises  Variation  and  Heredity;  and  by
slow  degrees  and  over  enormous  periods  of  time  carries
forward  the  creative  process  from  the  most  simple,  primitive,
inorganic  beginnings  to  the  most  exalted  spiritual  creations.
From  the  atom  to  the  Soul,  from  matter  to  Personality  is  a
long  way,  marked  by  innumerable  steps,  each  of  which
involved  a  real  creative  advance  and  added  something
essentially  new  to  what  had  gone  before.  Such  seems  to  be
the  nature  of  Evolution,  and  it  appears  to  be  fatal  alike  to
the  retrospective  interpretation  of  the  universe  according
to  Idealism,  and  the  prospective  interpretation  according  to
Naturalism.  Mind  or  Spirit  did  not  exist  at  the  beginning,
either  implicitly  or  explicitly;  but  it  does  most  certainly
exist  now  as  a  real  factor.

Another  world-conception  which  may  be  considered  as
having  considerable  affinities  with  the  Holistic  view  is
that  of  Leibniz’s  Monadology.  The  resemblance  is,  how¬
ever,  confined  to  certain  aspects  of  the  respective  central
ideas;  beyond  those  aspects  the  two  views  are  totally  and
essentially  different.  There  is  a  close  resemblance  between
the  central  ideas  of  wholes  and  monads;  that  is  all.  The
unities  and  units  which  exist  in  Nature  seemed  to  Leibniz  to
be  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  interpretation  of  the
universe;  not  the  One  but  the  Many  and  their  intimate
nature  seemed  to  him  to  supply  the  key  to  the  great  riddle.
I  have  in  the  foregoing  reached  the  concept  of  wholes  by  a
different  process  of  reasoning  from  that  followed  by  Leibniz,
but  the  result  looks  very  much  like  that  arrived  at  by  him
along  different  lines.  And  the  convergence  of  the  two  views
from  totally  different  standpoints  would  appear  to  suggest
that  there  is  a  substantial  element  of  truth  and  value  in  the
concept  of  wholes,  as  there  undoubtedly  is  in  the  Leibnizian


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


333


theory  of  Monads.  They  agree  in  having  an  innerness,  in
being  little  worlds  of  their  own,  with  their  own  inner  laws
of  development  and  with  a  certain  measure  of  inner  self-
direction  or  self-conservation  which  makes  them  partial
mirrors  or  expressions  of  the  greater  reality.  But  the
monads  according  to  Leibniz  are  essentially  spiritual  entities
or  selves,  conceived  on  the  analogy  of  the  human  mind,  and
their  activities  are  of  a  purely  psychical  character  such  as
perception.  They  are,  moreover,  absolutely  closed,  isolated,
self-contained  units,  each  with  its  own  immutable  inner
system,  uninfluenced  by  any  other  monad;  and  all  main¬
tained  in  harmony  with  each  other  by  some  divine  pre-
established  order  outside  of  them.  The  greater  and  lesser
selves  of  the  universe  lead  their  own  inner  self-existences,
without  any  contact  between  one  another,  and  only  the
divine  interposition  maintains  a  Pre-established  Harmony
between  them.  There  is  a  scale  of  these  monads,  from  the
lowest  most  simple,  such  as  atoms  or  molecules,  whose  con¬
fused  perceptions  produce  the  world  of  matter,  to  the  highest
most  complex  in  the  universe,  such  as  human  minds,  whose
clear  and  distinct  perceptions  produce  the  world  of  spirit.
God  himself  is  but  the  Supreme  Monad  of  monads  on  this
view.  It  will  be  seen  how  different  this  monadic  conception
is  from  that  of  wholes  developed  in  this  work.  In  the  first
place,  wholes  are  not  all  spiritual  entities,  and  the  world  is
not  a  hierarchy  of  spirits  exclusively,  as  Leibniz  conceived  it.
Spiritual  wholes  are  merely  the  apex  and  crowning  feature  of
the  universe,  while  non-spiritual  (material  or  organic)  wholes
compose  its  earlier  phases.  In  the  second  place,  wholes  are
not  closed,  isolated  systems  externally;  they  have  their  fields
in  which  they  intermingle  and  influence  each  other.  The
Holistic  universe  is  a  profoundly  reticulated  system  of  inter¬
actions  and  inter-connections  rising  into  a  real  society  in  its
later  phases.  In  the  third  place,  genetic  relationships  con¬
nect  the  entire  Holistic  universe.  Wholes  from  the  lowest  to
the  highest  are  akin  and  form  one  great  family,  and  are
derived  from  one  another  in  the  process  called  Evolution.
In  the  fourth  place,  it  is  the  ascertainable  character  of  this


334


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


evolutionary  process  which  holds  all  the  wholes  together  in
one  vast  network  of  adaptations  and  harmonious  co-ordina¬
tions,  and  not  some  mystic  assumed  Pre-established
Harmony.  Leibniz,  while  he  correctly  guessed  the  real
secret  in  his  idea  of  Monads,  missed  yet  the  true  explanation
through  not  having  any  knowledge  of  creative  Evolution,
such  as  the  deeper  science  of  our  day  has  revealed  to  us.
To  him  Evolution  was  a  mere  unfolding  of  an  implicit  con¬
tent;  he  adhered  to  the  traditional  preformation  views  of
his  day  as  well  as  to  the  current  belief  in  the  fixity  of
species.  He  could  not,  therefore,  realise  the  idea  that
monads  were  genetically  related  and  evolved;  and  that  the
order  which  underlay  the  series  of  monads  from  the  lowest
to  the  highest  was  of  a  creative  character.  In  the  absence
of  genetic  relationships  and  creative  Evolution,  he  had  to
make  shift  with  the  notions  of  isolated  inner  selves  and  a
pre-established  harmony.  We  may  therefore  say  that  just
as  both  Naturalism  and  Idealism  are  shattered  on  the  rock
of  creative  Evolution,  so  likewise  the  Monadology,  however
valuable  and  suggestive  in  other  respects,  founders  on  that
same  rock,  which  was,  however,  still  secret  and  undisclosed
to  the  science  of  Leibniz’s  time.  But  for  that  ignorance
who  knows 'whether  Leibniz  might  not  have  elaborated  a  far
more  adequate  and  suggestive  Holistic  conception  than
that  contained  in  this  poor  effort!

The  astonishing  thing  is  that  thinkers  of  our  own  time,
who  are  not  only  conversant  with  the  idea  of  creative
Evolution  but  convinced  adherents  of  it,  fail  to  adjust  their
view-points  to  it.  Thus  the  late  Professor  James  Ward,
who  advocated  the  view  of  Ev.olution  as  epigenesis  or  creative
synthesis,  and  whose  Pluralism  has  close  affinities  to  the
Monadology,  seems  yet  to  have  failed  to  realise  that  his  view
of  Evolution  as  creative  was  in  conflict  with  his  spiritual
Pluralism  or  Panpsychism.  His  Pluralistic  universe  also
consisted  entirely  of  spiritual  monads  or  entities,  and  this
implied  the  possession  of  spiritual  or  psychical  characters
not  only  on  the  part  of  the  higher  monads,  like  persons,  but
also  on  the  part  of  the  most  rudimentary  monads,  such  as


xn


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


335


atoms  and  chemical  compounds.  Spinoza,  who  otherwise
differed  widely  from  Leibniz,  had  also  assumed  that  all
things  were  jn  their  several  degrees  animata,  but  he  had
the  excuse  of  being,  like  Leibniz,  ignorant  of  the  idea
of  creative  Evolution.  But  Ward,  in  spite  of  his  fuller
knowledge,  calmly  follows  Leibniz  and  Spinoza  in  their
error.  The  plain  fact,  of  course,  is  that  psychism  or
spiritualism  can  by  no  stretch  of  language  be  ascribed  to
mere  bits  of  matter  or  energy  or  physical  entities  like  atoms
or  chemical  compounds  without  the  gravest  confusion.
The  very  idea  of  creative  Evolution  or  epigenesis  is  that
both  life  and  mind  are  later  creations  in  the  evolutionary
series,  and  cannot  possibly  be  antedated  to  the  mere  physical
level  of  Evolution.  There  is  not  a  great  Society  of  Spirits
in  the  universe,  of  which  Persons  and  Things,  Souls  and
Atoms  alike  are  members  on  the  same  spiritual  footing.
When  the  term  “  Spiritual  ”  is  stretched  that  far  and  spread
that  thin,  it  loses  all  real  value  and  becomes  a  mere  empty
figure  of  speech.  There  is  indeed  no  such  spiritual  Society
of  the  whole  universe,  but  there  is  the  Holistic  order,  which
is  something  far  greater,  and  stretches  from  the  beginning
to  the  end,  and  through  all  grades  and  degrees  of  holistic
self-fulfilment.  Holism,  not  Spiritualism,  is  the  key  to  the
interpretation  of  the  universe.  Mind  is  not  at  the  begin¬
ning  but  at  the  end,  but  Holism  is  everywhere  and  all  in  all.
If  the  universe  were  a  great  spiritual  Society  of  lower  and
higher  souls  or  spirits,  Evolution  as  creative  would  become
meaningless;  it  would  be  merely  a  process  of  explication  of
the  implicit  spirituality  (if  any)  inherent  in  the  universe.
The  Holistic  view  thus  not  merely  negatives  the  far-reaching
spiritual  assumptions  of  the  Monadology,  or  Panpsychism,
but  it  is  also  in  firm  agreement  with  the  teachings  of  science
and  experience.  Nor  does  it,  in  fact,  detract  from  the  value
or  importance  of  the  universe.  It  but  impresses  on  us  the
necessity  of  that  great  lesson  of  humility  which  is  the  ethical
message  of  Evolution.  It  shows  that  values  should  not  be
confused  with  origins,  and  that  from  origins  the  most  lowly
may  be  raised  values  the  most  exalted  and  spiritual  in  the


336  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

order  of  the  universe.  The  Great  Society  of  the  universe
leaves  a  place  for  the  most  humble  inanimate  inorganic  struc¬
ture  no  less  than  for  the  crowning  glory  of  the  great  soul.  To
conceive  the  universe  otherwise  is  to  indulge  in  anthropo¬
morphism,  which  may  be  pleasing  to  our  vanity,  but  in
reality  detracts  from  the  richness  and  variety  of  the  universe.
The  Holistic  universe  embraces  all  the  real  structures  from
the  lowest  to  the  highest  in  their  own  right  and  as  they  are,
without  decking  them  in  spiritual  habiliments  which  are  alien
to  their  true  nature.  This  world,  in  the  noble  language  of
Keats,  is  indeed  the  valley  of  soul-making;  but  it  could
not  be  that  if  the  valley  itself  consists  of  nothing  but  souls.
To  those  who  have  the  deepest  experience  of  life,  this  world
is  not  only  the  upward  path  for  the  soul,  but  a  very  hard  and
flinty  one.  To  attempt  to  pave  that  rugged  way  with  the
roses  of  the  spiritual  order  would  be  a  profound  mistake
from  every  point  of  view.

To  say  this  is  not  to  assume  that  there  is  anything  alien
or  antagonistic  between  the  human  soul  and  the  natural  en¬
vironment  in  which  it  finds  itself  in  this  world.  There  is
not  only  poetic  value  but  profound  truth  in  the  spiritual
interpretation  of  Nature  to  which  Wordsworth  and  other
great  poets  of  Nature  have  accustomed  us.  And  that  truth
is  not  merely  due  to  the  creative  part  which  mind  plays  in
the  shaping  and  fashioning  of  Nature.  It  is  not  merely
that  we  invest  Nature  with  our  own  emotional  attributes.
It  is,  in  fact,  to  be  traced  to  far  deeper  sources  in  our  human
origins.  For  we  are  indeed  one  with  Nature;  her  genetic
fibres  run  through  all  our  being;  our  physical  organs  connect
us  with  millions  of  years  of  her  history;  our  minds  are  full
of  immemorial  paths  of  pre-human  experience.  Our  ear
for  music,  our  eye  for  art  carry  us  back  to  the  early  begin¬
nings  of  animal  life  on  this  globe.  Press  but  a  button  in  our
brain,  and  the  gaunt  spectres  of  the  dim  forgotten  past  rise
once  more  before  us;  the  ghostly  dreaded  forms  of  the
primeval  Fear  loom  before  us  and  we  tremble  all  over  with
inexplicable  fright.  And  then  again  some  distant  sound,
some  call  of  bird  or  smell  of  wild  plants,  or  some  sunrise  or


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


337


sunset  glow  in  the  distant  clouds,  some  mixture  of  light  and
shade  on  the  mountains,  may  suddenly  throw  an  unearthly
spell  over  the  spirit,  lead  it  forth  from  the  deep  chambers,
and  set  it  panting  and  wondering  with  inexpressible  emo¬
tions.  For  the  overwrought  mind  there  is  no  peace  like
Nature’s,  for  the  wounded  spirit  there  is  no  healing  like  hers.
There  are  indeed  times  when  human  companionship  becomes
unbearable,  and  we  fly  to  Nature  for  that  silent  sympathy
and  communion  which  she  alone  can  give.  Some  of  the
deepest  emotional  experiences  of  my  life  have  come  to
me  on  the  many  nights  I  have  spent  under  the  open
African  sky;  and  I  am  sure  my  case  has  not  been  singular
in  this  respect.  The  intimate  rapport  with  Nature  is
one  of  the  most  precious  things  in  life.  Nature  is
indeed  very  close  to  us;  sometimes  perhaps  closer  than
hands  and  feet,  of  which  in  truth  she  is  but  the  extension.
The  emotional  appeal  of  Nature  is  tremendous,  some¬
times  almost  more  than  one  can  bear.  But  to  explain
it  we  need  not  make  the  unwarrantable  assumption  of
a  universal  animism  or  animatism,  and  invest  inanimate
things  with  souls  kindred  to  our  own.  Evolution,  with  the
genetic  relationships  and  fundamental  kinship  it  implies,
accounts  for  all  this  intimate  emotional  appeal.  The  idea
of  the  universe  as  a  spiritual  Society  of  Souls  is  a  poetical
idealised  picture,  and  not  in  accord  with  the  sober  realistic,
scientific  view  of  the  facts.  This  is  a  universe  of  whole¬
making,  not  merely  of  soul-making,  which  is  only  its  climax
phase.  The  universe  is  not  a  pure  transparency  of  Reason
or  Spirit.  It  contains  unreason  and  contradiction,  it  con¬
tains  error  and  evil,  sin  and  suffering.  There  are  grades
and  gaps,  there  are  clashes  and  disharmonies  between  the
grades.  It  is  not  the  embodiment  of  some  simple  homo¬
geneous  human  Ideal.  It  is  profoundly  complex  and  replete
with  unsearchable  diversities  and  variety.  It  is  the  ex¬
pression  of  a  creative  process  which  is  for  ever  revealing
new  riches  and  supplying  new  unpredictable  surprises.
But  the  creative  process  is  not,  on  that  account,  issuing
in  chaos  and  hopeless  irreconcilable  conflict.  It  is  for


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


338

ever  mitigating  the  conflict  through  a  higher  system  of
controls.  It  is  for  ever  evolving  new  and  higher  wholes
as  the  organs  of  a  greater  harmony.  Through  the  steadily
rising  series  of  wholes  it  is  producing  ever  more  highly
organised  centres  whose  inner  freedom  and  creative
metabolism  transform  the  fetters  of  fate  and  the  contin¬
gencies  of  circumstance  into  the  freedom  and  harmony  of
a  more  profoundly  co-operative  universe.  But  though  the
crest  of  the  spiritual  wave  is  no  doubt  steadily  rising,  the
ocean  which  supports  it  contains  much  more  besides  the
Spirit.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  the  lower  is  not  in
hopeless  enmity  to  the  higher,  but  its  basis  and  support,  a
feeder  to  it,  a  source  whence  it  mysteriously  draws  its
creative  strength  for  further  effort,  and  hence  the  necessary
pre-condition  for  all  further  advance.  Thus  beneath  all
logical  or  ethical  disharmonies  there  exists  the  deeper  crea¬
tive,  genetic  harmony  between  the  lower  and  the  higher
grades  in  the  Holistic  series.

Reference  must  be  made  to  one  more  question  or  set  of
questions  before  we  conclude.  I  have  said  before  that  the
scope  of  this  work  is  limited,  and  that  it  is  not  intended  to
deal  exhaustively  with  the  entire  subject  of  Holism.  But
within  the  limits  of  the  introductory  task'  which  I  have
set  myself  here,  one  problem  remains  to  be  mentioned.  It
is  the  problem  of  The  Whole,  the  great  whole  itself  as  dis¬
tinguished  from  the  lesser  wholes  which  we  have  found  as
the  texture  of  Evolution.  In  other  words,  is  there  a  Whole,
a  Supreme  Whole,  of  which  all  lesser  wholes  are  but  parts  or
organs?  And  if  there  is  such  a  Whole  of  wholes,  how  is  it
to  be  conceived?  Is  it  to  be  conceived  on  the  analogy  of
an  organism,  as  Nature?  Or  is  it  to  be  conceived  on  the
analogy  of  Mind  and  Personality  as  a  Supreme  divine
Personality?  Or  are  both  these  conceptions  inadmissible,
and  is  there  some  other  way  of  conceiving  the  system  of
wholes  in  their  actual  or  possible  synthesis?  These  are
very  difficult  and  thorny  questions,  but  it  is  clear  that  we
cannot  leave  the  consideration  of  wholes  at  the  present  stage
of  our  argument.  For  that  argument  implies  clearly  some-


XII  THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE  339

thing  more  to  complete  it,  even  in  the  preliminary  way  which
is  all  that  is  intended  in  this  work.

Two  points  arise  from  the  preceding  discussion  which
naturally  carry  us  forward  to  the  consideration  of  these
larger  questions.  In  the  first  place,  where  do  we  fix
the  limits  of  a  lesser  whole?  In  a  whole  we  have  in¬
cluded  its  field;  but  how  far  does  this  field  extend?
What  limits  are  there  to  the  field  of  an  inorganic  body,
or  an  organism,  or  a  Personality?  Leibniz  represented
each  monad  as  containing  or  mirroring  the  whole  universe  in
its  own  way  and  from  its  own  particular  angle;  lower
monads,  of  course,  more  imperfectly  than  higher  monads;
but  each  in  its  own  degree  is  a  sort  of  microcosm  or  minia¬
ture  universe.  In  other  words,  each  tiniest  least  monad  is
in  a  sense  cosmic  and  universal.  This  description  would  not
apply  to  a  field.  As  we  have  seen,  a  field  is  of  the  same
character  as  the  inner  area  of  the  whole,  only  more  attenu¬
ated  in  its  force  and  influence,  and  the  farther  it  recedes  from
that  area  the  greater  the  attenuation;  so  that  the  field,
though  theoretically  indefinite  in  extent,  is  in  effect  quite
limited  in  practical  operation.  When  we  come  to  consider
a  group  of  wholes  we  see  that,  while  the  wholes  may  be
mutually  exclusive,  their  fields  overlap  and  penetrate  and
reinforce  each  other,  and  thus  create  an  entirely  new  situa¬
tion.  Thus  we  speak  of  the  atmosphere  of  idea,  the  spirit  of
a  class,  or  the  soul  of  a  people.  The  social  individuals  as
such  remain  unaltered,  but  the  social  environment  or  field
undergoes  a  complete  change.  There  is  a  multiplication  of
force  in  the  society  or  group  owing  to  this  mutual  penetra¬
tion  of  the  conjoint  fields,  which  creates  the  appearance  and
much  of  the  reality  of  a  new  organism.  Hence  we  speak  of
social  or  group  or  national  organisms.  But  as  a  matter  of
fact  there  is  no  new  organism;  the  society  or  group  is  organic
without  being  an  organism;  holistic  without  being  a  whole.
The  mentality  of  a  crowd  as  distinct  from  the  number  of  in¬
dividuals  composing  it  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  changed
and  reinforced  mental  field  which  results  from  the  meeting
of  many  individuals  and  the  fusion  and  heightening  of  their


34o  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

conjoint  fields.  And  the  more  psychic  they  are,  the  more
they  are  under  the  influence  of  strong  passions  or  carried
away  by  some  contagious  idea,  the  more  overpowering  the
common  field  becomes.  The  force  of  the  group  field  is
generally  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  strength  of  the  idea
or  the  passions  in  the  individual  units  composing  the  group.
The  group  field  is  so  to  say  the  multiplication  of  all  the
individual  fields.  The  subject  falls  under  the  study  of
social  psychology  and  is  referred  to  here  only  for  the  pur¬
pose  of  illustration.  We  have  in  such  cases  an  organic
situation  but  not  an  organism.  Groups,  families,  churches,
societies,  nations  are  organic  but  not  organisms.

Taking  all  the  wholes  in  the  world  and  viewing  them
together  in  Nature,  we  see  a  similar  interpenetration  and
enrichment  of  the  common  field.  When  we  speak  of  Nature
we  do  not  mean  a  collection  of  unconnected  items,  we  mean
wholes  with  their  interlocking  fields;  we  mean  a  creative
situation  which  is  far  more  than  the  mere  gathering  of
individuals  and  their  separate  fields.  This  union  of  fields  is
creative  of  a  new  and  indefinable  spirit  or  atmosphere;  the
external  mechanical  situation  is  transformed  into  an  in¬
ward  synthetic,  “  organic  ”  situation  or  atmosphere.  This
“  organic  ”  Nature  seems  in  certain  situations  to  be  alive  to
us,  to  stir  strange  unsuspected  depths  in  us,  to  make  an
appeal  to  our  emotional  nature  which  often  “  lies  too  deep
for  words.”  Thus  we  come  to  consider  Nature  as  an  organ¬
ism;  we  personify  her,  we  even  deify  and  worship  her.  But
the  sober  fact  is  that  there  is  no  new  whole  or  organism  of
Nature;  there  is  only  Nature  become  organic  through  the
intensification  of  her  total  field.  In  other  words,  Nature  is
holistic  without  being  a  real  whole.

Nor  is  it  merely  we  humans,  with  our  intense  psychic
sensitivity,  who  feel  this  appeal  of  organic  or  holistic  Nature.
All  organic  creatures  feel  it  too.  The  new  science  of  Ecology
is  simply  a  recognition  of  the  fact  that  all  organisms  feel
the  force  and  moulding  effect  of  their  environment  as  a
whole.  There  is  much  more  in  Ecology  than  merely  the
striking  down  of  the  unfit  by  way  of  Natural  Selection.


XII


34i


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE

There  is  a  much  more  subtle  and  far-reaching  influence
within  the  special  or  local  fields  of  Nature  than  is  commonly-
recognised  or  suspected.  Sensitivity  to  appropriate  fields
is  not  confined  to  humans,  but  is  shared  by  animals  and
plants  throughout  organic  Nature.

There  is  a  second  point  which  emerges  from  the  fore¬
going  chapters  and  leads  up  to  the  issue  now  under
discussion.

In  Chapter  VII  we  have  spoken  of  a  general  common
trend  of  Evolution,  of  Evolution  as  not  tacking  and  veering
about,  but  as  moving  in  one  general  direction,  as  keeping
a  general  course  and  direction  through  all  the  endless  ages
of  her  voyaging.  How  is  this  to  be  explained?  Here
again  the  expedient  of  personification  is  often  resorted  to
for  the  purpose  of  finding  an  explanation.  It  is  said  that
Evolution  discloses  a  grand  inner  Purpose,  that  Nature  or
the  universe  is  purposive  or  teleological,  and  that  no  other
category  will  do  justice  to  the  great  fact  of  Evolution  as  we
see  it.  But  if  there  is  purpose  there  must  be  a  Mind  behind
that  purpose.  And  thus  Mind  comes  to  be  personified  in
Nature  as  the  source  of  the  great  evolutionary  purpose  which
the  world  discloses.  Cosmic  Teleology  spells  a  correspond¬
ing  transcendent  Personality.  Do  the  facts  warrant  or  neces¬
sitate  such  tremendous  assumptions?  Would  it  not  rather
seem  that  the  whole  basis  of  this  reasoning  is  unsound  and
false?  In  all  the  previous  cases  of  wholes  we  have  nowhere
been  able  to  argue  from  the  parts  to  the  whole.  Compared
to  its  parts,  the  whole  constituted  by  them  is  something
quite  different,  something  creatively  new,  as  we  have  seen.
Creative  Evolution  synthesises  from  the  parts  a  new  entity
not  only  different  from  them  but  quite  transcending  them.
That  is  the  essence  of  a  whole.  It  is  always  transcendent
to  its  parts,  and  its  character  cannot  be  inferred  from  the
characters  of  its  parts.  Now  the  above  reasoning,  by  which
a  supra-mundane  Mind  or  Personality  is  reached,  ignores
this  fact.  Such  a  “  Personality  ”  would  be  creatively  new
and  unlike  the  wholes  which  we  know  and  which  would
constitute  its  parts.  It  would  be  as  different  at  least  from


342


HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION


CHAP.


human  Personality  as  this  again  is  from  mere  organism.  To
call  such  a  new  Transcendent  Whole  by  the  same  name  as
human  Personality  is  to  abuse  language  and  violate  thought
alike.  There  is  universal  agreement  with  the  well-known
argument  of  Kant,  that  from  the  facts  of  Nature  no  inference
of  God  is  justified.  The  belief  in  the  Divine  Being  rests,
and  necessarily  must  rest,  on  quite  different  grounds.  From
the  facts  of  Evolution  no  inference  to  a  transcendent  Mind
is  justified,  as  that  would  make  the  whole  still  of  the  same
character  and  order  as  its  parts;  which  would  be  absurd,
as  Euclid  says.  From  the  facts  neither  an  organism  nor  a
Mind  of  Nature  can  strictly  be  inferred;  still  less  a  Person¬
ality  constituted  by  both.

Nor  is  it  necessary  to  make  these  far-reaching  assump¬
tions.  There  is  indeed  a  great  trend  in  Evolution,  but  it
would  be  wrong  and  a  misnomer  to  call  that  trend  a  purpose,
and  worse  to  invent  a  Mind  to  which  to  refer  that  purpose.
There  is  something  organic  and  holistic  in  Nature  which
shapes  her  ends  and  directs  her  courses.  Without  forming
an  organism  or  a  mind  the  totality  of  wholes  which  compose
Nature  develop  an  organic  field  which  is  sufficient  to  control
her  creative  movement.  As  a  physical  field  has  its  lines  of
force,  so  the  organic  field  of  Nature,  which  results  from  the
creative  interpretation  of  all  fields  of  wholes  composing
her,  has  its  own  structural  curves  of  progress.  In  human
society  we  see  how  the  social  field  or  atmosphere  becomes  a
system  of  control,  a  moulding  influence  to  which  all  incom¬
ing  members  are  subject.  The  individual  in  society  is  born
into  a  vast  network  of  controls,  and  from  birth  to  death
he  never  escapes  its  subtle  toils.  The  holistic  organic
field  of  Nature  exercises  a  similar  subtle  moulding,  control¬
ling  influence  in  respect  of  the  general  trend  of  organic
advance.  That  trend  is  not  random  or  accidental  or  free
to  move  in  all  directions;  it  is  controlled,  it  has  the  general
character  of  uniform  direction  under  the  influence  of  the
organic  or  holistic  field  of  Nature.

And  there  is  more.  Behind  the  evolutionary  movement
and  the  holistic  field  of  Nature  is  the  inner  shaping,  directive


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


343


activity  of  Holism  itself,  working  through  the  wholes  and  in
the  variations  which  creatively  arise  from  them.  We  have
seen  in  Chapter  VIII  that  these  variations  are  not  accidental
or  haphazard,  but  the  controlled,  regulated  expression  of
the  inner  holistic  development  of  organisms  as  wholes.
There  is  Selection,  and  thus  direction  and  control,  right
through  the  entire  forward  movement,  not  only  in  the  origin
of  variations  but  also  at  the  various  subsequent  stages  of
their  “  selection,”  internal  and  external.  This  organic
holistic  control  of  direction,  this  inner  trend  of  the  evolu¬
tionary  process  is  really  all  that  is  meant  by  the  metaphor
of  Purpose  or  Teleology  as  applied  to  Nature  or  Evolution.
To  infer  more  is  in  effect  to  make  the  mistake  of  spiritual
Idealism  and  to  apply  later  human  categories  to  the  earlier
phases  of  the  evolutionary  process.

Thus  it  is  that  when  we  speak  of  Nature  or  the  Universe
as  a  Whole  or  The  Whole,  we  merely  mean  Nature  or  the
Universe  considered  as  organic,  or  in  its  organic  or  holistic
aspects.  We  do  not  mean  that  either  is  a  real  whole  in  the
sense  defined  in  this  work.  We  have  seen  that  the  creative
intensified  Field  of  Nature,  consisting  of  all  physical  organic
and  personal  wholes  in  their  close  interactions  and  mutual
influences,  is  itself  of  an  organic  or  holistic  character.  That
Field  is  the  source  of  the  grand  Ecology  of  the  universe.
It  is  the  environment,  the  Society — vital,  friendly,  edu¬
cative,  creative — of  all  wholes  and  all  souls.  It  is  not
a  mere  figure  of  speech  or  figment  of  the  imagination,
but  a  reality  with  profound  influences  of  its  own  on  all
wholes  and  their  destiny.  It  is  the  olkos,  the  Home  of
all  the  family  of  the  universe,  with  something  profoundly
intimate  and  friendly  in  its  atmosphere.  In  this  Home
of  Wholes  and  Souls  the  creative  tasks  of  Holism  are
carried  forward.  Without  idealising  it  unduly  we  yet  feel
that  it  is  very  near  and  dear  to  us,  and  in  spite  of  all
antagonisms  and  troubles  we  come  in  the  end  to  feel  that
this  is  a  friendly  universe.  Its  deepest  tendencies  are  help¬
ful  to  what  is  best  in  us,  and  our  highest  aspirations  are
but  its  inspiration.  Thus  behind  our  striving  towards  better-


344  HOLISM  AND  EVOLUTION  chap.

ment  are  in  the  last  resort  the  entire  weight  and  momentum
and  the  inmost  nature  and  trend  of  the  universe.

I  have  now  reached  the  end  of  my  argument.  The  re¬
flections  embodied  in  this  work  lie  far  removed  from  the
busy  and  exciting  scenes  in  which  most  of  my  life  has  been
spent;  and  yet  both  of  them  tend  toward  the  same  general
conclusions.  It  has  been  my  lot  to  have  passed  many  of
the  years  of  my  life  amid  the  conflicts  of  men,  in  their  wars
and  their  Council  Chambers.  Everywhere  I  have  seen  men
search  and  struggle  for  the  Good  with  grim  determination
and  earnestness,  and  with  a  sincerity  of  purpose  which  added
to  the  poignancy  of  the  fratricidal  strife.  But  we  are  still
far,  very  far,  from  the  goal  to  which  Holism  points.  The
Great  War — with  its  infinite  loss  and  suffering,  its  toll  of
untold  lives,  the  shattering  of  great  States  and  almost  of
civilisation,  the  fearful  waste  of  goodwill  and  sincere  human
ideals  which  followed  the  close  of  that  vast  tragedy — has
been  proof  enough  for  our  day  and  generation  that  we  are
yet  far  off  the  attainment  of  the  ideal  of  a  really  Holistic
universe.  But  everywhere  too  I  have  seen  that  it  was  at
bottom  a  struggle  for  the  Good,  a  wild  striving  towards
human  betterment;  that  blindly,  and  through  blinding
mists  of  passions  and  illusions,  men  are  yet  sincerely,
earnestly  groping  towards  the  light,  towards  the  ideal  of  a
better,  more  secure  life  for  themselves  and  for  their  fellows.
Thus  the  League  of  Nations,  the  chief  constructive  outcome
of  the  Great  War,  is  but  the  expression  of  the  deeply-felt
aspiration  towards  a  more  stable  holistic  human  society.
And  the  faith  has  been  strengthened  in  me  that  what  has
here  been  called  Holism  is  at  work  even  in  the  conflicts  and
confusions  of  men;  that  in  spite  of  all  appearances  to  the
contrary,  eventual  victory  is  serenely  and  securely  waiting,
and  that  the  immeasurable  sacrifices  have  not  been  in  vain.
The  groaning  and  travailing  of  the  universe  is  never  aimless_
or  resultless.  Its  profound  labours  mean  new  creation,  the
s!ow7  painful  birth  of  wholes,  of  new  and  higher  wholes,  and
the  slow  but  steady  realisation  of  the  Good  which  all
the  wholes  of  the  universe  in  their  various  grades  dimly


XII


THE  HOLISTIC  UNIVERSE


345


yearn  and  strive  for.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  universe  to
strive  for  and  slowly,  but  in  ever-increasing  measure,  to
attain  wholeness,  fullness,  blessedness.  The  real  defeat  for
men  as  for  other  grades  of  the  universe  would  be  to  ease  the
pain  by  a  cessation  of  effort,  to  cease  from  striving  towards
the  Good.  The  holistic  nisus  which  rises  like  a  living
fountain  from  the  very  depths  of  the  universe  is  the  guar¬
antee  that  failure  does  not  await  us,  that  the  ideals  of  Well¬
being,  of  Truth,  Beauty  and  Goodness  are  firmly  grounded
in  the  nature  of  things,  and  will  not  eventually  be  endan¬
gered  or  lost.  Wholeness,  healing,  holiness — all  expressions
and  ideas  springing  from  the  same  root  in  language  as  in
experience — lie  on  the  rugged  upward  path  of  the  universe,
and  are  secure  of  attainment — in  part  here  and  now,  and
eventually  more  fully  and  truly.  The  rise  and  self-perfection
of  wholes  in  the  Whole  is  the  slow  but  unerring  process  and
goal  of  this  Holistic  universe.


INDEX


Absolute  Values  as  wholes,  107
Absolutists  and  “the  whole,”  100,
102,  no;  their  sterile  monism,  108
Abstraction,  the  error  of,  15,  20,  27
Acceleration  and  gravitation,  equiva¬
lent  expressions,  28-9,  30
Acquired  characters,  inheritance  of,
194,  201

Acquired  experience,  inheritance  of,
205  n.

Action,  the  physical  basis  of  the  uni¬
verse,  31,  41,  £4,  5i,  56,  326,  327,
328;  its  structural  character,  41-2,
44,  327

Adsorption,  46

Alchemists,  their  guesses  not  far
from  the  truth,  42-3
Alga  and  fern,  possible  bridge  be¬
tween,  74-5

Algonkian  mountains,  age  of,  42
Alternation  of  generations,  basis  of,
73-4

Analysis,  the  error  of,  19-20,  27
Anaxagoras,  229
Aniline  dyes,  57

Animals:  the  psychical  development
manifested  in  Sexual  Selection,  13-
14;  plants  and,  their  similarities
and  divergences,  70,  71,  73,  75;
co-ordination  and  self-regulation
in,  77,  82,  105,  106,  230,  231;
power  of  self-healing  in,  80-81 ;  re¬
garded  as  wholes,  82,  83,  105,  106;
animals  and  humans,  heredity  and
educability,  252,  274
Armstrong,  Dr.  E.  F.,  47
Artistic  creations  as  wholes,  98, 105-6
Associative  memory  of  white  mice,
experiments  on,  205  n.

Atom,  the,  37,  40,  61,  71,  83-4,  97,
173;  importance  of  placing  and
spacing^of  atoms,  37-8;  not  static
but  active  in  the  Space-Time  con¬
tinuum,  38;  the  conquests  of  the
New  Physics,  38-9;  theory  of


Rutherford  and  Bohr,  39-41 ;
nucleus,  electrons,  and  quanta  of
radiation,  39-40,  41,  49;  its  plane¬
tary  structure,  39,  40,  45,  48,  83-4 ;
the  proton,  40,  41;  as  a  potential
source  of  energy,  42;  the  artifi¬
cial  breaking  up  of  matter  and
the  transmutation  of  metals,  42-3 ;
external  properties  dependent  on
internal  structure,  43-4;  the  basis
of  the  hypothesis  of  its  struc¬
ture,  48-50;  a  creation  of  Holism,
128,  153,  228,  229,  319-20;  dis¬
continuity  in  its  structure,  331
Atomic  numbers,  40-41
Attention,  development  of  power  of,
236,  237,  240,  241


Baly,  Professor,  69

Beauty,  its  holistic  basis,  221,  222

Becquerel,  23,  38

Bergson:  his  philosophy  of  Evolu¬
tion  summarised  and  examined,
92-5;  the  principle  of  Duration,
92-3,  94,  95,  99,  US ;  the  Intel¬
lect,  93-4,  95,  hi
Berkeley,  270,  272
Bio-chemical  mechanisms,  151
Bio-chemical  wholes,  151-2,  154,  168,
169.  See  Organisms.
Bio-chemistry,  recent  advances  in,  72
Biographies  as  aids  to  the  science  of
Personology,  284-9,  294
Biological  wholes,  100,  101,  104
Biology:  and  a  new  concept  of  life,
3,  5;  Mechanism  and,  4,  5,  n,
109,  113-14,  121;  latest  advances
in,  5,  7;  new  syntheses  more  im¬
portant  than  specialisation,  5,  7,
11 ;  Sexual  Selection  in  Organic
Evolution,  14 ;  its  study  of  Evolu¬
tion  and  the  cell,  61 ;  value  of  the
concept  of  the  whole  to,  no,  221,
259;  value  of  the  concept  of


350


INDEX


Double-contents  cell,  generation  of,
74

Driesch,  Professor  Hans,  171-2

Ductless  glands,  holistic  organs,  143,
205

Duration,  Bergson’s  principle  of,

92-3,  94,  95,  99,  ^5

Durkhen,  experiments  of,  207  n.

Duty,  Personality  and,  314

Ecological  modifications  leading  to
variations,  207,  208,  210,  218,  219,
238

Ecology,  science  of,  218,  340-41,  343.
See  Environment.

Einstein,  6,  7,  239,  240;  the  new
view-point  of  Relativity,  6;  pub¬
lishes  General  Theory  of  Relativ¬
ity ,  23;  the  theory  capable  of  be¬
ing  put  simply  and  intelligibly,

24- 5;  its  mathematical  origin,  24,

25- 7;  the  Ten  Equations,  25,  185;
the  old  mechanics  and  the  new,
25-32 ;  motion  never  absolute,
25-6:  the  Special  Theory  of  Rela¬
tivity,  26-7 ;  his  application  of
the  concept  of  the  Space-Time
continuum,  28-32,  33-4;  the  illus¬
tration  of  the  closed  cage,  28-9;
the  idea  of  the  inertia  of  matter
destroyed,  28;  the  subjective  and
objective  in  the  Space-Time  syn-
thesis,  33,  34

Elan  vital ,  99

Electro-magnetism,  an  instance  of
the  selectiveness  of  matter,  161-2

Electrons,  39,  40,  49;  and  the  nu¬
cleus,  39;  combinations  of  protons
and,  40;  external  properties  of  the
atom  decided  by  number  and
grouping  of,  43

Elements,  the,  41,  52;  their  nuclei,
40;  atomic  numbers,  40-41;  the
Periodic  Table,  41,  42,  52;  their
spontaneous  breaking  up  in  Radio¬
activity,  42,  52;  artificial  destruc¬
tion  and  transmutation  of,  42-3,
52,  53;  external  properties  the  ex¬
pression  of  internal  structure,  43-4

Elimination  of  the  unfit,  n-12,  13.
See  Natural  Selection.

Embryo:  formation  of,  by  cell-
division,  62;  phylogeny  repeated
in  ontogeny,  74,  115

Emergent  Evolution  (Morgan), 321  n.

Ends,  the  realm  of,  259


Energy:  the  “field”  of  an  object,
17-18,  112,  327-8;  matter  simply
a  form  of,  31,  41,  44,  51,  56,  326,
327,  328;  intimate  relation  be¬
tween  structure  and,  41-2,  44,  51,
55,  56,  327;  potentially  available
by  artificial  breaking  up  of  mat¬
ter,  42 ;  first  functional  in  the
cell,  64,  65;  holistic  use  and  con¬
trol  of,  105,  106,  107;  laws  of,
and  principles  of  life  and  mind,
155,  163-70,  305

Entelechy,  theory  of,  171-2,  177,  269
Environment:  a  confused  complex
concept,  1 13;  the  organism  largely
independent  of,  136-7,  138,  300,
340;  Variation  and,  207,  208,  210,
218,  219;  consciousness  increases
influence  of,  238;  mind  as  creator
of,  251;  social  inheritance  borne
by,  251-2;  Personality  and,  300,
301-4

Enzymes,  action  of,  46-7,  68-9
Epistemology,  Personality  and,  277
Equilibrium:  of  the  atom,  and  its
external  properties,  43-5 ;  insta¬
bility  and  readjustment  of  funda¬
mental  structures  of  Nature,
1 73-4 ;  the  same  rhythm  in  the
structure  of  life,  174,  176,  177-8,

216,  235;  persistent  overbalance
caused  by  Holism,  178-9,  214;
tension  and  selective  compensation
as  the  source  of  mind,  235-6

Ether,  hypothesis  of,  17,  269,  323-4
Ethics:  individualism  and  ethical
problems,  241,  246;  ethical  char¬
acter  of  Personality,  294,  295,  298,
299-300,  304-5,  311,  312,  313,
314-16

Euclidean  geometry  and  the  theory
of  Relativity,  25,  29,  30;  suitable
to  the  Newtonian  and  Kantian
conception  of  Space  and  Time,  32
Evolution,  2-3,  8-10,  88-90,  141,  171,

217,  323,  325,  328,  331-2;  Darwin¬
ism,  6,  n-16,  186-90,  191-4,  218;
the  19th-century  battle  over,  8-9;
the  modern  belief  in  Creative  Evo¬
lution,  and  its  implications,  9-1 1,
23,  89-90,  129-35,  137  ( See  Crea¬
tive  Evolution) ;  mechanistic  con¬
ceptions  strengthened  by  Darwin¬
ism,  n-16,  189,  190;  its  tendency
to  hark  back  to  simpler  types,  54;
the  idea  applicable  to  matter,


INDEX


56-7,  89-90;  the  position  of  the
cell  in,  64-5,  83,  84;  cell  differen¬
tiation  and  the  divergence  of  plant
and  animal  forms,  75-7;  creative
Holism  the  motive  force  behind
Evolution,  98-99,  102,  105,  107-8,
129-35,  137-9,  141-3,  178,  216,

220- 3,  230,  273,  320,  321  n.,  323,
325,  326,  328;  the  lower  unit  the
basis  of  the  next  higher  unit,
153-4,  169,  175,  178;  life  and  mind
the  two  great  saltus  in,  154,  271;
its  persistent  trend  not  accidental,
178,  341,  342 ;  Neo-Darwinian  the¬
ories,  188,  190-92,  194-203;  the
Germ-cell  theory,  188,  190,  194,
197-205;  Mendelism,  194,  195-6;
the  Mutation  theory,  194,  196-7;
experimental  Evolution  and  its
limitations,  194,  195-6,  200,  217;
Holistic  Selection  in,  211,  212-15,
220;  its  negative  aspect,  215-16,

221- 2;  interaction  of  internal  and
external  factors  in,  218-20;  the
place  of  mind  in,  226,  228,  229-35,
248-9,  251;  the  psychic  and  the
organic  in,  230-32,  234,  235-8,  240-
41,  243-4,  249-53,  273-4;  its  ad¬
vance  towards  individuality  and
Personality,  232-3,  275,  276,  282,
320;  Naturalism  and,  329-30;
Monadology  and,  332-4;  Pluralism
and,  334-5;  purposive  view  of,
justifies  no  inference  of  a  Su¬
preme  Mind,  342

Evolution  in  the  Light  of  Modern
Knowledge  (Bower),  207 n.

Experience:  interaction  of  matter,
life,  and  mind  confirmed  by,  2,  3,
155-6,  157;  its  plasticity  and  the
rigidity  of  our  concepts,  17,  21,
23;  the  Space-Time  continuum  of
events  in,  27-8,  33,  34;  the  Sub¬
ject-Object  relation  in,  32-3,  94,

238,  239,  277;  Bergson  on,  92-3;
the  duality  of  the  mind  and,  238,

239,  240,  245,  246-51;  scientific
interpretation  of,  247-8,  250;  in¬
fluence  of  past  on  present,  254;
Personality  as  the  Subject  of,  277,
292


Females,  emotional  sensitiveness  of,
implied  by  the  principle  of  Sexual
Selection,  13,  14,  222-3


351

Ferments,  action  of,  in  protoplasm,

47,  68

Ferns,  gametophytes  of,  74-5;  mod¬
ifications  and  variations  in,  207  n.
Fibro-vascular  system  of  plants,  76,

78

Fields,  value  of  the  concept  of,  17,
18,  no,  m-14,  328,  339;  applied
to  concepts,  17-19;  things  and
their  fields,  17,  112,  113-14,  327-8;
the  Space-Time  continuum  the
field  of  the  material  universe,  31-2,
34,  114,  327;  the  field  of  matter
dependent  on  its  internal  struc¬
ture,  44,  no,  112-13;  colloidal
surfaces  as  fields,  47;  wholes  and
their  fields,  no,  112,  113-16,  335,
339,  34o;  organisms  and  their
fields,  113-16;  the  field  of  the
germ-cell,  191,  204,  206-8,  219;
the  field  of  mind,  228,  253-9;  the
field  of  Nature,  340-41,  342,  343J
group  fields,  339-40
Force,  doubtful  validity  of  concept
of,  160;  laws  of,  and  the  princi¬
ples  of  mind  and  body,  163-70
Freedom:  of  the  organic  whole,
I37-9,  306,  307,  309;  of  the  Per¬
sonality,  139,  274,  275,  276,  304,
3°5,  309-12,  314,  315;  of  the  mind,
250,  258-9;  the  rule  of  the  uni¬
verse,  307-8;  not  limited  to  the
307,  309,  310

Function  and  structure,  their  rela¬
tion  in  wholes,  104,  106,  107,  112,
122-4

Future,  the,  an  operative  factor  in
the  activity  of  the  mind,  258-9

Galileo,  25
Gametes,  the,  74
Gametophyte  generation,  the,  74
Gases,  result  of  internal  equilibrium
in  the  atoms  and  molecules,  44,  45
General  Theory  of  Relativity  (Ein¬
stein),  23,  24

Generalisation,  the  error  of,  15,  20
Genes,  53,  200;  struggle  for  existence
assumed  among,  201-2
Genetics,  563;  theories  of  Variation,
53,  194-205,  220

Geological  age  measured  by  Radio¬
activity,  42

Germ-cell  theory  of  Variation,  188,
190,  191,  194,  197-205,  220;  the
field  of  the  germ-cell,  191,  204,


354


INDEX


85,  97,  108,  227,  228,  270;  the
gaps  between  life,  mind,  and  mat¬
ter  bridged  by  Holism,  108-9,  121,
158,  174-6,  178,  179,  320-21;  the
concept  of  the  whole  preferable  to
that  of,  109-10,  160-61 ;  degrees  of
Freedom  in,  139;  the  laws  of
thermodynamics  and  the  principles
of  life  and  mind,  155,  163-70;  de¬
velopment  of  mind  from,  151-2,
154,  178,  180,  231-4,  235-8;  life
and  mind  not  independent  entities,
157-9,  170;  the  Vitalistic  hypoth¬
esis  criticised,  159-61,  171-2,  177;
power  of  selection  and  self-direc¬
tion  in,  162-4,  165,  167,  168,  170-
71,  176-7,  235,  237,  249;  unity  and
inter-action  of  life  and  mind,  170-
71 ;  the  theory  of  Entelechy  and,
1 71-2,  177;  life  and  its  action  on
the  body,  Holism  and,  172-9;  a
new  structure  based  on  those  of
the  physico-chemical  order,  174-6,
178,  179,  181,  230,  335;  the  rhyth¬
mic  equilibrium  in,  174,  176-9;
Goethe  on  its  purpose,  315;  Nat¬
uralism  and, 329

Light:  its  velocity,  and  the  principle
of  Relativity,  26-7 ;  the  curvation
of,  30;  accounted  for  by  quanta
of  radiation  released  by  electrons,
39-40;  light  effects  as  basis  of
theory  of  atomic  structure,  49-50

Liquids:  and  internal  equilibrium  of
the  molecule,  44-5;  molecular
structure  of,  45,  64

1

Males,  the  operation  of  Sexual  Se¬
lection  limited  to,  13

Malpighi,  62

Man:  a  psycho-physical  whole,  152;
his  mind  and  his  environment,
251-2;  the  role  of  structure  not
very  prominent  in,  252-3;  hered¬
itary  past  in  mind  of,  255,  274;
heredity  and  educability  in,  274;
“a  legislative  being,”  296;  the
Ideal  Man,  312-13;  Naturalistic
view  of,  329-30

Materialism,  its  unjustified  infer¬
ences,  8,  10,  15;  its  struggle  with
Spiritualism  over  Evolution,  8-9,
11

Matter:  apparent  separateness  of
matter,  life  and  mind,  not  founded
in  fact,  2,  3,  21,  50;  new  concept


of,  needed,  3,  4-5,  10,  11,  16,  50-
52,  56,  57,  61,  96;  thought  and,  4;
development  of  life  and  mind
from,  7-8,  io-ii,  51,  52,  S3-4.  SS,
57, #  58,  174-6;  19th-century  ma¬
terialism,  8,  9;  Evolution  and  the
new  concept  of,  io-ii,  23;  its
field  the  structure  of  the  Space-
Time  universe,  31,  44,  112,  327;
a  form  of  Energy  or  Action,  31,
41,  44,  51,  55,  56,  326-7;  recent
advances  in  the  knowledge  of  its
constitution,  37-50,  95,  162;

structural  character  of,  37,  38,

44- 5,  5i,  55,  56,  95,  162,  173-4,
230,  231,  331;  the  proton  possi¬
bly  the  fundamental  form  of,
41 ;  artificial  breaking  up  of,
greatest  potential  source  of  en¬
ergy,  42;  internal  structure  and
external  properties  of,  44-5,  112;
its  behaviour  in  the  colloid  state,

45- 7,  57-8,  162;  selectiveness  of,
47,  57,  161-2,  235;  creativeness  of,
55-8,  89-90,  96-7,  128;  in  the  cell,
64,  65;  overflow  of  matter,  mind,
and  life  into  each  other’s  domain,
85,  97,  108,  227,  228,  270;  Holism
and  the  disappearance  of  the  gulf
between  life,  mind,  and  matter,
108-9,  121,  158,  174-6,  178,  179;
life  a  complex  structure  of,  174-6,
178,  179,  230,  335;  spirit  and,
Spmozist  position,  321 334-5

Mechanical  system,  holistic  system
distinguished  from,  103-4,  125-6,
I27,  133,  141,  305

Mechanics,  25;  the*  new  system  of
Relativity,  25-34

Mechanism,  149,  152;  invades  the
domain  of  life,  4,  5,  12,  109,  no;
biology  and,  4,  5,  n,  100,  109,
H3-I4,  121;  the  system  shaken  by
the  concept  of  creative  Evolution,
ro-n,  132-3;  strengthened  by  a
misconception  of  Darwinism,  n-
16,  189,  190;  its  recent  domina¬
tion  of  science,  89,  100,  103,  322,
324-5;  wholes  not  mechanical  sys¬
tems,  103-4,  125-6,  127,  133,  141,
305;  Holism  and,  147-181;  the
concept  of  Holism  transforms  and
transcends  the  mechanistic  system,
147,  148-52,  179-81;  man  and,
152;  an  early  phase  of  Holism,
i53>  *8o,  329;  inadequate  for  mod-


INDEX


ern  physiology,  177;  its  view  of
Variation  arbitrary  and  mislead¬
ing,  190-91,  214,  215,  220;  unable
to  cope  with  Personality,  292

Memory,  254;  associative,  205  n.;
hereditary,  255

Mendel,  Abbot,  195

Mendelism,  63;  its  theory  of  Varia¬
tion,  194,  195-6

Mercury,  its  possible  transmutation
into  Gold,  42-3

Metabolism,  the  process  of,  67,  78,
101,  129,  165,  191,  300;  the  same
power  necessary  to  the  Personal¬
ity,  301-4

Metaphysics,  Holism  and,  260

Mice,  associative  memory  in,  205  n.

Milton,  288

Mind:  apparent  separateness  of
mind,  life,  and  matter  not  founded
in  fact,  2,  3,  21,  50;  new  concept
of,  needed,  4-5,  10,  n,  16;  general
acceptance  of  physical  basis  of,
7-8,  io-ii  ;  life  and  mind,  true
operative  factors  in  Evolution,
15-16,  324-5,  332;  mind  and  the
Space-Time  universe,  32,  33,  254;
Kant  on,  32-3 ;  creativeness  of,
32,  90,  246,  250-52,  336;  life  in
the  cell  on  its  way  to,  66,  77;  its
development  in  animals,  77;  the
overflow  of  mind,  life,  and  matter
into  each  other’s  domain,  85,  97,
108,  227,  228,  270;  structure  and,
94,  95,  252,  253;  gaps  between
mind,  life,  and  matter  bridged  by
Holism,  108-9,  121,  158,  174-6,
178,  179,  320-21;  its  development
from  life,  151-2,  154,  178,  180,
231-4,  235-8,  336;  the  closed  sys¬
tem  of  physical  science  and,  155,
156,  161 ;  life  and  mind  not  inde¬
pendent  entities,  157,  158,  170;
the  laws  of  thermodynamics  and
the  principles  of  life  and  mind,
155,  163-70;  power  of  self-direc¬
tion  in,  162,  163-4,  165,  167,  168,
171,  250-52,  270;  unity  and  inter¬
action  of  life  and  mind,  170-71;
the  theory  of  Entelechy  and,
171-2,  177;  psychology  and,  227,
228;  the  field  of,  228,  253-9;  Per¬
sonality  and,  229,  233,  235,  264,
267-73,  277,  279;  crude  as  com¬
pared  with  organic  co-ordination
and  self-regulation,  231;  lines  of


355

advance  of  its  evolution,  231-5;
as  an  organ  and  expression  of
Holism,  222,  226-60,  264,  292,
320,  325;  individuation  and,  233,
234-5,  241,  244-6,  248;  organisa¬
tion  and  central  control  of,  233,
234,  248,  250,  292;  development
of  attention  and  consciousness,
236,  237-8;  duality  of,  the  Sub¬
ject-Object  relation,  238-40;  mind
and  body  not  independent,  239,
267:73,  277,  279;  as  a  rebel
against  universality,  241,  244,

246,  248;  Reason  and,  243,  244,

247- 8;  the  Self  conquered  by,
244-6;  Science  the  proudest
achievement  of,  247-8,  249,  250;
its  enrichment  of  the  universe,

248- 51 ;  and  its  environment,
251-2 ;  the  subconscious  mind,
254-5,  257,  279-80;  influence  of
the  past  on,  254-5,  257,  336-7;
the  senses  and,  255-7;  telepathy
and,  257;  influence  of  the  future
on,  258-9 ;  purpose  the  highest
manifestation  of  its  activity,
258-60;  body  and  mind  in  Person¬
ality,  267-73,  277,  279;  Natural¬
istic  view  of,  329;  the  assumption
of  a  Supreme  Mind,  341-2

Minkowski,  27

Modifications,  Darwin’s  theory  of,
192,  193;  inheritance  of,  nega¬
tived  by  Weismann,  194,  201,
202-3;  possibly  the  conditions
precedent  to  Variation,  203,  204-5,
206,  207,  212,  219

Mohl,  von,  62

Molecule,  the,  37,  153;  importance
of  the  placing  and  spacing  of  its
atoms,  37;  combination  of  atoms
into  molecules  rests  on  unstable
internal  equilibrium,  43,  44;  mo¬
lecular  structure  of  liquids,  45,
64;  lattice  pattern  in  crystal  struc¬
ture,  45 ;  in  the  colloid  state,  46

Monadology  and  Holism,  332-4,  335,
339

Monistic  conception  of  the  universe
furthered  by  Holism,  108-9

Moral  character  and  the  influence
of  Holism,  299-300,  313,  314

Morgan,  Professor  Lloyd,  32m.

Motion:  Newton’s  laws,  25;  the
Einstein  theory,  25-34;  never  ab¬
solute,  25,  27;  stationariness  an


INDEX


356

illusion,  25-6;  the  co-variation  of
Space  and  Time,  26-30;  the  Space-
Time  continuum  applied  to,  28-30

Multicellular  organisms:  reproduc¬
tion  by  cell  fusion,  73 ;  reproduc¬
tion  by  reduction  division,  73-4,
75;  formation  of  the  earliest,  75-6

Mutations:  De  Vries’  theory  of,  53,
194,  196-7,  206;  of  matter  to  life,
57;  Darwin’s  theory  of,  192,  193;
exceptional,  197,  218;  of  body  to
mind,  270-71

j

Natural  Science  reunited  with  psy¬
chology,  240

Natural  Selection,  erroneous  me¬
chanical  view  of,  n-12,  14,  15,
19,  189,  190;  fundamentally  psy¬
chical,  14-15,  222-3,  313;  Darwin’s
theory  of,  186,  187-8,  189-190,
192,  193,  206,  219;  co-operation
between  Variation  and,  192,  193,
210-16 ;  operative  within  the  germ¬
cell,  201-2 ;  of  small  variations,
205-8,  210-14;  Holistic  Selection
and,  206,  209-16;  its  limitations,
215;  co-operative  and  helpful
rather  than  murderous,  218,  219

Naturalism:  and  the  principles  of
life  and  mind,  i54~S,  156,  157,
169,  170,  171;  Holism  and,  329-
30,  331;  irreconcilable  with  crea¬
tive  Evolution,  329-30,  332,  334

Nature:  errors  in  the  observation  of,
19-21;  new  view  of,  23-4,  266;
her  high-speed  internal  energies,
51;  the  concept  of  Holism  and  the
explanation  of,  95,  96,  108,  131-5,
222,  342-3;  mind  and,  96,  97,  156,
229,  336,  342;  wholes  as  the  real
units  of,  99,  100,  108,  no;  value
of  the  Space-Time  integration  to
the  understanding  of,  in,  122,
173;  fields  in,  in,  112-13,  340-41;
the  concept  of  creativeness  and,
131,  132,  133-5;  the  closed  system
of  physical  science,  153-4,  *56;
life  a  new  structure  of  her  holistic
physico-chemical  structures,  173,
174-9;  warfare  not  the  rule  in,
218,  219;  the  emotional  appeal  of,
336-7,  340,  343;  holistic,  not  a
whole,  340,  342,  343;  teleological
view  of,  341-2;  the  holistic  Field
of,  342,  343;  the  inference  of  a
Supreme  Mind  behind,  341-2,  343


Necessity:  in  the  closed  system  of
physical  science,  155;  the  limita¬
tions  of  its  power  over  wholes,
305-6;  the  concept  not  grounded
in  reality,  308

Neo-Darwinians  and  the  theory  of
Variation,  190-92,  194-205

Newton,  7,  25,  32,  164,  185,  186;
his  First  Law  and  the  inertia  of
matter,  32,  51;  his  conception  of
Space  and  Time,  32,  33;  his  Law
of  Gravitation,  184-5

Nitrogen  atom  split  up  by  Ruther¬
ford,  43

Nomenclature,  reforms  needed  in
scientific  and  philosophical,  6

Nucleus,  the:  of  the  atom,  39,  40,
41,  42,  49;  spontaneous  breaking
up  in  Radioactivity,  42;  of  cell,
62,  65;  its  part  in  heredity,  63;
in  cell-division,  70-71,  73

Object,  relation  of  Subject  and,
238-40

Objects:  their  fields,  17,  18-19,  112,
327-8;  regarded  as  events  in
Space-Time,  hi;  misinterpreted
by  our  intellect  and  senses,  m-12

Ontogeny  repeats  phylogeny,  74,  115

Organic  and  inorganic:  vanished  fix¬
ity  of,  23 ;  the  colloidal  surface  as
the  bridge  between,  47,  58;  differ¬
ent  structure  of  organic  and  inor¬
ganic  compounds,  47-8,  64;  the
cell  the  real  distinction  between,
64-5

Organic  Descent:  its  operation  com¬
pared  to  that  of  Radioactivity,
52-3,  54-  See  Descent.

Organisms:  power  of  regeneration
possessed  by,  80,  299;  as  typical
wholes,  82-4,  96-7,  98,  101,  104,

no,  121-5,  127,  209,  214-15.  268,
271 ;  relations  of  the  parts  and  the
whole  in,  82-3,  84,  96-7,  101,  104,
106,  124-5,  127,  142,  210;  inner
co-ordination  and  self-regulation

of,  97,  98,  106,  140-43,  i59,  162,
177-8,  209,  210,  214-15,  216,  230-
31,  234;  their  fields,  113-15;  time
factor  in  development  and  expla¬
nation  of,  114-15,  210;  transfor¬
mation  of  a  stimulus  into  free
action  by,  127,  135-6,  306-7;
creativeness  of  wholes  as  seen  in,
128-31,  132-5,  137;  and  their  en-


INDEX


357


vironment,  136-7,  138,  210,  238,
300,  340-41 ;  Vitalism  and,  159-61 ;
selectiveness  the  fundamental
property  of,  162,  163;  the  freedom
of,  162,  305,  306,  307 ;  the  laws  of
thermodynamics  and  the  princi¬
ples  of  life  and  mind  in,  163-70;
variations  in,  208-9,  210-n  ( See
Variation) ;  holistic  repression  of
variations  in,  215-16;  individual¬
ity  of,  232,  233,  242;  development
of  mind  in,  235-8;  material  objec¬
tive  of,  294;  treated  as  synthetic
units,  320;  organic  situations  dis¬
tinguished  from,  339-40
Organs,  holistic,  143
Origin  of  Species  (Darwin),  23,

186-7

Osmosis,  65,  68,  76

Oxygen  in  the  vital  processes,  72

Pangenesis,  Darwin’s  theory  of,  188
Panpsychism  and  creative  Evolution,
334-5

Past,  the,  in  the  activities  of  mind,
254-5,  257,  336-7
Pavlov,  Professor,  205  n.

“Peraction,”  suggested  term  for
body-and-mind  relation,  270
Periodic  Law,  the,  38
Periodic  Table,  the,  41,  43,  54
Persona  in  Roman  law,  282-3
Personality,  the:  the  supreme  em¬
bodiment  of  Holism,  105,  106,
140,  152,  153,  233,  246,  263-4,
276,  277,  283,  292,  293,  304,  308,
320;  repressive  activity  of  Holism
and,  216;  mind  and  the  develop¬
ment  of,  229,  233,  235,  264,

267,  274;  Purpose  a  function  of,
235,  240,  241,  259,  296;  an

apparent  deviation  from  the
main  plan  of  Holism,  241 ;  its
present  imperfection,  241,  246,

297,  299,  309-10;  its  basis

universal,  245-6,  263-4;  the

hereditary  past  and,  255,  273,
2  74,  275,  276;  as  a  whole,  263-
89;  the  body  and,  264-6,  279,
280;  body  and  spirit  in,  264-7;
body  and  mind  in,  267-71,  272,
273,  277;  its  own  creative

holistic  activity,  271-3,  284,  292,
299,  304;  its  individuality,  274-5,
278-9,  284-5;  constant  and  pro¬
gressive,  275-6;  as  the  Subject


of  experience,  277-8;  psychology
and,  277,  278,  279-82,  293;  the
subconscious  mind  and,  279-80,
296-7;  the  need  for  a  science  of,
281-2,  284-9,  293-4;  evolution  of
the  idea  of,  282-3 ;  value  of
biography  to  the  study  of,  284-9,
294;  functions  and  ideals  of,  292-
316;  an  organ  of  self-realisation,
293,  294,  295,  315-16;  ethical

ideals  of,  294,  295,  298,  299-300,

303,  305,  311)  312,  313,  314-16;

the  will  and,  294,  295,  298,  309;
the  intelligence  and,  294-5;  inner
control  and  direction  of,  296-9,
300,  310;  self-healing  power  of,
299-300;  environment  and,  300,
301-4;  purity  or  wholeness  of,
303-4,  305,  312-15;  freedom  of,

304,  309-12,  315,  316;  and  the
idea  of  a  Supreme  Whole,
341-2

Personology,  the  science  of  Per¬
sonality,  282,  284-9,  293-4

Pluedo  (Plato),  102

Philosophy,  90,  91,  297;  its  co¬
operation  with  science  ensured
by  acceptance  of  creative  Evolu¬
tion,  90-92 ;  the  idea  of  the  whole
neglected  by,  100;  “the  whole”
in  absolutism,  100,  102;  the

concept  of  the  whole  more  precise
than  that  of  life  in,  109-10;
Holism  and  the  old  concepts  of,
148;  and  the  relations  of  body
and  mind,  156,  269;  Personality
in,  277,  278

Photo-synthesis  in  plants,  68,  69,
71,  76

Phylogeny  repeated  in  ontogeny,
74,  ii5

Physical  mixtures  and  chemical
compounds,  analogies  from,  122-4,
128,  133,  134

Physical  science:  new  concept  of
matter  in,  3,  5,  51 ;  recent

progress  in,  5,  7;  the  general
acceptance  of  Evolution  and,  1 1 ;
and  the  relations  of  life  and  mind,
16,  154-5,  156,  157,  163-70;  the
error  of  abstraction  in,  20;  the
doubtful  validity  of  the  concept
of  force  in,  160;  Holism  and  the
Naturalism  of,  329-31

Physico-chemical  mechanisms,  150,
I  i57,  173;  Vitalistic  hypothesis  of,


INDEX


358

159;  structural  equilibrium  in,
173-4,  J76 ;  inner  holistic  char¬
acter  of,  174;  the  material  of
the  new  structure  of  life,  174-5,
176

Physics,  the  New,  37,  327;  dis¬
coveries  as  to  the  constitution  of
matter,  37,  38-41,  327;  assimi¬
lates  chemical  categories  to
physical,  47-8,  150;  associates

energy  and  mass,  164

Physiology:  and  Mechanism,  152;
new  categories  demanded  by,
177;  and  Personality,  279

Planck,  Max,  39

Plants:  the  plant  cell,  62,  65-9;
the  origin  of  the  cell,  70-75;  the
process  of  reproduction  similar
to  that  of  animals,  70,  71,  73;
common  origin  of  animals  and,
75;  causes  of  divergence  of  plant
and  animal  forms,  75-7;  holistic
co-operation  and  co-ordination  in,
78,  82,  83,  105,  106,  230,  231;
regenerative  power  of,  80 ;  eco¬
logical  modifications  and  Varia¬
tion  in,  207,  208

Plato,  102

Pleurococcus,  cell  aggregation  in,
75-6

Potentiality  and  organic  creative¬
ness,  13 1-2

Pre-established  harmony,  220,  269-
70,  272,  333,  334

Proton,  the,  40,  41

Protoplasm,  46,  54,  62,  65,  114;
enzyme  action  in,  46,  47,  68;  its
movement  in  the  cell,  65 ;  always
in  a  process  of  creative  change,
66-7;  its  formation  of  new  proto¬
plasm,  67;  metabolism  of,  67,  68;
possible  origin  of  its  primitive
forms,  72

Psychical  nature  of  Natural  and
Sexual  Selection,  13,  222-3

Psychological  Principles  (Ward) ,
280-81,  282

Psychology,  239,  244,  278;  its

methods,  227,  228,  278-80;  the
standpoint  of  Relativity  essential
to,  239,  240;  natural  science

reunited  with,  240;  and  the
syntheses  of  Reason,  244;  the
services  of  Holism  to,  259-60;
and  the  Personality,  277,  278,
279-82,  293


Psycho-physical  wholes,  154,  168,
169;  the  theory  of  Entelechy  and
171-2

Purity,  an  ideal  of  the  Personality,

303-4,  305,  312-15

Purpose:  purposiveness  distinctive
of  wholes,  139,  140;  a  function
of  Personality,  235,  240,  241,

259,  296;  the  highest  manifesta¬
tion  of  mind,  258-9;  the  pur¬
posive  view  of  Evolution,  341-2,
343

Quantum,  the,  39,  41;  quanta  of
radiation  released  by  electrons,
39-40,  49;  discontinuity  of  the
quanta,  40,  331 ;  supremacy  of
the  quantum  law,  51

Racial  and  individual  development,
differentiation  of,  198-9,  201-3,
204

Radioactivity,  23,  37,  38;  a  spon¬
taneous  breaking  up  of  matter,
42 ;  and  the  transmutation  of
elements,  42-3,  52,  53;  its  opera¬
tion  compared  to  that  of  Organic
Descent,  52-3,  54

Radium  converted  into  Lead,  42

Reality,  4;  its  nature  obscured  by
the  analytical  character  of
thought,  15,  19,  hi  ;  the  sensible
order  and  the  conceptual  order,
49-50,  92,  in ;  the  old  static
view  of,  88,  89;  creative  Evolu¬
tion  and,  89,  92,  117,  132;  not
explained  by  Bergson’s  Duration,
92,  93,  94;  Holism  and  the  evo¬
lution  of,  106-7,  108,  1 16,  142-4,
221;  Relativity  and,  in,  114,  122,
326;  formula  for  its  fundamental
problems,  147,  149;  individuation
and,  239,  240,  242,  246;  Reason
and,  243;  our  sense  of,  and  a
sixth  holistic  sense,  256;  Person¬
ality  and,  263,  273,  277

Reason,  243-4;  creative  of  values,
90,  243

Reflexes  and  the  development  of
mind,  237,  249

Regeneration,  organic,  80

Relativity,  theory  of,  16,  23,  24-5;
its  mathematical  origin,  25-7;
gravitation  in,  25,  28-9,  30-31,
32,  185;  the  Space-lime  universe,
28-32,  33,  326,  327;  its  subjec-


INDEX


tive  and  objective  aspects,  33-45
value  of  the  Space-Time  inte¬
gration  to  our  understanding

of  Nature,  in,  114,  122,  326;
psychology  and,  239
Reproduction,  the  process  of:

similar  in  plants  and  animals,  70,
71-3;  cell-division,  70-71,  72-3;
cell  fusion,  73 ;  reduction  division,
earlier  than  the  separation  of

plant  and  animal  forms,  73-4,

75;  its  holistic  nature,  81-2;  and
the  germ-cell  theory  of  Variation,
198,  200

Rock-formations,  measurement  of
age  of,  42

Roman  law,  concept  of  personality
in,  282-3
Rontgen,  39
Roux,  Wilhelm,  189
Rutherford,  Sir  Ernest,  39,  43

Saltus,  creative  leaps  in  Evolution,
154,  197,  271

Sartor  Resartus  (Carlyle),  286
Scheiden,  62
Schwann,  62

Science,  247,  278;  rigidity  of  its
former  concepts,  9,  16-17;  linked
with  philosophy  by  creative
Evolution,  90-92,  148;  mechan¬
istic  outlook  of,  91,  100,  103,  153,
322,  324;  its  neglect  of  the  idea
of  the  whole,  100,  322;  Holism  in
relation  to,  109-10,  142,  148,  160,
221,  248,  321-5;  its  mistaken  view
of  life  and  mind  as  separate  enti¬
ties  from  the  body,  154-5,  *56,
157,  161,  324-5;  the  system  of
Science  the  greatest  achievement
of  mind,  247-8,  249,  250;  the  body
rehabilitated  by,  266
Selectiveness:  of  matter,  47,  57,
161-2,  235;  of  life,  65,  79,  162,
163,  165,  167,  168,  170-71,  176,
23S,  237,  249;  of  intellect,  in
Bergson’s  philosophy,  93-4,  111,
112;  inherently  holistic,  162-3,
343;  the  tap-root  of  will,  162,
163;  of  mind,  167,  168,  171
Self,  the,  292 ;  as  the  centre  of
experience,  238,  240,  243,  245-6,
292-3;  an  apparent  rebel  against
the  universal  order,  241,  244,  246;
as  the  centre  of  the  higher  order
of  Holism,  243,  293;  largely  a


359

social  construction,  244-5,  246.
See  Personality.

Self-determination,  the  true  ideal
of  human  development,  309,  311
Self-direction  in  life  and  mind,  162,
163-4,  165,  167,  168,  170-71,
176-7,  250-52,  270
Senses,  the:  their  limitations  and
defects,  m-12;  holistic  char¬
acter  of,  255-6,  284;  mind  and,
256-7

Sexual  Selection:  Darwinian  theory
of,  12-13;  its  operation  limited
to  males,  13;  emotional  sensitive¬
ness  of  females  implied  by,  13,
222;  psychical  nature  of,  13-14,
222-3

Shakespeare,  his  hidden  Personality,
288

Single-content  cell,  generation  of,  74
Society:  holistic,  106,  344;  crea¬
tion  of,  by  mind,  251,  252;  Per¬
sonality  and,  296;  group  fields
and,  339-40,  342
Socrates,  229

Solids,  internal  structure  of,  45
Soul,  the:  19th-century  material¬
ism  and,  8,  9;  as  a  whole,  102;
mistaken  physical  analogies  of,
158;  relations  of  body  and,  161,
264,  265-7;  Personality  and,  264,
265-7,  298;  and  the  ideals  of
Holism,  312,  314,  315,  316,  335-6,
337-8;  the  universe  not  a  Society
of  Souls,  335-6,  337;  environment
and,  336-7..

Space:  in  the  theory  of  Relativity,
26,  27,  28-32,  33,  34;  as  con¬
ceived  by  Newton  and  Kant,  32-4,
94

Space-Time  universe,  the,  27-32,  38,
41,  i73,  326,  327;  value  of  the
concept  to  our  understanding  of
Nature,  in,  114,  122,  173
Special  Theory  of  Relativity  (Ein¬
stein),  26-7

Spectrum  analysis,  39,  40
Spencer,  Herbert,  188,  202
Spinoza,  270,  272,  321  n.,  334-5
Spirit,  the:  spiritual  ideals  of
Holism,  99,  106,  107,  108,  139,
144,  152,  222,  240,  241,  242,  243;
spiritual  structure  of  man,  152;
materialist  misconceptions  of  the
spiritual,  158;  the  trend  of
Evolution  towards,  178,  181;


INDEX


360

relations  of  body  and,  264,  266-7 ;
Personality  best  studied  in
spiritual  life,  286-8;  spiritual
objective  of  Personality,  294,  299,

305

Spiritual  idealism  (Spiritualism) :
its  battle  with  materialism  over
Evolution,  8-9;  life  and  mind  in,
169,  170;  irreconcilable  with

creative  Evolution,  330-31,  33  2 ,
333-6,  337,  343

Sporophyte  generation,  the,  74

Sports,  biological,  and  Personality,
276

State,  the,  a  super-individual  whole,
98,  106

Structure:  structural  character  of
the  universe,  24,  31,  34,  37,  44,
230,  323;  of  matter,  37-42,  43-4,
5i,  55,  56,  95,  162,  173-4,  230,  231,
331 ;  relations  of  energy  and,  41,
44,  5i,  55,  56,  327;  internal  struc¬
ture  and  external  properties,  43-5,
112,  173-4,  176;  dynamic  self-
controlled  equilibrium  of,  43-5,
173-4,  176-9,  235;  organic,  64,
114,  169,  177-8;  modem  science
and  the  study  of,  90-91 ;  and  the
process  of  creative  Evolution,  91,
92,  129-31,  133-5,  143-4,  169-70,
178,  230,  323;  mind  and,  94,  95,
252,  253;  intellect  and  experience
and,  94-5;  functions  and  struc¬
ture  in  wholes,  104,  105,  106,  107,
112,  122-4,  153;  holistic  char¬
acter  of,  104,  105,  106,  107,  108,
122,  123-4,  127,  iS3,  174,  175,

178,  179,  180,  232;  the  field  and,
112-15;  bfe  a  new  structure
based  on  the  physico-chemical
structures  of  Nature,  174-6,  178,

179,  181,  230,  335;  mind  as  a  new
departure  in,  178,  181,  229,  231,
235-6,  253;  distinction  between
Mechanism  and,  180-81;  heredi¬
tary,  less  important  in  the  human
than  the  animala  252,  253;  unit
character  of,  331

Struggle  for  existence,  the,  11-12,  13,
14-15,.  186,  187-8,  189,  206;  the
exception,  not  the  rule,  218,  219

Subconscious  mind,  the,  253-5;  in
the  Personality,  279-80,  296

Subject-Object  relation,  the,  238-40

Substance,  divine,  Spinoza’s,  270^
272


Sunlight  and  its  action  upon  chloro¬
phyll,  47,  58,  68,  71,  76-7
Survival  of  the  fittest,  law  of,  n-12
13,  15,  186,  187-8,  189
Synthetic  unity  of  wholes,  the,  123-5,
126-7,  129,  130

Teleological  view  of  the  universe,
341-2,  343.  See  Purpose.
Telepathy,  257

Thermodynamics,  laws  of,  155;  and
the  principles  of  life  and  mind,
163-9

Things  and  their  fields,  17-19,  112,
1 13-14;  327-8;  as  events  in  Space-
Time,  hi;  misinterpreted  by  the
senses,  m-12
Thomson,  Sir  J.  J.,  39
Thorium,  its  conversion  into
Radium,  42

Thought:  baffled  by  misconcep¬
tions  of  life,  mind,  and  matter,
2,  3,  4,  157,  158-9;  value  of  the
idea  of  fields,  17-19,  31;  errors
due  to  analytical  character  of,
19-20;  creativeness  of,  90;  deduc¬
tive  and  inductive,  128-9;  struc¬
tural  character  of,  180;  a  social
instrument,  245 ;  telepathy  and,
257

Time:  in  the  theory  of  Relativity,
26,  27,  28-32,  33,  34;  as  con¬
ceived  by  Newton  and  Kant,  32-4,
94;  and  Bergson’s  principle  of
Duration,  93 ;  the  Time  factor  in
the  field  of  mind,  254.  See  Space-
Time  universe.

Transmutation  of  elements,  42-3,  52,
53

Treviranus,  62
Tropisms,  236,  237,  249

Unicellular  organisms,  reproduction
of,  70-71,  73,  75-6
Unity:  of  structure  and  functions  in
the  whole,  84,  122-5,  127,  141-2 ;
Holism  the  tendency  towards,  179,
181,  220,  232

Universality  and  individuation,  two
tendencies  of  Holism,  238,  240,
241,  242;  Reason  the  organ  of
universality,  243-4
Universe,  the:  its  structural  char¬
acter,  24,  31,  34,  37,  44,  230,  32 3,
327;  stationariness  in,  an  illusion,
25-6,  31;  the  Space-Time  uni-


INDEX


verse,  27-32,  38,  41,  ni,  114,  122,
173,  326,  327;  Action  its  inmost
nature,  31,  41,  Si,  56,  326-7,  328;
its  creativeness,  55-7,  89,  i325
Holism  fundamental  in,  82,  84,
97-8,  99,  100,  107,  108,  143,  179,
181,  307-8,  319-45;  two  con¬

trasted  explanations  of,  88-90;
mechanistic  view  of,  89,  100,  103 ;
Bergson  on  Duration  as  its  crea¬
tive  principle,  92-3;  absolutist
view  of,  100,  102 ;  its  friendliness,
218,  220,  343;  the  value  of  mind
to,  248-9 ;  transformed  by  Per¬
sonality,  277-8,  320;  Freedom

the  rule  of,  307-8;  Naturalistic
view  of,  329-30;  Idealist  view  of,
330-31 ,  337;  monadic  view  of,
333-4,  339  J  teleological  view  of,
341-2,  343;  the  assumption  of  a
Supreme  Mind  in,  341-2

Uranium,  41:  its  conversion  into
Radium,  42

Use  and  routine,  and  modifications
and  variations,  203,  204,  206-8,
212,  219-20

Values,  or  creative  Ideals  of  Holism,
107,  144,  221,  241,  243,  259,  305,
335,  344-5

Variation,  141,  192;  Darwinian

theory  of,  186,  187,  188,  189,
192-4,  206;  Neo-Darwinian  theo¬
ries  of,  188,  190-205;  the  germ¬
cell  theory  of,  188,  190,  191,  194,
197-205;  mechanistic  view  of,
arbitrary  and  misleading,  190,
194-5,  209,  214,  215,  220;  the
principle  of  Holism  and,  191,  206,
209,  210-15,  332,  342-3;  Muta¬
tion  theory  of,  194,  196-7;

Mendelism,  194,  195-6;  possible
influence  of  modifications  on  the
germ-cell,  203-5,  206,  20 7,  212,
219;  the  natural  selection  of  small
variations,  205-9  ;  environment
and,  207,  208,  210,  218,  219;
Holistic  Selection  and,  2ii_,  212-
15;  Holism  and  the  repression  of
variations,  215-16

Vitalism,  the  hypothesis  of,  criti¬
cised,  159-61;  the  theory  of
Entelechy  in,  171-2

Wallace,  A.  R.,  12

War,  the  Great,  344


361

Ward,  Professor  James,  280-81,  282,
334,  335

Weismann,  14;  his  germ-cell  theory
of  Variation,  190,  191,  194,  197-
205;  his  doctrine  of  germinal  iso¬
lation,  198-9,  201,  202,  203,  219,
220

Whole,  the:  the  reciprocal  influence
of  the  whole  and  its  parts,  77-84,

107,  122-7,  138-9,  209-10,  214,

271,  272-3,  341;  fundamental

tendency  of  the  universe  towards
wholes,  82,  84,  97-8,  99,  100,  107,

108,  143,  179,  181,  307-8,  319-21,

326,  329,  335,  337-8,  344-5;

the  character  of  wholes,  98,  99,
101-2,  103-4,  106-7,  108,  121,

122-3,  341;  ideal  wholes,  98,

105-6,  107,  144,  222,  243,  259,

305,  311,  312,  313,  314-16,  329,

344-5 ;  the  whole  in  absolutist
philosophy,  101-2,  103;  creative¬
ness  of  wholes,  101,  102,  104,
128-32,  133-6,  142-4,  221,  222,
271,  273,  304;  relation  of  function
and  structure  in  wholes,  104,  106,
107,  1 1 2,  122-4;  progressive  scale
of  wholes,  105,  106-7 ;  the  con¬
cept  of  life  and  that  of  the  whole,
109-10,  160-61;  wholes  and  their
fields,  110-16,  335,  339,  340;
stimulus  transformed  into  free
action  by,  127,  135-6,  138,  306-7;
the  whole  and  the  idea  of  cause,
126-7,  135-6,  137,  138;  freedom
of  wholes,  137-8,  306-8,  309-12;
individuality  of  wholes,  139-40,
232-3;  co-ordination  and  co¬
adaptation  in  wholes,  140-42,
208-9,  214-15,  220,  333-4;  selec¬
tivity  of  wholes,  162-3;  the  trend
towards  a  greater  Whole,  179,  243,
293,  315,  316;  Personality  as  the
highest  whole,  263,  264,  267,  272,
273,  275,  292,  294,  295,  297,  302,
304,  309,  310;  psychic  wholes,
271,  273;  monads  and  wholes,
332-4,  335,  339;  the  nature  of
the  Supreme  Whole,  338,  341 ;
Nature  as  a  society  of  wholes,
340,  342,  343

Wholeness:  in  life^  77-84,  97;  the
aim  of  Personality,  295-6,  297,
298,  300,  302-4,  309,  312-13,
314-15,  316

Will,  the,  155,  250;  selectivity  and,


INDEX


362


162,  163;  development  of,  240,
243;  the  basis  of  Personality,  294,
295,  296,  298;  freedom  and,  307,
309,  310


Wordsworth,  336

X-rays  and  the  investigation  of
atomic  structure,  39,  112


THEOLOGY  LIBRARY
CLAREMONT,  CALIF.


9,6^03
