Life and Work at the Great Pyramid, Vol. 3 (Smyth, 1867)
========================================================
Charles Piazzi Smyth — Life and Work at the Great Pyramid, Vol. 3 (Edinburgh, 1867), public domain. Plates, plans, and tabulated survey results of the 1865 expedition. Scan via Internet Archive (lifeworkgreatpy3smyt). Raw OCR, not proofread.

vid
tier ty


LIFE AND WORK


AT THE GREAT PYRAMID.


VOB. Tit.


EDINBURGH ! PRINTED BY THOMAS CONSTABLE,


LONDON .


CAMBRIDGE


DUBLIN .


GLASGOW .


FOR


EDMONSTON AND DOUGLAS.


HAMILTON, ADAMS, AND CO.
Rs we . | MACMILLAN AND Co.
Sea NS : M‘GLASHAN AND GILL,


. 5 . , : JAMES MACLEHOSR.


Vol. If. Cae


a
y rata,
Bud huli an R Daa
NC ia CAA “F aN Rene
ACM. era aoe omit! al SR "a
a itl jl _ S


A


Masonry COUTSES, backing stones, és casing stones
of 2% Pyramid, near the upper part of § Kast “2
From abit he i


Vertical Section
of Masonry - courses
backing-stones , ard
casing -stones on the

North Stone Pyramid of
Dashoor. Howard Wyse
Perring, wh arge Plate XIV.


Vertical Section’ y
of Howard Vyses casing -
-stone, backing, and the


MABONTY COUTSES, at
North foot of the’
Creat Pyramid.
; YY
wo 60: 7 @ 100 200 ]/ 4 uD Le zB
ee el | ae! avement


oer saree DAM
Scale’ of Inches.


W.H.M¢ Farlane, Lith? Edin®


LIFE AND WORK


AT THE GREAT PYRAMID


DURING THE MONTHS OF JANUARY, FEBRUARY,
MARCH, AND APRIL, A.D. 1865;


WITH


A DISCUSSION OF THE FACTS ASCERTAINED.


BY C. PIAZZI SMYTH, F.R.SS.L. & E.


B.R.A.S., F.R.S.8.A. 5 HON. M. INST. ENGIN. SC., P.S. ED., AND R.A.A.S, MUNICH AND PALERMO:
PROFESSOR OF PRACTICAL ASTRONOMY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,
AND ASTRONOMER-ROYAL FOR SCOTLAND.


IN THREE VOLUMES;


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS ON STONE AND WOOD.


VOL. III.


EDINBURGH:


EDMONSTON AND DOUGLAS.
1867.


CONTENTS OF VOLUME III.


DISCUSSION OF RESULTS.


DIVISION I.


LAWS OF PHENOMENA.


PAGE
INTRODUCTION, ; : j A ‘ 3 ; ; ‘ 3
ProposiTion 1.—The Base of the Great Pyramid is square? . 10
Proposition II.—The four sides of the Great Pyramid incline
towards its central vertical axis at equal angles? i 13
Proposition III.—The Angle of Inclination of the Sides of the
Great Pyramid is 51°51’ 14:3”? ; 5 : : 19
Proposition IV.—The Angle of Inclination of the Inclined
Passages in the Great Pyramid, is 26° 18’ 10’ nearly? .. 34
Proposition V.—The Great Pyramid is sensibly in the latitude
of 30°? . : : : ; : : ; ; é 40
Proposition VI.—Angular alterations in the Earth’s crust have
been practically insensible during the existence of the
Great Pyramid? .. . ‘ ‘ ‘ ; : : 52
Proposition VII.—HypsoMetry oF THE GREAT PYRAMID, > 60
Datum plane, “ “ ‘ : , 4 : 60
Present Vertical Height, . : 3 ; ; : 61
Ancient Vertical Height, . : : F : ; 67
Floors of the Chambers, ; ; : : : : 71
Fresh-water Levels, . , ; yj A ‘ : 75


Sea-water Level, . : ; ; x d : . 78


vl CONTENTS.


Proposition VIII.—MATERIALS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID,
Composition of the Pyramid hill,
Internal substance of Great Pyramid,
Exterior substance of Great Pyramid,
Salt inside Great Pyramid,
Mortar of Great Pyramid,
Diorite,
Granite,


Proposition [X.—Orientation of the Great Pyramid,


DIVISION II.
OBJECTS OF CAUSATION.


INTRODUCTION,


Section I.—STANDARDS OF SIZE,
Pyramid linear measure,


Section II].—STANDARDS OF WEIGHT, ;
The Coffer belongs to the King’s ees ;
Place of the King’s Chamber in the Great Pyramid,
Pyramid Weight and Capacity Measure, ; ,
Determination of Weights from Linear Measure on the
Great Pyramid System,


Sscrion IIJ.—Sranparps oF Hzat,
Pyramid Heat Measure,
Second part of the Heat t raaiea’


Section [V.—STANDARDS OF ANGLE,
Structural reference to 250° in the Quadrant,
Itinerary Measures,
Compass Points, .


Section V.—STANDARDS OF TIME, .
The Week in the Grand Gallery, F
The Sabbatical Week in the Queen’s Chamber,
Correction for Flooring,


PAGE
82
84
86
93
95
98

100
101


106


115


123
142


143
161
169
174


175


177
193
193


202
207
209
211


215
219
222
229


i


EEO


CONTENTS.


Authority for Twenty-five Inches,
Authority for the number Twenty-five, .
DATE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, ‘
Whether the Great Pyramid is to be sialinicl as aitast
nomical at all? ‘ .
Siriadic Theory of Mahmoud sie: .
a Draconis Theory of Sir John Herschel,
Pyramid data, ’ : ;
The Year of the Pleiades, . 2
The Pleiades and the Pyramid,
Great Pyramid Astronomy, . : :
Star-maps, explanation of,
Great Pyramid attestations, . ’
Conclusion of the Metrological Inquiry,


DIVISION III.


NOTES IN GREAT PYRAMID HISTORY.


CHAPTER I,—MoNnUMENTAL DOCUMENTS STILL TO BE PROCURED,


An uninterpreted Sign, :


Cuapter II.—Names AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS,


A Name erroneously advocated,

Dates of Manetho’s Dynasties,

Names and Designations of Dynasties, .

King’s Names, . : : : : ‘ F A
Clashing result,


Cuapter IIIL.—HistoricaL AUTHORITIES,


Osburn and Ancient Writers,
Greek and Roman Travellers, : ; ; : ,
Characteristics of Egyptian Monuments,


Cuaprer [V.—EARLIEST PROVED POINT oF EeypriAn History,


Baron Bunsen’s Authorities demanded,
Consequences of there being no Authorities, .
Origin of the Egyptians, ; : "


Vili
PAGE
232
236
240


246
251
260
261
263
271
277
283
286
291


303
310


314
316
321
329
330
338


340
345
349
351


356
363
367
370


CONTENTS. —


CHAPTER V.—LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE,


Men of the Fourth Dynasty,

Social Relations, .

Reported Engineering of Nile elie
Of the Pyramids and their Kings,
Conclusion of the Old Empire,


CHAPTER VI.—LIFE UNDER THE New Empire,


Invasion of the Hyksos,

The Joseph Period,

Rise of the Theban Power, ‘

Order of Kings under the New laine

Authorities for the Eighteenth, and later, Zisnraibicts
Scenes in the Eighteenth Dynasty,

Of their Religious Principles, :

The kind of Hero developed in Egypt, .

Queen Thuoris, and her adopted son, Moses,

The Beginning of the End,


ScrenTIFIC GRouNDS,

Research de novo, :

Pyramid Idea, whence derived ?

Wisdom of the Egyptians fails, :
Necessity for seeking a wisdom higher digs man’s,


REtiIeious GROUNDS, ‘
Time of its Performance suitable ?
Metrology suitable as a subject? .


CHAPTER VII.—ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, ON


CHAPTER VIII.—ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, ON


Of the Plans which Moses took for the Henkes of


Weights and Measures, .
Style of the Metrology suitable? .
SUITABILITY OF THE MEN CoNCERNED? .
(The Inspired messengers, were Foreigners ?)
(Cuseans retire from Egypt, Northward ?)


(Egyptians punished in the building of Great Pyramid "


(Early Shemites not chosen ?)
(A new objection.) ;
Pyramid itself, whether ceo gegen in Seti ?


CONTENTS. 1x


PAGE

CuAPpTER [X.—On someE Points In PrimevaL AstRoNoMy, . 545

Who invented the oldest Constellations? : . 545

Proposed reforms among the Constellations, ; >. O59

With whom rests the right to Name, or Re-name ? . 562

The Constellations as means for perpetuating Ideas, . 566
CHAPTER X.—INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE GREAT PyRA-

MID’s MANIFESTATION, . : : ; ; , . 570

Proposed Solutions, No. 1, . : ‘ ; : . 572

+ 3 No. 2, . ‘ ; P é {. Bis

z a” a a P ‘ : z ; Be

5 ay No. 4, . : ; ; 578

Anglo-Saxon originals of Metrology, . ; : ; 881

Anglo-Saxons, where from, of old ? i : : .  §90

Metrological test of European races, . : ; +. $92

Britain in particular, and Israelitic warning, ¢ . 596


INDEX, . : 4 ; - ; ; : . ; . 605


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


IN VOLUME III.


(Tse following Plates, being mostly on very small scales, are
capable of little more than giving first approximate ideas of the
general nature of the subjects observed and measured. It is par-
ticularly requested, therefore, that no ‘Pyramid measures’ be taken
from the Drawings; but that the numerical entries of the original
measures, contained in this Volume, be always referred to, when


exactness is required.)


No. oF PLATE.


I. CASING-STONES, BACKING-STONES, AND MA-
SONRY COURSES OF THE SECOND, AND
OTHER, PYRAMIDS, : . FRONTISPIECE.


REFERRED TO AT P. 24, 26, 27.
INSERTED AT PAGE


II, DIAGRAMS OF PYRAMID THEORY, . ; 41


REFERRED TO AT 35, 41, 51.


III. VERTICAL DIAGONAL SECTION OF CORNER
OF GREAT PYRAMID, : ; : 66


REFERRED TO AT 66.


IV. SUBTERRANEAN CHAMBER, : E - | 2a
REFERRED To AT 74, 208.


V. PYRAMID POINTS AND DEGREES, : . 215


REFERRED TO AT 215.


Xl LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


No. or PLATE. INSERTED AT PAGE


VI. ASTRONOMICAL LINES IN GREAT PYRAMID,
REFERRED TO AT P. 219.


VII. STAR-MAP OF ECLIPTIC POLE, .


REFERRED TO AT 283.


VIII. PYRAMID MERIDIAN STAR-MAP FOR 2170 B.C.,
REFERRED TO AT 284.


IX. PYRAMID MERIDIAN STAR-MAP FOR 1883 «.p.,
REFERRED TO AT 285.


X. VERTICAL SECTION OF NORTH FRONT OF
GREAT PYRAMID DOWN TO SEA-LEVEL,
REFERRED TO AT 313.


XI. MAPS OF EGYPT AT TWO EPOCHS,


REFERRED TO AT 388, 411.


XII. ROYAL OVALS PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED FROM
DR. LEPSIUS’ ‘ KONIGSBUCH,’
REFERRED TO AT 259, 319, 461.


XIII. ROYAL QUARRY-MARKS AND OVALS, .
REFERRED TO AT 417, 521, etc.


219


285


285


285


313


388


461


521


VOL. IIL


DISCUSSION


OF RES UL Te


‘The fair question 1s, Does the newly proposed view
“remove more difficulties, require fewer assumptions, and
‘present more consistency with observed facts than that
‘which it seeks to supersede? If so, the philosopher will
‘ adopt it, and the world will follow the philosopher—after


‘many days,


MR, PRESIDENT GROVE’S
Opening Address at the British Association for the
Advancement of Science, at Nottingham in 1866.


DIVISTEON. J


LAWS OF PHENOMENA.


VOL. III.


‘As a first preparation, therefore, for the cowrse he ws
‘ about to commence, he (every student who enters wpon a
‘ scientific pursuit) must loosen his hold on all crude and
‘hastily adopted notions, and must strengthen himself, by
‘ something of an effort and a resolve, for the unprejudiced
‘ admission of any conclusion which shall appear to be swp-
‘ ported by careful observation and logical argument, even
‘ should i prove of a nature adverse to notions he may
‘have previously formed for himself, or taken wp, without
‘ ecamination, on the credit of others.


SIR J. F. W. HERSCHEL, BART.,
In Par. I. of ‘ Outlines of Astronomy.’ 1849.


~
C—O  ———E———————E—————eeeeeeee


DIVISION I—LAWS OF PHENOMENA.
INTRODUCTION.


HAVING now, in the course of Volume ii., set our
numerical observations of 1865 before the reader, in
all their rigorous roughness, and perhaps rather con-
fusing multiplicity,—it is a duty to formalize their
illustrations up to a certain extent ; and show, both
what their own internal evidence, and external com-
parisons of them with other men’s observations, may
indicate as the proper weight to be attached to
their principal results.

This department of the subject, therefore, begins
with very little allusion to, and certainly no de-
pendence on, any theory of the Pyramids. We
shall curtail our aims indeed even more still, pro-
posing to treat practically not of the Pyramids of
Egypt generally, but only, of the Great Pyramid of
Jeezeh ; and of that too, not by any means in its
entirety, but rather as touching certain features of
universally allowed, and most evident and tangible
character,—wherein it differs from every other
known Pyramid.


4 INTRODUCTION. [DIV. I.


With all well understood points of resemblance
therefore amongst Pyramids, we have nothing to
do; especially when these points belong to the
necessary mechanical road by which every Pyramid
builder must have set out, to construct the beginning
of any Pyramid whatever. Hence, how or wherewith
the builders reared stone upon stone, so as to form
the great bulk of the masonry, is not our present
topic; for the self-same practical methods which
lifted the blocks to form the courses of, say the third
Pyramid of Jeezeh, would have been exactly sufhi-
cient, more time only being allotted, to lift the more
numerous, but not necessarily more weighty, single
blocks of the Great Pyramid into their successive
places. We sce plainly in the dozens of Pyramids
still standing, far and near, that the stones were
lifted, and great exertions of art or strength may
have been requisite to that end ; but there is nothing
in the stone-upon-stone composition of the Great
Pyramid, which speaks of the mere building problem
to be solved there, as being of a different character,
or requiring inventions by man of any absolutely
higher order, than elsewhere.

In fact, the artesan construction of the Great
Pyramid, is as nearly similar to that of all the re-
maining Pyramids of Jeezeh, and many others else-
where,—as is the physical constitution of man’s
bodily frame, or of his bones, muscles, sinews, and
blood-vessels, to the bones, muscles, sinews, and blood-
vessels of most mammals on the face of the globe ;


DIV. I. | INTRODUCTION. 5


growing on the same principles of growth, and hurt
or nourished by the same, or nearly similar, material
agents. Some superior finish and perfection of
parts there may be indeed, and actually are, about
the composition of the Great Pyramid,—even as the
body of man is superior in beauty and perfection to
that of all animals. But, if we would look to what
most distinguishes man, we must attend to what is
present in him, and wanting in all the other denizens
of earth ; viz., mind, language, and soul, his schemes
for education in this world, and self-denying pre-
paration for another.

ven in the same manner,—whatever may be
ultimately thought as to the degree of the thing
shadowed out,—there appears to be a series of features
in the Great Pyramid, which have no counterparts
whatever in the other Pyramids ; and excel, as well
in the grandeur of their objects, as elevation of their
meaning, the mere corporal existence of any ordi-
nary Pyramid, as far as does the soul, the body of
man. ‘To these, so to speak, psychical distinctions
of the Great Pyramid, therefore, we propose now to
address ourselves ; but our progress must be very
cautious, and jealously watchful for any possibility
of being led astray by imperfect knowledge,—not of
what the monument is now, picturesque and grand
too in its ruins,—but of what it was at the time of
its building ; for only in so far as we can regain
that state, are we entitled to any certainty in con-
cluding its original character, objects, or purposes.


6 INTRODUCTION. [ DIV. 1.


Now, in this point of view, we cannot realize to
ourselves too copiously, that the Great Pyramid has
been standing amongst mankind, by the testimony
of all modern authors, 3500 years at least,—some say
very much more, as even 6500 years,—and we may,
in the end, be able to throw some light on the
question of how long exactly. It dates, therefore,
even at the lowest published computation, in Biblical
personal chronology, not only from before the ‘ birth
‘of history on that night when Moses led the
‘ Exodus out of Egypt,’ but before Jacob, and before
Abraham ; long before any known literal representa
tion of language, either Hebrew, Sanscrit, or even
Egyptian ; before any papyrus that has been pre-
served, and before any recognised examples of even
pictorial representations, other than a few carved
and painted stones in and about the Pyramids
themselves.,

What changes, then, and what mischiefs may not
have occurred to the Great Pyramid, through all
that enormous space of time, during which Egypt
was trodden under foot by nation after nation in
succeeding ages of the world ; and the Great Pyra-
mid standing all the time in the midst of a field. of
tombs, one of the grandest scenes of burial through-
out the whole earth. For a time, indeed, the sanctity
of a place of sepulchres reputed of the kings of the
nation, would hedge the whole district around with
intense respect, nay, even veneration ; and a deposit
of other things for safe keeping, besides occasional


DIV. 1. | INTRODUCTION, ¢


gold and jewels, may have been made there. Of
treasure, however, in the usual acceptation of the
term, there has been remarkably little found at any
time near the Jeezeh Pyramids, so that mere robbers
for filthy lucre’s sake, never received much en-
couragement ;* and the first form assumed by want
of respect towards the original dead, which arose
with new dynasties and strange tribes dominant in
the land, was merely an occupying of their expen-
sively constructed, or laboriously excavated tombs
for similar burial purposes again.? In short, the
field of the Pyramids, and often the same individual


1 Ancient Roman coins are found occasionally in some of the tombs,
and we saw a handful in 1864, which had been bought the same day
from an Arab near the Pyramid. Gold signet-rings of Egyptian manu-
facture, have likewise been met with: for, not only is there the well-
known instance of the ring secured by the late Dr. Abbott, and dis-
tinguished by the oval of King Shofo; but we have been lately
informed, that a very similar ring, massive and solid, but belonging to
a subsequent dynasty, was found in a tomb on the eastern side of the
Great Pyramid hill in 1866, and was sold from hand to hand at in-
creasing prices, before the Museum of Boolak could step in to claim
its own. |

2 In Hekekyan Bey’s Chronology of Siriadic Monuments, the fol-
lowing instructive passage occurs at p. 20 :—‘ But we must be on our
‘ guard not to assign the construction of a monument always to the
‘most prominently legible names that have been engraved on it.
‘There was a colossal statue of the first class in dimensions in
‘ Memphis, the cylinders of which had apparently, by the frequent
‘ sections sliced off from them to engrave new seals or ovals on them,
‘been so much diminished, that a mortise was made through and
‘ through in each hand for the introduction of new cylinders. There
‘ were also standard statues in the temples, made to the size of life,
‘ with a hollow in their faces for the introduction of new noses, in
‘ order to bring about a resemblance to the king of the day. As these
‘ statues were painted and gilded, a clever artist, assisted by conven-
‘tionalities respected by public opinion, could gratify the vanity of
‘ the ruling sovereign.’


8 INTRODUCTION. [ DIV. 1


vaults, continued to be used for interment over and
over again, for more than two thousand years, or up
to the time of the Romans; and the full rage for
breaking up, ransacking, and plundering,—only


really began, after the locust-like armies of the


destroying Muslims had issued from their Arabian
home, and established themselves in the Coptic
land.

Here, then, in the Great Pyramid, are the re-
mains of a building so old that no contemporary
writing about it exists; indeed, no subsequent
book-writing treats of it within 1500 years at least
of its foundation,—when changes of race, religion,
and sentiment innumerable had in the meantime
occurred, and its real purpose been lost. And now
it is so injured, by comparatively recent ravages, as
to be in the eyes of some passing travellers little
better than a heap of stones. What, therefore, can
be undeniably made out from its relics in our day,
as to an exact nature or character having ever
appertained to it ?

Little enough, we may fear ; unless, indeed, some
far surpassing skill was employed, both in devising
its principles, and superintending their methods of
execution. But as that is precisely what has been
often, and very variously, asserted, and denied,—
the question, as above proposed, is brought im-
mediately before us, and invested with important
claims for earnest, and even instant, attention.
Wherefore, taking for granted that our readers at


a i ag ne ee a


DIV. I. | INTRODUCTION. 9


this stage are acquainted with all the leading points
in its history (so far as written), and the generally
acknowledged more conspicuous features of its ap-
pearance,—we shall treat of the Great Pyramid, not
as a thing just descended upon earth, and requiring
a round-about induction before anything whatever
is to be inferred concerning the mere existence of
any part of it,—but, as something known approxi-
mately for a long time; and allowing us freely to
begin, by mentioning some very simple proposi-
tions already adverted to by numerous authors,
and testing how far they may be borne out by
these recent, and more than usually painstaking,
observations of ours: hence—


PROPOSITION I.


‘THE BASE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID IS SQUARE 2’


GENERALLY speaking, every one can see that the
base of the Great Pyramid has four sides ; that the
angles at the corners cannot be very far from
right angles ; and that the sides cannot be very un-
equal in length: but some men have hesitated to
admit any high degree of exactness in those parti-
culars, in face of the following passage from F.
Vausleb, A.D. 1664 :—

‘I have taken notice that none of the Pyramids’
‘ (bases) are alike, or perfectly square ; but that all
‘ have two sides longer than the others. I intended
‘to measure the greatest ; for that purpose I had
‘ with me a string of about thirty land yards; but
‘because the winds have heaped about it mountains
‘of sand, I could not possibly draw a line straight
‘from one angle to the other.’

Now, from the confidence with which this author
speaks of two sides being so plainly overlong, even
to casual observation,—one can hardly imagine that
he would infer less difference than about 1-5th of


PROP. I.] IS BASE OF GREAT PYRAMID SQUARE? 11


the whole of one side, which feature at the Great
Pyramid measures about nine thousand inches in
length. Yet in the early part of April 1865, when I
had had three months’ acquaintance with the Pyra-
mid,—and then went over all four sides (vol.
ii. p. 133) with a 500-inch cord, making the best
allowance that I could for broken corners, and
heaped flanks,—the difference of the least, from the
greatest, measured side seemed under one hundred
inches ; or, 1-90th only, of the whole ; in spite, too,
of such evidently large errors of observation accom-
panying, that this result could be considered only
as a first and rather distant approximation.

Yet no closer approach was probably ever made
in modern times, until a few weeks afterwards,—
when Mr. Inglis uncovered all four of the peculiar
corner-sockets of the original casing-stone surface,
or true exterior of the ancient Pyramid (vol. i. ch.
Xvi. p. 535; also Plate rv. vol. i); found them
marked sharply and immovably in the solid rock
below ; and the distances between them not to vary
in any two cases above eighteen inches (vol. ii. p. 134),
or, no more than 1-508th of the whole side! And
even this could only be regarded as another step of
approximation, weighted too, more probably with
large errors of observation by the modern observer,
than of commission by the ancient builder,—because,
the ground between each socket is now so excessively
difficult to measure over, by reason of heaps of
broken stones.


12 IS BASE OF [DIV. 1.


The third approximation therefore fell to my
share, in measuring with the Playfair altitude-azi-
muth instrument, the azimuth,—first, of the line of
the two sockets on the eastern side, and second, of
those on the northern side of the Pyramid ; for such
measure was independent of the exact length of the
sides, and made positive use of the heaps of rubbish
in the middle of them by mounting the instrument
upon their bulk, thereby enabling it to see, both
the signals placed over the terminal sockets, and
also the Polar star. The latter was unfortunately
the only means of connecting the two sets of
sockets, for each socket is in a sort of hole, and can
see no other socket on account of huge intervening
mounds of rubbish ; hence the observation is not
by any means a ne plus ultra of modern measure ;
yet it was more trustworthy, @ priori, than the two
former methods, and made the angle of the Great
Pyramid’s base at the north-east corner, to be equal
to 90°,—all but a few seconds short of 1’ (vol. ii.
p. 194). Let us say 1’; and, to form an idea of
what that signifies in the former terms ;—if that 1’
were caused solely by the west side of the Great
Pyramid being of a different length from the other
three,—a variation of 2°5 inches, or only 1-3600th
part of the whole length, would make all the
difference of angle found.

In direct proportion then as our means of measur-
ing the contested point have advanced in power, so
has the base of the Great Pyramid been proved to


een ee


PROP. II. | GREAT PYRAMID SQUARE ? 13


be closer and closer to a true square ; and so close
at last, that there can hardly be any reasonable
doubt left, as to the zntention of the builders to have
made it as perfectly square as their practical means
enabled them to do. Seeing, moreover, that no
better result of measure is likely to be procured,
until excavations and clearings are effected round
the entire Pyramid,—and in so extensive as well as
complete a manner that no one at present living,
whether European or Egyptian, seems disposed to
be at the expense of undertaking them,—we may
consider this first Proposition to have been tem-
porarily settled in the affirmative.


PROPOSITION IL.


‘THE FOUR SIDES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID INCLINE
TOWARDS ITS CENTRAL VERTICAL AXIS AT EQUAL
ANGLES 2’


Now Dr. Perry, in 1743, has written, that ‘ in the
‘ opinion of most persons the different sides of the
‘« (Great) Pyramid ascend at. different angles ; that
‘one side has an angle of 40%, another of 37°5, a
‘third of 35°, and a fourth of 42°5°” and although
Colonel Howard Vyse remarked, ‘this may be
‘ owing to the dilapidated state of the building and
‘to the base having been covered with sand and
‘ rubbish—for the building was no doubt equilateral


14 ARE SIDES OF [ DIV. 1.


‘ and equiangular, —yet this does not exactly meet all
the difficulties of the case. It might also be further
alleved with that party, that not only he, but the
French savants of 1799, Sir Gardner Wilkinson,
and all other really first-rate authorities, have inva-
riably thought it sufficient in their published descrip-
tions of the Great Pyramid, to give the angle of one
side only,—or rather to state one angle, even to the
accuracy of a single minute of space,—as represent-
ing equally and sufficiently the inclination of every
side. But then comes the question,—if they only
measured one side, of what possible authority can
their assertions be, as touching the other sides ?
There may be more observations on the subject
recorded somewhere by those eminent men, but |
am not at present acquainted with them : nor was I
when, in January 1865, Mr. Ayrton kindly commu-
nicated to me his own observations (given in vol. i.
Section v.) ; observations taken with a theodolite,
and evidently by a man well acquainted with the
principles of mathematical investigation. Now, as
these observations give the angles of the different
sides varying from 51° 51’ to 55° 58’, they appear to
prove an immense fact of diversity actually exist-
ing in the present pile of the mere internal courses
of the ancient Pyramid ; an amount indeed of error,
which the builders would have found it very diffi-
cult to restore to truth, with the limited means
which the thickness of the casing-stones placed at
their command. In this point of view, I conversed


a ee


PROP. II.] GREAT PYRAMID EQUALLY INCLINED? 15


on the subject with other members of the late Cairo
Institute ; but they expressed the utmost confidence
in Mr. Ayrton’s observations, as representing a real
feature in the Pyramid, and deserving most serious
attention. They likewise characterized the whole
casing-stone theory asa pure modern invention,—the
Great Pyramid having always been, in their estima-
tion, the ‘ stepped,’ or ‘laddered, structure it now is.
Let us therefore first take the present Pyramid
just as it stands, and test that by further observa-
tion. Before bringing any instruments to bear too,
let us make ourselves acquainted with the structure
which is to be observed : for, even passing over the
asperities of rectangular courses of stone, forming,
by their being set one within the other as they
ascend, a general oblique line,—it is sensibly inexact
on a larger scale, dependent on the greater weather-
ing of the softer stone used for the middle part of
every side, and the less weathering of the harder
stone introduced all along the corner slopes, and
over the whole summit ;—a feature well brought out
in some of the photographs, especially Stereograph
No. 5. Hence the tendency would certainly be,—
were a person on the summit of the Pyramid, and
directing a theodolite along the edges of the stone
courses in the middle of every side as far as he
could see clearly,—to obtain too large an angle of
dip ; and a very inexact one also, because it must
be decided by the weathering of the stones at a
distant part, where they cannot be well examined.


16 ARE SIDES OF [ DIV. 1.


Now this, I am told, was the manner,—very credit-
able too, to the observer, as touching the brave ex-
posure of himself and theodolite on the top of a
dizzy, dangerous height,—in which Mr. Ayrton’s
observations were made ; and his own angles of in-
clination of the corner-lines of the Pyramid (where
there is hard stone all along), if we compute the side
inclination therefrom, prove his mean observed angle
of the side to be full 2° over great. His corner-line
angles are also much more accordant inter se, vary-
ing only 30’, against the variation of his side angles
by 4° 7’. Plainly, therefore, the latter large quantity
is an error due to not attending to the practical de-
tails of the nature of the thing to be observed ; though
it gives a gratifying proof of the perfect honesty and
general ability of the observer concerned.

My own direct measures of the case were only
made on April the 8th; when I had become pretty
well acquainted with the accidents of the Pyramid
surface. And my method was, to ascend the rubbish-
heap in the middle of every side, and choose there
amongst stones variously weathered, one that had
suffered least, and then measure the angle from that
to the summit of the Pyramid,—where I knew from
previous observation, though I could not then see it,
that all the stones were little worn :—and the result
was, that no greater difference than 15’ was found
between any two sides (see vol. ii. p. 165).

A more powerful opportunity, however, occurred
in the last week of the same month, after the corner


PROP. Il.] GREAT PYRAMID EQUALLY INCLINED? 17


sockets of the original base of the Pyramid had been
opened up. For, on observing with the large Playfair
alt-azimuth instrument, the angle of altitude of the
top of the Pyramid, as seen from the floor of each
socket just inside its outer corner,—the differences
were reduced to 8’; and when the floors were cor-
rected. for their various depressions below a given
datum. plane, the differences (see vol. ii. p. 176) were
further reduced to 3’. Ld I -
Now this last approximation, which comes so very
close to the statement of our proposition, was ob-
tained by employing the present Pyramid at the
top, and the ancient Pyramid at the bottom, as
represented by its four sockets; and as these are
considered to be the sockets of its former outside


- casing-stones,—their theory is included, and partly


confirmed by the result. But we have further testi-
mony on that point.

Herodotus and other authors speak of the smooth
surface of the sides of the Great Pyramid, evi-
dently as formed by the bevelled outside of the
casing-stones: besides which, we see portions of
the casing of the second and third Pyramids still
existing ; and, by excavation, may find the lower
part of the casing of the seventh, eighth, and ninth
Pyramids still 1m situ; all these casings being on
the same plan, viz., stones of fine quality, admirably
worked, rectangular at the back towards the bulk of
the Pyramid, and bevelled off on the outer surface
to one general angle for each Pyramid.

VOL. III. B


18° ARE SIDES OF [ DIV. I.


‘That may be, said learned Cairenes, ‘ for all
‘ those other Pyramids you have mentioned ; but the
‘Great Pyramid was different from its neighbours
‘in that particular, for it was always the “ laddered”
‘ Pyramid; and though no doubt Colonel Howard
‘ Vyse did find two bevelled stones at the northern
‘ foot, there were never more than those two!’

I have already described, however, in vol. i. ch.
ix. p. 216, the finding by our party, of fragments
of casing-stones innumerable, on all four sides of the
Great Pyramid: and have now further to record, that
when the oblique angles of fourteen of these frag-
ments were afterwards measured carefully in Edin-
burgh, they gave, within twelve minutes, the same
angle for each of the four sides of the monument ;
as close a proof to the equality of the ancient angle
of the Pyramid sides, as could be expected from the
small size and injured character of the specimens.
And having had, further, a large theoretical model of
the Pyramid recently constructed by a very exact-
working carpenter,—and having had set in the sides
of that model, with either their upper or lower sur-
faces coincident with a horizontal section of the
same, all the available casing-stone specimens,—
their outer bevelled surfaces were invariably found
practically coincident with the theoretical slope of
the model.* ‘I should not have been so much sur-
‘ prised,’ said the carpenter, speaking as a represen-


1 This model, with its casing-stone fragments, was presented to the
Royal Society, Edinburgh, in April 1866.


PROP. Ill. ] GREAT PYRAMID EQUALLY INCLINED? 19


tative man of his order in the present advanced age
of the world, and in a city noted for intellect and
education, ‘I should not have been so much sur-
‘ prised, if one or two of the stones had fitted ; but
‘ to find all fourteen of them fit; and fit as exactly
‘as if they had been made to my own work, that
‘ does surprise me !’

After this rude though thoroughly practical illus-
tration, it will probably be allowed,—that in its
original perfect state, the Great Pyramid must have
been a remarkably close approach to the regular
figure demanded in our present Proposition.


PROPOSITION IIL


‘THE ANGLE OF INCLINATION OF THE SIDES OF THE
GREAT PYRAMID IS 51° 51’ 14°3” 2’


THE two former propositions merely went to
ascertain whether the Great Pyramid could be con-
sidered as a regular structure, or indeed as a mathe-
matical Pyramid at all—a quality which may or
may not belong to any of the other so-called
Pyramids around; and is generic only, in its widest
sense. But the present proposition is far more par-
ticular ; for, while from the same base there may
be raised, by altering the angle of the sides, an in-
finite number of regular, though different, Pyramids;
it is here asserted that the angle of the sides of the


20 WHAT 1S EXACTLY [ DIV. I.


Great Pyramid is of precisely such an amount, as to
cause the linear proportion which the vertical height
of the whole mass, bears to twice the length of one
side of the base,—to be precisely that of the diameter,
to the circumference, of a circle; the invaluable
quantity a of all modern mathematics.

This view of the matter is owing certainly and
solely to the late John Taylor. He derived it
originally from the measures published by Colonel
Howard Vyse, giving the angle of his two celebrated
casing-stones im situ at the northern foot of. the
Pyramid, as being between 51° 50’ and 51° 52’ 15”.
This result was by two different methods of mea-
surement, but the latter slightly better than the
former, so as to raise the mean rather above
51° 51’ 8”: and he, John Taylor, held to his views
therefrom, notwithstanding that a host of diverse ma-
thematical theorems were advanced by other investi-
gators, as having probably regulated the proportions
of the Great Pyramid. Notwithstanding also that
Colonel Howard Vyse’s friend and assistant in Egypt,
Mr. Perring, subsequently fell away from his own
original measures; and, having lost by death the
Colonel’s friendly and honest guidance, committed
the fatal mistake,—applauded though it was by
Chevalier Bunsen,—of remodelling all the measured
proportions of the Pyramid, according to a pure
hypothesis as to even numbers of the Egyptian
eubit having been employed on the principal lines.
Whence resulted the angle 51° 20’ 25”, for the incli-


PROP. III. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? 21


nation of the sides of the Great Pyramid ; a quan-
tity which has therefore been boldly, even brazenly,
printed as heing the actual fact, in the second volume
of Bunsen’s Lgypt’s Place in Universal History.)
Now, if the question had rested still, where Colonel
Howard Vyse left it, I would not have presumed to
interfere. For although my angle-measuring instru-
ments were superior to his,—there is not now any
feature accessible about any part of the Pyramid,
which can approach in the remotest degree to the
admirable facilities for correct measure «vhich his
large casing-stones in situ afforded,—or which can
pretend to bring the question within the very small
range of uncertainty, which his two perfectly in-
dependent methods of measuring the same thing,
ultimately resulted in.? But when some one else in
London, subsequently alters the quantity at will, by
more than half a degree,—I have then no compunc-
tion in bringing out whatever I may have actually
observed in Egypt; and in thereby allowing all men


1 As an illustration both of the persuasions to which Mr. Perring
may have succumbed, and of some men being still sadly prone to put
theory, not only before, but in place of, measure,—I may mention
having received a letter from an octogenarian in October 1866, suggest-
ing that I should proportion all my own measures to his theoretical lengths
of coffer and Pyramid ; for though these latter hypothetical numbers
are often very wide of the actual quantities, their author thinks they
illustrate ‘ eternal laws,’ and ‘absolute harmonies ;’ and are therefore
infinitely superior to anything that can be derived from direct mea-
sures. He likewise advises that the present book should be illustrated,
not with drawings of the Pyramid itself, but with photographs of a
large diagram representing his theoretical idea of the Pyramid !

2 See Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid, by the Author, pp. 21
to 24.


22 - WHAT IS EXACTLY [ DIV. 1.


to see for themselves, whether there is any probability
of 51° 20’ being nearer to the fact of the Great
Pyramid, than 51° 51’; for the odd seconds are not
worth noting in the presence of more than half a
degree of defalcation.

First, then, I would remark, referring to page 165
of volume second,—that my measures of the mere
denuded sides of the Great Pyramid, taken with spe-
cial pains to avoid effects of weathering, are, on every
flank of the Pyramid, contained within the numbers
51°39’ and 51°59’.. And, second, that the fragments
of all the casing-stones measured, come (vol. ii. p. 169)
in the means of two sets arranged according to their
having been derived from the upper or lower edge
of the casing-stones,—between 51° 49’ and 51° 58’.

But whereas those two examples may be con-
sidered of very limited powers, I would allude,
thirdly, to the observations taken with the Playfair
altitude-azimuth instrument from the four corner
sockets of the Pyramid. There, at least for the
lower parts, we had the very original terminal mark-
ings of the Pyramid’s base ; and if for the summit we
had only the denuded top of the Pyramid, we may
have some means of approximating to the thickness
of casing to be virtually supplied. In fact, on this
point the whole question turns; we shall do well,
therefore, to inquire into its structural details before
referring to instrumental observations.


Now, only by examination of the Pyramids them-


|


PROP. III. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? aS


selves, can we expect to become acquainted with
their builders’ mode of applying their peculiar sys-
tem of a casing-stone finish to the exterior; and
there are some points about it, which have not yet
been brought out in print. On looking to the third
Pyramid of Jeezeh, we see many of its casing-stones
still in situ at various heights, simply seated in the
angles of the component courses of masonry ; and if
that were the rule also at the Great Pyramid, the
average thickness of the casing must always have
been measured by one stone. But, if we examine,
on the other hand, the second Pyramid of Jeezeh,—
it is found to have one, or more, thicknesses of a
sort of intermediate class of backing-stones, between
the rude courses of masonry and the exquisitely
bevelled exterior of the outer casing ; the horizontal
thickness, consequently, of what must be considered
there, the general casing, is measured by several
stones, and is much greater than at the third Pyramid.

Which of these two plans, then, was probably
adopted at the Great Pyramid ?

Without doubt that of the second oe for
there, all the casing still visible about the upper
part, is of the white Mokattam limestone, such as all
the fragments at the foot of the Great Pyramid are
composed of; and those two are nearly contem-
poraneous buildings (see chapter x., vol. i.) ; while
the third Pyramid is an erection of a long sub-
sequent age, and its casing is in red granite, a rare
and costly material in Lower and Middle Egypt.


Dt WHAT IS EXACTLY [ DIV. 1.


‘Let us attend then to what are the facts at the
second Pyramid; where, after having first noticed
certain phenomena from the ground below it, with
the eye,—I was subsequently enabled to obtain an
approximate measure of them by placing several
photographs, then and there taken, under a micro-
scope provided with a micrometer; and the following
are the nearly consistent results derived from views
of both the north, east, and south sides, but more
particularly from the southern end of the east
side, close to the lower termination of the casing
there—


Height of each of the regular courses of masonry

forming the core of the upper part of the building, = 37 inches,
Height of each of the stones forming the external sur-

face of the casing, P : 1 =—Sho¢- yy
Height of each of the stones tose one or more

layers between the regular internal courses of

masonry and the outside bevelled casing-stones, .= 20 ,,
Horizontal distance from the outside bevelled surface

of the casing-stones, to the regular courses of in-

ternal masonry core, including, therefore, all the

interstitial layers of backing-stones of 20°, ~ eee ile
See Frontispiece.


1 As a further illustration of the large amount of horizontal projec-
tion of the casing-stones beyond the courses of the second Pyramid,—
I may mention that our Arab attendant, Alee Dobree, being freed
from our service on a Sunday, employed his leisure on one occasion in
company with some of his friends, in conducting an eager traveller,
name unknown, up the second Pyramid. They progressed well
enough for half the ascent; but when they came close under the
casing, and saw it spread out over their heads like an umbrella,—the
traveller became so nervously alarmed, that Alee and the Arabs had
to bind him to them, they said, with ropes, or he would have fallen
down like a stone; and there was an end at once to all his ambitious
projects, at the second Pyramid.

In Howard Vyse and Perring’s folio views the horizontal distance of


PROP. IIL. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? 25


Now, inasmuch as these numbers show, that the
casing-stones were generally small as compared
with the blocks forming the courses of masonry,
and were accompanied by other small stones, also
of fine quality behind them, and cut rectangularly,


—we see immediately why the casing of a Pyramid,


cased on such a plan, was so great a prize to the
Muslim plunderers of the middle ages, who were in
need. of building materials for their newly-devised
cities. or, such moderate-sized rectangular stones,
of the white Mokattam order, are precisely what the
Arabs about the Pyramids are still plundering the
tombs of,—whenever their internal walls are so
composed; and at the Great Pyramid, the supply of
such stones could only be got at by pulling off the
bevelled casing. While, if this itself was likewise
composed for the most part of stones only twenty
inches high,—they could be trimmed into shape -with
far greater ease, than such very large blocks as all
the casing-stones have been usually supposed to be,
from the enormous size of Colonel Howard Vyse’s
celebrated two. These, however, formed part of the
very base of the casing, and had a particular mecha-
nical reason for being massive, which did not like-
wise appertain to the majority above them.


the outside casing from the inside courses, is about ninety-six inches,
close under the casing ; but rather more a few courses lower down.
The datum for linear measures of details in my photographs already
alluded to, I should add, has been the breadth of the second Pyramid,
from point to point of its casing’s lower end, as given in the meridian
section of the same folio views, and made equal to two thousand two
hundred inches.


26 WHAT IS EXACTLY [ DIV. I


To infer again what the arrangement of the
upper part of the. casing of the Great Pyramid must
have been, from another example than that of the
second Pyramid,—we may allude to Colonel Howard
Vyse’s description of the north Pyramid of Dashoor,
the architecture of which he frequently compares to
that of the Great Pyramid; besides its being, in
point of size of base, the nearest approach to that
grand example, of all the Pyramids of Heypt. This
Dashoor monument, then, was built of a local red-
dish stone, full of petrified shells, but was cased
with white Mokattam stone. Some patches of this
casing still exist 7m situ, at various heights of the
Pyramid’s sides; and one of them, represented on
Plate 1, shows unequivocally the backing, or filling-
in, with rectangular blocks of white Mokattam mate-
rial, between the bevelled casing-stones and the
regular courses of constructive masonry of the
Pyramid’s core. There is no scale to the Colonel’s
or Mr. Perring’s view (Plate 14 of his folio views) ;
but, measured. by his stated breadth of the entrance
passage which is close by,—the mean horizontal
thickness of the white casing and backing stones
represented, is rather more than 120 inches. In
other parts of the Pyramid the same feature varies
from 60 to 130 inches,—the figure given by the mere
masonry courses being very rude, and requiring much
larger corrections in some places than in others.!


1 The following further account of this Dashoor Pyramid is impor-
tant. ‘The top of the Pyramid was built entirely with Arabian


eT eas


“


PROP. IIL. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? 27


Now comes the all-important question, viz., what
thickness shall we assign to the casing that once
surrounded the present summit of the Great Pyra-
mid ; which so-called summit, let it always be borne
in mind, must have been some 350 inches below
the original culminating point? Colonel Howard
Vyse gives for the distance of the outside of his two
casing-stones, from the Pyramid courses, on their
level, ‘about nine feet, or 108 inches; and in his
view, he fills part of that space with certain filling-in
blocks, as also shown on our Plate 1. fig. 3. But
if we take for the summit casing’s horizontal
thickness in the middle of one of the sides, the
round number of 100 inches,—and add one inch for
the thick layer of red mortar between the outside of
the masonry course and the first surface of the
backing-stones,—similarly with what may be seen
outside the present north-eastern corner of the Pyr-
amid near the ground (stereographic photograph
No. 1),—we then have a side thickness which gives
a diagonal measure at the corner, of 143 inches.
And, from our actual measure, at the socket below
with the Playfair altitude-azimuth instrument, of


signals held out at the top of the Pyramid to dis-


(Mokattam) stone. The apex had been formed of one block, and the
‘course below it of four others, 57 inches thick; but in general the
‘ courses towards the top were about 24 inches, and those near the
‘base 36 inches in thickness. The stones are laid in horizontal
‘ courses, and the whole of the masonry is good, and resembles that of
‘ the Great Pyramid of Jeezeh.’

‘ Being still very sharp at top, it is called by the Arabs ‘‘ Haram
‘ Mesinee,” the pointed or sharp Pyramid. It is also called “ Haram
‘el Wataweet,” from the number of bats within it.’


28 WHAT IS EXACTLY [DIV. 1.


tances of both 100 and 150 inches in the diagonal
direction,—we are justified in stating (see vol. ii.
p. 176), that the 143-inch diagonal would have an
altitude at every corner, between 41° 58’, and 42° 1’;
while the theoretical corner angle arising from John
Taylor’s side angle of 51° 51’ 14°3", is 41° 59’ 48°17".


This example may perhaps suffice to show, that
Colonel Howard Vyse’s measured, and John Taylor’s
adopted, angle of the side inclination of the Great
Pyramid, cannot be very far from the truth. But
there is even a fourth reference which may be made
to observation ; and if the things referred to therein
do not appear at first sight, to be in any immediate
way connected with the matter, and never have
been so connected yet by any author or traveller,—
they will speak for themselves when they come ‘to
be measured. Most happily too, every part of them
which has to enter into the measurement, still exists
visibly and tangibly; so that good, painstaking,
modern observation is perfectly able of itself, either
to prove or disprove what has just been advanced.

The features here alluded to, are the azimuth
trenches, as we have termed them (vol. i. p.134 and
416; and vol. i. p.125 and 185; see also Plate xv.
vol. ii.), before the Eastern face of the Great Pyramid ;
features which are unique, and have nothing at all
resembling them, about any other of the Pyramids
of Jeezeh. The earliest distinct notice which I
have been able to identify as alluding to them, is


PROP. III. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? 29


that of Dr. Richardson in 1817; and he, travelling
in the train of a peer of the realm, and at a time
when the trenches were half filled with rubbish,
speaks of them as resembling the inclined roads by
which a gentleman’s carriage would be taken to
and from a pond of water. He then speculates upon
whether they might not really have had something
to do with moisture in a more important manner,—
imagining that the water of the Nile was raised up
in ancient days by bucket-wheels innumerable to
the top of the hill, and then poured into the
trenches ; which, if cleared of their present ano-
malous contents, might be found, he suggests, to
descend very deep, and convey their fluid supplies
to the concealed tomb of King Cheops, keeping
that structure thereby perpetually surrounded with
water, in the island-like manner detailed by Hero-
dotus. 3

Subsequently, M. Caviglia in 1820, and Mr.
Perring in 1837, did clear out most of the loose
rubbish ; and thereby showed the untenability, either
of the carriage-road or the water-trough hypotheses :
—in their place, however, announcing the idea, that
the trenches had been used for mixing mortar in
at the tume of building the Pyramid; an idea
repeated by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, though with-
out particular affirmation. Dr. Lepsius again looked
on at the same hollows in 1843, pronouncing them,
according to his map, to be tombs. And finally,
the moment I caught sight of them in January


30 . WHAT IS EXACTLY [ DIV. I.


1865, they gave me the impression of being some-
how or other connected with an original laying out
of the dominant angles of the Great Pyramid,—in
the manner of an astronomer’s marking the meri-
dian and prime vertical lines with much exactitude,
before beginning to build a public observatory.

Two of the trenches, the north and south ones, evi-
dently indicate a meridian line, or rather a parallel
to the east face of the Great Pyramid. And then
a very peculiar, sharply, and deeply cut trench,—
the east-north-east one,—goes off from the middle of
the linear distance between them (Plate xv. vol. ii.),
at an angle, measured accurately with the Playfair
instrument, of 76° 25’ 52” with the line of the north
and south trenches; and of 76° 11’ 22” with the
line of the two sockets at the north-east and south-
east corners of the Pyramid’s base.. The mean of
these two quantities, being 76° 18’ 38’,—while the
angle at the summit of the Pyramid between op-
posite faces, according to John Taylor’s theory, is’
TUT SL,

Again, from the same starting-point, the angle
between the north-north-east and east-north-east
trenches, is 51° 53’ 22”; evidently a near approach
to John Taylor's number for the angle of elevation
at the foot of the Great Pyramid in the middle of
one of its sides. But as this angle can be deduced
trigonometrically from the angle at the summit of
the Pyramid, of which we have the two distinct
trench measures above given,—there can be produced


PROP. III. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES 4 34


from the azimuth trenches three determinations for
the angle of the foot of the Pyramid, as thus—


i i : ; : ; : ‘ D1 oo oe

2; F * r a ‘ ; 51 47 4
OS | See oP eee Sa eee ee 5l 54 19
The mean of all which, is . 5r 51 35


an astonishingly close approximation surely to John
Taylor's 51° 51’ 14°3”: and utterly removed from
Mr. Perring’s and Chevalier Bunsen’s hypothetical
quantity of 51° 20’.

True, no doubt, that these trench results may be.
termed ‘ only a coincidence ;’ but then what a coin-
cidence, compared to any other that could be in-
stituted in all that region, even amongst forms more
apparently similar! Look round, for instance, at all
the rest of the Jeezeh Pyramids, some of them in-
dicated historically to be built in imitation of the
Great Pyramid,—but by kings or architects who were
of a diametrically opposed religious belief ; and who
evidently, by the fact of the measured proportions
of their works, did not appreciate the invaluable
geometrical consequence of the particular angle
51° 51 14°3”.. For thus are given those Pyramids’
angles by modern independent observation—

52° 50’ by the French savants.


Second Pyramid, 52 20 by Howard Vyse.
52 50 by C. Piazzi Smyth.


Third Pyramid, 51 0 by Howard Vyse.
Fifth, ,, 52 15 3
Seventh ,, 52 10 3
Eighth ,, 52 10 df


Ninth _,, 52 10 >


32 WHAT IS EXACTLY [ DIV. I.


That is to say, each and every one of these Pyramids
is largely removed,—or, by a great many times the
value of the azimuth-trench angular differences,—
from the typical angle of the Great Pyramid! But,
while pointing out this remarkable feature as a cry-
ing fact, I am at the same time quite ready to bow
before a civil engineer like Mr. Perring, in a matter
of building,—and allow, that the trenches were used,
and. probably.opened out and widened along their
axes at the time of the building of the Great Pyra-
mid,—for ‘miaing mortar’ in. Or, to be equally re-
spectful before Dr. Lepsius, as a sepulchral authority,
—and consent to the trenches having been used, after
the building was over, and mortar-mixing no longer
required,—for the interment of corpses; (indeed, our
own. people, in clearing out rubbish from the southern
end of the north trench, turned out several lumps of
bitumen, and a few mummy rags). But these em-
ployments can by no means explain, and have not
even attempted to explain, the particular, nay, the
more than particular, angles at which the axes of the
trenches are azimuthally situated with respect to
each other ; and the placing of them at those angles,
must have preceded their employment for the other
more material and subsequently useful purposes
alleged.

Hither, then, the trenches were placed by their
original diggers at the actual angles now ascertained,
intentionally, or not intentionally. If the former,
those men, who must also be looked on as the


PROP. III. | THE ANGLE OF SIDES ? 33


builders of the Great Pyramid, knew what a re-
markable property they could give to a Pyramid,
by constructing its slope at the critical angle of 51°
51’ nearly, and we shall do wisely to attend with
care to their other angular works. But if the latter,
that is, if the angle was the result of pure accident,
without the will or intention of the builders being
exerted to any extent,—and if we find, on investi-
gating further, that the Great Pyramid is full of
similar accidents,—each of them dovetailing into
the other, and forming a regular system with a set
purpose and grand design,—then what some men
call accident, others will be inclined to look on as
Providence ‘overruling the works of men, and
‘causing them to assist in bringing out results
‘ which they never anticipated.’

For the present, however, we merely request
attention to the features of this one case on its own
merits; for there, no subsequent use which the
trenches may have been put to, during the last four
thousand years, has prevented an orzginal feature of
them being recovered by modern scientific measure ;
and when it is so recovered, it is found eminently
corroborative of John Taylor’s peculiar angle, while
it lends additional force to the truth and reality of
this, our third Proposition.


VOL, III. C


34 INCLINED PASSAGES, [DIV. I.


PROPOSITION IV.


‘THE ANGLE OF INCLINATION OF THE INCLINED PAS-
SAGES IN THE GREAT PYRAMID, IS 26° 18’ 10’,
NEARLY ?


In so far as the Great Pyramid has a descending
entrance passage leading to a subterranean chamber,
it is like every other Pyramid at Jeezeh ; but from
a certain part of that entrance passage, defined on
the floor by a device of the builders which our
linear measures discovered (vol. i. p. 154, and vol. ii.
p- 15), there branches off the system of ascending
passages, known now by name of the first ascending
passage, and the Grand Gallery; and these, as
they exist in the Great Pyramid, are quite unique
throughout all known Pyramid architecture. Con-
sidering, then, the descending entrance passage, from
its mouth to the sign on the floor, a necessary means
of approach to the other two passages, both of them
ascending,—we have three passages peculiar to, or at
least connected with, the typical part of the Great
Pyramid; and of which passages we require to
know the angle of inclination. While we may well
be urged to a more studious examination of the
subject, on recognising in the walls of these passages
the very surfaces, still existing, that were formed by
the handiwork and intentions of the original builders.

Generally speaking, all modern travellers have


PROP. IV.] HOW MUCH INCLINED ? 35


at once pronounced the amount of angle of the
ascending passages above a horizontal level, to be
equal to that of the descending passage below the
same ; though some have stated sensible differences
amongst them, and have given angles for one or all
varying anywhere between 25° and 27°. For, as to
30° and 60° of some earlier authors, they must be
attributed to the effect on their nerves of the dark-
ness, and their ‘terrour of descending the slope,’ the
facilis descensus Averni, as they thought it, rather
than as the result of their applying any instrumental
clinometer, however rude.

The angle, on the other hand, contained in our
proposition, is a very simple deduction (which oc-
curred to me in 1864), from a consideration of Mr.
Taylor's figure of the Pyramid already given ; and is
to be further explained in our next Proposition, as
well as in Plate 1. Being therefore founded in its
birth upon the proved and measured proportions of
the whole Pyramid,—the passages’ angular quantity
hence asserted, may be fairly allowed the honour
of standing the ordeal of a trial, upon its merits ;
though no further opinion can be declared, until the
result of such trial becomes known. We shall, there-
fore, at once take each of the three passages in suc-
cession, and examine it rigorously by itself.

First, of the entrance passage. When the modern
approved measures of this feature were handed me
in Cairo, before going out to the Pyramid, as
standing,—


36 INCLINED PASSAGES, [ DIV. I.


‘ Angle by Colonel Howard Vyse, = 26°41’ 0”
‘And angle by Mr. Ayrton,’ = 26 40 18
each of these angles being measured by a theodolite
at the upper end, observing a lamp at the lower end
of the passage,—I expected the theory would be
found inapplicable ; but proceeded to make measures
notwithstanding. Now, although my observations
went no further down the passage, than the fiducial
mark on the floor already described,—that ought not
to have made any sensible difference in the angle ;
because those who have been down further, describe
the passage as perfectly straight throughout its
chief length. Yet, a very great difference was found
between the former results, and mine; indeed, so
constant, abiding, and decided a difference, that
in no part fifty inches long, of the one thousand
inches in length that I examined, was there a single
case,—even when the particular angle there was
swelled by error of observation, and dilapidations of
the building,—of the numbers reaching so high as
26° 40’; and the means of three perfectly different
modes of observing, with different instruments, and
at different times (vol. il. p. 145), united ‘in giving
the angle as 26° 27’, without a chance of an error
so large as 2’.

Second, of the first ascending passage. This pas-
sage angle is too generally assumed by travellers to
be necessarily the same as that of, either the Grand
Gallery, or, the entrance passage reversed ; and the
only distinct statement that I can find of its having


PROP. LV. | HOW MUCH INCLINED 2 37


been really measured by a competent observer, is
Colonel Howard Vyse’s, where it is given as 26° 18’.
My double series of observations, however, with one
instrument observing from below to above; and
with another, long after in point of time, from
above to below (vol. ii. p. 151), combined inexorably
in giving 26° 6’—certainly true within 2’.

These two small passages, then, which we have
now examined,—give, one of them more, and the
other less, than the theoretical quantity: their mean,
or 26° 16’ 30", being within 2’ distance therefrom ;
and looking like a case of probable error of con-
struction on the part of honest workmen, who knew
the right theoretical angle, and wished to hit, but
had practical difficulty in hitting, it exactly.


Yet if this be the fact, then we are entitled to
expect that, in the Grand Gallery, the angle is
much more closely approximated to; for the result
of our months of measuring inside the Pyramid was
eminently to show, that the builders had ever risen
in accuracy of work, conformably to the architec-
tural or theoretical importance of the part they were
working upon; and the Grand Gallery, from its
superior length, as well as vastly superior height and
finish, must be considered far to overweigh both of
the little passages by which it is approached. With
extraordinary anxiety, therefore, to be accurate in
my measures, did I begin the testing of the Grand
Gallery, and in utter uncertainty how the affair


38 INCLINED PASSAGES, [ DIV. I,


would end; for if, on one hand, Colonel Howard
Vyse has stated the angle of the Gallery as 26° 18’,
on the other, his angles of the two previous pas-
sages had proved erroneous by many minutes ; and
Mr. Ayrton had since made the following observa-
tions on the Grand Gallery :—

‘ Angle of .Grand Gallery by measurement of a


‘base and perpendicular, =. 25° 17’ 36°
‘ The same, by hypothenuse and ae” = 25 42 53
The same, as recorded by M. Jomard, = 25 55 30
The same, by Mr. Edward Lane, = 26,30 ,9


I attacked the Grand Gallery, then, with three
different instrumental methods, (vol. ii. p. 155),
measuring it both optically from end to end, and
mechanically along every step of both sides. And
as the work progressed, and even more now, I am
perfectly confounded to think, how the excellent
observers above mentioned could possibly have
obtained the quantities set down against their
names; for no angles beginning with 25°, ever
entered even into any single observation of mine,
not even the most discordant; and all the sets joined
in pointing with admirable unanimity to 26°17’ 37’,
as the true mean quantity, certainly correct within
the limits of 1’. While if, from original error of con-
struction, the angle in some limited. portions of the
run of the Gallery varied from 26° 2’ to 26° 35’,—
that was only towards the middle of the whole
length, where a little undulation was not of so much
importance as at either end ; and there, it was most
instructive to see how closely the mean angle had


PROP. IV.]| | HOW MUCH INCLINED ? 39


been preserved, equally too, on both sides of the
room. (See vol. ii. p. 158.)

The undoubted result, then, of the most severe
measurement by the most powerful angular measur-
ing instruments ever brought into the Pyramid,—
for such the Coventry clinometer and Playfair alti-
tude-azimuth may fairly be considered,—has been
to show an error from the theory of less than 1’. In
fact, we may say, practically to prove the theory,—
in a case where modern observers had differed from
each other in their observations of the same thing
by at least 70’ (minutes).

This allusion is made in no critical spirit, but
rather with the useful object of drawing a few
much-needed conclusions for the regulation of our
Pyramid theorizing. Some men, ardent for mathe-
matical accuracy, may refuse to consider our propo-
sition proved by observation, unless the latter has
brought out the same second, or fraction of a second,
that can be computed theoretically ; but these gen-
tlemen must be reminded, that the Pyramid, even
though the plan of it should have been drawn up by
an angel with absolute perfection, was realized only
by the hands of mortal men of the handicraft trade
of masons, whose powers of accuracy were, and are,
limited. And, if modern philosophers have consi-
dered that they have identified the same part of the
Pyramid, by their observations of angle differing
from each other by 70’,—is it too much to concede
to the ancient masons, in their far more difficult


40 | WHAT IS GREAT [ DIV. 1.


process of constructing the long slope of stone, that
they considered their whole Grand Gallery angle,
when within 1’ of the theoretical angle, to mean the
same thing as that ?

But in the Grand Gallery they put out all their
possible powers; and were far closer there, than in the
two small passages, where the errors are + 9’, and
—12’. Let us then in future limit our ideas at the
Pyramid of a practical angular proof of theory, when
in an unimportant part of the structure to some-
thing that comes within 15’; and in an important
part, to within 2’, of what can be computed.


PROPOSITION V.


‘THE GREAT PYRAMID IS SENSIBLY IN THE LATITUDE
oF 30°?


THERE are not many authorities to examine for
the latitude of the Great Pyramid, and by reason
probably—that few persons having hitherto con-
sidered any very precise angular distance from the
equator, to be a priort necessary for the import of
the monument—men had not that peculiar stimulus
to observation in universal science, of comparing
fact with theory, and ancient performance against
modern measure. <A still further development,
however, of John Taylor’s original idea to that


eleanor


Vol Ill.


Gwen AB De Section’ of Great’ Pyramid) according to Jeaa Laylor,
(i.e. AC4DB .»: radians : circumference’ of cir ele:
& EF ?#-A G Sey C,
then’ angle B CL. = < angle CLI = ane AE: 10"


_ Gtren Fig. f also LO trisected b Sait wus es VE,
é CLE salad % C6, aw LZ,


W.H.MS Farlane, Lith? Edin?


Given) Fig. 2, aleo CN drawn’ through Vid CM throwgh P where


, “ oe CP- EF - :
ding to John’ Taylor, ; ’
of ine one : = Lower cadminatioh of a Pole star
20.
Vertical) section’ of the ancient’ triad passages, Eastward of ee
the Great Pyramid,


atter Colonel Howard Vyse.
he looking Westward. /


cl tolF, wn Ve v,


ye, with angle of tncl,-- R618)
(of vinel.= + 26, 18.
w~. =+ 26, ‘18; wo 50 r) 100


300 400 500 800 Jo


200
Scale of British/ Inches.
W.H.MS Farlane, Lith? Edin’


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


Vol Ill.


Ciren Fig. 2, also CN draww through Vz & CM through P where’
a ‘ : : : i ee Cer = m
Gwen ABD > Section’ of Great’ Pyramid) according to John Taylor, ass ae ae
(te, AC?4DBP ': radius : circumtéirence’ of then/ angle eo & 26» 18 , LO
LEP e-ACKBEC, ne pee Ae te Nand Ree
then angle BCS = angle CLI = 26°, 18:20.


-


= Lower culmination of a Pole star
= Latitude of Pyramid.
| BON-2 33. 4, 2% = Upper cudmination of same Pole-star
and WW height of Grand: Gallery, --rearly. sare S


Vertical section’ of the ancient trial passages, Eastward of
: the Great Pyramid,
atter Colonel Howard Vyse’.
J looking Westward.)


Fig. 4.


Given Fig. 1, also LC trisected by lines paralled tolF, am VE,
& OL similarly bisected, ww Z,


ra


Scale of British/ Inches.
W.H.M® Farlane, Lith? Edin?


PROP. V. | PYRAMID’S LATITUDE ? 41


described in our last Proposition, induced me, before
visiting Eeypt,—to think that a latitude of 30° was
necessary to complete the fulness and appropriate-
ness of the Pyramid’s geometric symbolizations.
Such an angle certainly came out from a very
simple treatment of John Taylor’s proportions of the
Pyramid, and may be described thus :—(In Plate 11.
fig. 1) the triangle a BD represents a section of the
Great Pyramid through its vertical axis, and the
middle of opposite sides; and the proportions are,
according to the above venerable authority, such,—
that ac, the vertical height, is to 4 BD (or to four
times the length of one side of the base),—as the
radius, to the circumference of a circle. On that as-
sumption, any one can compute the angle and find—


51° 51’ 14:3”
76 17 31°4


Angle at either foot, .
And angle at summit, ¥ ‘


I tl


The linear proportions—for as yet we do not say
anything about absolute lengths—may of course be
computed from the same data. And having in that
manner obtained a theoretical area of the given
vertical section of the Pyramid,—a square of equal
area, EFGH is formed and placed centrically and
symmetrically, as in the figure ; where, by continuing
the line EF to the circumference of the circle and
parallel with BD, and by joining cL,—we obtain
in the angle CLI, or its equivalent BOL, a new
quantity, and by computation = 26° 18’ 10”.

Now, in the first place, this angle is peculiar to a
Pyramid of John Taylor's characteristics ; for if there


42 WHAT IS GREAT [ DIV. 1.


should be one higher in proportion to the breadth
of its base, the above angle would be smaller, and
if lower, it would be greater: and, in the second
place, this angle, as confined to 26° 18’ nearly, has
been made much practical use of by the builders of
the Great Pyramid,—who, as shown in Proposition
Iv.,—appear to have regulated all three of the inclined
passages upon it. Accordingly, without altering any-
thing in fig. 1, if we merely add thereto the addi-
tional lines in fig. 2,—viz., trisection of the upper
half and bisection of the lower half of the centrally
disposed square, by lines parallel with the base of
the Pyramid,—we obtain, first, a point z; from which,
if we draw a line parallel to the former CL, we ob-
tain one x y Z, which lies almost as exactly as it can
be measured (see Pl. 111. vol. i.) in the very peculiar
position of the entrance passage of the Great Pyramid.

In the next place, if from v downward we draw
a line at an equal but opposite angle to the cL1 of
fig. 1,—we obtain a line v wy, which occupies the
position in the Pyramid of both Grand Gallery and
first ascending passage ; while from the intersection
point w, we have the line wu already formed, and
representing closely the horizontal passage leading to
the Queen’s chamber.

This is surely a large amount of confirmation
from the actual building ; and if confined as yet to
mere mechanical geometry, there follow some tests |
derived from astronomy,—seeing that the entrance
passage has been claimed by various authors, as a


PROP. V. | PYRAMIDS LATITUDE ? 43,


tube pointed to the lower culmination of a star
which was Polar at the period of the Pyramid’s con-
struction." Agreeably with this idea, our fig. 3
shows, that by drawing one line from ¢ through v’,
already given, and another also from c through P,
(where Cc P=EF), we obtain together with the line
CL, three lines, cL, CM,and CN; of which, if cL be
really the direction of a circumpolar star at its lower
culmination, CN is its direction at the upper culmi-
nation, c M being the place of the Pole, within limits
of a few seconds only; the computed values being—


BCL, = 26° 18’ 10”
BOM, =: 30.7:0° ©
and B CN, = 93 41 24


Now these are angles which, under the same mode
of treatment, would be yielded by no other shape
of triangle than that arising from John Taylor’s
proportions of the Great Pyramid ; and they appear
remarkably confirmed by the masonry of that build-
ing, inasmuch as they seem to regulate the exces-
sively increased height of the Grand Gallery, over
the original small height of one of the ordinary
passages, as shown more particularly in Plate v1.
But a more serious test will consist in ascertaining,
whether the angle of latitude in which the Pyramid
stands, is really the angle pointed to in the diagram
by Bem; for if it is, the concurrence of the geometry,
geography, and astronomy, of the Great Pyramid
will be remarkable to a degree past all mere chance


1 See Sir John Herschel’s letter in Colonel Howard Vyse’s Opera-
tions at the Great Pyramid of Gizeh, vol. ii. pp. 107-109.


44 WHAT 1S GREAT [DIV. I.


coincidence; and a striking reason will then be
obtained for the monument standing in its present
parallel, and no other.

The first point to be tested in this astronomical
department of the general question, is one which
has been usually taken for granted, by all those
authors who have claimed the entrance passage
for a polar star; viz, that the Pyramid must
have been correctly oriented, or placed with its
several faces accurately to the north, south, east, and
west points of the horizon. Yet the only instru-
mental observations on the subject, were those by
the French savants, and they had shown an error,
==:19' 58” of are.’

That quantity, however, being overlooked by all
theorizers,—showed very plainly, that they did not
think it capable of vitiating their astronomical de-
ductions: and it is not a much greater error, than


1 «La Pyramide est orientée avec exactitude. M. Nouet, astro-
‘nome, a trouvé, par des opérations géométriques et astronomiques
‘ (Voyez Décade Egyptienne, t. iii. p. 105, et suiv.), que la cété du
‘ Nord déviait de la ligne Est et Ouest de 0° 19’ 58” vers le sud, d’oa
‘il aconclu que la ligne méridienne qui fut tracée pour orienter le
* monument, déclinait de 20’ vers Ouest : mais, comme le revétement a
‘ disparu, il n’est pas certain que cette petite différence provienne de
‘Ja direction primitive des faces, et il est naturel de lattribuer, au
‘ moins en partie, a la difficulté de déterminer avec une précision par-
‘ faite la direction des degrés qui bornent aujourd’hui les faces. On
‘ sait que Vorientation de lobservatoire de Tycho Brahé a été trouvée
‘4a Uranibourg, par l’Académicien Picard, en défaut de 18’.

‘D’ailleurs, suivant la remarque méme de Il’observateur, la ligne
‘ méridienne étant tracée et dirigée exactement au nord, on aurait eu
‘ de la peine, en élevant ici une perpendiculaire, de ne pas dévier, sur
‘une longueur de 113 métres 4, de trois décimétres, quantité suffisante
‘ pour donner 20’ de différence. [1 aurait fallu, selon moi, observer


a


PROP. V. | PYRAMID’S LATITUDE ? 45


what was permitted in the most celebrated Euro-
pean observatory of two hundred and thirty years
previous. But when the Great Pyramid, of nearly
twenty times as many years earlier, came recently
to be examined by us, with due attention to its
fiducial markings (vol. ii. p. 196), behold its utmost
error, not the 19’ 58” alleged, nor even the 18’ of
Tycho Brahe, but only 4’.35"!

Hence, we may now go forward with renewed
confidence to the next point, and consider the
latitude of the Great Pyramid. The result of
M. Nouet’s observations in the celebrated national
French work, is set down as 29° 59’ 6”; and my
recent result with the Playfair altitude-azimuth
instrument is, 29° 58’ 51"; accurate probably to
within 3°. Nevertheless, if M. Nouet’s original
observations can be found, or shown to have been
as extensive as mine,—I shall not be disposed
to quarrel with any one who prefers taking a mean’
of the two results, to either one by itself; though’


‘ quelle direction a le plan du premier canal de la Pyramide, celui qui
‘aboutit 4 Pentrée dont j’ai parlé plus haut: Vopération aurait été
‘ difficile sans doute ; mais le parallélisme exact et l’entiére conserva-
* tion de ses faces auraient procuré une ligne presque mathématique &
‘comparer au meridien du lieu. Nous connaissons l’angle du plan
‘ formé par le fond de ce canal avec V’horizon, et cette notion fournit
‘déja des remarques intéressantes; elles le deviendront davantage
‘encore, quand on connaitra parfaitement, si elle existe, l’inclinaison
‘ de son plan vertical sur le plan du méridien : ce travail, qui importe-
‘rait & Vhistoire de l’astronomie, ne serait que la continuation des
‘recherches que l’Académie Royale des Sciences ordonna dans le
‘ xviiié siécle dans la vue de comparer les observations de cette espéce

‘chez les différens peuples.—M. Jomard, in Déscription de b Egypte,
Antiquités, Déscriptions, tom. ii. p. 61.


46 WHAT IS GREAT — [prv. 1.


meanwhile I beg to be allowed to retain my own
determination.

Now the numbers 29° 58’ 51", do come so abun-
dantly within our rule of 2’ discordance being
allowed, that we might in so far at once declare the
case practically proved. But that rule is not to pre-
vent our testing any one particular instance more
accurately still, if possible ; nor was it intended to
apply to exactly such a subject as the minutes of
latitude angle. There is therefore no objection what-
ever, to any one asking, ‘ why the builders did not
‘hit the theoretical angle of 30° 0’ 0° of latitude, a
‘ little closer, than to a distance of 1’ 9" only?

To this, the answer seems to be,—especially when
looking at the real Great Pyramid passage pointing
to an actual star in the sky,—the asking, in Scottish
fashion, of another question; viz. ‘Ought not the
‘ latitude rather to be such as, with a mean amount
‘ of refraction added to it, will place the Polar point
‘ visibly to men, rather than theoretically only, at
‘an angular elevation of 30° 2’

On some grounds, this view is decidedly to be
preferred. But noting that there is only one, of the
two daily meridian culminations marked by a mate-
rial passage, where men could look out at the actual
fact in the sky (during the building of the Great
Pyramid, though not afterwards, for other and very
different reasons), we may be safer in taking a mean
between the two hypotheses ; 2.e., between an angle
of 30° absolute from the equator,—and a certain


PROP. V. | PYRAMID'S LATITUDE 4 47


other angle therefrom, which, with the refraction
added, would present an apparent elevation of the
Pole to the same amount of 30°. And as the refrac-
tion at such altitude is on the average about 1’ 37’,
such geometric polar angle is 29° 58’ 23”: the mean
between which and 30°, is equal to 29° 59’ 12”.

But 29° 59’ 12", is still something very perceptibly
greater than 29° 58’ 51”, though no doubt a re-
markable approximation. The original question may
therefore still be put, by some who expect super-
human accuracy in others: viz.: ‘ Why did not the
‘ builders hit the mark even yeta little more closely ?
‘Or, why did they not carry the Great Pyramid 21”
‘ farther north, and make it thereby perfectly accu-
‘rate in its geographical place 2”

The answer here is simply, Go and look at the
topographical position of the Pyramid; and see,
that the realizing of those 21" would have taken the
building off its noble hill, and buried it ingloriously
in a broad bay of sand which intervenes to the north
of it, and extends in that direction through several
whole minutes of latitude ; while if we alter the
longitude also, to avoid that low ground, and shift
the Pyramid westward as well as northward, we
should find only the indistinct undulations of a
desert valley for an indefinite distance in the exact
parallel of 29° 59’ 12" of latitude. Hence there is
in fact no other conspicuous or suitable rocky hill
for the Pyramid to stand on, except its own hill,
throughout all this region ; for though the eminence


48 WHAT IS GREAT [ DIV. 1.


to the south of the palm-trees, is bold enough, it is
very much too far southward for latitude purposes.
There was therefore no choice left to the builders,
but to place the Pyramid on the hill where they did
place it ; and if in being there, it is slightly in geo-
graphical error, they have indicated a strangely per-
fect knowledge on their part, of the existence of such
an error ; for why, otherwise, upon any hieroglyphic
theory of the Pyramid that has ever been brought
forward, has that most massive building of the
world,—when there was plenty of room southward
for mere foundation,—been pushed so close to the
very northern edge of the hill! Yea, even so dan-
gerously close to its northern cliff, that there is, just
in front of the north-eastern corner of the Pyramid,
a slicken-side scratched surface of rock, indicating a
land-slip of part of the cliff to have already occurred.
there ; and still worse, there is a deep cleft in the local
rock, ‘a chasm,’ according to Colonel Howard Vyse,
preparing for another breaking away of the cliff,
and passing slantingly under the front of the very
Pyramid itself. (See Plates 11., 11, and rv., vol. i.)
The builders too knew of this most dangerous
feature, for they filled it up with good masonry to
a depth of forty feet, and cemented it over; and
they further made those enormous banks of their
ancient rubbish on the northern front of the cliff
outside (vol. i. p. 186), to keep it up, as it were ;
recognising that a fall of that part of the rock
would be ruinous indeed to the Pyramid. As yet


PROP. V. | PYRAMID'S LATITUDE ? 49


the rock has not given way, though it may always
be considered as threatening; but meanwhile, if
ever a building vividly represented the scriptural
phrase of standing on ‘the utmost bound of the
‘ everlasting hills, —it is surely the Great Pyramid ;
reared, and with a remarkable reason for it, on the
very ultimate northern edge and brink of its steep-
sided, desert, table-land.

For its own safety, then, we would not wish to
see the Great. Pyramid pushed any farther towards
the north: and it is surely far enough already in
that direction, to satisfy the requirements of modern
scientific travellers, in strict justice to their own
latter-day work. Because, have their measurements
of any of the angles of the Great Pyramid been con-
ducted within an agreement amongst each other, of
21"? Nay, have they been within 21’?


Also worthy of note is it, before leaving this
subject, that if the Great Pyramid be not quite
far enough northward in latitude,—it yet comes
nearer to what theory points out, than any other
Pyramid whatever, large or small. For all the others
in its neighbourhood, are to the south of it; the
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, notoriously
so; and the seventh, eighth, and ninth,—when we
consider, in proper scientific process, the places of
their centres as compared with the centre of the
Great Pyramid,—fall in the same category.

One rather disputable case, however, exists out-


VOL. III. D


50 | WHAT IS GREAT [ DIV. I.


side all these; seeing that north of the seventh
Pyramid, and north also of the latitude parallel pass-
ing through the Great Pyramid’s centre, there is a
system of inclined passages in a vertical and meridian
plane, tunnelled into the rock of the hill—and
looking so much like the commencement for building
a small pyramid,—as to have induced some authors
to declare, that if no pyramid was ever actually
erected there, men had intended to erect one, and
may have begun it, though no stones are found there
now. And such a pyramid,—though its proportions
must have been insignificant, as being necessarily
curtailed by the edges of the hill north and east,—
would yet have been, as to its centre, a litile nearer
to the proper latitude desired by theory for the
Great Pyramid, than the Great Pyramid itself.

This is serious. But on turning to Colonel
Howard Vyse, we find that that most trustworthy
authority, assisted by Mr. Perring, made careful
measures of these passages (see fig. 4 on our
Plate 11.), and arrived at the conclusion,—that they
are neither in the meridian line of the passages of
the seventh, eighth, and ninth Pyramids; nor at
a commensurable distance, in any meridian line, to
form one of a regular series of Pyramids with them
along the eastern side of the Great Pyramid. Mr.
Perring likewise expresses an engineering opinion,
that the surface of the ground, near to and above
these passages, was never prepared to receive build-
ing stones upon it; and he alludes to Herodotus


PROP. V.] PYRAMIDS LATITUDE ? 51


noticing only three small Pyramids on the eastern
side of the great one, as reason for concluding that
no other small pyramids, other than the three now
to be seen, ever stood in that neighbourhood.

But why was there not a complete line of them
constructed? Or why was the partial line begun
from the south instead of the north? And what
were those inclined passages in the rock for, if not
intended to have a pyramid erected over them ?

The two first features of this rather over-much-
demanding question, would be satisfied,—if it was
considered reasonable, that the architects of the
Great Pyramid would allow no other building to
interfere with their mighty work in any of. its
higher attributes, not even in correct geographical
position. And the last portion of the question,—
which is the most important, and is even necessary
to the whole,—throws some light on itself when
practically examined.

For, look at the passages in plan and vertical
section (Plate 11.), and see that they are a system, in
principle of arrangement, such as exists in no other
Pyramid whatever, except the Great Pyramid ; for
there is the long descending entrance passage ; an
upward and opposite rising passage from the middle
of that, like the Great Pyramid’s ‘first ascending
passage ;’ then the beginning of a horizontal passage,
like that to the Queen’s chamber; and finally, the
commencement of an upward rising Grand Gallery,
with its remarkable ramps on either side.


a HAS THE EARTH (piv. L


The angles, heights, and breadths of all these are
almost exactly the same as obtain in the Great
Pyramid. And if the lengths only, are so curtailed


as to be ridiculous in compairson,—or rather such


as to show all the leading angular features of the
Great Pyramid’s passages within the space of a few
feet,—that assists to a conclusion which the facts
of the neighbouring azimuth trenches first prompted
me to :—viz., that this system of inclined passages
in the rock north-east of the Great Pyramid, was
merely a trial, or model, cut beforehand into a spare
part of the hill surface by the masons of the Great
Pyramid,—to improve their understanding of the
internal figures they were afterwards to form close
by ; just as the azimuth trenches were to show
the exterior angles. Hence, the Great Pyramid is
finally and most decidedly left the northernmost,
and nearest to the theoretical latitude, of all the
Pyramids of Jeezeh, either at present, or ever, ex-
isting.


PROPOSITION VI.


‘ ANGULAR ALTERATIONS IN THE EARTH'S CRUST
HAVE BEEN PRACTICALLY INSENSIBLE DURING THE
EXISTENCE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID 2’


THroveHout all our previous Propositions we
have discussed differences between theory and fact,


PROP. VI.]| = SURFACE MOVED ? 53


as referrible only to errors of either ancient work-
men or modern measures, combined with inevitable
effects of dilapidation ; but where an interval of
several thousand years is concerned, it may be ex-
pedient also to inquire, whether any slow natural
changes of the earth itself,—though utterly insen-
sible during all the period of existence of our post-
medizeval civilisation,—may not have accumulated
with greater time to some appreciable extent.

At the last meeting in Dublin of the British As-
sociation for the Advancement of Science, for in-
stance, a learned traveller stated,—in connexion with
a mathematical paper which had just been read on
certain views regarding the interior consolidation
of the earth,—that he had seen ancient buildings
in Abyssinia which indicated a sensible difference in
the direction of gravity at the time of their erection,
from what obtains now. And, again, there was the
question, much agitated by Dr. Hooke in his day, as
to whether there is any slow progressive change in
the place of the axis of rotation of the earth within
its substance ;—or again of the crust of the earth over
the position of the poles,—altering in that manner
both the latitudes and longitudes of all places, to
some minute quantity, in the course of many ages.

Had our observations at the Pyramid, alluded to
under the last Proposition, come before Dr. Hooke,
the practical Newton of his day,—he would inevitably
have seized on the 21” defalcation of north latitude,
and the 4’ 30” west error of the Pyramid’s meridian


54 HAS THE EARTH [DIv. I.


line, as indicating an oblique movement of the north
Polar point of the world ina north-eastern direction.
And he would further have had by this time, in the
successive decreases of the published latitude of
Greenwich by every succeeding Astronomer-Royal
during the last century, something like a confir-
mation of the latitude part of the effect closer at
home. |

But what are we, who live now, to think,—taking
all things into consideration,—as to the Pyramid’s
evidence of such terrestrial change ? This probably,
that a shifting in place of the earth’s axis of rotation
within itself, if solid, or nearly so, to the amount
of 21° in four thousand years, is utterly beyond
all physical probability,—so overwhelming is the
dynamical stability of the axis of rotation in so
huge and heavy a ball as the earth; such a
computation, though not for those precise numbers,
having been made by La Place long ago, and con-
firmed, we believe, very recently by Professor P. G.
Tait of Edinburgh.

The question, again, of the earth’s crust being rather
thin, and carried by variations caused in its local
amount by special chemical and other actions, to or
from the place of the pole of rotation of the grand
fluid internal mass, supposed to remain constant,—
has also, I believe, been considered ; but without any
one venturing to say how much change might be
produced in the latitudes of places in a given time
from that cause. We are left, therefore, only to


PROP. V1. | SURFACE MOVED ? 55


speculate on a smaller and more confined class of
changes, produced either by temperature or volcanic
agencies,—which push, twist, elevate, or depress
sometimes whole continents, but more generally
parts of them only ; and occasionally act in opposite
directions within very small areas, according to the
distance of the solid surface of the ground from,
either the molten interior of the whole earth on
which it is floating, or the fluid contents of sub-
terranean lakes and cavernous receptacles of similar
matter contained within its substance. Now the
amount of these changes, is wholly without the
power of theoretical science to compute ; and such
a case as that of the Great Pyramid, giving the
result of’ human experience through the longest
series of years of any monument yet erected, is
probably the best, if not the only, opportunity of
practically ascertaining whether anything of the sort
has really taken place.

With regard to the latitude effect, however, I
would remark ; first,—that the defalcation of 21” is
only chargeable on the Pyramid through reference
to the deductions from John Taylor’s figure of the
monument; for without that, we should have no
means of knowing what the latitude of the Pyramid
was thought or observed to be in the days of its build-
ing ; and, second,—we have shown topographical
and other reasons why such an amount of error, if
it existed at the time, might very properly have
been neglected by the builders. But with regard to


56 HAS THE EARTH [ DIV. I.


the azimuthal deviation from the meridian, there is
not only a much larger quantity to be dealt with
there, but it is independent of John Taylor’s or any
other man’s theory, further than this general belief,
—that the Great Pyramid was originally intended
to be correctly oriented ; and that its builders had
the capacity to place it so, true within 2’, if not
much less. Something is therefore to be explained
in that anomaly; and we may have a reason to
suggest in a future chapter, without requiring the
Egyptian earth to have been twisted round 4’ or
5’ in four thousand years.

Meanwhile, though thus practically confessing
that the great geographical ordinates of the Pyramid
have not been materially interfered with by physical
causes, there remain to be considered the probable
effects of such disturbing actions, in altering the
correctness of its lesser mechanical and geometrical
features. Has the rock, for instance, under the
Pyramid, been tilted up in one direction or another,
thereby throwing out of the vertical or horizontal
that which was once both plumb and level true ?

As touching directly on this subject, we may
turn to the article by M. Ernest Renan on ‘ Egyptian
‘ Antiquities, in the Revue des Deux Mondes for
April 1865, as giving both his own views and those of
the extensively experienced Mariette Bey also. And
there we read, that there is not a particle of devia-
tion discernible in that most carefully constructed
room of all the rooms throughout the Great Pyra-


PROP. VI. | SURFACE MOVED ? 57


mid, viz., the King’s chamber ; or, in the author's
own words, ‘ Malgré l’épouvantable poids que porte
‘ cette chambre, elle n’a pas fléchi d’un millimétre ;
‘le fil & plomb n’y accuse pas la moindre déviation.’

Sorry am I to say that my observations upon the
walls of the King’s chamber, taken very carefully
through means of the circular clinometer applied
with a beam one hundred and twenty-six inches
long, do not in any way agree with the above
assertion ; for they indicate, in the first place, very
consistently, that every wall is inclined to the
central guasi-vertical axis of the chamber by the
amount of 3’ 47”; and, in the next place, that that
axis is tilted at the top towards the west by the
amount of 6’ 9”, and towards the south by the
amount of 6’ 4” (vol. ii. p. 163).

That is the instrumental fact, which cannot be
departed from until better observations are made ;
but the whole quantity of deviation is by no means
to be necessarily put down to a permanent physical
earth change, for the chamber’s floor is greatly
shaken and disjointed even since Colonel Howard
Vyse’s time,—either by the progress of dilapidation,
or ruinous effect of a passing earthquake shock.!
Let us therefore see what sort of tale the three in-
clined passages tell, touching depression towards
the south. Such an effect, if general over the whole


1 Such as that recorded in Mr. Sopwith’s Notes on Egypt, to have
occurred in 1856, and injured much the house of the hospitably-in-
clined English engineer of the railway from Alexandria to Cairo.


58 HAS THE EARTH [ DIV. L.


building, will tend to increase the dip of the en-
trance passage, and decrease the rise of the other
two. And what do we find? Why, that the dip
of the entrance passage is greater than the theory
by 9’, the rise of the first ascending passage less
by 12’, and that of the Grand Gallery also less,
by 0’ 35". But as the large deviations of the two
first passages have already been shown to be pro-
bably due to error of construction on less important
parts of the Pyramid, the only thing left securely
outstanding to attribute to a general tilting of the
whole Pyramid, is the 35” of the Grand Gallery ;
indicating therefore that the 6’ of the King’s chamber
is a local error or masonry defect, magnified in
angular value by the short radius of the walls.
There is another set of our observations, however,
bearing on the point, viz., the measurement of the
corner angles of the Pyramid’s summit from the
sockets below, by means of the Playfair altitude-
azimuth instrument; and this would have been a
very sufficient method, had there not been the one
weak feature about it, that the dilapidations of the
top rendered it most difficult to decide, within a
few inches, where the general corners of the summit
platform should be considered to lie.’ Referring,


1 On a future occasion it might be worth while to enclose the top-
most course of stones, forming the summit platform of the Pyramid,
with a grand square of carpentry : for that woodwork might be made
in itself an approximately true square, and the position of any one of
its corners would be regulated, not by that same corner, only, of the
broken stones, but by the general contour of the whole topmost area
of stones,


i
a ee oe


PROP. VI. | SURFACE MOVED ? 59


however, to vols. i. and ii. pp. 538 and 173, for the
efforts that were made to be accurate in this point,
we have now only to deal with the observations as
taken and recorded at the time; and they are as
follows : the south-east and south-west observations
give a greater tilt to the Pyramid than the north-
east and north-west, by 0’ 30°,—implying a dip of
the ground southward by that angle ; and the north-
east and south-east give a greater angle than the
north-west and south-west by 2’ 39",—implying a
dip of the ground eastward by that angle.

These quantities evidently throw discredit on the
large angles of deviation in the King’s chamber, as
an earth effect ; but they coincide, it is not unin-
teresting to remark, with the south-east dip of all
the limestone strata composing the hill on which
the Pyramid stands; and which may be distinct
from any large portion of the rest of the country,
even as it is believed generally in Egypt now, that
the land of the Delta is sinking, while that of Suez
is rising. Hence, while we omit making any fur-
ther reference for the present to the eastern element
of angular variation about the Pyramid, we are
bound to acknowledge that every one of five dif-
ferent subjects of observation,—nay, six, including
the geological strata,—have combined in giving a
dip southward, as an effect that has come over the
foundations of the Pyramid with time. The amount,
however, of such dip can only be inferred with
safety from the large radii of the Grand Gallery,


60 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [DIv. L


and the corner observations of the whole Pyramid ;
and as it is indicated in both these quarters to be
barely more than 32’, such a quantity may well be
neglected in any ordinary discussion about Pyramid
angles. Though there is no harm, and perhaps even
the merit of following strict rule, if we add that
number of seconds to the angle of the Grand Gallery,
as observed in A.D. 1865 ; increasing its 26° 17’ 37”
to 26° 18’ 9". Or bringing the observed angle of
that noble, and most ancient, hall,—within 1” of the
26° 18’ 10° independently demanded by modern
theory, and published to the world before our ob-
servations were made.


PROPOSITION VIL.


‘ HYPSOMETRY OF THE GREAT PYRAMID’ ?


Datum Plane.


Tue datum plane to which it is proposed to refer
all levels taken at the Pyramid, is the upper surface
of the pavement, alluded to in connexion with the
corner sockets (vol. i. p. 137); and found to be,
practically even with the floor of the south-west
socket ; from six to ten inches above, the floors of
the north-east and north-west sockets; and rather
more above, the lower floor of the south-east socket,
The same pavement too, it is believed, from whose
broad and well constructed surface, in the middle of


PROP. VII. | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 61


the northern side, Colonel Howard Vyse found the
inclined slope of the whole Great Pyramid flank
at once to begin.


Present Vertical Height.


This feature may most appropriately be reckoned
from the pavement’s upper surface, as the lower
starting-point for such measure, up to the flat,
square area on the summit, as its higher reference.
On that area, near four hundred inches long in the
side, there are, it is true, two fragments of courses
of masonry, one on the other, and twenty-one and
nineteen inches in respective heights. A learned
authoress, too, a few years ago, described herself
and party very racily mounting on them to get a
little nearer still to the sky ; and they do enable any
one to stand absolutely higher by forty inches, than
if on the four hundred inch area level. But they
are unfortunately too fragmentary and low, to assist
one in forming safe conclusions respecting the
whole deficit between the present broken, and the
ancient unbroken, Pyramid top,—or a quantity
closer in linear height, upon almost any theory,
to 380 inches. It seems better, therefore, to ter-
minate the vertical measuring at the four hun-
dred inch area, which does possess some degree of
completeness, and offers an approach to those re-
quired data on which the final quantity must be
computed.

Another description of that area, is this ; viz., that


62 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [ DIV. I.


it forms the upper surface of the 202d course of
masonry from the Pyramid pavement upwards.
Hence, when good measurers give the height of ‘204
‘courses, they may be expected to have included
the two fragmentary sets, and require to have forty
inches subtracted from their observed height to
compare it with ours.

These points it is well to settle, before coming to
the height itself; for the time may arrive, when
more of the upper courses will have been broken
away,—as several have been already within the his-
torical period,—and the ‘topmost area’ will then
signify a different number of courses from the pave-
ment upwards, from what it does now.

How many courses there may have been at any
particular past epoch, it would be difficult now to say ;
but probably within the last three hundred years,
there were never more than 204; most likely less—
the maximum required to complete the whole figure of
the Pyramid, with a topmost corner stone 100 inches
thick, and the two next courses approximating to
the same thickness (agreeably with the still visible
masonry finish of the Northern Pyramid of Dashoor,
and the superior size of the lower socket-holes, and
lowest row of casing-stones at the Great Pyramid),
being something like 210,—with an uncertainty of
not more than two or three, one way or the other.
Wherefore, it is melancholy to find among earlier
travellers such varied statements as the following,
—-in which their absolute errors as to courses,


PROP. VII.]| | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 63


are often further illustrated by the heights as-
signed :—


No. of Courses of
Date, _ | Masonry existing | G,eat Pyramid.
British inches.

Sandys, : ‘ . 1610 255 cae
Greaves, . : ‘ 1638 207 or 208 5988
Melton, : : “ 1661 206 6240

| Vausleb, . : : 1664 255 7944
Lucas, ; . 3 1699 243 8748
Egmont, . 3 : 1709 206 6000
Pococke, . Z ; 1743 212 ae
Perry, : : : 1743 oi 8244
Davison, . ¢ A 1763 206 5532


That all very recent travellers are talking about
the same ‘topmost area’ surface is evident, both
from the age of many of the inscribed names of
visitors, as well as from the length of the side of
said area as measured and given by them ; for every
lower course will evidently have a greater length of
side, to an extent extremely easy to measure. When,
therefore, Messrs. Aiton and Inglis, in 1865, give
195 courses on the north-east angle, and 199 on the
south-west ; or Mr. Lane in 1843, 203 courses, and
some of the French savants in 1799, also 203,—we
may suspect a misapprehension in counting, and
not an alteration in the Pyramid.

Of these observers, the first statement, as I have
shown in vol. i1. Sect. v, has so many anomalies in the
first fifty steps from the ground, that I have not
attempted to follow the rest. But Mr. Lane, of the
Modern Egyptians, was a phenomenon for accuracy,


64 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [DIv. 1.


and produced one of the most careful drawings of
the Pyramid ever made by human hand ;* while the
French savants of 1799, devoted themselves, in
number, and with peculiar enthusiasm, to linear
numerical measures about the Pyramid (which kind of
mensuration was indeed special to the science of that
day, when physics meant the application of geometry
to a subject, and was as yet innocent of geology,
chemistry, and many other branches both of natural
philosophy and natural history, which are now oc-
cupying the chief attention of the mass of learned
men). It was with no small relief therefore, that I
found the 203 courses of the French savants, and
apparently those of Mr. Lane also, meant the same
as my 204 ; for their lowest, and which some of them
(2.e., M. Le Pére, and Colonel Coutelle), have actu-
ally entered in two portions of 20, and 52 inches
respectively in height,—must really be considered
as two distinct Pyramid courses.

That they were long held as one, was partly due
to the first French measures made in 1799 or 1800,
being previous to the later excavation of MM. Le
Pére and Coutelle, which took place only ‘in the
‘month Rainy, of the year 9’ (January 1801) ; and
first disclosed the full depth of the supposed lowest
course being, not 40 inches only, but 72 inches, or
in excess of any other known Pyramid course ; and
partly also to the circumstance that, at the north-


1-See Plate x11. of Colonel Howard Vyse’s and Mr. Perring’s folio
views of the Pyramids. London, 1840.


—————


ee carl aye aS
|


PROP. VII.] HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 65


eastern corner of the Pyramid, the upper surface of
this 72-inch duplex course, is, for a small space,
seen to be formed in the solid standing rock of the
hill. Whence M. Jomard concluded, that there was
anciently a raised pedestal of seventy-two inches
on which the Pyramid stood, and that its inclined
sides only began above that level.

Such an idea, however, has not only been directly
disproved since then, by Colonel Howard Vyse’s
casing-stones, as already mentioned, beginning at
seventy-two inches below that level,—but it is also
shown, by our photographs now brought home,
combined with the measures, to be a mistaken ap-
prehension of Pyramid masonry.

For these peculiar modern documents testify,
1st, That that portion of a rock course seen at the
north-east corner, was abundantly within,—not only
the external casing and proper position for a base
or pedestal_—but within, likewise, several thick-
nesses of the stones of the inner masonry courses,
themselves also within the casing-stone series.

2d, The standing rock was used merely to supply
economically a portion of the internal bulk of
masonry,—not to form any part of, or react upon,
the external form and surface of the Pyramid. For
this, indeed, it would not have been good enough ;
and the Pyramid builders knew the fact so well, that
therefore they sent painfully to the Mokattam or
Arabian hills on the eastern side of the Nile, for the
denser limestone from there, for the outside blocks.

VOL. III. E


66 | WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID'S’ __[DIV. 1.


And it is not a little notable, that this north-eastern
portion of the native rock course, and which has
only recently been disclosed by the process of dila-
pidation—is already far more decayed than any of
the fragments of the casing-stones found by our ex-
ploration ; which fragments too, though now, and
for the last one thousand years, buried in rubbish,
—must have been exposed on the flanks of the
Pyramid to the weather, for full three thousand years
previously ; or for several times as long as this un-
happy piece of rock-course has been visible to men.

3d, The portions of standing rock thus employed
to make up the interior substance of the Pyramid,
though cut square and level on the upper surface of
their terraces, are by no-means also cut in every
case coincidentally with the surfaces of the abutting
courses of masonry ; and as the rock addition is
only partial and accidental, while the masonry
courses are structural and extend unbroken around,
and as we believe through, the entire Pyramid,—
we cannot allow the enumeration of the latter, to be
interfered with by a casual and local feature of the
former. Many of the data of these conclusions are
rendered in the Photographs described in Section v.
of vol. ii. ; and thevr general testimony is pictorially
represented in Plate 111.,.which gives a diagonal
sectional view of the north-east corner of the Pyra-
mid, and shows the subservience of the rock to the
masonry courses, at that point.

Hence we trust there is no real error in represent-


=|


area iret
>=


fo Leusoo £907 Nf
ones qouchvip yoonse,
(Pesoyory


PROP. VII.] | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 67


ing the courses between the pavement below, and
the present (A.D. 1865) platform at the top of the
Pyramid, as 202 ; even by the French measures, and
Mr. Lane’s also. And we then have, for the vertical
height between these two places, the following re-
sults of different authorities :—


Measurers. pe Een Reference. bay a

MM. Jomard and Cecile, . | 1800 | Steps, Vol. ii. Sect. v.| 5433

MM. Le Pere and Coutelle, | 1801 | Steps, Vol. ii. Sect. v.| 5435

Trigono- te:

M.Novet, . . «| 1800 |{ tas, }| Vol, ii, Sect. v. | 5443

Colonel Howard Vyse, . | 1837 | Unknown, | His own work. | 5409
Mrs. Poole

Mr Dane.  . 4 }'1843°| Caktnown, rete he 5432
Alexandrian

Mahmoud Bey, . . | 1862 | Barometer, Pamphlet >| 5445

of 1865.
C. Piazzi Smyth (April), . | 1865 | Steps, Vol. ii p. 1381. | 5445


Messrs. Aiton and Inglis, 1865


(May) Steps, Vol. ii. Sect. v. | 5475
>


The simple mean of all which comes out, 5440
British inches,


Ancient Vertical Height.


From the present fragmentary portion of the
Great Pyramid, to deduce the height of the ancient
complete structure, theory must be referred to in
some way or to some extent; and the simplest
idea appears to be, that the now missing portion
was only a continuation of the present structure ;
or, that the building was simply and altogether a
Pyramid, but ‘ cased’ about, of course, as already


68 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID'S [ DIV. I.


much alluded to. Yet this conclusion has not been
always or usually followed; for many travellers
have had a great fancy for mounting a colossal
statue on the existing platform.

After searching for their reasons, however,-—they
appear to be no other, or better, than that ‘they
‘ thought such a termination to the Pyramid would
‘ look well ;’ or such imperfect reasoning and positive
statements without foundation, as the following :—

‘On the top of the greatest Pyramid there was
‘anciently a statue or a colosse. This appears, be-
‘ cause it is not sharp as the others, but plain ; and
‘there are yet to be seen great pits, which were to
‘keep fast the colosse from falling’—F. VAvusues,
1664.

And again :—‘ The other two Pyramids terminate
‘in a point, and hence ’tis conjectured, that there
‘might have been some colossus erected on this.’—
VeERYARD, M.D., 1701.

On the opposite side, however, it is alleged by
learned Egyptologists, that—1st, the Egyptians never
put their colossal statues on a height ; 2d, no one
ever saw a statue of any kind on the top of any
Egyptian Pyramid ; 3d, the hieroglyphic represen-
tations give only the mathematical form of a Pyra-
mid, or terminate it at the top in a point ; and 4th,
though the topmost area now measures near 400
inches in the side, it has been traced backwards,
through various authors, mischiefs, and dilapidations,
gradually decreasing in size from now up to the time


PROP. VII. | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 69


of Pliny, when it was reported to have been only 100
inches in side length; and as the casing was still exist-
ing in his day, such statement, if its measure can
be depended upon,—indicates that the Pyramid had
then lost only its chief and topmost corner-stone.

Hence we adopt the Pyramidal hypothesis for
completing the present figure of the Great Pyramid,
as the only one at all probable ; but must steer wide
of an error in applying it, which even so eminent an
authority as Sir Gardner Wilkinson has fallen into,
on p. 173 of Murray’s Handbook to Egypt. For
therein, that admirable traveller computes rigorously
the height of the missing part required to be added
to the present decapitated, to reproduce the ancient
complete, Pyramid. But he computes it on the
datum of the present length of the sides of the
summit-platform, instead of the ancient length at
that level,—z.e., the present quantity increased out
horizontally at either end by the thickness of the
casing-stones and backing-stones ; which important
layers were once there, and must be virtually re-
placed now, in any attempt to compute the original
height of the monument.

Attention to this refinement in practical construc-
tion at the Pyramid, will fortunately be found to
remove almost entirely, a difference to a serious
amount between two methods of Sir Gardner’s for
arriving at the same thing, viz., the ancient height.
For whereas on one hand he gives a computation from
Howard Vyse’s data of Pyramid base-side, and


70 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [ DIV. I.


casing-stone angle, as making the whole height of
the complete Pyramid 5832 inches :—on the other
side, he computes the height of the missing portion
at 240 inches ; and that quantity being added on to
the same authority’s measured height of the present
platform, or 5409 inches, gives only 5649 inches for
the ancient height by that method; or leaves a
difference of 183 inches between the two results,—a
difference large enough to invalidate any theory on
which the calculations are founded.

Better instructed, however, by his example, we now
proceed thus :—1s¢, The vertical height of the ancient,
and complete, Pyramid,—given by the ground base-
side = 9140 inches (see page 136), and the angle of
slope = 51° 51’ 14’—-amounts to 5819 inches.

2d, The upper platform side of 400 inches (vol. ii.
p: 132), increased by 200 inches,—for twice horizon-
tal thickness of the casing-stones of old (p. 27),—
yields, with the same angle, a vertical height of 382
inches ; which, being added to our previous mean
measured height of said platform, or 5440 inches
(p. 67), gives for the ancient full height, in this
manner, 5822 inches. That is to say, it differs by
only 3 inches from the former result, where no part
of the height was directly measured ; and enables
us to state the quantity now being sought,—or the
ancient vertical height of the Great Pyramid from
its pavement plane upwards to its absolute apex,—
as something that must have been very near indeed
to 5820 British inches.


PROP. VII.| | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 71


Floors of the Chambers.


The heights of the floors of the Queen’s and
King’s chambers in the Great Pyramid, are import-
ant theoretical quantities to have determined. But
the only two full authorities to be referred to, are,
Howard Vyse and Perring in 1837, and Aiton and
Ingls in 1865; for the French interior of the
Pyramid has many glaring errors; and my own
measures, though taken with more care than per-
haps any others, were not connected, for want of
opportunity and means, with the exact features of
the ancient outside of the building. Hence the
numbers we here refer to are—.


aa Minit ‘ King’s
ate chamber, its Passage chamber,
Measurers. A.D. floor above floor. floor above
pavement. pavement.
British inches. |British inches. |British inches.|
Vyse and Perring, . | 1837 808 830 1665
Aiton and Inglis, . 1865 860 891 1720


The differences of the authorities are evidently
large ; but being in the same direction as their differ-
ences in the whole height of the Pyramid from the
mean of the observers,—we may expect the truth to
lie between the two. It will be noticed also, that
agreeably with what has been remarked on these
chambers by other persons, each of the observers
makes the level of one chamber very nearly half the


72 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMIDS [DIv. I.


height of the other ; though this approximate equal-
ity requires the general passage floor to the Queen’s
chamber to be taken, in Howard Vyse and Perring’s
case; but the chamber-floor itself, in Aiton and
Inglis’s. This is a difficulty, though, which need
not be very much dwelt on now, since both chamber
and passage floors, as abundantly shown in vol. i.
p- 60, are in an unfinished and negative condition.
Assuming, however, Howard Vyse as the correcter
expression of the idea,—my own observations may
be made some use of on that hypothesis, as they
allow the difference of level of the chambers to be
determined pretty well.

Computing, therefore, 1883 British inches, or my
measured length of the Grand Gallery, with an angle
of rise of 26° 18’, as observed,—we have a vertical
height of 834 inches. To which, adding 1 inch for the
elevation of the floor of the King’s chamber above
the great step at the head of the Grand Gallery, 6
inches for the elevation of the step’s surface above
the southern termination of the floor slope produced
to the south wall, and 5 inches for the southward
dip of the reputed horizontal passage leading to the
Queen’s chamber ;—but subtracting 6 inches for
height of the north end of that passage above the
beginning of the Grand Gallery floor—we have,
finally, 840 British inches. That being our result
for a quantity, which, according to Howard Vyse, is
repeated no less than three times in the building ;
or 1st, from the Pyramid’s pavement to the floor of


PROP. VII.| | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 73


the Queen’s chamber passage ; 2d, from that level to
the floor of the King’s chamber ; and, 3d, from that
to the roof of the topmost chamber of construction,
the highest known room in the whole Pyramid.
Hence for height of Queen’s chamber passage floor,
above pavement of the Pyramid ; we have in all, by


British inches.


Howard Vyse and Perring, , , = 830
C. Piazzi Smyth, c : ; 2 E = 840
Aiton and Inglis, e659 891

Mean, z , ° : E = 854


and for height of King’s chamber floor, above pave-
ment of Pyramid—


British inches.
Howard Vyse and Perring, : : = 1665
C. Piazzi Smyth, . : i : : i = 1680
Aiton and Inglis, . P =. 1720
Mean, . . ; ‘ ; = 1688


To which we may add, that the height of the roof
of Campbell’s chamber,—the angular-roofed topmost
chamber of construction above the King’s chamber
floor,—is at the height above the Pyramid pavement
of, not the 2496 as given by Colonel Howard Vyse,
but more probably, 2540 British inches.

Similarly also, the roof of the subterranean
chamber will be depressed, not 1088, but more
nearly 1112 British inches; and its floor, with the
Colonel’s given wall-height of 138 inches, will be,
not 1226, but 1250 British inches below the
Pyramid pavement. But then, again, that wall-
height is a special maximum in a chamber which,
though its roof is level and truly rectangular, its


74 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [DIV. I.


floor (like all the rest of the room, chiselled out of
the solid rock) is so excessively uneven as to make
the walls in various places of all heights from 40
to 138 inches. (See Plate iv.) Something more
nearly approaching, therefore, to a mean of the
various heights, would be safer to employ ; and as
the quantity of 91 inches—not very different from
a mean—is given by the very point of the floor, on
which Colonel Howard Vyse and Mr. Perring have
marked ‘the centre of the Pyramid,—or as being
touched by the central vertical axis of the Pyramid
produced downwards,—we prefer to adopt that
height in place of 138 inches. Hence must be
reduced our final statement for the depression of
the floor of the subterranean chamber below the
Pyramid pavement, from 1250, to 1203 inches,


Fresh-water Levels.


By an approximate hand-levelling method, I
ascertained that ‘Hast Tombs,’ where we lived, and
where the meteorological observations were taken,
was about 980 inches below the pavement of the
Pyramid; the sand-plain at the foot of the hill, about
1400 inches; and the water in the well of King
Shafre’s tomb, about 1800 inches below the same
datum plane in the month of February 1865.

Next, by closer levelling with a regular surveyor’s
telescopic levelling instrument and staff; Mr. Inglis
ascertained, in the month of April 1865, that the
sand-plain at the foot of the Pyramid hill was


PROP. VII.] | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 75


variously between 1380 and 1460 inches beneath
the Pyramid pavement ; that the water in the well
of King Shafre’s tomb, was at the same level as that
in the many agricultural wells in the neighbouring
irrigated plain ; and that such level was, 1766 British
inches beneath the Pyramid pavement.

In Messrs. Aiton and Inglis’s large ms. plans and
sections of the Pyramid, such level is attributed to
‘the Nile; yet there is reason to believe that the
Nile itself was not measured on the occasion, but
only believed on principle to coincide with the well-
water near the Pyramid hill,—a hydrostatic cireum-
stance, however, by no means necessary to obtain,
as we shall presently see.

Thirdly, here,—but primarily in point of time,—
Howard Vyse and Perring made many and accurate
observations of levels in the years 1837 and 1838 ;
arriving at some curious results too which puzzled
themselves, and several other Egyptologists of the
period also. These results were mainly, that at cer-
tain seasons of the year, the well-water near the
Pyramids was much, even many feet, above, though
sometimes as many below, the water in the Nile,—
down to whose very river course those gentlemen
appear really to have carried their measures.

But they believed on theory, that the well-water
at the Pyramid should always coincide with the
existing level of the Nile; and on finding the
well-water so much higher at times, they concluded
rather hastily, that it must be fed by local springs


76 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [ DIV. I.


from the Pyramid hill. Knowing, however, that
from the rainless character of the climate, true
springs are unknown in Egypt,—they pounced on
this apparent or supposed proof they had stumbled
on, of the existence of one spring supply of water
at the Pyramids,—as indicating the existence of a
special phenomenon of extraordinary importance in
the Coptic land. Sufficient, indeed, they considered,
to explain that very strange story which Herodotus
gathered from the Egyptian priests, about the
shepherd Philition and his flocks being located for
so long, and so remarkably, about the Pyramids, at
the time of their building.

The hydrostatic theory, however, was wrong, or
imperfect rather, though the facts were well enough
observed. For, on the great scale of the Egyptian
valley, the well-water at its borders appears to be
supplied by a slow, average effect only of saturation
of the soil by the river; whence, time must be
taken into account; and the greatest height of
water in the wells, two or three miles from the
parent stream, can only occur several weeks or
months after the greatest height of the actual river-
inundation. Neither is it then so marked a pheno-
menon; for the resistance of some miles of soil tends
to create in the wells an approach to a mean level
all the year through, or between high Nile, low
Nile, and high Nile again. Hence it is easy to see,
that the water in the wells at the Pyramids must
be sometimes higher and sometimes lower than the


PROP. VII.] | HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 77


water in the open bed of the river, nearly three
miles off,—and yet have been all originally derived
from thence. Add to which natural phenomenon,
the effects among particular wells of more or less
drawing upon them during the day, for the supply
of some hundreds of workpeople,—and that some of
the shafts were in the solid limestone rock, where
the water could hardly get in at all, while others
were in porous rubbish ;—and then the anomalies
nearly vanish. Wherefore we may condense the
Colonel’s observations as follows, and consider them
in so far, as very useful and well-observed facts :—


British inches,
Sand-plain near the Pyramids, below the pavement of


the Great Pyramid, . é i : : from 1500
to 1536

High Nile level in October 1838 (above the average), . 1647
High Nile level in October 1837 (below the average), . 1714


Well-water in June 1837, in shaft No. 3, one of many


such wells, : ‘ s : , ~~ gos
Well-water in October 1838, in same shaft, . : 21 ALT TS
Mean Nile level in 1838, . ; : ‘ 3 pees 7)
4 Eat mt Pegg ety! alt OEY See Res
Low Nile level in June 1837, ‘ . : : - 1896
sy >» in June 1838, . ’ . 3 . 1945


It is observable here, that the high Nile of 1838,
which Colonel Howard Vyse describes as above the
average, has barely the height above the previous
mean Nile,—of what other authors, as Sir Gardner
Wilkinson and Mr. Lane,—both of them with larger
and more varied Egyptian experience,—attribute
to an ordinary rise of the river at Cairo ; neither are
the low Niles by any means so low, as those observed
by the French savants from 1798 to 1801.


78 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S __ | DIV. 1.


We shall not be far, however, from the truth, if
we combine all the results (see the French measures
in vol. ii. Section v.), and consider for the year 1865
that the following levels hold good :—


British inches.


East Tombs station, below Pyramid pavement, ED
Sand-plain, in parts, . ‘ = 1400

Do. in other parts, . = 1500
Ordinary high Nile in October, = 1650
Well-water near the Pyramid in ei = 1780
Ordinary low Nile in June, . . : ‘ = 1950


These three last levels, however, vary progres-
sively with long continued time; for, according to
the very sure testimony of Sir Gardner Wilkinson
and the monuments,—the bed of the Nile, as well as
the surface of the irrigated land, goes on elevating
every year by deposited matter, to the extent of
about 4°0 or 4°5 inches for each hundred years near
this part of Egypt; or from 160 to 180 inches in
four thousand years. A period this, taking us back
to a very remote date, but which we may have to
deal with on paper, and when the fresh-water levels
quoted, were a large number of inches lower than
they are now.


Sea-water Level.


The Pyramids are distant about ninety miles
direct from the Red Sea ; and one hundred and ten
miles direct from the Mediterranean, but one hun-
dred and fifty along the course of the Nile. Recent
levelling operations having shown the identity of
the mean levels of the two seas,—we can turn our


PROP. VII.] §HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 79


attention to the Mediterranean alone, in attempting,
from the length of course and character of the Nile,
to estimate both seas’ depression below the Pyramid
base. To this end, we have to deal with the river,
not when in flood and violent current, but rather at
low Nile, when its stream is more regular; though
still very notable, as indicated by trafticking boats
being wafted along by the current against any,
but the strongest, winds blowing in the opposite
direction.

What is the fall, then, per mile on the surface of
the water in the river for the last one hundred and
fifty miles of its course ?


For the mean distance between Assuan and Rosetta, or 720 miles,
Sir Gardner Wilkinson says about, per mile, . . = 6 inches.
And Professor Chaix, about . ' = 5'8
From the Nilometer at Rhoda, when the Nile y was oA
its lowest in 1846, to Tineh on the Mediterranean,
according to M. Talebot, were 554 inches of fall,
equal, on 150 miles, to 3°7 per mile. (This result was
kindly communicated to me by Mr. Samuel Birch
of the British Museum, from the late Leonard
Horner’s paper in the Philosophical Transactions),. = 3°7 ,,~


7


‘Cairo’ is stated by Russegger to be 780 inches above

the sea-level, per mile of distance, . ase
The Rhine falls in the last 300 miles of its course, per

mile, . = 40 ,,
And the Fives tei ere to Cheadington, ee

mile, . x : : : 7 é pile ae Ia


From all these particulars we may pretty safely
take for an ordinary low Nile, 4:2 inches per mile,
on 150 miles,—or, 630 inches. Which, being added
to 1950, or the previously stated level of such Nile,
gives 2580 British inches, as the depression of the


80 WHAT ARE GREAT PYRAMID’S [ DIV. 1.


sea-level below the Pyramid pavement for the epoch
A.D. 1866.

But was this element different in amount, four
thousand years ago? On one side we have our own
observed fact of a dip of the Pyramid pavement
south and east; also a generally believed in, slow
sinking of the Delta region of the Nile; and a pro-
bable alteration of the agricultural physical aspects
of upper Egypt, by the escape of the waters of
the Great Ethiopian lake of William Osburn, sub-
sequent to the epoch of the Pyramid’s building.
But, on the other side, the apparent dip of the
Pyramid pavement in one direction, may have been
caused by an elevation of it in the other,—making
no difference in the hypsometric position of the
centre ; even as the sinking of the Delta region,
is said to be at least made up for in the intervening
country, by a rise of the land near Suez; while
a bursting of the supposed Ethiopian lake may
be attributed to many other more likely causes,
than a large alteration of the levels in the Pyramid
region.

Altogether then, the historical evidences may be
certainly considered to imply, that the change, if
any, in relative level of sea and Pyramid base dur-
ing the last four thousand years, must have been
very small; and the same idea is given by our
Plates 1. and x., representing John Taylor’s theory,
as extended by myself, to meet the positions of the
several passages in the Pyramid.


PROP. VII.]| - HYPSOMETRICAL DATA ? 81


When last referring to Plate 1, we contented
ourselves with computing the angles resulting there-
from ; but let us now calculate the lengths of the
several lines concerned, viz., thirds and fourths of
the semi-side of the central square there depicted ;
the data for calculation being,—the angles already
assigned,—and, the number of 9140 British inches
elsewhere concluded to be the closest measured ap-
proach to the length of one side of the Pyramid’s
base, or the line B p in Plate m1.

Had the sea-level been the only hypsometric
quantity successfully approximated to by the hypo-


thesis, I would not have called attention to the


circumstance ; but we have also,—and in addition
to the whole height of the Pyramid,—the levels
of the topmost construction chamber, the King’s
chamber, Queen’s chamber, subterranean chamber,}
and the ancient well-water, all closely represented ;
as will be evident from the following tabular state-
ment, both of practically measured, and theoreti-
cally computed, hypsometric values :—


1 This chamber exhibits the largest difference found anywhere,
between theory and observation ; equal to 87 inches on a run of 1200
inches. But that is rather the necessary consequence of the residual
practical anomaly or correction introduced by the builders, in that
—for some reason not hitherto explained, or even suspected, by any
modern author,—they ceased the dip of the entrance passage, and
made it nearly horizontal for a short distance before reaching the
subterranean chamber. And yet, it is possible that an important
reason, both symbolical, and structural, may appear in our next divi-
sion of this volume. (See Plate tv.)


VOL. IIL. F


82 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. TI.


Hypsomerric TABLE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.


Observation. Theory.


Names of Parts alluded to. Letters in
Plate 1. Measured Computed


Quantities. Quantities.


British inches. | British inches.


Ancient height of Pyramid, . AC +5820 +5819
Present height, a.p. 1865, . BEC + 5440 Ror
Outcrop of air-channels on :

ancient surface, (?) +230
Arab’s half-way corner niche, (?) oe +3203 ys
ib cama construction ay 42540 4.2578
Floor of King’s chamber, P cv + 1688 +1719
ae Queen’s chamber pas- wack + 854 + 860
Pavement of Pyramid, ‘ . DCB 0 0
East Tombs piggies: Sei sta-

tion, - pine.
i eo of subterr ranean ae 1203 1290
Sand-plain, east of Pyramid- hill, ae — 1450
Present well-water level, . ; ae — 1780 ee
Ancient well-water level, ; . C7 — 1950 — 1934
Sea-level present and ancient, . CK — 2580 — 2578


PROPOSITION VIII.
MATERIALS OF THE GREAT PYRAMID ?


Arter the frequent mention in vol. i, of the
materials met with in and about the Pyramids, and
the further description of hand specimens in vol. ii.
Sect. v., little more notice of that subject would seem
to be necessary here ; especially as the natural sub-
stance in which nearly pure geometric forms have


amet eee nears ee


PROP. VIII.] THE GREAT PYRAMID. 83


been executed, can be of no importance directly to the
theory of them,—though of some indirect influence
touching both the lasting powers of the monument
they compose, and a few other questions connected
with its human history and interests. The present
is, however, the appropriate portion of our book,
wherein we are bound to bring before: our readers’
attention, and against our own observations, any
and every antagonistic statement that can be found,
—if it can only claim the smallest respectability of
origin, or be likely, in the present educated day, to
claim a single believing soul on its side. And we
make this proviso, because, there have been some
things hastily written about the Pyramids in
medizeval times,—as ‘ that the Pyramids were built,
“not by men, but by fallen angels, for they only
‘could have moved stones four hundred feet long,’
‘ete. etc.—which no one would thank us now for
occupying their time with: especially too, when
some of those things were written with reference
to features, where the several sets of measured num-
bers which we have brought together in vol. ii., con-
tain their own internal evidences, and are capable
of giving up a silent story of proof to all reflecting
readers, more convincingly than any verbal attempt
of ours could speak for them.

But advanced, as we now are, to some special
subjects beyond the bounds of numerical demon-
stration,—we must here request indulgence for some
extent of mere speech, in order to set forth in their


84 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. 1.


true colours a few of the extraordinary things which
a student of Pyramid literature, even in the plain-
sailing department of ‘ materials, may still expect
to find by his wayside ; and in such a position, or
brought there by men with such authority, that
they cannot be passed over altogether unnoticed.


Composition of the Pyranuid Hull.


We have already stated, as one of the broadest-
based foundational truths of the region, that the
Pyramid and neighbouring hills are composed of
limestone full of fossils, and without any trace of
igneous or metamorphic action of any kind or
degree ; to the utter impossibility, therefore, of
certain published theories, as to Egyptian Pyramids
being always formed around basaltic protrusions of
rock. But, to our great surprise, having met since
then with an officer from India, employed for many
years in that Peninsula on geological surveys, he
spoke with the greatest confidence of the ‘trap
‘dykes’ on the Great Pyramid hill. He had seen
them himself, ‘when he visited the Pyramid on his
‘way home from India, and there was no doubt
‘about the matter ; for they, the trap dykes, were
‘cropping out on the eastern edge of the hill
‘through the other strata and the sand’!

‘Were they standing up, then, as planes or walls
‘of rock above the surface ?’ we asked.

‘Not exactly,’ he replied; ‘the chief plane or
‘dyke that had once stood up was now lying in


PROP. VII] © THE GREAT PYRAMID. 85


‘ pieces in situ at the foot of the hill ; but the case
‘was nevertheless perfectly clear, for the dyke
‘appeared again higher up the hill; a regular
‘greenstone dyke, such as every geologist would
‘ distinguish in a moment, and at any distance, from
‘ limestone !’

‘Had he judged of it from a distance, or by going
‘to the place and tracing the vein of greenstone
‘material in contact with the beds of limestone ?
we again inquired.

‘Oh! only at a distance,’ responded he ; ‘in fact,
‘ he did not leave the usual road by which all visitors
‘ascend the hill, to the Pyramid ; but the notable
‘ elevation of that road had enabled him to see these
‘ evident traces of igneous rock, just a little way off,
‘ to his left hand’!

‘Then, now, I know precisely what you are allud-
‘ing to, I was enabled to reply ; ‘ viz., to the black
‘basalt stones which do appear. two or three times
‘in a line straight eastward from the Pyramid
‘down the side of its hill to the plain, and on a
‘track only a few feet south of the visitors’ road of
‘ascent. But I have been amongst those stones often,
‘and turned many of the smaller ones over, and
‘found them to be only loose masonry blocks
‘brought from elsewhere ; and now to be seen on
‘that spot, as having once formed there some part
‘of a well-shaped building; perhaps a tramway ;
‘and even still showing a carefully prepared, if
‘not also polished, surface on one side, and some-


86 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. |.


‘times even on two adjacent sides meeting at a
‘ particular angle.’

After this, the officer admitted ‘that he might
‘have been mistaken on the subject of natural
‘ dykes; though, as for the materials of the stones
‘he saw, being igneous rock,—what he was now
‘ told, proved that he had not been deceived there ;
‘and so he felt sure at the time.’


Internal Substance of the Great Pyramid.


The plain and simple account by Howard Vyse
and Perring, who excavated extensively in various
parts of the Pyramid, is,—that excepting a small pro-
portion of the rock of the hill left standing,’ and the
granite linings in and near the King’s chamber, with
a few others,—all the rest of the Pyramid substance
is built of rectangular blocks put together by masons’
art, and in a limestone material. This material is also
stated to be generally the product of the Pyramid
hill ; but occasionally, the denser rock of the table-
lands on the eastern side of the Nile,—and distin-
guishable still, not only by that greater density,
freedom from nummulites, and uniformity of con-
sistence,—but by quarry-marks, more or less legible,
in red paint, being usually found on the under or
inner sides of the blocks formed out of it.


Fully confirmatory of every item in this account


were all my experiences, so that I had considered it


1 « Averaging 8 feet in height over the whole base of the Pyramid,’
they say ; i.e., 8 feet only out of the whole height of nearly 490 feet.


PROP. VIII. | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 87


to have disposed for ever of all the talk of some men
about white marble; of others, that Herodotus’s
bringing stone from the Arabian hills was nonsense
and supererogatory, because the Pyramid hill could
furnish plenty of the same sort; and of others, that
there had been no large amount of building of any
kind, because the Pyramids were merely hills
trimmed down where they stood.

But errors, as well as truths, have much vitality ;
and this last notion has recently been produced
again with such effect, as to have appeared in more
than one shapely book ; and not unfrequently to have
been flung at ourselves in conversation, as being
something we could not gainsay. An eminent con-
tractor for the execution of first-class earth engineer-
ing works, has recently declared—so these authorities
aver—that the Great Pyramid ‘was never con-
‘ structed, —a sounding phrase, even a signal flag to
fight under ; and meaning, the technicality of the
words being interpreted, that the Pyramid was not
built by masons, but banked up or dug away by
navvies and quarrymen. |

Well, the engineers of the present day, and con-
tractors too, are a wonderful class ; and have a right
to be heard on the modus operands of ancient
works, either of architecture or engineering. But
what are the proofs of their new battle-cry, ‘The
‘ Great Pyramid was never constructed’?

These two, according to themselves—1st, the
ground around the Pyramid looks as if it had been


88 é MATERIALS OF [DIV. 1.


excavated ; and, 2d, one of these able contractors
who has been twice to the Pyramid, and spent about
three hours there each time, ‘is certain that the
‘ ancients had no machines by which they could have
‘ lifted such large stones.’

‘Is he a well-read man in ancient architectural
‘ literature ?’ asks an onlooker.

He himself says, ‘Oh no! not at all! He never
‘yreads'a book in any language.’ And when referred
to the Pyramid’s side, where he may see the
masonried stones up on high, actually lifted, no
matter how it was done, but asa proof it was done,—
he replies, ‘that is only apparent, not real, building ;
‘ the stones were cut into shape on the ancient hill-
‘side up there, and left as we see them now. And
‘he will not acknowledge any difference between
‘ the dense limestone from Mokattam, and the friable
‘nummulitic limestone of the Pyramid hill; free-
‘stone all of it, he roundly declares.’

His questioner then began with an argument of
power :—‘ You say those stones on the Pyramid
‘ side were not lifted up there, because no machine
‘known to the ancients was strong enough to lift
‘such heavy blocks; and as they are of limestone,
‘and the whole hill is of limestone, you hold they
‘must have been portions of a high original hill
‘trimmed into shape in situ. Vastly bigger, how-
‘ever, and heavier too, than any of these limestone
‘ blocks you see,—are the granite blocks in and about
‘the King’s chamber; and as they could not have


PROP. VIII. | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 89


‘formed part of a limestone hill, they must have
‘been lifted up by human agency to occupy their
‘ present well-built, and well-devised, positions. So,
‘if the heavier blocks were lifted, why not the
‘ lighter ?’

But this pointed shot fell harmless off the con-
tractor, like a mustard-seed from the sides of a
rhinoceros ; for he answered with amazing aplomb,
‘ That’s not granite at all in the King’s chamber, it’s
‘all concrete,—a mixture that was carried up in
‘ little basketsful at a time, and then cast in a mould.’

‘Not granite !’ gasped the questioner ; ‘ why, look
‘at this specimen of the mineral : it was picked up
‘ outside the Pyramid, as being almost exactly of the
‘same order as the walls of the King’s chamber !’*

‘Oh! that’s granite, of course,’ said the contractor,
taking the specimen in his hand, and turning it over
and over jauntily ; ‘but that’s not the walls of the
‘King’s chamber. Have you seen Pompey’s Pillar
‘at Alexandria? No, youhaven’t. Well, I thought
‘so; and it’s a pity you haven't, because there you
‘ would find the whole thing most completely proved
‘to your own and everybody’s satisfaction. There
‘ are some marks made on Pompey’s Pillar by cannon-
‘balls at the siege ; and wherever one of them has


1 Neither in this conversation nor elsewhere in this work, have the
mineralogical differences of granite, syenite, and syenitic-granite been
taken into account; for, as regards architecture, granite is the well
understood term that includes all three ; and all three are, for the
purposes of a mason, so nearly similar to each other, and entirely
removed from soft limestone.


90 MATERIALS OF [DIv. 1.


‘struck and torn up the surface, you can see quite
‘plainly that it’s all concrete inside, and nothing
‘else. All“cast in moulds; though men who look
‘at the outside only, are always raving about the
* beauty of the granite shaft, forsooth !’

‘ And you formed all that idea for yourself, asked
the other ; ‘ didn’t get it out of any book ?’

‘ Haven’t I told you I never read any books ?
returned the contractor.

‘ Yes, [ remember now, that you said so,’ replied
his questioner ; ‘ but it is so very strange to find an
‘old idea exactly repeated in modern times. For
‘this is how a writer expresses it in 1702; the
‘ quotation beginning at the middle of a paragraph
‘at the foot of page 202, thus—


‘« The only entire pieces that have escaped the common fate
‘ of the rest, are the column of Pompey, and four obelisks of
‘granite. ’Tis said the first was erected by Ceasar, to the
‘memory of Pompey: some think it a kind of marble, but others
‘ incline rather to believe that ’twas built of melted stone, cast in
‘moulds upon the place. The latter opinion seems most pro-
‘ bable, for there is not the least piece of that stone to be found
‘in any part of the world, and the pillar is so prodigiously big and
‘high, that it could hardly be erected without a miracle. I
‘ know ’tis alleged by those who believe the story of the Rhodian
‘ colossus, that the ancients had the advantage of admirable
‘machines to raise such bulky pieces; but I should reckon my-
‘ self extreamly obliged to these gentlemen, if they would show me
‘any probable reason why among so great a variety of Egyptian
‘monuments of antiquity there is not one of marble; and by
‘what unaccountable accident the stone called granite, which
‘was then so common, is now grown so scarce, that the most
‘ curious enquiries into the works of nature cannot find the least
‘fragment of it, that was not employed in ancient structures.


PROP. Vill. | THE GREAT PYRAMID. a1


‘ And even though I should suppose, with my adversaries, that
‘ the quarries out of which this stone was dug were by degrees
‘so entirely exhausted, that there is not the least footstep of ’em
‘left; and that Nature herself has lost so much of ancient vigour
‘ and fecundity, that she is not able to produce new ones ; I may
‘ still be allowed to ask why granite was only used in obelisks
‘ or columns of a prodigious bigness: for if it were really a sort
‘ of stone or marble, I see no reason why we might not find small
‘ pieces of it, as well as porphyry, and other precious kinds of
‘marble. These reflections, in my opinion, may serve to confirm
‘ the hypothesis of those who believe that all these admirable
‘monuments were actually cast ina mould: and if they would
‘ take the pains to view this column attentively, they would soon
‘ be convinced by the testimony of their own eyes, that ’tis only
‘ a kind of cement composed of sand and calcined stone, not unlike
‘to mortar or lime, which grew hard by degrees. I will not
‘ pretend to determine by what artifice these ancient workmen
‘ kept the cement from yielding or sliding till the pillar was com-
‘ pleated ; though perhaps it might be probably alledged, that
‘ they made a mould of stone or wood, besmeared on the inside
‘ with some fat or unctuous substance, to hinder the matter from
‘ sticking to its cover; and that after the work was finished, and
‘the column almost dry, they broke the mould that preserved
‘ the regularity of its figure, and kept it from falling.’

‘ « This column is 80 foot high, and 24 in compass: ’tis placed
‘on a marble pedestal eight foot square, and crowned at the top
‘ with a chapiter of the same granite, of which the pillar consists.
‘ I know not what opinion you may have of the ancient engines,
‘but for my part I must confess, whether I consider the weight
‘ or bulk of so vast a mass, I find it equally impossible to con-
‘ ceive that it could be raised by the strongest and best contrived
‘ machines that were ever invented.” ’


‘So there,’ continued the questioner to the
modern engineering contractor, ‘you have, in a book
‘ printed 164 years ago, your own theory of the easy
‘formation of granite in moulds (only you must
‘remember to grease them well inside), and a
‘ disbelief in the power of ancient machines to raise


92 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. I.


‘large stones ; and all this in reference to the well-
‘known and frequently-visited Pompey’s (Diocle-
‘ tian’s) pillar. A. thing, not secluded ina dark room
‘ of difficult access, like the King’s chamber in the
‘ Great Pyramid, but standing out in the open sun-
‘ light, in a sea-port town, appealing to all observers ;
‘and those curious inquirers, would therefore have
‘ long ago found out, and made patent to all the world,
‘ such a flagrant case of cheating ; or, if you like, such
‘a splendid invention for imitating granite,—had it
‘really been as represented. But I rather incline
‘to think that the true difficulty to man, is not the
‘mechanical exertion of lifting a heavy stone when
‘ you have got it,—but competing with Nature in
‘making a natural rock. The idea, however, that
‘men could do so, seems to have prevailed rather
‘extensively at one time, and has led to the ill-
‘ treatment of other monuments besides the King’s
‘chamber and coffer of the Great Pyramid ; for
‘thus the worthy Dr. Stukely is compelled to write
‘ about Stonehenge, in 1740 A.D. :—


‘ ¢ Nevertheless the current of so many ages has been more mer-
‘ ciful to Stonehenge, than the insolence of rapacious hands (besides
‘ the general soccage brought upon the work of old) by the unac-
‘ countable folly of mankind, in breaking pieces off with great
‘hammers. This detestable practice arose from the silly notion
‘ of the stones being factitious. But alas! it would be a greater
‘ wonder to make them by art, than to carry them sixteen miles
‘by art and strength; and those people must be inexcusable,
‘ that deface the monument for so trifling a fancy.”’’


PROP. VIII.| | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 93


Exterior Substance of the Great Pyramid.


Portions of Great Pyramid casing-stones which
we have placed in the hands of a lapidary, have not
come up to the polish of ‘ marble,’ only to that of
moderately hard limestone; yet it is a nice and
pleasant species of worked stone to handle, uniform
in its structure, of small specific gravity, of a warm
and rather more than a cream-colour in tint, and
with a great adaptability to cut up into accurate
mathematical figures, of any angle.

But the ancient exterior surface of these speci-
mens is found, in nine cases out of ten, to be of a -
rich brown hue, the exception being a pale blackish
tint ; and underneath the brown colour, a thin film
is sometimes perceivable, rather whiter than the rest
of the stone. Altogether, the brown tint has been
taken by many persons as the remains of paint or
‘shellac varnish ;’ and as a proof of the lubrication
of Pliny, meaning some unctuous coating applied
to the stone ; though others translate the word as
merely polished, and consider it to imply that sort
of polishing which results from grinding, or other
mechanical smoothing process.

Dr. Wallace, of Glasgow, however, has found
(vol. ii. Sect. v.) the brown material to be oxide of
iron, and considers it to be an exudation from the
stone. This suggestion, too, explains the similar
browning which is found over all the tops and ex-
ternal sides of most of the stones forming the present


94 - MATERIALS OF [ DIV. I.


summit of the Great Pyramid ; stones from Mokat-
tam in every instance there, though never on the
ancient exterior surface of the Pyramid ; and there-
fore never in a position to get part of a coat of paint
once spread over the bevelled outside, if such a coat-
ing was ever really applied.

The development, however, of this outward iron-
browning, would seem to require a long exposure to
sun and air; for however much of it there may be
on the bevelled, and therefore ancient, outside of an
ordinary casing-stone fragment,—there is none on
the same fragment’s own adjoining surfaces, of they
formed any part of the course of masonry, and were
in so far in an interior position. Every chipped or
scraped surface of any of the stones still standing
am situ, as those about the entrance to the Pyramid,
is furthermore lighter and lighter in colour, accord-
ing to the recentness of the scraping. A matter
abundantly provable by the dates attached to the
names of travellers, in the label spaces which they
have often prepared for themselves by scraping ;
and which, in photographs of the cyclopean blocks
placed en décharge over the entrance,—appear like
so many white paper patches on the brown stone;
while Dr. Lepsius’s inscription to the late King of
Prussia, looks like the large advertising-bill of some
unscrupulous trader. The untouched parts, there-
fore, of these inclined blocks, are decidedly brownish ;
and if not of the full casing-stone, or topmost stone,
hue,—it 1s because they have not the same unmiti-


PROP. VIII.| | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 95


gated exposure to sun and wind, on account of their
position in a hollow on the northern side of the
Pyramid ; and it was on that flank of the building
alone, that several casing-stone fragments were found
by us with their original outside surface, occasion-
ally, not brown, but pale black. Another exudation
of the stone, however, there is, which seems notably
to require darkness, quiet, and want of change of
air for its manifestation, viz., the salt.


Salt inside the Pyramid.


This substance is so abundant, .e., in dense plates,
an inch thick often, in the horizontal passage and
Queen’s chamber,—and so scanty everywhere else,—
that the Arabs believe, both that it exists nowhere
throughout the Pyramid except in these two named
localities ; and that it is to be found there, simply
because the builders put such ‘salt stones’ into
that particular department of the building. Yet
there are incrustations of salt in large superficial
extents, though to small thickness, developed on the
walls of the Grand Gallery.

Similar incrustations, too, are to be seen on the
horizontal part of the entrance passage and the
walls of the sepulchral chamber of the second Pyra-
mid,—though greatly reduced from their appearance
when Belzoni entered it, some seven hundred years
after its last medieval visitors had left ; for he then
found incrustations, or rather exfoliations, more like
‘endive leaves, and several inches long,’ where now


96 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. T.


they are to be measured only by tenths of inches.
Yet in every case, the material comes out of the
wall with curving fibres, as if it were a viscous
substance forced out through small apertures with
enormous pressure ; and it is still coming out, as
proved by its decorating recent scratched figures.
This fibrous aspect, appears to have been well
noticed by Mr. W. R. Wilde,’ who, speaking of
similar saline formations in the chambers of con-
struction in 1837,—or the very year of the discovery
of those rooms by Colonel Howard Vyse, and there-
fore before they were blackened by the smoke of
visitors’ torches,—describes what he saw as ‘a re-
‘markable incrustation of a shining white, curly,
‘and crystalline substance, not unlike the moss
‘ called ursnea barbata covering some of the trees
‘in Madeira. It is found in little bunches on the
‘roof, and as it is a substance, not, that | am aware
‘of, as yet accurately described, being generally
‘supposed to be nitrate of potash or saltpetre, it
‘has been subjected to chemical analysis by my
‘friend, Professor (since Sir Robert) Kane, and
‘found to be common salt, chloride of sodium.
‘ He states to me that its occurrence in this form is
‘of considerable interest, as it illustrates the man-
‘ner in which some species of the alum family
‘assume the curious fibrous and contorted figure
‘of these specimens. A question of exceeding
‘interest here presented itself,—how did it get
1 Narrative of a Voyage to Madeira, Teneriffe, etc. ‘Dwblinj 1840.


PROP. V1II.] | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 97


‘ into.and crystallize’on the sides of these chambers ?
‘Three modes of resolving the problem have oc-
‘curred to me: either that the granite (?) itself
‘ was filled with this substance in its original bed,
‘and that it oozed out and crystallized in this
‘ curious form afterwards; or that the atmosphere
‘from the desert, where salt is found (as it is in
‘the neighbourhood), becoming impregnated with
‘fine and impalpable saline particles getting into
‘the interior of the Pyramid, so encrusted it as I
‘have described, although we know that for cen-
‘turies there was no apparent inlet for it; or,
‘thirdly, that it was used in some of the mystic
‘rites that were of old practised in the lower
‘chambers, and, being carried up in the form of
‘ vapour, cooled and crystallized in the upper apart-
‘ments. But, at the same time, I must acknow-
‘ledge that. none of these modes satisfy me as to
‘ the way in which this salt was formed.’

That the salt is almost entirely common salt, or
chloride of sodiwm, Dr. Wallace’s recent analysis
confirms the older; and that one, if not the only,
origin for it, is its original presence in the material
of the Pyramid (not the granite indeed, on which I
have never seen any trace of the salt, but the lime-
stone),—is also shown by his analysis of the num-
mulitic lime-rock of the Pyramid hill, and the shell
limestone of the southern hill: as well too as by
my own late finding, that the recently cut and
polished specimens of the Great Pyramid casing-

VOL. IIL. | G


98 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. I.


stones, after being put away for a few months in a
closet, are quite salt to the tongue.

But that, I must confess, does not of itself ex-
plain why there should be twelve times as much
salt found in the construction of the stone forming
the lining of the Queen’s chamber, as in any other
part of the Pyramid, or Pyramid hill, yet examined.
So that the question may still be opened up, as to
whether the Pyramid builders used this very salt-
stone for the Queen’s chamber and its passage,
through accident, or design. Unless the following
suggestion should be deemed of weight, viz. :—That
there is a tendency of the salt contained in all the
mass of the Pyramid, to crystallize out towards, and
into, any internal void ; and that the product goes on
increasing therein, if there be no ventilation. Co-
incidently with which idea, it should be remembered,
that the Queen’s chamber is absolutely without
visible ventilation,—forming, as it does, a cul-de-sac
out of the line of the passage leading to the King’s
chamber, with its peculiar air-tubes ; the Queen’s
chamber, moreover, being conspicuous in most
travellers’ accounts from the time of Sandys and
Greaves downwards, for its ‘noisome savour and
‘ grave-like smell forcing a quick retreat.’


Mortar of Great Pyramid.
From a paper,! by William Wallace, Esq., Ph.D.,
of Glasgow, to whom two specimens of Great Pyra-
1 Chemical News for April 1865, p. 185. }


PROP. VIII] THE GREAT PYRAMID. 99


mid mortar, one from the interior, the other from
the exterior of the structure, had been furnished by
William Clarke, C.E—the following analysis is
taken :—


Interior. Exterior.
Sulphate of lime, hydrated, 7 , 81+50* 82:89*
Carbonate of lime, ; ? , 9°47 9°80
Carbonate of magnesia, “ ? : 59 79
Oxide of iron, . : " , ‘ io ‘21
Alumina, . " ‘ : : : 2°41 3°00
Silicic acid, 4 ‘ : , ; 5:30 4:30

99°52 100°99
* Water by actual estimation, . y 16°66 17°38


Both varieties of mortar being described as appear-
ing, ‘a mixture of plaster of a slight pinkish colour,
‘with crystallized selenite or gypsum,—I should
be inclined to say, that Mr. Clarke had not secured
any of the more precious mzlk-white cement of the
finishing blocks of the interior,—but only some of the
ruder cement of the masonry courses. This, too, is the
same in every part of the Pyramid, and has just the
pink aspect ascribed to it, together with a variety of


small pea; and in colour, chiefly brown, red, and
white. A portion of this sort of mortar, of my own
gathering, which I recently transmitted to Dr. Wal-
lace, he describes as identical, chemically, with what
he had previously examined.

Hence the above analysis represents the mortar of
all the chief mass of the Great Pyramid structure,


100 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. L


and shows it to be different from ancient Phoenician,
Greek, and Roman mortars,—perhaps all mortar, in
consisting almost entirely of sulphate of lime ; and
having little or nothing of the carbonic acid with
lime, silicic acid and sand which abound in them.
This characteristic fact of Pyramid mortar seems to
have been first discovered by Dr. Wallace, through
means of genuine chemical examination ; and ap-
peared to him so unusual, that he was not a little
interested to receive from me afterwards some
specimens of rock, as well as loose crystals picked
up near the Pyramids, and which he then ascertained
to be ‘sulphate of lime, very pure.’


Diorite.


The stone which I have called dzorite, and which
Dr. Wallace looks on rather as a ‘ hornblendic quarte-
‘ tte, is apparently the same as that forming the
statue of King Shafre in the Museum of Boolak ;
and is abundantly distinguishable to the most com-
mon observation from the black or blue basalt, and
greenstone of all varieties in size of grains, found
lying in fragments on various parts of the Pyramid
hill. But it is the occurrence of chips of the diorite (?)
amongst the ancient rubbish north of the Great Pyra-
mid, to which I would now eall attention,—for no
presently existing part of the Pyramid is constructed.
in this material ; and there is much uncertainty as
to whence so remarkable a mineral was brought.

The Arabs always say, with every strange stone


——


PROP. VIII.] © THE GREAT PYRAMID. 101


they are asked about, ‘From Upper Egypt ;’ but I
have not met with a single man, either Arab or
European, who has seen it there in situ; and the
coloured plates of minerals from Assouan in the
great French work, do not contain anything at all
resembling it; so that the question would seem to
be still an open one.

There are likewise, some similar questions, yet to
be settled finally, as to the Sinaitic or Syene-itic
derivation of the Great Pyramid’s red granite.


Granite.


Hence, a little more about granite, but upon a
new accusation, must really be requested of our kind
reader's patience. The extract which we formerly
gave, p. 90, indicates the scanty knowledge of this
lordly mineral possessed by Europeans in recent
ages; and the mystical impossibilities, therefore,
attached to it. In the present day, when the quar-
ries of Aberdeen and St. Petersburg have enabled
all men to talk quite glibly about ‘red granite,—
even ‘as maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs,—we are
rather surprised at the laborious phrases with which
the learned Dr. Clarke found himself obliged to con-
vey to his readers, of only sixty years ago,—a notion
of the sort of substance he was speaking of; but
had to make plain to them in the following round-
about manner :—‘ By Greaves’ Thebaick marble
‘is to be understood that most beautiful variety
‘of granite, called by Italian lapidaries, granito


102 MATERIALS OF [DIV. I.


‘ rosso (see Forbes’ Travels, p. 226, London, 1776),
‘ which is composed essentially of feldspar, of quartz,
‘and of mca. It is often called Oriental granite,
‘and sometimes Hgyptian granite, but it differs in
‘no respect from Huropean granite, except that the
‘red feldspar enters more largely as a constituent
‘into the mass than is usual in the granite of
‘ Hurope. The author has seen granite of the same
‘kind, and of equal beauty, in fragments, upon the
‘ shores of the Hebrides, particularly at Icolmkill’
Yet, was Dr. Clarke quite right in his day, to
take so much pains; and had he lived now, he
might not have found his task everywhere quite
finished ; for thus, an English visitor,—a graduate
of the University of Cambridge, and bearing a
name respected in science,—-remarked to us in our


dining-room tomb, at East Tombs, Pyramid hill, -


with the petrified nummulites staring him in the
face,—‘ What an interesting granite cave you are
‘ living in here!’ And again, divers recent travellers
have spoken of the entrance passage of the Great
Pyramid, being lined with granite; when there is
nothing but soft limestone there to be seen. The
excuse may perhaps be made for these gentlemen,
that they did not try the hardness ; and only looked
at a distance to the corrugated surface of weathering,
more or less blackened by smoke, and rubbed for
ages on the points of the corrugations by passing
Arabs in greasy clothing; which gives occasionally,
with the assistance of chance drops of wax from


PROP. VIII] THE GREAT PYRAMID. 103


flaring candles, a very peculiar mottled appear-
ance.

What shall we say, however, of a literary man,
who has been often and long in Egypt,—has written
many books upon it most learnedly ; has excavated
at the Pyramid hill; and, through means of broken
pieces of the limestone, has seen beneath the cor-
rugated, parti-coloured exterior surface,—witnessing
there only the soft, white, uniform powdery character
of the interior of Mokattam blocks,—and persists,
nevertheless, ‘ that it is all granite !’

‘Impossible!’ might any one well exclaim ; and


yet here is the fact :—


‘ Another point also regarding the Pyramid of Suphis, seems
‘to require explanation. It is the generally received opinion,
‘ that the Pyramid was originally covered with a casing. . . . The
‘ researches of Colonel Vyse, and Lepsius, led them to the con-
‘clusion, that the casing-stone was of limestone of Tourrah
‘(Mokattam). We are compelled to say that such is not our
‘impression. In the course of repeated visits to Jeezeh, includ-
‘ ing a residence there for a time, it occurred to us, that the casing
‘had been removed from the Pyramid of Suphis at a very early
‘ period, long before the days of Herodotus,’ etc. etc.

‘We were induced by this consideration, to examine the
‘mounds of detritus, which everywhere, and to an enormous
‘depth, encumber the platform of rock on which the Pyramid
‘stands. We found they were composed all but entirely of frag-
‘ ments of a grey granite, identical in appearance with that which
‘lines the inner passages and vaults. It was this circumstance
‘ which forced upon us the conclusion, that the outer casing also
‘had been of the same material like that of the third Pyramid.
‘ This granite was obtained, not from Syene by the Cataracts, but
‘from the Peninsula of Sinai. Accordingly Herodotus tells us
‘that Cheops brought the stone with which he covered the
‘ Pyramid, from the mountains of Arabia; an epithet not ap-


104 MATERIALS OF [ DIV. I.


‘ plicable to the limestone hills of Tourrah, which everywhere
‘ overhang the Nile, and do not reach so far either northward or
‘ eastward, as to be with any propriety entitled to the name of
‘ Arabia.

‘The casing of the Great Pyramid, then, was of grey granite,
‘a material not to be found anywhere either in Lower or Middle
‘ Egypt, or their vicinity ; and, therefore, very valuable in that
‘country, because brought thither from a great distance. It
‘ served for a series of ages as the granite quarry of Heliopolis,
‘Memphis, and other cities in the vicinity. It is, we submit,
‘thus, and thus only, that we can account for the entire and
‘early disappearance of the casing, and also for the vast and
‘ deep couche of granite detritus which surrounds the Pyramid.’


Now this author, is no other than William Osburn,
member of the Royal Society of Literature; and
the work quoted from, his Monwmental History of
Egypt, published in 1854, in two large volumes
octavo,—containing unitedly more than a thousand
pages, and filled for the most part with admirable
investigations and disquisitions concerning the in-
terpretation of hieroglyphics, and their application
towards elucidating the early history of Egypt.
Even in this passage, too, the author shows his
perfect honesty and loyalty, in openly stating at
the beginning, that the testimony of two such
weighty authorities as Colonel Howard Vyse, and
Dr. Lepsius, is dead against him. What, then, can
we think of this formal declaration on his part, of
grey granite in place of white’ limestone ?

At first, I hoped there might be some explanation
under the cover of the word ‘grey ;’ which may


1 Dry oxidated fragments seem to lose their cream-colour, and form
powder as white as flour.


PROP. VIII. | THE GREAT PYRAMID. 105


mean, according to the speaker, almost anything from
white to black. But on p. 271 of his volume 1, the
following words of the same author settle that point,
—when we know of how dark a chocolate colour,
nearly black, the coffer of the Great Pyramid is,—
‘The whole interior cased with grey granite, and
‘ the square inscriptionless sarcophagus of the same
‘material. Hence, the colour also, which Mr.
Osburn assigns to the fragments forming the hills
of rubbish outside the Pyramid, and lying against
the sides of its base,—is as totally different from
what we found it, and our photographs represent
it,—as are their material and mineral characters.


What, then, are we to do with Mr. Osburn’s
book? Are we to throw it altogether away from
us, as undeserving of any confidence, because it has
this flagrant error in a single simple matter? No,
certainly ; not on that account, according to any
principles of common justice: for there is no one
who has written yet on the Great Pyramid, who
has not blundered at some one point or other. And
when the writer has been a great man,—say a
French Academician, for instance, writing down the
depth of the coffer three whole inches too great,—
the world has not ceased on that account to con-
tinue to pay such great man adulation, and believe
in all the rest of his writings as before ; especially
if the slip should have occurred in something that
was not his forte, or his usual subject of pursuit.


106 ORIENTATION OF [ DIV. I.


Now the latter characteristic appears to have
been precisely that of Mr. Osburn and mineralogy ;
for his main subject is hieroglyphical interpretation,
and there he seems even to be a giant.

But his case, as already intimated, is not a soli-
tary one; and the records of Great Pyramid inves-
tigations (as these volumes will probably indicate
before they are concluded), contain instances numer-
ous and striking enough,—either to destroy all faith
in the testimony of man, and to confound any com-
puter of mathematical probabilities,—or, to lead. to
the institution of new inquiries on the admission and
weighing of evidence: either one result, or the other,
according to the nature of each recipient’s mind.


PROPOSITION IX.


ORIENTATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID ?


ALTHOUGH some features of this question have
been touched on in previous pages, yet for the sake
of condensing all the information and depositing it
in a part of our work appropriate for the purpose,
and easily referred to,—we beg to wind up our
phenomenal Division 1, with a few remarks on this
important question of astronomical emplacement.

A Pyramid would evidently still be a Pyramid,
towards whatever quarters of the horizon the sides


PROP. IX. | THE GREAT PYRAMID? 107


of its base were pointed. But something may be
added to its other meanings, if one particular direc-
tion has been selected with some trouble, out of all
other possible ones. And that seems to have been
the case not only with the Great Pyramid, but with
all the other Pyramids, and most of the monuments
round about it ; even down to the small sepulchral
square-shafted wells——for their sides are always
approximately north, south, east, and west.

This is a direction peculiar, apparently, to the
Egyptian monuments ; for the Rev. G. Rawlinson, in
his Ancient Monarchies, describes all the earliest of
the Chaldean temples (and he would place some of
them synchronously with our date of the Great
Pyramid), as having, not their sides, but their angles
pointed to the four astronomical quarters.

With the Egyptian structures, again, their sides
are directed, not towards those points of the com-
pass,—as runs the prevalent idea of many existing
men,—but according to the azimuthal direction of
the earth’s axis, and a line at right angles thereto.
What the direction of the compass was at the Great
Pyramid four thousand years ago, probably the man
amongst us best versed in the theory of terrestrial
magnetism, and the rate of movement of the mag-
netical poles,—would avoid any attempt to calculate;
but at present the north end of the needle on the
Pyramid hill, inclines some 10° towards the west ;
and as all the larger monuments are within, and
much within, one degree of the astronomical or


108 ORIENTATION OF [ DIV. I.


earth’s axis direction, we need not allude to the
compass again. Neither is there occasion to refer
to the smaller constructions ; for, unavoidable tear-
and-wear on the stones composing them, has made
it impossible—with their short radii—for modern
observation to determine, whether they are, or ever
were, once so remarkably accurate as the Great
Pyramid has been lately proved to be.

Many celebrated travellers and competent men,
take the Viscomte de Rougé for an example, have
spoken with admiration of the Pyramid’s ‘ astonish-
‘ing justness of orientation ;’ and the Egyptian
astronomer, Mahmoud Bey, has described interest-
ingly that when he mounted, on the evening of
March 21st, 1862, shortly before sunset, upon the
eastern end of one of the courses of masonry on the
north side of the Pyramid, immediately above the
rubbish-mound,—he saw the sun apparently descend-
ing vertically just on the head of his friend, whom
he had placed at the western end of the same course.
But as these verbal terms of laudation may yet in- |
clude anything under half a degree,—the result of
M. Nouet, Astronomer to the French Academicians
in 1799, giving the instrumental error of 19’ 58”
for the north end towards the west,—may be taken
as closer ; and was even thought very close, by the
Academy. (See p. 44.)

My own measure, too, of the north and south
azimuth trenches, giving 19’ 14” in the same direc-
tion,—looked very much like a confirmation of M.


PROP. 1X. | THE GREAT PYRAMID 4 109


Nouet, touching the amount of error in the Pyramid
as now existing. But on afterwards measuring the
traces of the original Pyramid, and comparing them
directly with the Pole-star, there were obtained for
the error westward (vol. ii. pp. 190-195)—


Of the north end of the line of the outer corners of


north-east and south-east sockets, west of north, . + 4! 44”
Of west end of the line of outer corners of north-east
and north-west sockets, + 90°, . ; +4 0
And of north end of entrance passage from een
granite portcullis to mouth, . f : : - +5 0
Mean, : . = + 2 oo


Now this is a remarkable result, not only for the
very great proportional amount of reduction in the
instrumental error previously believed in,—but in
the consistence of all three parts of the Pyramid ;
so that none differs more from the mean, than 35”.
Notable enough is this angular agreement if found
in any part of the Pyramid ; and capable of proving,
on former experience, that the builders must have
attached extreme importance to the feature ; but
still more notable is it, when the greater difficulties
of astronomical, over geometrical or mechanical ob-
servations are taken into account. All three angles
may, however, be merely geometrical deductions
from one and the same original astronomical obser-
vation ; and which, if it did in this case turn out
+ 4’ 35",—might, on a second attempt being made,
have given—4’ 35’, or some other largely different
quantity.

There is, however, as I have proved to my cost,


110 ORIENTATION OF [ DIV. I.


so much difficulty in comparing the inclined and
high entrance passage with any side of the Pyramid’s
base,—that I am rather inclined to think that two
astronomical references by the builders are included
in these three given features of the Pyramid. And
the only constructional or pyramidally learned way
that remains to mankind, of obtaining more evidence
on the subject, is, to compare the Grand Gallery
with the celestial Polar direction ; for the error in
that admirable and gigantic piece of construction
we may safely assume, as detailed on pp. 39 and 60,
to be less,—probably much less,—than 2’.

But how to compare the Grand Gallery with the
stars? At present, the three long cork-like blocks of
the granite portcullis in the first ascending passage,
stop the way. They cannot be pushed downwards
into the entrance passage and so got rid of, because
the passage tube into which they fit, contracts below
them. But could they not be pushed upwards, and
southwards, by a hydrostatic press acting against
the floor of the entrance passage ?

There would be the friction of long-cemented
sides to overcome, as well as the weight of the
blocks; and besides that, the performers would
have to consider whether, looking to the rudely and
cruelly broken-out cavern of Al Mamoon’s hole
close by, the masonry about the portcullis region
might not collapse, when the support of its blocks
shall be gone. In fact this eventuality looks so
probable, that I myself having seen the place, would


PROP. IX.] THE GREAT PYRAMID ? Tri


only now venture to propose,—that a round hole be
bored through the portcullis blocks in situ, so that
they might be observed through, and no more.
Hither such an operation ; or, an attempt by three
observers and three theodolites, worked simultane-
ously,—one in the entrance passage, one in Al
Mamoon’s hole, and one in the first ascending pas-
sage,—to carry the angle round the portcullis blocks.
But there is doubt, if this last operation could be
conducted with the requisite amount of nicety.
And even if it was ; and if those who were engaged
in its performance, fully believed in the excellence
of their own work,—would it equally command the
same confidence from the rest of the world,—that a
direct comparison of two signals at either end of
the Grand Gallery on one side, with the Pole-star
on the other, would be pretty certain to receive ?


+


ON II.


Aerts


DIVISI


Zz
oO
st
al
<i
mM
=)
<
+
Fey
7
re
=
i)
and
m=
FQ
S


VOL. Hi.


‘ Whenever any material step in general knowledge has
‘ been made,—whenever any philosophical discovery arrests
‘our attention, some man or men come before us, who have
‘ possessed, in an eminent degree, a clearness of the ideas
‘ which belong to the subject in question, and who have ap-
‘ plied such ideas in a vigorous and distinet manner, to


‘ascertained facts and exact observations.’


REV. WILLIAM WHEWELL, M.A.
History of the Inductive Sciences, p. 9, Vol. i., 1837.


THE GREAT PYRAMID
AS A METROLOGICAL MONUMENT.


INTRODUCTION.


AFTER having shown in the course of Division 1,


the Great Pyramid’s striking regularity of figure,


perfection of workmanship, and close fulfilling of the
requirements of a particular geometrical construc-
tion, touching some of those very fundamental
matters,—we are called on now to take somewhat
higher ground: and, while discussing still further
details of mere measures made with care on sub-
sidiary features of the monument,—to endeavour
to ascertain how far the numbers given by observa-
tion either confirm or refute, certain well-known
and long-expressed opinions before the world,—re-
specting the reasons for such and such lengths,
breadths, or angles having been given to particular
parts.

From the time of Herodotus downwards, or for
more than two thousand years, men have been
accustomed to talk of the Great Pyramid, and in-
deed all the Pyramids, as tombs of kings or persons


116 INTRODUCTION. | [ DIV. II.


of kingly race. That is, most men of West-Kuropean
civilisation have done so; for in the East, there
seem always to have been traditions of an opposite
character; or as to something connected with science,
religion, or wealth, being locked up for future gene-
rations, and more remarkably in the Great Pyramid
than in any other. Within the past two hundred
years, however, this last form of belief has gained
many supporters both in Great Britain, on the Con-
tinent, and in America; gradually assuming with
them the shape of a settled hypothesis,—that some-
how or other the Great Pyramid was intended to be
a grand metrological, or ‘weights and measures,’
monument for mankind. . Not so much though, as a


place of frequent reference for those things,—as for ~


preserving safely—during some thousands of years,
and through all intervening revolutions of nations,
empires, and religious creeds—the grand standards
of metrology, true to their original settlement in old
primeval times. For they were considered then, as
now, to form some of the most necessary material
means of civilisation: yea, even ‘the very rules
‘whereby all men’s rights and properties are set
‘forth, distinguished, and valued, the alteration
‘whereof might bring much inconvenience, with-
‘ out any prospect of advantage ;—as an anonymous
author on the Great Pyramid wrote, in the year
1706.

The first dawn of this view in English literature,
is probably contained in the works of Bishop Cum-


DIV. 11. | INTRODUCTION. 117


berland of Peterborough, 4.p. 1685 ; though it there
takes little other form than assuming, that the
several parts of the Pyramid were regulated in size,
according to convenient even numbers of local
standards of measure then existing. But the sub-
sequent anonymous author above quoted, pro-
nounces boldly for the object of the Pyramid’s
erection having been to supply,—or commemorate
through all time what was once supplied,—to the
various origines of mankind, as their several weights
and measures ; without, too, having any special con-
nexion with what might be in vogue amongst the
Egyptians in particular. And after having shown,
but in a manner which he himself allows is rather
obscure, and which I must confess myself unable to
follow satisfactorily—that some early Saxon mea-
sures were represented by certain proportions in the
Pyramid,—he more emphatically adds, ‘and if we
‘ consider the standards of our Hnglish measures here
‘found, which you have seen, and the standards of
‘such ancient Persian, Grecian, and Roman mea-
‘sures, which you will see if you ‘please, you will
‘find it very hard to conjecture that they were all
‘in use amongst the Egyptians.’

A second edition of this curious and most in-
genious treatise was published in 1745 ; and states
in the title-page, equally with its predecessor, that
the author was Mr. John Greaves, ‘ Astronomy Pro-
fessor at Oxford.’ But he died in 1652, and there
is no trace of the work having existed before 1706 ;


118 INTRODUCTION. [DIV. 11.


and though his, Professor Greaves’, measures at the
Pyramid, in 1637, are the things founded on in con-
ducting the investigation,—the conclusions, particu-
larly the date of the Pyramid’s building, are directly
opposed to his acknowledged publications on the
subject.’ |

Metrological purposes for the Great Pyramid were
also maintained in France by M. Paucton in 1780 ;
and by M. Romé de I’'Isle in 1789 : were much al-
luded to by the French savants in Egypt in 1799:
resumed again in England by the Rev. Thomas
Gabb in 1806 in his Finis Pyramidis; and finally
published on by the late John Taylor in 1859 and
1864. :


1 The title-page of the above work runs thus :—
‘ The Origin and Antiquity of our English Weights and Measures
‘ discovered by their near Agreement with such Standards that
‘are now found in one of the Egyptian Pyramids. Together
‘with the Explanation of divers Lines therein heretofore


* measured.
‘ By Mr. JoHN GREAVES,


‘ Astronomy Professor at Oxford.


‘ As also; Some Conjectures concerning the Time when these
‘ Pyramids were built ; in Answer to certain Letters, etc.

‘ London : printed for G. Sawbridge at the three Flower-de-Luces
‘in Little Britain. 1706.’


While in Professor Greaves’ own works, collected by Dr. Birch,
besides his own opinions, the following likewise appears, being quoted
apparently with honour :—


‘For my singular good friend, Mr. John Greaves.
‘ Srr,—I am more indebted to your affections, than to your judge-
‘ ment in making me a censor of your learned piece. It had not per-
* adventure been much amiss, if you had been so far at cost as to have
‘ afforded us a particular topographical map of the place where these
‘ insane substructionum moles stand. For by that we might have been
‘ able the better to have judged of the discourse of a learned gentle-
man of Bavaria, Johannes Fredericus Herwart, who in the twentieth


DIV. It] INTRODUCTION. 119


Some other authors probably should be mentioned
as having written with similar views; but I have
not met with any of their theories, either so original
in their nature, grand in conception, or whose num-
bers come by any means so close to the best Pyramid
measures, as do the late John Taylor’s; and that sort
of numerical agreement is, in so far as it exists at
all, the main feature which we have to look to in
the present department of our work. No apology
need therefore be offered, for beginning with John
Taylor, and giving his ideas a severer scrutiny than
those of any other theorist. Simply, therefore, leav-
ing his numbers to come out of such a trial brighter,


‘ chapter of his Admiranda Ethnice Theologie Mysteria, endeavours to
‘ take off from the founders of these stupendous buildings the scandal
‘ of folly and madness, which in the common judgement of the world
‘hath struck upon them ; and would persuade us, that the Pyramids
‘ are monuments of the singular wisdom of the raisers of them, and of
‘ wondrous use and benefit to the country, in maintaining the banks
‘of that part of the river upon which the city of Memphis stands,
‘which otherwise were in danger to be swept away by the unruly
‘eruptions of the river, if it were not checkt by these wonderful
‘structures. If your leisure will give you leave to write unto me,
‘ give me your judgement upon that discourse of his. One thing I
‘miss’d in your work, which makes me suspect it is not of such
‘moment as many report, because I find not that you do it so much
‘honour as to name it; I mean the Sphinx, which is wont to be repre-
‘sented unto us in the shape of the head and shoulders of a woman.
‘ When you list to lose so much time, let me hear from you what you
‘ have observed concerning that piece, if at least it yielded anything
‘ worth your observation. Sir, let not the world be deceived in their
‘ expectations to partake of your collections in your travels. I assure
‘ myself, that as they will greatly benefit the generality, so will they
‘more particularly your true and faithful friend,


‘ Joun HALEs.’
‘ From Eron Couuzce this 18th of October 1646,’


‘Commend me to Mr. Pullein, and request him to send me Fhilo-
‘ storgius.’


120 INTRODUCTION. [DIV. II.


if they can,—we shall proceed forthwith to institute
such examination, and in as impartial and even
unsparing a mood as we can muster for the occa-
sion.

Etymologically, indeed, Mr. Taylor may be wrong,
or he may be right, in the Greek derivation of the
word Pyramid being, not as hitherto supposed, from
wip, fire (which had made some persons look on
monuments of that shape and name as having been
erected by Persian fire-worshippers), but from srupos,
wheat, and pwérpov, measure. Words which might be
taken, as designating the primitive purpose for which
weights and measures were first employed amongst
men ; and some foundation, too, for the popular tra-
dition, so rife in Sir John Maundeville’s day, of the
Pyramids having been built by Joseph for grana-
ries." Yet it matters little, we say, what meaning of


1 ¢ And now also I schalle speke of another thing that is beyonde
‘ Babyloyne (Babyloyne the lesse, nigh the righte gret cytie of Cayre)
‘ above the flode of Nyle, toward the Desert, between Afrik and Egipt
‘ of Canopic ; that is to seyn the grenneres of Joseph, that he let make,
‘for to kepe the Greynes for the perile of the dere yeres. And thei
* ben made of ston, fulle wel made of masonnes craft ; of the whiche,
‘two ben merveylouse grete and hye ; and the tother ne ben not so
* grete.

‘And every gerner hathe a gate for to entre withinne, a lytille
‘hyghe fro the earthe; for the land is wasted and fallen sithe the
‘ gerners were made ; and withinne thei ben alle full of serpentes.

* And aboven the Greneres withouten ben many scriptures of dyverse
‘ langages ; and sum men seyn, that thei ben sepultures of grete Lords,
‘that weren somtyme: but that is not treue; for alle the common
‘ rymours and speche is of alle the peple there, both far and nere, that
‘thei ben the Gerneres of Joseph, and so fynden thei in here scrip-
‘ tures and in here cronycles. . . . wherefore it is not to believe, that
‘thei ben Tombes or Sepultures.’—The Voiage and Travaile of Sir
John de Maundeville, Kt., A.p. 1350.


DIV. IL. | INTRODUCTION. 121


their own language the Greeks put on the word,’
—if its invention was long antecedent both to them
and their nation, and had been, as said by some,
from the earliest times recognised as a name by the
builders of the monument; or in the ancient Coptic
language; and as meaning, a ‘division into ten;
‘ from “pyr,” division, and “ met,” ten.’

Now this derivation, which we first heard of in
Cairo, and have since tested by reference to Euro-
pean digests of the earliest Egyptian language,—is
not only connected with the right ethnological
quarter,—but is a much wider and more significant
appellation for a metrological monument of the most
scientific kind, than any of the Greek forms. It
coincides too, in some degree, with the leading


1 From zupds, wheat, and dudw, to collect.—Rees’ Cycl,

From rvpév xal péduros, a cake of pointed figure, and sweetened with
honey, as used in the Bacchic rites.—Mr. Kenrick and Sir Gardner
Wilkinson, in Rawlinson’s Herodotus.

From the Arabic ahram, or héram. :

From perami, ‘lofty ;’ thought to be the same with the Hebrew
Charaboth, which in Job iii. 14, obviously signifies ‘a sepulchre,’
though rendered in our version ‘desolate places.’—Rev. G. Trevor,
M.A.

From pouro, ‘a king ;’ and misi, ‘a race’ or ‘ generation,’ in the
Coptic language.—Wilkins, Disser. de Ling. Copt.

The name of Pyramid in Egyptian appears to be br-br.—Sir Gardner
Wilkinson.

See also a whole essay on the derivations of the name by M.
Jomard, in the great French work.

2 The above words in italics are merely written down by us, rudely
phonetic, as we heard them. But, on referring to Bunsen’s Hgypi’s
Place, where no such origin for the word Pyramid is hinted at, and
where the Great Pyramid itself is positively claimed for a sepulchral
monument only,—we have since found at p. 474 of the Egyptian voca-
bulary, in vol. i, ‘ PCr =division ;’ and again, in volume iv. p. 107,
in the chapter on Egyptian numerals, ‘ X (10)=Mént, mét, Copt.’


122 INTRODUCTION. [ DIV. IL.


mechanical features of the whole Pyramid; which
are,—that it is a mathematical body with five sides
(including the base), and with five corners; or,
masonically, five corner-stones.

Hence, if the metrology taught by the Great
Pyramid is to coincide, either with its name (where
we cannot pretend to be quite certain), or figure
(where we are quite certain and perfectly assured
of the facts)—we must expect to meet frequently
with multipliers and divisors, powers and times,
both of ten and five. That is, whenever the subject
really admits of such numbers with advantage ; for
there are some things to which even decimal divi-
sion, notwithstanding all its ravishing beauties for
many minds, cannot be applied. An example, too,
of these inflexible subjects, is held up by the Great
Pyramid at once to all men, and at very first sight,
—in its vertical height, as compared with the
length of the four sides of its base, being arranged
with particular care to be in the proportion of the
radius to the circumference of a circle ; two things
which are incommensurable evenly,—not only in
this world, but in every other throughout all the
bounds of the Universe.

With this proviso, we proceed at once to consider
the several measured features of the Great Pyramid,
in an order suited to the heads or principal natural
divisions of any large and comprehensive system of
Metrology. And in that spirit, have to deal first
with—


SECTION IL
STANDARDS OF SIZE.


A COMPLETE system of these measures will evi-
dently embrace cubic and superficial, as well as linear;
but the two former being merely geometrical vari-
ations of the last,—we have only to employ ourselves,
so far as scientific physical standards are concerned,
in seeking for those of near measure. Now, such
standards have been already looked for by many and
many an author, in the sides of the base of the Great
Pyramid ; even before they knew that the terminal
points of those magnificent base-lines, had been care-
fully marked in the solid rock of-the hill, by the
socket-holes of the builders. (Vol. i. p. 528; vol. ii.
p- 134.)

My own measures of the mere present masonry-
courses,—correcting by estimation for the extra
breaking away and ruin at the corners,—yielded
about 8950 inches for the mean length of one of
the four sides of the base, exclusive of the ancient
casing and backing stones; and having elsewhere
(p. 27), elected to take 101 inches horizontal,
for their thickness on one side,—we must add twice
that to the above measure,—and accept 9152 inches


124 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [ Div. 11.


as the original length of one side of the base of the
finished Pyramid. But this determination is affected
by such very large errors of observation (+ 50 inches
at least) that it is not worth any attention in presence
of measures by other men, who have operated upon
the actual socket-marks alluded to above.

Now the only man, who ever had the privilege of
measuring all four sides of the Great Pyramid’s base,
between their respective corner-sockets, is my young
friend and sometime fellow-labourer, Mr. Thomas
Inglis,—representing for the time, Mr. William
Aiton, of Glasgow. And he (vol. ii. p. 134), made the


North side, : ? : 9120 British inches long.
South ,, - E ‘ 9114 re
East, 2 “ 4 9102 9
And West ,, : : : 9102 3
Mean, = 9110


But the north side had been previously measured.
between its two sockets, by the first and always to be
gratefully remembered discoverers of those sockets,
viz., the French mathematicians in 1799; also by
Colonel Howard Vyse and Mr. Perring ; and finally,
by Mahmoud Bey, Astronomer to His Highness the
late Viceroy Said Basha, in 1862.’ Some other
names, indeed, might also be given as having
measured from the north-east socket,—but their
accounts are not quite clear as to what they touched
at the north-west corner, where they seem to have


1 DT’ Age et le but des Pyramides lus dans Sirius. Par Mahmoud Bey.
Alexandria, 1865; but based on observations made in 1862.


SECT. I. | STANDARDS OF SIZE. 125


looked on the stone,—which has merely tumbled by


accident into some part of the general area of that
socket-hole,—as the true and veritable ancient corner
of the Pyramid itself. The sole authorities, there-
fore, to be quoted, stand as follows :—


British inches.


North side, by French Academicians in 1799, = 9163
3 by Colonel Howard Vyse in 1837, = 9168
< by Mahmoud Bey in 1862, . = 9162


These look fair enough by themselves,—but what
shall we say on comparing them with Mr. Inglis’s
measure of the same side ; or of the other sides, all
between their respective and appropriate sockets !
Closer together are the results, than those of pre-
vious centuries, when they are found thus :—


English inches.
Professor Greaves, A.D. 1637, a side of base of Great
Pyramid, . , : ‘ : ‘ = 8316
Dr. Shawe, . o \ aay, 4 = 8040
Dr. Perry, . Jind F435 ws = 9360


But a difference of 50 inches in a run of 9100, is
far too great to be tolerated in the present day. And
yet we suspect it will have to be borne with, until
the long-desired opening-up of all four sides of the
base, from end to end, shall be performed by some
country, or ruler, or people. For, to demand of any
single scientific traveller to make a correct measure
over the hills of broken stones, as they are now,—is
like: asking a Londoner to ascertain the horizontal
breadth of base of St. Paul’s Cathedral, by measuring
over the outside of the dome thereof. But the pre-
sent encumbrances of the ground at the Pyramid, are


126 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [ DIV. II.


modern and factitious ; and the lines whose lengths
we require to know there, were not only nicely laid
out by the ancient builders on a level surface of
rock all the way,—but their terminations were well
defined, by having been neatly and deeply cut into
the solid rock of the hill. Hence, if modern men
have not yet ascertained the true length, it is thee
fault, rather than that of the monument,—that
the residual uncertainties we have to deal with, lie
among tens of inches, rather than single inches, or
smaller portions of space still.

From the numbers actually given above, the pro-
babilities seem, that the northern side is rather longer
than the others. But that may arise merely from the
rubbish-heaps there being, as they undoubtedly are
(see Map, Plate 11. vol. i.), steeper, more broken,
and consequently more difficult to eliminate in their
tendency to give an increased length to a superficial,
over a horizontal, line. Again, one is almost inclined
to fancy that Mr. Inglis’s mode of measuring must
have had some constant error about it, when all his
sides come out so much smaller than one of the sides
measured between the same marks by three inde-
pendent observers. But we are hardly entitled, on
that presumption merely, to give his four measures
the weight of one only, when taking a mean
between him and the other three observers; nor
yet, looking at the natural reason for some such
presumption, can we give him the weight of four,
where each of three good predecessors are accorded


SECT. I. | STANDARDS OF SIZE. 127


only one. Allowing him, therefore, the weight of
two,—the mean of all four observers (which we may
after that consider to approximately represent the
length of the mean of all four sides of the Pyramid’s
base), presents the following numbers, viz. 9142
British inches.


Wherefore upon that foundation, derived as it is
from the best modern measures yet made, comes the
question— What does that definite length of base-
side mean, or imply, as a standard of linear measure ?

Some men, chiefly hieroglyphic scholars and general
antiquaries, looking at the matter too much in an
Egyptian point of view,—have pronounced rather
hastily for the base-side representing the round
number of 400 ancient Egyptian cubits, or of so
many of the cubits of Memphis and the Nilometer,
even. But as that cubit, according to Sir Isaac
Newton, was about 20°7 British inches in length,—
and, agreeably with the various examples of it quoted
by that very safe authority Sir Gardner Wilkinson,
has hardly ever, if ever, been found to vary more
than from 20:4 to 21°0 British inches,—and by our
own determination (vol. ii. p. 340), was more nearly
20°72 British inches,—that gives a length at the
utmost of 8400 inches,—which is totally impossible
to receive, in face of 9142.

Next came M. Paucton, in France, with his ‘ Me-
‘ trology, or Treatise of Measures, Weights, and
* Monies, of both Ancient and Modern Nations;—a


128 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [ DIV. Il.


noble quarto of 960 pages, and he a worthy man,
publishing in 1780, with the approbation and privi-
lege of the King. Stating, moreover, on his title-
page, that ‘God had arranged everything in measure,
‘ weight, and number ;’ and giving on the reverse
of title, six memorable quotations from Scripture—
showing that a care for the justness of weights and
truth of measures was not beneath the attention of
the Almighty in legislating for His peculiar people,
and when granting revelations of His will for the
instruction of all mankind.

After drawing a theoretical picture of what the
ancients might have done to preserve a knowledge of
their measures for posterity,—Paucton takes ground
boldly on his page 6, in stating ‘that they have at
‘ least done what is quite equivalent thereto. For, in
‘ the first place, they have preserved their linear mea-
‘sure on a monument as durable as a monolithic
‘rock ; and, in the second place, upon a model or
‘type taken from nature, as ingenious and exact as
‘the pendulum itself, viz.,a degree of the meridian.’

This idea is further developed in his pages 110 to
116, and mainly depends upon the belief or assertion


that—
500 times the side of the base of the Great Pyramid,
or 20,000 times the cubit of the Nilometer,
or 500 times a certain ‘stade’ measured in ‘ Laodicea by Mr.
‘ Smith of London,’ '


all mean the same thing, or amount to the same


1 «Omnia in Mensur& et Pondere et Numero disposuit Deus.’—Ex
Libr, Sapient. xi. 21. . Leviticus xix. 35-36 ; Deut. xxv. 13-17; Pro-
verbs xi. ] ; xvi. 11; xx. 10; and xx. 23.


SECT. I.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 129


length ; and that length is the measure of a degree
of latitude ; such degree being, the 360th part of a
circle.

Now, as Paucton’s Egyptian authorities do not
seem to ascend higher than the Alexandrine Greeks,
or within some two thousand years of the Pyramid-
building day,—we may well ask for some further
proof than ‘the practice of Ptolemy and Theron,’
that the Pyramid builders were accustomed to divide
the circle into 360°. But without pressing that point
at present, the previous statement may at once be
settled—by comparing the attributed equality of
the Pyramid bases’ side, with 1-500th of such a
degree, applied to the earth; for the quantities
are by modern measure, Pyramid base side = 9142,
and 1-500th of degree = 8750 British inches.

These conflicting numbers are enough, as a late
classical friend would have said, to make poor
Paucton turn in his grave ; for he had received some
travellers’ notes in his day, taken without reference
to casing-stones or socket-holes either, and making
the length of the Pyramid base side = 684°2 pieds de
Rois, or 8754 British inches. Indeed, he had been
cruelly misled about many of the Great Pyramid’s
proportions ; for, amongst other things, he was made
to believe, that the angle of the sides with the base,
was 54 44’; a monstrosity of modern European
measure, or guess-work, long since exposed.


A few years after M. Paucton, appeared on the
VOL. IIL. I


130 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. Il.


field, his countryman, M. de Romé de L’Isle, with
a Metrology, or Tables for the Understanding of
Ancient Weights and Measures. But the times
had then become troublous and foreboding of evil ;
wherefore it is almost melancholy to read his touch-
ing dedication :—

‘TO MY COUNTRY.


‘ being born again under the auspices of Louis xv1., in the year
‘ of grace 1789, M. Neckar being Minister of Finance, and the
‘ French nation assembled for the restoration of law and public
‘ credit.’


In addition to length, surface, capacity, weight,
and money, De Lisle treats very properly of tvme
as a necessary part of metrology ; and in a rather
long Preface, where he has some small faults to find
with: Paucton’s evaluation of Greek measure, he yet
lauds his Egyptian Pyramid meridian degree theory
to the skies ; considers that its original conception
‘ has a just title to rank as one of the chief works of
‘the human mind,’ and he would like to see it made
the basis of a reform of the French measures. But
he does not add anything to Paucton’s theory, nor
correct his very large errors in the actual size of the
Pyramid ; and therefore falls irretrievably into the
same pit with his unfortunate predecessor,—so far
as concerns the explaining wherefore the Pyramid
base was made of the precise size we find it to be.

The sage M. Jomard, the principal author of the
Pyramidal antiquities, in the great French work
detailing operations from 1799 to 1801 a.D., —is fully


SECT. I.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 131


as enthusiastic as any of his predecessors for a
metrological meaning in the Great Pyramid,—of
which building he has a special Plate, with lines
cutting it up for reference to various measures : and
to which one building he evidently alludes, in
sundry rhetorical passages where plural Pyramids
are mentioned.

Thus, ‘these Pyramids,’ writes he (on page 531,
Antiquités Mémoires, vol.i.), ‘to which both ancients
‘and moderns have assigned so many different ob-
‘jects, which have been attributed to vanity by
‘some, to superstition by others, but saluted by all
‘ages as the wonders of the world,—have perhaps
‘served as tombs according to the idea of many
‘authors. But in such case they are the tombs of
‘ Princes who either wished or permitted that their
‘remains should attest to posterity the lights of
‘learned Egypt ; and they, the Pyramids, have ful-
‘filled their destination, for they have preserved to
‘us the certain type of the size of the terrestrial
‘ globe, and the inappreciable notion of the invaria-
‘ bility of the celestial pole.’

From these generalities the learned author ad-
vances to particulars, and having Colonel Coutelle’s
measures of the base along its northern side—from
socket to socket—before him,—is too well informed
to take either 1-500th or 1-400th part,—but adopts
1-480th of the terrestrial meridian degree of 360° to
the circle, as having been intended for one side of
the Great Pyramid’s base. But that result, or 9115


132 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIv. 11.


British inches, is neither close enough to the mea-
sured quantity to be received as its representative ;
nor is any reason whatever given, for introducing
such a fraction as 1-480th, into that particular part
of the Pyramid. |

Next comes before us the Rev. Thomas Gabb, R.C.,
of Retford, in 1806, with a whole book, and a very
well written book too ; but containing only a sort
of accidental or relative theory about the Pyramid
base’s side; viz., that it was made one hundred times
the outside length of the coffer in the King’s
chamber. Very decided, however, is he on that
point, having heard ‘such proportion to have been
‘ascertained by Bonaparte’s savants in 1799; and
that they believed said coffer’s exterior had been
intended by the Pyramid builders as a standard of
length. Wherefore Mr. Gabb gladly concludes, that
‘that proportion of 1-100th is now most incontro-
‘ vertibly ascertained ; that the curious granite chest,
‘hitherto incongruously called a sarcophagus, was
‘ deposited in its place by the architect himself, who
‘ certainly knew it to be commensurate in its length
‘ with the side of the external foundations, and did,
‘no doubt, so design it for metrical purposes ;
‘whence it is another illustration of this perfect
‘harmony, this happy, pleasant, useful commen-
‘ surability of the Great Pyramid of Jeezeh.’

Unfortunately, though, the said coffer, as already
set forth in vol. i. p. 117, is not very regular in ex-
ternal figure; and, on the mean, only measures


SECT. 1] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 133


about 89°71 inches in length: and one hundred
times that, cannot be looked on as the happy, useful,
and perfect representation of 9142.


Lastly, however, comes the late venerable John
Taylor ; who, though not a scientific man, yet en-
dued with appropriate knowledge by his Pyramid
literary researches carried on for nearly thirty years,
at once transcends in this particular all the most
learned geodesists of every age and country : for he
teaches us to look,—not at either a degree, or a
quadrant, or any other length of any part of the
surface of the earth,—but to the internal axis of
rotation, as the one most important linear feature
of the whole earth—as well, too, in its abstract
physics, as its practical requirements when servy-
ing for man’s abode; and more especially in its
sufficiency to form, in the best manner, the basis
of a grand metrological reference for linear measure.

This position, after its publication, was admirably
defended and enforced by Sir John Herschel, in the
Atheneum for April 1860; as likewise was the
venerable Mr. Taylor’s second enunciation, viz., that
five hundred millions of a certain kind of inches,—
each of them being ‘001 of an inch only, larger than
the legalized British inch,—measure the length of
the axis of rotation of the earth; with the full ac-
curacy, moreover, of all the geodesic knowledge yet
accumulated by mankind, and whether represented
in the latest trigonometrical surveys or the highest


134 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. II.


mathematical investigations by the best men in
France, Germany, Russia, and England.’

In so far, then, we have in the 5, with the many
0’s that follow it, a Pyramidally commensurable and
symbolically appropriate unit for the earth’s axis of
rotation. But what is the nature of this unit’s
connexion with the length of the side of the Great
Pyramid’s base, already assumed from measure, as
the rough-looking quantity of, 9142 British inches ?

Thus it is that John Taylor proceeds. Referring to
Sir Isaac Newton’s most remarkable investigations on
the length of ancient cubits,*—wherein that gifted
author, both shows the Egyptian or ‘profane’ cubit
to have been close on 20°7 inches in length; and
equally proves ‘ the sacred cubit of the Israelites’
(a most peculiar and cherished cubit of theirs, which
they possessed as a people or family ‘ long before
‘they went down to Egypt,’ and which Moses took
special care that they should always employ for sacred
purposes after the Exodus), Sir Isaac proves it to
have been close on 25 inches in length,>—basing then


1 The latest authority for the size and figure of the earth (vol. ii.
Sect. v.) is the noble quarto published last year by the Ordnance Sur-
vey, after comparing the linear standards of many countries. Two
methods for computing are-surveys are there adopted, with the same
materials observed. The first of them gives the earth’s polar axis
= 500,482,296, and the second = 500,522,904 British inches ; and as
the former has rather more weight than the latter, the weighted mean
of the two comes out exceedingly close upon 500,500,000 British, and
500,000,000 Pyramid inches. The mean equatorial axis is about
1-300th larger, or near to 502,179,000 British inches.

2 See page 341 of our vol. ii.

3 The last length obtained from all his data by Sir Isaac Newton
for the sacred cubit, is nearly two-tenths of an inch less than 25 inches,


}


SECT. L.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 135


on this remarkable research by the greatest master
mind that ever lived in modern times, John Taylor
shows, that such a 25-inch cubit is most remarkably
and astonishingly earth-commensurable,—being, the
one-ten-millionth of the semi-axis of rotation of the
earth. Or, whereas the modern French metre was
chosen by decimal-loving mathematicians, to be the
one-ten-millionth of a quadrant of a particular meri-
dian of the earth,—the sacred cubit, received so very
early into their possession by the descendants of
Abraham, was the same admirably even fraction, but
of an infinitely better portion of the earth-globe to
refer to ; viz., a straight line coming from the centre
to the surface, along the governing axis of the
world. An extraordinarily convenient length too,
for man to handle and use in the common affairs of
life, is the one-ten-millionth of the earth’s semi-axis
of rotation, when it comes to be realized ;—for it is
extremely close, either to the length of the ordinary
human arm, or to the ordinary human pace, in walk-
ing with a purpose to measure.

Now this remarkable, or even more than remark-
able cubit, Mr. Taylor believed the planners of the
Great Pyramid knew perfectly well of,—even in all
its grand relations to nature,—though the Egyptian
people did not. They, the Egyptian people at large,
deep-dyed idolaters in their hearts, worked their


and has too generally been the only one quoted ; but it is worth while
to remember that the mean of all his nine determinations or limits,
amounts to 25:07 British inches. See ‘Hebrew Standards,’ Sect. v.,
vol. ii.


136 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. II.


ordinary work according to their well-known pro-
fane cubit of 20°7 inches in length, with its subdi-
visions, if necessary, into six palms, and each palm
into four digits ;* but the planners of the Great
Pyramid were no more bound to that measure, which
is void of all modern scientific recommendation,—
than they were to the degrading animal-worship of
the dwellers in the valley of the Nile, or to that
grievous sin which themselves so strenuously, though
in vain, endeavoured to put down.? Those purer-
minded architects indeed contrived, apparently, to
make their heathen masons labour in such a manner,
as to be in reality introducing the sacred measure,
when they least suspected what they were about ;
and to introduce it too in the most signal and ap-
propriate manner, or in a form pervading the whole
building, and with a reference to that which
measures everything ; for, after many thousands
of years, the method seems to have been discovered
with certainty, and to be simply this, viz.—that
there are as many lengths of the sacred cubit in
one side of the Pyramid’s base, as there are days in
a year.

That is, 25 x 365°25 = 9131. But these repre-
sent Pyramid inches ; and when reduced to British
inches, are = 9140; while the mean length of the
Pyramid’s base side derived from measure, is, with


~ 1 Some hierologists say, in later times into seven palms, and each
palm into four digits ; see vol. ii, Section v.
2 See vol. i. chap. xv. p. 467.


a ee


SECT. I.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 137


some small limits for probable error (see p. 127),
= 9142.

The nobler cubit therefore really employed, or in-
tended to be perpetuated to distant ages,—was con-
cealed from vulgar gaze, under the veil of the earthly
connexion between time and space. By no means
an inappropriate idea, when the standard of length
is founded on the earth’s axis of rotation, the action
of which mechanically makes the successive days ;
and when the general form of the whole Pyramid,
according to John Taylor’s grand circular proportion,
causes its vertical height to present towards the
continued length of the four sides of its base, the
proportion of radius to the circumference of a circle ;
—or a model of the circuit of the mean earth round
the sun in the course of a year,—and where, on the
perimeter of the Pyramid, the earth’s mean daily
motion is represented by the round and even quan-
tity of, 100° inches of length.

I had formerly imagined, that the expression for
one side might be, not 365°25 times the sacred cubit,
but 36600 times,—as being the nearest even number
of turns made by the earth on its axis in the course
of a year ; but under the aspect of more numerous
Pyramid measures than I was then acquainted with,
especially those of Mr. Inglis—the 365°25 ap-
pears to be the more probable supposition. And
yet the 366 may perhaps in a manner be pre-
sent, simultaneously, through means of the peculiar
office of the ‘ pavement,’ which lies both around


138 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. II.


and partly under the Pyramid ; and thisis a feature
which we must pay close attention to, in spite of
the trouble of so doing, if we would understand the
smaller and residual features of the monument.


Architects in modern times, have in their draw-
ings, plans, or elevations, often finished off the Pyra-
mid below, according to their own esthetical ideas
of propriety,—based either on Gothic or Grecian
art ; and hence large pediments, bases, flutings, and
what not. While one very well-intentioned and
venerable investigator of geometrical proportions,
writes me that he has just arrived, theoretically, at
a high and noble base for the Pyramid,—which base,
finished off with a plinth, he conceives would be most
suitable for enabling a whole row of astronomers to
observe the Pole-star from, like a row of harpers,
harping with their harps!

But of all these additions to its simple figure, the
known facts about the Pyramid give no testimony
whatever. M. Jomard, indeed, in the great French
work, has, with some appearance of authority, drawn
the Pyramid with a rectangular base 72 inches high ;
but that seems merely derived from a misapprehen-
sion as to the nature of the ‘ course’ of rock, left
standing by the builders near the north-east corner,
merely to save interior component masonry ; and the
only real authority touching the ancient appearance
of the lower part of the Pyramid outside, is Colonel
Howard Vyse with his casing-stones in situ.


ei


SECT. 1.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 139


These remarkable stones, according to his tes-
timony, spring at once, with their oblique exterior
slopes of 51° 51’ 14", from the upper surface of a
broad, flat, level, area of exquisite masonry, known
as ‘the pavement;’ which in that part of the Pyramid
passes under it to some extent, is 21 inches thick
and 402 inches broad, from the outer line of the
casing-stones. Hence the extensive assumption has
been made by some persons, that a pavement of the
same breadth and thickness completely surrounds
the Pyramid; but, so far as thickness is concerned, a
portion of pavement is shown in one of our Stereo-
photographs, taken near the north-west socket,—
and is found to be barely more than 10 inches thick.
By examining, however, the angles and positions of
the joints of this fragment, the inference may be
pretty safely made, that the lower part of the corner-
stone of the oblique casing-stone sheet there, must
have been of rectangular figure, though pyramidally
bevelled above; and that it did, by the depth of
such rectangular part or base, go through the whole
thickness of the pavement there, whatever that was,
and into the socket-hole cut for it in the rock below.
Hence the horizontal distance from outer corner of
one, to outer corner of another, adjacent socket-hole,
—measured on the pavement and by means of the
rectangular edges of the holes worked therein,—is,
or should be, the true measure of the length of the
ancient maximum bevelled side of the Pyramid;
and may be considered equal to, either 9140 or 9142


140 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. Il.


British inches, as already indicated. But whether
that number would be extended to 9159,—by the
slope being carried symbolically through the pave-
ment, and then measured on the level of its under
side, or at a thickness nearly similar to that which
obtains at the north-west corner,—is a residual
problem that must be left, notwithstanding its im-
portance, for future excavations to settle; seeing
that the earth, and the earth only, still retains the
secret.


Meanwhile, attending to nothing but what has
been actually secured by measure; and remarking,
too, that all the minute differences of the slightly
varying theoretical lengths we are now in search of,
are contained within the mutual discordances of
the best modern observations,—it may be expedient
to inquire, whether the Great Pyramid stands
sensibly alone; or whether it has many competitors
amongst the other Pyramids of Egypt,—for making
so noble a use, as it seems to do, of the sacred cubit.
That is, for coming either so close, or perhaps
closer, to the expressive quantity of 9140 British
inches. Referring, therefore, to the works of
Colonel Howard Vyse,—the best authority on the
subject amongst all men of all nations,—we find
that he has published from his, and Mr. Perring’s,
measures for the lengths of one side of the bases
(always assumed. square), of many Pyramids, re-
spectively as follows :—


SECT. I.] STANDARDS OF SIZE. 141


British inches.
Second Pyramid of Jeezeh, lat. 29° 59’ N., side of


base, . 5 ; 3 3 , = 8493
Third - = 4254
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, iia Ninth,

allunder. : = 2064
Pyramid of Aboo- Tonkt lat. “30° 2, : = 3840

ri. Zouyet el Arrian, lat. 29° 57’, = 3600
Great Pyramid of Abooseer, lat. 29° 54’, = 4320

ma Sakkara, lat. 29° 53’, = 4212
N on Stone Pyramid of Dashoor, lat. 29° 49’, = 8634
Southern a sis tat 292-486 = 7402
Greater Pyramid of Lisht, lat. 29° 38’, about = 5400
Pyramid of Meydoon, lat. 29° 27’, - = 6360

is Ilahoon, Faioum, lat. 29° 17’, = 4320
Other Egyptian Pyramids generally, under = 3000


Hence there is no other known and measured
Pyramid throughout all Egypt, which can compete
in the remotest degree with the Great Pyramid of
Jeezeh, for possessing after so signal, or anything like
so accurate, a manner, if indeed in any way, a
memorial of the sacred cubit. A length, that cubit,
in its earth-polar radius commensurability, above all
human knowledge or effort from the beginning of
history to within the last two hundred years,—to
have been arrived at intentionally; though when
once the idea is given out in the present age of the
world, any one and every one can instantly see the
many recommendations which attach themselves to
such a standard for linear measure.

Most fortunate, therefore, is it for practical
metrology, that with the theory of the sacred cubit
in our minds, and the results of recent scientific
measures of degrees of the meridian in our libraries,
we may entirely dispense for the present with a


142 STANDARDS OF SIZE. [DIV. II.


solution of the small remaining uncertainties about
the base of the Great Pyramid. And, content with
its measurement having given the cubit’s length as
9142 + 365'25 = 25°03 British inches, accurate pro-
bably within 005 of an inch,—we may proceed to
recover with still greater exactness that grand linear
standard from the earth itself; arranging a scheme
of linear measures thereupon in the following form,
but with leading reference to the Pyramid numbers
of 5 and 10,—and finishing with 4, in imitation of
the four sides of the base :—


Pyramip LINEAR MEASURE.


1 inch, roughly a thumb-breadth, = the unit.
25 inches, roughly an arm, or a pace, length, == 1] sacred cubit.
100 sacred cubits, or 2500 inches, : r = | acre-side.
25 acre-sides, or 2500 sacred cubits, ‘ = 1 mile.
4 miles, or 100 acre-sides, or 10,000 sacred cubits, = 1 league.


ComPARISON OF PYRAMID, wiTH BritisH, LinzaR MzAsuRE,
AND WITH THE EARTH’S SEMI-AXIS OF Rotation.


Earth’s semi-axis of


Pyramid measures. British measures. Secon es
inches.
1 inch, 1:001* British inches, .. | 1-250,000,000th.
1 sacred cubit, 2083 _ », feet, 1-10,000,000th,
1 acre-side, . 09992 ,,  acre-side, | 1-100,000th.
1 mile, 0:9874 ,, miles, . | 1-4000th.
1 league, 1:3166 ,, leagues, | 1-1000th.


The inch and sacred cubit are the only Pyra-
midally authorized parts in the above scheme ;
though there appears much probability that there


* ©001 of an inch = half a hair’s-breadth of the finer human order.


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 143


will be found by and by, similar authority for the
acre-side in the ‘ pavement,’ when fully opened up.
But meanwhile, the above-given Pyramid acre-side
and mile, come so very close to the British acre-side
and mile,—that they can hardly be passed by ; and
the Pyramid league forms so neat a fraction of the
earth’s semi-axis of rotation, as to present the very
essence of a connecting link between terrestrial, and
celestial, distance measures.


SECTION IL
STANDARDS OF WEIGHT.


WITH measures of weight, those of capacity are
usually classed ; and will be here also, because they
serve as a bond of connexion between weight,
which would otherwise be perfectly isolated in
metrology, and a linear standard supposed to have
been already determined; but they further evi-
dently require, besides the certain mensuration of
any cubical amount of space, as such, that that bulk
shall be occupied for the time by some substance or
matter of a known and uniform density or specific
gravity. The reference for this purpose usually
made by most nations, has been to distilled water of
a given temperature ; and the standard of weight
then becomes the weight of the quantity of water
necessary to fill a vessel, whose hollow interior


144 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. II,


measures a certain previously chosen amount of
cubical size, or capacity measure, defined in terms
of the linear standards.

On this well-known principle the late John Taylor
announced, after studying many Pyramid writers,
that the once so-called porphyry, but really granite,
perhaps syenitic-granite, coffer in the secluded King’s
chamber,—must have been intended to serve, with
its hollow cubical space or contents, as a standard
measure of capacity and weight. And he enlarged
much upon the evident manner in which the whole
Pyramid was planned and builded, as if its chief
purpose were to keep that hollow, rectangular, open,
box-like vessel, and nothing else than that,—in the
utmost degree of safety that can be materially in-
sured to anything whatever upon earth.

So far, he was not altogether original; for the
Rev. Thomas Gabb, R.C., in 1806, mentions that the
French savants of 1799, ‘ give it as their belief that
‘the excavation of this granite chest was originally
‘intended, by the founders of the Pyramid, not for
‘ the repository sarcophagus of a corpse, as has been
‘the prevalent but truly ridiculous opinion, but for
‘a standard measure of capacity.’ Similarly a cer-
tain Mr. A. P. J. de V: , of Paris, in 1812, in
his New Researches on the Origin and Destination
of the Pyramids of Egypt, speaks of the coffer in
the Great Pyramid as a ‘ vase of porphyry, that
“can never be taken out of the Pyramid, and was
‘intended to serve as a measure of capacity. The


SECT. IT. ] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 145


English anonymous author of 1706, also obtains
some measures of capacity from the coffer,— but in a
manner not dependent on its cubical contents,’ and
not necessarily forestalling any of these later authors
in their simpler and larger conception.

John Taylor, however, is yet to be noticed before
each and all his compeers,—not only on account of
the superior extent and variety of his researches
touching the coffer, and which should be read in his
own book, (The Great Pyramid: why was rt built,
and who built it?) ; but by reason of his success-
fully identifying its cubical contents with that of the
ancient Hebrew capacity measures on one side, and
the Anglo-Saxon, on the other. So that, according
to him, either, four Hebrew chomers, or, one Hebrew
laver,—and, on the other side, either, four British
quarters, or, one original Anglo-Saxon chaldron,
chalder, or chaudron,—equally represent the exact
cubic contents of the Great Pyramid’s primeval coffer.

This interesting conclusion, however, depended
entirely on the correctness of the numbers employed
by John Taylor for the internal capacity of the
Pyramid coffer; and though he had taken them
fairly and with judgment from two good observers,
viz., Professor Greaves in 1639 and Colonel Howard
Vyse in 1837,—yet there was a strange mass of tes-
timony against them, as evidenced by the follow-


1 By taking some single linear measure, either from the inside or
outside of the coffer, looking on such length as the axis of a sphere,
within whose hemisphere a certain polygoneous figure of a particular
capacity may be described.


VOL. III. K


146 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. Il.


ing table of authorities sip by myself in
1864 :—


Moprern MEASURES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID CoFFER.


Material Exterior. Interior.
Authors, Date. as Pook ude S © calbe ante ob
Named. Length, |Breadth| Height.| Length.|Breadth| Depth.

A.D. Inches. | Inches, | Inches, | Inches. | Inches. | Inches.
Bellonius, z - | 1553 | Black marble, | 144° 12: te a
P. Alpinus, . - | 1591 | Black marble, | 144° 60° 60°
Sandys, . . . | 1610 vada sa far Seu 9
De Villamont, - | 1618] Black marble, | 102° Pe POE FH
Professor Greaves,. | 1638 | Thebaic marble,| 87:5 |89°75 | 39-75 | 77-856} 26 “616 | 34°320
De Monconys, - | 1647 Bea 86° 87: 40° ee
M. Thevenot, . . | 1655 | Hard porpyhry, | 86° 40° 40° 752? |29°9
M. Lebrun, . - | 1674 Bie. 74° Sie 40° an
M. Maillet, . . | 1692|Granite,. . | 90° |48: | 48:
De Careri, 2 ; 1698 | Marble, . . 86° ST: 39° a ree
Lucas . i - | 1699 | Like porphyry, | 84° 36° 42° 74°? | 26°?
Egmont, : . | 1709 | Thebaic marble,| 84: ae ieee (2°? a
Pere Sicard, ..,. . ,| 1715 | Granite, . .. 84° 42° 36° a ae
Dr, Shaw, : . | 1721'| Granite, . < | 84 36° 42° Le 24°?
Dr, Perry, * seal L7AS uGranite, fay. 84° 30° 36° Ae
M. Denon, ; 5 1799 FER SEE 5 84° 48° 38°
M. Jomard, . : 1799 | Granite, . . 90°592 | 39°450 | 44°765 | 77° 836 26 “694 wid 285
Dr. Clarke, . «, | 1801 | Granite, . . 87°5 | 39°75 | 39°75
M. Hamilton, . ~ | £002" | Granite, -. 90° 42° 42°0 |78°? |30°2
Dr. Whitman, F 1801 Se 78° 88°75 |41°5 |66°2 | 26°75? 32°
Dr. Wilson, . “ 1805 FESS 92° 38° ce Hh SO R652) Os 5


M. Caviglia, . A 1817 Baers 90° 39° 42° 78°? 27-9
Dr. Richardson, . | 1817 | Red granite, . 90° 39° 39°5 fs =

Sir Gard. Wilkinson, | 1831 | Red granite, . 88° 36° i re es ee
Col. Howard Vyse, | .1837 Te 90°5 |39°0 |41°0 |78-0 |26°5 |34°5


From these particulars, it will be seen that-—with-
out having regard to the almost incredible differences
amongst minor observers,—the depth element, as
given by the French savants of 1799, disagrees from
the determinations adopted from Greaves and Vyse,
by nearly three whole inches ; equivalent in its effects
on the capacity of the coffer, to an addition of about
6000 cubic inches! With whom, then, lay the
burden of such an error as this ; or did it perhaps
reside in the coffer itself, owing to its not being of


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 147


a regular figure, and having been measured in
different parts by successive travellers ?

These were the questions to be practically settled
in 1865; and I very soon satisfied myself at the
Pyramid, despite all the modern chippings of the
edges of the coffer; first, that the errors of its in-
ternal figure were contained within very narrow
limits ; and second, that the French savants were
the parties who had been so unfortunate as to have
an error of three inches of excess in their measured
depth, though true to the tenth of an inch as. to
length and breadth. But there was a worse error
still, pervading both their engravings, measures, and
descriptions ; an error, too, vitiating the measures of
all the other known authorities as well,—in that,
none of them had alluded, so far as I know, to a
certain ledge which is cut inside the top of the
coffer sides, on the east, south, and north, and all
over the breadth of the western side, to a depth of
1°72 of an inch.

Greaves, in 1639, describes the coffer as presenting
a rectangular figure of pure mathematical form ;
‘or two cubes finely set together, and hollowed
‘within ; it is cut smooth and plain, without any
‘sculpture or engraving, or any relevy or emboss-
‘ment ;’ and the admirably executed plates of the
French national work make it, therefore, a regular-
shaped, equal, box-sided vessel in the year 1799 ;
such, also, is the appearance given to it in Sir
Robert Ainslie’s view, copied by John Taylor, into


148 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. II.


his Great Pyramid: why was i built, and who
built 7¢? and there are numerous allusions in older
authors, to the coffer’s having been always a lidless
vessel, like a water cistern.; a stone box without a
top; a granite chest without a cover, and many
similar phrases. Yet, the mere presence of such a
ledge as is plainly now to be seen, not only implies
the once existence of a lid,—but also that the vessel
must have been serving as a sarcophagus; and,
because, that is the manner, or very near it, in which
the lids of genuine sarcophagi are pushed on, and
fastened down, into their places.

Although an absolute discovery to me at the
time, this ledge feature, I have since found, is re-
presented in Howard Vyse and Perring’s large
Pyramid views, published in folio, in 1840. How
these able authors regarded the feature, does not
appear ; nor do I know whether the usually irre-
proachable members of the French Imperial Institute,
are prepared to maintain the truth of their large
enoravings, for the date at which they were made ;
or to imply, that the ledge was cut between their
day, and that of Howard Vyse. In the meanwhile,
however, most persons will probably assume that the
remarkable cut-out must be far older than the first
French Revolution ; and some will even hastily con-
sider it as entirely subversive of the recent metro-
logical-coffer idea.

So, too, it would be, perhaps, if there were any-
thing in the present sarcophagus-guise of the coffer


SECT. IL] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 149


in addition, as to substance, to what was required
for the original coffer, or mere box-shaped vessel.
But that is not the case; for the ledge is merely
something cut into, or removed away from, such a
vessel ; and something, too, which would be very
easy for any granite mason to effect, after the box
form had once been realized.

We may prove, moreover, that after the coffer
had had a sarcophagus-appearance given to it by
the cutting of such a ledge into its top,—it would
not have made a good sarcophagus according to the
ideas of the time; for, at the second Pyramid,
where there is an acknowledged sarcophagus of red
granite, and which is, with its lid, in excellent pre-
servation,—the following system obtains. The lid
slides on to the top of the body, by means of acute
angled grooves ; and when finally in its place, cer-
tain vertically-sliding pegs fall partly out of holes
in the lid, into corresponding holes in the top of the
lowered side of the sarcophagus,—completely pre-
venting the lid being drawn horizontally back ;
while the oblate spread of the side grooves, prevents
its being lifted up or taken off vertically. The
whole thus forms an arrangement which locks itself,
and is eminently suitable to the purposes of a sar-
cophagus proper.

But at the Great Pyramid vessel, pe there
are similar holes in the west side for falling pins to
fall into, out of a once existing or intended lid,—and
the arrangement would prevent such lid being drawn


150 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. II.


horizontally back, after being once pushed into its
place,—yet the side grooves being rectangular, and.
parallel with the coffer sides, they could not in the
slightest degree prevent the lid being lifted straight,
or vertically, up,—and freely exposing the contents
of the coffer, if any.

Now this shows a degree of clumsiness in contri-
vance and inefficiency of workmanship which we
should be careful how we charge on the architect of
the Great Pyramid, where everything else is carried
out with far more skill and perfection than at the
second Pyramid; and it may even be taken as a
pretty secure indication, that the cutting of the
ledge and turning, or attempt towards turning, the
coffer into a sarcophagus,—were the work of subse-
quent hands. Whose these were, during the long ages
which intervene between us and the original builders,
may be an interesting inquiry to take up when we
come to the history and personal experiences of the
Great Pyramid ; but meanwhile their names signify
nothing to our present purpose, which is solely
directed to finding out, if possible, by modern
measures—what were the cubical contents of the
vessel in its original state, before any ledge was
ever cut into its fair proportions; and then ascer-
taining—if such cubical contents correspond, or not,
with a certain exact, and even inexorable, quantity,
derivable from the theory of the Great Pyramid,
when applied to the earth as known to modern
science.


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 433


This theory is shortly, as regards the kind of
standards now under discussion,—that a cubic space
is to be formed, with sides having a length equal to
the one-ten-millionth of the earth’s axis of rotation,
or 50 Pyramid inches.’ A tenth part of such space,
—or 12,500 cubic inches (agreeably with the Coptic
interpretation of the name of Pyramid), is then to be
filled with matter of the mean density or specific
gravity of the earth as a whole. In which case,
such a mass will form the grand weight standard of
the Pyramid ; while the space occupied by an equal
weight of pure water, at a given temperature,—will
form the grand capacity standard of the Great
Pyramid ; or, as we believe, will represent, and be
represented by, the cubic contents of the hollow of
the coffer: but this is the point to be tested by
actual measure and calculation.

Much in the problem, evidently depends on the
precise value of the earth’s mean density, as com-
pared with that of water; and such an introduction
of that important natural characteristic of density,
with respect to the mean of the whole contents of our
earth-ball globe,—is a novelty amongst all known
human systems of metrology; the very best and
most modern of which, either make their weight-


1 The standard of linear measure is the one-ten-millionth of the
semi-axis of rotation, or 25 inches; because, in distance-measuring
amongst celestial globes, the quantity to be measured is always scien-
tifically the distance from centre to centre of them. But the moment
we come to any questions of the earth’s actual bulk, the whole
diameter, from one side to the other, is the effective length to be
guided by.


152 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. IL.


standard a something entirely accidental, as with
the English (ie. so far as most modern Englishmeft
are aware of) ; or overlook every other constituent
of the earth, except that one article of water; as
with the French metrical, and other European,
arrangements on modern scientific principles.

Yet if there is commendable virtue amongst any
of these systems,—and they do take much praise
to themselves, in referring their linear standards by
an even fraction to some length scientifically con-
nected with the size of the earth as a whole,—
surely there must be similar intellectual advantage,
in referring all weight and capacity standards to
the most practical features bearing on the weight
and capacity of the earth, likewise as a whole. The
capacity of the earth, indeed, is evidently derivable
from linear measure and geometrical theory ; but its
weight, depends altogether upon the proportionate
amounts and densities of all the multitudinous
solids and fluids which together make up its won-
drous bulk; and in which too, there is a far larger
amount of solid and heavy, than light and watery
matter.

One chief superiority of our earth over the larger
planets, such as Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Nep-
tune,'—according to that universal genius, the late
respected Master of Trinity, in his Plurality of
Worlds,—consists in its possession of so large a per-


1 The density of these planets, in terms of the earth’s mean density,
is stated in Sir John Herschel’s Outlines of Astronomy, as 0°24, 0°14,
0°24, and 0°14 respectively.


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 153


centage of heavy solid matter, as to make its specific
Gravity nearly five times theirs; and led him to
conclude that their vasty spheres, consisting of little
but water and mist, can be no sufficient or appropri-
ate abode for reasoning and intelligent beings. How
important then for man, both zesthetically to acknow-
ledge the terrestrial fact of superior density, in the
principles whereon terrestrial standards for measuring
weight and density are founded ;—and what a duty,
religiously, to symbolize his thanks for all the myriad
curious substances,—all of different densities or
capacity weights,—and usually esteemed more and
more precious as they exceed in specific gravity,—
which the Creator has been pleased to introduce into
the composition of this earth of ours. For no other
purpose, too, that the greatest sages can see,—than
for the present and future benefit, and ultimate high
civilisation, as well as enjoyment,—of working, in-
tellectual, and continually advancing mankind.’
Fortified, therefore, by this view,—which, in so
far as it came to me through the Pyramid, is not


1Sir Samuel Baker, in his recent explorations in Central Africa, had
an admirable opportunity of witnessing some difficult social questions
reduced to their primitive simplicity, and elemental clearness. Hence
we find him recording that the poorest, lowest, most degraded and most
miserable of all the nations he met with, were on the marshy banks of
the White Nile, in a fine warm climate, but a world of water, mud,
and reedy vegetation, abounding in, and apparently just fit for, hippo-
potami, crocodiles, buffaloes, wild-geese, and nothing higher. But
as soon as he reached the hilly country,—especially where the hills
produced heavy iron, as well as lighter stones and agricultural soils, —
instantly there was a most marked improvement in the natives, and a
rise in their whole style of life and social well-being.


154 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. IL.


of my invention,—let us see how the earth’s mean
density comports itself in the particular coffer ques-
tion. The numerical value of the remarkable
quantity (in terms of water), is not yet quite so
accurately determined by modern science as it
should be ; but may, for reasons presently to be
adduced, be taken as 5°70; 2¢, 5°70 times as
heavy, as an equal bulk of distilled water at a tem-
perature of 68° Fahrenheit. Wherefore, on the pre-
viously announced principles, 12,500 cubic inches
multiplied by 5°70, or, 71,250 cubic Pyramid inches,
ought to form the internal bulk of the grand stand-
ard of capacity-measure for the Great Pyramid.

Now what does the interior of the coffer measure,
when restored,—by reference to many of the origi-
nal traces which happily still remain,—to its original
unsophisticated shape and true internal size ?

Referring to the measures in vol. i. p. 122, the
mean length, breadth, and depth, inside, by sixty
measures, came out, in British inches, 77°93, 26°73,
and 34°34 respectively. These are, in Pyramid
inches, 77°85, 26°70, and 34°31; and give—by
being multiplied together—-71,317 ; or too much
by rather less than 1-1000th.


Of the practical closeness of this approach to the
theoretical quantity, we may best judge, by comput-
ing the cubical contents of any acknowledged sarco-
phagi, treated in the same manner as unledged ves-
sels; for then, the sarcophagus of the second Pyramid


SECT. II. ] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 155


is found to give by the measures in vol. ii. p. 272,
66,410; or 64,554 by Howard Vyse’s numbers ;
that of the third Pyramid by Howard Vyse’s
measure, = 46,219 ; a sarcophagus in a large tomb
near the Pyramid, pictured in the great French
work, = 51,117; while that in the fourth Pyramid
= 29,610; and in the fifth Pyramid, = 39,775
(both of them, according to Howard Vyse) ; and
others are still smaller. These others are further
more or less ornamented artistically on the ex-
terior ; and in so far, stand entirely removed from
the simple conception of vessels for purposes of
mensuration ; whose only claim to admiration should
be, the closeness of their realization of simple truth
and exact physics. - Yet this idea is not so gener-
ally admitted as it might be,—for I was lately rather
scornfully attacked by a really very able member of
one of the learned professions in public, and in
private a wealthy, highly-educated, representative
man of the nineteenth century a.D., with—‘ but if
‘ this Great Pyramid coffer was intended for such an
‘important destiny as to be a standard of measure
‘ for all nations, pray what sort and amount of orna-
‘ment is there about it 2’

Of that species of meretricious perfection, then,
let all men know at once, there is nothing whatever
about the Great Pyramid coffer; while there are
traces, on the contrary, that if anything else was
indulged in beyond the rectangular figure, it was

1 Volume ii. p. 123, of Vyse’s Pyramids of Gizeh.


156 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. IT,


rather in the direction which the venerable Mr.
Jopling has maintained during some years past ; as,
that it was formed with views of relative commen-
surability ; at least in so far that the cubical contents
of the outside were made just twice those of the
inside. An entirely theoretical conclusion of Mr.
Jopling’s was this idea, for none of the recorded
measures came even approximately near the desired
quantities; but on referring to my measures in
vol. ii. p. 119, where the linear dimensions are cor-
rected, for the first time in the history of such
measures, for the error of figure of the hitherto
assumed perfect planes of the sides, they will be
found, expressed in Pyramid inches, to be
(89°62 X 38°61 X 41:13) + 2 = 71,160

the mean of which, with the interior determination,
allowing for errors of measurement and straining of
figure by the tilted position of the coffer, comes to
71,238 ; while the theoretical quantity required, is
71,250; showing an error of barely 1-6000th.*


Let the uncertainties, however, of our present
measures touching the true size of the coffer’s interior,
or of this practically obtained number, 71,238,—be


1 The sarcophagus of the second Pyramid, treated similarly, without
reference to its cover, or ledge, yields 82,200 nearly, against 66,410: ;
the sarcophagus of the third Pyramid, deeply carved outside, gives
62,160, against 46,219°; the sarcophagus of the fourth Pyramid,
38,440, against 29,610: ; and that of the fifth Pyramid, 70,565, against
39,775°: leaving the Great Pyramid’s coffer, therefore, perfectly unique
throughout all Egypt yet measured ; and, as well for the absolute con-
tents of the interior, as for the duplex commensurability of interior
and exterior.


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. Loy


considered 100 cubic inches +, though they are pro-
bably less ;—then it is most important to note, as
comparing modern science on the whole, with the
primeval tradition of the Pyramid,—and for under-
standing our own place in ‘universal scientific his-
‘tory,—that the uncertainties of the theoretical
quantity of 71,250,—as depending on the imperfec-
tions, or at least unexpected and anomalous differ-
ences found amongst the best modern scientific
determinations of one of the natural elements in-
volved in the question,—amount to several hun-
dreds, and perhaps even thousands of inches!

The usually received quantity, as an instance, for
the mean density of the earth, has been for some
years past, not the 5°70 we have assumed, but
5°67; as depending on the late Francis Baily’s
repetition of the Cavendish experiment in 1842,
—where his mean results, for several different
branches of the trial, varied between 5°6604 and
56754. (See vol. xiv. of Transactions of Royal
Astronomical Society.) But though Francis Baily’s
was by far the best determination ever made, up to
that time,—his successors were not satisfied with it ;
and, on one side, the present most learned Astrono-
mer-Royal, with all the power of the ancient National
Observatory at his disposal, has since tried a different
method of arriving at the same quantity in nature ;
as likewise, on another side, has Colonel Sir Henry
James, with the far more extensive means of the Ord-
nance Survey establishment placed under his hand.


158 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV, IL.


If two men and two offices had been picked out
from the whole nation for undertaking this question,
no others probably could, or would, have been
selected as more proper and efficient for it, than these
two chiefs; and the wisdom of the choice has been tes-
tified by the Royal Society of London printing both
their papers, descriptive of their respective proceed-
ings, im extenso in the Philosophical Transactions.
Wherefore, by looking to the results recorded there,
we may have a measure at once of what the powers
may be of modern science in that particular field ;
and they appear to be thus :—Had the Astronomer-
Royal’s 6°565, been the only new determination,—
the earth’s mean density (the mean between the
above numbers and Mr. Baily’s being taken), would
have been raised up from 5°675 to 6°120, and the
theoretical coffer numbers. from 70,938 to 76,500 ;
but had Sir Henry James’s 5°316, been the only
modern repetition,—the received mean would have
been reduced to 5°496, and the coffer numbers to
68,700 ; or, with similar reference to both, it would
have been raised to 5°852, and the coffer numbers to
73,150. Indicating, in fact, that the question of the
earth’s mean density, though a thing exact in itself,
and well known to the Almighty,—is so exceedingly
difficult to man, that modern science is hardly sure
of being right in the unit’s place of it ; and is quite
incompetent as yet, to speak positively of its tenths,
hundredths, or thousandths. While the advance in
accuracy of this sort of observation has been so


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 159


nearly imperceptible during the last quarter of a cen-
tury, that hundreds of years may pass away—before
even the best philosophers will have determined,
from the earth, what a very moderate man may
determine from the coffer, viz.,—whether, in the theo-
retical expression already assumed, the earth’s mean
density ought to be expressed by 5°69, 5°70, or 5°71.

We must confess, that 5°70 appears to us not only
the quantity indicated within very narrow limits by
the coffer,—but that which is pointed to also by the
earth-experiments, though within wider limits; on
giving, as judgment requires, a much greater weight,
to Baily’s, than to the two subsequent determina-
tions. (Vol. ii. p. 451). Hence, in assuming 5°70,
for the value of the earth’s mean density—ex-
pressed in terms of water,—we are not only within
the limits of the best individual observations of
that quantity by the first modern philosophers,—
but, as: close as can be, to the most rational mean
of all their measures. And if any one chides us for
not waiting contentedly for a few centuries more,
until a much better earth determination,—and one not
depending on a mean amongst hideously discordant
single results,—-shall have been obtained by modern
science ; we are compelled, amongst other things, to
state in self-defence,—that both the explanation of the
theory of the Great Pyramid (which has been waiting
for four thousand years already), and the settlement
of vexatious agitations respecting the best metrology
for existing mankind, can admit of delay no longer.


160 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [ DIV. II.


Hence, while in the matter of linear measure, the
Great Pyramid both originated the idea of reference
to the earth’s semi-axis of rotation, by a one-ten-
millionth for a standard; and has also furnished
from its own base side the material length of such a
standard with considerable exactness, say to within
0°01 of an inch,—we yet preferred taking the length,
much within that 0°01 of an inch, from modern
scientific knowledge of the earth, when employed in
accordance with the Pyramid idea; and capable
then, of giving the standard true, probably to within
0001 of an inch. But with weight and capacity
measure, we must not only accept as a gift the idea
of referring to the earth’s mean density,—rather than
to the density of only one of its myriad components
—from the Great Pyramid ; but must also receive
therefrom, the exact numerical value of that mean
density element—in shape of measures of the coffer,
treated according to the Pyramid formula ; and cer-
tain, within a very small fraction of those large differ-
ences, which are found among the best existing of
direct earth-mean-density measures.

Our proof, then, that the coffer is the right vessel
originally intended for a weight and capacity
standard,—depends upon its measured contents
coming out close to what was expected by a certain
theory, closely based upon the previously proved
linear standard. But seeing that that theory must
also, be partly founded on, or rather tested by, modern
determinations of the earth’s density, which deter-


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 161


minations are by no means very close or accurate,
—-the proof may be regarded as not an absolutely
certain one. Most valuable, therefore, is some
further evidence which the Pyramid itself affords,
illustrating not only that the coffer’s size is no
accidental matter, but that it was something had in
extraordinary regard by the architect, when building
in the mighty granite blocks of the King’s chamber.
For by those blocks he has given us another
numerical test, by which we may prove that the
present coffer was the original one; and is still
therefore the right vessel in the right place, viz.,
the chamber originally prepared for, and adapted
to, it; and which would suit no other known
Egyptian sarcophagus or coffer-like vessel in the same
strikingly appropriate manner, or in any way suitably
with the admirably scientific linear-standard theory.


The Coffer belongs to the King’s Chamber.


In the so-called, in modern times, ‘King’s
‘chamber’ of the Great Pyramid, stands the coffer
now; but what was the apartment designated
originally ?

Over its doorway of entrance, and on the outside
thereof, or as forming the south wall of the ante-
chamber, is a remarkable symbol, which has been
variously described as consisting of four, or five,
lines. Our measures of the thickness of each line,
and the width of the separations between them,
compared with the whole breadth of that wall, in-

i L


162 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. 1.


dependently measured (see vol. ii. p. 97 ; also Plate
X11. vol. ii.), prove incontestably that there are four
deeply cut, equidistant vertical grooves, so placed
as to divide their containing wall into five ver-
tical strips ; illustrating, therefore, a division ito
five.

This, too, is all that can be really stated about
them ; for, as to the architectural apology that they
were grooves for ropes employed in lowering certain
supposed portcullis-blocks in the antechamber,—
that was not a usual Egyptian practical method of
accomplishing such work ; and there are no corre-
sponding grooves on the opposite sides of the room
or on the floor; nor have any good reasons been
given, why the grooves on the south wall should
pass along its entire extent in height, or from
actual top next the ceiling to very bottom, as
marked by the low entrance into the King’s chamber,
—when the supposed portcullis-blocks, and even the
utmost reach of their sliding frames, were only a
small part of the same height.

Hence all that we can declare as the fact, is, that
near the interior of a building whose ancient name,
it is said, was ‘a division into ten,—there is one
wall typifying, or rather positively illustrating,
‘ a division into five.’ And this symbol is the last
object seen by any one entering the King’s chamber,
as he makes his final stooping progress to enter that
important room ; for the sign may be said to be
fastened over the doorway thereof outside, and to


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 163


belong therefore rather to the large King’s chamber
than the small antechamber.

Is that symbol, then,—so remarkably held forth
to every entrant,—the true name of the larger
chamber; or is it intended to call attention to
something of a similar character therein ?

Let us see.

The coffer, according to the metrological theory,
is founded, in part, on the one-ten-millionth of the
earth’s axis of rotation ; or, fifty inches.

This is something suspicious of a connexion,
especially if divided by the Pyramidal 10, but not
enough ; and on looking round the room, an attentive
observer may soon perceive a more striking illus-
tration of a division into five; in that the four
walls of the room have each, four horizontal joint
lines, actually dividing the walls’ whole surfaces
into fe horizontal stripes or courses, (Plate xm.
vol. ii.)

Rather remarkable is it for testing the sufficiency
of modern travellers’ descriptions (for no Greek or
Roman visitors were ever in this room), that some
of them have stated these walls to be composed in a
single course, and others in six courses, or variously
as thus :—

Sanpys, 4.D. 1610, says—‘ Hight stones flagge the ends, and
‘ sixteen the sides.’

Proressorn Greaves, 1639.—‘ From the top of it descending to
‘ the bottom, there are but six ranges of stone, all which, being


‘ respectively sized to an equal height, very gracefully in one and
the same altitude run round the room.’


164 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. II.


Lorp Ea@mont, 1709,.—*‘ The walls were composed of five ranges
‘ of stone.’ ’

Dr. Suaw, 1721.—‘ Height (of five equal stones) sixteen feet.’

Dr. Pocock, 1748.—‘Six tiers of stones of equal breadth
“compose the sides.’

M. Fourmont, 1755.—‘ The walls are composed of six equal
* ranges.’

Dr. Crarxe, 1801.—‘ There are only six ranges of stone from
‘ the floor to the roof.’

Dr. Ricuarpson, 1817.—‘ Lined all round with broad flat
* stones, smooth and highly polished, each stone ascending from
‘ the floor to the ceiling.’

Lorp Linpsay, 1838.—‘ A noble apartment, cased with
‘ enormous slabs of granite twenty feet high.’

W. R. Wine, and Mr. R. J. A., 1837.—‘ An oblong apart-
‘ment, the sides of which are formed of enormous blocks of
‘ granite reaching from the floor to the ceiling.’

E. W. Lane, and Mrs. Pootz, 1843.—‘ Number of courses in
‘ walls of King’s chamber, six.’


Poor John Taylor, too, misled himself and others
in this particular, by making a copy from Sir Robert
Ainslie’s' view of the King’s chamber, the fronti-
spiece of his first edition of the Great Pyramid:
why was it built, and who built it? for therein are
pictured sex courses, as clear as the art of the
engraver can make them.

But that the number is five, I presume I may
state with certainty, and without apology,—from
having measured them again and again ; besides
comparing the individual height of each course, and
the number, with the whole height of the room in-
dependently ascertained ; as likewise did Mr. Inglis
afterwards, with the same result (see vol. ii. p. 305) ;

1 Sir Robert Ainslie’s Views of Egypt, 1840.


SECT. II] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 165


and we may even venture, therefore, to state the
right designation of the chamber to be ‘ the chamber
‘ of five,’ or sometimes ‘the chamber of the standard
‘ of fifty.’ True, there are not also five courses in
either ceiling or floor; but there are four walls or
vertical sides against those other two sides, and these
two are irregular in the number of courses or joints
they do possess. That is, the floor consists, it may
be said, of six courses, or stripes of stones crossing
the room from north:to south; and the ceiling, of
nine large beams ; but the widths of both floor-
courses and ceiling beams are unequal taken conse-
cutively, or in any other way ; and have therefore
not had the attention bestowed on them, that was
eminently paid to the wall-courses, in bringing out
the idea of number and regularity of division.

The walls, indeed, are in this respect deserving of
most particular notice; for, with one exception,
presently to be described, every one of their courses
is of equal height with every other, and runs round
and round the room at the same height ; just as, in
so far, well and eloquently described by Professor
Greaves. Such an arrangement, too, being not only
quite different from the ordinary Pyramid masonry,
—where, if the purpose was to build a wall of so
much area, the builders looked little or not at all to
the regularity in size or shape of the stones, so long
as the joints were good, and the surface-planes even
—(sufficiently demonstrated both in the walls of the
Grand Gallery, and in the pavement, according to


166 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. I.


Howard Vyse, besides the neighbouring instance of
the walls, both limestone and granite, of King
Shafre’s tomb),—not only different, we say, from
the ordinary Egyptian mason’s ideas of what need,
or should, be done in mere wall-building, but a
thing especially difficult and expensive to realize in
granite. This is on account of the hardness and
amorphous character of that material, causing the
quarries seldom to yield two blocks of the same size
or shape; wherefore, the expense and waste of
trimming a continued length of more than 6000
inches of granite blocks, near 50 inches broad, to a
uniform height, must have been immense; and
not to be undertaken by any one,—certainly least
of all by sage, religious-minded men,—without some
very peculiar and important reason.

But there is an anomaly, as already hinted,
affecting the equal vertical heights of all these
courses ; for they are each 47 inches high, except
the lowest,—which is 47 less 5, or 42 inches
only. More apparent, may be considered this dif-
ference, than real ; for it is only an effect to the eye,
caused by the granite floor being introduced within,
and up within, the granite walls of the chamber by
the amount of five inches ;—the blocks of this
lowest wall-course itself, when examined at the
sides of a hole at the north-west angle of the floor,
being seen there to be really 47 inches high, like the
rest. But still, why even that apparent anomaly ;
why that too visible breaking in upon the other-


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 167


wise perfect symbolization of five pervading the
entire room?* (See Plate x11. vol. ii.)

The following consideration may have something
to do with the reason ; especially when we remember
that the five-inch space concerned, though quite an
unmeaning fraction when measured in terms of the
profane Egyptian cubit and its subdivisions,—be-
comes a most peculiarly Great Pyramid quantity,
both with reference, 1st, to the length of the earth’s
polar axis, 2d, to the nwmber of inches which it, the
five-inch space, contains, and 3d, to its actual fraction
of the sacred cubit of the Pyramid and the Israelites ;
viz., a fraction of 1-5th, The coffer stands on the
floor, amongst the stones of that lower course of the
four walls, like a small vessel within a larger one of
the same capacity-measuring kind, but of a higher
order ; what proportion then, does the one bear to
the other, in cubical capacity ?

The length of the room, by our measures, is
412°55 British, = 412°14 Pyramid inches; the
breadth, 206°30 British, = 206°09 Pyramid inches ;
and the corrected, and by the Pyramid builders
corrected, depth of that lower course is about 42
inches. About only, is all we can say, so lamentable
are now the dislocations of the floor blocks; for,
though described as admirably smooth and level in

1 Over the doorway, inside, the five courses of the north wall are
interfered with for a small space, by two of them joining into one, to
form a stout roof-block for the said door; but that is a constructive


requirement, only to be looked at for a moment, to be allowed at once
without prejudice to the chamber’s whole idea.


168 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [ DIV. II.


Howard Vyse’s time, they now vary an inch and
six-tenths in places; and give, on a mean, of ten
points measured, a depth for this course, of 41°84
inches; but indicating, that a majority of high
places had been needlessly taken, and that the true
mean of the whole would have been between 41°84
and 42°0; say, 41:9 Pyramid inches. Then—


412°14 X 206°09 x 41°9 = 3,558,899 cubic inches,


3,558,899
and Re: = Thee ees


Now, inasmuch as the 1-50th of the cubic contents of
that course, if left by the builders at the uncorrected,
or original depth of 47 inches,—would have been
79,842 cubic inches,—we may see that their cor-
rection of that one element, by an even quantity of
the Pyramidally characteristic 5 inches in ‘the
chamber of five,’ has at once brought out a result
almost exactly fifty times the cubic contents of the
coffer proper, or 71,250. |

The result, too, may originally have been some-
what closer ; for, as the walls of the chamber do not
now present such marvellously close joints as many
old authors have described—(‘it is really impossible
‘ to force the blade of a knife between the joints ;
‘ this has often been related before, but we actually
‘ tried the experiment, and found it to be true,’ says
Dr. Clarke in 1801; whereas, now, some of the
joints rather gape in our photographs of them in
1865) ;—we may expect some small alterations
of the interior size of the chamber to have occurred


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 169


in the direction of enlarging it, at least in length and
breadth. Assuming, then, the original measures to
have been laid off in even Pyramid inches, and
taking the nearest inch always to what the respec-
tive parts measure now, we find that—

412° x 206°x 42° 3,564,624

50 ny 50

Or actually closer than before, both to the measured
contents of the coffer, and the theoretically deduced


= 71,292.


' value it should possess, as the Pyramid standard of


weight and capacity.

Hence the chamber is constructed commensurably
to the coffer, and the coffer to the chamber, with fifty
and. five as the ruling numbers. But there exists
even more testimony of this sort, identifying the
whole Pyramid also, with the coffer and its chamber ;
in a quarter too where I had certainly never ex-
pected to find anything of the kind, viz., the com-
ponent courses of masonry of the entire building.


Place of the King’s Chamber in the Pyramid.


These grand courses, which are seen so prominently
on the outside of the Great Pyramid in the present
day, from having had their once outer covering of
casing-stones stripped off, are—as often described—
rude and rectangular. Yet though rude even to
barbarism, if intended for outside work, they are
strongly and consistently built; for not only is
cement used abundantly in every joint, and the
break-joint well managed, but the stones are keyed


170 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [ DIV. 11.


and wedged into each other, so that hardly can one
be extracted from the mass, without being first
broken in pieces, (a feature which should be well
weighed beforehand by any one who rashly proposes
to ‘drive tunnels right through every part of the
‘Pyramid ;’) and then all the stones of each course,
are arranged in admirably horizontal layers, extend-
ing for certain all around, and apparently also,
through, the whole Pyramid.’

The French savants early noted the faithfulness
with which every component course of stone was
carried at the same thickness round every side of,
and by inference through, the Pyramid ; but they
also remarked the large irregularities which often
and even generally occur amongst swecessvve courses.
So likewise must have, almost all travellers who ever
ascended the Pyramid; though why those gentle-
men busied themselves so frequently in counting
the number of the courses, does not appear ; especi-
ally as they were content to vary from each other
between 206 and 255,—as see the accounts of tra-
vellers throughout the last two centuries,

In some places, the present visible contour of the
courses is rather interfered with by debris; but


1 A single case of discrepance appears at the north-east angle, where
a part of one of the courses is broken in upon by a double layer ; but
on close examination, that small top layer is found to be merely a
making up of a ‘ left part’ of the standing rock to the same height as
the course of masonry proper. There are also instances in the mea-
sured courses, of two thicknesses of stone being occasionally employed
in place of one; but that is positively to keep up the full thickness of
the whole course ; and can be distinguished from two small courses
by ollowing the run of the platform for some distance,


SECT. I1.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 171


towards the west side, of the south-west angle, it
is freer than elsewhere; and one may contemplate
from below, and at a distance, the formation of the
courses, under various angles of solar illumination,
with eminent advantage. This I used often to do ;
and over and above special anomalies in single
courses, noted the rate at which the whole of the
courses gradually decreased in thickness, with their
height, up the Pyramid side.

Thus, near the ground, they were very large, and
gradually diminished in size as they ascended, with
some few minor variations. But at the thirty-sixth
course from the bottom, all of a sudden a much
larger series of courses begins ; z.¢., larger than the
very small size which the original ones had gradually
dwindled down to there. One could fancy an overseer
coming to the men at that stage, and telling them that
they had contracted the size too rapidly, and must
enlarge again ; or, that a new series of quarries had
been opened, yielding larger blocks than the older
ones. But whether the alteration was voluntary or
accidental, it is equally plain that unless it had been
introduced, there would have been above that point
a larger number of courses in the Pyramid side than
what now obtain; and in such case, there would
not have been found the peculiar commensurability
which seems actually to exist and cannot be alto-
gether accidental. For on referring in vol. ii, and
Division t. of vol. iti., to all available measures of the
individual heights of the courses on one hand, and


172 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. IL.


comparing them on the other with all determina-
tions of the level of the King’s chamber. floor,—it
will be found, that the fiftieth course of the whole
Pyramid-from the pavement upward, is practically
identical with the floor of that already remarkable
chamber. Or, such fiftieth course forms the plane,
on which stands the mysterious coffer,—making use
of a standard of 50 inches, in its tank of 50 times
itself, in the chamber of five, or the chamber with
walls in five courses, and with the symbol of five
inscribed over its entering doorway. The mensura-
tion numbers, with their errors, are as follows,— )


Fiftieth masonry course, vertically above Pyramid’s pavement, as
measured by—


MM. Jomard and Cecile, in A.D. 1800, = 1675 British inches.
MM. Le Pére and Coutelle, . 1801, = 1696 Zs -
C. Piazzi Smyth, in April. . 1865, = 1686 ,, 4,


Messrs. Aiton and Inglis, in May 1865, = 1702 5 xt


Mean height, = 1690


Floor of King’s chamber above Pyramid pavement, as measured by—
Howard Vyse and Perring in . 1837, = 1665 British inches.
C. PiazziSmythin April . . 1865, = 1680 Bi 5
Aiton and Inglis in May . . 1865, = 1720 Ls i


oeerceeeny


Mean height, = 1688


Thus the Pyramid itself appears to be closer in
these two elements, than are the observations of
any two modern observers on one and the same
element ; and shows a point where future scientific
men may usefully distinguish themselves, and re-
deem at the same time the modern exactness and


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 173


power both of physical science and instrumental
investigation.

Meanwhile the case, so far as now proved, fully
joins the other metrical phenomena ; and enables
one to say that there is more, and even far more,
than accident—in having come again and again, in
connexion with this chamber, upon these construc-
tive allusions which it makes, to fives and fifties in
accordance with the scientific theory of Pyramid
metrology. And this too, although its more osten-
sible commensurabilities, so far as made out by Sir
Isaac Newton on Greaves’ measures, had nothing
to do with five or ten; but only with the profane
cubit of Memphis, and its division into six and
twenty-four, or, according to some, into seven and
twenty-eight, parts. Hence we seem to be fully jus-
tified in condensing a practical conclusion of the
whole, in the neat, and, so to speak, Pyramidal form,
in which it enables a small standard of Great Pyra-
mid weight to be described, but with a noble refer-
ence to universal weight, and capacity, measure. For,
if the weight of the whole, original, coffer’s contents
of water (at the temperature of 68° Fahrenheit) be
divided by fifty times fifty, there is produced what
may be called a pound weight of the Pyramid ; and
which can be referred to, or scientifically checked
anywhere all the world over, in weight, as, ‘5 cubic
‘inches of the earth’s mean density.’


The arrangements of this most cosmopolitan


174 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT, [DIV. IL.


standard, to form a practical system of weight and
capacity measures, are expressible thus,—the inter-
vening multipliers or divisors being understood to
be arbitrary, except in so far as they accord with
the already established Great Pyramid numbers and
proportions :—


PyrRaMiIp WEIGHT MEASURE.


Earth’s mean density,
substance of, in Pyramid
eubie inches.


Unit = 1 grain, , . : = 0:0005
100 grains = 1 dram, “ : i = 0°05

10 drams = _ 1 ounce, 4 J — 0°5

10 ounces = 1 pound, a ‘ ‘ = 5:0

10 pounds = 1 stone, : : . = 50:0

10 stones = 1 cwt., “ - . = 500:0

25 cwt. =. 1] ton, ‘ t r = 12,500°0

50 tons = 1 rock, ~ ; 2 = 625,000°0


Pyramip Capacity MEASURE.


Sacred Hebrew Standards. Fee, cue inches


(Vol. ii. p. 470.)

Unit = Ildrop, . ; : Mees f= i 00285
100 drops = 1 spoon, . : ; oe 0°285

10 spoons = I glass, . : = 0°85

10 glasses = 1 pint, , . ._ = 28:5

10 pints = 1 eallget . . . . = 2850

10 gallons = 1 bushel, . . - = 2,850°0

25 bushels = 1 coffer = 1 ark, orlaver, = 71,250°0

50 coffers = 1 keel = I ‘molten-sea,’ = 3,562,500°0


RELATIONS OF PyRAMID CAPACITY, AND WEIGHT, MEASURE.


1 drop of water, at temp. = 68° Fahr., in weight = 1 grain.
-lspoon ,, A ‘ : ; ena = 1 dram.

1 glass es . , 3 ; ns Seas = | ounce,

1 pint i - : : Z See = 1 pound.

l gallon ,, ; ; P 4 tGs = 1 stone,

l bushel ,, 4 r ‘ é a aa OWL

1 coffer Ax ; “ 4 ; ae 4 = I ton.


1 keel by . : F ‘ Tonal = 1 rock,


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. 175


The relations again of these Pyramid weights and
measures with the British Imperial system, at their
most important points of connexion, are—


For WEIGHT.


1 grain Pyramid, os } 0-960 grains, old English.


0°720 ,, new English.
1 pound, = 1:028 pound avoirdupois.
1 cwt., A 5 : = 0'918 cwt. ss
1 ton, ; 3 : * = a1 45° t0n fy

0-956 ton, shipping.


AND FoR CAPACITY.


1 drop Pyramid, 0°792 drop apothecary’s.


1 pint, = 0°987 old wine pint.
1 gallon, = 1:03] gallon imperial.
1 coffer, = 1:007 of four quarters imp.


Determination of Weights on the Pyramid
system.


Much importance is usually attached among
metrologists, to an easy method of determining
weights from linear measures; and the English
arrangement has been much decried on this par-
ticular point, in comparison with the French. But
the Pyramid system appears to combine most of
what is advantageous in either, with some merits
that are peculiarly its own.

For, the number of cubic inches in any mass
having been obtained,—its weight in Ibs., is simply
1-5th of that number: or, if the bulk has been
worked out in cubic cubits,—its weight in tons, is the
same as the number of such cubits with 1-4th more


176 STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. [DIV. IL.


added to them. That is, the weight will be so
many pounds, or so many tons, respectively, if the
quality of the substance as to density be like that
of the mean contents of the whole earth; but if it
be of the heavier, as gold, or the lighter, as water,
an alteration must be made accordingly ; or, in
short, a table of specific gravities must be referred
to, as with the English, French, or any other
system.

The usual tables, however, at present most fre-
quently met with, are arranged in terms of water as
unity ; except, indeed, the astronomical, which have
long used the more exalted Pyramid unit, of the
earth’s mean density. We may therefore appro-
priately conclude this section, by an example of a
general table of specific gravities, arranged to suit
the requirements equally of the ancient Pyramid
metrology, and the most advanced modern astro-
nomy. ,


Spreciric GRAVITIES.


Earth’s Mean Density, = 1.


CosMICAL.
Sun, 2 F : . O25 , Mars, . : - . 0°95
Mercury, 2 ‘ . 1:12 | Jupiter, . ; ‘ . 0:24
Venus, . ‘ . « 0-92 | Saturn, . ; ‘ - O14
Meteoric stones, . | “O:61- | sUranus ys - j . 0°24
Meteoric iron, ‘ . 1:23 | Neptune, i ; - O14
Earth, . , F « 1°00


1 Conversely, the weight of a body being given, to find its cubical
measure,—multiply the pounds-weight by five, for the number of
cubical inches; and decrease the tons-weight by 1-5th, to find the
number of cubic cubits.


SECT. II.] STANDARDS OF WEIGHT. T7¥


TERRESTRIAL.—(Specific Gravities.)


Cork, . ‘ ; . 0:043| Aluminium, . . 0460
Poplar wood, . - , 0°067 | Red granite (Peterhead), 0°464
Larch wood, . ; . 0°095 | Red granite (Great Pyramid),0°479
Honduras mahogany, . 0°100| Bottle glass, . . . 0°480


Lithium, r ; - 0:100 | Diprite (Great Pyramid), 0°484
Pitch-pine, . * . 0116} Jasper, . ; F . 0°494
Beech-wood, . ‘ . 0-122 | Basalt (mean of 3 varieties

Riga fir, ‘ ‘ - 0°132 from near Great Pyramid),0°500


Spanish mahogany, . . 0150} Arragonite, . ? . 0517
Potassium, . . - 0150 | Flint-glass, . ‘ - 0584


Wax,  . : é . 0'158 | Diamond, ; ; . 0618
Tallow, . : ; . 0°166 | Sapphire, F y . 0-701
Oakwood, . ‘ - 0170} Ruby, . : ‘ - 0-751
Sodium,.  . ; . 0°170| Arsenic, : : ‘Ee


Distilled water, ° . 0'175| Chromium, . : . 1:04
Sea water, . . - 0-180) Tellurium, . ‘ in SEO
Water from Dead Sea, . 0°218| Cast antimony, . + sae
Lignumvite,  . 3 . 0°234 | Cast zine, : 7 +) 126
Calcium, ; F - 0°280 | Cast iron, * ° on dee


Bone of an ox, ; - 0°291 | Cast tin, “ : op Clee
Magnesium, . : - 0310 | Bar iron, d : . 1:36
Ivory, . 5. - 0°320| Hard steel, . ¢ <. Binee


Graphite or plumbago, . 0°340/ Cast brass, . , - 1:47
Bisel pe2 ii 8°, : - 0:°351 | Cast copper, . : . 154


Great Pyramid casing-stone, 0°367 | Cast bismuth, , Je
Glucinum, 3 : . 0°370] Cast silver, . : . 1°84
Gypsum, F 5 - 0°381 | Cast lead, ; ; oi GHO9
‘Paving stone,’ fi . 0°424|] Mercury, : F . 2°38
‘Common stone,’ . . 0°442 | Cast gold, 5 ; Pais £29 fe:
Strontium, . b - 0450 | Hammered gold, . . 3°40
Desert sand from near Pure platinum, . - 3°42
Sphinx, : : . 0454] Platinum, laminated or
Flint, .. 4 A . 0:455 beaten into leaves, sisi


SECTION IIL -
STANDARDS OF HEAT.


INASMUCH as all known substances, both fluid and
solid, vary in size and specific gravity with every
VOL. III. M


178 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II.


accession of imponderable heat, some definite tem-
perature must be referred to, when dealing accurately
with standards either of length, capacity, or weight ;
and thus it came, that many years ago, the British
linear standards were referred for their zero of
length to the temperature of 62° Fahrenheit, and
the French metrical system to 32° of the same
scale. Not indeed expressed by the French authori-
ties in that scale, for they refused to be bound, as
the English so easily allowed themselves to be, by
the whim of the Dutchman Fahrenheit; and per-
ceiving early the intrinsic connexion between heat
and other subjects of metrology, they, the French
authors of the metrical system, very wisely made
their subdivisions of the great natural unit of heat,
conformable to their other decimal arrangements,
whence their now celebrated Centigrade scale of the
thermometer, having 0 at the freezing point, and
100 at the boiling point of water. |

In practice, indeed, some unexpected difficulties
were found in the way of realizing, as a heat re-
ferring point, the 0° of their scale for-all the French
standards of measure; and in the same searching
furnace of practice, the British referring point of
62° Fahr., has been somewhat departed from in its
full integrity and simplicity. Yet, inasmuch as the
necessity of referring any and every part of metro-
logy to something definite on the water-scale of heat,
has rather grown, than lost, in importance in the
eyes of modern philosophers, with all this increase of


SECT. III. ] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 179


perplexity and trouble,—more attention than ever
must be paid to its ultimate refinements, in any
system which may hope to continue before the world.
Let our first inquiry therefore, at the Pyramid be,
whether it possesses any heat-reference for its
standards of measure ?

No indications, indeed, of a thermometer of any
acknowledged kind, are to be seen in the Great
Pyramid ; but a little reflection will soon show the
attentive visitor, that the whole building forms in
itself a something more important still, towards
attaining success in carrying out practically, even
the most refined operations of metrology ; for the
Pyramid’s enormous mass of solid, and slow con-
ducting-of-heat, masonry, at whose overwhelming


amount the world has hitherto merely wondered, or


jeered, or inveighed, or abused, must have the useful
and inevitable effect. of remarkably equalizing the
temperature on anything, as the granite coffer, con-
tained within its substance. ‘

The linear standard, it is true, does not seem to
have that protection ; for, being the length of one
side of the base of the Pyramid, and defined by the
corner-sockets, it depends not so much on _ the
building, as the natural rock of the hill. But there,
we presume, that not the most critical geodesists


of the present day, would pretend that. any season


temperature correction could possibly be required ;
for in all their own practice, whenever they have
measured base lines directly, or trigonometrical lines


180 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. I.


indirectly, on any part of the surface of the earth,
whether by day or by night, summer or winter, or
even year after year, they have never considered any
reduction for variations of temperature admissible
or sensible : the variations felt on the surface, being
supposed to be merely skin-deep, over a uniform heat
below, and unable to produce any mechanical altera-
tion of size. — | fh Bronk or

‘Equally then, at the Pyramid, must the linear
standard, seeing that it is not a loose bar of brass,
but part of the earth surface,—be considered by the
involuntary testimony of all modern geodetical
practice, to be invariable in the temperature which
governs its size; and whatever that temperature
may be, the capacity standard is bound to the same,
—by being surrounded and covered in, in its place in
the King’s chamber,—with so huge a mass of nearly
solid building,—that variation of season, cannot be
felt within its interior. A necessarily constant and
therefore definite temperature, exists for each of the
Pyramid standards ; and, in so far, they can be in-
troduced worthily amongst the most perfect inven-
tions of modern science towards the same end,—2f we
can discover what that definite temperature is ; and
if, also, there be anything about it, either in amount
or character, indicative of design in the builders, or
desire on their part to have obtained that particular
temperature, rather than any other ?

Now here, is one of the most curious parts of the
whole Pyramid question ; for, on referring to the


SECT. III.] STANDARDS OF HEAT... 181


French observations of temperature in and out of
the Pyramid, they will be found to indicate that the
temperature is close to 68° Fahr., or what might be
called a temperature of 1-5th; that is, 1-5th the
distance between the freezing and boiling of water,
measured upwards from the freezing point. And if
that quantity be further supposed to be divided into.
fifty parts,—suitably with the 50-inch standard re-
ferred to for weight and capacity measure in the
chamber of five, or the King’s chamber reached by
fifty courses from the ground,—then the whole
distance between freezing and boiling will be re-
presented by 250; while 1000 of the same degrees
represent as nearly as it has been measured, or
given out by the ‘ Diffusion of Useful Knowledge
‘ Society, that very notable physical point in the
temperature scale, where heat begins to give out
light, or iron is seen to be red-hot in the dark.’

All these numbers, then, are eminently coincident
with the divisions and subdivisions of the rest of
the Pyramidal metrology ; while the reference to an
earth temperature, viz., that of the Pyramid hill,
depending chiefly on its parallel of latitude, and ex-
pressed only, but not regulated, by the accurate
mensuration afforded in the physical nature of
water,—is perfectly suitable to the principle already
shown to have been followed in capacity and weight
measure ; or that of employing for their regulation


1 Diffusion of Knowledge Society’s Natural Philosophy, vol. ii.
p: 63.


182 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II.


the whole earth’s mean density, but for their
practical expression, water. Hence, design will be
begun to be indicated in the temperature arrange-
ments of the Pyramid, if the heat point of 68° Fahr.
be really found to prevail there, on further measures.
being obtained than the few and scanty French
ones’ already alluded to.

- The first and most definite inquiry, therefore, to
be made with this view, is to ascertain the tem-
perature of the King’s chamber; and the moment
that was made by myself, and equally whenever it
was made (see the observations in vol. ii. p. 207),
extending from 19th January to 1st April, the tem-
perature came out, not 68°, but closer to 75° Fahr.

Of this there was no doubt whatever, for varia-
tions of two or three tenths of a degree are not
worth talking about in presence of 7°. Was the
whole proposition, therefore, negatived 2? By no
means, as yet; for what feature of the Pyramid
is there, which renders at once by measurement, in
the present day, its ancient proportions? None ;
seeing that in every case the first measure only gives
us the original building plus (perhaps I should say
minus), some awful amount of dilapidation, destruc-
tion, or alteration, and which must be immediately
inquired into as to its numerical effect. So it is
with the heat question ; and the first anomaly to


1 The temperature is stated by M. Jomard and Colonel Coutelle to
have been 22°C. inthe King’s chamber, 25°° C. in tombs outside, and
17° or 18°C, in Joseph’s Well at Cairo.


SECT. 111. ] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 183.


force itself on the attention of a careful observer is,
the finding that while the King’s chamber marks
75°; the Queen’s chamber below, marks. 74° ; and
the well mouth, lower still, marks 73°.

_ fAh! then might even an untutored country-.
man easily see reason enough to exclaim, on find-
ing,—in such a latitude and elevation above the
soil,—mean temperatures decreasing with descent,
and all of them too great; ‘ Ah! there is a centre of
‘disturbance up here aloft, and prevailing to a
“larger extent in the King’s chamber than in lower
‘parts of the building; the cause of it must be.
‘ searched for without delay.’

One source of the anomaly is without any Boh
the daily visits of numerous parties of travellers,
with their multitudinous Arabs, all of them supplied’
with lighted candles, and abounding in animal’
spirits, dancing their hornpipes ‘over King Cheops’
‘tombstone, banging the coffer for accompanying’
music, and throwing off waves of heat all the time ;°
which heat-waves, first entering the air of» the
chamber, and not being able to escape thereby, as’
the ventilating tubes are now choked up,—must in-'
fallibly affect the walls. But as these walls are 170°
feet thick, no sensible carrying away by conduction’
or radiation from their outer surfaces can possibly’
take place ; and there seems no other eventuality
in store, than a continual rising of temperature in
the King’s chamber, so long as these ceaseless evolu-
tions of imported heat of a higher temperature take


184 STANDARDS OF HEAT. (DIV. 1.


place, and no counteracting effect can gain ad-
mittance. Even when a small party had visited the
chamber on one occasion, March 25, 1 found after
they had gone, an increase of 0°4° in a thermometer
inside the hole of the northern air-channel ; and,
more notably still, when I was, although solitarily,
watching for three hours, yet in the confined space
of the forced passage intercepting the northern.air-
channel further on,—and representing therefore more
nearly the effect of a large party almost filling the
King’s chamber,—the thermometer rose 3°6", or to
78°2° Fahr.

_ Hence a likely remark that an observer, seeing
and feeling all these things, may probably make,
will be, ‘ What a wise idea and necessary institution
‘those air-channels of the ancient builders must
‘ have been, to keep up equality of temperature in-
“side the Great Pyramid; or rather to prevent
‘disturbances to the said equal temperature accru-
‘ing. For, if living men were intended and expected
“to visit the inside, nothing but a current of air
‘ could efficiently carry away the doses of heat they
‘would involuntarily throw out, so long as they
‘ were there ; and which doses, if not bodily carried
‘away, must go on, in such a locality, perpetually
‘accumulating. Important of course that the air-
channels should not be too large, lest the heat of a
summers day and cold of a winter one should
thereby enter too freely to the central apartment of
the Pyramid ; but on comparing the smallness of


SECT. III.] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 185


the bore and length of stone channel of ‘these air-
tubes of the Pyramid, with the similar elements of
culverts in the new Palace of Westminster,—and
allowed there, on the testimony of critical examiners,
to give something very like the mean temperature of
the year, to air passing through them, even on the
hottest summer’s day,—there seems to be abundant,
and even superabundant, security that the same con-
trolling effect will be exercised at the Pyramid.
When Colonel Howard Vyse opened both of the
air-channels in 1837, he speaks of ‘ the sudden rush
‘of air that took place,—indicating pretty clearly
the anomalous state of temperature into which the
King’s chamber had previously grown, during the
long closing of these important channels. And had
he observed thermometers then, and at frequent in-
tervals subsequent to his successful unlocking of
the vents,—he would have found the extra heat
draining away, from day to day, just as the waters
of the great Ethiopian lake are reported to have
done, when their northern barrier was _ broken
through in the days of Joseph’s patron king, Phiops,
Aphophis, or Apappus. But what thermometrical
point the chamber would have lowered down to, at
least by this process of merely drawing off the
extra heat, or to what point it was lowered before
the air-channels were again stopped up,—is very
difficult to say ; and though the world is now so
much increased in wealth, it may be long before
another equally liberal-minded man to Colonel


186 STANDARDS OF HEAT. _[DTv. I1.


Howard Vyse will be found, to undertake the clear-
ing out of the air-channels once more from the
mischievous quantities of sand and stone thrown
into them; and allow of the temperature experi-:
ment being tried again, and this time more wei
and scientifically. 2 ;

In the dearth, however, of such opportunities,
we will venture our own opinion, that the lowering
would by no means amount to the 7° required to
reduce the 75° at present observable, to the 68° of
the hypothesis ; and because, a part of the anomaly
is due to another source, and one equally unintended
by the original builders,—viz., the practical absence
of watery vapour. The climatal effect of this most
important natural agent has been well entered into
by Principal Forbes, in his paper on Mean Tem-
peratures, in the 22d volume, part 1, of the Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; and
with the effect of showing, from an inductive
examination of the relations of mean temperature,
latitude, and the relative proportion of land. and
sea in a given parallel,—that there would be in
latitude 30°, an increase of 19° Fahr. in the mean
temperature, were the surface made entirely of land,
in preference to entirely of water.

Now, though we all know that. neither the globe
nor the parallel of 30° north, is composed entirely
of land, yet the region about the Pyramid speaks:
more of desert than of ocean ; and besides that, in
confined localities, as inside any of the tombs, and


SECT. IIL] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 187,


even over definite tracts of the desert,—caused by
the hold of the ground upon the air, and the not
perfect mobility of the latter,—there are some very
close imitations occasionally found of the tempera-
tures proper to a globe without water. Hence it is,
that temperatures higher than 68°, as 73° and 74’,
are found even in the well of the Great Pyramid,
in the sepulchral chamber of the second Pyramid,
and many other localities not visited by very large
numbers of travellers or Arabs. But all these
temperatures come within, and abundantly within,
the limits assigned by Principal Forbes to 30° of
latitude north, on either the total land or total
water hypothesis, z.e., between 80°9° and 61°9° ;
while they would also be infallibly reduced some-
what, and in the direction of 68°, if an evolution
of, and ventilation by, watery vapour were freely
allowed in their vicinity ; and an approach thereby
made to the natural circumstances of the parallel as
a whole.
That, on one hand, the builders intended watery
vapour to be present, may be assumed ; first, from
the part which water plays in the capacity measures
of the coffer; second, from the existence of the
lower well, which, though in commencement only,
descends from the floor of the subterranean chamber
straight down towards the well-water level of the
region, even as the square well of the sepulchral
chamber in King Shafre’s tomb does descend to, and
reach, it; and third, from the fragments of tradi-


188 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II. .


tion gathered by Herodotus and others as to the
tomb of King Cheops, the builder of the Great
Pyramid, being at the bottom of the structure, on
an sland surrounded by the waters of the Nile.
And that, on the other hand, by such introduction
of the Nile waters into the lower parts of the Pyra-
mid, the temperature of the hollow portions of the
upper part of the building (communicating by open
passages with the lower), would be brought to some-
thing exceedingly close to the temperature of 1-5th,
or 68” Fahr., may be concluded from several sources..

First, general earth observation and physical
theory. | |
: These are given well in Principal Forbes’s paper,
already alluded to ; the observations being the ex-
tensive collections of all countries made by Professor
Dove of Berlin, and the theory,—Principal Forbes’s
physical theory,—connecting them all together ;
and they give, for the mean temperature actually
existing in 30° of latitude north, the former 69°8°,
and the latter 69°4°. The reduction of these quan-
tities to the latitude of the Pyramid, or 1’ 10° south
of 30°, is practically insensible, amounting only to
0°015° Fahr.; but their reduction from the sea
level, at which alone they apply, to the elevated
position of the Pyramid at its base, or 2580 inches
there above, is much more important, and unfor-
tunately rather uncertain ; for though in our own
country, say in latitude 53°, the decrease of tem-
perature with elevation has become pretty well ascer-


SECT. III.] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 189


tained to be, at the rate nearly of 1° for every 3312
inches of height from the surface of the earth,—a
much more rapid decrease may be expected in a
latitude of 30°, where the surface is exceedingly
heated by continual sunshine, while the streams of
the atmosphere over it, must present a balance of
many, and more shaded, latitudes. The only obser-
vation, too, which I was enabled to make bearing
on this point, viz, one between the minimum
temperature simultaneously of Hast Tombs and the
summit of the Great Pyramid,—shows the rate
exceedingly greater, or 1° for every 1000 inches of
ascent ; but that is probably exaggerated, for the
mean temperature at least ; and the result we are
therefore brought to for the mean temperature of
the base of the Pyramid, as derived from both
general earth observations and approved physical
theory, is something between 69°0° and 66°9°; the
mean whereof happens to be, 68°0° Fahr.

Good observations for mean temperature at the
Great Pyramid itself, would of course be preferable
to these deductions from observations taken in
every other part of the world except the Pyramid ;
but such observations are wanting, for no person
capable of observing has ever stayed there long
enough. My own observations bear on the ques-
tion no doubt, but, extending over only a third part
of the year, cannot be employed without an uncer-
tain reduction of the first four, to the whole twelve,
months. Let us see, however, what they indicate.


190 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II.


The atmospheric observations (vol. ii. p. 265) taken
daily by self-registering thermometers, give for the
simple mean of maximum and minimum thermo-
‘meters (a very usual, though not perfectly accurate
method), 64°6° for the period in question ; while the
discussion of the hourly observations taken once a
week during the same time, and safe from some of
the sources of error to which the minimum ther-
mometer was exposed, give 63°4. Wherefore,
doubling the weight of this result on account of
its instrumental superiority, the best mean result
deducible from both methods would seem to be,
63°8° Fahr.

Then for the reduction of any number obtained
during the four months employed, to a whole year,
the following data have been collected from the
following sources :—


Reduction of
mean temp. of


i it four A
Date. Place. Latitude. | months, to the Authority.
whole twelve
months of the
year.


| |) |


7 ¢ Fahr. | ( Meteorological
1856-1865 } owns 6 56° 12’ N.| + 6-9° |2 Society of Scot-
land.


1840-1851 | Dublin, 53 23,,| + 60 ae Eloyd,
Royal Engineers

1853-1865} Malta, 35 54,, | + 100 and Military
Medical Staff. —

? Bombay Obser-

1862 Bombay, 18 54,,} + 2°8 vatory Volume.
1848 Py a Re PF Bods ese


Trans.


Some of these numbers we fear are not so accu-


SECT. III. } STANDARDS OF HEAT. 191


rate as they might be, for one set assumes that
observations at 9h. 30m. a.m., and 3h. 30m. P.M,
necessarily give the mean temperature of all the in-
stants composing 24 hours,—whereas it will be seen
from our table of hourly corrections (vol. ii. p. 261),
that these instants are both in excess, one of them,
indeed, very near the time of maximum solar in-
fluence ; and the other observers have seldom noted
more than the simple points of maximum and mini-
mum, the latter marked on a thermometer not so
sensitive as what is employed for the former.
Taking, however, from them all a positive cor-
rection of + 67, for the seasonal effect, and an
elevation effect of —1° from our own experience to
reduce from the meteorological station to the Pyra-
mid base,-—_we have for final result, and as deduced
from local atmospheric observations, 68°8° for the
quantity sought after; in place of 68°0° even.

And lastly, referring to the well temperatures,
which are often thought to give at once the mean
temperature of a country without further trouble,
the mean of twelve observations (see vol. ii. p. 202)
- of Cairo wells gives 69°9° ; of ten observations of
agricultural wells in the alluvial flat opposite to the
Pyramid, 69°1° ; and of six in King Shafre’s tomb-
well, closely approaching in position, age, and
character, any water well in the Great Pyramid,
these give 64°6° Fahr.

The further small corrections which these raw
observations may require for season and elevation,


192 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV II.


I will not attempt to inquire into, with the scanty
means for that purpose at my disposal. When, too,
we find that every result, whether from theory,
atmospherical observation, or well-water observation,
oscillates closely upon the temperature of 1-5th, or
68° Fahr.,—it is probable a long series of measures
would have to be carried on daily, and for many
years, before any one could.decidedly say from local
data alone, whether the true quantity is below or
above that peculiar point." In the meanwhile, |
however, it is most likely plain to every one, that
both watery vapour and hypsometric elevation are
required in the latitude of the Pyramid, to prevent
the actual mean temperature being too high: or,
these things being given, that a very different lati-
tude from 30°, could not have been fixed on for the
Pyramid with any appearance of a temperature of
1-5th ; the mean temperature of 20° north latitude
being no less than 7°5° greater, and of 40° north
latitude 12°3° less, than for 30° north latitude,
according to the general collection of observations
and the theory, already mentioned.

Hence, compared both with nature, and the
modern European scales of temperature, the as-
sumed, and apparently the real, Pyramid scale of
temperature reads as follows :—

1 The annual mean temperatures by observation at fifty-five stations
of the Meteorological Society of Scotland were, in 1856, = 45°7°; in
1857, = 48-0° ; in 1858, = 466°; in 1859, = 46°8° ; in 1860, = 44:5°;


in 1861, = 46°9°; in 1862, = 46°9°; in 1863, = 46°8°; in 1864, =
45°5° ; and in 1865, = 46:9°.


SECT. III] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 193


Pyramid | Fahrenheit | Centigrade} Réaumur
Scale. Seale. Scale. Seale.


Iron bright red in the dark, | 1000°| 752°° 400°° 320°°


Water boils, ; . “ 250° O12: 100: 80:

High summer temperature E ; j /
at Great Pyramid. signi si sa is

, temperature at Great 50: 68° 920° 16:

yramid, .

Water at maximum den- : ; :
sity, nearly . ig gt 2 ae

Water freezing, . . ‘ | 0: 32° 0: 0°


Second part of the Heat question.


" As already indicated on p. 178, so insidious, multi-
farious, and difficult are the actions of heat, that the
originally simple references of both the British and
French systems have rather broken down in practice ;
and exhibit now, how vain are the efforts of man to
set his own rules to nature.

Thus the British idea of referring everything
metrological to 62° Fahrenheit, is generally ignored
by all Englishmen in their measures of specific
gravity, where the more even number of 60° Fahren-
heit is preferred ; sundry references too are made
to the density of water, by some at the temperature
of 39°2° Fahrenheit, and by others at 40° Fahrenheit ;
while more recently still, the copies of the standard
yard made under Government supervision, if found
too long or too short at the standard temperature of
62°, are issued, under authority, as being of the cor-
rect length at some other temperature—as 59°, 63°,
65°, or whatever the individual case of linear error

VOL, IIL. N


194 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. IL.


may require, according to the expansion of the
material from heat. |

In the French philosophers’ system, again, it was
thought to be a magnificent idea at first, to have
declared the freezing temperature of water their heat
referring point ; because, there was then no depen-
dence on any thermometer. But though such a
temperature may answer with permanent solids, it is
very inconvenient, and something worse, when using
these in combination with water to obtain .the
French unit of weight; and in fact, for that pur-
pose, the water had to be raised in temperature,
until it had ceased the anomalous expansions it in-
dulges in on approaching the crystalline state, and
had acquired its condition of greatest fluid density
somewhere beween 39° and 40° Fahrenheit.

A thermometer, then, must be employed after all
to get the expansions of the solid vessel, holding the
water, between 32° and 40° Fahrenheit ; and neither
of these two temperatures are found agreeable or
conducive towards good measures being obtained
by man. For not only does man, as a warm-blooded
animal, use his faculties to most advantage in a
temperature very much higher than that of freezing
water ; but there are pernicious effects to the instru-
ments he is studying, when the difference of his
own heat and theirs, amounts to a large quantity ;
such heat exchanges increasing at a very accelerated
rate, with the simple increase of the differences
between two neighbouring bodies. So important is


SECT. ITI. ] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 195


this consideration in some inquiries, that we have
heard an eminent Indian geodesist hastily declare,
that ‘he would have his experimenting and instru-
‘ment-making room heated up to blood-heat, say
‘ 98°4° Fahrenheit.’ But then he soon after allowed,
that such a temperature would be rather too high for
his full purpose ; for though 98°4° Fahrenheit, may
be the heat of man’s interior, it is not that of his
exterior and neighbourhood,—besides being, in the
air breathed, too relaxing to both body and mind
when at difficult work.

Lastly, too, we have to chronicle the inglorious
termination of the French heat-referring point, for
their solid and official metre; for the said metre
bar having been found too short by a very notable
quantity, owing to an error in the triangulation of
France recently discovered,—the freezing point has
been given up, and that parent of all the metres is
now referred to, as representing its intended length,
only when it has been expanded by rising to a
temperature of something near to 50° Fahr. An
accidental temperature, in fact ; the accident of an
accident ; representing nothing great in nature ;
and liable to be altered again at any subsequent
time, to some other accidental quantity, when a new
error in the steps by which the metre was obtained,
shall unhappily be discovered.

The friends of the French metre, either hush up
this result ; or, affect to look rather too kindly upon
it, and say,—‘ How beautiful that the French metre


196 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV, IT.


* should be self-adjustible, and always show mankind,
‘ through means of more or less heat-expansion, the,
‘length of one-ten-millionth of the quadrant of the
‘meridian passing from the North Pole through the
‘ city of Paris to the Equator.’ But supposing, or
allowing to them, that it does so,—they must them-
selves confess, that they keep up their connexion
with that one natural linear unit, and not the best
of its kind in the world, by sacrificing their con-
nexion with another unit of a different natural
element, and not less important,—viz., the heat
unit.”

If then, both the British and French heat
references have failed, in practice, to hold men
true to their ancient covenants with them,—is
there any chance that the Pyramid reference, if
tried, would fare any better ?

We believe it would, and for the following
reasons :—


1 The friends of the metre are not often quite so clear in their
statement of the fact,—for they delight sometimes, in referring the
metre’s origin, even as a decimal scale, to ‘one of the great circles of
‘ the earth,’—when really only 1-4th part of such circle was ever at-
tempted to be referred to,—and the decimal division cannot apply
equally to both. Neither, again, do they often let their readers know,
that late researches on the figure of the earth, have shown that
quadrants of the meridian in the northern hemisphere, vary in length
with their longitude; so that the length of the French quadrant: is
local and national only, not universal and cosmopolitan to all the
nations of the earth. (See vol. ii. p. 450.)

2 In the enlarged Natural Philosophy of the present day, expanded
as it has been by the dynamical theory of heat,—questions of heat are
more momentous to the prospects of life and energy, in and throughout
the universe, than anything connected with a little more or less linear
proportions.


SECT. III.] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 197


ist, As a temperature of 1-5th, and marked by
50° on its own scale, it would have certain
numerical advantages in arithmetical operations ;
or, the evenness of the Centigrade, with the greater
expressiveness of the smaller degrees of Fahrenheit.

2d, The temperature of 1-5th, or 68° Fahr,, is
most admirably adapted to human beings to breathe
and labour in; or literally for life and work; feeling,
as we have experienced again and again in Egypt,
simply pleasant, fresh, and wholesome, without sense
either of numbing cold, or oppressive heat ; and

3d, There seems a prospect of its being a vastly
more important natural unit, than what has been
hitherto mentioned ; and a something, therefore,
which all men endued with sense, would be as
eareful how they altered, as they would be morally
with regard to removing their neighbour's land-
marks. We have hitherto, for instance, merely
spoken of the temperature of 1-5th as being by
nature, or art, or both, that of the Great Pyramid,
in the particular spot of the earth where that build-
ing was set down ; but what will nations say if that
temperature be, and that one place be found to
have, the mean temperature of the whole surface of
the earth ; and yet this may be inferred, at least to
the degree of accuracy whereto modern observation
enables us to proceed.

In some works, no doubt, and works much spread
among the people, the temperature of 50° or 51°
Fahr., is mentioned as that ‘of the whole earth.’


198 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II.


Of the whole surface of the earth, may be presumed
to have been meant ; for, if we were to take account
of a molten interior, there would be an inconveniently
high result.for mankind to examine metrological
standards in ; and climate, which is so important to
man’s well-being, is an affair of surface, and super-
ficial influences on the earth, only. Even in this
necessarily limited view of the case, however, the
above authors seem to have mistaken a determination
of the temperature in latitude 45°, or the middle point
of a meridian line alony the surface, for that of the
area of the whole surface of the earth. The latter is of
course the true reference, and the middle parallel in
either hemisphere for surface, is by no means 45° ;
but, if computed as a sphere, comes out 30°; or the
exact latitude of the Pyramid as already mentioned,
all but the small defalcation of 1’ 10°.

Hence, the annual mean temperature of the
parallel of 30° latitude, is more likely to be the
mean temperature of the whole surface of the earth,
than is that of 45°. But not necessarily with exact-
ness ; for it must depend, partly on the rate at which
the temperatures increase, or decrease, on either side
of the parallel; and also, on the difference of tem-
peratures in the two hemispheres of the world. Of
this last, indeed, very little is known as a whole ;
for though in low latitudes, southern parallels are
colder than northern, there is no necessity,—as
Professor Dove has remarked,—that the same feature
should still prevail in higher latitudes.


SECT. III.] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 199


As a first approximation, then, let us take the
northern hemisphere alone, and ascertain the tem-
peratures both of 30° latitude,—which parallel evenly
divides the surface between Pole and. Equator,—
and of the latitudes 48° 35’ and 14° 29’, which like-
wise evenly divide the surfaces between the Pole
and 30° latitude on one side, and between 30°
latitude and the Equator on the other.

The data for this purpose are extracted from
Table 11. of Principal Forbes’s important Memoir,
above quoted, and appear as follows :—


Temperatures, in degrees Fahrenheit.


Latitude. Forbes’s Formula.
Observations col- Theory by
lected by Dove. Forbes.
All land. All water.
North.
60° 29°8 27°D° 18-4° 37°4°
50 42°5 43-0 39°9 46°5
40 56°5 58°0 61:4 54°9
30 69'8 69°4 80-9 61°9
20 775 76°6 96°5 67°3
10 79°9 79°6 106°3 70°6
0 79°7 80:0 109°8 vp Se


Whence we derive the mean temperature for lati-
tude—


Fahr.
48° 35’ Lat. By theory, . = 45°1°
BOs EO: es es i = 69-4
14 29 ,, 99 . ° — 78:2
And the mean, doubling the middle ie 65-5

latitude co-efficient, a“


The first approximation, therefore, by doing little
more than attending to the nature of the circum-


200 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [ DIV. II.


stances really concerned, when the surface of the
earth is in question—has brought up the quantity
from the previously believed 50° to 65°5° Fahr., or
within 2°5° of the 1-5th temperature ; and the chief
part of that comparatively small difference, may be
suspected to arise from error in the theory employed,
when computing for the northernmost latitude.
That there is such an error may be inferred thus:
The mean temperature of Scotland, derived from
fifty-five of the stations of its Meteorological So-
ciety, having a mean lat. of 56° 30’ north, and eleva-
tion above sea= 3072 inches, is for the period from
Fahr.


1856 to 1857, or 2 years inclusive, = 46°8°
» 1858, or 3 years o = 46.8
»» 1859, or 4 years ar = 468
a 1860, or 5 years ra = 46:3
», 1861, or 6 years 3 = 464
Se ae RBS OV F6Er8 5 = 46°4
», 1863, or 8 years Ry = 46-4
», 1864, or 9 years ay = 46°3
»  1865,orl0 years ,, = 46-4


Whence any one may clearly see, that the last quan-
tity is not likely to be much altered by further ob-
servation with the same instruments and methods ;
in fact, that it is, with the above limitation, very
well determined, and probably much better than the
great majority of stations on which the theory is
founded.

But that theory (see second column of above
Table) makes the mean temperature of the parallel
of 56° 30’ = 32°9° Fahr. ; or hardly raised above
the freezing point; and in so far, is 13°5° in differ-


SECT. IIL] STANDARDS OF HEAT. 201


ence from the observed mean temperature of many
years. Only in difference, though, not in error ;
because the theory attempts to represent that whole
parallel, while Scotland only occupies one point of
it,—and that point a locality, where ocean abound-
ing over land, a something of the warmth of a
water climate over a land one when north of lati-
tude 45°, ought to be felt. To what extent though ?
The theory fortunately answers for itself, stating
that, if the globe were ‘all water,’ and therefore the
highest possible result obtained from that source,—
the mean temperature of 56° 30’ north, and at the
sea-level, would still be only 40°6° Fahr.; or no less
than 5°8° below what actually obtains in Scotland,
where, though there are complaints that the climate
is very rainy, it is not all water yet.

Hence although the theory alluded to, is termed
by its talented author the ‘rational theory,’ in con-
tradistinction to Brewster's and Mayer’s, which are
‘empirical,’ or ‘merely mathematical,’—and although
it is decidedly in advance of theirs in taking into
account the distribution of earth and sea over the
land’s surface,—yet, either these have been erro-
neously estimated ; or, as we rather believe, there
are other important, though hitherto neglected, phy-
sical conditions to be taken into account, in deducing
terrestrial mean temperatures. Whichever be the
cause, the effect of the results being at last attended
to by future investigators, will inevitably raise our
previously deduced mean temperature of the whole


202 STANDARDS OF HEAT. [DIV. II.


world’s surface from 655°, to something nearer, if
not absolutely to, 68°0° Fahr., the standard 1-5th
of Great Pyramid heat metrology.


SECTION IV.


STANDARDS OF ANGLE.


AS men improve in science, or advance in the
magnitude and importance of the subjects they apply
themselves to,—angular measure, seldom heard. of
in primitive society, becomes one of the most impor-
tant branches of metrology.

The pure mathematician, indeed, might go on for
a long time, expressing all his angles in terms only
of the whole circumference as unity, or in terms of
the angle subtended by the are which is equal to its
radius; but the practical man, whether minera-
logist, surveyor, astronomer, or many another pro-
fessional, would seldom attain much accuracy, and
would infallibly lose a vast deal of time over every
determination,—unless assisted by some predeter-
mined system of dividing the circle into small equal
portions or degrees; and these arranged suitably
with the prevalent arithmetic of the day. So
thoroughly was this principle confessed by the
savants of the first French revolution, that they
altered the 90°, assigned from Greek-Alexandrine
example, for the quadrant, to 100°—in order to


a fe


~


SECT. IV.] ~ STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 203


make a decimal, or centigrade, scale a pervading
feature through the whole of their metrical arrange-
ments,

But their 100° for the quadrant and 400 for the
circle, have not taken with the world at large;
wherefore, after some gallant efforts in the way of
producing logarithmic tables, astronomical books,
and angle-measuring instruments arranged on the
‘ centesimal’ method,—the Parisian savants have
reverted to the ancient ‘sexagesimal’ system, and
divide once more their whole circle into 360°. Not,
however, without the step having been pronounced
by high authority in this country ‘a calamitously
‘retrograde one in the progress of science ;’ so
many advantages are there in a centesimal over a
sexagesimal arrangement, if properly carried out.

Although, then, at the present moment, the
French metrical system is without an angular
arrangement of its own,—its past history confirms
our principle, of no metrology being complete which
does not include angle. Now, at the Great Pyra-
mid, so much of the importance of the questions
discussed in vol. i. Division 1, turns upon. very
peculiar angles, and their remarkably close realization
by the builders,—that a system of angular gradua-
tion may fairly be expected to have prevailed
amongst them.

Against this idea, it is true, there immediately
arises a class of antiquaries, declaring, that in the
early day of the world’s history when the building


204 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. [DIV. II.


of the Great Pyramid took place, men must have
been so ignorant of true science, as to have had no
idea of angle, as angular measure ; and that if cer-
tain inclines now appear in their work, it is because
they are the hypothenusal, or joining, lines of the
ends of certain horizontal and vertical lengths laid
out in mere, and simple, linear proportions.

This statement has indeed been met by another,
and from an antiquary of remarkable mathematical
and philosophic attainments, too,—with the effect
of showing that angle, as angle, is after all not so
very recondite a matter, but that it might have
easily occurred to intelligent minds in an early con-
dition in the world. But it is rather our duty
throughout this book, to take no theories of any
kind about the Pyramids or their builders for
granted ; and in this part of our labours, at least,
to do nothing more than ascertain, what the mea-
sured parts say for themselves.

Now, in the Pyramid, there are, by observation,
two dominant angles ; one of them that of the foot
of the Pyramid, or ascent of the sides, = 51° 51’
14:3”; and the other the angle of the passages, or
26° 18’ 10" (see vol. iii. Division. 1 p. 34). To
the former, we might perhaps add the angle of
the summit of the Pyramid, and the upper angle
of a horizontal section through the sides,—but
these being in reality only trigonometrical con-
sequences of the other, have no separate scientific
existence.


SECT. 1V.] STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 205


What proofs, then, can be produced, that the two
sets of inclined lines which we have read off on our
present European 360° scale, as 51° 51’ 14:3", and
26° 18’ 10°,—were derived from linear proportions ?

The following is the best I have heard :—Two
horizontal and one vertical, gives an angle of 26°
33’ 54"; and twice that, is close to the angle of the
foot of the Pyramid. Nay, but how close? Why,
it makes 53° 7’ 48".

In the last century, 53° 7’ 48" might have passed
as being perhaps the angle of the Great Pyramid’s
foot ; but, since Colonel Howard Vyse’s measures,
and our own (see vol. iii. Division 1. p. 28), we
imagine that no other angle than 51° 51’, and some
seconds, can be admitted. Similarly, too, on referring
to our chapter on the passages (vol. iii, Division 1
p- 38), it will be found that 26° 33’ 54", is decidedly
outside the actual angle of all the passages.

The dominant angles, therefore, must have had
some other origin than the simple linear proportions
of ‘two horizontal and one vertical ;’ and, that the
Pyramid builders did look on angle as angle purely,
we may refer to the azimuth trenches (vol. iii. Divi-
sion I. p. 30, and Plate xv.), where the absence of
perpendiculars and the elimination of the inner ends
of all the radiating lines, appear to form proof posi-
tive that they were laid out as angles ; and can be
connected still, by angular measure only.

As angles then, but on what system of angular
mensuration? Men call them now 51° 51’ 14°3’,


206 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. [DIV. II.


and 26° 18’ 10’,—but what numbers did the Pyra-
mid builders give them? Having already con-
demned those, who made the Pyramid builders
divide the circle into 360°, merely because the
Alexandrine Greeks used that method two thousand
years afterwards,—we must seek something more to
the point; and the following general principles,
highly approved of elsewhere, immediately suggest
that—

ist, The method of division should be agreeable
to what is followed in other departments of Pyramid
metrology ; and

2d, The dominant angles of the Pyramid, when
expressed in those terms, should be as nearly in
whole numbers as possible.

For the first, then, we have the following paral-
lelism afforded by the French circle graduation with
their thermometer scale, but substituting the Pyra-
mid thermometer numbers ;—viz., 250° for the
quadrant, 1000° for the circle, and decimal subdi-
visions of each degree.

And for the second, we have, on computation by
that system, the two angles above mentioned, ex-
pressed 2m even degrees to less than one-tenth of
such a degree ; or, within those limits of probable
error, already assigned to good Pyramid practical
work. This Pyramid system of angle-mensuration,
too, seems to be the only one yet tried in the world,
which will give those two angles with tolerable
evenness ; as illustrated by the following numbers :—


SECT. IV. ] STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 207


o - Angle at Foot of | Angle of Passages
System of Angle Mensuration. Great Pyramid. | in Great Pyramid.


360° to circle, . eal gol od 14-379) OG" Jie”
Same, with degrees divided devi: 51-85° 26-30°
mally,
400° to circle, . $ ; 3 57°62 29:23
100 tocircle, . . 3 ‘ 14°40 eo
32 tocircle, . . 4 4°61 2°34
1000 to circle, or the Pyramid ay ee 144:05 73°08


Structural reference to 250° in the Quadrant.


But there is some further testimony in the Great
Pyramid, and actually marked into the building, as
to the adoption of 250° for a quadrant.

We have already shown, that despite the irregu-
larity of the thicknesses of successive courses of the
general masonry in the whole structure-—yet the
final number of 50 was found to extend from the
pavement, upwards to the floor of the King’s
chamber ; or the chamber where the employment of
a standard of 50 inches in length, was a distinguish-
ing feature : and equally, a final number of twenty-
five courses will be found to extend from the pave-
ment to the floor of the Queen’s chamber, where
the employment of a standard of 25 inches in length,
was a similarly important characteristic of its sym-
bolization. But no reason has yet been found for
the number of courses in the whole Pyramid, and no
scientific use for the third, or subterranean chamber
of the Pyramid. Yet, if the King’s may be called
the chamber of the standard of 50 ; and the Queen’s,


208 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. [DIV. II.


the chamber of the standard of 25,—there seems
reason to term the subterranean, the chamber of
angular measure.

The chief actual, visible, and generally acknow-
ledged angularly placed line in the whole Pyramid, is
the entrance passage ; and the chief virtual line which
must necessarily be referred to, as the zero for that
species of measure, is the central vertical axis of the
whole building,—and this axis, if produced down-
wards, will meet the entrance passage close to, if not
actually within, the subterranean chamber. The
entrance passage is indeed actually in a different ver-
tical and meridian plane from the central axis, and
would therefore pass by it altogether, without con-
tact,—but for the former’s expansion, at its lower
end, into the subterranean chamber ; on the floor of
which Colonel Howard Vyse and Mr. Perring have
accordingly marked the place of the central vertical
axis of the Pyramid produced. (See Plate 1v.) The
question, therefore, now is,—standing at that point
of the floor of the subterranean chamber,—what is
the angular subtense therefrom, of the whole side of
the Pyramid, in degrees of the Pyramid, or 250° to
the quadrant ?

This question is fortunately very simple to com-
pute; for in the triangle aBc (Plate Iv.), cB, the
length of the slant side of the Pyramid, or 7400
British inches, is computed from the elements of the
vertical height, angle at summit, and _base-side
length already given, in Division 1.


2 eee to Fast, ,& ar sar = x
1 : aif 1
- fig i.


f
iS i YY
\)\ \ . a. beclion/ Y
; | { ee: : iaerranca —_ -
¢ sy /
b ip i hy bey
AY NEE,
oe ; /
of Pyr ;
i a N Yi
E / /
| A A


MMMM im


ce =
oe


= ee
vy za pote 4
tT R
j (| /; ]/ 3

y


Ces


ery eae


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


UY, lkeal & ne - Fa y
eeetat ee i | ed /; co
: gh Ave
Th i :
an
y


= Gi
rs a. Rs aie ! a
@ oo a


mS
Jie
}
ti Us


SECT. IV.] STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 209


cA, or 7023 British inches, is the sum of the
vertical height 5820 inches, and the depression of
the floor of the subterranean chamber below the
Pyramid pavement, or 1203 inches, as determined
on page 74.

And the angle at co, = 38° 8’ 46’, or half the
angle at the summit of the Pyramid, likewise
already given in Division 1.

With these elements, then, the angle at A, or the
intersection-point on the floor of the subterranean
chamber, may be computed, and found = 75° 15’ 1°
of ordinary, z.e., Greek-Alexandrine degrees ;—and
these, reduced to Pyramid degrees, are= 209°03°.

If we now therefore turn to page 62, for the num-
ber of masonry courses in the whole Pyramid, they
will be found to be stated, subject to a small resi-
dual uncertainty, as 210 + 2 or 3: including, in
fact, the very number computed; and forming as
good a numerical proof of the quadrant having been
entended to be divided into 250 degrees, as had
been before deduced for the cubit being divided into
25 smaller portions, which we call inches.


Itinerary Measures.


Rather an antiquated, and now practically ex-
ploded form of linear measures would it be, to have
one standard on which to measure the length of a
day’s journey, and another to ascertain the length
and breadth of a field. But we use the term here,
to designate a particular class of linear measures

VOL. IIL. )


210 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. (Div. 1.


which are bound up with angle, and rendered com-
pulsory on all those who journey by sea; viz.,
‘nautical miles,’ as distinguished from ‘ statute
‘ miles.’

The latter, of course, every one knows as arising
from the mere multiplication—according to Act of
Parliament—of smaller measures of length ; and con-
sisting, at the present moment, in Great Britain, by
name either of 1760 yards, or 5280 feet, or 63,360
inches. But the former, or nautical miles, are
nearly confined to navigators and geographers ; and
depend on the system in vogue of angle-mensura-
tion, combined with the size and figure of the earth.
Omitting at present the small variations due to the
spheroidal figure of the world, the nautical mile is
the length of 1’ of are (or the 1-60th of a degree, of
which degrees 360 go to the circumference of a
circle), on the surface of the earth near the sea-level ;
and is valued by most authorities as near 72,984
inches.

Hence we see at once that the approximation—
between the lengths of a nautical, and a statute, mile
—is something very distant; and though tolerated
hitherto, is productive of continual confusion in
many practical operations,—as in stating the speed
of ships; the registration of revolving anemometers ;


1 At the Pole, the value is 73,037 ; and at the Equator, 72,783.
‘As the lower latitudes are more frequented by shipping than the
‘ higher, 40° has been assumed as the average latitude. Also as the
‘ curvature of the earth is different on the prime vertical and on the
‘meridian, the circle of curvature, crossing the meridian at 45° of
‘ azimuth, has been employed.’—Raper’s Navigation.


SECT. IV.] STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 211


and many other subjects, where a difference of so
much as 1-7th of the unit can by no means be


~ permitted.


Now let us see how this matter would be regulated
in the Pyramid metrology.

1st, The Pyramid mile is in length (see p. 142),
equal to 62,500 Pyramid inches,

2d, The Pyramid knot being considered the
1-25th of a Pyramid degree, of which 250 go to the
quadrant, will be almost exactly,—and on a mean
between the Pole and Equator,—equal to 62,995
of the same inches.

Hence the difference between a nautical mile and
a statute mile would, on the Pyramid system, be
reduced from the present large amount in British
navigation, of 1-7th, to so low a fraction as 1-125th,
—a quantity that might be neglected in most practi-
cal operations, to the saving of much valuable time.


Compass Points.


Amongst other features of diversity which prevail
presently between those ‘who go down to the sea in
‘ships,’ and those who remain on dry land, is this
often most inconvenient one,—that the former em-
ploy 360° to the circle in all their astronomical
and more exact proceedings, but 32°, or ‘points,’ to
the circle when alluding to azimuthal direction ;
whereas the latter employ 360° for everything
angular. And yet, that there is no absolute necessity
for so striking an anomaly, occasional seamen of


212 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. [DIV. 11.


education sufficiently testify from time to time, by
taking the direction, where great accuracy is re-
quired, of either a ship’s course or the wind, in terms
of degrees of which 360 go to the circle. This
they do, when they once make up their minds to it,
with facility ; and are then able to reap advantage
immediately,—in the resulting computations which
may be required,—from all the numerous trigono-
metrical tables which are prepared and published
for degrees of the 360° order.

But the general sailor, having observed the same
natural things in terms of compass points, has either
to reduce his points, half-points, and quarter-points
to degrees proper,—an awkward proceeding, on ac-
count of the incommensurability of 11° 15’ or one
point, 5° 37’ 30" or’a half point, 2° 48” 45” or a
quarter of a point, and 1° 24’ 22°5” or 1-8th point,
to 360°,—or he must refer to a special set of tables
prepared for entry by points, half-points, quarter-
points, etc., which tables are comparatively rarely to
be met with, and are understood to be adapted only
to the rudest and clumsiest of work.

Seeing how stoutly the sailors have stood out for
ages against the recognised land method of dividing
a circle, there is no prospect of controlling them to
uniformity by Act of Parliament; and the only
chance of producing that desirable bond of union
amongst men, would seem to be, by offering them
something eminently recommendable in itself for
their own purposes.


SECT. IV.] STANDARDS OF ANGLE. 213


Now the conveniences which seamen find in their
method of points of 32 to the circle are chiefly, the
fewer numbers they have to deal with then, as com-
pared against degrees having 360 to the circle. But
the inconveniences are,—the difficulty of treating
arithmetically the barbarous fractions which arise,
when directions have to be defined with greater
accuracy than a whole point; without saying any-
thing further on the bad commensurability of all of
them, with angles reckoned in the usual manner.

Hence, if there is to be a practical method of
compass directions on the Pyramid system—it must
be, not by degrees, but by ‘ points’ containing many
degrees ; attending, however, rigidly to this, that
the Pyramid metrology can never admit of such an
anomaly as eight points to the quadrant. But there
may be ten ; and then each point will contain 25°, a
most proper content for any standard of the Pyramid.

On this principle, too, the eight chief cardinal points,
so-called, are retained, as N., N.E., E, S.E., 8.,'8.W., W.,
and N.w ; and the only variation is, whether between
these named points there shall be four divisions, as
at present, or five. Four may be the easiest in
some senses ; but five presents no difficulty, at the
same time that it is more expressive and exact.
A greater number than five could not be admitted,
because there would be an uncertainty in distin-
guishing at once by the eye which was which. Set
out, for instance, ten even divisions, and few persons
will be able to say instantly, on ocular inspection


214 STANDARDS OF ANGLE. [DIV. II.


only, which was the fourth, or fifth, or sixth; but
set out five similar divisions, and any one can say at
a glance which is the second, or third ; or first, or
fourth.

This is a peculiarity connected with the number
5, which we are told has been practically turned to
account by the musicians of all modern nations in
their choice of the number of lines wherein, or
whereon, to write the notes of music ; four would be
too few for their purpose, and six too many to dis-
tinguish by the eye in a moment ; but five serves
either purpose. The same feature of advantage is
further found when subdivisions have to be made
with the eye; so that if we have a scale divided
mechanically to tenths of inches, and require to
read off to hundredths,—1.e., to subdivide each tenth
into ten parts again,—a mistake of one of those tenths
may often be made by inexperienced persons mea-
suring in haste ; but if the same scale be divided
mechanically into half-tenths, so that the estimator
has only optically to divide each space into five
parts, there is hardly any possibility of erring then,
to the extent of any one of those parts.

Hence we may see, that there is really something
noteworthy in the Pyramid system, and increasing
its adaptability to all kinds of metrology, even in
this one feature of making so much as it does of
the number 5, as well as the number 10; and we
trust that sailors will take kindly to the fact. At
all events, in this manner they may have, if they


Vol. IIT. he


Compass-card, adwided to Pyramid’ Powts.


Pyramid Circle for Angular measure;
divided to every 5° f numbered to every 25° of 1000° to the Circle’,


W.H.MS Farlane, Lith? Edin®


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 215


choose, between the eight cardinal points, five
smaller points, each equal to a whole number of
Pyramid degrees taken in groups of 25. And
should they desire, as doubtless the best among
them will, to steer closer still than to a single point,
—if they will divide each of these Pyramid points
into five parts, these will still be equal to a whole
number of Pyramid degrees, or 5 degrees each ;
and will express very nearly as small a quantity in
nature, as the troublesome half of a quarter of a
point on their present system. While a further
division still by five, will bring them to Pyramid
degrees; and enable seamen then to speak in full
and sympathizing community of terms, with all who
make use of angular mensuration in its highest and
strictest form.

See Plate v., for these things graphically repre-
sented.


SECTION V.
STANDARDS OF TIME.


In Romé de l'Isle’s metrological tables, the de-
partment of tume-measures occupies a considerable
space,—illustrating thereby the widespread belief,
that time is one of the subjects to be treated of in
any complete metrology. Later still, in the same
country, not only did the arrangements for the new
French metrical system confirm the same fact, but


216 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II,


involuntarily indicated the further truth,—that there
are some features about tvme, which refuse to be
bound by any rules invented, or to be invented, by
man.

Thus, decimal division and multiplication were to
have been the rule of everything throughout the
metrical system; and therefore its authors, on
coming to ‘time,’ began upon the week as hitherto
kept in the world,—and changed its contents from
seven, to ten, days. The difficulty indeed there,
was spiritual rather than physical, yet cogent never-
theless ; and will be, so long as the greater part
of civilized nations believe, that the period of
seven days was appointed by Almighty God as a
rule to be perpetually observed by man. The
grounds for believing this, we may examine after-
wards ; at present we have only to deal with the
fact, that the French metrical system practically
ignored the belief, in their decades of days; and
then proceeded, or symmetrically should have done
so, to their next steps in time-mensuration, viz.,
the periods of 100 days and 1000 days.

But then it was, that they were met, and de-
eidedly overthrown, by nature ; which has caused
the year of the earth’s revolution round the sun, to
be so extraordinarily marked by changes and sea-
sons,—the study of, and compliance with, which
are absolutely necessary to man’s existence on
earth,—that the period during which these seasons
accomplish their cycle, is of infinitely more vital


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 217


importance to humankind, than all the niceties of
decimal arithmetic. The year is in truth one of the
units of nature, as is the day; each and both of
which must be observed by man, if he would live ;
and the day, whether taken singly, or in tens (the
decadal weeks of the French metrical system), can-
not be made by any decimal arrangement to give
evenly the actual length of the year, which all our
readers well know consists of 365 days, and very
nearly a quarter of a day.

The year, then, in spite of attempts at alteration,
is still the same in France as it used anciently to be,
before the metrical system was ever thought about ;
and so is the week too; for the metrical reformers
found it in the end, as practically impossible to im-
pose a decimal arrangement there, against the moral
and religious prepossessions of mankind in favour of
seven, as to fight against the physical arrangement of
365°242 days in the solar tropical year. As so signal
a failure, then, of their attempts has been the result,
pity ‘tis they ever tried the proposed alteration ;
but they were driven on probably by the popular
enthusiasm of the moment for decimalizing every-
thing,— without waiting to consider whether every-
thing can, or ought to be, decimalized. Now this
piece of common information, so useful for the
framers, as well as the subsequent employers of
metrological arrangements, but which the Parisians
were void of in the last century,—was furnished
ages before in a most conspicuous manner at the


218 STANDARDS OF TIME. [D1V. IT.


Great Pyramid : for the first feature held up by the
general form of the whole building, is, the incom-
mensurable relation evenly,—as we have already had
occasion to mention,—of the radius to the circumfer-
ence of a circle (see vol. iii. p. 20); a proportion
indeed which no man through all time coming, will
ever be able to divide evenly, upon either a decimal,
or duodecimal, arithmetical system.

Again the incommensurability evenly of the day
and the year is exhibited practically in the same
ancient structure, by the expression of the number
of whole days and the portion of a day, constituting
a year, in terms of the sacred cubit, in the length
of one side of the base of the Great Pyramid ; which
combination too, of time distinctions with linear
standards, seems to furnish further proof positive,
that tume-mensuration was to be treated of in the
Great Pyramid, as well as other more usual topics
of ‘ weights and measures.’

A still further warning seems to have been
given to the effect,—that the seven days compos-
ing a week, formed an essential interior institution ;
though how this was to be represented with clear-
ness and certainty in a Pyramid where the arrange-
ments, proportions, and parts generally go by fives,
may not appear immediately on the surface ; and in
fact, presented itself to me only recently, when con-
sidering the measures contained in Volume ii.


iat


e


.


Vol. IM. Div. Il.


Norther
foot’ af G
Lyrami


ae


iw CGnter of Base of Great Pyramid.


right-hand
of Plate 2,
same letters
the conciden
weal lines, d
Consarucion
Great Pyra

Pla


1040 500 0 1000 2000 3000
CORRES TE PA a a a
. Scale of British Inches.


foot’ af Great > ete SS oy,
Pyramid. on Grts Se STFA A


Entargement of the lower ‘
right-hand portion’ of diagram 3
of Plate 2, Vol. HI, Preserving the
same letters of refirence, and showing
the coincidence of symbolical astronom -
ical lines, dotted, with’ the lines of
constructiow of the passages, of the’
Great Pyramid, taken’ trom/

Plate 3, Vol. I.


2000 3000 4000 5000 6000


Scate of British Inches.


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


Vol. IM. Div. Il. PL. 6.


ta
ec


toot af Great
Pyramid.


Ae
goto?
wee

oor


4 Center of Base of Great Pyramid.


Enlargement of the low er ‘
right-hand portion of diagram be ae
of Plate 2, Vol. H1, Preserving the’
same letters of refirence, and showing
the coincidence of symbolical astronom -
ical lines, dotted, with’ the lines of
construction of the Passages, of the
Great Pyramid, taken’ trom/

Plate 3, Vol J.


1040 500 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
} Scale of British Inches.


eee


a a a


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 219


The Week in the Grand Gallery.

Of all the internal architecture of the Great Pyra-
mid, the Grand Gallery is the most unique, ano-
malous, colossal, and hitherto entirely unexplained.
Why, for instance, was it made so enormously high,
when the passages both before and behind it are so
distressingly small ; these so low that no man can
move through them without stooping painfully,
the other so high that a visitor's torch can hardly
show him the roof; and all this in a building where
our careful inspection of the joints, sizes, qualities,
and fittings of the stones convinced us, that every-
thing had been well considered, and thoroughly
calculated beforehand, with a view to the maximum
of economy, combined with efficiency, for some
worthy purposes intended.

A further development on Plate v1., of the geo-
metrical theory of the Pyramid (illustrated in small
upon Plate 1), showing that the direction of the
celestial equator enters the north end of the Grand
Gallery, from an astronomical intersection on the
base of the Pyramid,—had led me, in 1864,’ to look
on the Grand Gallery as connected with time ; and
then, the seven architectural overlappings which
every one has remarked in the side walls, suggested
a possible connexion with the week of seven days ;
this idea being further strengthened,—on believing
that the vertical height of the Grand Gallery, an


expression for which was also obtained from the
1 See Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid. Part rv.


220 STANDARDS OF TIME. [ DIV. Il.


same geometrical and astronomical diagram,—must
be seven times that of one of the ordinary small
passages, which might be considered to represent
unit days.

To such an idea, then, what answer is returned
from our measures last year ?

First, That the vertical heights of the small pas-
sages are by no means uniform ; that of the inclined
passage entering the Grand Gallery from the north,
being 53°0 British inches; and that of the hori-
zontal passage leaving it at the opposite, or south,
end, being only 43°7 British inches. Such an amount
of difference would be fatal to the two lengths mean-
ing the same thing in linear measure ; but then it is
not linear measure for its own sake, which is now
being sought; for that having been settled and
proved with all exactness in the base of the Pyra-
mid, does not need being proved anew ; and, indeed,
there are indications in other places besides this,—
as in the mutual incommensurability of the lines
employed for the shape of the coffer,—that men
were purposely by such differences deterred from
seeking linear standards inside the Pyramid, or any-
where else than the one true place for them, viz., the
sides of the base of the entire Pyramid.

But in our late discussions about the coffer, we
neglected its figure, as an ultimate object,—because,
mere figure is of no essential importance for the
purpose of capacity measure; and we considered
only the cubical contents. In the Grand Gallery,


SECT. V. | STANDARDS OF TIME. 221


therefore, we must on the same principle similarly
neglect the differences between the passages of
entrance and exit from its either end, and consider
only their mean value, which is 48°4 inches; and
then ascertain how many times that goes into the
height of the giant hall.

The height and length of this important feature
of the Pyramid’s interior, have been thus variously
given by diverse authorities :—


Height, supposed | Length, supposed
always to be vertical,| to be always along
Authority. Date. of Grand Gallery, | the incline, of Grand


from inclined floor | Gallery, from north
to roof. wall to south wall.
A.D. British inches. British inches.

Greaves, ; : . | 1689 312 1848

De Monconys, , . | 1647 at 1947 -
Thevenot, . : . | 1655 RS 1944
Maillet, : 4 werk OO 300 1488
Egmont, ; : - | 1709 270 1632
Shaw, . ; ‘ A yea 270 1632

Dr. Perry, . ! . | 1743 288 1800
Fourmont, . : . | 1755 ee 1848

De Binos, ; : Pe baa Le fp 288 1632
Coutelle, ‘ : . | 1800 320 1595
Jomard, : , . | 1800 Ss} 1461
Richardson, . . cttel Sly 312 1440

M. Caviglia, . , vy eae 360 1824
William Turner,! . . | 1820 | ‘about’ 600 ‘about’ 4200
Howard Vyse, ‘ . | 1839 336 1872

E. W. Lane, . : - | 1840? +e 1896

C. Piazzi Smyth, . . | 1865 339°5 1883


Out of these various heights, it is to be hoped I
may be excused for preferring my own, seeing that
the practical measure is a very difficult one to make
at the place, without some special apparatus being


1 Journal of a Tour in the Levant. London, John Murray, 1820.


222 STANDARDS OF TIME. [D1V. II.


provided ; and which apparatus is not mentioned
as having been possessed by any of the former ob-
servers. My own result, too, being the mean of a
large number of measures (see vol. ii. p. 86) taken
at various parts of the length of the Gallery, can
claim to represent the mean height of the whole
Gallery ; and, with its assistance, we find 48°4 going
into 339°5, 7°014 times; or certainly sufficiently
close to seven times even, to enable any one to dis-
tinguish that it is 7, rather than 6, 8, 9, or 10,
which is intended.


The Sabbatical Week in the Queen’s Chamber.


A division by 7, suddenly occurring in a Pyramid
generally devoted to tens and fives, requires
emphasis to assure one, after thousands of years
have passed away, that it was no mistake or accident
of the builders, but an intended purpose of their
system. Accordingly, we have already seen the
local division of 7 repeated twice in the Grand
Gallery, and shall find it yet twice again before
leaving the neighbourhood.

From the lower northern entrance point of the
Grand Gallery, there radiates off, pursuing a nearly
horizontal direction thenceforward to the south, a
passage, known as the horizontal passage, leading to
the Queen’s chamber. Source of unnumbered. per-
plexities has been this passage to Pyramid mea-
surers ; for some begin to measure its length at once
from the north wall of the Grand Gallery ; some


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 223


from the beginning of its own horizontal floor,
twenty-two inches south of that; and others again
from the point of its passing under the floor of the
Grand Gallery, nearly 200 inches from the first
starting-point. This latter idea, however, seems just
as unsupported by the whole facts concerned, as that
of other men beginning to measure the length of
the Grand Gallery from the same point,—merely
because it is a signal beginning, yet not the first, of
its inclined floor-plane.

Now the manner in which the Grand Gallery floor
seems to terminate at some distance from its northern
end, is undoubtedly very striking in an architectural
point of view (see Plate vi. vol. i, and Plate x.
vol. i.) ; and as it connects itself with the roof of
the horizontal passage passing under it,—deserves
some attention in this inquiry; especially on con-
sidering, that that roof is the only fully finished part
of the horizontal passage, whose floor is indeed so
entirely unfinished as to be no floor at all, in
a Pyramid sense of masonry. While further
symptoms obtrude themselves on the eye, to the
effect—that all this northern end of the horizontal
passage was once intended to be built up and con-
cealed, beneath an apparent continuous inclined
floor of the Grand Gallery ; which would then have
extended from its northern wall the whole way up
to the grand step in front of the southern wall.
Nevertheless, attending for the time, only to the
forms and finish actually before us,—breakages ex-


224 STANDARDS OF TIME. [ DIV. 1.


cluded,—the distance from the north wall to the
mean of the two cuts-off, by whose united effects
the great triangle, viewed in section of the Grand
Gallery floor, is terminated northward, has been
found equal to 217°8 inches (vol. il. p. 58.)

Taking this, then, as a pointed or pricked-off
part of the length of the horizontal passage,—how
many times does it go into the entirelength? That
quantity being by our measurements 1519°4 inches,
the answer is 6°98; or practically 7 times, and cer-
tainly not 6 or 8, or any other simple number.

This, however, is not all which the passage has to
indicate ; for at its farther or southern end is a
portion having a suddenly increased depth or height,
——after a proportion of 68 to 46 nearly,—and in
length equal to 216°1 inches. A simple matter, yet
stumbled at grievously by modern authors ; for the
great French work in its fine engravings ignores
this deep step altogether ; and Chevalier Bunsen, in
his Plate x1. vol. i. of Hgypt’s Place in Universal
Mistory, turns it, the step, the wrong way, or makes
that part of the passage of decreased height. But
Colonel Howard Vyse’s measures agree entirely
with ours, and enable the statement to be put forth
confidently,—that the southernmost part of this
passage is the largest and noblest in its proportions of
height ; while in length, it is practically again 1-7th
of the whole passage, or, more accurately, 1-7:03.

Now here is the first possible indication of a very
different thing from a mere division by 7 ; for many


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 225


early nations are said to have counted by sevens,
and by weeks of seven days, too ; the practice being
attributed to them by modern savants, on account of
the facility of the days of the year being almost en-
tirely disposed of without large remainder for inter-
calation, by fifty-two weeks of seven days each ;
and similarly the days of the month, by four weeks
of the same length. But the Egyptians of the
Pyramid and earlier days did not. even make this
use of 7, preferring to divide their lunar month of
29°53 days, into three portions of ten days each, or to
use a decadal week ; and the year into three seasons,
the inundation, the growing, and the harvest ; much
less, then, did the Egyptians attend to, or respect,
a period of seven days ending with a sabbath, 7.e., one
day of a more important character following six ordi-
nary ones. In fact, such approved books of reference
as Kitto’s Cyclopedia of Biblical Interature and
Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible, together with all
their authors quoted from, profess entire ignorance
of either the Egyptians or any other early heathen
nation having been acquainted with the week as we
now understand it from the Hebrews,—viz., again,
seven days ending with a sabbath day ; though com-
munities in different parts of the world had simple
weeks of a variety of days—five, seven, nine, and ten.

Agreeing, then, with these authors in the mere
fact that a week of seven days ending with ‘a sab-
bath is a far more rare, peculiar, and advanced in:
stitution than one of ‘seven days merely,—but

VOL. IIL. P


226 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. It.


acknowledging the Pyramid principles which we
have submitted to elsewhere ; or that nothing im-
portant can be considered intended to be proved,
unless in the finest and truest of workmanship,—we
must leave this entrance passage, though it does bear
some constructive resemblance to the definition of
the Hebrew week, and enter the chamber it leads to,
viz., the Queen’s chamber, so called.

Why so called, it is difficult to say with any good
reason conformable to tradition or discovery ; for if
kings were reported to be buried inside great
Pyramids, queens were said to be buried in small
Pyramids outside ; and here, in this chamber, not the
smallest line or scratch of a hieroglyphic, such as
tombs proper to Egypt abound in, or any remnant of
the ordinary sepulchral preparations, has been found
in modern and provable times. One of the early
Arabian historians, indeed, Aboo Djafar Mohammed
Edrisi, who flourished about seven hundred years
ago (see Howard Vyse’s Pyramids, vol. ii. p. 335),
speaks of this chamber as ‘a square room, wherein
‘ was an empty vessel, and on the roof of the room
‘ are writings in the most ancient characters of the
‘heathen priests. He afterwards visits the King’s
chamber, and describes that as ‘a square room also ; —
‘and with an empty vessel similar to the former.’

All this description, is evidently inapplicable to
the Queen’s and King’s chambers as we know them
now; but how much we may retain as true, is not
easy to say, on the historian’s own merits. |


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 22:7


Mr. Perring, again, whose ideas as an engineer
and architect, and while still working under Colonel
Howard Vyse, were sound—considered that this cham-
ber was merely a hollow space for storing, during
the building of the Pyramid, the huge blocks of stone
with which the first ascending passage was after-
wards completely filled up, solid, from the inside ;
the men escaping by the well, in the manner he has
indicated. And Mr. Perring having had the blasting
and clearing out of some of these strange fillings of
the passages in other Pyramids,—where he was the
first man, sinee the original builders, to make an
entry,—we bow so far to his authority; at once
confessing the probability, both that the first ascend-
ing passage of entrance in the Great Pyramid was
so rammed ; and that the blocks wherewith it was
rammed full—when everything else in the structure
was complete,-—may have been kept waiting the
occasion in the Queen’s chamber.

The Queen’s chamber, then, in actual fact and
utilitarian reality, served, or may have served once,
as a store-room for stone blocks ; but was that all
the purpose the builders had in view when con-
structing it? Few parts of the Pyramid have ful-
filled one purpose alone; and not only have we
seen already, in the azimuth trenches, that both
mortar-mixing during the building, and mummy-
burying afterwards, had followed the institution of
a peculiar angular arrangement,—explainable only .
on the hypothesis of its having served an important


228 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. Il.


feature in the theory of the building. But the
most casual observer who looks to anything at all,
in this Queen’s chamber room (and many hasten
away quickly on account of the close smell and un-
ventilated air), must be enraptured with the original
whiteness of the stone, and microscopic fineness of
the workmanship on the blocks lining or forming
both walls and roof; for some parts of them, cer-
tainly several of the joints in the west wall, are the
closest and most accurate in the whole Pyramid.

That being the recorded and positive case, then,
every maxim of the building we have learned yet,
points to something else of a nobler order having
been once intended for the chamber, than mere
storage of stones. Let us look at it therefore, first,
in a merely mechanical point of view. The floor is
nearly square, 2¢. 205 by 226 inches, or vastly
nearer such a form than is any other room in the
Pyramid; besides which, this chamber includes
between these approximating lengths that special
length we were just discussing, of the higher and
nobler terminating seventh portion of its own enter-
ing passage, viz., 216 inches.

We may next remark that the room is seven-
sided ; not walled, but sided like a crystal or a
geometrical figure ; for it has a floor, four walls, and
two ceilings, on account of the covering above being
angular, or in two halves, each inclined about 31° to
the horizon. But what are the proportions of these
seven sides as to area ? for unless something similar


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 229


comes out in that way, we could not think of them as
units of the same order. The following is what ap-
pears on merely taking the rude lengths, breadths,
and heights as given by present measure (see vol.
li. p. 66) :—


Square inches.


North wall, ’ ; , 226 x 183 = 41,358
South wall, é : , 226 x 183 = 41,358
East wall, : : ' 205 x 214 = 43,870
West wall, ? . ; 205 x 214 = 43,870
North roof, : : : 226 x 119 = 26,894
South roof, ; , ; 226 x 119 = 26,894
Floor, ; : ; ; 205 x 226 = 46,330


No very distinct story of anything is told. by
these numbers ; and we are driven thereby to con-
sider, whether the existing measures represent the
ancient room ; for unless they do,.of what service
can they be in such an inquiry ? No sooner, too,
do we look at it with this view, than the question
comes up,—What method are we to pursue with the
floor, or about the floor ? for flooring proper, as suit-
able to a Pyramid chamber, or even passage, this
chamber is not in possession of.


Correction for Flooring.


As already mentioned in vol. ii. p. 62, the floor
lining blocks of this room, if ever put in, are now
decidedly taken out and gone ; wherefore we must
replace them by computation, if we would hope to
come at the original proportions of the chamber.
But of what thickness shall these imagined floor
blocks be? The evident answer is,—‘ See if there


230 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


‘are any markings on the walls showing how high the
‘flooring once stood.’ On examining the lower part
of the walls accordingly, nothing was found ; and
we had to follow the walls upwards from their very
bottom, to the level of the first overlappings of the
niche in the eastern wall, and to the top of the
northern doorway,—before any horizontal cuttings
were met with.

But these three necessary cuts and shapings are
all on one level ; and therefore, though a floor line at
their height presents the incongruousness of sealing
up the entrance to the chamber,—yet seeing that it
is a symbolic chamber, and was to have been sealed
up again, and at that same precise height, by the
completion of the Grand Gallery floor at the north
end of its entering passage,—this virtual closing up
of the entrance may be allowed as a trial hypothesis
in our present research ; and a symbolical flooring
may be imagined at the marked height alluded to,
or sixty-seven inches above the actual rude founda-
tion blocks. Subtracting, then, this quantity from
the height of each of the walls, we have the
corrected area of the sides of the room, as


Square inches,


North wall, ; ‘ 226 x 116 = 26,216
South wall, 4 ; 226 x 116 = 26,216
East wall, . ; 5 Fi 205 x 147 = 30,135
West wall, : ; : 205 x 147 = 30,135
North roof, ; i ; 226 x 119 = 26,894
South roof, : . A 226 x 119 = 26,894
Floor, : : ‘ j 20D) ite 2262 =


46,330


Something more is beginning now to appear, but


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 231


not very clearly as yet; wherefore returning to an
examination of the room, and wishing our measures
had been more exact than they were, when they
necessarily had the uneven floor stones as their
base plane,—we are reminded of the presence of
the colossal niche in the eastern wall. (See Plates
vi. and vit. vol. ii.) That niche, we had left out of
the calculation at first, as being a subsidiary feature
of the apartment, and rather difficult to deal with.
What was it intended for, for instance? There is
nothing like it through all the rest of the Pyramid.
‘I excavated in vain below it, in quest of a sepul-
‘chral pit,’ wrote Sir Gardner Wilkinson years ago ;
and years further off still, other men had burrowed
a distance of 50 feet eastward into the masonry at
the back of the niche, searching for treasure, or a
pathway to the Sphinx, and found neither.

- Our only safeguard here, from numerous unfor-
tunate errors, would seem to be—mechanical appre- _
ciation of facts and forms; in which sense, the


niche is evidently an addition to the bulk of the


cubical contents of the room ; and the easiest way
to allow for it would be,---to suppose the east wall of
the chamber, simply as a plane, pushed outwards to
such a distance farther eastward, as to produce
thereby the same increase of cubical space as that
given by the niche. Now the niche recedes over
its chief extent, about 41 inches ; but is nearer 140
inches in some of its middle and lower parts ; though
how much exactly, we cannot say, on account of


232 STANDARDS OF TIME. [ DIV. II.


modern dilapidation. Let us try, however, 25
inches, in the calculation of the wall; and then we
have,—


Square inches.
North wall, : : ; 251 x 116 = 29,116
South wall, : ; d 257% DbIG-—_ 29116
East wall, é 3 ; 205 x 147 = 30,135
West wall, r é : 205 x’ 147 = 30,135
North roof, : : ’ 251 x 119 =) 29,869
South roof, ; , , 251 .x 119 = 29,869
Floor, " : t : 205 x 251 = 51,455


or, expressed in terms of ten thousand inches, six of
the sides of this fair and white-walled chamber re-
present three each, and the seventh represents five ;
the latter an important number in its place as a
Pyramid number, as well as of more actual weight
than the others. So that we seem to have now the
original secret of this room before us, in the same
elemental manner as we had that of the azimuth
trenches, on measuring their axial angles; and find
it to be no other than the culmination of the various
symbols of a week, which we have been touching on
indistinctly elsewhere, but now have come to posi-
tively, and are absolutely shut up with, finding it
to be a week like the Hebrew week, consisting of six
ordinary days, terminated by, or founded on, one
larger, nobler, and, in the Pyramidal terms in which
they are measured, more glorious than the rest,


Authority for Twenty-five Inches.


But all the approximate accuracy of this result, as
3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, and 5, in terms of even numbers


~~


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 233


of 10,000 square inches,—depends on having em-
ployed a length of 25 inches on the surface of the
whole east wall, to represent the cubical contents
given by the greater depth, but smaller surface, of
the eastern niche ; and though some correction of
the sort was evidently required by the presence of
the niche, there has been no structural indication as
yet recognised inthe room, distinctly counselling
that one, rather than any other, number of inches
to be used.

Under these circumstances of mental dissatisfac-
tion, the idea spontaneously arose, and only recently,
in my mind,—to test by measure this chamber’s
second and next most striking anomaly to the exist-
ence of the niche itself; and one equally unex-
plained by all hierologists and Egyptologists who
have ever written on the Great Pyramid. This
second anomaly is, that so grand and admirably
wrought an architectural feature as the niche,
should not have been placed in the middle of its
containing wall! (See Plates vi. and viii. vol. ii.)

The wall being pointed towards the top, shows
clearly enough where its central vertical axis lies ;
and then one sees, as a most painfully evident want
of ordinary architectural symmetry, that the niche is
on one side, or to the south of such a line. Not so
far as to belong altogether to the southern half of
the chamber, for a plumb-line from the central top of
the wall would strike within the lower and broader
part of the niche ; but still, grossly far to the south


234 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


of the similar feature of the room. So far, that no
modern—with eyes set square in his head—can fail
to perceive it as a most notable fact ; and so far also,
that no ancient Pyramid builders could have com-
mitted a fault to so huge an extent; or have know-
ingly introduced such a feature, without careful
calculation beforehand, of the sizes and shapes of
the fine-qualitied, well-worked stones required to
give it a form and local habitation. How far, then,
is the vertical axis of the niche horizontally from
the vertical axis of its containing wall ?

- Here, I have to regret exceedingly, that no idea
of the amazing importance of the Queen’s chamber
occurred to me, when there; and that I merely
measured general features, standing on the rough,
uneven floor-stones, and not knowing particularly
what most required measure. But I fortunately
took, pretty accurately, the breadth of the base of
the niche, and the distance of its either side from
the terminating lines north and south, of the east
wall ; and computing recently from these, the dis-
tance of the central axis of the niche, from the central
vertical line of the east wall,—what was my surprise,
to find it practically 25 inches; or, as the numbers
came out, 25°3 inches ; and again, to find that the
breadth of the head of the niche was likewise 25,
or 25°3 inches."


1 The only test for these last numbers, rather inferred than very
closely measured (as I could not, when standing, reach to the higher
part of the niche), are,—so far as I know,—Mr. Perring’s drawings in
Colonel Howard Vyse’s folio publication on the ‘ Pyramids of Jeezeh ;’


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 235


‘Why, here at last we have come upon the sacred
‘ cubit of the Israelites !’ was the very natural excla-
mation to make; ‘and how, or in what position,
‘have we found it? In the act of serving as the
‘signal under which has been commemorated the
‘sabbatical week ; that week which may have been
‘a primeval Divine command to all men, in terms
‘of the 2d chapter of Genesis; but which had been
‘since so generally forgotten by them all, that we
‘may now for the moment distinguish it by the pro-
‘ portions of its parts, but without reference to date,
‘as the week of the Hebrews and Mount Sinai. We
‘have this communication, too, in a. chamber of the
‘ whitest stone of the Pyramid, and one wherein,
‘both by its want of ventilation, and the prepara-
‘tion for filling up the entrance passage to its roof,
‘man was evidently not intended to dwell much.
‘ Certainly, he was not to interfere there as a master,
‘or presume to alter any of the symbols of days ex-


and they give, with some evident errors of drawing, for the breadth
of the niche at the top, 23°5 ; for the distance of its central axis from
central vertical line of room, = 26°0 inches; and for distance of same
from plumb-line hanging from top of angle of wall (not quite the same
as the half distance between the two side walls), = 24:0 inches. But
it is a greater strain than any drawing on such a small scale ought to
be exposed to.

With regard to the excess of 0'3-inch on my own measures, it is not
more than error of observation with error of appreciating dilapidation-
effects, under the circumstances, would render very probable.
Chevalier Bunsen, too, has remarked, in vol. ii. p. 31 of his Egypt, and
with reference to a determination of other cubits, ‘ A difference of three
‘lines (old French measure) is certainly no reason for doubting the
‘ original identity of two measures which has been established by in-
“dependent systems, and with different materials for making the
* calculation.’


236 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


‘ pressed by its walls, and indicated by the standard
‘above them, as derived from a source higher than
‘man. The only source, too, which could in primeval
‘ days, have furnished, for the sacred cubit, the un-
_©approachably perfect terrestrial reference which it
“has ; viz., the one-ten-millionth of the earth’s semi-
‘axis of rotation.’


Authority for the Number Twenty-five.


But we must still delay all quwasi-religious or
psychical discussions, and attend merely to mechani-
cal, or rather to masonic features, used in the archi-
tectural, not mystical, sense. And then, there is the
further fact of construction to be found,—that the
Queen’s chamber,—or, as it might more appropriately
be termed, the chamber of seven, or again, the cham-
ber of the standard of 25,—has another reference
still to a standard of 25 inches ; a standard, indeed,
as eminently and intimately connected with this
chamber’s main symbolization, as the standard of
50 inches has already been shown to be with regard
to the King’s chamber, and its scientific interpreta-
tion.

‘Standards of length, equal to 25 and 50 inches,
‘but not necessarily expressed in inches, might
any one unacquainted with the Great Pyramid cor-
rectingly remark. To which, however, the Great
Pyramid itself answers, ‘Nay ; but the actual number
‘ of the units, of the same length very nearly indeed,
‘ as inches, call them by what name you may, must be


a


a


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 237


‘respectively 25 and 50 ; for the latter number was
‘ shown (p. 172), to enumerate correctly the courses
‘of masonry reaching up to the floor of the King’s
‘ chamber, from the Pyramid’s base ; and now it will
‘be proved, that the number of courses reaching
‘from the same plane to the floor of the Queen’s
‘ chamber, is apparently 25.

As no such connexion has been detected, or even
imagined, hitherto by any known author, and the
data are still very scanty,—we will try to lay them
in all their scantiness and weakness before the
reader, that he may not be misled by mere assertion.

First of all, then, for the height of the upper
surface of the twenty-fifth course of masonry of the
Great Pyramid above the pavement,—we have the
following authorities from our vol. ii. sect. 1. and v.:—


British inches.


MM. Jomard and Cecile, in 1800 a.D., . = » 859
MM. Le Pere and Coutelle, ,, 1801 ,, =" "877
C. Piazzi Smyth, », 1865 ,, = 869
Messrs. Aiton and Inglis, ,, 1865 ,, = 858

Mean height of twenty-fifth course, . = 866


Colonel Howard Vyse and Mr. Perring do not
seem to have made these necessary measures of
every building-course of stones in the Pyramid,
imagining probably, and with most persons, that
there was nothing, in their dimensions, accurate or
intended beforehand ; but they fortunately did their
best to measure the next element which we require,
or the height of the floor of Queen’s: chamber above


1 See Vyse’s Pyramids of Gizeh, vol. ii. p. 110.


238 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


the Pyramid’s base. There, other authorities are
more rare; neither is it easy to perceive how to
proceed, with what those few have given us. For, to
what part of the Queen’s chamber ought we, in due
architectural propriety, to make the hypsometric
reference? Not to the present floor, which has been
already shown to be a mere excavated hole, or un-
finished pit; and not to the roof of the apartment,
because that was not the portion of the King’s
chamber to which we referred, when investigating
there for a similar commensurability with another
masonry course. But we referred, then, to that
room’s coffer-bearing floor, which is very notably
42 inches below the ceiling of its entrance passage.
And as the ceiling of the entrance passage to the
Queen’s chamber is likewise an accurately formed
feature,—we take 42 inches below that, and then
find the horizontal plane there, to be vertically
above the Pyramid pavement, according to


British inches.


Howard Vyse and Perring, . : i . = 833
And Aiton and Inglis, . : 3 : ¢. ee Oe
Mean, 864.


or much closer to the height of the twenty-fifth
course, than any one could have expected from the
roughness of the measures employed ; and showing
too, without the smallest doubt, that that course
is contained within the uncertainties of the floor as
dependent on modern measure to prove either its
present existence, or ancient structural intention.


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 239


Now, this is in itself a very noteworthy circum-
stance connected with the question of ‘design ;’ for
whereas the Pyramid courses, on the whole, decrease
in thickness as they ascend (from 58 to 26 inches,
says Colonel Howard Vyse approximately), and the
King’s chamber floor is as much vertically above the
Queen’s chamber floor, as this is above the Pyramid
base, according to the same authority,—evidently
that coincidence of both the fiftieth and the twenty-
fifth courses with these chambers respectively, could
not have taken place if such decrease of course-thick-
ness had been perfectly regular. For in that case,
if 50 had reached the King’s floor, less than 25
would have reached the Queen’s, or if 25 had touched
the Queen’s, a greater number than 50 would have
~ been required to attain the King’s floor.

But here we may see the effect of that remark-
able increase in the thicknesses of the courses, which
takes place between the 25th and 50th, as well as
the over-rapid rate of diminution from the founda-
tion courses upwards until the above correction is
interposed ; and which correction any good photo-
graph of the Pyramid will show. Show it, too, not
beginning or terminating with either of these
courses, for that might have revealed the secret too
easily ; but occurring sufficiently within their limits,
to prevent more than 50 being required to step up
to the chamber of the standard of 50 inches,—after
25 had successfully marked a similarly placed
floor in the chamber of the standard of 25 inches.


240 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


Hence the proportions and arrangements of parts
we have been enabled to describe in the Queen’s
chamber,—not only indicating a week like the week
of the Hebrews, of six ordinary days and a sabbath
day,—but connecting it with the sacred standard of
length of the Hebrews, or 25 inches; or again, the
one-ten-millionth of the earth’s semi-axis of rotation,
—are also connected with the finest and_ best,
largest and most pervading structural features of
the whole Pyramid ; so that they could have been
introduced at no other period than that of the very
building of the entire monument, and by no other
man than the original architect himself.

If, therefore, for the further elucidation of the
general question of the sabbatical week,—of such
infinite importance to mankind,—we should desire
to find the date of its symbolization in this remark-
able chamber of the Pyramid,—we are thrown back
on the larger, and more general, question of, ‘ What
‘is the date of the building of the Great Pyramid
‘itself?’ And here the authorities to be consulted
are numerous.


DATE OF THE GREAT PYRAMID.

Without at this point going very particularly into
minutize or reasons, there is no difficulty in gathering
that the general progress of literary inquiry during
the last fifty years has been to increase the received
antiquity of the Great Pyramid.’ Thus, in and


1 One exception, indeed, does exist in the Historical Survey of the


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 241


about A.D. 1817, the date of 1800 B.c. was frequently
quoted for the building of that Pyramid ; but in Sir
Gardner Wilkinson’s Ancient Egyptians, published
in A.D.-1837, the period is extended to between 2083
B.c. and 2123 B.c.; and in the same author's sub-
sequent Murray’s Handbook to Hgypt, in A.D. 1858,
the date is raised to 2400 B.C.

This increase is, however, only a moderate portion
of what had then grown with the times, and which
our truly sage British Eeyptologist resisted admit-
ting to its full extent ; notwithstanding, too, that the
researches of the most learned German philosophers,
with the indescribable prestige in this country in
favour of everything German, had been mainly in-
strumental in bringing about the new idea. Thus,
the renowned Chevalier Bunsen,—the authorized
English translation of whose great work on Egypt
began in 1848 and ended in 1860,—gives for the
date in question, and with the utmost confidence,
the year 3280 B.c.; while the equally learned, and


Astronomy of the Ancients, by the late Right Hon. Sir George Cornewall
Lewis in 1862, and a most melancholy affair it is; for, persisting in
looking at all things in the world merely through ancient Greek classical
authors, and employing himself in writing privately on astronomy, in-
stead of perfecting the establishment and developing the powers of a
Royal Astronomical Observatory placed officially under his charge, he
concludes that there are no authentic accounts of anything earlier
amongst men than the era of the Olympiads, or 772 B.¢. (p. 433) ; and
that ‘it is difficult to fix any event resting on a certain tradition which
‘can be carried up to so high adate.’ But on page 440, he consents to
name 1012 B.c. as the higher limit of all possible dates for building,
either the Pyramids of Egypt or any other of the monuments ‘extant
‘in the time of Herodotus.’ Neither does he think (p. 445), that the
whole world has a much higher antiquity.


VOL. IIL. Q


242 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. TI.


perhaps still more practically experienced in Egyp-
tology, MM. Brugsch and Lepsius, are understood to
incline in their different publications between 3100
and 3500 B.c. More recently still, these views have
been enlarged by Mariette Bey ; and have found a
most eloquent exponent in his original countryman,
M. Ernest Renan, who has a communication on the
subject in the Revue des Deux Mondes for April
1865, and insists on a date of at least 4500 Be. ;
while Hekekyan Bey, from a different source, and
publishing in London in 1863, states, on page 15 of
his erudite and severe work, that the Pyramid of
Soris (Osiris) and Suphis dates in B.c. 4863.

All these conflicting determinations are claimed
by their authors to be based upon, or at least con-
firmed by, ‘the monuments ;’ treated in most cases
from a hieroglyphic, but in the last from a hydraulic,
point of view. Astronomy has also been tried, and
with the following results :—

In 1839 a.D., Colonel Howard Vyse communi-
cated’ to Sir John Herschel his principal measures
of the Pyramid, besides some very crude remarks by
previous explorers in 1817 a.p., as to their having
seen the present Pole-star, a Ursee minoris, by look-
ing at night ‘near the period of its culminating,’
out of the inclined entrance passage of the Great
Pyramid. This statement approached particulars a
little more than that of M. Jomard; who, in the


1 Volume ii. of his Pyramids of Gizeh, pp. 105-109.
2 We hope that these gentlemen meant the lower culmination.


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 243


great French work,’ speaks in rather a mystic way
‘ of the Pyramids having preserved the inappreciable
‘notion of the invariability of the celestial pole ;’
and was more advanced, because the said entrance
passage does not point to the place of the pole at
all, but to a distance of more than 3° therefrom !
Yet the passage, being in the plane of the meridian,
there may possibly be some allusion contained to the
meridian transit of a circumpolar star, with a par-
ticular north polar distance at the epoch. Such a
phenomenon, however, is by no means, as the ex-
plorers of 1817 A.D. appear to have thought, in-
variable ; but alters so unceasingly, and through
such large extents, with time,—1.e., the polar distance
does, at which any given star will in successive ages
cross the meridian,—that, as Sir John Herschel had
to explain, the present Pole-star could not by any
possibility, or at any part of its diurnal circle, have
been seen out of the tubular entrance passage of the
Great Pyramid, either at or anywhere near the re-
puted date of its building ; for the star was then
so far from being circumpolar, as to be at the large
distance of nearly 24° from the pole.

But what time, in that case, did this eminent
astronomer take as the date of the building ?

He seems to have assumed, that ‘the supposed
‘ date’ of the literary world in the year 1839 A.D., or
the epoch of 2123 B.c., was likely to be true; and then,
for the facilities of computation, took four thousand


1 Antiquités Mémoires, p. 531.


244 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


years back from 1839 A.D., and computed for 2161
B.C.,—what large star, if any, fit to be a polar star of
reference for the naked eye, was at that particular
distance from the pole, which would have enabled it
to be seen both at its transit of the meridian beneath
the pole, and under an angle of altitude at the Pyra-
mid, equal to 26° 41’—viz., the angle of the entrance
passage according to Colonel Howard Vyse. On
solving the problem, Sir John Herschel found,—
assuming the latitude of the Pyramid at 30°,—that,
at the date in question, the star a Draconis was in
the required position within some 28’; or close
enough, in his very competent opinion, to settle that
a Draconis was the Pole-star of the Pyramid build-
ing day, and of the northern hemisphere of the
world, in and about the year 2161 B.c.

This was a most original contribution, and a
splendid advance on the style of Pyramid investiga-
tion then in vogue ; and inasmuch as the date pro-
duced, agreed toa handful of years with the approved
literary dates of the time,—the question was con-
sidered by most men as finally settled. But when,
after a few years, the literary dates, under the in-
fluence of German scholarship, again rose in amount,
and attaimed 3200 and 3500 B.c.—the a Draconis
view dropped out of sight, with any or all men
aiming at a ‘scholarly reputation ; and at last the
Egyptian astronomer, Mahmoud Bey, appeared on
the scene, and by means of a theoretical reference of
the Pyramid’s southern face to the star Sirius,—a


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 245


reference conceived in his mind on a particular night
during the spring of the year 1862 A.p.,—deduced
thence an astronomical date of 3303 B.c. as that of
the building of the Great Pyramid.

Astronomy seemed thus as ready to confirm the
new literature, when produced, as it had been to side
with the old; and with regard to the 2200 (nearly)
date of Sir John Herschel’s reference, it might be re-
marked,—though we are not aware that it has been as
yet in print, to assist Mahmoud Bey’s and Chevalier
Bunsen’s side of the question,—that, if the course
of a Draconis under the influence of precession be
traced a little further back in point of time, the star
will be found to have reached its closest position to
the pole—almost.at the pole itself—in 2800 B.c.
roughly ; and would again have reached some 3° or
4° therefrom, or be seen at such a height above the
horizon as to have its lower culmination in the
direction of the entrance passage of the Great
Pyramid, in the year 3400 B.c. nearly.

In this manner, too compliant with the received
human authority, astronomy received another short
meed of praise for its new agreement with the hiero-
logist’s conclusions ; and was then betrayed irretriev-
ably when their literary dates were presently taken
up higher again, or to 4500 and 4700 B.c.,—with
indications too, from M. Renan, that they will
shortly be elevated higher still.

Now this is not the usual. position which modern
astronomy has occupied in questions of chronology ;


246 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV, If.


and as its failure is due to no real weakness of its
own, but rather to imperfect knowledge of the
Pyramid forms to which its doctrines have been ap-
plied,—it is incumbent upon us to inquire into the
matter rather closely; and ascertain, if we can,
whether the Pyramid is really capable of giving out
determinate, or only indeterminate, answers as to
the length of time it has stood upon the surface of
the earth.
First, then, let us inquire—


Whether the Great Pyramid 1s to be regarded as
astronomical at all ?


Before we can expect to make any advance in
this question, we must free ourselves of all mere
vague and inferential hypotheses about the Pyra-
mid ; and attend more minutely than has been the
practice hitherto, to the actual measured and
measurable facts still existing upon, or within it.

Quite aware that he had not put out his whole
strength on the occasion, the greatest astronomer
who has yet taken up the question, wrote, in 1839
A.D.,—that his calculation of a star angle for the
Pyramid, might nevertheless ‘be considered quite
‘ equal, in point of precision, to any direct observa-
‘tion, that an Eeyptian astronomer of that date
‘ (2161 B.c.) could have made ;’ and in 1849 AD.
publishing on the subject again, after additionally
attending to the physical astronomy concerned, the
same great authority changed his computed angle


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 247


from 27° 9’ to 26° 16’. But that amount of differ-
ence, though nearly a whole degree, must still have
been thought, rather complacently by its author,
to be quite small in comparison to the average error
of observation of an ‘Egyptian astronomer of the
‘ period;’ because, in seeking for a Pyramid-passage
observed angle wherewith to compare his anew
computed angle for the Great Pyramid,—the
modern physicist, in his book referred to, takes a
mean indifferently between angles obtained from
many Pyramids, and varying from 25° 55’ to 28° 0’.

Now this constitutes towards the Great Pyramid,
a strangely unjust procedure ; for it overlooks all
that building’s superior workmanship—so far in
advance of what obtains amongst the rest of the
Pyramids; and all the closeness with which—after
employing painful, laborious, and enduring methods
of construction—its three inclined passages were
made to agree with each other. 250 years ago
Kepler declared, that if he could only be certain of
Tycho’s observations within 8’, he would thereby
be able to alter the whole theory of the planetary
motions ; and he did thereupon succeed in demon-
strating, that circular eccentrics were erroneous, and
ellipses sensibly true. But what would be thought
of any one testing Kepler’s triumphant conclusion,
by swamping Tycho’s observations with others re-
corded so very badly, as to be seldom within several
degrees of the truth!

Yet this is, in effect, what men have been doing


248 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. I.


for years at the Great Pyramid. Allowing their
prejudices to lead them,—indulging preconceived
notions of what an infantine approach only, towards
accuracy, could have been made by an ancient
Egyptian astronomer ; and then, forming a resolve
not to condescend very far towards such a mere
beginner in the first rudiments of the art.

But there is so little known now, of what was
practised either by Egyptian, or any other class of
men four thousand years ago, or whether an Egyptian
astronomer was concerned in the matter at all,—that
such prejudices ought not to prevent us from taking
account of ancient facts still existing, when they
present themselves in a clear manner and measurable
shape. And amongst many facts of this order, are
the now undeniable ones, that the Great Pyramid
has totally different proportions and arrangements
from any other known Pyramid ; and is no more to
be made answerable for their imperfections, than
Newton’s Principia for Zadkiel’s Almanac. Where-
fore, the angle of the Great Pyramid’s entrance
passage we will take only from observations made
upon itself; and we shall then find it something
capable of being defined within a very few minutes ;
or, taking the measures of all the instruments em-
ployed into account, within a few seconds.

These several angles, and their closeness to each
other, as given at length in vol. ii. pp. 144-161, and
vol. ii. p. 39, are capable of mechanical testing at
any time ; but the main point of difficulty that next


—__ ie


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 249


arises, is,— where exists any proof of these angles
having had an astronomical intention ?

That the sides of the Pyramid are duly oriented
and the entrance passage is in the plane of the
meridian, are much towards that end (see vol. ii. p.


194, and vol. iii. p. 109),—has been already accepted,


as we have seen, by so eminent a philosopher as Sir
John Herschel, and many others. But the hiero-
logists are even now rising up once more to claim
the passage as a mere slope necessary for the intro-
duction of a sarcophagus ;.and ask also, ‘ What
‘ purpose in astronomical observation could be sub-
‘served by a passage which, though looking towards
‘a Pole-star, was blocked up with stone as soon as
‘ the building was complete 2’

The first objection appears to us of little force,
seeing that large tombs near the Pyramid accomplish
the same purpose for their sarcophagi, by means of
sometimes vertical, and sometimes horizontal, shafts
and passages. But the second, is a feature not yet
sufficiently noticed among most Pyramid theorists ;
who, finding the entrance passage open now, are too
much disposed to think it was always so, and must
therefore have been intended to be used as a
telescope ; or a means of observing stars by day-
light,—as the fable reports them to be so observable
from the bottom of a well: while another theorist
of a different order, inquires, with deep-felt emotion,
whether the intention was not rather ‘the levelling
‘a tube at Draco 2’


250 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


We cannot, however, too fully realize to ourselves,
that when the Pyramid builders left the Great Pyra-
mid, its entrance passage was filled up all the way
with long blocks of stone, and the outward termina-
tion of it concealed in the masonry of the casing.
Hence, it could not possibly have been intended for
observing astronomy ; 2.¢., the entrance passage could
not have been intended to be used, after its con-
struction, for an observatory. Why, then, may be
reasonably asked, was so much trouble taken in
placing it both in the plane of the astronomical
meridian, and at a particular and precise angle
of elevation therein ?

To this we answer, suitably with all the metro-
logical features of the Pyramid we have yet come
upon, ‘for the purposes of symbolical astronomy ;
‘for memorializing, by lines, angles, and positions,
‘sundry facts in astronomy ascertained previously
‘or otherwise,—-but necessary to be marked there,
‘and rendered readable in after ages, in order to
‘ carry out the full system of standards originally
‘intended. Such a system requires time-measures
‘on the large scale, as well as the small, and
‘references to star directions are the only means of
‘indicating long periods of time with certainty.’
Such a destination, then, completely gets over the
difficulty of the passage either having been once
used for lowering a sarcophagus, if the hierologists
will ; or having afterwards been built up with solid
blocks,—for when these are withdrawn, as they are


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 251


now, the passage is again available for its originally
intended purpose, if men are only able to read it
aright. And we may even add the further con-
firmation, seeing that John Taylor’s theory extended,
has already explained so many of the angles of the
Great Pyramid with a correctness of a few seconds,
—that. its expressive lines (see Plate v1.), while
they acknowledge that the actual building shows
only one, of the two daily meridian transits of a
Pole-star particularly marked,—yet accounts for, or
shows the direction of the other transit, and the
place of the pole as well.

Hence, we conclude the character of the astronomy
of the Pyramid, to be symbolical only ; and in this
view proceed to discuss some existing interpreta-
tions.


Sirvadic Theory of Mahmoud Bey.


This theory takes for granted, and is founded
altogether on the assumption of, such a symbolical
character as that just described, and nothing beyond
it, belonging to the astronomy of the Great Pyra-
mid ; yet is remarkable for making no mention of
a Draconis, or the entrance passage, or Sir John
Herschel, or any thing or person whence we have
drawn our chief ideas and views.

All the European friends of the ancient name,
and warm-hearted promoters of the modern resusci-
tation of the kingdom, of old Egypt, must have been
affected most agreeably to hear of a new astronomical


252 STANDARDS OF TIMF. [DIV. II.


theory on the age and objects of the Pyramids,
being produced in these days by a native astronomer
of the Siriadic land ; and they will be equally de-
lighted to find, that in the department of calculation,
a full mastery is shown of the best French methods,
and a skill that would have adorned a memoir from
any countryman whatever. But there is also, unfor-
tunately, a more striking omission still, than any
we have above alluded to, and one rather damaging
to the author's credit. in several ways; for, with
one small exception,—and which rather makes the
matter worse,—not only is there no mention of any
British traveller connected with either the history,
measurement, or calculation of the Pyramid, from
one end of the pamphlet to the other,—but the name
and labours of even Colonel Howard Vyse, have not
the least mention, or acknowledgment, though they
really outweigh those of all other travellers, and
natives too, put together, for sound and extensive
numerical data.

Howard Vyse, as most of the world knows, was
at the Pyramid for seven months, working hard with
several hundred assistants ; while Mahmoud: Bey
was there in the year 1862, the date of his. paper,
only four days with two friends. Hence his mea-
sures are merely a few of the outside of the Pyra-
mid, and when he requires some from the other
Pyramids he has to refer to Colonel Howard Vyse’s
measures after all; but.in place of taking them
from him directly, with acknowledgment of his


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 253


name, which is indeed still in the mouths of all the
Arabs about the Pyramid hill,—he, the Bey, takes
the Colonel’s numbers, from Chevalier Bunsen’s
copy of them, mentioning only his, Bunsen’s name,
as though he were the original authority. All this
strange proceeding too, is not for the purpose of
attaining in 1862 greater accuracy than Howard
Vyse reached in 1837 ; for whereas he attained the
close limits of 2’ of error for his angles of the casing
of the Great Pyramid—Mahmoud Bey is content to
employ in computation: an angle for the same,
nearly three-quarters of a degree different from his
own observed, and more than half a degree different
from the true, angle. While finally, the Bey more
unhappily concludes his omissions of Howard Vyse’s
name for what he did do, by bringing it in, as ‘ le
‘ Général Wyse, for what he did not do, and would
have been rather scandalized at its being attributed
to him, viz. confirming Bunsen’s literary date of
3310 Bc., as that of the termination of the fourth
dynasty.

Thus faults there are: of commission, as well as
omission, in this otherwise very creditable Egyptian
pamphlet ;+ but faults which, depending as they do
more upon the tastes, predilections, and perhaps
patriotic fancies, rather mistakenly interpreted, of
the author,—he has the means of rectifying when-


1 D’Age et le But des Pyramides lus dans Sirius. Par Mahmoud
Bey. Alexandria, 1865 a.p.; reprinted from the Bulletins of the
Royal Academy of Belgium, vol. xiv. 2d series, pp. 171.


254 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


ever he chooses; and will doubtless do so in his
next publication.

Having now performed all this part of the duty
which a simple sense of common justice requires, we
can turn calmly and kindly too, to consider the Bey’s
Pyramid theory on its own merits ; and the state-
ment of it appears to be as follows.


The star Sirius, Soth, or Sothis, the great Dog-
star, says Mahmoud Bey, was the god of the dead
with the old Egyptians; and his hieroglyph was a
triangle or pyramid, a star, and a crescent. Where-
upon he,.the Bey, proposes,—that the Great Pyramid
was constructed with its southern face,—placed too,
as he is most glad to show, very exactly towards the


astronomical south,—at such an angle of elevation, |


that the supposed beneficent rays of the star Sirius
should shine down on it, at the moment of the star’s
culmination in the sky, at right angles to the plane of
the surface of masonry ; and therefore in the most
powerful direction, he thinks, to transfuse all the
substance of the Pyramid; and, through its solid
substance, about 200 feet thick near that part, reach
and affect favourably the mummied corpse of the
monarch, reposing in his sarcophagus in the dark
and mysterious King’s chamber near the centre of
the building.

As an actual effect, the amount of such favour
must evidently be rather homeeopathic ; but with
that, perhaps, we have nothing to do, the present


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 255


occasion being only with the Pyramid as a scientific
monument of geometrical design ; and our business,
merely to see if the above theory is proved by mea-
surable facts ; for we need hardly repeat, that the
theory is purely the thought of Mahmoud Bey’s
own mind, and can only be received as one express-
ing also what were the thoughts of the Pyramid
builders, according to the proof it may receive from
the monument itself.

At present, Sirius, when on the meridian, does
not shine down directly, or at right angles to the
southern face of the Pyramid, being some 6° too
high ; but as precessional movement is concerned
there, we may compute back, and find when: the
star was at precisely the required height ; and that
being done, the calculation brings out, according to
Mahmoud Bey, the year 3303 Bo. nearly. Nor
need there be any doubt about this result being fairly
close to the truth; for the Egyptian astronomer’s
mode of treating the case is such as to do great
credit to his former scientific training at the Im-
perial Observatory of Paris, not only by his readi-
ness to make practical use of a formula by La Place,
but his consideration of the vexed question of the
proper motion of the star ; bringing out, indeed, the
very remarkable result, that that anomalous move-
ment of Sirius in declination during the last five thou-
sand years has been, probably, to the extent of 3°,—or
nearly one-third of its ultimate amount of precessional
displacement. Likewise does the Bey demonstrate


256 STANDARDS OF TIME. [ DIV. IL.


that the variations of the proper motion within
moderate periods of time have been so marked, and
with a tendency to show in past days a greater
amount of annual proper motion still,—that it is
rather hazardous to fix on what precisely may have.
been the mean quantity of this anomaly during
several thousand years elapsed."

In fact, Sirius is a dreadfully bad star to try to
fix an ancient date by ; and there is perhaps hardly.
a worse through all the extent of the sky. An orb
it is to wonder and gaze at for its brilliancy ; but
what with its recently detected orbital movements
round some dark body unknown, or preternaturally
dark, if it is known, in addition to all we have
previously stated concerning its proper motion,
—its place cannot be computed back for long
periods. of time with anything approaching to the
ordinary accuracy connected with what, by com-
parison with it, may well be called ‘the fixed
stars.’

Still, such as it is, Mahmoud Bey computes that
about the year 3303 B.c., more or less, Sirius, when
on the meridian, must have been in a rectangular
direction from the southern face of the Great
Pyramid. But he wisely allows that that, by itself,


1 The following are some of the particulars :-—
Declination of Sirius by modern observations in A.D. 1850, = —16° 13’
», _ by Mahmoud Bey’s computation for B.c. 3250, = —25 23


5,  thesame, corrected for a mean proper motion Ae
in declination of 2:2” in the interval, “i
Observed proper motion in declination between ee 1-16”


1750 a.p. and 1850 A.p.,


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 257


is no proof that the Pyramid was built either then
or for that purpose ; because an immense number
of stars in the course of a night, and with the pre-
cessional effect of ages, may be seen for the moment
of their culmination, at some date or another, in
such a rectangular direction ; and he adduces, as his
only proofs of a cogent order, 1st, that the hiero-
elyphic of the star Sirius, has a Pyramid attached ;
and, 2d, that his Sirius date agrees with Bunsen’s
and Brugsch’s dates, derived from other sources.

Hrom a mechanical point of view, however, we are
inclined to object—

First, that there is nothing visible about the south
face of the Great Pyramid, to distinguish Sirius
from all other stars near its extensive parallel ; or, in
fact, to show any exclusive and intended relation-
ship between that side of the building and any star.

Second, The angle of the face of any Jeezeh
Pyramid, was a much more exact matter than
Mahmoud Bey seems to have been aware of; and
that of the Great Pyramid was set to a very peculiar
quantity,—the same, too, within a few seconds, on
every one of its faces ; but different by a large part
of a degree from any other Pyramid. Now sup-
posing for a moment, that the south face was set
to its actual angle to suit the Bey’s idea about
Sirius in culminating,—why should great pains have
been taken to set all the other faces exactly and
scrupulously to the same angle; for, at the same
angle there, or in those directions E., w., and n., they

VOL. IIT. R


258 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


could not have been equally adapted to receive the
utmost transfusion of essence from one and the same
star divinity, as that one shining down on the
south side. John Taylor’s theory, on the other hand,
accounts for the angle of every side being similar, and
gives an independent statement of what the angle
should be, which agrees with fact as closely as the
most refined observation can detect. The building
is, in truth, excellently formed to demonstrate John
Taylor's theory ; but by no means of the shape, as
a whole, to realize Mahmoud Bey’s idea: for that
would have been more promising if the south face
had been rather concave ; and the other three, so
decidedly convex,—in order to throw off all other
influence there—that the Pyramid would not have
been a pyramid at all, but a huge beehive form, with
a large slice cut out of one side.

Third, Overlooking, for argument’s sake, the op-
position of the actual east, north, and west sides of
any Pyramid to the southern star-view theory,
and taking only the south side ; granting also for the
same purpose, that the slope there of any Pyramid.
was always arranged so as to be at right angles to
Sirius when on the meridian at the time of the
building,—then we ought to be able to fix the
relative dates of different Pyramids from the
differences of these southern angles. Now, in the
case of the seventh, eighth, and ninth Pyramids
of Jeezeh, both tradition, and their arrangement
symmetrically about the base of the Great Pyramid,


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 259


have led almost all men to be confident that they
were built subsequently to that mighty monument.
Yet their angles being all 52° 10’, according to
Howard .Vyse, or 52° 13’ according to Mahmoud
Bey, quoting through Bunsen,—while the angle of
the Great Pyramid is 51° 51’,—that implies, on the
Bey’s theory, that the former were builtin a previous
age to the latter, instead of a subsequent one.

Fourth, the hieroglyphic of the star Sirius, is
stated by Mahmoud Bey, to be ‘atriangle or face of
‘ the Pyramid, a crescent, and a star, thus K®~ But
a Pyramid, in hieroglyphics, had a peculiar base at-
tached to it, as see them in the titles of the Memphite
Kings in our Plate x1. (photographed from Dr.
Lepsius’ KGnigsbuch.) See also p. 523 of Bunsen’s
Egypt, vol. i. ‘The mere acute triangle above given,
—a different sign altogether, and far too acute angled
to stand for a side of the Great Pyramid,—is said
by Bunsen, at his p. 534, to mean (except when em-
ployed for Soth), ‘a pyramidal cake, a kind of food,
‘ragout ; and to represent the sound sns.’

Fifth, and last, we have to mention, that Mahmoud
Bey’s second supposed -proof, viz., his astronomical
date agreeing with the supposed true date of the
Kgyptologists,—is cut from under his feet by the
further extension, since then, of precisely the same
sort of LEgyptological inquiries; for these — as
effected by his adopted compatriot Mariette Bey in
Kgypt, and elaborated by M. Renan in France,—
have shown, that on the same principles as Bunsen


260 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IL.


extended the date of the Pyramid from 2100 B.c. to
3300 B.c., it should now—when the Museum of
Boolak has become possessed of more inscribed stones,
—be extended from 3300 Bc. to 4500 Bo. at least.
In fact, the Siriadic theory is left without any sup-
port, and has its most serious refuters in Egypt itself.


a Draconis Theory of Sir John Herschel.


This theory recommends itself much more to the
reason than that just described ; because, in the first
place,—it bases itself on one Pyramid passage or
tube, looking in one direction only, and not on four
broad surfaces looking in as many different direc-
tions, only one of which is made any use of ; and in
the second place,—because the direction in which it
does look, being not only in the plane of the astro-
nomical meridian, but close to the pole, appears
thereby,—besides being astronomically inclined,—to
pick out one particular star, out of all the sidereal
heavens ; or at least, to confine itself to a very small
circumpolar region of the sky, where the number of
large stars must always be extremely limited.

Hence Sir John Herschel, in selecting a Draconis
as the star to which the Pyramid builders referred,
had very few stars to choose amongst; and has
happily selected the one and only star, both large
enough to be reckoned a polar guide by primitive
men, and which could have been in the prescribed
position, or 3° 42’ from the northern pole, during
all, or any of, the various dates that have been fixed


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 261


on by any one whatever, for the Great Pyramid’s
building. Thus there is every probability that
a Draconis, as a particular star, was really made im-
portant use of, and much looked to, by the men of
the Great Pyramid ; and the only ultimate failure
in the theoretical scheme is,—the uncertainty as to
which of the two occasions of that star being 3° 42’
from the pole, viz., before or after, the star’s closest
appulse to that celestial pole, was the occasion in-
tended to be typified. If the latter one was meant,
the date must be not far from 2200 B.c.; and if the
former, 3400 B.c., nearly : but nothing monumental,
in the scientific way, has ever yet, so far as we are
aware, been brought up to shed the smallest light
on the difficulty. Pe

Sir John Herschel’s work, then, was excellent as
a scientific performance so far as it went,—but it
did not go far enough to reach firm standing-
ground ; and we have now to inquire at the Pyra-
mid itself, whether there are any further data there,
by means of which the balance of evidence may be
turned to one or the other side ; 2.¢., to show whether
the Pyramid was built at the last, or the last but
one, occasion of a Draconis being 3° 42’ from the
northern pole ; and a difference of more than 1200
years waits upon the result.


Pyranud Deiter:


In taking up the Great Pyramid at this particular
point, we must confess to have originally deduced


262 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. I.


from, and now to add to, our measures,—a general
belief in that building’s excellent adaptation to its
original purposes, whatever they were. Hence we
have been more struck than most of our prede-
cessors seem to have been, with this apparent
anomaly,—viz., that if the meridian transit of a
Pole-star, at a given polar distance, was the pheno-
menon to be commemorated in the building of the
Great Pyramid,—why was one only of the two daily
transits marked, and that one the lower and less
important of the two ?

We had, indeed, ourselves pointed out, in 1864,
that the northern air-channel seems to be in the
direction of the upper transit ; but that air-channel
is itself balanced by the southern one, and required
therewith in a different problem ; nor can it for a
moment compare in mechanical importance with a
passage like the entrance passage, large enough,—and
indeed the only one in all the Pyramid,—for men to
enter at. Wherefore the anomaly still remains, of
the lower and inferior culmination of a Draconis
having alone been signally marked ; as if, to the
builders, it had been vastly more important than
the upper and more visible culmination ! —

Why this strange anomaly, or preference?

‘For some good reason,’ our respect for the long-
buried architects suggested ; and the following pre-
sently appeared the most weighty, as well as the
most simple, reason that could be adduced,—
‘ Because when that star was crossing the meridian


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 263


‘below the pole, another and more important star
‘was crossing the meridian above the pole; and it
‘is not the manner of the Great Pyramid to wear
‘its most vital signs “or meanings” in the most
‘ prominent and external situations.’

That was merely an hypothesis to be tested ; and
on trying by calculation what star or stars of chief
importance crossed the meridian above the pole, and
at any polar distance whatever, when a Draconis
was crossing below at the 3400 B.o. period, with a
polar distance of 3° 42’,—we could find none. But
the moment we tried the same thing for its 2200
B.C. epoch, we alighted immediately on the Pleiades.


The Year of the Plevades.


Now the group of stars variously known as the
Pleiades, the Seven Stars, the Doves, Brood-hen,
Gluck-henne, Hen and Chickens, Cabrillas, or Little
Nanny-Goats, Peliads ; in Hebrew, Chima, the Con-
sregation of the Judge; in Arabic, Wasat, or the
Centre; and in Latin, Vergilie, also with an allusion
to a centre of turning,—are ‘not only an interesting
and pleasantly regarded cluster to all men in the
present day, but were propitiously mentioned in the
Bible as far back as the time of the patriarch Job.
They were also, as recently shown by the learned
researches of Mr. R. G. Haliburton,’ very extensively
referred to in the earliest of primeval times, as part
of a traditional rule of chronology, bearing traces of

1 Barrister of Halifax, Nova Scotia. See vol. ii. p. 370.


264 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


wisdom of so very elevated a character, as to demand
at once both admiration and inquiry. |

Mr. Haliburton’s works, which have as yet only
been printed privately in America, appear under the
title of ‘New Materials for the History of Man,
‘ derived from a Comparison of the Calendars and
‘ Festivals of Nations: No. 1, Festivals of the Dead’
(extending to 104 closely printed pages); ‘and
‘ No. 2, On the Astronomical Features in the Mosaic
‘Cosmogony’ (to 14 pages) ; and much is it to be
hoped that their acute and persevering author will
soon be prevailed on to print them in this country
for the general public. (See also vol. ii. Section v.,
Letters of the Freemasons.) In the meanwhile, we
may shortly state for him, that the result of his
inquiries into the literature of many nations, and the
traditions of most existing savage tribes,—has been
to find traces amongst them all of their having once
employed a common, universal, original system of
chronology, based on the Pleiades, and in a manner
equally simple and perfect. Thus, the year begins
on that one night when ‘the Pleiades are above,’ or
‘ are most distinct,’ or ‘when most is seen of them,’
or, in fact, when they cross the meridian at midnight.
. Now this is a faultless principle of observation,
that of a midnight noting of a star when at the
culminating point of its celestial path ; and one to
which modern astronomy can add little else than
merely some technical improvement of the means by
which the principle is to be carried out ; while, asa


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 265


working method through long periods of time, for
determining the beginning of a new year,—it is not
only capable within itself of the utmost precision,
but has the same exactness after thousands of years,
as after one year,—subject only to a small and very
slowly increasing natural correction. Very different,
therefore, is this, from the hopeless confusions of
calendar which the more civilized nations of the
world,—in its subsequent, but still early historical
days,—were always floundering in,—from accumula-
tions of the annual difference between the real length
of the year and their supposed length of it. |

Quite a large chapter in the history of the Chaldean,
Egyptian, Greek, and Roman astronomy is it, the
chronicling the successive approximations made by
their astronomers as to the real length of the
tropical year, and their always being wrong. This
was because they never could conceive the idea of
the real length being incommensurable in even terms
of days ; so that, driven on by their own inventions,
they assumed, say 360 days for the length of the year,
and then went on counting their years by 360 days,
until the difference between that and the true num-
ber, or 5°2422, etc., days, mounting up every year,—
soon made a calendar that once began at seed-time,
appear at length to be heralded in by autumn, or
vice versd. Then a new approximation was tried,
which brought the calendar year somewhat closer to
the natural one; until the Egyptians—of a day
long after that of the Great Pyramid,—seemed to


266 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


think they had attained the very height of all calen-
dar regularity, when they made their theoretic year
to consist of 365 days.

Yet even then, they had the confusion, that in
the short space in the history of a great nation, of
1460 years, or really a little more,—the seasons of
sowing and reaping, winter and summer, passed
through every month of the year. The Egyptians
tried indeed to make a glory of their error,—for that
period of 1460 years, produced from supposing the
fraction of a day to be a quarter of a day exactly,
they converted into the mystical and highly lauded
wisdom of their Sothic cycle. But a most confus-
ing cycle it must have been ; repeated itself in the
duration of their monarchy more than once; and
was endeavoured to be bolstered up, and its single
years distinguished by a variety of complicated con-
trivances, such as the Phcenix cycle, Panegyrical
Periods, the Triakontaeterides, etc., etc., which have
occupied learned men during long ages, and in large
books, to try to make either effective or clear.


‘ Did not the Egyptians then know of the simpler,
‘better, and more efficacious Pleiades year? is a
question that may be asked. And the answer is,
‘Yes, they knew of it, or had known of it once ;
‘for traces and allusions to it may be found in
‘some of their religious rites, especially in the festi-
‘ val of the Isia; but these remembrances seem to
‘have been involuntary on their part ; for, in so far


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 267


‘as they could, the Egyptians had cut themselves
‘ free from the Pleiades year, both as to the stars
‘and the manner of making the observations,—
‘ binding themselves astronomical slaves for ever to
‘ Sirius Sothis, the great Dog-star, and his heliacal
‘ risings or settings. Hence our only hope of learn-
ing more, of what was in reality a pre-Egyptian in-
stitution, would seem to depend on searching the
traditions of savage tribes ; where, as Mr. Halibur-
ton shows, knowledge is well-nigh absolutely station-
ary; and thereby reveals to us, in the present
day, and equally whether amongst the Australians,
Fijians, Mexicans, or Peruvians, that which was
once communicated to them, and to all men, long
before the days of the first known observations of
Chaldean astronomers, or the first recorded thoughts
of Phoenician sages ; in a word, before any of the
Eastern empires which have left any historical traces
whatever behind them, had either waxed or waned.
The common possession of this Pleiades year by so
many isolated and far removed races of mankind, is
a sufficient proof that they did not receive it from
any one or other of the great nations of antiquity,
—the Egyptian, for instance,—exclusively ; for they,
the Egyptians, never had any dealings with Austra-
lians and Fijians. Besides which, both Egyptians,
Greeks, Romans, and others such, in proportion as
they advanced in civilisation, academical learning
of their own, and national importance, invariably
sophisticated down, or thinned away the original


268 STANDARDS OF TIME, _ [DIV II.


Pleiades method, until hardly a trace remained
amongst them, to communicate elsewhere if they
would. Thus, not content with the beauty and
power of the primitive maxim for observing a star
on the meridian at midnight,—they, the said great
heathen nations, must prefer to observe it when on
the meridian at sunrise or sunset, though the twi-
light nearly rendered the faint stellar ray invisible ;


then, the star itself was to be observed at its rising.


or setting, with the vapours of the horizon added to
the difficulties of twilight. And finally, the ne plus
ultra of impossibility for an observer was fixed on,
when the sages of the profane world had got to the
furthest possible point from the spirit of the Pleiades
method of old; and instead of fixing the begin-
ning of the year when the sun was at the maxi-
mum of distance from the Pleiades, or when these
were ‘above’ at midnight, and ‘ most distinct, —they
made it when the sun was in that group, or its
constellation Taurus ; 2.¢., when the Pleiades were
‘above’ at noonday, or, not only not distinct, but
absolutely invisible ; and when no man could directly
tell, during several months, whether the priests fi
the almanacs were right or wrong.

The Pleiades method having been thus reduced, in
the temples of the most humanly advanced of the
heathen nations, to something well-nigh futility,—
the arena was considered open to new inventions ;
and then began. those calendar methods already


alluded to, according to imperfect human estimates.


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 269


of the length of the year in terms of days, which
occupied the learning of the classic world through
all its history ; exhausted its attention, and kept up
its praises and admiration for man and his doings,
—has led to dislocations of the calendar again and
again, but with glory always to some new man for
setting it right for a time,—given different reckon-
ings to different nations at varying epochs,—and
is untowardly felt, even in this present age of the
world, in the shape of one European people, ‘ who
‘possess the ninth part of the habitable globe,’
counting their time differently by twelve whole days
from all the rest of the civilized world.

Now the original method of the Pleiades would
have saved mankind, if they had kept to it after re-
ceiving the gift, from all this confusion, intricacy,
and waste of human energy ; for it is, in its appli-
cation, aS universal as it is simple and effective ;
and can be observed and profited by, wherever man
lives on the earth-surface. Not only too, does it
enable the beginning of each year to be fixed ; but,
if well observed, it proves also what year, each year
is, ina something which may be regarded as ap-
proaching to absolute chronology ; or in a cycle of
time, admirably definite, and so vast, that all the
known period of man upon earth, has not yet run
through one-fourth part of it ; and the duration of
any great nation, nay even the life of a distinct
language, has in few cases yet amounted to the one-
twelfth part.


270 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


Let us explain practically. The Pleiades, as
stars, come, and as nearly intertropical stars come
very notably and measurably, to the celestial meri-
dian of any place 3m. 59s. sooner every night ;
therefore any one who can determine when it is
midnight, and when. these stars are on the meridian
to the rude quantity of a minute, can determine on
which night such a year begins. But a tolerable
astronomer, even with moderate means, can, not
only determine that phenomenon far more accurately,
or to a single second,—but can measure the place of
the star from a definite point, the vernal equinox,
to a second of time also, or less; and the Pleiades
increase their distance each year from that point by
about 3°5 seconds, through means of the so-called
precession of the equinoxes. Hence such astro-
nomer can determine the place of his star on that
line of its precessional motion, to an accuracy
abundantly within the quantity of a year’s move-
ment; or, in other words, he can settle in which
year’s place the star is, and how many years have
elapsed since the star left its celestial starting-point
for measuring from, viz., the vernal equinox. And
inasmuch as that grand effect on the places of the
stars, the precession of the equinoxes, goes on so
slowly, that a star does not travel through its whole
precessional cycle, or begin to repeat itself therein
until 25,868 years have passed by,—there has been
no ambiguity as yet, since man began to chronicle


~
= a a


SECT. V. | STANDARDS OF TIME. 271


anything, as to which of its precessional rounds his
celestial referring point is in.

This, then, is the chronological system of ‘the
‘ year of the Pleiades, as so admirably worked out
by Mr. Haliburton from the traditions of all peoples
and tongues ; and shown by him to have been more
perfectly followed in the ages preceding the rise of
the great heathen civilisations, than sence. But
granting the correctness of all his eloquent deduc-
tions, our readers may ask, ‘ What are the proofs of
‘that system having been appreciated or attended
‘to by the builders, or rather the planners, of the
‘ Great Pyramid ?’


The Plevades and the Pyramid.


When used at any time, according to the above
indications, by men concerned in metrological
arrangements, there can be no doubt that the
Pleiades must have been to them the most impor-
tant star, or star-group, by far in the whole heavens.
Many other stars may be infinitely more conspicu-
ous, as indeed was Sirius the Dog-star, but its splen-
dour could have been no more than idle tinsel,
compared to the metrological aid furnished by the
Pleiades under that system. Hence, granting for a
moment a use of the system, we may be morally as
well as scientifically certain, that for the sake of
having the Pleiades commemorated on the meridian
above the pole, a Draconis,—though otherwise, as for
orienting the whole structure, a useful enough star,


272 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. 11.


—umust be content to appear below the pole, if the
two are to be observed together ; especially seeing
that at the hour when a Draconis was above the
pole (the stars being supposed opposite in right
ascension), the Pleiades must have been altogether
invisible or apparently under the earth.

At present the two stars,—for it will be con-
venient to allude to the Pleiades as a single star,
selecting for that purpose its principal component,
7 Tauri, whose Greek name Alcyone, when reduced
to an Arabic root, signifies ‘the centre, —at present
we say the two stars are by no means exactly
opposite, being nearly 30° distant. therefrom. But
neither is a Draconis now at the distance of 3° 42’
from the northern pole, but rather at something
like 25°. Compute, however, the place of both stars
back, as affected by precession, for every past cen-
tury ; and with every century earlier, a Draconis
will be found nearer the north celestial pole, and y
Tauri nearer to being opposite toa Draconis in right
ascension ; until, indeed, after retracing many cen-
turies, you will find there is one, wherein, not only
was a Draconis precisely 3° 42’ from the northern
pole—but » Tauri was then also just twelve hours
distant from a Draconis in right ascension; or,
crossing the meridian above the pole, when the
other star was doing the same below the pole.

The ingenious author of the article ‘Egypt, in the


1 Mazzaroth or the Constellations. By the late Miss Rolleston.
London: Rivingtons, Waterloo Place, 1862.


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 273


last edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, does
not scruple to say, p. 500, that Sir John Herschel’s
finding the entrance passage of the Great Pyramid
at the time of its building pointed to a Draconis
‘is not to be regarded as more than accidental ;’
and for this one reason only, that ‘ the entrance pas-
‘sages of Pyramids were always closed at the com-
‘ pletion of the building.’ Not only however have
we removed that objection, by showing that the
Great Pyramid is all along, in every one of its
features, not an observatory for making new obser-
vations, but a place of deposit for remarkable
standards of metrology previously in existence,—
and requiring in astronomy, solely, that the pheno-
mena of a particular epoch should be memorialized
once and for ever,—not only have we thus shown
the groundlessness of that objection upon our
view of the case,—but now a new star, and the
most important of all stars for metrology in the
early primeval ages, is exhibited in precise angular
coincidence with what was computed for a Draconis
in combination with the entrance passage ; render-
ing therefore the chances against the latter being an
accident, perhaps seventy times more secure than
before.

The Great Pyramid, however, does not leave the
matter even in that very nearly established state
only, but furnishes further data for conclusion and
settlement, of the following order :—-

First, for instance, we may now advantageously

VOL. III. 8


274 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. If.


take account of Lord Valentia’s truly sage critique
of nearly sixty years ago ; when his Lordship asked,
with all common sense on his side, ‘ Why, if in the
‘ opinion of all Eeyptologists the Pyramids had been
‘built solely to preserve the sarcophagi of buried
‘monarchs safely, why did not the builders pull out
‘all the fine white lining from the passages, and
‘build up the long holes with ordinary masonry,
‘ like the rest of the mass; for then half the moun-
‘ tain-like building, or more, would have had to be
‘pulled down before the concealed central room
‘would, or could, have been discovered ; whereas
‘now, with the fine and polished lining left im,
‘ whether the passage itself be internally stopped up
‘ or not, the line of it is clearly distinguishable, and
‘conducts a depredator at once and inevitably to
‘the very chamber where, on the burial hypothesis,
‘ he ought not to go?’

We thank his Lordship for the sensible idea ; and
can now suggest, that had the builders of the Great
Pyramid obliterated its entrance passage in the
effective manner proposed by Lord Valentia,—they
would not only, in all human probability, have pre-
served the proposed sepulchral chamber from viola-
tion, which seems, from the whole of the facts now
known, not to have been their purpose ; but they
would thereby just as certainly have deprived dis-
tant posterity of the required symbolical key, where-
with to unlock the secrets of the Great Pyramid’s
primeval chronology; and that they seemed to


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 275


have most positively desired, should one day be

understood.
Secondly, as a Draconis,—recovered by Sir John

Herschel, through means of the entrance passage


_ being still visible——may be regarded as the key, and


the Pleiades, now found, as the lock,—let us see how
the key works in the lock. Wherefore, compute the
absolute right ascension of » Tauri, when it was at
that peculiar difference of right ascension just de-
scribed, or opposite to a Draconis at the tume of that
star beng 3° 42’ from the pole, and what do we
find ? why, no less than this, that » Tauri was then
at Oh. of right ascension, or in the equinoctial point
itself, z.¢., at the necessary and essential starting-
point and commencement of all reckonings by
Pleiades years ; in the very beginning, therefore, of
the Pleiades chronology, and at the one epoch of all
others during the last six thousand years, and many
more too, when, if ever a monument was to be, or
could be, appropriately erected to symbolize and
commemorate the Pleiades calendar, it should have
been erected.

Not only, too, was the epoch thus remarkable in
pure astronomy, but in its applied form to agricul-
ture and the general affairs of men, it was equally
precise and noteworthy. For when the Pleiades
and the equinoctial point were on the meridian
together at midnight, then the primeval year began
coincidently with the autumnal equinox of the
northern hemisphere; and that autumn, as well as


276 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. Il.


that night became, agreeably with old tradition, ‘the
‘ mother-night of the year.’

Again, Mr. Haliburton’s researches have shown
(vol. ii. pp. 372 to 438), that amongst most early
nations there was a very wide-spread idea of con-
necting both the constellation Taurus and the
Pleiades stars, with reminiscences of a saving from
the Deluge and a beginning of ‘ sweet influences.’
Why there was such a connexion, otherwise most
inexplicable, the astronomy of the Great Pyramid
seems to furnish a very tangible clue. For, though
there was no particular absolute change among
known stars about the epoch of the Deluge (for whose
date see Division m1. chap. viii.), yet, viewing them
according to the peculiar and very accurate prin-
ciples of Great Pyramid observation,—there was a
Pyramidal relative alteration just then of the whole
sidereal heavens ; and with the effect, of even making
the most positive antithesis between the normal con-
stellations for chronological purposes, of antediluvian,
on one side, and postdiluvian, times, on the other.

Compute, for instance, for the date of 3400 B.o.,,
or any other certainly antediluvian time, what were
the equatorial and zodiacal constellations on the
meridian above, when a Draconis was on the meri-
dian below, the pole,—and you will find them to be
Serpens, Ophiuchus, and Scorpio. But as the year
2800 B.c. came on, a rapid displacement of those
constellations began to be effected, amounting almost
to a rushing round of the whole heavens (dependent


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 277


on the exaggerated effects of precession on a Dra-
conis, then quite close to the pole of rotation of the
sky). And when towards 2200 B.c., the extreme
rapidity of that change had passed,—and the dangers
of the Deluge also, according to the traditional chro-
nology of every nation,—then, if you compute what
constellation was above, when a Draconis was below,
the Pole,—and in the direction of the entrance passage
of the Pyramid—you will find, that all the former
mentioned zodiacal stars are entirely departed from
the visible hemisphere,—leaving Taurus dominant in
their place, and the Pleiades exactly on the Meridian.

Hence, too, a chronological method for a stellar
year, that formerly began in spring, would be
changed almost suddenly into an autumn observa-
tion,—explaining further traditions. But let us con-
tinue to inquire more and more closely into all our
necessary facts ; and, first of all, into the calculation
of the proper Pyramid sidereal coincidences, as yet
only cursorily mentioned. 3


Great Pyramid Astronomy.


The general results of our observations in vol. i1.,
show decidedly that the Great Pyramid, though ap-
proaching closer to perfection than most persons
had hitherto allowed, is yet by no means an abso-
lutely perfect building; and has certain small
probable errors of construction, partly perhaps in-
duced from dilapidation-effects difficult to eliminate,
but certainly existing in the present day.


278 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


In a similar manner, all the calculations which
I am able at present to bring forward, for computing
the places of the stars four thousand years ago,
though agreeing in the general facts, have some
variations. We must not, consequently, expect
absolute agreement in the inquiry we are entering
upon, but only a practical amount thereof; and
then, we shall probably find observation closer
together with theory, than different modern ob-
servers at the Pyramid have been hitherto with
each other.

The circumstances of origin of these almost
necessary errors, are not always easy to investigate ;
and would have been less so still, had not the two
stars of Great Pyramid reference, viz., 7 Tauri and
a Draconis, both been as it were so admirably
selected in primal times from amongst all stars, for
certain qualities of transcendent cosmical physics,—
that they have hardly any proper motion at all
sensible in the present state of astronomy ; hence,
full freedom with them, from all the worst of the
drawbacks connected with trying to use the Sirius
Sothis of Egyptian hierarchy, for any of the grander
purposes of long chronology.

The first authority for the calculated places to be
presented before our readers, is at least quite a dis-
interested one,—being a friend of Chevalier Bunsen,
and his Pyramid date of 3280 B.o. ; viz., the learned
Professor Heiss, of Minster. This gentleman’s
testimony, moreover, was quite unintended ; for he


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 279


had merely furnished to Bunsen’s fourth volume of
Egypt's Place in Universal History, two star-maps ;
one of them showing the precessional movement of
the pole, and the other the precessional displace-
ment of the equator of the sky, for several thousand
years back; and both maps were actually con-
structed for the purpose of illustrating a point con-
nected with 8 Urse minoris, as the probable Pole-
star of the ancient Phoenicians. But, as the maps
contain, besides many other stars, both a Draconis
and » Tauri, we may as well ascertain what they.
say about them; and it seems to be as follows :—

1st, a Draconis was at 3° 42’ from north pole of sky in year 2071

B.C. nearly,

2d, a Draconis at above date, was not 12h. from y Tauri, but

llh. 23m. ; and

3d, » Tauri, was at Oh. A.R., or in the meridian of the equinoctial

point, in year 2100 B.c. nearly.
Hence, the first and third phenomena agree very
fairly, but the second is largely in error ; due, with
little doubt, both to the necessary imperfection of
small maps, and to these particular star places not
having been expected to be called for.

In the second place, we submit two results by
Sir John Herschel for a Draconis alone. These
were both computed for Colonel Howard Vyse’s
value of the angle of the entrance passage, or 26°
41’, giving 3° 19’ of celestial polar distance. We
have, therefore, reduced them to the later more
correct determination of 26° 18’ for the mean
passage angle, and 3° 42’ for the north polar dis-


280 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IL


tance, using an annual precession in north polar
distance of 20"; and find,—


a Draconis at 3° 42’ from north pole, by computation of 1839 a.p.
in 2011 B.c.; and

a Draconis at 3° 42’ from north pole, by computation of 1849 a.p.,
in 2158 B.c.


the last being preferred.

In the third place, we submit the results of a
computation for each star in both elements, or
right ascension and declination, by the formula
contained on p. 19 of the Introduction to the
British Association Catalogue, and applied to every
hundred years ;' whence it would seem,—


B.C.


Ist, a Draconis at 3°42’ N.P.D., .. 5 a in year 2128
2d, a Draconis and 7» Tauri opposite, or 12 hours

distant in right ascension, A) See
(And 12h. 15m. 30s. in 2100 B.c., a Draconis
JSollowing y Tauri Be that ane? | 3; and

3d, 7 Tauri, at Oh. ALR., : fs i ees


Here the second item is still very discordant, and
the first and third not so close as might have been
desired ; wherefore, we began to suspect the full ap-
plicability of the formula, to the very much greater
lapse of time it is employed for here, than any which
seem to have been contemplated by the worthy
Francis Baily, to whose long and earnest labours the


1 The formula being as follows :—
Aa=m +n. sin a. tan 6.
Ad=n. cos a.
where m = 46:02824” + y 0:0003086450”.
n = 20:06442” — y 0:0000970204”.
a = Right ascension.
5 = Declination.


SECT. V. | STANDARDS OF TIME. 281


British Association owes the opportunity of append-
ing its name to the best star-catalogue the world
has yet seen. There is something too, even still,
not quite so well understood about the numerical
quantity of precession, as it should be; La Place
having one annual value, and Bessel another, while
an excellent author on physical astronomy printed,
a few years ago, the prudent conclusion :—‘ This
‘rate of motion, 50°2” per annum for precession, is
‘not perhaps sufficiently well determined to make
‘it worth while to compute exactly the time in
‘which the equinox describes the whole heavens, a
‘period between twenty-five and twenty-six thou-
‘sand years.’

With reference also to some errors that had been
previously committed in precessional computations,
Sir John Herschel subjoins to Par. 319 of his
Outlines of Astronomy the instructive note :—

‘On this calculation the diminution of the ob-
‘liquity of the ecliptic in the four thousand years
‘elapsed has no influence. That diminution arises
‘from a change in the plane of the earth’s orbit, and
‘has nothing to do with the change in the position
‘ of its axis, as referred to the starry sphere.’

Now this paragraph is not a little interesting, as
a reminder, and a timely one, of the extraordinary
importance in celestial physics of the earth’s axis
of rotation ; that axis which is already referred to
at the Great Pyramid for the standard of linear
measure, as well as for weight and capacity measure ;


282 STANDARDS OF TIME. _ [DIv. IL


is typified statically, in the vertical height of the
Pyramid ; and as to its dynamics, in the base thereof.
Most worthily too, for that axis of the earth’s rota-
tion, with its uniform rate of turning and power of
keeping its own angular position (that is, of follow-
ing its own laws of slow angular change such as
precession, in defiance of other angular changes
going on round about it on a vastly larger scale, as
in the alteration of the plane of the enormous orbit
carrying the earth itself round the Sun),—that axis
of the earth’s rotation, immaterial though, like the
orbit, it be,—is endued with more power of perma-
nency and constancy than any of the other move-
ments or properties of the earth ; and does directly
govern both the polar distances of the stars, and
all our ideas of, and means for, checking the uni-
formity of our first invaluable standard and unit
of time.

Hence, as the fourth example, we exhibit the re-
sults of the computation of 50°211” as a mean
amount of annual precession for the whole period,
supposed to be uninfluenced by any other changes,
and then find for—


B.C.


2170


Ist. a Draconis at 3° 42’ N.P.D., the date . =
2d. a Draconis and » Tauri, opposite in R.A. ; first in
1797 B.c.; second in 2562 B.c. ; Mean, = 2180
(a Draconis following » Tauri at that mean date
of 2180 B.c., by 12h. 5m. 28s.) and
3d. » Tauri at O-h. R.A. in date = 2176


The places of the stars in 1800 a.D., and between
2000 and 2300 B.c., being as follows :—


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 283
» Tauri or the Pleiades. a Draconis.
Date.
Right Ascension.| Declination. | Right Ascension. Koen oy
ji hes i Pyare Me fie 'S.

1800 a.v.| 3 35 37°9 23° 28’ 32" | 13 58 58:5 24° 39’ 59"
2000 Bc. | 0 8 596 5 22 32 | 12 12 20°9 4 38 35
2100 B.c.| O 3 52:2 4 49 14 | 12 8 34°5 4 5 18
2200 B.c. | 23 58 45:1 4 15 55 | 12 4 25°8 3 32 0
2300 B.c. | 23 53 28°2 3 42 36 | 11 59 42°8 2 58 41


Having thus exhibited without favour all the
widest variations in results, of which the case seems
well-nigh capable,—we may be pretty certain that
the true date will ultimately prove to be contained
within them ; and will be found, if not actually
2170 B.c., at least closer thereto than the beginning
or end of the duration of the Great Pyramid’s build-
ing can be to its middle date.


Star-Maps, explanation of.


In Plates vi1., virt., and 1x., the principal features connected
with the astronomy of the Great Pyramid, are approximately
represented in a graphical form.


PLATE VIL.

Plate vit. is therefore a star-map, showing both the place of
the pole of the ecliptic and its surrounding sky for a breadth of
from 80° to 90°; near the middle of which space, the circle,—
described under the influence of precession in 25,867 years
approximately, by the celestial pole of rotation traversing round
the pole of the ecliptic, or rather round its own mean posi-
tion during the whole period,—is duly marked; together with
the series of actual places successively occupied in that circle by
the rotation-pole, at the end of every hundred years, continu-
ously, from 4000 B.c. to 2000 a.p. of the Christian era.

This map is of course independent of the geographical posi-
tion of the place of observation ; and the cosmical accident may


284 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


be noticed with interest, that whereas the seven larger stars of
the Great Bear are the most easily recognised group in the sky,—
and two of the stars forming the preceding side of the square, so-
called, in that group, serve as the popular ‘ pointers’ to direct atten-
tion to, and enable beginners to recognise, the present polar star of
the world, or « Ursz Minoris,—so the two stars forming the oppo-
site or following side of that square are the pointers, even more
directly and immediately, to the ancient Pole-star of the world,
or a Draconis.

This star will likewise be readily identified by being half-way
between ¢ Ursee Majoris, and y Urs Minoris; also, by having
another star near it, in the same direction almost as ¢ Urse
Majoris on one side of it, has ¢ of the same constellation, and y
Ursze Minoris on the other, has B of that constellation: so that
a Draconis and its companion are the middle pair, of three paral-
lel-placed pairs of stars, between the Greater and Smaller Bears.

Modern observations do not show any notable proper motion
affecting the place of a Draconis ; but there is a sensible fluctua-
tion in its apparent brightness, making its limits of magnitude
lie between the second and fourth, and in a period amounting
very vaguely to some two or three hundred years; so that we are
only enabled thereby to say, that at the period of the Great
Pyramid’s building, a Draconis may have been brighter than it


is now, which is somewhere about, and probably rather below, —


the third magnitude, at which we have depicted it.


PLATE VIII.


Plate vit. is another star-map, but a local one; and repre-
senting on a smaller scale, both for the particular year 2170 8.0.
and for the special latitude of the Great Pyramid, a meridional
strip of the sky extending the whole distance from the southern
horizon, through the zenith and to the northern horizon,—with a
breadth of rather more than 40° on either side of the meridian.
The meridian line, the prime-vertical, the equator, and the pole
are indicated by black lines.

The stars represented in this definite space, are those which
filled it at the moment when the Pleiades were crossing the meri-
dian, at night,—say rather—as characterizing the season of the
year, and a primitive observation for determining the beginning
of the year—at midnight.

The map next shows, that the following further coincidences


Vol. Ul.


1}
a
oO
°
Ye)
Qe
7
’
’


m @ snmp
oe


A’
a5 >
aes


GM pif @ pid ‘QB uiV’ 9098 7714 20 vssragybrug uo sopmprubru yp quasrsds 03 padopn noqudy
CV 0008 toh ry 3 “9° N04 ead 2Yg pwOLy
Hn burma hypprwedss pun puoymod. Jo Mog Wwpsyny Ayy Fo
pou yuorssrud ayy burpwesa.des | dou-0079


>
D> ; a
ee leg @
BA OGRE RE fe zener “*7
. ay q
Jes... / Gp SNA
“Se SZys W
am (Se


aes
7]


>> a Dr acd
Ss
ACP a am


®


W.H.M® Farlane Lith’ Edin™


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


W.H.M® Farlane Lith’ Edin?


Star-map , representing the precesstonal movement’
of they Celestial Pole of rotation’ and especially marking Ww


trom’ the year 4000 B.C. to the/ year 2000 A.D.


Symbols adopted to represent the/ magnitudes or brightnesses of the/ stars, aie @. 27k B®. Se he Ge:


the


TWDILWIA AWNIYd


s, at the mstant when’ ¢


enting for the year 2170 B.C. and &


WESTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN
EASTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN


nap PEPres


:
S
“
rs
%


» F,


Symools adopted to express the magnitudes or brightness of the stars, [3°


Approximate star
the mertdional Op PRarance of the s


Mol) TLD.


is crossing the Meridian’ below the/ Pole’ and thy Pleiades (near
the Pole, at midnight and hare the same’ hight ASCEHSTON’ as


=e
SS Rs
Seat


NORTHERN HORIZON


3
=o

= o
oc ro)
> Ds
ie é
S ?
oc

.


o
-
A


ECLIPTIC


$s


a Ss


SSS
<a


os
Soo


>


SSS


“TTS Soe


SS


iS
CS


5


+s
—


ares
SSSSSossss


LS SSYS SSS


NUN


S Ts


Ww
ee
Ss SS SSS wae
SOUTHERN HORIZON


arena
wh
=


SS
et
=


NaN
aa


SSS
Sos
SEs


AN


ar
Ss


SES
SS


Sth


:
) oJ Ps oe .
:
ar; rf <
v sf, 5 a

q Pi 7 =
rc!
GE Ys
~. +
,


ASTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN


ing for the year AITO B.C. and thy Latitude of the’ Great Pyramid,
he stars, at the mstant when w Draconis (at 3, 42'N.P. Dist.)

ne’ Pole and the Pleiades (near the FE. quator ) are crossing above’

he same’ hight Ascension’ as the Equinoctial pont.

mitides or brightness of the stars, [:*= @. 2°42 @,; Fs. 4 an


W.H-MS Farlane, Lith® Edin™


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


8.


page


JILd1193


TVOILYRA ANIYd


els Ah.


WESTERN SIDE (OF MERIDIAN


Meridian above’ Pole, North’ of Zenith’ —


rf


NORTHERN HORIZON


EASTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN


Ladtitade/ of the Great Pyramid,


at the mstant when w Draconis (at 3 » 42° NP. Dist. }


1s CPOsstng the Meridian’ betow the Pole and thy Pleiades


the Pole/, ab midnight,


he


for the year 2170 B.C. and the


enting


Approximate star nap repres
the mertdionatl Ap PLaTance of the stars


near the Equator) are crosstv above’
v4 a


and hare the same Right Ascension’ as the E quinocdiav pont.


/


A. 4” 25


Symbols adopted to express the magnitudes or brightness of the stars; 1. @. 27°" @, 37


WH.M¢ Farlane, Litht Edin®


NOZIYOH NYFHLy oy


Vol. UI.


PRIME VERTICAL


ECLIPTIC
» EQUATOR


WESTERN SIDE OF MERUADIAN


(Gy


=


——
Wass


| hs


——
ES


—_
BOOTS S
D>


s =——
wes


5 peers
BSS SS


EASTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN


Approximate starmap representing, (tor the year 1883 AD. and
the meridional appearance of the stars, at thy stant when the P
are crossing thy Meridian at midnight, bui whew nether & Dracor
is on the Meridian, either above or below the Pole.

Symbols adopted to express the/ magnitudes or brightness of the stars, TI:


.


Liga


wolvnda =


rs)
b-:
a.
id
—
vu
uh D


WOMASA JIWNId


ESTERN SIDE OF MER


NoZIYOHK NYFHIngs


—Z


ASTERN SIDE OF MERIDIAN


, [Tor the/ year IS83 AD. and thy Latitude of the/ Great: Pyramid,)


nor any other circampolLar star


if


,at the instant when the Pleiades, (now near the Zenith’)


le’ Stars
night, but whew nether & Draconis
or below the Pole.


yritudes or brightness of the’ stars, 13* @, 27° @, 37% A, 4% a.


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


yozidOH NYFHLY¥oy


—s


Sa


a


=


er Se
—= SSS SOT SN SY


est
TS


———
ESSSSS RV SASAAY
A


m EQUATOR
a
CO


SS
ees


NORTH of Zenith’


s
°


aw


es
A Se
oF Ro ©


we


—
=


=
=


TA


A
~


Approximate starmap representing, [tor the year L883 AD. and the Latitude of the’ Great Pyramid, ff
the meridional appearance’ of the stars, at the mstant when the Pleiades, (now near the Zenith),


are crossing the Meridian’ a midnight, but whew nether & Draconis, nor any other cireumpolar star


is on the Meridian , either above or below the Pole.
Symbols adopted to express the magnitudes or brightness of the stars, 15% 6, 27 @, FO hes De ae


=
=—— Se


SOUTHERN HORIZON


=


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 285


must have occurred at that moment, and been peculiar to that
date of 2170 B.c. :—

1st, The equinoctial point, or crossing of the equator and
ecliptic ; and

2d, The Pole-star, or a Draconis, must both have been on the
meridian at the same instant, viz., the instant of the Pleiades
also being on the meridian.

a Draconis was indeed below the pole, but that position, com-
bined with its particular polar distance of 3° 42’ in 2170 B.c.,
gave it then to observers at Jeezeh, an angular altitude of 26° 18’ ;
or practically the same as the entrance passage of the Great
Pyramid, and therefore in so far connecting it therewith.


PLATE Ix.

Plate rx. resembles Plate vit. precisely, in so far as it is in-
tended to show, for the latitude of the Great Pyramid, the
appearance of the meridional portion of the starry heavens at
night, just at the instant when the Pleiades are crossing the
meridian ; but the date, in place of being the long-past date of
2170 B.c., is now the future, or near-present one of 1883 a.p.

With this difference of date, ‘ precession,’ not to say anything
of ‘ proper motion,’ accumulating through the long interval, has
introduced many changes in the appearance of the usually re-
puted ‘fixed stars;’ as thus—

1st, The ecliptic no longer cuts the equator symmetrically in
the same right ascension as the Pleiades.

2d, a Draconis is no longer on the meridian either above or
below the pole; neither is it at 3° 42’ from the pole.

And 8d, No other circumpolar star is on the meridian either
at that, or any other, horth polar distance: so that the entrance
passage of the Pyramid, in the present day, points at vacancy ;
but assists thereby in indicating the remarkable importance of
the several consentaneous phenomena which are depicted in
Plate vimt., as then, and then only, or in the year 2170 B.c.,
accompanying the meridian passage of the Pleiades.

The figures of the constellations which appear in red lines on
each of these three Plates, vi1., viut., and 1x., are chiefly introduced
to render the stars more easily identifiable to readers in the pre-
sentday; and not to indicate now, ideas supposed to have prevailed
in the primeval world, But as the figures may prove to be a first
step towards knowledge in that direction,—the subject will be
alluded to again, with such a view, in Div. m. chapter ix.


286 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


Great Pyramid Attestations.


Just possible is it now, after having succeeded
thus far, in showing astronomical agreements with
Great Pyramid construction,—that the supporters of
the elongated hierological dates of 3300 B.c., 3700
Bc., and 4500 B.c., ete. etc., may object, ‘ that any
‘number of concurring astronomical phenomena,
‘ even though indicated in the lines of a building,
‘and too numerous and exact to be attributed to
‘ accident, does not prove the building to have been
‘ erected at that date; for the lines might have been
‘computed by theory for so many centuries back,
‘or so many centuries forward, from the building
* date, when there was no such visible coincidence,
‘ or even any approximation to it in the sky.’

Such objection may be made, though with less
and less force in proportion to the complication of
the problem and the early age of its supposed nu-
merical performance ; but the most signal and unique
answer that may be returned for the Great Pyramid,
of all the monuments in the world, is this,—the
Great Pyramid has a theory (John Taylor’s deve-
loped), whereby its metrological features have been
already abundantly illustrated, and especially the
interwoven character of its time, and space, symbols.
Now this theory, already honoured with success at
many other points, indicates by its lines equally the
position of the Great Pyramid in tyme, as in space,
2.e., in its latitude on the surface of the earth; and


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 287


we have visited the building in the spot where it
actually stands, and found by measurement that it
does sensibly, or to within a few seconds, fulfil the
latitude, or space, requirement. Therefore it would
seem, that the resulting conclusion should be in
favour of a high probability, and something that
must be admitted until more direct and positive
evidence can be adduced on the opposite side,—that
if we could by a miracle overtake the time that is
passed, and revisit the Jeezeh hill at the date of
2170 B.c., as indicated by the theory, we should
certainly find some part or other of the building
then in progress; or in other words, the operation
itself would be abundantly visible from that com-
puted point of time,—even as the consequences of
the operation are to be seen now, from the similarly.
computed point of space.


And now we come to some further constructive
details in the building itself, which are well worth
attending to. In Plate v1, the two culminations of
the Pole-star, including the polar point, are sym-
bolically indicated in the height of the northern end
of the Grand Gallery, as seen from the centre of the
base of the Pyramid ; and having before remarked
that the equatorial line of the sky, as seen from an
important astronomical intersection of the base,
enters the lower north end of the Grand Gallery,—
we may presently add thereto, that the line of
direction of the Pleiades, as seen in the year 2170


288 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


B.c., or 4° 22’ north declination, approximately
strikes the middle height of the Grand Gallery from
the same point ; a symbolism which, combined with
the seven overlappings, might well seem to bear
out the ideas of those who have thought, for other
reasons, that this slanting corridor was a part of the
monument specially devoted to ‘ the seven stars.’
With our own more practical tastes, however, we
rather incline to note the remarkable observing
qualifications of the combination of a polar, with an
equatorial, star. An astronomer of the present day
desirous of obtaining time with the utmost accuracy,
procures a transit-instrument, which contains in its
collimation, the essence of a T-square,—or of the
correct base of a square Pyramid ; levels its axis,
orients it by looking at the Pole-star when on the
meridian; and then, and not till then, observes
another star near the equator, to obtain the ‘time
by. Even thus does the Great Pyramid indicate
that its fiducial lines were first oriented by a Dra-
conis near the pole, and then the time obtained by
the Pleiades ; which group, though now upwards of
23° from the equator, was in the year 2170 B.c.
only 4° 20’ therefrom, or, to all practical intents and
purposes, formed a good equatorial ‘clock star.’
Thus each of the Pyramid stars had a special
purpose to fulfil; and the astronomy of the Great
Pyramid would not have been complete or capable
of accuracy, symbolic only, or rather memorial
though it be, without both of them being employed.


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 289


Neither, perhaps, would the Great Pyramid be
thought fully furnished, unless, besides a system for
minute accuracy in procuring time at the instant,
some further and grander arrangements were made,
capable of indicating the total length of the whole
cycle, in terms of which such periodical time is to
be chronicled,—viz., the full length of the ‘ Great
‘ Year’ of the Pleiades. Now this is, and must evi-
dently be, the period of the precession of the equi-
noxes ; and we have just witnessed one prudent man
of the present day declining to risk the computation
of the exact length of the cycle——so many are the
minutely disturbing causes which may be brought
to light in its course. Until recently, indeed, the
published statements have been very various ; or


25,816 years, according to ; ; ‘ Tycho,

25,920 + A : : : Ricciolus,

24,800 “3 - i 2 ; Cassini,
and 25,740 - . F : : Bradley ;


but now the number ascertained by Bessel, or 25,868
years, has most favour; and this must be our test,
—because the best one available—of whether the
Great Pyramid speaks here also in terms of astro-
nomical truth.

Much struck with having found inches in even
hundreds when measuring the diagonals of the
sockets (see vol. ii. p. 135), and connecting that
with the length of 100 inches representing the
time-unit of a day, when the perimeter of the whole
Pyramid represents a year, or 100 inches x 365°242;

VOL. III. iy


290 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


reflecting also on the extraordinary importance of
diagonal equality to prove a square, and the pro-
bability of the symbol of the whole chronological
system pervading the entire monument, if any part
of it,—I computed the diagonals of the base of the
Great Pyramid from the previously observed mea-
sures of the sides and angles contained ; and then,
allowing an inch for a year, the cycle of the Pleiades
seemed to appear at once, in the sum of the two
diagonals.

9140 British inches, we have elsewhere assumed
as the most probable length of one side of the base ;
and that number being equal to 9131 Pyramid
inches, yields, for the sum in question, 25,827 of
the same inches. Or if, as we have also shown else-
where, the base may for some purposes be measured,
not on the upper, but the lower surface of the pave-
ment, so as to give 9150 Pyramid inches in the
side, the sum of the diagonals then amounts to
25,880 of the same units. The mean of the two, or
25,854, is certainly an amazingly close approach to
the 25,868 of Bessel’s cycle for precessional change,
—or, as usually expressed, for the circle described
about the pole of the ecliptic by the pole of the
equator ; but perhaps more correctly to be defined
as the circle described by the pole of the equator,
under the influence producing the precessional
movement round its own mean position in space;
for the rotation of the mass of the earth about its
polar axis is the grand fact which rules everything


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 291


material, as well in all human astronomy as in the
symbolisms of the Great Pyramid.


Conclusion of the Metrological Inquiry.


Let us pause now for a moment, and consider the
stage we have reached in this progress of plain
mechanical interpretation of the measured facts of
the Great Pyramid.

A most comprehensive metrology arranged in
five different branches, appears, indeed, to have been
discovered, each of them imbued with characteristics
of a most commendable, and even excelling, kind ;
but the objection may nevertheless, or rather on that
very account, be raised,—and we beg to be excused
for always relating most fully any or all serious ob-
jections whenever we hear of, or wherever we meet
with, them;—for our prevailing desire is to afford
our readers a full view of either side of the argu-
ment, as the only method of ultimately reaching the
truth,—the objection, we say, may be taken that,
Jirst, the foundations of the units and standards
concerned in that supposed metrology are vastly too
high, or deep, or difficult in scientific investigation
to have been arrived at by a primitive people ; and,
second, the units and standards themselves are in
every case utterly diverse from the units and stan-
dards of the same branches of, or subjects in, metro-
logy, as employed by the ancient Egyptians.

Now the reasons mentioned under these two heads
are fairly stated by the objectors; and the latter one


292 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. IT.


especially, is most perfectly as well as pointedly
true ; and we would ourselves, previous to our ex-
perience of the Great Pyramid inquiry, have looked
rather suspectingly on any book or person found
either attributing to any ancient people a higher
degree of acquaintance with astronomy and terres-
trial physics than what is certainly known and
generally practised in the present day,—or finding
something amongst them totally alien to all their
acknowledged manners and customs throughout
their whole historical period. But any one so doing
would be acting to a certain extent under the in-
fluence of prejudice in favour of what he knew, or
supposed he knew, before; and would be only
justified therein, if his old beliefs were established on
very firm data, and the new ideas rested on no addi-
tional, or certain, or sufficiently numerous facts to
allow of chance coincidences being eliminated, and
something approaching to proof established.

So far, however, is the Great Pyramid from being in
this latter questionable condition, that it possesses in-
finitely more facts capable of close and accurate mea-
surement than does any other subject of equally long
standing on the surface of the earth ; and we. have
now before us a greater number of, and more refined
observations as to, those facts than have ever been
seen in print before. Hence we have considered our-
selves not only allowed, but pre-eminently called on,
to drop all past prejudices as to what early nations
might be supposed able, or not able, to do ; and try


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 293


what the measured features of the Great Pyramid,
taken merely on their own inorganic merits, can
say for themselves.

If, then, after having long followed this, in prin-
ciple, unexceptionable course, certain all the while
of the unrivalled closeness of our measures,—we find
developed before our wondering gaze a consistent,
continuous, and most philosophic system of metro-
logy, explaining far more of the measurable lines
and angles about the Great Pyramid, than any other
theory has ever done or attempted to do,—what
answer shall we return to the sweeping judgment
enunciated by Chevalier Bunsen on p. 658 of vol. iv.
of his Egypt’s Place in Universal History, and re-
ligiously believed in, we are told, by a vast majority
of the heads in the literary world,—a judgment pro-
nounced, indeed, originally upon Sir John Herschel’s
and John Taylor's researches, but more applicable
now, if at all, to our own? The words are, in the
authorized London edition of 1860 A.D. :-—

‘The groundlessness of the fancies which have
‘been again very recently indulged in about the
‘ astronomical purposes of the Pyramids, and about a
‘ hidden symbolical system of astronomy, is demon-
‘ strated by that thorough conviction which is forced
‘upon us by a view of the monuments and the
‘reading of the hieroglyphics.’

The following is all the answer we propose—
simply to examine the alleged demonstration of
Chevalier Bunsen on the same principles we have


294 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


been testing the Great Pyramid by, or with little
beyond plain common mechanical sense. On which
understanding, let us inquire, first, what monuments
these are, so undefiningly alluded to; and, second,
what sort of a view of them is it which is required
to be taken ?

If a material view of any of the standing monu-
ments of the land, we believe that Chevalier Bunsen
was never in Egypt to enjoy that important and in-
structive sight ; and if a literary view of them only,
through the works of other men, what were the
monuments viewed? For if they were not the
Great Pyramid, they can hardly be received as being
more weighty in a question of and about the Great
Pyramid than the Great Pyramid itself! We fear,
too, that the mention of ‘the reading of the hiero-
‘ glyphics’ shows that the monuments which the
scholarly Chevalier preferred for explaining the
Great Pyramid by, were not even other Pyramids of
any kind or degree, but merely small buildings or
excavations, like the tombs—things of no sort of
resemblance to the Great Pyramid, and not un-
frequently of a very different age.

Chevalier Bunsen’s knowledge of the Great Pyra-
mid’s wondrous mass of building, ‘in number,
‘weight, and measure, appears to have been con-
fined to his copyings from Howard Vyse, and to
some unfortunately manipulated contributions by
Mr. Perring ; the Chevalier’s statement, too, of these,
is accompanied with so many slips or misrepresen-


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 295


tations of his own, that in the course of ten pages
(155-165 of his vol. ii.) we have marked twenty
notable errors of facts and features of mechanical
construction.


We do not detail each and every one of these
errors here, partly because to find out mistakes in a
copyist when the original authority can be referred
to, is rather supererogatory for the advancement of
science ; and partly because, in charity, we remem-
ber how very difficult it was in our first Pyramid
book of 1864 to realize all the facts of the Pyramid,
on other persons’ mutually contradicting descrip-
tions alone. But there is one of the faults of the
eminent German author of too serious a nature,
and too wilful on his part, to be passed over in
silence, and it is this,—after having profited his own
volumes most largely, both in the plates and descrip-
tions from Howard Vyse’s labours, Chevalier Bunsen
indulges in successive ungenerous animadversions
on the laborious and successful explorer he has been
borrowing from. Thus, as one example, M. Bunsen
tells his readers, in page 164 of his Philosophy of
History, ‘ Vyse has made a collection of quotations
‘ from different travellers in the sixteenth and seven-
‘teenth centuries, to prove that Dr. Clarke (1801)
‘did his countrymen an injustice by asserting that
‘the sarcophagus was broken to pieces by English
‘soldiers. The French savants merely remark that
‘they did not find the lid,’


296 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. 1.


The first sentence of this extract gives to Colonel
Howard Vyse rather a fool’s errand to collect quo-
tations of one and two centuries earlier, for the
purpose of proving that the coffer had not been
broken to pieces in 1801 (the occasion of English
soldiers visiting the Great Pyramid), when he knew
of his own observation in 1837, and all the world
did too, that it, the coffer, was not ‘ broken in
‘ pieces’ even then ; but the Colonel is grievously
misrepresented by the German philosopher. Dr.
Clarke’s charge was, see pp. 198 and 199 of volume
v. of the fourth edition of his Travels, that the coffer
‘was entire when our troops were landed in Egypt ;’
‘that they began, alas! the havoc of its demolition,’
‘and left behind them a sad memorial of the British
‘name; but only succeeded in accomplishing a
‘fracture near one of the angles.’ And to this
charge, Colonel Howard Vyse, jealous of the honour
of British soldiers under false accusation, showed
most conclusively that they did not begin the first
fractures of the coffer,—because French and Italian
travellers of preceding centuries had recorded, and
even gloried in recording, that they had broken off,
and carried away small bits of it. In fact, Colonel
Howard Vyse’s note on the subject, at the foot of his
283d page, volume ii. is logical, moral, and eloquent.
But what shall we say of the concluding sentence of
Chevalier Bunsen’s paragraph, already given, under
any of these heads ; for, as it stands there, it has no
visible connexion with what precedes, and when we


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 297


refer to the Great Egyptian work for what the
French savants did say, we find in a note to page 75
of Antiguités, Description, tom. ii., not the innocent
phrase which Bunsen states is what they ‘ merely
‘remarked,’ but the following version of Dr. Clarke’s
erroneous charge ;—‘ Since the French expedition,
‘the sarcophagus has been broken, as they pretend,
‘by English soldiers.” ‘ Depuis l’expédition Fran-
‘ caise le sarcophage a été brisé, & ce que l’on pré-
‘tend, par des soldats Anglais.’

Neither would the untenable nature of Chevalier
Bunsen’s paragraph have been explained, had more
of his preceding matter been introduced, while some
of his errors of another kind would have been
thereby exhibited ; for only six lines previously, he
states that the coffer (sarcophagus) of the Great
Pyramid, ‘is somewhat shallower and shorter, than
‘ that of the second largest Pyramid.’ Shorter it is,
but not shallower ; on the contrary, very considerably
deeper, my measures, and Colonel Howard Vyse’s,
for the former vessel’s depth, being 34°3 and 34:5,
respectively ; and for the latter's, 29°4 and 29:0
respectively : my own being expressly stated to ex-
clude the ledge in both cases ; that ledge, which, in
the case of the Great Pyramid coffer, is so strange
an omission on the part of the French savants, and
which Chevalier Bunsen does not bring to light.

In fact, upon the proportions of the Great Pyra-
mid, as printed by Chevalier Bunsen, in company
with his frequent blunders,—we doubt whether any


298 STANDARDS OF TIME. [DIV. II.


- metrological theory could be got to hold. But there
is no proof yet, that he made even an attempt to
see whether such a theory would hold on either his,
or any one else’s numbers; and he has therefore no
right to issue dicta, controlling those who have, and
to charge them before the world roundly and utterly
with indulging groundless fancies. .


Hence, there is not one measure of line or
angle, and not a single description of material or
mode of building about the Great Pyramid, that we
have founded on in all the previous pages,—and laid
the particulars of before our readers at length,—
which need be altered to the smallest extent, at
least on account of any of the sweeping judgments,
or rather most ‘groundless fancies’ and erroneous
numbers contained in all Chevalier Bunsen’s four
large and very learned volumes.

Some small alterations in our final figures, we
may have to introduce in future years (if we live to
see them), when new, better, and completer obser-
vations than our own, shall have been made at the
Great Pyramid; when the four sides of the base
and the whole pavement surface shall have been
cleared of rubbish ; the portcullis pierced; the
Grand Gallery compared with the Polar star ; the
air-channels opened ; and the subterranean water-
chamber reached. But in the meantime, we cannot,
if we would, escape from the grand and accomplished
fact, that a magnificent metrology, worthy of all


SECT. V.] STANDARDS OF TIME. 299


attention from scientific, commercial, and philosophic
men, has been evolved from a sound method of treat-
ment of all the best obtainable measures of the
entire Great Pyramid, both inside and outside, up
to the present instant. It is,in fact, the stones of
the Pyramid, themselves ‘ crying out.’

If, then, so much early excellence in pure mathe-
matics, terrestrial physics, and practical art as this
resuscitated Great Pyramid Metrology implies,—
seems to be inexplicable, as the hierologists insist it
is, according to their long-taught ideas of Egyptian
society at the period, but yet to stand on a broad
and sure basis of mechanical proof of its own,—let
us submit those hierological ideas to a more search-
ing scrutiny, from a monumental point of view,
than they have ever yet undergone; and inquire
thereby, whether the puzzling anomaly complained
of, may not prove the forerunner in discovery, of
some remarkable events in the history of human
life and its trials on the earth.


DIVISION IIL


OTES IN GREAT PYRAMID HISTORY.


oo


i
in


When Ae es bent Judah for me, filled the how with


}


NOTES IN GREAT PYRAMID HISTORY.


CHAPTER LIL


MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS STILL TO BE PROCURED.


SuccgsstvE ages have witnessed both writers
and theorists clustering strangely about particular
features of the Great Pyramid ; instinctively con-
vinced apparently of something important being
there, and fully borne out in such an impression by
subsequent discoveries, though all their own guesses
were usually very wide of the mark. In the
number of such attractions of concealed truth, are
to be placed many of the points alluded to in the
curious work, of 1706 A.D., attributed to Professor
Greaves ; and amongst them, perhaps the following,
where the anonymous author writes,—‘ and the best
‘reason that can be given why they’ (the metro-
logical standards of the Hebrews, Saxons, and other
nations commemorated in the Great Pyramid,)
* were expressed with so much obscurity, that in all
‘ kelyhood they might for ever remain unintelligible,
‘is, that the contrivers of these antient monuments
‘had a fore-knowledge by Divine Revelation, that
‘ in the latter days they should be understood.’


304. MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS [D1V. ITT.


Without attempting to go to all the serious leneth
and extent of this unknown author,—we would yet
remind our readers, that the several features accom-
panying the peculiar arrangement of joint-lines in
the floor of the entrance passage, as discovered by
ourselves just under the junction point of its ceiling
with the granite portcullis of the first ascending
passage,—led us inevitably to the conclusion (vol. i.
p. 156) that the builders had left there a sign by
which future men, expected to visit the building,—
not indeed soon after, but in long subsequent ages,
—should be enabled, whatever the language they
spoke, at once to find out the particular ceiling-
stone which hid the narrow ascent to the Grand
Gallery and upper chambers, with all their truly
wonderful symbolization of standards in weight,
capacity, and time.

As it happened, the key never required to be had
recourse to; for the accidental dropping out of the
one important ceiling-stone, when Khaliph Al Ma-
moon was quarrying in the neighbourhood,! dis-
closed the secret of the existence of the first ascend-
ing passage to him and his accompanying Arabs.
‘But would the key ever have been interpreted
‘ without such an accident ?’—1is a question we have
already been asked, and by those to whom it is our
desire and duty to endeavour to answer as well as
we can. Wherefore we reply mainly as follows :—
‘Much, almost everything, depends on the mental


1 See Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid, p. 86.


CHAP. I.] STILL TO BE PROCURED. 305


‘ preparation and scientific skill of the modern in-
‘quirer.’ It is generally believed, for instance, from
indications in the classic writers, that the later
Egyptians of Persian, Greek, and Roman times had
opportunities of passing down the. entrance passage
and into the one and now well-known subterranean
chamber of the Great Pyramid; in monumental
proof whereof, M. Caviglia, who rediscovered and
cleared out that chamber in 1817 A.D., is said to
have found certain smoked inscriptions in Roman
letters on the chamber’s roof. ‘The letters are good
‘ uncials, and therefore cannot be of the time of the
‘ Khaliphate, writes Chevalier Bunsen on a subject
where he is an authority of power. But yet those
Persian, Greek and uncial-writing Roman visitors
did not succeed in finding the ascending passages
and their carefully hidden, upper chambers; as
monumentally testified to again, by the earliest in-
scriptions there, being the Arabic ones either of, or
posterior to, Khaliph Al Mamoon and the year 850
A.D. Neither again have any of the numerous
visitors in modern times who have tramped up and
down that one long entrance passage, believing it
to have been constructed for leading to a sepulchral
chamber only, or ‘for the greater mysteries of the
‘ Freemasons, ever perceived even the existence of
the key ; but the moment a man entered impressed
with the idea of practical geometry having been
an aim and object, and in so far the language of
the builders for expressing their purposes in,—
VOL, II. U


306 MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS [DIV. III.


so soon the peculiar joint-lines on the floor were
discovered.

Not only, too, did we find them thus speedily,
and by our measures of line and angle inside the
entrance passage,—but they impressed us vividly
with the belief, that they were something very
peculiar, and most important in the intentions of the
builders,—even before we had found their relation
to the butt-end of the granite portcullis in, or rather
above, the passage’s roof ; for to so marked and sig-
nal an extent were they a geometrical anomaly in
the otherwise close regularity which prevails in the
joint lines thereabout.’


1 The construction of the entrance passage generally, and its con-
nexion with the ascending passage particularly, have been strangely
involved by Chevalier Bunsen, in his vol. ii. pp. 160 and 162; and to
the extent of his at last declaring, that a certain very important and
necessary examination is now impossible, which in truth is extremely
easy ; his least unexceptionable sentence being as follows :—

‘ The western passage, which was forced by the Khaliphs, has suffered
‘serious injury, just where the ascending and descending passages
‘meet in the ledge of the rock ; so that it is no longer possible to
¢ ascertain whether the three great granite blocks placed at the entrance
‘ of the ascending passage 14 feet 9 inches long, were intended to con-
‘ ceal one passage, or the other, or both.’

To which let us answer that,—

First, The ascending and descending passages do not meet in a ledge
of the rock ; but in the midst of masonry.

Second, The western passage of Khaliph Al Mamoon being merely
a rudely forced, broken way, smashing through everything that op-
posed it, can hardly be considered as having ‘ suffered serious injury,’
but rather inflicted it upon the entrance and ascending passages, when
it met them nearing the point of junction.

Third, Khaliph Al Mamoon’s ‘ broken way’ assumes an enlarge-
ment near the point in question, so as to enable it to compass the
ascent from the lower descending entrance passage to the upper ascend-
ing passage ; and by breaking, as it does, through the western walls
of either. But that enlargement, so far from making the task ‘ no


CHAP. I.] STILL TO BE PROCURED. 307


‘Granted, however, this much,’ say our ques-
tioners, ‘ that the diagonal joint-lines in the entrance
‘ passage floor would inevitably have been discovered
‘sooner or later; and would also have been per-
‘ ceived (by whomsoever had the fortune to be the
‘original discoverers or subsequent confirmers, of
‘ their existence), to constitute an intense anomaly
‘in the Pyramid masonry ;—still there is doubt,
‘ whether those or any other persons would thereby
‘ have been led to the further discovery of the par-
‘ ticular secret of what lay behind, at the back of,
‘ or above, the roof of the passage, opposite to the


‘longer possible to ascertain whether the three great granite blocks
‘ placed at the entrance of the ascending passage, were intended to
* conceal one passage, or the other, or both,’ is precisely what, with
the assistance of going into the passages also, enables any one now to
study the nature of the said granite portcullis, at its either end, north
and south, and also along a portion of one side, the western one ; and
see with the utmost certainty,—that all three blocks form merely one
long cork or plug driven from above towards the lower end of the
ascending passage ; but not through and beyond it into the entrance
passage beneath, on account of a contraction in the bore of the channel
near the bottom ; but still several inches above the roof of the entrance
passage (as see vol. ii. p. 41, etc.) So that the blocks are now, and
always have been, up within the limits of the ascending passage, and
never could have protruded down and through, into the lower or de-
scending entrance passage, so as to stop that. And

Fourth, The office of the granite blocks was, therefore, with the
ascending passage only ; and to stop it up, not conceal it ; for plugging
a large square hole in white-limestone with red granite, is rather a
way to call attention to the fact of a hole having been made there,
than to conceal it. Concealing was required also, no doubt ; but that
office was undertaken by the limestone block in the ceiling of the de-
scending passage, which entirely hid from view, so long as it was in
its place, both the hole formed by the upper passage and its heteroge-
neous filling ; making thereby that particular part of the ceiling of the
entrance passage indistinguishable from any other part thereof, for a
long way either north or south of it ; and in effect, delaying the dis-


308 MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS [DIV. ILL.


‘ lines on the floor,—unless its nature had been pre-
‘ viously disclosed.’

We admit there is ground for the doubt, but not
for absolute negation ; and while we are exceed-
ingly thankful to have been assisted by the dis-
closure, as above, having been made before our time,
—we would also call attention to one practical
result of that disclosure when it was made; and
suggest, with the consent probably of every one,
that if the ascending passage, Grand Gallery, and
chambers of the standards of 50 and 25, had not
been discovered then, or up to the present time,—
the true aims, objects, and ends of the Great Pyra-
mid could have been guessed only very imperfectly
indeed : so imperfectly,—that even now, before pro-
ceeding any further in our proposed course of his-
torical discussion, the question may be asked with
much propriety, whether we are yet in possession
of everything material required to be known; or


covery of all the ancient built chambers beyond, to far within the
centuries of the Christian era.

In happy contradistinction to the entangling mistakes of Chevalier
Bunsen in this matter, is the luminously clear account of Sir Gardner
Wilkinson, p. 167 of Murray’s Egyptian Handbook :—

‘On going down the entrance passage, at about 80 feet from its
‘ present mouth, you perceive the end of a granite block, which closes
‘the upper passage, and which was once carefully concealed by a tri-
‘ angular piece of stone fitting into the roof of the lower passage, and
‘ secured in that position by a cramp on either side. This stone has
‘ been removed, and the end of the granite it once covered is now ex-
‘ posed. But the granite closing the upper passage still remains in its
‘ original place ; and in order to avoid and pass above it, you turn to
‘the right by a forced passage, and, after climbing a few rough steps
‘you come to its upper extremity, and ascend to the Great Gallery,’
ete. 7


CHAP. I.]} STILL TO BE PROCURED. 309


whether there may perhaps be still, some hitherto
undiscovered chamber of importance in the Great
Pyramid ?

That numerous persons have fancied there is, the
abundant excavations at the well-mouth, north top
of Grand Gallery, Queen’s chamber, King’s chamber,
Davison’s chamber, and Howard Vyse’s huge hole
in the south side of the Pyramid, sufficiently attest.
Still more too, does the latter’s extensive digging in
the rock on the north front of the Pyramid ; for
this proceeding was mainly actuated by the men-
tion in Herodotus, and other classic authors, of the
tomb of the King of the Great Pyramid being down
some deep shaft, and ina chamber upon an island
surrounded by Nile water.

So consistent too are the accounts of the old
writers herein, that after concluding all his vain
attempts to reach such a chamber, Colonel Howard
Vyse still describes himself as under the impression
that it will be found some day in the low, as well
as aqueous, position foretold.’ We ourselves also
have been much puzzled by the ancient legend, that
nearly a third of the time employed in building the
whole Pyramid, was spent preliminarily on subter-
raneous excavations ; for the lower parts of the well
and entrance passage, together with the one central
unfinished subterranean chamber (the only parts now
known which can be included in such a description),
need not have occupied by any means so long.


1 See p. 104, vol. ii, Vyse’s Pyramids of Gizch.


310 MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS [DIV. LI.


An uninterpreted Sign.


In connexion then with such views, it is inter-
esting to note,—that if there be any virtue in our
supposed key in the entrance passage floor, pointing
to the upper chambers of the Pyramid,—the same
passage has another key of a closely similar order,
alluding apparently to something else not yet dis-
covered, or even suspected. We allude here to the
two joint-lines crossing the walls of the entrance
passage diagonally near its upper end, and quite as
striking an anomaly in their way, as are the two in
the floor lower down under the granite portcullis.
The difficulty however of interpretation in this new
case, is, in there being ¢wo such symbols ; or, one pair
of lines in either wall. Had the symbol existed on one
side only, any one would have said, from experience
of the portcullis, ‘Search on the opposite side of the
passage ;’ but here the opposite side reflects the
same signal, What shall be concluded then? The
case is open to every one, and fully described in
pages 37-39 vol. ii, and in Plates 11. and 111. of vol. i.

Our own idea, merely an idea, but derived induc-
tively from known Pyramid facts in other cases, is,
—that the direction to search in, lies at right angles
to the line joing the two symbols, that is, either
straight above or straight below.

Now straight above, thanks to modern dilapida-
tions, we can examine the structure (as see the
the Plates in section), and shall then find there the


CHAP. I.]} STILL TO BE PROCURED. 311


cyclopean blocks, placed pent-roof-wise, which mag-
nificently decorate the present entrance into the
Pyramid. They are unique, too, in the Great Pyra-
mid, for there is not anything similar over the
entrance passage of the second, third, or any other
known Jeezeh Pyramid; and though the present
double set of blocks placed in a single vertical plane,
are not precisely over, but rather to the south of,
the two anomalous joints of the passage walls below
them,—yet there are traces, in abutments left in the
masonry, that there were formerly two or three
other pairs of similar angularly disposed stones
outside, or north, of the present ones ; and to such a
thickness, that the mean position of this great mass
of architectural device was really, when complete,
in a vertical above the passage marks below.

But then what object did these large inclined
stones serve ?

Some writers have suggested, ‘to relieve the roof
‘of the entrance passage from the enormous weight
‘it has to bear of all the upper parts of the Pyra-
‘mid. But Colonel Howard Vyse very properly
rebukes these authors, academicians and good
mathematical mechanicians though they may have
been, for not perceiving that the position, close
under the sloping side of the Pyramid, secures to
these pent-roof-forming stones, their having very
little weight to bear. Moreover, if connected with
the entrance passage at all, it is only at its outer
end, where the pressure is least ; for while the pas-


312 MONUMENTAL DOCUMENTS [DIV. III.


sage dips southwards at an angle of 26° 27’,—the
basal line of the inclined roof-stones runs hori-
zontally southward, and would therefore rapidly
leave the neighbourhood of the entrance passage ;
even if it, the basal line, were to be continued
further than where we now behold it; but that is
not the case, for the Colonel assures his readers that
there is ordinary course-masonry, immediately at
the back of the present gable-end blocks we see.

Mechanically, then, these mutually sloping-to-
each-other blocks appear to be useless ; and would
have been so architecturally also in the perfect days
of the Pyramid, if, as most probable, or rather quite
certain, they were then hidden under the outside
coat of the casing-stones of the whole structure.
What, then, could they have been inserted for ?

We can only suggest, inductively again from
what we have observed for ourselves, that they were
intended ‘to add additional force during the Pyra-
‘mid’s latter days of decay, to the indication that
‘ opposite to them—or downwards through the floor
‘of the entrance passage, and between the two
‘diagonal points of its walls—is a shaft leading to
‘a most important and probably water-furnished
‘chamber of the builders of the Pyramid ; not in-
‘deed supplied by a canal from the Nile, as some
‘have thought, but by the same general infiltration
‘ through the rock, which fills the sepulchral well in
‘ King Shafre’s tomb.’ And we are rather confirmed
in the notion of such a chamber existing in the


“Vol. Hi.


:


\


vertical’


Central


<


0009


Pl. 10.


0005 0004 0008


‘SIYTUT (USHUT fO0 (JDIS’


vebnssod osu. agusy (YB JO gods
PTY LOU (0 (MOL LPO CYB JO (LOLI 847 ay F f


‘euoxzoump soynbun
qrorioucusn punpL.odue Jo “punoih

f2 PRUNE MOPY SLOT IILYP oy £
vabossnd

- po uDagUg (un speaol YOM JOOBLA NY wire

vabvssvd, VODUDAJUT LOAO FPU0ZS PIU TYP 95] UIMTIG
Moworvuuo0s IYx bumoys
sobnossod rpg yo rund rx
CIWV Ad LYTYD fo fry usopson fo
‘gsyy, buryooy uoypes [wonLa


eee ee ee


bey


Manenee


rz


000% ooo! oO 005 000r


’
N


ee ts


WAHLMS Farlane, Lith? Edin®™


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


0009


0005 0004 0008 000% Ooor 0001
‘SIYOUT (UST JO (ITDIS?
oO vobvss0d-evunpusy (PUB $2 gods
= |) paper ro ruosy apoyo Jo ruompoep 7 any P


qreorucuoygs penpodua yo punosy
Jo PONJENS MOPY SUOMDISLIU POLYZ ini £
vabossnd


W.AHLMS Fatlane, Lith® Edin?


- (POU AFL (U2 Speaol YOM THOBLAL OYF yi, %
vobossnd aUbtpug 0A0 SPU0RS PRUYTL Tp 3 | UIM7IG
MonoeuUo0s 24x bumoys
sobnssnd yg po vumd ur
CIWYYAd LYTYD f0 Jy Usoyplony 40
‘gsyy, buryoo) uompes Torri


oe


ae


8


Central vertical


“Vol. Hi.


CHAP. I.] STILL TO BE PROCURED. 313


locality, both by Plate x., which shows three im-


_ portant astronomical intersections in the indicated


direction, and also by remembering the many
fragments of diorite mixed up with the ancient
rubbish on the northern or neighbouring edge of the
hill, and unconnectable with anything yet seen by
any modern man within the Great Pyramid.

If there really exists such a chamber, the history
of the monument will be written far more completely
after its discovery, than before ; but meanwhile, as
we know of no one likely to undertake the search,
and have exhausted all our own small stock of
means,—it is our duty now to make what literary
use we can of the materials already collected ; and
of which the portion now newly added, amounts to
a larger mass of Pyramid detail, than was ever
before discussed in a serious manner.


CHAPTER IL
NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS.


In the first edition of Sir Gardner Wilkinson’s
important publication on the Ancient Egyptians,
but which particular edition is only now to be read
for illustrating the advance since made both by the
author and his science,—in that edition, we say, of
1836 A.D., there is a well-reasoned-out theoretical,
or purely literary, conclusion that the builder, or
the king over the builders, of the Great Pyramid,
was Suphis ; otherwise and variously called—accord-
ing to inflections used by different interpreters and
nations—Chufis, Shofo, Khufu, Saophis, and Cheops;
or the second royal personage in Manetho’s fourth
dynasty of Egyptian kings.

Now at the time of Sir Gardner’s publication,
Colonel Howard Vyse had not yet begun any of his
celebrated excavations, nor does he seem to have been
acquainted with the published opinion when he did
so begin. Amongst the most delightful and satis-


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 315


factory instances, therefore, of theory confirmed by
fact, must it be classed, that when,—within a year
after Sir Gardner Wilkinson’s book had appeared
elsewhere,—Colonel Howard Vyse broke his way
through solid masonry into the ‘chambers of con-
‘ struction’ of the Great Pyramid, and thereby saw
things never intended by the builders to be seen
until the final ruin of the long-lasting monument,—
he perceived rude paintings or red crayon markings
on some of the blocks of stones; and having had
them copied by various hands, and transmitted to
the learned Mr. Samuel Birch of the British Museum,
—that experienced Egyptologist pronounced them
to be ancient quarry-marks; and found amongst
them the oval of King Suphis, or Shofo, or Khufu ;

Also, these two royal ovals,
(ck FD): of which the first is certainly pro-
nounced by authority to read Sen-suphis, Nu-suphis,
Nu-Shofo, or Knemu-Khufu ; and the last is, I
believe, accepted as the same name written short, or
Knemu or Nu only: equally therefore alluding
to the same man; viz., a brother of Shofo, also
a king, and a co-regent with him in the fourth
dynasty. )

These three ovals are the only ones that have been
found in any part of the Great Pyramid ; and that
they really exist in the chambers of construction


316 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS, [DIV. III.


there, as described by Colonel Howard Vyse, is
testified to by the first page of the third folio volume
of large plates by Dr. Lepsius ; where that scholarly
and in-the-field-experienced philosopher has had the
original red markings on the stone re-copied by his
own artists, and has given the oval of Shofo upon
an extra large scale, followed by those of Nu and
Nu-Shofo on a smaller size.


A name erroneously advocated.


The testimony, then, of the Great Pyramid itself,
is simply for Shofo and Nu or Nu-Shofo ; and had,
we thought, been allowed by every one, until
Chevalier Bunsen, in his second volume of Hgypt’s
Place in Universal. History, p. 161, made Shafre,
Shafra, Sephres, Chephrenes or Chabryes,—in hiero-


glyphics thus, ,—the principal King of


the Great Pyramid : introducing his oval, and his
alone, into the text, p. 161; ‘for Shafra,’ says he,
‘must either have completed the upper part, or at
‘ least have cased and arranged the upper chambers,
‘ of the Great Pyramid.’

Now here is very positive language, and from a
man of pre-eminent fame as a literary philosopher ;
we inquire, therefore, from him himself, whence his
reason for adding so notably to the Pyramid’s testi-
mony about its regal authors; and find it in the
next line to be,—‘ This is the only way of explain-


CHAP. IL] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 317


‘ing his (Shafre’s) title “ the Great of the Pyramid,”
‘and the statement of Diodorus about Chabryes, as
‘ well as the ignorance of the historians whom Pliny
‘consulted, and of which he complains, as to who
‘really built it (the Great Pyramid). Shafra’s title
“again, would be most appropriate, if he completed
‘it. The king who actually completed this Pyra-
‘mid might with perfect right be called the Great
‘ of the Pyramid.’

With all deference for the author of this state-
ment, we cannot look on the whole of it as proof ;
certainly not of that simple and straightforward kind
which the Pyramid’s metrological theory has hitherto
been receiving from a close and searching examina-
tion of the monument itself. In another part of the
eminent Teutonic scholar’s deeply-read work (vol. i.
p- 163), we are indeed informed that ‘history does
‘not admit of the cogent proof of mathematics,
‘precisely because her province is an infinitely
‘higher one, that of mental and moral conviction.’
But even on these latter grounds, so far as we
understand them, it may reasonably be suggested’
that, because ‘ Pliny, as above mentioned, com-
plained of the historians he consulted not knowing
who built the Great Pyramid, he, Pliny, does not
thereby pronounce an opinion in favour of a new
and particular name recently produced by Chevalier.
Bunsen ; and as to what Diodorus, whom Bunsen else-
where calls ‘the bewildered and bewildering,’ says


318 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


about Chabryes,—the statement is inserted on page
125 of Bunsen’s own book, as due to Herodotus ; and
a few pages further on the name is identified with
Shafra, and Shafra again with Knemu-Khufu ; or,


in the Egyptian tongue, (+ 8 0), which has


never been found inside the Great Pyramid, is made


the same with [ A» cf #), which has been


found there, and is perfectly different in all its
symbols but one.

Hence we cannot really discover any force in the
classical, and less in the monumental, reasons hitherto


cited for making Shafre, 2.¢., (+ B 0), the chief


builder or completer of the Great Pyramid ; and
the sole remainder of Chevalier Bunsen’s proof must
rest on his interpreting correctly that peculiar title
of Shafre’s, which he renders ‘ the Great of the
‘ Pyramid ;’ for though, in a following paragraph,
speaking of the Queen’s and King’s chambers in the
Great Pyramid, the Chevalier states with the most
complete positivism, ‘Shafra converted the former
‘into the apartment, and made the upper one his
‘sepulchral chamber, as appears from his having
‘had his sarcophagus introduced into it,—yet all
this is mere assertion, without one particle of addi-
tional evidence tending to single out Shafra more
than any one else in all Egyptian history as having


CHAP. Il.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 319


performed the works, or owned the sarcophagus
alluded to.

This latter assertion, therefore, as well as the for-
mer, equally depends upon the name of Shafra, or


Shafre, , not unfrequently found in


neighbouring tombs on the Pyramid hill,—though
never in the Great Pyramid itself,—having some-
times a complementary device after it of a bird and
a pyramid (see our Plate x11.) ; and upon. the true,
certain, and correct translation of that device being,
as Bunsen gives it, ‘the Great of the Pyramid.
But both Sir Gardner Wilkinson and another hiero-
glyphist of mark, translate the same device as, ‘ of
‘ the little Pyramid ;’ the bird being said by them to
be really a sparrow or swallow, and not a pigeon, as.
it had been taken for in the ‘ great’ interpretation.
Both these latter authorities, too, place Shafre in the
fifth dynasty ; making him represent the Sephres of
Manetho ; and our own observations of the entrance
passage of the recently discovered granite and arra-
gonite building near the Sphinx,—either the tomb or
temple of King Shafre from his statue duly signed


being found there (see vol. i. chap. xii.),


—connects that monarch in a practical manner, and
equally whether he was of the fourth, fifth, or any
other dynasty,—with the second, and not the Great,
Pyramid.


320 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. {DIv. Ill.


Hence, monumentally, or according to any exist-
ing or known direct evidence of the monuments—
Pyramids and others—Shofo and Nu-Shofo were
the only kings who had to do with the building of
the Great Pyramid ; and they both belonged to the
fourth dynasty according to the testimony of every
modern Egyptological author, as well as of the
ancient Manetho.t Let us now therefore apply our
own monumental and astronomical date from vol. 11.
Division 11. to that dynasty, and see how it then
comports with received chronologies of Egypt. In
the following table, accordingly, the first twenty, out
of Manetho’s thirty, dynasties of kings subsequent
to Menes, have their dates entered against them
according to the several authorities mentioned at
the head of each column :—


1 One modern writer, indeed, has to be excepted, viz, Hekekyan
Bey, in his ‘Treatise on the Chronology of Siriadic Monuments, de-
‘ monstrating that the Egyptian Dynasties of Manetho are records of
* Astro-geological Nile Observations which have been continued to the
‘ Present Time’ (London and Cairo, 1863, printed privately): for this.
subtle and ingenious theorist, with a good knowledge of mathematics,
and of extensive as well as varied and quaint reading, inserts seventeen
kings’ names into each of the two first dynasties downward from
Menes; and makes the second such dynasty include the names of
Manetho’s fourth; while he completes the whole Egyptian history
down to the time of the Persians in twenty-two dynasties, in place of
Manetho’s thirty. But then, again, the very title-page indicates some
new theory with regard to Manetho not a little revolutionary in its
character,—as yet unsubscribed to, so far as we can learn, by a second
individual,—and not traceable through any series of alleged monu-
ments, in so far as our examination of them has extended,


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 321


MANneETHO’s EcypTiAN DyNASTIEs,
DATES AND DURATION OF THE FIRST TWENTY, ACCORDING TO
VARIOUS AUTHORITIES.


ou Be Chevalier | E. W. Lane,| W.Osburn,
The most Dr. Lepsius Dr. Lepsius’} Bunsen, {Sir Gardner] ‘ Mon. His-


Peace advanced : ae ‘Konigs- | ‘Egypt’s | Wilkinson,| tory of
oot | MER | tend ne bt
ge | Berlin, 1852. me} 498-506. | Brit’ |yol.ii-p.632.
B.C. B.C. B.C. BC. B.C. B.C.
i{ 5735 4800 3892 3623 2700 2429
5472 3639 3434 2480 2329
24 5472 3639 3433 2480 2429
5170 3338 3210 2080 2329
3{ 5170 3338 3433 2670 2329
4956 Re 3124 3210 2440 2229
4{ 4956 4000 3124 3209 2440 2228
4472 h 2840 3055 2200 2108
Bf 4472 2840 3054 2440 2228
4254 2592 2948 1860 2108
6{ Ss 2744 3054 2200 2107
% 2546 2948 2080 1959
7 { 2 | 2592 | 2947 | 1800
e3 2522 2926 1800 we
8{ ee ; 2522 2925 1800
igs 2380 2782 1650
of “3 2674 3054 2200 2107
5 2565 2948 1750 1959
10 44 2565 A 1959
= 2380 Ae
{ ; 2423 2925 2200 2107
stork ea 2380 2782 2080 1959
124 3435 ne 2380 2781 2080
ae ot 2167 2635 1920 1959
134 2136 2634 1920
oe 1684 2228 1525 1800
14{ $5 2167 2287 2080
a 1684. 1777 1674
sf} ~ 2101 | 2547 | 2080
- 1842 ae Pes 1900
16{ i 1842 ate
Y 1591 1777 1800 1900
inf lesa | 1776 |...


a 155 1591 | 1625 | 1520 | 1674


pe
fee)
hr,


1314 | 1322 | 1448 | 1409 | 1304


_
oO
ma


bo

Oo
ee
i
i)
for)
©
—
bn
iv=)
©
bm
to
oo
bo
—_
iJ%)
—_
ee


VOL, III. x


322 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


Remembering then, that our astronomical date
for the building of the Pyramid was 2170 B.c., we
find, on referring to the above table, that there is
only one of the authorities, within the alleged
period of whose fourth dynasty, that date is in-
cluded. Our result is indeed just outside that of
Sir Gardner Wilkinson and Mr. Lane, largely differ-
ent from Chevalier Bunsen, more so still from Dr.
Lepsius, and entirely irreconcilable with M. Renan
and Mariette Bey. But we cannot on that account
give up our astronomico-architectural determina-
tion of the Pyramid’s date, seeing that it rests on
so large a mass of observations at the Pyramid
itself ; and is far more direct and. cogent in charac-
ter than the series of indistinct literary probabilities
derived from a subsequent age, out of which the
early chronicles of Egypt have been attempted to
be elaborated, by the world-famous writers in ques-
tion ; and on which, also, they have hitherto arrived
at so little agreement among themselves.

Let us ascertain, however, inquiringly, what those
authors’ foundations are. Early Egyptian monarchs,
as every one knows, are always arranged in dynas-
ties; what are these dynasties ?

_ They first appear by name in the work of Manetho,
the Egyptian priest of Sebennytus, in the age of
Ptolemy Philadelphus, 280 8B.c.; or nearly a hundred
years after the last reputed dynasty had expired
under Nectanebo 11.,and four thousand years after the
first is reported to have begun under Menes. The


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 323


‘dynasties’ may have formed a mode of arranging,
or talking about their past kings always in vogue
among the Egyptian priests; or they may have
been so arranged first by Manetho himself, as part
of a memoria-technica, to enable his new Grecian
prince, Ptolemy, to acquire thereby more easily a
bird’s-eye view, rather than a deep knowledge, of
the history of the ancient land of Egypt. Certain
it is that subsequent critics have been much puzzled
to define a dynasty in Egyptian history, so little is
there often to distinguish between the last king of
a former, and the first king of a following, dynasty ;
or to show why a dynastic separation should have
been made between them.

Certain is it also that dynasties are never alluded
to in hieroglyphics of regal names. Hence, when
hierologists proclaim that they have found such and
such a dynasty on ‘the monuments,’ they mean,
that they have read the names of the kings in the
engraved ovals there, and found some of them some-
thing more or less similar to certain of the Grecized
names in one of Manetho’s dynasties. But there
was, on the monument, nothing about the dynasty,
either:in name or number. And, as two of the
modern interpreters seldom read a_hieroglyphie
precisely the same,—and a large amount of latitude
is allowed between what they do read, and what is
written in the scraps of Greek treatises (through
which alone whatever fragments of Manetho’s
original work still exist, have come down to us),—


=


324 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


we need not wonder at different authorities often
varying, as into which dynasty of literary invention
to put such and such an oval, cartouche, escutcheon,
or hieroglyphic royal signature found on the monu-
ments ; and yet complacently declaring, both that
that dynasty is found on the monuments, and that
the monuments confirm Manetho’s dynasties or lists.

Again, even when agreeing as to the number of
the Manethoan dynasty to which a particular monu-
mental oval shall be assigned, the modern hiero-
logist authorities are by no means always at one, as
to what name to call the said dynasty by ; whether
to attach it to Tanis, Memphis, This, or some other
city ; and to say, whether its sovereign and his
officers were Lower Egyptians, Amalekites, Philis-
tian-Shepherds, Thebans, or perhaps even Negroes ;
and whether one dynasty was contemporaneous
with, subsequent, or anterior, to some other. Oc-
casionally, too, the same author makes a change in
his previous arrangements, on account of some
newly discovered fact; and then the amount of
such change is a fair measure of the certainty of the
science professed ; as when Bunsen, vol. iii. p. 10,
shifts the construction of the Lake of Morris, at one
stroke of his pen, from the first king of the sixth
dynasty to the fourth king of the twelfth dynasty.

While as an example of the different conclusions
of acknowledged Egyptologists on one and the same
inscribed or sculptured remain, the following extract
may be quoted :-—


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 325


‘ Perring, the Pyramid measurer, has, in a recent
‘ publication, attempted to establish the strange
‘notion, which I found also existed in Cairo, that
‘the monuments of El Amarna were the work of
‘the Hyksos (fourteenth dynasty) ; others wished
‘to refer them to a period anterior to that of Menes
‘(first dynasty), by reason of their certainly great
‘but not inexplicable, peculiarities ; I had already
‘explained them in Europe as contemporaneous
‘kings of the ezghteenth dynasty’—(Dr. Lepsius’
Letters from Egypt, p. 111.)

These are merely specimens of a very small order
of discoveries, ascertained while testing—from a
mechanical point of view—the degree of reliance to
be placed on the assertions of some one or another
very first-rate Egyptologist, when he asserts that he
has found such and such an historical fact on the
monuments ; and that. it must therefore be admitted
by all the world. But the methods of Egyptologists
have been most extensively examined by Sir George
Cornewall Lewis,! from a grammarian point of view;
and have unhappily led him to consider—that, ‘ the
‘ operations of Bunsen and other modern critics upon
‘ the ancient history of Egypt, rather resemble the
‘manipulation of the balance-sheet of an insolvent
‘company by a dexterous accountant (who, by
‘transfers of capital to income, by the suppression
‘ or transposition of items, and by the alteration of
‘bad into good debts, can convert a deficiency into


' An Historical Survey of the Astronomy of the Ancients. 1862.


326 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. II.


‘a surplus), than the conjectures of a speculative
‘historian, who undertakes to transmute legend
‘ into history.

‘Egyptology, continues Sir George, ‘has an
‘ historical method of its own. It recognises none
‘ of the ordinary rules of evidence ; the extent of its
‘demands on our credulity is almost unbounded.
‘ Even the writers on ancient Italian ethnology are
‘moderate and tame in their hypotheses, compared
‘with the Egyptologists. Under their potent logic,
‘all identity disappears; everything is subject to
‘ become anything but itself. Successive dynasties
‘ become contemporary dynasties ; one king becomes
‘ another king, or several other kings, or a fraction
‘ of another king ; one name becomes another name ;
‘one number becomes another number ; one place
‘ becomes another place.’

Among examples to illustrate his assertions, the
Right Honourable Baronet cites the opinions of
both Baron Bunsen and Dr. Lepsius, regarding that
potent name in Egyptian antiquity, Sesostris ; and
finds at last these two leading Egyptologists,
‘though differing in other respects, agree in think-
‘ing that Sesostris is not Sesostris. ‘But here
‘their agreement stops. One assigns Sesostris to
‘ what is called the Old, the other to what is called
‘the New Empire, separating his respective dates
‘by an interval of 3793 years. What should we
‘ think, if a new school of writers on the history of
‘ France, entitling themselves Francologists, were to


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 327


‘arise, in which one of the leading critics were to
‘deny that Louis xv. lived in the seventeenth
“century, and were to identify him with Hercules,
‘or Romulus, or Cyrus, or Alexander the Great, or
‘ Cesar, or Charlemagne; while another leading
‘ critic of the same school, agreeing in the rejection
‘ of the received hypothesis as to his being the suc-
‘cessor of Louis xu, were to identify him with
‘ Napoleon 1., or Louis Napoleon 2’

Even the method of interpreting hieroglyphics
according to the principles of Young and Champol-
lion, is attacked root and branch from the same
grammarian point of view by the late learned mem-
ber of the Palmerstonian Government ; and he
insists that it is to be described only as ‘ the uncer-
‘tainty of uncertain conjectures built upon other
‘uncertain conjectures. But here we can by no
means fully agree with the distinguished classic ;
and can only imagine him to have arrived at such
extreme opinions, by attending solely to the points
of divergence amongst Egyptologists and hierolo-
gists. These are sufficiently wide, and frequent too,
to take away from all their announcements the
positive trust that was for long accorded to them ;
and by referring to Baron Bunsen himself, vol. i.
p- 479, we may instantly see the amount of license
with which he would indulge himself, when inter-


preting old Egypt; for the following series of


English words is given as being, each and every


328 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV., II.


one of them, equally the true rendering of the
Egyptian sound sr, viz. :—
a camelopard.
a sheep.
a spike.
a species of duck.
fire.
to distribute.
an arrow.
a chief, a noble.
to drink.
a flabellum.
cheese ?


But though there be some points extremely un-
settled even still among the Egyptologists, that
must not blind us to the very great number of
points on which they are either perfectly, or almost,
agreed ; and do produce nearly identical, and those
sensible, phrases out of the same hieroglyphic in-
scription.

Similarly too, in the vexed subject of the dynas-
ties, they form at least a something tangible on the
surface of the dark waters of old historic literature ;
they do assist the memory to a considerable extent ;
there is not anything else to refer to for first ideas
in these distant times; and, that some portion of
them has tolerable certainty, we subjoin herewith,
Jirst, the designations of the nineteen earlier dynas-
ties ; and second, the names of their kings, as given
by the leading authors of the most opposite views
in various schools of hierology.


CHAP. Il.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 329


puodses100 Aqje10ued ‘08 Loy sv rey os ‘Sourvu oso ‘sduTy STY Jo Youve ynq ‘seyseuAp 03 ATJOaIIp opN][e JOU Soop soMEyASoyseIY »


‘ueqeuy,
“ueqouy,


‘sproydoyg oqtq dure yy por[eo-og


‘oqloX
‘weqouL,
“uUeqouyLy;
“ueqouy,


‘avyodosprr1ey 10 eyAuueqeg
‘ueytodoopovzey] 10 oyAuueqeg


‘oqrqdureyy


uephqy
‘oqrqdore yy
oqrydure yy
‘oqrq dure
‘oqrydmeyy


uINgsO “M


SUBqeTT, 94} JO, Sv popytyue ore ‘omyoueyY 07 Ayaso[o


“‘sueqou,L,
‘sueqouy,
“suUvqoTT,


‘sosyAY] werurysoreg


‘sosyAP uviqery
“BOTOX

Mbanees Yaa
‘sueqouyL,
‘sueqolL,


‘sueppodoopoei0 fy]
“sueqifodoopoer10 yy


‘saqgiqd ue


"pog ‘d Bury ueqoyy, T


“soqrq dure yy


‘suveurTyueydely
‘sop dure
‘soqiyd ure

“sopra L
“BOP


‘AL ‘TOA ‘MosuNg JoT[eAoyO


ueqyrpodsorg,
“ueqrjodso1qy
“ueqtpodsorqy


‘sosy APT


‘sosy AH]
*a410xX
‘uezrpodsorq,
‘ueytpodsorg,
‘ueqrpodsorq,


‘ueqIjodoapoes0 FT
“ueqr[odoopovse FT
oqry dora

oqry duro
‘uveuryueydryy


‘oq uno yy
‘oqry dure
‘opp duro
“oqTUTY,L,
‘OHUIGL


‘Youqssugy, snisdory} * Soueds


‘sueqoyy,
‘sueqouy,
‘sueqoq,
‘sueqoyy,


eeoeee


‘sueqouy,


‘sueqouy,
‘suBqoyT,
‘sueqou,
ENGL
‘sueqouy,


‘sueqouyy,


-Osvay


‘suvqrpodsorqy
"stregt[Odso1q


‘sproydoyg werormayg


"suRqou,


*suvqtpodso1q,

‘BOPLOX
‘suey fodsorq.
‘sueqppodsorgy
‘sueqIpodsorq


‘suvptpodoopoe1ey]
‘suvppodoopoese yy]


‘soqry due
‘soqryd ue]
‘HOAIS OULVU ON


‘suveuTyueydory
‘soqryd may
‘sopryd ue yy

‘HOAIS OULU ON

‘U9AIS OULU ON


‘sniqosny Ul ‘oyjouRyL


‘sdury proydoyg 10430
‘ssuTy paoydeyg 10q90


‘sueqptpodoapori0 fy
‘sueqipodoapoe10y7


‘snUBOLITY snipne ul ‘oyjouryy


‘sueqrpodsorq.
‘sueq1podso1q,


‘sSury proydeys
‘SOplOX
‘suezjodso1q
‘suvqodsoiq
‘sueqt,odsorq


‘soqryd ue yl
‘sop d utes
‘soqrqd uray


‘suve@urjuey doi
‘soqrydueyy |
‘soqryduoyy |

‘sovrTaryL

Big. Lig AO


‘SHILIMOHLOAY SHOTEVA OL DNIGHLOOOV ‘NOLAN NT LStld FHL dO SNOILVNOISHG GNV SANVN


‘SHILSVNAC, 8S OHLANV][


330


NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS,


[DIv. II.


Kines’ NAMES IN MANETHO’s FIRST NINETEEN DYNASTIES,


Lepsius’
‘ Kénigsbuch.’


Menes.
Athotis.


Kenkenes.


Uenephes.
Usaphaidos.
Miebidos.
Semempses. -
Bieneches.


Boethos.
Kaiechos.
Binothris.
Tlas.
Sethenes.
Chaires.
Nephercheres,
Sesochris.
Cheneres.


Necherophes.


Tosorthos.
Tyreis.
Mesochris.
Soyphis.
Tosertasis.


Aches.
Sephuris.
Kerpheres.


Soris.
Suphis 1.


Suphis 2.


Mencheres.
Ratoises.
Bicheris.
Sebercheres.
Thampthis.


Usercheres.
Sephres.
Nephercheres.
Sisires.
Cheres.
Rathures.
Mencheres.
Tancheres,
Onnus.


tees


Bunsen, Bunsen,
Vol. ii. Vol. iv.
Meni. Menes.
Atet. Athothis 1,
Raton f Athotis 2.
mee Diabies.
Pemphos.
Kaiechos. é
Ratetkar. Momkheiri.
Khufu. Stoikhos Ares.
An. Gosormies.
Seserenra. Mares. —
Sahura. Anoyphis.
Senefru. more .
nubos
Raenseser. { RPGnet i
Rasesermakar| Rayosis.
Aakaru. Biyres.
Asses Karf. oth a
Sent. Fae
Khufu. Saophis 1.
Num Khufu. | Saophis 2.
— Kar. Menkheres 1.
Menkara. Menkheres 2.
Raneferkara, | Pammes.
Rashaf. atts 'd
Usskarf.
Senefru.


Raneferkar 1.
Raneferkar 2.
Ratetkar 2.
Raneferkar 3.
Harmeren.
Sneferkar.
Kaenra.
Raneferkar 4.
— neferkar.
Neferkar.
Sneferkar.
Merenra.
Harmenkar.
Tetu.

Unas.


Menes.
Athothis.


Kenkenes.


Unephes.
Usaphais.
Miebis.
Semempses,
Bieneches.


Boethes.
Kaiechos.
Binothris.
Tlas.
Sethenes.
Chaires.
Nepherchenes,
Sesochris.,
Cheneres.


Menes.


2


Necherophes. {


Tosorthres,
Tyris.
Mesochris.
Soyphis.
Tosertasis.


Aches.


Sephuris.
Kerpheres.


Soris.
Suphis.


Sophris (?).


Mencheres.
Ratoises,
Bicheris.
Sebercheres.
Thampthis.


Usercheres.
Sephres.
Nephercheres.
Sisires.
Cheres.
Rathures.
Mencheres.
Tancheres,
Onnos,


Shofo.
Nushofo.
Menkere


{


Usercheres.
Shafre.


Menes.
Semempses.


ooee


eee


eee


Cechous,
Raophis.


Soris.

Suphis.
Nu-suphis.
Nephercheres
Sesochris.


eoee


Usercheres.
Tatcheres,
Sephres.
Mencheres.


no
7


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS.


Manetho


Kine’s Names—continued.


Bunsen,
Vol. ii,


331


Lepsius’
‘ Kénigsbuch.’


Gardner
Wilkinson.


Methusuphis.
Phiops.
Menthesuphis
Nitokris.


70 Kings
for 70 days?


27 Kings
for 146
years ?


Ammenemes.


for 48


(" Kings
years ?


¢| Ammenemes.
Gesongosis.
Ammenemes,
Sesostris.
Lacheres.
Ameres.
Amenemes.
Skemiophris,


i ee


60 Kings
for 453
years?


L wep


(6 Kings for
484 years?
15 ez!


eee


Pepi.
Mentuhept.
Teti.


Nitakar.


wee


Mentuhept.


Hantef.
Hantefaa.,


Hantef.


Hantef.
Rasneferkar.
Ranubter.
Seseren Ra.


Amenemha 1,


Sesertesen 1,


Amenemha 2,


Sesertesen 2.
Sesertesen 3.


Ameneniha 8.
Amenemha 4.


Sebeknefru.


Shetenra.

Rasenkhet.
Sebekhept 1.
{ Sebekhept


2, and
others.


} Rakhutcti.


\ 3


Rakherp-
kar and
others ;
doubtful.


)


Apappus.
Ekheskos.
Nitokris.


Amyrtaus.


Thuosimares.


Sethinilos.
Semphukrates


Khuther
Tauros.


Meires.
Tomaephtha,
Soikunis.
Peteathyres.


Phiops 1.
Menthuophis 1


Phiops 2.


Menthuophis 2
Nitokzis.


Ammenemes. Ammenemes um
Stammenemes|Sesortasis 1.


Sistosis.
Mares.


Sipthah.


Phuoro.
{ Amuthar-


toeus and
60 Kings ?
{ 76 Kings?
No names.


Salatis.


Buon.
Apakhnas.
Apophis.
Jannas.


Asses.


Amenenemes 2
Sesortasis 2.
Sesortasis 3.


Papa.
Merenre.

{ Nitokris
and others


}


acne


Ementefs.


Mantoftep 2.
Senofrkere.


Mandothp.


Enentef.


Imephthis.


Senucheres.
Menthesuphis.


Nubecheres,


Usercheres 2.


Ammenemes. | Nesteres.


seve


Osirtasen.


Achthoes.
Amenemes.


Sesortosis 1.


Amunmhe 2. | Amenemes 2.


Osirtasen 2.
Osirtasen 8.
Amunmhe 38.


Ammenemes 8.) Amunmhe 4,


Ammenemes 4.
Sebeknophris.


60 Kings (?). {


} Amuntimaos.


Amenemes.
Tiaaken.


Salatis,


Banan.
Apachnan,
Apophis.
Anan.
Aseth.


coos


aeee


Sabaco
and la
mulioRtne j


Sesortosis 2.

Sesortosis 3.

Amenemes 3.
Amenemes 4,
Skeniofris,


Menthesu- .


phis 2. -
Sechemetes.


Sabacon 1,


Sabacon 2
and others.


chamber


{° Kings in
of Thawek.


‘


332


NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS.


Kine’s Names—continued,


‘[DIV. III.


| years ? no \
164 |< names.


43 Kings
for 151
years ? no


names.


Tuthmosis.
Chebron.
Amenophis.
Amesses.
Mephres.
{ Mephra- )
muthosis. §
Thmosis.
Amenophis.


Horus.
Akencheres 1.
Rathotis.
Akencheres 2.
Akencheres 3.
Armais,
Ramesses.
Armesses.
Miamu.
Amenophis.


Sethos.
Rampses,


Amenepthes.


Ramesses.


Ammenemes.


Thuoris.


Tanaken.


Nakhara.


Aahhept.
Raspenneb.
Khames,


Aahmes 1.
Amenhept 1.
Aahmes.
Tetmes 1.
Tetmes 2.


Hatasu.
Tetmes 3.
Amenhept 2.
Tetmes 4.


Amenhept 3.
Horus.
Amenhept 4.
Aakhenaten.
Ai.

Titi.
Amentuankh.


Rameses 1.
Seti 1.


Rameses 2.


Menephtah.


Sephtah.


Amenemhes.
Seti 2.


Bunsen, Lepsius’ Gardner
Vol. iv. ‘Kénigsbuch.’ Wilkinson
f a Kings
or 511
( years? no ; Ra-Apepi c
names.
if 17 Kings Amosis
for 131 { and Ne-
(years? phris.
Mentuo-
phis and Amenophis 1.
others.
Raat Tuthmosis 1.
Tuthmosis 2.
Tuthmosis 3.
Amosis. Tuthnosis 3. | Amosis.
Amenophis 1.| Amenophis 2.) Amunoph 1.
Tuthmosis 1. | Tuthmosis 4. | Thothmes 1.
Tuthmosis 2. | Amenophis 8.| Amun-nouhet.
Tuthmosis 3. | Xuenra, Thothmes 2.
Amenophis 2. | Ai. Thothmes 3.
Tuthmosis 4. | Tutan Xamun.| Amunoph 2.
Amenophis 3.| Horos. Thothmes 4.
Horus. Amunoph 3.
x i Horus.
~ARe bee Rathotis.
Ramesses 1. | Ramesses1. | Remeses 1.
Sethos 1. Sethos 1. Sethi 1.
Ramesses 2, |Ram. Miamun.| Remeses 2.
Pthah-
Menopthah. | Menephthes. aerk t
Pthah-
Sethos 2. Sethos 2. men-seep-
thah.
nee Men. Sipthas. as
Need Sethnechthes. seni


Saites.


Aphophis.
Melaneres.
Jannes.
Asses.


Amosis.
Chebron.
Mesphres.
Achencheres.
Amenses.


Thothmosis.


Acherres.
Armais.
Ameno-
| phis-beke-
naten.
Encheris,
Ai.~
Chebres.
Tai.
Ameno-
{ phis-Mem-
non.
Horus.


Ramessu.

Sethos.

{ Sesostris-
Ramses.

{ Siptha.
Thuoris.


Amenepthis.
Sethos 2.


a


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 333


An attentive examination of the preceding tables
will probably convince any one, that of all the
earlier dynasties, their recording authorities are more
unanimous about the fourth than any other, declaring
it to be Memphite ; and of the kings in that dynasty,
the same voices are more confirmatory of the once
real existence of Shofo and Nu-Shofo, as variously


inflected, or of and a> OX g


than of any others.

Now these are the two kings’ names which the
Great Pyramid itself shows in the quarry-marks of
the chambers of construction. Of that there can be
no doubt ; and the only remaining possibility that
we see, to prevent the Pyramid’s own symbolized
date of 2170 B.c. being given to those kings and
their dynasty, depends on the following considera-
tion :—

In several of the buildings around the Great
Pyramid, stones have been found with hieroglyphics
on their lower sides, or in such a useless position,
that travellers have unanimously declared they must
have been taken out of an older building, and used
over again as mere raw material in the new. Is it
possible then that these now marked stones in the
Great Pyramid, and of which the markings are often
upside down, were similarly taken out of an older
building ; and that their present employment may
therefore be of a date long subsequent to the inscrip-
tions and the lives of kings Shofo and Nu-Shofo ?


334 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


After rather strenuous efforts to find something
in this idea, we have been obliged to abandon it,
for the following reasons :—

First, The signatures are not hieroglyphics, only
quarry-marks ; they give, indeed, approximately the
fioures of the hieroglyphics, or are in the hiero-
glyphic language pure and unadulterated ; and are
not in the enchorial, demotic, or other forms of writ-
ing subsequently found in use amongst the Egyp-
tian people for ordinary purposes. But quarry-marks
are radically different things from hieroglyphies, in
that economical sense which we have shown else-
where to have ruled throughout the Great Pyramid
building. Hieroglyphics, for instance, as their name
imports, must be cut, carved, or engraved into the
stone ; always a long, laborious, and expensive pro-
cess, but so attractive in appearance when executed,
as to have therefore ever been a favourite method
of decorating, as well as ‘rendering vocal,’ Egyp-
tian public buildings. Hence travellers have had
common sense on their side, when they have deemed
that no one would take the trouble to carve hiero-
glyphics on the surface of a large, well prepared
stone, and then turn that surface inwards and bury
it in the composition of a rubble wall, side by side
with ordinary rough stones.

But quarry-marks, on the other hand, are merely
the rudest outline imitation of hieroglyphic figures ;
linear daubs put on the stone with a piece of chalk,
or a coarse paint-brush, and with a freedom and


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 335


carelessness which show they could hardly have
occupied the artist-workman more than seven
seconds each, in the execution of any regal name.
Such is certainly the full extent of time which the
rude, almost ridiculous representation of King Shofo’s
two walking birds (chicks or quails), the horned viper
and solar sieve, in the oval found by Howard Vyse
in the Great Pyramid’s chamber of construction,
need have employed. Hence, if such works are
turned inwards when building a wall, no offence
against economy is committed, especially if the
marks had already been of some other service. Now
the service performed. there, is plain enough, when
both Howard Vyse and Perring inform us, that
these red markings are found only on the Mokat-
tam limestone, whose blocks had to be cut and
squared on the opposite side of the river, and, in-
deed, of Egypt. Baron Bunsen, no doubt, in his vol.
i. p. 164, tells us that they, the four low flat-ceiled
chambers, ‘are all from 2 feet to 4 feet 10 inches
‘high, and cased with granite, when quarry-marks
might have been looked for in vain. But this is
only another of the great word-philosopher’s blun-
ders when treating of mechanical facts, and of which
he gives an additional instance in the very next line
by writing—‘ above them lies Campbell’s. tomb.’
‘Campbell’s chamber, it is, if you like, i.e. one of
the five chambers of construction built inside the
Great Pyramid, and merely to be a hollow (unen-
terable by man), for relieving the ceiling of the


336 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


King’s chamber from too much weight,—but ‘Camp-
‘ bell’s tomb’ is the name applied, by the same ex-
plorer who named the chamber, to that magnificent
and easily enterable tomb near the Sphinx; a real
tomb with sculptured sarcophagi of the age of the
twenty-sixth dynasty, and totally unconnected with
the Great Pyramid in any and every way.

The Campbell’s chamber too, would have been
well worth more exact attention from the celebrated
philologist ; for there it is, that in the highest of all
the five chambers of construction, and far above any
other known chamber in the Pyramid, the oval of
Shofo is found. And his too, is the only legible
oval in that room; so that if any name were re-
quired to indicate who was ‘the completer of the
‘ Pyramid,’ surely that proud title, together with its
supposed consequent in fame, ‘the great of the Pyra-
‘ mid ’—must be the due of Shofo, and of no one else,
according to the testimony of the stones of the
Pyramid itself; and there is no need to bring in
any other king, when his, Shofo’s, name is actually
written up in the sole and highest and most signi-
ficant place.

In our Plate xtv. vol. ii, we have endeavoured to
insert the quarry-marks on the walls of the chambers
of construction, as described by Howard Vyse ; and
they will be found,—by attending to the symbolism
of granite and limestone in section,—to appear on
limestone-lined walls only.

Hence we may perceive that the ovals and red


CHAP. II.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 337


figurings in the chambers of construction of the
Great Pyramid, are merely passing daubs of quarry-
marks connected with certain special blocks of lime-
stone brought from a distance; and are markings
most probably put on at the quarries, while their pur-
pose was served when the stones had been safely con-
veyed to the builders of the Pyramid. Wherefore,
though stones with the quarry-marks of Shofo and
Nu-Shofo—as the reigning monarchs of Egypt—
might have been subsequently taken out of an old
building of their day, and inserted upside down or in
any other way into a new edifice of a later date,—their
is no pressing economical reason why the particular
stones of the chambers of construction should not
have been similarly misplaced, as to the mere read-
ing of their quarry-marks, at their first as well as last
occasion of being builded into a wall in the time of
Kings Shofo and Nu-Shofo.

Second, we may remark, that while it is easy
to imagine the builders of any little tomb in the
neighbourhood, pulling a few stones out of the Great
Pyramid for their petty purposes,—it is much more
difficult to fancy the builders of the Great Pyramid
supplying themselves with stones for their gigantic
purpose out of the comparatively Lilliputian tombs,
temples, or any work erected by man, either far from,
or near to, them ; for all such edifices would afford —
but a drop to the required bucket. There is no
visible symptom too now, of the Great Pyramid being
a patch-work building, made up of heterogeneous

VOL. IIL. ¥


338 NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. [DIV. III.


materials in size, quality, and intended. uses, aims, or
ends ; but everything, on the contrary, shows one
grand uniform idea to have extended through the
whole structure, and that its materials were pro-
eured by application to nature, or nature’s earth-
stored supplies, direct and immediate.

And third, we are informed that all authors, of
every nation and every varied form of chronological
belief, have invariably considered hitherto, that
the quarry-mark ovals in the chambers of construc-
tion were originally drawn for the Great Pyramid
works ; and thereby prove convincingly under what
kings these works were carried. on.


Clashing Result.


Hence the whole monumental conclusion, formed
by combining the quarry-marks of the Great Pyra-
mid with whatever is to be trusted, or is tolerably
agreed upon, among Eeyptologists, and both of them
with our astronomical date of the building,—can be
no other, than that two of the kings of the fourth
dynasty of Egyptian history, Shofo and Nu-Shofo
by name, lived through a period including the epoch
of 2170 B.c.

We do not wish to conceal in any way, but rather
to call attention to the circumstance, that this date
compels us to differ totally, as regards date, from all
the famous hierologists, save one, of modern times ;
and makes our study of the Great Pyramid, accord-
ing to the careful measure of its lines and angles,


CHAP. IIl.] NAMES AND DATES OF THE BUILDERS. 339


lead to an entirely different result from that attained
by those eminent men. (See Table on p. 321.) To
their astonishing learning in many points we bow
extremely low; but yet can no more think of deny-
ing, or fearing to acknowledge, the existence of those
lines and angles which we have measured in the
Great Pyramid, and on which we found, or to up-
hold their contemporaneousness with the Pyramid’s
building, and to imsist on the importance of their
scientific interpretation,—than any one else could
deny the existence of the Great Pyramid in Egypt,
or of Egypt in the world.

Let us pause, however, for one moment in the
course of our impartial mechanical investigation,
in order to ascertain into whose company our first
step into the history of the Great Pyramid has
brought us.


CHAPTER III.
_ HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES.


Mr. OsBurn,—the one historian into the very
middle of whose date and duration for the fourth
dynasty of Egypt, the epoch 2170 B.c. falls——was
only brought to our attention very recently, and
then by an accident ; but after having experienced
something of the earnestness of his manner, and
thoroughness of his style of investigation,—we pro-
cured one after another of his works, tracing thereby
the growth of his knowledge of Egypt, her monu-
ments, and both ancient and modern language, con-
tinually increasing through a long period of years,
until it may be considered to culminate in his
Monumental History of Egypt, published in 1854.

His grand and abiding purpose appears to have
been, to ascertain if the unlocking of the written —
materials of Egypt by Champollion’s method of in-
terpreting hieroglyphics, would disclose any traces
of the sojourning of the Children of Israel in the
Nile-land, or anything bearing on the Bible records
of early events transacted therein or connected
therewith.

‘Is it not marvellous that they can now read the


CHAP. ILI. ] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 341


‘ old Egyptian readily, and understand its grammar ?
‘These Egyptian discoveries are likely to be one of
‘ the greatest wonders of our age,’—had written the
late Dr. Arnold ; and William Osburn pressed for-
ward in his younger life, with a youthful enthusiasm
which did not tire during thirty years of devotion
to the task, in order to acquire this power both of
reading and of grammar, that it might be employed
on the one chief object of his life. To prepare him-
self worthily, therefore, for his subject, he appears
to have visited Egypt, made himself well acquainted
with its physical features and climatic experiences,
studied its monuments in situ, and copied hierogly-
phics with his own hand,—over and above the never-
ceasing task of making himself familiar with all the
idiomatic particulars of the Coptic language, the
extensions of hieroglyphic interpretation-methods,
the works of modern hierologists, and the remains
of all authors of antiquity who have treated on
Egypt.

Hence while he is often going over the same
ground as Gardner Wilkinson, Rosellini, or Lepsius,
there is a difference in his manner; with him no
dallying by the road-side, entranced by vivid de-


tails of private life in ancient times, or the skill of


ancient workmen, or the often intricate details of idol
and animal worship ; that is, for their own sakes,
—for he does not neglect such topics altogether,
but keeps them in due subservience to his own
orander object of pursuit, and estimates their true


342 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [ DIV. lil.


value by the light of a more advanced civilisation
and a purer religion. ‘To trust no one of interven-
ing times, seems to be a notable principle with him ;
and after sifting to the utmost all that has come
down to us from Alexandrine Greeks, his principal
labour begins with the unravelling the tissue of
fictitious history composed by the ancient Egyptian
priests, and recorded by their despotic monarchs on
the exteriors of their temples, in a land of eternal
slavery, where none dare openly contradict what
was appointed to be inscribed. For this remarkable
purpose Mr. Osburn makes abundant use of the
hieroglyphics found on private tombs, sealed up in
their own day, and only recently disclosed by exca-
vations ; but thereby in their turn unfolding for the
first time the opposite side, to the official side, of
EKeyptian history ; and delightful is it to observe his
astonishing facility in dealing with the hieroglyphic
characters of every age, and either in large or small
amount.

But he, Mr. Osburn, is not perfect ; for we have
already, in vol. i. p. 104, exposed his lamentable
error as to the material of the ancient casing of the
Great Pyramid; and could now add thereto his
further errors, of placing Heliopolis opposite to, or
east, instead of north-east, of the Sphinx ; and allud-
ing to the still remaining portion of the casing of
the second Pyramid near the summit as being
of plaster, and the lower part as having been of
‘ granite of a vernulion colour, pieces of which are


CHAP. II1.] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 343


‘lying about in abundance.’ These are real and
melancholy facts ; and when we sought very recently
to enter into correspondence with him, it was mainly
to inquire how he had contrived to fall here and
there into such astounding mistakes respecting
simple things,—for they constituted the exceptional
feature to the general rule of his otherwise admir-
able work and its precise character.

To our extreme regret, however, one of his pub-
lishers, and then another, though having a kindly
remembrance of the man, and instituting special
inquiries after him, were unable to procure any
tidings; and by a secretary and member of a
scientific and literary society to which he had once
belonged, we were only further told,—that he had
been much asked after of late, both in London and
at Leeds, where he had once resided, but he had not
been seen at either place now for many years ; not,
in fact, since an unfortunate break-up in his pecu-
niary affairs,—a sudden and total loss of all his pri-
vate fortune, they feared, by the failure of a bank
in which he had deposited whatever he possessed,
and to the chief director of which, very shortly
before the crash came, he had dedicated one of his
learned volumes in sincerity of friendship and con-
fiding trust. Since then,—and whether all the
particulars were exactly so or not, was somewhat
uncertain—our chief informant repeated, ‘ Mr.
‘Osburn had not been seen, and every one now
‘ believed he was dead.’


344 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [DIV. IT.


This, then, would seem to have been the melan-
choly end of a man of peculiar talent, high resolve,
noble purpose, and magnificent ideas of devotion in
a good cause,—and his works alone now speak for
him in the world. What is thought of him gene-
rally we know not ; and the only expressed opinion
we have come across anywhere, is a passage in
Chevalier Bunsen, vol. itt of Egypt's Place im
Universal History. The name, indeed, is differently
spelt, but there can be no doubt it is intended
for the author of the Monumental History of
Egypt; the date of which is also sufficiently indi-
cated by the relative time-allusion thereto, seeing
that Bunsen’s preface to his English edition was
written in November 1858. ‘The passage runs
as follows :—

‘Unfortunately, too, we are obliged to say of Mr.
‘ William Osborne’s work on Egypt, which appeared
‘two or three years ago, that, from a eritical point
‘ of view, it has no value whatever.’

Now, Chevalier Bunsen having previously laid
down, in his vol. i. p. 163, that ‘ Criticism is the
- * testimony of a scholar who tests the evidences of
‘ the past, —we must confess that this definition ap-
‘pears to us most admirably descriptive of the general
contents of Mr. Osburn’s historical volumes. And if
there is any large difference between his criticism
and Chevalier Bunsen’s, it is first, that William
Osburn translates the hieroglyphics originally for
himself, instead of depending, like Bunsen, in the


CHAP. III.] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES, 345


majority of cases, on two friends always at his
elbow ; and, second, that Osburn’s critical testing
of the evidences of the past, has led him to a dif-
ferent result from that arrived at by Bunsen. Here


we suspect is the chief grievance of the complaint ;


and if Chevalier Bunsen had, since his time, been
proved independently to be right, by the grand test
of whether his method of procedure led to truth or
error,—there might be no resisting his dicta. But
on one side, the same methods of philosophizing
having since been taken up by the more brilliant
M. Renan, have led him to chronologies so much
greater than Bunsen’s, that these latter have all
their once supposed strength completely taken out
of them; while, on the other hand, our recent me-
chanical and scientific investigations on the Great
Pyramid, within their own circle, emphatically de-
clare Bunsen wrong and Osburn right.


Osburn, and Ancient Writers.

One charge is still indeed pressed in some quar-
ters, viz., that W. Osburn’s method was merely an
‘idle attempt to collect evidence ;’ and this is
thought very seriously of, because Bunsen has writ-
ten (vol. i. p. 163), ‘to faith it is immaterial whe-
‘ ther science discover truth in a spirit of scepticism
‘or of belief,—and truth has really been found by
‘both courses, but never by dishonesty or sloth,’
Now, that idleness of such a kind is not to be
charged against Mr. Osburn, the list of his principal


346 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [DIV. 111.


published works below sufficiently attests.’ While,
that it is not proper to term the attempt ‘idle,’ in
the sense of any proper principle of research having
been interfered with, when he determined to study
Egyptology with reference to one particular class of
research only,—may be considered by the public to
appear from the title of a great association which
has recently arisen in this country,—is at this pre-
sent moment forming auxiliary committees in every
town and city through the length and breadth of
the land,—and claims to have been founded ex-
pressedly and approvedly ‘for the accurate and
‘systematic investigation of the archeology, topo-
‘graphy, geology, and physical geography, etc., of
‘the Holy Land, for Biblical Illustration,’

Leaving then any further defence of Mr. Osburn’s
style of research to this new society,—one impor-
tant and most difficult branch of whose work he
laboured at long and successfully through years of
solitary, and unsympathized, toil,—we only demand
leave to include him amongst our great philologists-
of-reference ; and can assure our readers of being
enabled thereby to lay down a broader and. more


1 (1.) An Account of an Egyptian Mummy. Presented


to the Museum at Leeds. 8vo, F 1828
(2.) Ancient Egypt: Her Testimony to the Truth of ri

Bible. 8vo, 4 : 4 : 4 3 . 1846
(3.) Antiquities of Egypt. 8vo, . ‘ ‘ , : 1847
(4.) Israel in Egypt. 12mo, ; , : ‘ A 1853
(5.) Monumental History of Egypt. 2 vols. 8vo, . 7 1854
(6.) Genesis and Exodus Illustrated from Existing Monu-

ments. 12mo, , ; A ; : ; 1856


(7.) Israel in Egypt. 2d Edition, . F : : . 1856


CHAP, III.] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 347


secure track over the morass of doubt, and dark pits
of oblivion, which beset man’s present knowledge of
the affairs of the world, as transacted four thousand
years ago.

Thus when Baron Bunsen, with his vast erudition
and transcendent critical powers, has gone over the
ancient field, in vain searching for any counter
evidence,—and when he asks,’ ‘can it then be ac-
‘ cidental that everything which has been quoted
‘ from the theological works of Manetho by classical
‘or ecclesiastical writers up to the time of Theodo-
‘ sius, indicates a man of sound reason and sobriety,
‘and of extraordinary learning in the antiquities of
‘his nation? ... and would the same man, by
‘ altering the lists of the kings, which we have now
‘authentic proof he had before him, have stamped
‘ himself as a deceiver and an empiric ?—then it is
that Mr. Osburn steps in with a word of caution in
due season. For how does Manetho’s sound and
sober history of Egypt really begin? With the
following statement, according to Bunsen himself :—


Years.


(1.) Dominion of the Gods, in two divisions, lasting for . 13,900
(2.) Dominion of Heroes, in two divisions, ‘ j 1,255
(3.) Heroes and Kings of the primeval race, transition from

divine to human history, : . : 4 . 5,813


(4.) Purely human history—provincial princes ;
Years.


a. Kings without particular notices (of Thebes?), 1817
b. Thirty Memphites (Lower HeaBY 2 y . 1790
c. Ten Thinites, ‘ ; ’ . ames 191 0)
—— 3,957


Sum-total, : : + == 194,995


1 Egypt's Place in Universal History, vol. i. p. 66.
y. Pp


348 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [ DLV. III.


And this long series of rulers and kings is ante-
rior to the usually-referred-to thirty dynasties of
subsequent kings, beginning with Menes, all of them
equally constituting what Manetho teaches as real
history ; and if his name is usually connected with
the latter reigns only, it is because his original work
has perished ; and so far, fortunately for his charac-
ter, the notices now existing of what he did write,
are only the more probable parts of his narration, as
culled by the criticism of Africanus, Eusebius, Syn-
cellus, and other early Christian writers of the North
African school. But even with the well-known
thirty dynasties, Mr. Osburn further points out that
Manetho describes, arranges, and numbers them so
as to extend ostensibly over 5462 years, but says
in a more private manner at the end, and in a mode
provocative of many doubts, that they really lasted
only 3555 years: and we may add, that even this
quantity seems about one-third longer than the
empire of Hgypt actually lasted. While Sir George
Cornewall Lewis does not scruple to say, after re-
ferring other lists of primitive kings in reputed
ancient chronologists, to the productive powers ot
late fiction :—‘ The list of Manetho, must, in like
‘manner, be regarded as the result of his own in-
‘vention ; aided, doubtless, by some traditionary
‘names and stories received from his predecessors.’

The only subsequent author to Manetho in the
antique world, having any independent claim to
chronological authority, is Eratosthenes ; the Cyre-


CHAP. IIL] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 349


nian Greek, supposed to have been librarian in
Alexandria in the days of Ptolemy Euergetes
(247 B.c.); ashrewd man, but picking up his infor-
mation at second hand among Greeks only; and now
entirely lost, as to his writings, except for some few
quotations from him that have come down in other
authors. Yet upon Eratosthenes does Chevalier
Bunsen rely implicitly, as an unexceptionable source
and unquestionable canon of early Egyptian history,
—even with as firm a faith as, on the opposite side,
Lepsius adopts the shorter, and M. Renan the longer,
summation of Manetho; while even William Osburn,
who is usually full of praise for whatever he thinks
worthy in Bunsen, is obliged to speak of one parti-
cular attempt of his to establish a forced meaning
of a particular passage in Eratosthenes, ‘ as a favour-
‘ite theory of his, Bunsen’s, which he seems dis-
‘posed to support at a considerable expense of
‘historical probability, and perhaps also occasion-
“ally of accurate rendering of the text of his Greek
“ authorities as well.’


Greek and Roman Travellers.


From these doubtful views, therefore, among the
chronologists professed, we turn to Egyptian travel-
lers, foremost amongst whom stands the venerable
Herodotus. He, though a pure Greek, was earlier
than the native Egyptian Manetho, having visited
the ancient land about 445 B.c., when Egypt, though
already passed over by the destroying hand of


350 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [DIV. ITI.


Cambyses, was enjoying rest and independence once
more for a brief interval. But though Herodotus is
worthily immortalized for his writings in history,
and though every one speaks lovingly and with
praise of the simple, confiding, inquiring, childlike,
manner of the blue-eyed Herodotus,—he wrote of
Egypt, not a history, only an account of what he
had seen and heard there; stories founded on
history perhaps, but with their chronology utterly
wrong, doubled up and twisted inand out. Where-
fore it is, that even his great admirer Chevalier
Bunsen ‘lays it down as established,—

‘That the chronology of Herodotus, in the proper
‘sense of the word, (only) begins with Psamme-
‘ tichus; that for the previous period he possessed
‘no expedient by which the discrepancy between
‘the Egyptian computation and his own series of
‘ dynasties, could be reconciled ; that these two sys-
‘tems differ by about ten thousand years, and that
‘neither consequently can be considered as either
‘ certain or possible.’ As a traveller, then, only can
Herodotus be received in his Egyptian writings ;
and as a Greek traveller, knowing no language other
than his own native tongue ; dependent, therefore,
on interpreters in all his communications with the
people ; seeing everything, moreover, through the
medium of Greek idolatry, and believing that Greek
gods and Greek men had been the founders and
originators of everything else upon earth. These
imperfections, jomed to the tactics of Egyptian


CHAP. IIL] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 351


priests and the trickery of the dragomans of the time,
—Mr. Osburn in his critical examination of passages
sometimes breaks out with virtuous indignation on
‘ the imposition which had been practised upon the
‘ father of history by his unprincipled guides and
‘informants in Egypt,—were greatly in the way of
the eminent Halicarnassian arriving at the mind of
the Coptic land: and have now, to a great extent,
deprived his works of that full and perfect credence
which they implicitly commanded amongst his own
countrymen for several centuries after his death.

Of Diodorus Siculus, who followed in about 58 B.c.,
Strabo in 18 A.D., and Pliny in 70 A.p.,—or closer
to our own times than to those of the Great Pyra-
mid,—they contain so little in addition to what is
related in Herodotus,—that, though they are all to
be read and pondered over in connexion with other
sources of information, and have been abundantly
presented before the British reader again and again
by Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Corey, Rawlinson, and
others,—still the reader may gladly accept of Bun-
sen’s proposition to ‘leave at last all this chaff, and
‘turn to the monuments; for her monuments are
undoubtedly Egypt’s peculiar glory, and the verit-
able, and only extant pages of her most ancient
experienced. history.


Characteristics of Egyptian Monuments.


‘No nation of the earth, writes Chevalier Bun-
sen, with expressive eloquence, ‘ has shown so much


352 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [DIV. IE.


‘zeal and ingenuity, so much method and regularity,
‘in recording the details of private life as the
‘Egyptians. No country in the world offered
‘ greater natural facilities for indulging such a pro-
‘ pensity than Egypt, with its limestone and granite,
‘its dry climate, and the protection afforded by its
‘ desert against the overpowering force of nature in
‘southern zones. Such a country was adapted not
‘only for securing its monuments against dilapida-
‘tion, both above and below ground, for thousands
‘of years, but even for preserving them as perfect
‘as the day they were erected. Inthe north rain
‘ and frost corrode, in the south the luxuriant vege-
‘tation cracks or obliterates the monuments of
‘time. China has no architecture to bid defiance
‘ to thousands of years,—Babylon had but bricks,—
‘in India the rocks can barely resist the wanton
‘power of nature. Egypt is the monumental land
‘ of the earth, as the Egyptians are the monumental
‘people of history. Their contemporary records,
‘ therefore, are at once the earliest and most certain
‘ source of all Egyptian research,’

Similarly, too, and even more instructively, does
the great Lepsius write :'—

‘ An intense desire after posthumous fame and a
‘place in history seem to have been universal in
‘ancient Egypt. This exhibits itself in the in-
‘credible multitude of monuments of all descrip-
‘tions which have been found in the valley of the


1 Lepsius’ Hinleitung, freely translated by W. Osburn.


CHAP. III.] HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 353


‘Nile. All the principal cities of Egypt were
‘adorned with temples and palaces. Towns of
‘lesser note, and even villages, were always dis-
‘ tinguished by one temple at least,—often with more
‘than one. These temples were filled with the
‘statues of gods and kings, generally colossal, and
“hewn from costly stones. Their walls also, within
‘and without, were covered with coloured reliefs.
‘To adorn and maintain these public buildings was
‘at once the duty and pride of the kings of Egypt.
‘ But even these were rivalled by the more opulent
“classes of the people in their care for the dead,
‘and in the hewing and’ decoration of sepulchral
“chambers. In these things the Egyptians very far
‘surpassed the Greeks and Romans, as well as all
‘ other known nations of antiquity.

‘Still further to enhance to after times the value
‘ of these ever-during monuments of ancient Egypt,
‘it was universal with the inhabitants to cover
‘ their works of art of every description with hiero-
‘ glyphics, the purport of which related strictly. to
‘the monuments on which they were described.
“No nation that ever lived on the earth has made
“so much use of its written system, or applied it to
‘a purpose so strictly historical, as ancient Egypt.
‘There was not a wall, a platform, a pillar, an
‘ architrave, a frieze, or even a door-post in an
‘Egyptian temple which was not carved within,
‘ without, and on every available surface, with pic-
“tures in relief. There is not one of these reliefs

VOL. III. Z


854 HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. [DIV. II.


‘that is not history, some of them actually repre-
‘senting the conquests of foreign nations ; others,
‘the offerings and devotional exercises of the
‘monarch by whom the temple or portion of the
‘temple on which the relief stood, had been con-
‘structed. Widely different from the temples of
‘Greece and Rome, on which inscriptions were
‘ evidently regarded as unwelcome additions, form-
‘ing no part of the original architectural design,
‘but, on the other hand, interfering with and mar-
‘ ring it,—the hieroglyphic writings were absolutely
‘essential and indispensable to the decoration of a
‘ perfect Egyptian temple.

‘This writing, moreover, was by no means con-
‘fined to constructions of a public nature and of
‘ oreat magnitude, such as temples or tombs, but was
‘ also inscribed on objects of art of every other con-
‘ ceivable description. Nothing, even down to the
‘palette of a scribe, the style with which a lady
‘ painted her eyelashes with powdered antimony, or
‘even a walking stick, was deemed too insignificant
‘to be inscribed with the name of the owner, and a
‘ votive dedication of the object itself to his patron
‘divinity. Inscriptions with the names of the
‘ artists or owners, so rare on the remains of Greece
‘and Rome, are the universal rule in Egyptian art.
‘ There was no colossus too great and no amulet too
‘small to be inscribed with the name of its owner,
‘and. some account of the occasion on which it was
* executed,’


CHAP. IlI.] | HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES. 855


Here, then, is some idea of the vast storehouse of
materials for the early history of the world, con-
tained in the monuments of Egypt. There is
nothing at all approaching it in any other land
whatever, either in quantity, precision, or preserva-
tion ; it is a phenomenon in the history of the
human race, and formed a task so exceedingly im-
portant in itself for the world to have executed
for its future use and behoof,—while Egypt was
so precisely the country in which it would be in
every way best executed,—that there seems, to our
humble and distant contemplation, less than usual
of the vanity of human works attachable to. those
toil-worn records of the old Egyptians.

Nay, there would even appear to be also a some-
thing about those marvellous remains, symptomatic
of their having been a task appointed by Divine
Providence for the Egyptian people to perform. in
their day; and they did perform it well. <A
suggestive idea, perhaps, but one which we shall not
attempt to follow further ; as all that we have really
to attend to at present is this, viz.—that these
most remarkable and speaking monuments, having
come down to the times in which we live, duty
calls upon us to examine their weighty testimony—
and with all, and whatever, amount of power we may
be able to bring to the task—in the difficult, though
happily limited question, which is more immediately
set before us.


CHAPTER IV.
EARLIEST PROVED POINT OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY.


From all the characteristics, then, of Egyptian
monuments, as described by the most eminent
hierologists, we may gather the useful warning, that
when a date zs fixed ‘by the monuments’ in Egyp-
tian history, it must be fixed indeed. Hence have
arisen very strong remarks addressed to those main-
taining opposite views, and couched in such terms
as these :—

‘ We may venture to assert, without being charged
‘with temerity by competent authorities, that, in
‘consequence of Egyptian researches, the arbitrary
‘barriers which Jewish superstition and Christian
‘sloth have erected upon God’s free field of human
‘history are for ever broken down ;* and again,—
‘ There exist Egyptian monuments, the date of which
‘can be accurately fixed, of a higher antiquity than
‘those of any other nation known in history, viz.,
‘ above five thousand years. This fact must be ex-
‘ plained : to deny it would be proof of little skill,
‘ and still less candour, on the part of any critic, who
‘has once undertaken to prosecute the inquiry.”

1 Bunsen’s Egypt, vol. iv. p. 20. 2 Ibid. vol. i. p. 28.


CHAP. IV.] EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 357


These builded monuments of old Egypt do thus
in very truth come before us in every way, indirectly
as well as directly ; gaunt witnesses which will be
heard ; they are the facts which must be satisfied,
and to which everything else that can be referred to
for very remote illustrations, is entirely subsidiary.
No matter what course of criticism is adopted, as
many writers insist, or what road of inquiry is
taken, so long as those positive points, those veri-
table blocks of granite, are taken up at last,—for
omitted they cannot be. History,—say these instruc-
tors of the people,—in its scientific form, has to deal,
not with the question of probability, but of evidence ;
not with eloquently-drawn inferences, but with posi-
tive data, if at all. And againn—‘'The task which
‘ Kuropean science has now to perform, is to bring
‘ that (Biblical) tradition within the pale of history,
‘z.e., to deal with it conscientiously and honestly,
‘and to analyse it for the purpose of discovering
‘ what is the truth which is to be gleaned from it.
‘Of course we must here take our stand on the
‘ Egyptian monuments and records, including the
‘language, and cannot make Biblical research the
‘starting-point. It should be still more evident
‘that the whole inquiry stands upon the ground of
‘ philosophical history. And yet, with the growing
‘and preposterous claims advanced by the clergy to
‘ fabricate even historic truth, and with their strenu-
‘ ous exertions to destroy historical science wherever
‘it is possible, in order to bring us back to the dark


358 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. III.


‘ages, it has now again become the more imperative
‘to state this in plain terms. It is almost more
‘necessary, indeed, to lay great stress upon it in
‘Protestant than in Catholic countries. For dog-
‘matizing Bibliolatry, the superstitious use which
‘ Protestants make of their Bible as a cloak for in-
‘ dolence and want of reflection, must produce the
‘ effect which scholasticism and hierarchical tyranny
‘have produced in the south of Europe,—a total
‘abandonment of all scientific study of the sacred
‘records. Ignorance marches step by step with
‘ perversity, and scepticism with superstition.’

‘The nineteenth century has in the last thirty
‘ years witnessed, together with immortal discoveries,
‘the most senseless and shameless attempts to re-
‘establish in the world ancient and modern fraud,
‘ falsehood, and nonsense, and pass it off as ortho-
‘doxy. Posterity will. find in the noble love of
‘ truth and the fearless faith of German research an
‘atonement and consolation for political follies and
‘ despotic violence.’?

Agreeing, then, fully with the above author on
the importance and even necessity, in Egyptian
history, of ‘taking our stand on the Egyptian
‘monuments,—we are attracted to his page 57,
vol. iv., giving the ‘ limits of the duration of Eeyp-
‘tian epochs prior to Menes, according to Hgyptian
‘monuments, records, and traditions ;’ and then
meet with the most confident statement, of a

1 Bunsen’s Lgypt, vol. iv. p. 378. 2 Tbid. a iv. p. 397.


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 359


civilized government having existed in Egypt for
six thousand years before the time of Menes, the
leading king of Manetho’s first, out of his ilo
generally allowed, dynasties.

Upon this assumption or demonstration, wherein
the ‘monuments’ are brought to the head of the facts
concerned, Chevalier Bunsen proceeds, at p. 488,
vol. iv., to particularize true and real Egyptian
history as follows :—


Date B.c.
‘The period of the Nomes, and the formation of Osirism, or ,
‘the psychical element of religion, and basis of the union ;
‘ provisional solar worship ; beginning of Egyptian nation-
‘ality, . z . 5 - 10,000
‘ Beginning of the vondnalapis: of ditties s pein aiid warriors ;
‘ close of the republican period in the Nomes, . 9,086
‘ Bytis, the Theban priest of Ammon, the first eee
‘king, . ; ; . a j ; - 9,085
‘ Beginning of elective ‘Bias , . : 7,230
‘ Beginning of hereditary kings in apes ore a ; . . 5,413
‘End ofthem, . x 3,624
‘ Contemporaneous Thinite Pees rape em rstien the
‘last 350 years of the pre-Menite period, according to
‘Manetho, collaterally with the Memphites, therefore
‘ from 3974 to 3624,
‘ Menes king of all Egypt ; Orisis-Union, and the conscious-
‘ness of Egypt being a kingdom, . ’ : s - 3,623
‘ Pyramids built in the first dynasty, . ; 3,460


‘ Animal-worship introduced, improvement aiid Leet.

‘ment of writing, beginnings of literature; second and

‘ third dynasty (contemporaneous beginnings of the Ritual), 3,400
‘ Building of the largest Pyramid (the second of Herodotus), 3,280


The above remarkable chronology closes with a
blunder of description, for the ‘Great Pyramid,’
which is the largest of all the Pyramids of Kgypt,
is the first, not the second, Pyramid of Herodotus ;
his second Pyramid being that which he says ‘ was


360 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. III.


‘built by Cephren, the brother and successor of
‘ Cheops, and which Pyramid he, Herodotus, mea-
‘ sured and found to be much less in size than that
‘ of Cheops;’ in fact it is the Pyramid usually known
now as‘ the second Pyramid of Jeezeh,’ or sometimes
more particularly as the ‘second largest Pyramid of
‘ Jeezeh, but which expression eventually comes to
the same thing. In fact the case was simple
enough, until Chevalier Bunsen introduced assump-
tions of his own about the builders, then proceeded
to refer to those assumptions as demonstrated facts,
or to found on them as such ; and finally to bewilder
himself ; whence we can only explain amongst other
errors his statement! that ‘the elder’ (of the royal
brothers Cheops) ‘ built the second largest Pyramid,
‘and that vast appendage to it, the stone dyke;
for no built stone dyke exists far or near about the
second largest Pyramid, though there is such a
thing eminently in the going down eastwards from
the third largest Pyramid ; but that was long sub-
sequent to the brothers Cheops and their dynasty ;
and so very much smaller than the second largest
Pyramid, as never at any time to compete with it
either in name or fame.

Our purpose, however, now, is not to be critically
severe with the last item in the above long list of
chronicled events in Egyptian history, but to ascer-
tain how all the preceding items have been obtained
and settled. ‘That they are considered by Chevalier


1 Bunsen’s Hgypt, vol. ii. p. 175.


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 361


Bunsen as perfectly secure, and beyond the region
of doubt, appears from the manner in which he
refers to them again and again ; as thus :—

‘ The result of the researches in this present Book
‘ has been, that the traditions prior to Menes which
‘allude to human kings are real throughout, and
‘ exclude entirely herove fiction and all ideal re-
‘ presentations. We have seen that there was a
‘series of organic development ; in the first place
‘ we found sacerdotal kings, then elective kings out
‘of the military families, and lastly kings of an
‘ Upper and kings of a Lower country. Our tables
‘of the ages of the world show the connexion be-
‘tween these epochs and the general epochs of the
‘most ancient national history ; and the parallel
‘facts we have stated justified us, I think, in call-
‘ing the Egyptians the chronometers of universal
‘ history, and in asserting that Menes and his empire
‘are nothing more than the culminating point of
‘a long preceding constitutional development of
‘ Egyptian life.’

The case therefore grows in importance as it is
proceeded with, and its essence consists in this,—that
a history of an organized, constitutional, and there-
fore highly civilized Egypt is asserted to have pre-
vailed for a period of 6700 years prior to the build-
ing of the Great Pyramid ; and at the head of the
documents, on which this momentous agglomeration
of human experiences in this world of troubles,
trials, and vexations of spirit is asserted, detailed,


362 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. IIL.


and chronicled, stands the item which all must treat
respectfully, ‘the monuments of Hgypt.’

With striking propriety is precedence given to
‘the monuments’ among other remains of early
Egyptian history, because the monuments have
lasted better than anything else ; there are earlier
stone monuments, for instance, than papyri, or books,
or papers of any kind or degree; and the stone
monuments are all vocal with inscribed hierogly-
phies ; they speak clearly of what was transacting
in their time ; and are ‘ the contemporary records,
which Bunsen alludes to (vol. 1. p. 31) ‘as the
‘earliest and most certain source of all Egyptian
‘ research.’

Employed just in this manner, and in this only,
it is that Eoyptian monuments have the marvellous
power that has been attributed to them of clearly
establishing the events and stories of life in the
earlier days of the world. ‘Thus, also, Dr. Lepsius
lays down his view of the law under which Egyp-
tian monuments are to be exclusively, or at least
are understood to be exclusively employed in histo-
rical researches, when quoted therein by modern
Eeyptologists and hierologists :—

‘We set out then from hence, that the beginning
‘of the true history and chronology of no ancient
‘nation can, to meet the requirements of their day,
‘extend much further backwards than the date of
‘ the oldest contemporary source of knowledge; and
‘we have found this opinion confirmed to the dis-


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 363


‘eredit of the early histories of the inhabitants of
‘ Hurope and Asia. Therein lies the great advan-
‘tage possessed by the early history of Egypt over
‘all other histories, inasmuch as we can draw our
‘ knowledge of it from contemporary sources of so
‘ early a date ; and they, not literary histories merely,
‘ but also coeval monuments, the most correct and
‘indubitable of all teachers of history. Therefore
‘it is that the history of Egypt at so very early an
‘ era may be constructed.’


Baron Bunsen’s Authorities demanded.


Now, then, after being thus informed and _pre-
pared, let us ask, Where are the Egyptian con-
temporary monuments on which Chevalier Bunsen
has constructed these 6700 years of Egyptian his-
tory, prior to the epoch, or say to within one
hundred or two hundred years, of the epoch, of the
Great Pyramid ?

We may ask this question again and again ; and
echo will answer, Where? For there is not a single
contemporary monument of the kind known to
exist throughout the whole Egyptian land. The
millenniums of years have been piled up one over
the other by the great word-philosopher of our age
without a single monument to refer to. Chevalier
Bunsen, moreover, knew that there was not one
such monument for appeal or for guidance, because
he has. written in his first volume, page 69, of


364 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. III.


‘these monuments of the fourth dynasty’ (includ-
ing, therefore, the epoch of the Great Pyramid),
‘ the oldest in the world ; and though he attributes
in his second volume some of the Abooseer Pyra-
mids to the third dynasty, Dr. Lepsius claims them
for the fourth ; and the difference of years between
the two dynasties can in no case be very notable.
Extend it even to two hundred years, and ask again
—where are all the earlier contemporary monuments
on which Chevalier Bunsen constructed the Egyptian
history of the 6500 years previous to the dynasty
which erected the Great Pyramid, or the Abooseer
Pyramids ?

Again comes the answer,—such monuments do not
exist ; not a single one, large or small, fixed or
portable, belonging to all that enormous interval of
time, has ever been seen by modern hierologist or
excavator. Dr. Lepsius, the most experienced both
of all men now alive and of all who have lived
during the last three thousand years touching the
more ancient monuments of Egypt, wrote from
his excavations at Jeezeh in 1843 :—‘ Nor have I
‘ yet found a single cartouche that can be safely
‘assigned to a period previous to the fourth
‘dynasty. The builders of the Great Pyramid
‘seem to assert their right to form the commence-
‘ment of monumental history, even if it be clear
‘that they were not the first builders and monu-
‘mental writers.’ And again he says, ‘The Pyra-
‘mid of Cheops, to which the first link of our whole


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 365


‘monumental history is fastened immoveably, not
‘only for Egyptian, but for universal history.’

Two thousand years only from the Great Pyra-
mid downward, in the stream of time, have covered
the land of Egypt from one end to the other with its
marvellous piles of chronological monuments,——but
of Baron Bunsen’s 6500 asserted previous years of
highly civilized Egyptian monarchy, not a single
monument exists, not even in the resounding pages
of the great Prussian diplomate.

The monuments of the third dynasty are the first
there directly appealed to as existing ; and though
in vol. i, p. 617, the hieroglyphic ovals are printed
of kings in the first and second dynasties,—these
are not pretended to be derived from contemporary
monuments, but are deduced from votive or tradi-
tional references on subsequent buildings ; in the
same way, In fact, as the similar heraldic escutcheons
of two of the idol gods of Egypt, Thoth and
Hemithei,— which head Chevalier Bunsen’s list of
real kings,—have been obtained. Ina similar man-
ner, we conclude, have been derived most of the
escutcheons of twelve reputed kings of the third
dynasty ; for the only three which are referred to as
legibly written anywhere in the contemporary man-


ner, are , variously rendered by differ


' Page 21 of Dr. Lepsius’ Letters from Egypt in 1842 and 1845,
edited by Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie. London, 1852.

* Quarry-marks of a ruined Pyramid of Regah and the middle
Pyramid of Abooseer.


366 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. IIT.


ent authorities as Seser, User, Ousre, Ousrenre,
Ra-en-seser, Raosis, Userra, and Userchre, and placed
by Dr. Lepsius in Plate xxx1x,, vol. ui. of his folio


plates, in the fifth dynasty : ) vari-


ously rendered Re-shore, Shoure, Shura, Sahu-ra,
Soris, Sirios, and placed by Lepsius in Plate xxx1x.
of his volume iii, also in the fifth dynasty; and


lastly, 4 bese $4 , pronounced Snfru, Sene-


fru, Chnubos-gnevros, and Sephuris, and placed by
Lepsius again and again in the fourth dynasty.
Hence all the earliest monuments known even to
Chevalier Bunsen, cluster close about the fourth
dynasty, or the builders of the Great Pyramid ; and
according to’ the Great Pyramid itself, mechanically
and astronomically interpreted, they belong more or
less to the year 2170 B.c.; which date, and not the


year 10,000 Bo. is therefore the earliest date that


can be fixed by ‘the monuments,—used as they
only can be safely, properly, or legitimately, for con-
tenvporary events. Or, in other words, these severe
and unexceptionable witnesses, the monuments of
Egypt, have shattered in pieces the learned philolo-
gist’s baseless construction of 6500 years of previous
supposed Egyptian history, and over which he had
been: holding for so many years the name of ‘the
‘monuments’ as an zegis of protection.
1 Northern Pyramid of Abooseer, and a tablet in Wadee Macias


2 Tombs near the Great Pyramid, and. also tablets in. Wadee
Maghara.


CHAP. IVv.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 367


Consequences of there beang no Authorities.


Having once been cited on the field, these monu-
ments are indeed active, as well as passive, opponents
to those who use them wrongfully ; for not only do
they not bear testimony to an Egyptian monarchy
lasting through that immense period of time claimed
by Chevalier Bunsen, but their absence shows that
such a thing could not have been; for had it
existed, material traces innumerable of such a world-
long period of civilisation would have been left
behind, and in Egypt nothing of that sort decays.
‘ It is not there, says Bunsen himself, ‘as it would
‘be in Europe or India, where in the former cold
‘and snow, or in the latter heat and rain destroy ;
‘for Egypt is the monumental land of the earth,
‘adapted not only for saving its monuments from
‘great dilapidation, but for preserving them as
‘perfect as the day they were erected.’

Thus, too, the learned and most competent Dr.
Lepsius holds forth—‘ Even that apparently most
‘ perishable of all building materials, brick of black
‘Nile mud dried in the sun, has retained for
‘ thousands of years its architectural junctures, and
‘the cement with which it is united. Around the
‘ celebrated temple of Ramses the Great, at Thebes,
‘the “ Memnonium,” stands a suite of great vaulted
‘ halls, altogether built with this material, and partly
‘coated with stucco. These were built at the same
‘time with the temple itself at the commencement


368 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. III.


‘ of the thirteenth century B.c. This fact not only
‘appears from the architecture, but also still more
‘demonstrably from the bricks themselves, which,
‘as being made for the king’s service, are stamped
‘with his name. At that time, and earlier, it was
‘a very common practice to coat the tombs exca-
‘ vated in the rocks with Nile mud, and to lay upon
‘ that the white ground of stucco for the paintings.
‘This was especially the case when the rock was
‘brittle, and required a vaulted roof. The same
‘custom prevailed even up to the most ancient
‘ times of the Pyramids of Memphis. But not only
‘the materials, but also the colours which were laid
‘upon them, retain to this day all their freshness,
‘ without any perceptible change, in closed vaults,
‘and in certain cases, even when exposed to the
‘ open air.’

Even, therefore, had Egyptian monuments been
executed in mud alone, something of the innumer-
able buildings in that material during 6500 years
of the life of a great nation would have come down
to us in that peculiar land. But the Egyptian
country excels likewise in its abundance of hard
materials of the best quality, either for building or
carving into in situ; such as its admirable lime-
stones, sandstones, porphyry, basalt, and granite ;
and the Egyptians, of all people who have ever lived
on the earth, were the most skilful in working the
hardest materials : delighting apparently ever more
and more, to employ them either rudely in archi-


meal


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 369


tecture, or to sculpture them finely, the harder they
were. Hence both the hollow sarcophagi and solid
statues which they worked out of granite, basalt,
and diorite,—are alike, even still, a marvel to all
practical men as to how they were executed; and
the taste for working in these hard materials was at
least as strong, if not stronger, in the earlier than
the later dynasties.

These materials were also employed in a manner
still further to promote their lasting qualities; for
as Dr. Lepsius continues to remark,—‘ Next to the
‘ abundance and beauty of these works of art, is the
‘ extreme care for their permanence which was ex-
‘hibited by the Egyptians, and which was evidently
‘in accordance with their religious belief. It is
‘ scarcely needful to refer, in proof of this, to the
‘two great Pyramids of Jeezeh, which are, in fact,
‘ artificial mountains, constructed with huge blocks
‘hewn from the rock on which they stand, and in
‘which sepulchral chambers were afterwards ex-
‘cavated with the chisel, as though they had been
‘natural crags. It is as if the builders of them had
‘designed to erect two pillars to support the vast
‘ superstructure of the history of mankind. This is,
‘in a word, the peculiarity of all that remains of
‘the works of the ancient Egyptians. Whether
‘they built halls for pomps and festivities, or dug
‘ out sepulchral chambers; whether they constructed
‘ for life or for death, it was always with the inten-
‘ tion that their works should last for ever.’

VOL. III. 2A


370 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. IIT.


Hence the proper conclusion will surely appear
in the eyes of common sense,—that, if such last-
img monuments formed the permanent and abiding
character of the Egyptian nation, and we find no
monuments of it whatever, anterior to the epoch
of the reputed, and by moderns so-called, fourth
dynasty,—the nation itself did not exist anterior to
that epoch, and certainly not through the 6500 years
of Baron Bunsen’s assumed pre-Pyramid history.


Origin of the Hgyptoans.


There remains indeed the difficulty of accounting
as to how the Egyptian monuments make so grand
an appearance as they do, the moment they come
upon the scene at all; for the sculptures of the
fourth dynasty are not only in as true and fine art
as any, but even better than most, of those which
followed them ; and it is contrary to all experience
that a people could spring in a moment from abso-
lute nothingness to such admirable perfection. ©

The diticulty is indeed a serious one, but not
relieved in the slightest degree by going back to
Chevalier Bunsen’s vision of an early Egypt with
both an Upper and a Lower crown, and a city of
Thebes founded long before Menes or any of the
Pyramids ; for the tedious and enduring ages of
imperfect beginnings and defective executions should
then be findable. And here, at this point and view
of the case, the truth of which he also would seem
fully to allow, even the acute M. Renan is reduced


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 371


to something like wonder, confusion, and despair;
‘for when one thinks, writes he, in discussing the
Great Pyramid, Sphinx, and similar well-known
monuments, ‘when one thinks of this civilisation,
‘at least 6500! (really 4035) years old from the
‘present day, that it has had no known infancy ;
‘that this art, of which there remain innumerable
“monuments, had no archaic epoch ; that the Keypt
‘of Cheops and of Chephren is superior in a sense
‘to all that followed—one is seized with giddi-
‘ness ; on est pris de vertige.

This confession is frank, and does M. Renan nota-
ble honour ; for the facts before him do seem, as he
further on confesses, to imply, that all the ordinary
understood laws of the beginning and growth of a
nation ‘have been totally reversed in the case of
‘ Kgypt.’ One ray of light in the way of a possible
line of explanation, does indeed occur to him, but
he does not seem to follow it up ; and he does not
appear aware that it had occurred some years before
to another author, viz., William Osburn; and had
been abundantly probed, tested, and investigated by
him, even to the extent of showing that the people
who afterwards formed the Egyptian nation arrived


at the banks of the Nile, near the crown of the


1 This 6500 years ago, or 4635 3B.c., is M. Renan’s date for the
fourth dynasty ; and does not therefore point to anything, relative to
Egyptian history, earlier than our statement of 4035 years ago, or
2170 B.c. would do. He is therefore alluding really, under his larger
figure, to the same absolute time, monuments, and personages, that we
do under the smaller numbers given by the Great Pyramid itself.


372 EARLIEST PROVED POINT [DIV. TIT.


Delta, as colonists from another land, only a very
short time previous to the epoch of the fourth
dynasty.

As colonists from another land, and under very
remarkable circumstances: what these were, W.
Osburn goes into deeply, in a critical examination
of the foundations in nature of the hieroglyphic
forms ; deducing thence something in the first set-
tlers of Egypt ‘as to a company of persons once in
‘a state of high civilisation, but that through some
‘strange anomaly in the history of man, they had
‘been deprived of great part of the language, and
‘the entire written system, which had formerly been
‘the means and vehicle of their civilisation.’ Com-
bining which inference with the indications he
obtains otherwise, that ‘the Fathers of ancient
‘ Keypt first journeyed thither across the Isthmus
‘of Suez, and that they brought with them the
‘ worship of the setting sun,—‘ how is it possible,
he adds, ‘ to resist the conclusion that they came
‘ thither from the plains of Babel, at the first dis-
‘persion of mankind, and that the civilisation
‘of Egypt was derived from the banks of the
‘ Euphrates ?’

And after still further investigations, he speaks
more confidently of ‘the cares, the fears, the de-
‘sions of the leaders under whose standards the
‘ Mizraites first marched westward, before the mys-
‘terious impulse that drove them forth from the
‘ fertile plains of the Euphrates. They fled before


CHAP. IV.] OF EGYPTIAN HISTORY. 373


‘it, nor dared to tarry on the grassy banks of
‘Jordan, nor in the shady valleys of Judah, nor
‘by the waters of Siloah, that flow softly. The
‘ voice of a greater than man sounded in their ears.
‘The terror of an invincible power awed their
‘ spirits, and they dared not disobey. They braved
‘ the perils and privations of a journey over an un-
‘known desert, before the same fearful impulse ;
‘nor ever were they allowed to rest, until they had
‘reached the uttermost borders of the land which
‘ He who pursued after them had destined them to
‘ populate.’

Respecting this theory, we can only say at pre-
sent, that in so far as it offers a beginning for Egyp-
tian history, it accords with ‘the monuments of
‘ Egypt, those unaltering, unaltered, and unavoid-
able indices and accompaniments of every such
investigation. But if these same monuments do
not also, as evidently they cannot in themselves,
enable us to trace back to events much earlier than
their own times,—all-exciting as it would be to the
soul of man, were he really able to look into the
events of these truly primeval periods of the human
race,—we shall do well to endeavour, simply and
soberly, to ascertain by the light of their guidance
through later times, what was the further course of
this remarkable nation after its apparently forced,
and certainly very sudden, monumental beginning
on the banks of the Nile.


CHAPTER V.
LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE.


THE earliest identifiable contemporary monu-
ments of Egypt, or the beginnings of its monumental
history, so far as known to European researches up
to the present year, are, according to the unanimous
opinion of all hierologists;—the rock-tablets of
Wadee Maghara in the peninsula of Sinai; and the
Pyramids, with their surrounding tombs, at Jeezeh,
Sakkara, and the Memphis neighbourhood. And
this conclusion equally obtains, whether these re-
mains be considered to belong to the fourth dynasty
only, or partly to the third, and partly to the fifth.

Equally is it also the fact, that these earliest
examples of the monuments are confined to the
places mentioned; and that Middle and Upper
Egypt, and still less Nubia and Ethiopia, have
nothing whatever to compare with them in anti-
quity. So that the general testimony of the monu-
ments in Egypt itself, is precisely as Lepsius and
Osburn have demonstrated ; viz., that that species
of testimony to the civilisation of Egypt began, and


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 375


began suddenly, near the upper corner of the Delta,
and ascended, as it grew with ages, the valley of
the Nile; illustrating thereby its Asiatic, not
African, origin.

The Sinaitic remains of these earlier dynasties
are not many, but are remarkably well sculptured ;
are claimed by all hierologists to be authentic
and contemporary ; belong chiefly to the kings


Shofo, Nu-Shofo,
Sephuris, and Soris ;


show—by their designs—that animal-worship, or -
animal and semi-animal gods, were already esta-
blished and reverenced ; and that there was armed
opposition to the Egyptians from the natives of
that peninsula, emphatically represented as thrice
hilly ; and which we now are aware contains noble
pinnacles of mountains upwards of seven thousand
feet high,—natural watch-towers overtopping and
overlooking everything else in Egypt, Libya, and
Arabia for leagues and leagues around them.

The Jeezeh and Sakkara remains, on the contrary,
besides being vastly more plentiful, are eminently
peaceful in their traits. In the ease of the Pyra-
mids, indeed,—those closed and artificial mountains
of stone say nothing whatever, either by picture or
inscription, for one cause or the other ; while in form
and fact they merely supply the otherwise flat-topped
landscape with acute hill-points, and without offer-


376 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. — [DIV. III.


-ing anything approaching to strongholds for war, or
gathering-halls for peace.

But when we enter the tombs, there pictured
scenes are witnessed on every side, of agriculture,
eattle-feeding, industrious country life, and with
hardly anything else. These characteristics, more-
over, are continued, often through the lives of two,
three, and even more generations of the same
family ; indicating that, there, or then at least, and
however it was procured, the Egyptian people had
rest and quiet and freedom from war’s alarms.

For those who have not had the privilege of visit-
ing these earliest pictorial monuments of Mizraim,
and for many of those who have too,—their chief
trust for what is there contained must be placed,
and will be most worthily placed, in Dr. Lepsius’
large work of twelve folio volumes ;—the largest
collection of Egyptian plates, out of the many large
collections brought out by different Kuropean coun-
tries, that has ever yet been produced; and the
first that has been chronologically arranged. This
is a unique feature, and one which, to have its re-
quirements properly executed, perhaps needed a
Richard Lepsius to pave the way; but having once
been executed, and by him, some extension of grasp
of the great Egyptian subject must occur to every
one, on each successive occasion of looking over the
series of carefully-executed engravings.

Volume first, after several maps, begins a long
series of topographical views extending through


i


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 377


both this and the next volume, and arranged appa-
rently with strict attention to the date of the earliest
monuments discovered at each place; the names of
such places being then found to run in the follow-
ing order :—


Sinai, . Wadee Feran.
Wadee Maghara.
Sarbut el Kadem.
Memphis, Aboo Roash.
Jeezeh.
Abooseer.
Sakkara.
Dashoor.
Lisht, . Meidun, Dlahun.
The Faioum.
Sais, . Heliopolis, Tanis.
Benihasgsan.
Kl Amarna.
This and Abydos.
Thebes, Luxor, Karnak.
Esneh, EHilithya, Silsilis.
Philee.
Abusimbel.
Soleb, Barkal.
Meroe, Sofra, Naga, ete.


Any good map will show the generally increasing
southern distance of each of these localities succes-
sively ; but only the Plates themselves will give a
good idea of how, after the last rays of their meri-
dian splendour at Thebes, the monuments further
south become continually poorer, smaller, and even
more decayed though more modern, especially at the
last-named station in Ethiopia. |

But the next volume, or volume iii, begins the


378 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. _[DIV. III.


real burden of Dr. Lepsius’ great task, viz., the
inscriptions on, and views of, the monuments them-
selves. And how do they begin in his chronologi-
cally arranged work ?

Plate 1. entitled fourth dynasty, contains first,
a large-sized reproduction of the quarry-mark of


¢ ©) Shofo, from Howard Vyse’s chambers


of construction in the Great Pyramid ; second,
smaller copies of the quarry-marks of (ict FO)
and [ @ Om , or Nu and Nu-Shofo from the


same place ; and, third, some indistinct markings
from a Dashoor Pyramid. Plate 11, also entitled
fourth dynasty, gives three tablets from Wadee Mag-


hara, to Sephuris, (4 FB)
Nu-Shofo, and Shofo ; Howard Vyse’s


coffin-lid out of the third Pyramid with the oval of


(Gir) Mencheres, and a door-ornament from


Sakkara, now in the Berlin Museum. Then follow
five plates of pictures and inscriptions inside tombs
at Abooseer, and thirty-two plates of similar sub-
jects from tombs about the Jeezeh Pyramids, all
entitled of the fourth dynasty. These being fol-
lowed by forty-four plates entitled of dynasty fifth,


of which one is due to Wadee Maghara, sixteen to .


Sakkara, and twenty-seven to Jeezeh.
Volume fourth represents further subjects of


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 379


dynasties fourth and fifth, in twenty-three plates,
from tombs at Jeezeh and Sakkara ; then dynasty
sixth, in thirteen plates, at Sauiet el Meitin, Hama-
mat, Chenoboskion, etc.; and then follow in this
and the next volume dynasties eleventh, twelfth,
and thirteenth, from a greatly increased variety of
places, and with many new subjects.


Men of the Fourth Dynasty.


Before studying, therefore, these later periods, let
us cast a glance on the men of the fourth and fifth
dynasties, or those who were contemporary with the
building of the Great Pyramid.

On entering every tomb, we have these men
before us immediately ; reddish-brown men, with
long, and either straight or slightly aquiline curved
noses, large and long eyes, and rather full lips.
Their foreheads are probably low, certainly not
notably high, but the rest of the eranium is a
phrenological mystery, so completely is it hid ina
thick, fuzzy, close-cropped, black, wig.

The wig was a great institution in ancient Egypt,
and dyed jet black, so that even with the most aged
men,—and whose age is shown both by their leaning
on a staff, and having their poor naked breasts, and
whole torso seamed with deep, ungainly, transverse
wrinkles,—the blackness of the wig remains unim-
paired. Other clothing is not very abundant. The
princes issue forth to overlook their labourers with
an awful baton of authority and chastisement in their


380 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE.  [DIV. III.


hands, but attired only in a short kilt—usually of
white cloth—skate-like sandals, a blue and white
necklace, and the wig ; on a few occasions a leopard’s
skin is worn over the shoulder. The overseers next
in authority under them, and the succeeding grades
of scribes and field-labourers, have only a piece of
cloth about the waist, and not always that; no
sandals, seldom a necklace, but always a wig.

The women’s wigs are larger than the men’s, and
arranged so as to be typical of long straight-flowing
tresses, though rigorously confined to a definite
length. The complexion of their skin is a yellowish
pale olive ; and the costume,—varied only in the
case of princesses over servants by necklaces, brace-
lets, and anklets of blue and white glass beads,—
consists of one long, close-fitting and enclosing
garment of thin elastic material, like a guernsey
jacket ; but extending from the ankles, upwards, to
close under the breasts, whence two broad straps
pass over the shoulders to support it. This envelope
is brilliant scarlet in colour, has never a fold or
wrinkle in all its length or breadth, and yet appears
abundantly to allow of the separation of the feet in
walking or dancing.

Throughout the whole of the pictured scenes,
there is not a single instance of a peasant enjoying,
or working for, himself under his own vine and his
own fig-tree; no independent thought, or look, or
action, on the part of poor men is allowed, but they
are all in official training to serve the Prince of the


CHAP.V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 381


time being ; and administration is the order of the
day. The difference of dress described between
prince and peasant, is an involuntary method to the
artist of distinguishing rank ; but his intended method
is there also, viz., superior size or scale. Hence,
the owner of the tomb is a colossus standing the
whole height of the wall ; which, in front of him is
divided into six, eight, or more compartments, by
horizontal lines, on the edge of each of which his
servants are engaged on their various services.
Ploughing—and sowing too, in so far as concerns
covering up the seed thrown broadcast by hand,—
seem both accomplished by driving flocks of sheep
and goats over the lately inundated land ; reaping
is performed with a sickle ; thrashing by driving
herds of donkeys about a floor ; and winnowing with
spades. But the agricultural operations are very
scanty, compared to the pastoral. The sheep, indeed,
long-legged things, with horizontal and mutually
diverging horns,’ and the goats with venerable
beards and lyre-shaped retreating horns, are not
very numerous,—but the oxen and greater cattle are
in exceeding abundance, of magnificent quality, and
of a portliness which shows them rather intended
1 We say sheep advisedly, although M. Renan writes there are no
sheep. His account is otherwise good,—but for these very early ages
only of Egypt, be it understood,—and stands thus: ‘Amongst the
‘number of domestic animals possessed by the deceased were, oxen,
‘donkeys, dogs, apes, antelopes, gazelles, geese, ‘‘demoiselles de
‘ « Numidie,” ducks, tame storks, and pigeons ; but one never sees there


‘ either horses, camels, giraffes, elephants, sheep (?), cats (?), or fowls.’
—P. 669, Revue des Deux Mondes, April, 1865.


382 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. _ [DIV. ITI.


for the butcher than the farmer; their horns are
long, tall, and branching, and they, the animals,
move about with a pompous sedateness possible only
to enormous fat beasts, but with a regularity and
order forming an instructive contrast to the donkeys
which,—with how many men soever to beat them
into shape, have their heads diverging to all points
of the compass; and some of the group always
giving tongue with might and main.

Not a little remarkable also is it to see the many
wild animals, tamed apparently, or undergoing a
tentative process to that end ; there are in this con-
dition the small gazelle, and some larger antelopes
of the size of a half-grown heifer ; here with long
straight, and there with exceeding curved, horns.
Sometimes whole rows of these beautiful and power-
ful animals, with collars round their necks, are
brought up for the great man to inspect ; or for his
scribes, with one pen behind their ears and another
in their ready hands, to enter into the roll-list of his
property.

The hyzena is likewise often seen, and very tame ;
for though he is led along by a string attached to a
collar round his neck, the boy holding the string with
one hand, is supporting something like a basket of
crockery on his head with the other ; and while the
collar does not fit tightly round the hyzena’s neck,
that neck is so thick and the head so small, that the
animal could easily free himself, if he chose. But
he does not choose, and occasionally may be seen


CHAP. Y.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 383


quite unshackled ; while a boy behind tries, by rub-
bing the end of his tail between his palms, to urge
the-in these days most ill-tempered—beast, to
attack some object in front, in which direction too,
he is evidently pricking forward his ears.

And this hyena is always a large one, drawn
with admirable skill and knowledge of wherein the
strength and better qualities, or rather efficiency, of
a hyeena lie. There is no uncertainty with the artist,
no rubbing out of lines, no confusing the anatomi-
cal form with hair ; but you see a hyena walking
forth as nature originally made him, clean-limbed
and powerful, adapted either for speed or strength ;
neither over young nor over old ; over fat or over
thin ; but just as the Great Creator had intended
him to be in the plenitude of his life and powers.


Social relations.


Similar close observation of nature, combined with
artistic skill, is shown in the representation of the
birds innumerable, inhabiting the thickets of reeds
bordering the Nile (or that once bordered it, for they
have lamentably decreased since then, and all parts of
the Nile which we chanced to strike on, in our own
short experience of it, exhibited only clay banks). The
consternation, too, amongst the said birds, when the
prince approaches in his papyrus raft to smite them ;
or when his servitors spread large clap-nets for
them ; and the similar confusion amongst the fishes
when they are likewise netted,—all this is rendered


384 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


admirably true to life, and full of motion and pur-
pose.

Yet even in these sporting scenes, despotic power
is painfully manifest. There is a prince or two here
and there, and all the rest of the people are working
under or for him; well looked after, but ignobly
treated ; no labour-saving instruments are allowed,
not even a handle to a hammer-head ; the wretched
slave must make up for want of that mechanical
appliance which would cost his lord money, by an
extra exertion of his own muscles. Excellent pat-
terns they had to work up to ; their chairs for in-
stance being models of mechanical lightness and
strength ; the two hind-legs curved like the hind-
legs of some animals, and the two front ones like
the fore-legs,—fastened on to the seat by a mortised
joint, with an extraordinary length of bearing to
give firmness,—and yet so introduced into the artis-
tic expression, as not to take away from the light-
some look of the whole ; but hardly any tools are
seen about, and the polishing is executed with little
stones held in the hand, or with the fingers them-
selves and polishing-powder. The human material
appears to be held at the cheapest possible rate, and
to be used up for everything. The taskmasters,
too, are always present, and the people kept in ex-
cellent order by the same method that Chinese boat-
men are said to manage their ducks ; viz., the duck
which comes home not slowly, or absolutely late,
but relatively last, is killed ; or the man whose work
makes least show at the close of the day, is laid


CHAP, V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 385


down on the ground, and bastinadoed by his fellow-
slaves acting under orders.

On stated occasions come feasts, for there are some
respites to all slaves; but in ancient Egypt they were.
not ‘Saturnalia,’ for the notion of law and order must
never be interfered with there. So when this prince
has been satisfied with the exhibition of his property-
rolls, he seats himself like a god before a dinner-
table ; which is thereupon piled up with slices of
bread, and on the bread roast geese, joints of meat,
etc. etc., are accumulated, while rows of oxen are
turned heels over head, and slaughtered before him
in the most approved manner ; ultimately, no doubt
for the mass of the people ; but the joits must first
be carried to the prince, as if for his use only.

Nothing, too, can be done in these establishments
on a small scale ; when milk is required, a whole tier,
or perhaps two or three tiers, in the mural painting,
of cows are being milked at once by as many well-
trained, experienced milking-men ; and rows upon
rows of both men and women servants come laden
with provisions to the mighty presence, and servilely
attend its nod. No idleness was there in the land of
Eeypt during the fourth dynasty ; something was
found for every one to do; and not even a cripple
was safe from daily toil of some kind or another ;
such objects being seen at work in the pictures, and
having frequently the heartless and hopeless inscrip-
tion over them, ‘Slaves born in the house, (regis-
‘ tered) in the books of the house for ever.’

VOL. III. | 2B


386 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


This was the more public life, and in private it
was Just as unlovely. The father was a ruling
despot in his family ; the wife, indeed, may by grace
come up behind, and put her hand from a distance
on his shoulder,—but the children are diminutive
creatures, reminding one of mice more than human
beings, and are low down on the ground below the
level of the parents’ knees. What they think or feel
seems to matter little indeed to the lord their father ;
who is ever looking straight before him to the ad-
ministration alone of the affairs of his many estates.

Many estates, for sometimes ten or fifteen are
expressly mentioned in the hieroglyphics ; each with
a name and usually a notice describing by, or under,
which king the included land had been reclaimed
from the desert. This is an important element in
the history of the times; indicating strongly that
Egypt was then a new country, with its kings,
nobles, peasants, and all its inhabitants strenuously
engaged in rendering the ground amenable to cul-
ture and suitable to raising food for man.


Reported Engineering of Nile Banks.


Weare thereby, too, brought into contact with the
tradition related by Herodotus, that Menes, the first
king of Manetho’s first dynasty (the king therefore
with whom almost every writer begins the acknow-
ledged history of Eeypt,—though there is not a scrap
or a vestige of any contemporary monument, belong-
ing either to him or any of his reported successors


|


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 387


for many generations, still existing),—that this king
Menes was the first to cross over from the eastern to
the western bank of the Nile ; and there to found the
city of Memphis, after executing certain important
hydraulic works, whose nature has been much dis-
puted. Menes met the Nile, near the subsequent
site of Memphis, flowing along on the western side
of the Egyptian valley close under the Libyan
mountains, says Bunsen, with some assistance from
Wilkinson ; wherefore he, Menes, executed certain
considerable works at a place now called Kafr-e-
Zyat, some miles above Memphis,—and thereby
turned the river into a new channel cut along the
centre of the valley, and then obtained the ‘ beautiful
‘lowland of the former side-channel, which was so
‘ well adapted for the site of a great metropolis,’
With all respect for Chevalier Bunsen, we cannot
see the sense of the object thus described ; for there
was no gain of increased extent to the cultivateable
land of the Egyptian valley, but merely a change of
the stream’s place therein. And we doubt whether
the locality of the river’s late bed, ‘beautiful low-
land’ though it be called by a closet-philosopher,
could have been well adapted for founding a city in,
—unless the chief object were to expose the inhabi-
tants to the imminent peril of drowning at every
annual inundation ; especially as we see now that
towns and villages in Egypt are by preference built
on elevated ground. There was a theory too, first
started by M. Andreossy and the French savants of


388 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE, [DIV. ITI.


1799, to the effect that the Nile flowed anciently
westward to the sea from, or behind, the Pyramid
mountains to Bah-bela-ma (stream without water)
and the Natron lakes; these being notable depres-
sions still observable in the Libyan desert ; and that
Menes prevented this divergence of the water. But
Chevalier Bunsen treats the statement as a specula-
tion merely, and as referring to something geological,
mythological, and absurd ; whereas his own version
is ‘a historical work of a historical king.’

Again, however, we must differ, as indeed Mr.
Osburn has also done before us, from the eminent
philological critic. His asserted historical work has
no contemporary monument to confirm, and has
common sense against it. While, on the other side,
there are the natural facts, that the long valley of
the Natron lakes is, according to Sir Gardner Wil-
kinson, more than fifty feet below the level of the
Nile-bank on their latitude parallel ;* and though
nearly thirty miles therefrom in a direct line, yet
experiences an annual rise and fall of the water in
these lakes, dependent apparently upon the infiltra-
tion of the Nile inundation through the strata of
the intervening hills—a slow process, occupying
three months of time, or causing the lakes to be that
length of time behind the river. (See Plate x1.)


1 * According to a rough observation, I calculate the bank of the
‘Nile at Teranek to be about fifty-eight feet above the valley of
‘ Zakeek, or eighty-six feet above the surface of the Natron lakes.’—
Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Murray’s Handbook for Egypt, p. 226. London,
1858.


-
Sean eieieeeemeeenmeemmtntenneta tee en


Vol. IL.


EGYPT,
during the


FourrH Dynasty,


or 2200, & 2100 B.C. of


Great Pyramid
Chronology ;


with) some modern‘names of”


3L- 32
Longitude East fr


oO


om Greenwich’.


L197" Dyna


or 1400, F L300 B

Gr. Pyramd, and
Chronologies ;

with) some modern’ ne


ancent: places


EGS fy


;
Wi,


HN


4 fs


%


\
y


ae


| Ny


ig


13
k i |
fll


1) a te


HN


QE


ww


e;


EGYPT,
197" Dynasry.


or 1400, § 1300 B.C. of


Gr. Pyramd, and other
Chronologies ;


>
~ “>


ergs


Ru) HTS =


with) some modern’ names of


ancient places.


°


: os S2° IS F4"
Longitude East from’ Greenwich’.


W.H.M? Farlane, Lith? Rain?


Blank Page Digitally Inserted


EGYPT,
during the
fourrn Dynasry,


or 2.200, § 2100 B.C. of


Great Pyramid
Chronology;


with: some modern/'names of


ancient’ / places :


i
Longitude Fast


from Greenwich’.


L9™" Dynasry,


or 1400, F L300 B.C. of
Gr. Pyramed, , and other
Chronologies ,


with some modern’ names of


ancient places.


, SS
henge *


Fret veh
Avy) HTS TUBA, Hl


t


|


14


IS" Tz!


: ates 52°
Longitude East from’ Greenwich.


W.H.M¢ Farlane, Lith? Réhn?


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 389


Some of the Nile water, then, even yet escapes
towards the westward ; and vastly more would do
so, and go to waste, if there were any direct opening
through the river’s western bank, as far as these un-
doubtedly low tracts of the Libyan desert. If there
ever was such an opening, the sooner the first colo-
nists got it closed up the better, and preserved the
precious water for irrigating the Delta. Such a
work may have been executed, and would now be
buried hill-deep under the drifted sand of the desert,
but we cannot be certain of it. Neither is there any
absolute necessity to suppose, that there ever was a
plain mechanical hole in the western bank, to be
simply filled up ; for quite enough cause would it be,
for a westward extravasation of the water, that the
river should flow for some distance, as described in
the tradition, along ‘close under the Libyan moun-
tains. Because, seeing that they are composed of
limestone with a large proportion of salt, nothing is
more probable than that the water would work its
way through them in course of time to the deeper
hollow beyond. In fact, that would be the case still,
did not the river now pass along the middle of the
valley, and ‘ puddle,’ or render nearly waterproof, its
own bed by its successive yearly deposits of plastic
pot-clay, which is the real characteristic of the much-
vaunted fertilizing mud of the Nile. (See vol. i
p. 46.)

Now, then, we may appreciate the object of
Menes, or any other early king-colonist, in removing


390 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE.  [DIV. III.


the flow of the river from the very hygrometric
border of the salt-engrained Libyan desert, into the
middle of the retentive clay valley leading on
towards the flat and sweet land of the Delta; and
there can be no doubt at all, that before his time,
or that referred to by tradition, both the Delta was
less watered than it is now, and the Natron lakes
and Bah-bela-ma much more so. In fact, they
must have been extensive, and perhaps pestilential,
swamps,—over whose waters the sun, as seen from
the Memphian hills, daily went down to his rest ;
and on the borders of which the white egrets stood
pensively silent, giving rise amongst inventive minds
to the notion of their being the souls of the dead,
waiting in that submissive shape for the sacred boat
to convey them to the same western and lower land
to which the sun had just descended before them.
Almost in any way we may thus see, that an
enormous engineering work of immediate practical
utility, and even pressing necessity,— occupied the
first energies of the Egyptian colonists; and the
tombs tell the praises of every subsequent king who
by his dykes, ditches, and other appliances brought
more and more of the present land of Egypt under
the control of cultivation. But the moment that
the ending of the first great occupation had freed
the labour of the mass of the community, and while
the subsequent small improvements were still going
on,—the building of the Pyramids began ; those
strange and still incomprehensible monuments.


CHAP, V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 391


- Of the Pyramids and their Kings.

Strange and incomprehensible, in spite of all the
explanations yet given by hierologists; for, allow
them to have been built, agreeably to Lepsius,
Bunsen, Osburn, and any other hierologist whatever,
for kings’ tombs,—and allow even to Chevalier Bun-
sen in particular, that ‘no rational being ought ever
‘to have entertained the slightest doubt upon that
‘head, —still why were they, as tombs, constructed
long before the day of burial, of that peculiar shape ;
why so very large and solid; and why so entirely
undecorated,—when the idea of noble entombment
carried on by the princes and people round about
the precincts of any Pyramid at the very time of its
building, went so entirely towards superabundance
of ornament, and making ‘a good house’?

These questions have never been answered with
a successful interpretation of practical details by
any hierologist; and we can only remind, towards
their possible future clearing up, that the origin of
the Pyramids is to be looked for in the very begin-
ning of the Egyptian nation; not only because the
largest, best, and purest, or the Great Pyramid of
Jeezeh, is almost, if not absolutely, the earliest of
them all; but because the idea died out both as to
the pyramidal form and simplicity of internal archi-
tecture of a king’s tomb, before the Egyptian
monarchy had run through one-third of its course.


Even in the time of King Mencheres, Wty ©


392 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


(placed by Lepsius in dynasty fourth, after Nu-Shofo,
but with more probability by Osburn in dynasty
fifth), great size was no longer thought necessary to
a Pyramid, the attraction of colour having then be-
come the chief point outside ; while inside, the
sarcophagus shone a perfect marvel of ornamental
carving. After his, Mencheres’, day again, pyramids
were built smaller still, until at last abandoned alto-
gether ; the apprehended necessity for the use, or ap-
preciation of the virtue, of their peculiar form having
gradually died away completely out of men’s minds.

Wherein then lay the need for building the Great
Pyramid so tall, so broad, so heavy, so firm, even as
a mountain? We are entirely unaware of any
attempt at a hierological solution of this question,
save the suggestion of W. Osburn,— that ‘ Shofo
‘and his subjects may have been haunted with the
‘recollections of another great tower, which had
‘exercised an important function on the destinies
‘of the whole human race; that thence the idea
‘ originated in the mind of Shofo, and thence came
‘ the motives which awed his subjects into submis-
‘sion to his tyranny.’

We do not intend now to consider any of the
peculiar proportions, chiefly of originally hidden
features, by which the Great Pyramid differed
from other pyramids,—but only those more external
appearances which it had in common with them.
Similarly too of King Shofo, we shall now discuss only
what characteristics he possessed in common with


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 393


other kings of his race; and in this broad view have
to consider a fact, which Mr. Osburn brings to light
from the hieroglyphics ; viz., that some, not all, of
the ancient kings were worshipped as gods after
their death,—many and many a private man an-
nouncing himself to be ‘ priest to King Shofo’ in
the Great, or ‘to King Shafre’ in the second,
Pyramid ; the worship being conducted outside
either Pyramid, but directed towards the late king
as though he were tenanting the interior as God.
Now, as Mr. Osburn has well remarked, ‘the first
‘settler in Egypt, notwithstanding his accomplish-
‘ments,—a proficient in architecture, masonry, and
‘sculpture, with the skill to plan, the courage to
‘ undertake, and the perseverance to accomplish, the
‘ mightiest works of engineering,—was yet a slave
‘to the fear of the supernatural, This impression,
‘ call it religion or superstition (the name is unim-
‘ portant), assuredly was upon his spirit, and he
‘ erovelled in the dust beneath it. In his abject
‘slavish terror of the gods, he fenced in what he
‘ conceived to be their privileges with stringent and
‘rigid laws. In subsequent times these reserva-
tions extended, indeed, to many puerilities; but in
the earlier days, as Strabo duly records, there were
temples in Egypt erected to God, without pictures
and without images in them,—in accordance appa-
rently to an impression strong in primitive man, as
to the sin of endeavouring to materially represent
the unrepresentable Deity. And when one of these


394 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


temples was uncovered recently, viz., King Shafre’s,
near the Sphinx, behold it built without ornament,
having smooth square pillars, square beams, and flat
walls, but no carving and no painting.

Hence the undecorated interior of the ancient
Pyramids we may regard as consequent on the
deification of the king there entombed.’ All the
earlier gods of Heypt too, maintains W. Osburn,
were dead men; Osiris was Mizraim, the chief of
the clan who marched westward from Babel, carry-
ing with them as a tradition the worship of the
setting sun. Mizraim reached the banks of the
Nile, founded the city afterwards called Heliopolis,
and finally died, and was deified at Busiris in the
Delta. His name signifies ‘two cities or strong-
‘holds ;’ and was adopted as a special designation
for his descendants, as soon as either Menes, or some
predecessor of Shofo, crossed the Nile and founded a
new city on the western bank, in opposition to the
older one on the eastern side of the river. This dis-
tinction went on continually growing,—as one city
pushed its improvements upwards into the longitu-
dinal valley, and the other downwards across the
broad. Delta,—until it ripened into the historic oppo-
sition of Upper and Lower Egypt, with their two
distinct crowns, and hieroglyphic royal ovals always
written in duplicate.


1 «The Great Pyramid with its precinct, was dedicated to the wor-
‘ship of Shofo after his burial. It is repeatedly named “ the great
« “ temple of Shofo.”’—W. Osburn’s Egypt, vol. i. p. 278.


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 395


Every succeeding Memphite king to Shofo,
seemed to press further and further up the Nile,
and build a new city in the richer alluvial there to
be found. Such city was then forthwith presented
with a severed limb of the deceased Egyptian patri-
arch Mizraim, dismembered for the purpose at
Busiris ; and it also provided itself with a local god,
whose continual presence was assured for the pro-
tection of the citizens, through adoption of the
gross symbolism of a living animal. The celebrated
royal proclamation said by Manetho to have been
issued in the second dynasty, assigning the bull
Apis to Memphis, the bull Menevis to Heliopolis,
and a goat to the city of Mendes, being only a small
beginning of the dreadful religious leprosy which
afterwards spread over the whole land.

To Mencheres, however, is attributed by Mr.
Osburn the foresight to perceive, soon after he had
founded the city of Abydos, that this completely
free trade in the raising up of gods, was leading to
a rapid disintegration of interests amongst the now
numerous cities of Egypt; wherefore, he both
elevated the priests into a peculiar institution,
and set on foot efforts to make Mizraim or Osiris
the god of all Egypt. Hence, as a beginning, he
proceeded to gather up the severed limbs of the
patriarch from every city to which they had been
distributed. But from this arose,—for each city
tried stoutly to keep its own relic of their common
progenitor,—a long series of internecine wars,


396 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. [DIV. II.


which have caused the dynasties from the sixth, to
the eleventh, to be without names in Manetho, and
without monuments in Egypt. The Mencherian
faction, however, conquered at length; the priest-
hood became powerful, dominated in the temples,
wrote the only permitted history of the country,
denounced their late opponents, and praised up
Mencheres far above any other sovereign, either
before or since his time.

The details of all these points, and their explana-
tion of the priestly inventions of the fable of Osiris
and Typhon, Isis and Osiris, and their son Horus
(who was Mencheres himself, after he, Mencheres,
had manufactured Isis by splitting the figure of
Osiris in two, and then declaring that the chief god
of Leypt was married), these things, we say, should
rather be studied in W. Osburn and other special
writers. Here, we have only to deal with the
general result ; or that, with whatever number of
gods the early Egyptians supplied themselves, they
were never at ease. Not indeed that they were
erieved at, or troubled with, the thought of being
sinners,—for they were on the contrary for ever
declaring themselves to .be perfectly ‘pure, and
free from every kind of sin, the least as well as the
greatest ; but they seemed to fancy themselves


tyrannized over by a supreme Deity, and therefore ~


turned round, and in their boasted purity of both
heart and soul, tyrannized in turn over their fellow-
men,—until Egypt ‘became then, what it has


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 397


‘always been since, the house of bondage to the
‘ human race,’ |


Conclusion of the Old Empire.


Towards the end of the eleventh dynasty, with
which Manetho terminates his first volume, and in
the time of Kings Acthoes and Amenemes, Egypt
was visited by the patriarch Abraham; and, if we
may trust Josephus, expressly to commune with the
priests in a friendly spirit on their unhappy religious
beliefs. The Bible indeed gives no such particulars,
but does not say anything against them, while it
indicates that Abraham was in the country a long
time, sufficiently long too for such a purpose.
Nevertheless we presume that little faith is to be
placed in Josephus’s account, unless confirmed by
the monuments. Something however of that sort
appears really to be the case; for the sacred patri-
arch is likewise said in the same passage ‘ to have
‘ taught the Keyptians arithmetic, and to have com-
‘municated to them the science of astronomy as it
‘had then lately been built wp in Chaldza’ In
accordance with which, Mr. Osburn finds ever after
that date, what he never met in times before, viz.,
the year of the king’s reign always introduced in
hieroglyphics. He believes too, that that method
was induced in great part from the exactness with
which the Chaldean astronomy, imported into
Egypt by Abraham, showed the true length of the
year as measured in days easily counted.


398 LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


Hence, no doubt, the simplification of the Egyp-
tian calendar; for from King Shofo of the fourth
dynasty, or even from King Menes, if ever there
was such an individual, down to King Acthoes of
the eleventh dynasty, the Egyptian reckoning of
time is said to have been almost entirely lunar, and
based on two traditions brought with them by the
Mizraites, on first colonizing the Nile valley. The
first tradition being to the effect that twelve lunar
months proximately made a year; and the second,
that the moon immediately after Sirius had been seen
to rise cosmically, ought to be held the first moon in
the year ; whence sometimes thirteen lunar months
in their calendar year. Each year further began
with a full moon ; from which phase to the crescent
of the old moon, ten days ; then from that to the
crescent of the new moon, ten days; and from that
to full moon again, ten days nearly, making up three
of the old Egyptian decadal weeks of ten days each.

Thus have we followed the stream of Egyptian
life, by its contemporaneous monumental traces, from
its earliest known remains in the fourth dynasty
down tothe eleventh ; or from the year of 2170 B.c.
(perhaps 2200 B.c.) to 1959 B.c., according to the
dates of the Great Pyramid and W. Osburn ; and
have thereby reached the world-known name of the
patriarch Abraham,—but have touched, as yet, on
no independently settled and generally received
chronology, and nothing that can be called history.
We are still indeed in a manner high above the strata


CHAP. V.] LIFE UNDER THE OLD EMPIRE. 399


of clouds which keep the solid material earth of true
historical times from our view ; we are still in prim-
eval ages, whereof the only human contemporary
chronicles are the Egyptian; and those, imperfect,
and very variously interpreted by different modern
authorities. Wherefore, though we have with little
doubt passed through the age of the chief Pyramid-
builders,—it is incumbent on us to pursue the course
of their successors still further down the stream of
time,—until we have connected them with general
documentary history ; or seen them arrived amongst
events which all nations acknowledge, and upon
times where no schools of chronologists have any
sensible differences.


CHAPTER VI.
LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE.


ALTHOUGH several modern authors of repute in-
clude in their systems the twelfth Egyptian
~ dynasty, as forming part of ‘the old Empire,’ whose
limits they have concluded upon rather arbitrarily,
—we may do better, with William Osburn, in
attending to the broad line of separation which
Manetho himself established between the eleventh
and twelfth dynasties, or the distinction between
his first and second books. specially, too, may we
do so, when that line is confirmed in a substantive
manner by the monuments.

These authentic testimonies, without doubt, speak
of an unusually prosperous period for the twelfth
dynasty, testifying to union, numbers, and wealth
such as had never before been seen ; and the occur-
rence of which is looked on by the author of the
Monumental History of Egypt, as the legitimate
and to-be-expected result of the conclusion of the
long series of Mencherian wars,—terminated as they
had at last been by the positive triumph of one
party, and its complete domination over all who
had once offended them.


CHAP, VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 401


Neither was it a mere continuation or’ even


- augmentation of the scale of their former life which


Egyptians now experienced ; for partly owing to
increased wealth, and partly to the more complete
establishment of the priesthood,—a certain amount
of slow change in kind or quality did also take
place amongst this people. And it told by degrees
on their manners and customs, though as a nation
they have been accounted by most writers the
slowest of the slow—the Chinese of the earlier ages
of the world ; or, as M. Renan is pleased in fiction
to make them out, the close representatives of the
dull and unimprovable English,—while his own
countrymen are the very opposite, and mirror
exactly the intellectual ancient Greeks, whose land
was the glorious mother of everything noble,
sprrituelle, and elevating to the soul of humanity.
In accordance with the general geographical direc-
tion of early Egyptian colonization, the monuments
of the twelfth dynasty are found further, or more
southward, up the valley, than those we have hitherto
been considering. Some points in Lower Egypt were
still retained possession of, and adorned with costly
buildings, as the celebrated obelisk yet standing at
Heliopolis sufficiently proves. But engineering
works in the Faioum for irrigating that now most
fertile province of all Egypt,—followed by the build-
ing of the extensive halls of the Labyrinth, with an
appended Pyramid of no mean size,—though com-
posed of crude brick, and cased only with stone,
VOL. III. 2C


402 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


—chiefly occupied the attention of successive
monarchs. Together with these material works,
however, there was a new and more elaborate
organization of the religion instituted, and an
ordering of the burial rites of the whole country,
on the Mencherian model ; or that of general sub-
servience to Osiris as the chief god of Egypt, and
to Abydos, his now supposed final and complete
resting-place, as the holy city of burial for all the
land. ?

Of the inner life of Eeypt during this period, we
have abundant particulars in the unequalled range
of tombs in the cliffs of Benihassan. There, in
noble halls hewn out of the solid rock, with their
roofs supported on fluted pillared columns, the very
prototype of the long-subsequent Doric, are paint-
ings innumerable of almost every art, trade, or
amusement ever carried on by any and every branch
of the people. ‘Egypt of the twelfth dynasty,
‘ caught in the very fact, writes M. Renan.

The actors therein are still, in their leading
characteristics, the same people as, or the literal de-
scendants of, the fourth dynasty. All the occupa-
tions, manners, or customs represented of old in the
tombs around the Great Pyramid, are repeated in
those cf Benihassan; there are the same toiling
multitudes, the same official system of scribes, over-
seers, and taskmasters, and the same feasting accord-
ing to order. Something, indeed, of the gloomy
sameness is gone; manufactures now compete with


CHAP. VI] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 403


agricultural operations, the plough drawn by oxen
dispenses with many sheep treading the seed into
the soft mud; the cultivation of the vine and the
process of wine-making, diversify the scenes ; flax
may be traced through its several stages,—men
reaping it in the fields, and women weaving its
fibres indoors. But there sits the great man still in
colossal grandeur and unbending severity, overlook-
ing the busy hive, every one of whose human bees
is working for his benefit. And he still enjoys
his field-sports much as his ancestors did before him,
but with a variation ; for now the ropes of the clap-
nets are led by ingenious devices to his hands, as he
sits far away on an easy-chair, so that he may have
the honour, by giving a little pull to the trigger, of
appearing to have caught all the birds himself. Or
if his designs are against four-footed game, as the
graceful antelopes of the desert,—no longer content
with taking them alive and taming them,—he pursues
them now cruelly, both tearing them with dogs and
transfixing them with long arrows ;—whence some
most touching pictures of a poor gazelle turning
round in pain to lick the place where one of these
darts is standing in its flesh, and even protruding
through the opposite side of its body; or another
that has fallen lifeless on its tender offspring.

Very great lords were still the many chiefs who
ruled over the people, under the king ; one of them
records his estates and privileges ; first the range of
the eastern desert and its oasis, for his antelope-


404 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


hunting ; and of the ‘hinder or nether pools’ for
his bird-catching ; second, ‘the land of Raophis,’ or
a tract near the mouth of the Faioum, and ‘a sluice
‘in the eastern bank of the canal’ to water it ; third,
the land of the Hawk mountain, and another sluice
from the canal of the Faioum ; fourth, the land of
the ‘two streams, or a narrow strip of ground be-
tween the canal and the Nile, together with a license
for enlarging the sluices both from the canal and
the Nile, so as to irrigate the fields to that extent
‘ prescribed in the sacred book for the growth of
‘the plant asut; and the fifth, ‘the land of the
‘ hare,’ with a permit to construct two sluices on the
Nile.

But this chief is described as holding honourable
offices both in church and state; being, first, ‘the
‘custos of the divine stable of the sacred bull;
second, the constable of the palace of the King
Amenemes ; and third, ‘steward of the land-tax for
‘ the support of the schools of the sons of the kings
‘ of Lower Egypt.’

Another chief, who has been an extensive ad-
ministrator, recites his own praises; for in these
tombs, inscribed as well as painted, ‘the dead; as
M. Renan well remarks, ‘lifts up his voice and
‘relates his life.’ ‘All the lands under me,’ says
the prefect, ‘were ploughed and sown from north
‘to south ; nothing was ever stolen out of my work-
‘shops ; never was a child afflicted, never a widow
‘ill-treated by me. I have given equally to the


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 405


‘ widow and the married woman; and I have not
‘ preferred the great to the small in the judgments
‘ which I have pronounced,’

In these tombs of the twelfth dynasty, too, the
military element begins to appear; and in vaults
beneath some of them, and not yet discovered, are
deposited the mummies, so the hieroglyphics tell us,
of many hundred soldiers who had fallen in the
wars of King Sesortosis against the black Cushites
in Nubia. Prisoners, moreover, are brought back
from those campaigns,—and account for the negro
slaves now occasionally seen in the great man’s
household ; while under previous dynasties, we had
met with no closer acquaintance with southern lands
than the unpacking of a box containing elephants’
tusks. At the same time, however, other personages
now appear on the scene, sometimes singly, some-
times in groups ; men of aquiline features, brighter
colour than, and different dress from, the Egyptians ;
immigrants from Arabia and Palestine.

The most celebrated pictured group of them is
that which, in spite of the time being too early, and
the hieroglyphics telling a perfectly contrary story,
has often been alluded to as ‘ probably representing
“the arrival of Jacob with his family, and their
‘presentation to Pharaoh. But now, after they
have been called Greeks, Hebrews, Beni-Israel, and
many other names, Mr. Osburn reads their title as
—a group of thirty-seven Jebusites, purchased for
slaves from one of the petty kings of the Jebusites,


406 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


and presented by the chief Nuhophtis to King
Sesortosis 1. in the sixth year of his reign, on ac-
count of their skill in preparing stibiwm; a black
powder produced from antimony, and used profusely
throughout ancient Egypt as a cosmetic. It ‘ was
‘ applied between the eyelids, by means of a bodkin,
‘as in modern Egypt; the eyebrows also were filled
‘ with it, and broad lines were painted with it under
‘the eyes. The use of it in ancient Egypt seems
‘to have been absolutely universal, and by both
* sexes; so that the labours of these slaves would be
* largely in requisition for the preparation of this
‘ doubtless royal monopoly.’


Invasion of the Hyksos.


And so they, the triumphant sect of Mencherian
Egyptian religionists, went on dyeing their wigs
and painting their eyebrows, extending their palaces,
and oppressing their slaves,—until suddenly the fatal
day arrived, and in a moment King Amenemes the
Third, the Amun Timeeus of Greek historical legend,
was driven forth from his halls of granite, and
porticos of so-called white marble in his Labyrinth,
the wonder of the world; while his kingdom disap-
peared like chaff, before the sudden irruption of the
terrible Hyksos, the Eastern Shepherd Kings. So
at least say the Greek accounts ; and they are not
altogether without a foundation; though it be
lamentably deep and far to find, by reason of its
resting on tales derived without critical analysis


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 407


from the one-sided, partial history written by the
finally dominant faction, and recorded in state
temples.

A terrible dislocation occurred, no doubt, about
that time in the Egyptian annals; for, from the
thirteenth to the seventeenth dynasty inclusive,
there are few if any kings’ names recorded with
certainty by the annalists ; there is scarcely a con-
temporary monument to be found; and this period
of triumphant, as well as destructive, barbarism, is
said to have lasted for two thousand years by some,
and a thousand years by other, hierologist authors.
The latter duration is assumed by Bunsen, who
agrees with many German writers, in calling the
period by the name of the ‘Middle Kingdom ;’ and
painting it as something entirely different from the
Old Kingdom which preceded, and the New Kingdom
which followed with the advent of the eighteenth
dynasty.

But here steps in William Osburn, with most im-
portant aid from his minutely critical study of such
fragments of hieroglyphics as some of the tombs of
the period have lately yielded up; and he shows,
that the whole interval between the twelfth and
eighteenth dynasties, did not exceed some two
hundred years; and that the thread of Egyptian
public life was never broken, or the current of
Egyptian history brought to a stand during that
time. True, the nation had to pass through some ex-
traordinarily severe trials; but they were the very


408 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


results of the working of the Egyptian social and
religious principle ; which went on developing in
its appointed channels, until it finally produced
such fruit as it was capable of affording, or natur-
ally ought to bear, in the much-lauded glories and
sinful culminations of the nmeteenth dynasty.

But was there no invasion then, do our readers
ask, by the historical Shepherd Kings? that nation
of Hyksos coming, as we have hitherto been taught,
from no one knew whence, conquering by the breath
of their mouth, and vanishing again as mysteriously
into nothingness ; while Egypt, after suffering the
terrific incubus for a thousand years, re-awoke to go
on with its life and mission in the world, exactly at
the place where it had previously sunk—in a sleep
far longer than that of the seven sleepers of ancient
Ephesus—under the feet of destroying conquerors ?

Some of these questions, on common-sense prin-
ciples, answer themselves ; but to others, Mr. Osburn
replies, in utter antagonism to some ancient and
hitherto credited traditions,—‘ Hyksos, as a mon-
archy acting for and by themselves, there were
none ; but Hyksos, as Shepherd tribes, rangers of the
desert, bands of mountaineers from various regions,
entering Keypt by the Isthmus of Suez as travellers,
or settling as immigrants, and attaching themselves
to, and sometimes considerably acting upon, the
nearest government there for the time being,—of
these Hyksos there were many. There always were,
too, from the time that the renowned fertility and


CHAP, V1.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 409


vast extent of cultivateable land in Egypt, made
immigration in that direction as favourite a project
to the starving poor of surrounding countries, in
and about the year 2000 B.c.,—as are the United
States of America in A.D. 1866, to all who find the
Old World narrow and overstocked.

The shepherd Philitis,—who, according to one
tradition, fed his flocks near the Great Pyramid
during the time of that marvellous structure being
in progress of erection under King Shofo; and,
according to another tradition, was himself the
builder,—is an example of one, or rather of a whole
tribe, of the generic Hyksos ; though at a date long
before the historically famous and: yet not literally
exact, ‘invasions of the Shepherds,’ and ‘ Shepherd
« dynasties.” These, however, whether real or ficti-
tious, but as assigned to the later time, are all we
have to deal withnow; and shall find, through
William Osburn, that while the Mencherian twelfth
dynasty was enjoying its late victories in fancied
security in Upper Egypt,—-the remnants of a de-
feated dynasty had retreated to the swamps of the
Delta. There they nursed their enmities on the


1 In deciding whether the historical Hyksos could have been con-
nected with the building of the Great Pyramid, care must be taken, if
the method of absolute dates be employed, not to mix up the state-
ments of different systems. For their absolute chronologies have
vastly larger errors, and variations from each other,—than have their
relative chronologies.

All the systems, for instance, place the fourth Pyramid-building
dynasty, relatively before the fifteenth Hyksos. But Bunsen’s absolute
date for the latter is 2547 B.c., while Osburn’s for the former is only
2200 B.c., and that is nearly the true astronomical date also.


410 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE, [DIV. LI.


thoughts of their plundered Busirides (or special
places of sepulture ; where they had duly deposited,
and whence the Mencherians had violently taken
away, their inherited relics of the body of Mizraim
Osiris, the common progenitor) ; and continually in-
creased their numbers with immigrating Palestinian
hordes ; until, feeling their strength, and watching
the right moment, they advanced under their chief
Saites, and took possession of the royal city of Mem-
‘phis. It was an act of vengeance,’ writes Osburn,
‘in which all Lower Egypt joined, against the re-
‘ presentatives of those who had profaned their local
‘ gods, and outraged their sense of religion. Such
‘ we have found, and shall find to be the characteristic
‘of all the wars of ancient Egypt; viz., internal
wars between rival pretensions, and opposite re-
ligious beliefs, though intensely idolatrous always.

Soon after this event, Queen Skeniophris, the suc-
cessor of King Amenemes, was driven out of the
Faioum and of all Middle Egypt, and her descend-
ants only just continued to exist in distant southern
regions beyond Thebes, for some generations, as the
obscure thirteenth dynasty.


The Joseph Period.


In the meanwhile a strong government had evi-
dently been formed in Lower Egypt, having Mem-
phis for its capital ; where, third of the so-called
Hyksos line, ascended the throne Phiops, Aphophis,
or Apappus, a venerable character, who is said to


CHAP. VL] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 411


have been endued with the sovereignty in child-
hood, and to have retained it for nearly one hun-
dred years. In his reign, if some annalists tell truly,
came Joseph as a slave into Egypt; and then fol-
lowed those scriptural seven years of plenty and
seven of famine, whose effects, though general over
a large part of the earth’s surface, were specially
pointed and intensified for Egypt, by the formation,
—at the beginning of the plentiful period,—of an
opening in the north bank of the great Ethiopian
lake ; a thing which tradition had often indistinctly
hinted at, but only the researches of Lepsius and
Gardner Wilkinson at the place, have recently set
in a clear and understandable light. (See Plate x1.)

That the southern barrier of this lake was at
Silsilis, and that its water extended, at least during
the inundation, backwards through Nubia and ‘ the
‘ plains of Ethiopia,—seems to be abundantly proved
by all these regions being coated, at a height far
above the highest modern inundation-level, by an
alluvial deposit which ends northwards at Silsilis.
The hieroglyphic inscriptions also on the rocks at
Senneh, and elsewhere in the south, attest a sudden
and permanent lowering of the water-level in all
these parts—by more than twenty-seven feet—to have
taken place after the reign of the fourth king of the
thirteenth dynasty, and before the beginning of the
eighteenth,—or in what may be fairly taken as the


1 See Sir Gardner Wilkinson, in Murray’s Hand-Book to Egypt,
p. 429.


412 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE.  [DIV. III.


age of Aphophis. On these points all seem agreed ;
though they do not all consent to the effect of the
barrier at Sulsilis, when unbroken, having been a
permanent Ethiopian lake. Even supposing it,
however, to have been only an extension of the
inundation-surface,—still an extension so vast as
that must have been, and in position, above Egypt,
must have had toa great degree a lake-effect: 2.¢., in
tending powerfully both to equalize throughout the
year the overflow of the Nile in Egypt Proper ; and
to relieve much of the excessive labour of the
peasants, as obligatory on them ever since, at low
Nile, in pumping up the water for irrigation pur-
poses, by sheer manual labour.

While, if we allow W. Osburn’s fuller hypothesis
of a more nearly permanent lake ; then, when such
lake was emptying itself slowly through the fractured
or wearing northern barrier,—the extra supply of
water yielded thereby in the lower valleys, produced
the years of plenty: and when all the accumulated
stock of long-pent-up water was gone, and each new
inundation from the equator,—weakened, too, by the
rainless times of the general famine in most lands,—
had to diffuse itself amongst the gaping mud-crevasses
of the late lake-bottom of 100,000 square miles of
surface,—then came those trying years of scarcity ;
a calamity which in Egypt depends not so much, if
at all, on rain or no rain there, but upon a scanty inun-
dation, and the river being low down in its bed. With
these times of scarcity, too, were instituted, for the


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 413


people of Egypt, Joseph’s new regulations of land-
tenure and sovereign monopoly, which almost revo-
lutionized the condition of society. And came
therein also, within the precincts of the well-governed
land, the whole family of Jacob, the embryo nation ~
of Israel, to be nourished for a season,—and also
to be put through a very useful course of appren-
ticeship to the practical arts, most necessary to
the full education of a tribe of shepherd and tent-
dwelling people,—before being sent out to live its
completer life, and perform its grandly appointed
part in the open world.

Eeyptian evidences of these things, whether in
monument or story, seem to be numerous and dis-
tinct enough, for all authors are agreed on the reality
of the main facts, and differ only in detail and ideas
of causation. Thus, Mr. Osburn attributes the ex-
traordinary wisdom of Joseph’s measures as Prime
Minister of Egypt, to Divine inspiration; and is
never tired of showing the perfect application of
every unusual Hebrew word employed in the Scrip-
tures, when describing the sojourn, to some reality
in the life or language of Egypt as now deducible
from hieroglyphic interpretation.t But M. Renan,
on the other hand, after exposing the uniform dull
level of Egyptian men, ‘where never appeared a
‘ great warrior, a great philosopher, a great poet, or
‘a great artist,’ adds, ‘ Nay, not even a great mini-


1 See W. Osburn’s Monumental History of Egypt, and his Israel in
Egypt. |


414 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


‘ ster ;’ for Joseph, who did produce such enormous
changes in the state, was not a native.

Most conducive, however, to the tender planting
out of Israel in the land of Goshen, the hieroglyphic
‘ Jand of flowers,’ on the eastern side of the Delta,—
and to the sacred family’s ultimate spread over the
whole of that rich triangular region—must have
been the unquestioned supremeness of the authority
of the venerable King Aphophis; towards the end
of whose long reign it was, that the Hebrew immi-
gration took place ; and even Jacob himself bowed
to him in respect, when he made that touching
answer recorded in the Bible, with regard to the
length of his life and the years of his pilgrimage
upon earth.


Rise of the Theban Power.


With Joseph’s death, however, when that came,
then ceased this remarkably placid state of quiet
rule ; for, far away in Upper Egypt the relics of the
Mencherian faith were again making head, and
finding at length a suitable exponent in Amosis, the
first king of the eighteenth dynasty, a large fana-
tical army was collected,—which, making a sudden
irruption northwards, repeated in reverse order the
former invasion of the Shepherds, 7.¢., of the Shep-
herd, or Hyksos-assisted Lower Egyptians,—taking
their towns, and expelling them themselves from the
borders of the ‘pure land.’ Vindictive and furious
appears to have been this return-war from the upper


CHAP. VI.| LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 415


country, accompanied as it was by an opening of the
graves and a desecrating of the sacred places of the
conquered party. Mr. Osburn speaks from personal
examination, to a whole range of fine tombs, all the
faces of whose internal walls had been rudely but
completely chipped away, apparently to prevent any
trace remaining of Lower Egyptian rule,—called
by the Mencherians, to make it appear utterly vile,
‘the Shepherd domination, —remaining in the
upper land.

Then probably took place the violation of many
of the Pyramids, for two or three Shepherd kings
were said in their day to have been buried in Pyra-
mids near Memphis; and these Pyramids are now
open and ruined to an intense degree. The par-
ticular sovereign under whom this misfortune befell,
was Asses, the grandson of Aphophis. His chil-
dren thereupon retreated into the Delta, and rally-
ing around the city of Succoth or Xois, reconstructed
there the Memphian kingdom, and commenced a
new dynasty; but which appears to have been
strangely misplaced in the list, or misnumbered
during the confusion of subsequent times. To
facilitate references, however, we insert here a tabu-
lar view of W. Osburn’s arrangement; where the
order of date of the monarchs is obtained by fol-
lowing the order of the numbers, whether in one
column, or from column to column.


416


‘LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE.


[ DIV. 111.


CHRONOLOGY AND ORDER oF Succession oF Kinas AND DYNASTIES UNDER
THE NEWER EMPIRE, ACCORDING TO W. OsBURN.


10


22


29


30


37
38
39
40


41


62


Names of Kings


in
Lower Egypt.


Dynasty 10.


Heracleopolitans
or Sebennytes.


No names
known.
Dynasty 16.


So-called Mem-
phite Shepherd
Kings.


Saites or Salatis.


Aphophis, son
of Meris.


Melaneres, son
of Aphophis.


Jannes.


Asses.


Dynasty 14,
Xoites,


Names
unknown.


Siptha and
Queen Thouoris.


Sesostris Ramses.


Amenepthis.


Sethos 2.


Num-
Names of Kings bers Names of Kings
in a in ose
Middle Egypt. | of | Upper Egypt. vt
Kings.
Dynasty 12. 1965
Thebans.
1 | Sesortosis 1.
Kings omitted 2 | Amenemes 2.
from the lists. 8 | Sesortosis 2.
4 | Sesortosis 3.
5 | Amenemes 38.
6 | Amenemes.
Meenis, son of
Saites.
a9 9 | Skeniofris.
Dywasty 13.
Thebans.
11 | Menthesuphis 2.} 1750
Viceroy of Me- z
laneres, 16
17 | Sechemetes.
Nonameknown]| 18 | Sabacon 1.
for these num-
bers.
19
20
21 |Sabacon2,father| 1680
of Amosis,
Dynasty 18.
Thebans.
; 81 | Amosis.
F 82 | Chebron.
At 33 | Mesphres.
ae 84 | Achencheres.
ra 85 | Amenses.
. 386 | Thothmosis.
Acherres. 49 | Acherres.
Armais. 50 | Armais.
Amenophis- 51 | Amenophis-be-
Ddekenaten. kenaten.
| Encheris. 63 | Ai.
Tai. 54 | Chebres.
Amenophis- oe eras
Memnon.
Horus.
Dynasty 19.
Thebans.
Ramessu.
Sethos 1.


1360


1320


Events,


Abraham leaves
Egypt.


Tombs of Benihas-
san.


Labyrinth built.

Memphis taken by
so-called Shepherd
Kings.

Josephenters Egypt.

Ethiopian lake
drained,


Jacob enters Egypt,
and Israel’s so-
journ begins,


Shepherd Kings ex-
pelled from Mem-
phis ; or Upper
Egyptinvades and
conquers Middle
Egypt, and leaves
the Delta intact.


Permanent and final
reunion of Middle
and Upper Egypt.


The oppression of
the Israelites.

Rise of Moses.

One Pharaoh over
all Egypt.

The Exodus.


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 417


The new Xoite dominion in the Delta appears to
have extended as far southward as the Pyramid
hill of Jeezeh ; and here its chiefs began to devote
themselves to the worship of one of the deified
kings belonging to the old empire; viz., Shafre of
the second Pyramid. Something of the same sort
had been done previously by Sesortosis u. and
Sesortosis 111. of the twelfth dynasty, who had been
very successful against the southern enemies of
ther day, says Mr. Osburn ; and he is testified to
by their hieroglyphic names being compounded
with that of Shafre; wherefore these children of
Asses, in a later time, with so much need of help
against the southern foes of their day, also com-


pounded Shafre into their names, as (YB 0),
(i a9 (L} Bo) etc., and seemed even


to entertain the idea of making Shafre a great god
in Egypt, in opposition to the Amun worship of
Amosis, in Southern or Upper Egypt. (See Plate x11.)
As a beginning, moreover, of their practical measures,
“they proceeded with the elaboration of the Great
‘Sphinx out of its living rock, and with the rest of
‘the works of decoration which once adorned the
“second Pyramid, and its stupendous precincts ;’ a
locality long considered among Egyptologists as
peculiarly connected with King Shafre, although at
the time Mr. Osburn wrote, the statue duly signed,
and the temple to which we have often alluded,
had not been discovered.
VOL. ITI. 2D


418 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. II.


But even from this point the Asseans were finally
driven back northward, and pent up in the Delta,
with the growing numbers of the Israelites ; for the
great Sphinx was eventually taken possession of
and completed, or its dedicating tables of granite


erected, by Thothmosis tv, or Armais,


the fifth in descent from Amosis of the Theban
eighteenth dynasty ; in which line the Sphinx-form
became thereafter a favourite symbol of regal power.
This dynasty indeed, and after them the nineteenth,
victorious through all the longitudinal valley part
of Egypt, now ruled in royal state at Thebes, and
carried the Egyptian monumental fame to its highest
point of culmination, and even something beyond
down the road to decay.


Authorities for the Highteenth, and later, Dynasties.


Seduced, it would seem, by the beauty of the
monuments, it is with these two dynasties (eigh-
teenth and nineteenth) that most persons’ ideas of
ancient Egypt and Egyptian history begin." When
the oldest of the papyri are alluded to, they belong
to these, or even later times ; equally so the mum-
mies, for though the process of embalming and


1 Sir George Cornewall Lewis, indeed, with his deference to Greek
writings and Greek experiences only, will not allow of any real exist-
ence of Egypt until several dynasties later, or close upon the times of
Greek visitations.


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 419


mummification had been practised in Egypt long
before, it would appear to have depended too much
on spices, and too little on ‘ natron,—or too much on
the plant products of Arabia and Palestine, and too
little on the mineral exudations of the soil in the
Libyan desert,—and therefore not to have been
fully efficacious to prevent resolution of the body
into ‘black dust.* By far the greater part, there-
fore, of the remains now findable, and especially the
more showy works of art of the reputed ‘ ancient
‘ Egypt,’ all belong to this later period of Theban
domination, which extends from 1600 to 1300 Bc.


1 «The earliest mummy known to exist is that in the Leeds Museum,
‘ which is of the time of Ramses 1x., 1100 3.c.,’ says W. Osburn, p. 447
vol. i. of his Monumental History of Egypt.

In the Gentleman’s Magazine for April 1866, is a short article, signed.
S. W. B. ‘on the oldest relic in the world,’ and implying that the
mummy, é.¢., the greater part, if not the whole, of King Mycherinus
or Mencheres of the third Pyramid of Jeezeh, and therefore many
centuries older than the Leeds specimen, is deposited and now to be
seen in the British Museum. But the writer does not say anything
about the opinions of competent men to the effect, that the bones and
woollen cloth gathered up by Colonel Howard Vyse’s assistants, and
which make up the above so-called mummy, belonged to an unfortu-
nate Arab who died in the Pyramid when it had been opened by his
countrymen in the middle ages, The writer however does in honesty
mention that an old Arabian author,—describing what his countrymen
found in the sarcophagus of King Mencheres, when they ransacked it
six hundred years before Colonel Howard Vyse entered the Pyramid,—
says, ‘that with the exception of some plates of gold, there were only the
‘ decayed rotten remains of aman ;’ a phrase which expresses extremely
well the idea W. Osburn has formed from other cases, of the bad
results of embalming under the earlier dynasties. The phrase also
throws much light on the Colonel’s own description of what he found
in the interior of the third Pyramid, and even on the sarcophagus, viz.,
‘a good deal of this deposition (black dust) was also found in the
‘large apartment; and the dung of large birds, probably vultures,
‘ appeared in many places, particularly on the sarcophagus, and seemed
‘to have been there for many years.’—Vyse’s Operations at the
Pyramids of Jeezeh, vol. ii. p. 82.


420 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. TIT.


‘ Which was of great antiquity, at least as early
‘as the beginning of the eighteenth dynasty, is an
expression of Sir Gardner Wilkinson in reference to
a particular architectural decoration on Egyptian
monuments ; and it is just and true enough when ap-
plied relatively to other Pharaohs whose names are fre-
quently referred to in modern times, such as Shishak
of the twenty-second dynasty, contemporary with
Solomon ; Tirhaka of the twenty-fifth, contemporary
with Hezekiah ; and Hophra of the twenty-sixth,
with Zedekiah. Far more just still, is the phrase,
when employed in contradistinction to ‘ antiquities,
connected with all the race of the Ptolemies and
Ceesars; when new inhabitants, new times, new
civilisations, and new ideas had introduced into
Egyptian life a variety of features which,—though
we may find them described in hieroglyphics cut
grandly into the temples of Denderah, Ombos,
Phile, and Esneh,—were perfectly strange to the
EKeypt of the first twenty dynasties.

Requesting our readers, therefore, only to bear the
salutary correction in their minds, for their own
private information,if necessary,—that the eighteenth
and nineteenth dynasties are of the new empire,
and even the later part of the new empire, and very
recent as compared with that older empire, in whose
time the Great Pyramid was produced,—we would
pray them by all means to plunge into any and all
works wherein those dynasties’ remains are de-
scribed,—though under the mistaken implication of


CHAP. VL] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 421


their forming the very origin of all Egyptian his-
tory. For what we, as students in this matter,
require first, is,—to gather as much special and par-
ticular experience of facts and personages as pos-
sible ; and we may be able to rectify the chronology
and eliminate the erroneous impressions under which
they are, or may be presented, afterwards.

Now most books hitherto published on Egypt are
of this order. For until recently, the only large col-
lections of artistic pictures belonged to these two
dynasties or to subsequent ones ; and it was chiefly
to see their showy sculptures existing in fact on
temple-walls, and there representing the so-called
‘ Ancient Egypt, —that every winter for the last fifty
years has witnessed a fleet of wealthy travellers’
boats anchored off Karnak, while their owners were
exploring the wonders of Thebes and the Memno-
nian Palace ; or while traffickers in antiques were
grubbing about amongst the tombs, seeing what
they could steal.

‘In Thebes we abode, writes one of the best of
German travellers, ‘ for twelve over-rich astonishing
‘ days, which were hardly sufficient to learn to find
‘our way among the palaces, temples, and tombs,
‘ whose royal, giant magnificence fills this spacious
“plain. In the jewel of all Egyptian buildings,—in
‘the palace of Rameses Sesostris (which this great-
‘ est of the Pharaohs erected in a manner worthy of
‘himself and the God, “ Zo Amun-Ra, King of the
‘ “Gods,” the guardian of the royal city of Ammon),


422 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [ DIV. Il.


‘on a gently rising terrace, calculated to overlook
‘ the wide plain on this side and on the other side
‘of the majestic river, we kept our beloved King’s
‘ birthday with salute and flags, with chorus-sing-
‘ing, and with hearty toasts proclaimed overa glass
‘ of pure German Rhine wine.’?

Champollion’s grand work, in four volumes of
long folio plates, deals largely with the eighteenth
and nineteenth dynasties: for, beginning at Ipsam-
bul in the extreme south of Nubia, with the great
Ramses cavern-temple, it comes up successively
northwards to Ombos, to Thebes, to Denderah, to
Benihassan, and finally to Sakkara,—always pick-
ing out the most dazzling scenes, and spirited groups
of courtly or warlike figures, and which are usually
of the new empire ; mixing all sorts of subjects just
as they come on the monuments; and finally con-
eluding without any notice of the Pyramids, those
silent and almost sublime witnesses of an earlier
and more serious time.

-Rosellini’s great work in three volumes of folio
plates, will also yield data for the life of this period
to a large extent, and his engravings are arranged
in subjects ; vol. i, referring to history and public
life; vol. ii, to the trades and employments of
everyday private life; and vol. iii., to temple scenes
and matters connected with the religious belief of
the time.

Lepsius alone arranges his plates in chronological

1 Lepsius’ Letters from Egypt.


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 423


order, and enables any one in his volumes v., vi,
and vii, to study no less than ninety-seven large
plates of all subjects belonging to the eighteenth
dynasty, and eighty-four belonging to the nine-
teenth. A magnificent contribution to knowledge !
Not indeed all original or contributed for the first
time, for many of the plates represent the same
monuments figured previously by Champollion and
Rosellini; but there is advantage in comparing
the several styles and capabilities of the different
modern artists ; and while the palm is perhaps due
to the German edition for the most efficient render-
ing of the mystical awe and fate-like solemnity of
animal-headed gods,—the prize for human por-
traiture is undoubtedly to be given to Rosellini,
who contrives to indicate a degree of refinement in
nature, depth of feeling, variety of expression, and
wealth of human sentiment, in some of his heads of


kings and queens, which leaves all his competitors
far behind.’


Scenes in the Highteenth Dynasty.


But now let the trumpet sound,—the curtain rise,
on the eighteenth dynasty, and who are these on the
painted monuments before us? Brick-makers ; and
desperately are they toiling at their ungainly occu-
pation. With backs bent horizontal, they dig up


1 Consult also the great French work of 1800, and subsequently
Gardner Wilkinson’s Ancient Egypt, edition of 1847, or later, and
Burton’s Hxcerpta Hieroglyphica.


424 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. Ill.


the tough clay with short hooked implements, merely
a small improvement of their natural hands. The
process of moulding the clay, tapping out the pressed
lump, piling the rectangular blocks, and carrying
them away in collections of as many as one man can
just stagger under,—are interesting enough in an
industrial art and trade point of view. But there
all the time sits the taskmaster with his stick; a
cinnamon-coloured, clean-shaved, black-wigged Keyp-
tian he is ; and then we may perceive that the brick-
makers are not his countrymen, but light brown
men, with aquiline noses, grey eyes, and naturally
growing short beards of reddish hair;* a more
northern race evidently than the Egyptians, possibly
Israelites, and certainly Palestinians of some order
from the now overrun regions of the Delta.

Foreign slave-labour has evidently come into
vogue, since we last made acquaintance with these
men of the monuments. Some amount of ordinary
field-agriculture is still memorialized ; but it seems
now nearly overborne by garden cultivation, and
these gardens are more or less ornamental plots
round grand mansions and gorgeous temples, sur-


1 «From what I have observed amongst the numerous tribe of Jews,
‘ first at Gibraltar, now here (Algiers), and further on throughout the
‘ East—of the many thousands I have seen, a peculiar colour of the
‘ hair is so striking as to seem characteristic of the nation. Amongst
‘us, Jews have almost invariably hair of the deepest black, but this is
‘a light auburn, of a tint I have never seen before. If tbe letter to
‘the Roman Emperor may be relied on, this was in all probability the
‘ colour of our Saviour’s hair.’.—W. R. Wilde, Narrative of a Voyage,
1840,


ee


CHAP. VI.| LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 425


rounded with little brick hutches for retaining the
slaves at night. In place, too, of scenes of open-
air country-life, and sturdy chieftains inspecting
their stock,—the majority of social pictures is now
devoted to the gatherings of the rich in festive town-
halls ; and these rich again are found to be only
dependants in different kind or degree on the
monarch for the time being.

In him the king, the Pharaoh, now concentres all
the wealth of the people, all the life of the nation.
‘In old Egypt scarcely an act. of any Pharaoh is re-
‘ corded in the tombs of his subjects ; nor does his
‘name appear at all, save in the names of their
‘estates, and sometimes in their own names. But
‘in the tombs of the new kingdom, in the times that
‘ followed Joseph, all this is reversed ; for there is
‘scarcely a tomb of any importance, the principal
‘ subject of which is not some act of service or devo-
‘tion performed by the excavator to the reigning
‘ Pharaoh.

‘Nor is this difference confined to the secular
‘ princes of Egypt only. We found the priest’s office
‘in old Egypt to be a mere appendage to the secular
‘ functions of the princes and nobles, performed, in-
‘variably in the cases where the performance is
‘ depicted, by proxy, and by the hand of menials and
‘dependants. The contrast to this presented by the
‘monuments of the later epoch is marvellously per-
‘fect. The priest has risen greatly in authority and
‘importance in the State. This office becomes more .


426 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. IIL


‘and more exclusive and hereditary, until at length
‘he ascends the throne of the Pharaohs, and rules
‘ Keypt by a dynasty of priest-kings.’*

How perfectly these changes are in accord with
what the Bible describes as the results of the admini-
stration of Joseph, viz., that all the land and all
the cattle, and at last all the people themselves, were
sold to, and became the possession of, the monarch ;
except only the lands and goods of the priests, these
he bought not. The result of the change is eloquently
borne testimony to by M. Renan, in his description
of the difference between the subjects of the paint-
ings in the tombs of the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
twelfth dynasties, as compared with those of the
eighteenth ;—which last ‘seem to have been invaded
‘ by a whole pantheon, numerous, and accompanied
‘ by fictions horrible, and at the same time the most
‘ silly that the human brain has ever conceived.’

The religion, therefore, did not advance in char-
acter when so peculiarly protected, though it mul-
tiplied its external indications. The walls of palace,
and temple, and tombs are now indeed everywhere
covered with figures of grotesque animal-gods; they
increase in number with the progress of the reign,
or the pleasure of the king ; and are always more or
less in waiting upon him as mere puppets to receive
his royal pleasure; though destroying angels to
carry it out against his foes. To present him with
one symbol of the key of life to smell at, was enough

1 Twenty-first dynasty.


CHAP. VL] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 427


in former times ; but now these flattering gods ad-
vance on either side, and anoint the monarch with
long streams of innumerable repetitions of the sym-
bols ; and every hieroglyphic sentence is pretty sure
to begin, or end, with the oft-proved falsity, ‘King
‘ so-and-so, living for ever’!

Of course the said king does not improve in dis-
position under all this adulation and indulgence, for
cruelty amongst other vices becomes a dominant
characteristic. A most tender exhibition apparently
of family affection, is shown gracefully depicted
on one of the monuments of Amenophis (eigh-
teenth dynasty): the queen-mother gently cherishes
her stripling son ; and he with a magnificent head-
dress—the ancient wig made now fit for a king—
is seated on her knee, her favourite child, affec-
tionately reciprocating her regard ; and the scene
might appear very passable and even commendable—
did we not remark that the boy’s feet are all the
time on the backs of two sets of captives, Pales-
tinians and Negroes. These poor wretches lie there
with their hands cruelly tied tight behind them,
their bodies and limbs bent up triple, and internally
spiked collars round their helpless necks ; to which
collars strings are attached, so that the youthful
prince, holding them in his hands, can, by jerking
on them for amusement, instantly set half-a-dozen
grown men into most exquisite bodily pain.

But this was amusement also for the father-king
of Thebes as well; all these kings’ ideas of a glorious


428 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


triumph, either for war or peace, seeming to con-
centrate in riding in a chariot with prancing horses,
(horses, it will be observed, are now added to Egyp-
tian live stock, but only employed in war, or for the
king’s purposes,) and dragging behind them two
long lines of tortured, writhing captives. Some-
times these are Negroes, sometimes Asiatics, but
always with their hands and arms bound together
in some almost impossible and always perfectly
helpless position ; while the terrible spiked collars
round their necks are connected with the ropes held
by the king,—every sudden prance of whose horses
must produce unnumbered quiverings in all those
lacerated human nerves. The expression of various
agonies in these captives, obliged to keep running
along after the king in his chariot, and with no
hand available to ease the heavy collars which are
cutting into their necks,—is one of the highest
efforts of the Egyptian artist. It is too evidently
from the life, from scenes witnessed often ; and one
hardly knows which to pity most, the more childish
symptoms of yelling and pain amongst the Negroes,
or the deeper feelings of the more manly and
decorous-visaged bearded men of the North; but
both alike suffer all that human nature can bear,
and for the purpose merely of enabling an Egyptian
king to feel prouder than ever, before his slavish
and enslaved people.

Arrived at his palace, then how overwhelming
is the state which attends the monarch there! All


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 429


the Egyptian nobles are grovelling about him in
fancy costumes, as some kind of Lord Chamberlains,
or fan-bearers, or gold and silver stick-carriers.
Young damsels are beaten before him on their bare
backs, by stout men armed with sticks; and truth
ean seldom be heard in those royal halls, for the king
must never see or hear anything that can displease
him, and whatever he does is perfectly right. He
is held to be eternally justified of everything he can
do, and inscriptions are continually proclaiming his
piety and purity and splendour and power; while
his enemies are by very consequence the impure
and abominable ones of the earth, and seem to com-
prise in idea all who inhabit the whole world, save
the Egyptians themselves.


Of their Religious Principles.


With that race, self-justification, under any cir-
- cumstances, was from the first a leading principle
of their religion. ‘The forms of their worship and
the number of their gods were continually altering
from dynasty to dynasty, and were various at the
same time in different parts of the country ; but the
power and right of a man—z.e.,an Egyptian man—
to justify himself, not against his fellow-man, but
against God, was an essential and central thread of
their system wherever a single Egyptian existed.
And a thread of it, too, which they not only never
relaxed their hold of, but kept continually weav-
ing other threads of bad religion and perverted


430 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


morality into it, until it formed at length the
veritable cart-rope for drawing the national sin.

Another neighbouring nation had shown deep
respect to the maxim of religious wisdom and
truth, ‘let not the sinner say that he hath not
‘ sinned ; for God shall burn coals of fire on the
‘head of him, which saith before the Lord God and
‘his glory, I have not sinned.’ But every Egyptian
was taught by the ritual of the book of the dead, to
prepare to stand up before Almighty God, and
declare—


1. I have done no sin of omission.
2. I have done no sin of transgression.
3. I have neither done any sin, nor omitted any duty to any
man.
4. I have committed no uncleanness.
5. I have not spoken lightly.
6. I have not blasphemed with my mouth.
7. I have not acted perversely.
8. I have not accused any man falsely.
9. I have not stolen anything belonging to God.
10. I have not shortened the cubit.
11. I have not shaken off authority.
12. I have not been idle.
13. [have not been a glutton.
14. I have not been a drunkard.
15. I have not forged any of the divine images.
16. I have not withheld the seven linen garments due to the
priests.
17. I have not been avaricious.
18. I have not falsified the weight of the balances.
19. I have done no violence.
20. I have not multiplied words in speaking.
21. I have not changed the customs; neither have I enacted
foreign abominations.
22. I have not uttered boasting words ;


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 431


and so proceeds the self-justification, through no less
than seventy-four different items.
No true Christian can, of course, regard such a


system but with fear and horror; looking upon it,


as he must do, as expressing the very antithesis of
all which he regards as religion ; or of the first step
toward religion at all, in the light in which it has
been revealed to man by God, and those whom He
has enlightened for that purpose.

Hence, there need be no question raised, by the
hierologists,—as to whether we are deeply learned
enough in all the mysteries and vagaries of
Egyptian idolatry, to fully comprehend every sup-
plemental idea, which the chief latter-day sophists
amongst them attached to each new animal divinity
they invented ;* or the precise office they assigned


1 The gradual progress from bad to worse in their religion, the more
the Egyptian people advanced in arts, wealth, power, and their own
proverbial wisdom,—affords a striking historical confirmation, of some
of the leading arguments in a recent admirable pamphlet, entitled,
Thoughts on the Doubts of the Day, by the Dowager Lady Shelley.
(London, 1864. Harrison and Sons, 59 Pall Mall.)

True religion, the writer there argues, wherever it appeared in
primeval times, ‘shone forth suddenly, and in all perfection and
‘ purity, agreeably with the manner of a gift, or revelation from the
‘Most High ;’ while ‘ the grossest errors came afterwards to obscure
‘it by degrees, side by side with the arts, inventions, and discoveries
‘ of man.’

And again : ‘ In some cases (as of the animals and monster gods in-
‘vented by early pagan peoples), these creations of the imagination
‘ are so strange and horrible, that we are quite at a loss to account
‘ for their origin in nations otherwise intelligent. We can only sup-
‘ pose that when the builders of the Tower of Babel were dispersed by
‘God for the misuse of the divine gift of language,.they fled to all
‘parts of the earth, carrying with them debased ideas of the God
‘whose power they had defied, which were reproduced later in the


432 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. IIL.


to one god with a jackal’s head,—or another under
the form of a baboon,—and another still as a
monster hippopotamus, or horrible crocodile. These
things, we say, need not be so very particularly in-
quired into, as if just the last touch of colouring
given to one of the more obscure of them, were
capable of changing the place of all Egypt from the
left, to the right, hand of the Great Judge on the
last day,—because they are all of them in their
entirety the very necessary consequences of a prin-
ciple which is rotten at the core ; and form a course
which, compared with revealed religion, was per-
manently wrong from the first.

Hence, the more religious the Egyptians grew,
after their own fashion, the more they rebelled
against the God of heaven. Similarly in their
morals,—a highly moral people were they in mar-
Tiage, having generally only one wife ; but that wife
was too often, both with the princes and people,
within the most revolting incestuous degrees of pro-
pinquity ; so as to be horribly criminal in the eyes
of all other nations. And an industrious people
were they too, producing great public works; but
their plan of operating was through the power of
slavery, and the cruel oppression of all the poor and
weak, and defenceless ones, whom they ever came
‘revolting conceptions of the Hindoos, Chinese, and Egyptians,
‘amongst whom (if true religion had been an invention of man’s
‘ intellect), we might have looked for a most exalted idea of God ; for


‘it is well known that they enjoyed a much higher state of civilisation
‘ than was ever attained by the family of Abraham.’


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 433


into contact with. For a while, this Pagod figure
grew and flourished mightily in the earth; but in
the hour of its apparent greatest strength, was it
touched by more than mortal hand ; and calamitous
was the ruin which then supervened, and has never
ceased yet.


The kind of hero, developed in Egypt.


- It was under the reign of Ramses 11, of the
nineteenth dynasty, that the Egyptian power and
might seemed to have reached the most stupendous
proportions. He was reckoned to have been the
greatest, wisest, and best of all the monarchs that
ever sat on the Egyptian throne, and his reign lasted
more than sixty-six years. By W. Osburn, and
apparently by R. Lepsius also, his name is read
Sesostris-Ramses,—though Chevalier Bunsen rather
violently contends that there was no Ramses ever
called Sesostris; and that all the Greek and
Egyptian legends connected with a_half-fabulous
hero named Sesostris or Sesoosis, belong truly to
Sesortosis 11., of the twelfth dynasty.

It was this Sesortosis 11., insists Bunsen, who
built a fleet of long ships on the Red Sea (though
where the ship-timbers could come from in that arid
region, it is difficult to say), embarked with more
than half a million of soldiers, sailed through the
Straits of Babelmandeb ; landed, and in turn con-
quered Arabia, India, Bactria, Scythia, and Persia,
making a grand tour of conquest through all the

VOL. III. 2E


434 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. ITI.


world of Central Asia; and finally returned home
through Thrace and Asia Minor, with wealth enor-
mous, and captives innumerable.

But here comes into play once more the varied
critical acumen of W. Osburn, in showing that no
such Sesostris as he of the legends ever existed.
A bold conclusion, but in which he has since been
well confirmed by M. Renan, whose superior sharp-
ness to M. Bunsen, enabled him to detect that the
Sesostris described by Egyptian priests to classic
visitors of Greece and Rome—was ‘ an artificial per-
‘sonage, composed of pieces and morsels. To
Herodotus, the said priests of a conquered land,
related that their former native king was far greater
in his day than Cambyses, who then filled the mind
and attention of the enthusiastic Halicarnassian.
To Diodorus Siculus, in whose eyes, again, Alexander
the Great was the hero of the world,—they made
out that Sesostris had exceeded ham in every parti-
cular, and especially as an intellectual conqueror


overrunning half the world for the sake of an ‘idea.’ »


And to Germanicus, with the historian Tacitus in his
suite, they made their Sesostris appear as a more
methodical and business-like soldier, than any notable
commander of the approved Roman stamp ; or one
who looked on a campaign in the light of a mercan-
tile transaction, whose propriety was to be measured
by the muster-roll of tributary provinces it should
produce, or justified by the weight of solid silver and
1 Revue des Deux Mondes, p. 665, April 1865.


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 435


gold sent in ;—evidently in every case suiting their
tales to the notions of hero-worship amongst their
listeners.

But with regard to what any genuine Egyptian
heroes either really did do, or would have ambitioned
to bring about, in those earlier ages when their
monarchy was as yet unconquered by foreigners,
and uncontaminated by stranger nations,—there,
W. Osburn appears to have caught the spirit of the
Mizraite mind with astonishing success; and to
have realized long ago the nature and tendencies of
their polity so precisely,—that M. Renan’s much
later researches, while they have confirmed much,
have been able to add little, and alter less. W.
Osburn’s words, therefore, remain the most instructive
that can be quoted, and run thus,—‘ We have yet
‘ further to state on this point, and with the same ex-
‘ plicitness, that no such idea as the conquest of the
‘ world had presented itself to the mind of Egypt in
‘the days of the monarch Sesostris-Ramses, whose
‘monumental history is now before us. Egypt
‘alone was the world of Egypt, and its entire sub-
‘jugation to the Theban sceptre was the loftiest
‘ pitch to which the ambition of the Pharaohs had
‘ever soared at any epoch. Foreign conquest was
‘utterly abhorrent to their modes of thought. The
‘ districts watered by the Nile constituted the only
‘country in the world worth possessing. The sons
‘ of Mizraim were the only beings worthy to bow to
‘the sceptre of Pharaoh. The men of all other


436 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. ITI.


‘nations were inferior and degraded races, and their
‘countries unclean and abominable. The highest
‘honour to which a foreigner could aspire in Egypt
‘ was to bea slave; and, to minister to her luxuries,
‘ was his country’s highest distinction. What charms,
‘ we repeat, could foreign conquest have for a nation
‘holding sentiments like these, and with whom, even
‘ to overpass the bounds of Egypt, implied ceremonial
‘ pollution 2’

Egypt, then, in the course of its long career of
unimpassioned, exclusive, self-satisfied existence,
gave birth to no conqueror of the world to rival and
excel Alexander the Great, the most brilliant hero of
the Arian races of mankind ; but succeeded in pro-
ducing a great man of its own order, viz., Ramses 11,


r, e

F xii Sh ote 7

of dynasty nineteen, or 4 RT This monarch
AM i


moreover, may be at once connected with the
foundation of truth at the bottom of the absurd
tales told to the Greeks about the fabulous Sesostris,
in this ;—that whereas the latter is said to have far
exceeded all his predecessors in building, even to the
extent of erecting a temple in every city throughout
the land of Egypt, which was then reputed to con-
tain thirty thousand cities,—Ramses I1., is found by
examination of the existing monuments,—whether
still standing in Egypt, or transported to European
museums,—-to have left more architectural remains


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 437


impressed with his name, than have done all the
sovereigns of Eeypt put together. And yet. they
number, from Moses down to Ptolemy, about
one hundred and fifty known kings, and their
reigns extend over nearly two thousand years.

This most remarkable fact, in itself, at once: es-
tablishes one kind of relative superiority between
Sesostris-Ramses and all other native Egyptian
kings ; and a closer examination of all his principal
works, such as the Propylons of the New Palace of
Luxor, the Ramesseum of Western Thebes, and the
great cave-temple of Ipsambul, will disclose some
other notable particulars. These works, for in-
stance, all abound in colossal representations of
Sesostris-Ramses going out like a giant to battle ;
his chariots drawn by fleet horses galloping forth
before him over all the walls; then the battle, in
which his enemies are smitten in every conceivable
manner; and lastly the king himself the day after
the battle, seizing a compendious group of some
dozens of captives by the hair of their heads, after
they have been tied to a stake, and braining them
all with a sweeping blow of his mace; while one
of the animal-headed gods, possibly of his own
or his father’s creation, looks on approvingly,
and offers him even a more destructive weapon.
Wherefore, such slaughtering and truculent scenes,
cause most persons to imagine from the ‘monu-
‘ments, that Sesostris-Ramses, though only Ram-
ses 11., and not the traditional Sesostris of fable,


438 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


must have been a most warlike and conquering
king.

But then comes the strange counter information
from the hieroglyphics accompanying these enor-
mous sculptures,—that they all represent one and
the same action, fought in the fifth year of the
reign of the king, near Pelusium in the Delta ; and
not a very large or glorious affair either. Yet, as
the monarch went on for forty years of his long
reign, immortalizing the selfsame military exploit,
—we may draw the conclusions, first, that he had
no subsequent battles to boast of ; and, second, that
he was very desirous of being thought a mighty
man of valour; in aid of which view he could
order any amount of praise to be conferred upon
himself, in these public documents ; ‘ Moniteurs of
‘the time,’ says M. Renan, ‘and false by conse-
* quence.’

But how did Ramses acquire the immense com-
mand of labour, which he undoubtedly possessed
for the execution of his numerous monuments,
without having recourse to prisoners of war? may
well be inquired ; and the answer is, ‘ By political
‘subtleties acting on the weakness of the Xoite
‘Pharaohs in the Delta, and their numerous but
‘ peaceable Israelite subjects.’ Cunning and cruelty
seem to have characterized the man far more than
bravery ; and though he be that identical Pharaoh
‘who knew not Joseph,’ in the way of not remem-
bering the compacts of friendliness made with


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 439


him and his descendants—yet he seems to have
thoroughly understood and practised some of his
principles of administration, in so far as con-
cerned strengthening the throne and rail the
monarch.

In the various portraits which have come down
to our times of Sesostris-Ramses, whether in sculp-
ture or painting, he is without doubt a magnificent-
looking man, with even a bland expression of
countenance, and the inimitable air of being a
favoured scion of very high family and long royal
descent; but there is, withal, a semi-concealed
appearance of cunning, and a power of compassing
a cruelty, with all the time an urbane smile on his
lips,—that leaves one quite at a loss to conclude
what he might not attempt next.

In one way or another he did in the course of
his reign, at last contrive to bring about the
dominion of all Egypt, Upper, Middle, and Lower,
to the Diospolitan sceptre ; a scheme in the heads of
all his predecessors, but never fully carried out by
them, on account of the dynasties in the Delta.
The last of these, however, the Xoite, became in his
time reduced to a single infant of a year old, whom
he then,—in" his capacity of ally and guardian,—
immediately married to his eldest daughter Thuoris,
already far advanced in middle life; and by that
method, without a flaw in its legality, and without
bloodshed,—but a union which in course of nature
could be attended by no imconvenient dynastic


440 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


consequences,—he gathered up all that had once
belonged to the Xoite dominions into the appanage
of his Theban throne. In such manner came the
Israelites in the Delta under the control of Sesostris-
Ramses, originally of the upper country; and he
lost no time in setting them to work day by day in
digging irrigation-canals, and in buildings of various
kinds throughout all the length and breadth of the
united country; in testimony of which, either the
ruined mounds and buildings throughout Egypt
may be examined, or the terse and effective
description of the Bible remembered :—

‘And the children of Israel were fruitful, and
‘increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed
‘exceeding mighty ; and the land was filled with
‘them. Now there arose up a new king over Egypt,
‘which knew not Joseph. And he said unto his
‘people, Behold, the people of the children of
‘Israel are more and mightier than we: come on,
‘let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply,
‘and it come to pass, that, when there falleth out
‘any war, they join also unto our enemies, and
‘fight against us, and so get them up out of the
‘land. Therefore they did set over them task-
‘masters to afflict them with their burdens. And
‘they built for Pharaoh treasure-cities (magazines),
‘ Pithom and Raamses. But the more they afflicted
‘them, the more they multiplied and grew. And
‘they were grieved because of the children of
‘Israel. And the Egyptians made the children


—_——e


CHAP, VI.] . LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 441


‘of Israel to serve with mngour. And they
‘made their lives bitter with hard bondage, in
‘mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service
‘in the field: all their service, wherein they made
‘them serve, was with rigour.’


Queen Thuoris and her adopted son Moses.


Then came, as every one knows from the Bible,
severe measures of repression ; and at last the royal
order that ‘ Every son that is born, ye shall cast into
the river.’ In the meanwhile, however, there grew
up in the gentle mind of Thuoris, some fellow-feeling
of compassion for the strangers so cruelly oppressed
by the king her father. She had been sent away
from Thebes where he resided, by that unfeeling
despot in his family,—but who smiled so serenely
in public,—to be his vicegerent in the Delta, along
with her helpless infant husband; and there she
occupied herself chiefly with attending to sundry
religious services, to which she had been in a manner
dedicated, even before the strange marriage, forced
upon her without any possibility of refusing. Such
a religious ceremonial employment it is supposed to
have been, which took her down to the river's bank
on the eventful morning of the exposure of the child
Moses in the ark of bulrushes. Her true womanly
feelings, as well as her own experiences of undeserved
oppression, prompted her to pity the Hebrew child ;
her position as queen-vicegerent énabled her to
brave her then distant father’s infanticidal com-


442 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


mands; and her married state allowed her, without
any appearance of impropriety, to become a seeming
mother to the young castaway.

For forty years, or, as Mr. Osburn says, from the
monuments, forty-four,—was Moses thereafter cher-
ished in the palace of Lower Egypt; the bonds
of his countrymen were much loosened ; and poor
Queen Thuoris, at the end of that time become an
aged woman, received much comfort and assistance
in public affairs, and affectionate attentions in
private life, from her Hebrew protégé; but at last
came the trial. Her father at Thebes had died, and
had been succeeded by his son Amenepthis ; and he,
after reigning by himself two years only, had also
died ; and now the succession to the whole of Egypt
had fallen on Queen Thuoris in her old age. There
was her husband Sipthah to be sure; but he was an
incompetent, the last expiring member of a royal
race dying out from exhaustion of faculties; he
could never rule as an independent sovereign of a
powerful people,—but would Moses, so long in fact
her adopted son, and who had so dutifully performed
her behests for so many years; and shown such
superiority to all his fellows,—equally in learning as
in war,'—would he now become in the face of all
the world her legally adopted son, and heir to the
throne of the whole of Egypt ?

To one like Moses, brought up all his life, save
its first few days, in a palace, the opportunity must

1 See Josephus, Book u1. Chapter x.


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 443


have been, in a worldly point of view, most attrac-
tive. But, as we learn from several passages in the
sacred Scriptures, ‘ by faith Moses, at this time, re-
‘ fused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter ;’
abandoned all his splendid prospects of an earthly
throne, and preferred going forth alone and in
poverty to share the burdens, and sympathize with
the grievances of his oppressed countrymen. Pre-
sently, too, even to flee into the desert before their
ill-feelings and want of appreciation ; as well as
before the offended laws of Sipthah, residing then
in Lower Egypt.

A sad trial must this refusal of Moses have been
to the aged Queen; who thereupon retired to
Thebes, and occupied herself durmg the remainder
of her life, partly with the edueation of the infant
son of the late Amenepthis, or Sethos 11. ; and partly
with the preparation of her own and her husband’s
tomb in the Biban-el-Moluk, or valley of the tombs
of the kings at Thebes.

Of the various monumental proofs that Queen
Thuoris performed her part of Regent to the youth-
ful Sethos 11., faithfully and conscientiously, both in
its public requirements and private duties, as long
as she lived ; and also that her nephew,—in spite of
the loving care spent upon him, and ‘the special
‘books written for his sole use and behoof, con-
‘ taining all the good actions of his predecessors, —
turned out nevertheless an exceedingly bad and even
abandoned character,—we will not attempt to say


444 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


much in this place ; forwe should have to draw almost
entirely from W. Osburn, and our readers would find
greater advantage in referring direct to his fuller
accounts, original conclusions, and eloquent pages.

Suffice it then here, that we hurry on to the
time, when both Thuoris and Sipthah being dead,
the graceless profligate Sethos 11, ascended the
throne. One of his first acts thereafter, seems to
have been to hasten to the city of Ramses in the
Delta, and on finding the Israelites no longer toiling
as desperately for his royal advantage, as they used
to do for his grandfather, Sesostris Ramses,—he
instantly renewed their hardest burdens in that
excess of unfeeling manner, which caused the com-
plaints of the oppressed to rise up to Heaven ; and
occasioned the recall of Moses out of Midian, to Hite
the deliverer of his people.


The final Crash.


Most minutely does William Osburn criticise the
first nine of the scriptural plagues of Egypt,—
showing that they were each of them special in-
tensifications of natural features of the country or
climate ; almost as if it had been the Almighty’s
intention to show the Egyptians the inefficiency,
one after the other, of each of their gods whom they
had set up in charge over those elements. At the
same time, this peculiarly prepared and able author
shows clearly, that the order in which they are de-
scribed, proves that the series of these dread plagues


CHAP. V1.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. - 445


extended over nearly a year ; thereby allowing time
enough for the mighty preparations to be made for
the movement of so enormous a bulk of population,
as the Israelites had become at this period; viz,
not far short of four millions. An impossible
number, remarks W. Osburn, to remove in these
present days; but the exodus, we must remember,
was the last, or he should perhaps have said, a con-
tinuation, of the several great migrations of the
human race, which had been directed and assisted
by the finger of God. |

At length the historian comes to the tenth plague,
the death of the first-born. ‘In the execution of
‘ this most terrible judgment, God thrust forth His
‘own arm from behind the veil of nature and her
‘laws, and Himself struck the blow. Even on this
‘ occasion, it was not until another message of warn-
‘ing had been given to Sethos, and rejected ; nor
‘until he had finally dismissed with obloquy, the
‘ messenger whom God had thus mightily accredited,
‘that the blow was stricken. This is what W.
Osburn writes ; while the Bible similarly says, ‘ And
‘ it came to pass, that at midnight Jehovah smote all
‘ the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-
‘born of Pharaoh that sat on the throne, unto the
‘ first-born of the captive that was in the dungeon;
‘ and all the first-born of cattle.’ But Chevalier Bun-
sen writes,—-‘ We have stated in the preceding book
‘ that the exodus was only an episode, or rather one
“link in a fearfully vast, well-devised, plan, carried


446 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. [DIV. III.


‘into execution with sagacity and resolution, of
‘avenging liberty. That the Palestinians who in-
‘vaded the country were, as the Egyptians say,
‘called in by Moses, must be considered as an in-
‘vention of national hatred ; but the invasion is
‘ historical, and most important. It was a cover for
‘the exodus, and the great Sicilian Vespers by
‘ which Asia took her revenge upon Africa, These
‘ Palestinians were really, after more than two cen-
‘turies of oppression, the messengers of the Lord,
‘when, in the third year of Menepthah, son of
‘Ramses 11, rushing down from the north, they
‘ slew all the first-born even in the king’s palace.’
We do not agree with the too rationalistic view
of the great philologist as to the agency which
wrought on that memorable night. But if he believes
firmly in what he has written, then his further testi-
mony is more important than ours, or even than
William Osburn’s (though that should also be
studied), to the effect,—that Egypt never recovered
the results of the exodus; that the third volume of
Manetho’s history, or from dynasty twenty to
dynasty thirty,—merely records a succession of de-
gradations, until the Egyptians became utterly en-
slaved to foreigners,—their religious abomination at
all times ; were obliged in turn to expend all their
inimitable architectural powers and artistic skill,
with which they had erected the idols of old Egypt to
ensnare the world,—to glorify their several ‘impure’
conquerors ; until now, after having been for ages


CHAP. VI.] LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. 447


and ages the slaves of slaves, and the basest of the
base, these artistic capacities are completely de-
parted from them,—and they are left a useless and
effete people, an astonishment and a hissing on the
face of the earth, until it shall please the Lord to
take pity on them again.

But thus Chevalier Bunsen concludes his view
of the exodus, ‘ the historical exodus,’ as he terms it.
‘The courage and judgment of the Egyptians failed
‘in face of the moral faith so energetically evinced
‘by the man of God. At length a body of troops
‘was despatched to attack the multitude as they
‘withdrew. These perished in the waves ; and the
‘weakness of Egypt became self-evident to their
‘ Palestinian and Arabian neighbours, who fell upon
‘ the disorganized country which was humbled as it
‘never had been before. At the end of thirteen
‘ years the enemy was expelled, but the strength of
‘the nation was exhausted. After the brilliant
‘semblance of a restoration by the great conqueror
‘of the twentieth dynasty, the power of the
‘ Pharaohs was so shaken by the Assyrians that it
‘never recovered itself again for any length of time.
‘Nor did the work of the invaders produce any
‘ good to their country or to the world. The move-
“ment in behalf of human dignity and of liberty
* was alone blest for those who understood it and for
‘the human race.! ‘At all events the invasion and
‘exodus became the death-blow of the new empire.’


1 Bunsen’s Egypt, vol. iv. p. 589.


448 LIFE UNDER THE NEW EMPIRE. _ [DIV. III.


Plainly then here is no difference of note as to
the resulting material fact,—that with the night of
the exodus, when the visible career of Israel began,
and when ‘history was born,’ the ancient glories of
Egypt commenced rapidly their fatal decline. Our
absolute dates, moreover, in chronology, cross at this
point of the exodus with those of other authorities,
—from some of whom we had differed largely when
discussing the earlier dynasties ; for both Bunsen,
Lepsius, and Osburn are all within a handful of years
agreed upon the time 1320 B.c. nearly ; and differ
for the name of the king under whom ‘the man of
‘God’ ‘led the departure,’ only between the son or
iin of Ramses 11. |


Hence, having been enabled to trace, to the best
of our humble ability, no small portion of the mental
and manual characteristics of the Egyptians, even
from those primitive times of Egypt’s existence,
when that country stood solitary and alone in the
recorded annals of mankind,—down to the fullest
expansion which those characteristics ever subse-
quently experienced in better-known and more
abundantly peopled periods of earth-history,—it
is our duty now to return, with such help as
may thus have been procured, to our long-in-
terrupted investigation into the mystery. connected
with the origination of that earliest, and most
important of all human monuments, the Great
Pyramid.


CHAPTER VIL


ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, ON SCIENTIFIC
GROUNDS.


Towarps the close of his Section v. Division m1.
Book 1. of his Hgypt’s Place in Universal History,
Chevalier Bunsen, in reviewing the progress of
Egypt from dynasties first to twelfth,—has some
well-put philosophical remarks ; which, though ac-
companied by a few rather doubtful assertions,—
yet giving as they do, his very scholarly ideas on
the difference between ordinary Pyramids and the
Great Pyramid,—and again, between all Pyramids
and Tombs acknowledged or ordinary,—may be
expected to be here introduced. They are as
follows :— |

‘ Respecting the particular purpose for which the
‘Pyramids were designed, we have satisfactorily
‘shown, in the foregoing inquiry, that they are ex-
‘clusively gigantic covers of rocky tombs, built with
‘ great skill to bid defiance to the ravages of ages ; and
‘ that, as a general rule, they neither contain a sepul-
‘chral chamber nor large apartment. The largest
‘Pyramid is the only exception, owing, indeed, to
‘ particular circumstances which we think we have

VOL. III. 2F


450 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘ to a certain degree explained. It is the only one
‘ which contains two chambers, one of which served
‘fora tomb. Its construction, as well as the pains
‘ bestowed on concealing and barricadoing all the
‘ approaches to it, have been accounted for in refer-
‘ence to one single object—that of protecting the
‘hallowed corses of the kings, as far as human
‘power and human ingenuity could do so, from
‘destruction. But how are we to explain their
‘having such an object? Were the hieroglyphics
‘complete, and could we thoroughly understand
‘them, they would not answer the question. The
‘idea which gave birth to these wondrous edifices,
‘ one after the other, during a period of almost one
‘ thousand years, in the deserts of Libya, is itself a
‘ hieroglyphic, and a very mysterious one. Its inves-
‘ tigation belongs to the fifth book.’

In the fifth book, accordingly (p. 651, vol. iv.),
the subject is taken up again ; and it is argued—that
such an extreme desire to preserve the body safe in
a stone monument, was connected with the belief of
the Egyptians in the immortality of the soul; a
belief which existed in their minds from the earliest
times, but always accompanied ‘by a comfortless
‘ inability to embrace the idea in all its purity ;’ in
fact, they made the immortality of the soul rest on
the due preservation of the body after death. ‘This
‘was the tribute paid by the Asiatics, in earliest
‘times, for the occupation of Africa and the posses-
‘sion of the Nile.’ ‘ We assuredly owe,’ continues


CHAP. VII. | ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 451


the eminent philologist, ‘the stupendous fabric of
‘the Pyramids to a superstitious fear of the destruc-
‘tion of the body, rather than to the mere vanity
‘and love of display on the part of the builders.
‘The judgment passed by the people on their kings
‘ after death (as upon every other person who died)
‘ was, at the epoch of the first dynasties, no empty
‘form. Now the royal builders of the largest
‘Pyramids were, according to universal tradition,
‘ haughty, cruel tyrants, who had good reasons to be
‘ apprehensive of the popular verdict, the ordeal they
‘ would have to pass at the hands of the people and
‘priests. It was no easy matter for any one to find
‘his way into the Pyramids ; each of them had its
‘own secret barrier to prevent intrusion ; but, at
‘all events, a forcible entry into them was quite
‘ impossible.’

Now this attempted explanation,—-which we have
extracted pretty fully, because it seems to be the
highest and ultimate effort of all that mere philology, —
unaided either by exact science, or the principles of
revealed religion, can do,—seems to our moderate
apprehension to explain nothing of the innumerable
exact structural features which are peculiar to the
Great Pyramid, as different from the second and all
other Pyramids. Nor, again, isit explanatory of the
many particulars and methods of building, distin-
guishing all the Pyramids alike,—whether of kings
reported tyrants, or lauded as philanthropists,—from
the tombs proper of their own or subsequent times ;


452 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


and in which tombs, the preservation, by conceal-
ment or barricadoing, of the mummied corpses was
just as much attended to as in any Pyramid. Or, in-
deed, rather more so; for, in some instances, as in the
lined entrance-passages of Pyramids, they tended to
lead, rather than blind, subsequent depredators to the
place of hiding of the precious corpse, deep under, or
within, the mass of the covering monument. Nor
does Baron Bunsen’s explanation throw the smallest
light upon the reason why, or by whose agency, the
peculiar form of Pyramids first stood on the sur-
face of Egypt ; and wherefore the building of them
ceased again after several centuries, without any
alteration having occurred meanwhile in the national
faith,— respecting the soul’s life being dependent
on the dead body’s preservation.

Even under the learned author’s section of ‘ Arts,’
p. 654, the immense generic difference between the
decorated tombs and undecorated Pyramids is posi-
tively ignored ; as in the following passage,—‘ The
‘interior of the tombs, and in particular of the
‘ Pyramids, exhibits the most striking example of
‘the grandeur of the style of the old empire, and of
‘its artistic perfection.’ And when the very ex-

1 In his Expedition to the Euphrates, vol. ii. p. 88, Colonel Chesney
intensifies all these errors, thus—‘ The compartments of the Pyramids
‘ and temples of Egypt exhibit, in colouring still vivid, the history and
‘ occupations of the inhabitants of the valley of the Nile.’ But in that
volume, in place of giving any account of his actual expedition, the
Royal Artillerist attempts the whole history of the world, from Noah


to Napoleon Bonaparte, and a little later; and cannot therefore be an
original authority upon everything introduced.


CHAP. VII. ] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 453


tensively read author proceeds, with the view of
making the too much neglected actual features of
the Great Pyramid clearer after his manner,—not
by ascertaining what they are by measures of line,
number, and angle,—but by comparing them, in
hazy and elastic allusions only, with something still
less known, viz., ‘ the architectonical form of the
‘ vastest edifice in the world, the Temple of Belus,
‘as the watch-tower of Babel ;’ we must really beg
to decline following his grandly expressed, though
mistifying philosophy any longer.

If, indeed, we could compare the details of the
Great Pyramid exactly and certainly with those of
the Tower of Babel,—great would be the advantage
to knowledge ; but whereto shall we look for certain
and accurate particulars of the latter building? Of
the Great Pyramid we have, even in this our own
book alone, plans and sections, with three hundred
pages of numerical observations of lines and angles
taken on some most exact surfaces; and we have
seen and touched and do testify of these things our-
selves. But not one page of such features regarding
the Tower of Babel, does the philological philosopher
venture to bring forth to his readers; or even to
assert that he has in his private possession ; or to
indicate where in the present state of the world,
travellers may proceed and measure such documents
for themselves.

In the Rev. George Rawlinson’s The Five Great
Monarchies of the Ancient Hastern World, the foun-


454 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


dation plans of all the oldest Chaldzean temples yet
examined on the lower plains of the Euphrates (the
supposed region of the sete of Babel), are stated to
be invariably oblong rectangles,—the sides being in
the proportion of three to two nearly,—and not
squares like the bases of the Great, and other
Jeezeh Pyramids, Further and more remarkably
still, it is the angles of all these Chaldzean buildings,
never their sides, which are presented to the four
cardinal points ;' so that they are as different from
the Egyptian buildings of Pyramidal ages, in the
important feature of azimuthal emplacement, as it
is actually possible for them to be. In elevation,
there was likewise a characteristic opposition ; for
the culminating height of a Chaldean temple was
always towards one end, and never vertically over
the centre of the base, as with every Pyramid in
Egypt: and such culminating part was an open
chamber in the former, and a solid mass of masonry
in the latter description of building. The former
was moreover left in successive stages, usually three
in number, and the lower one—rough with protrud-
ing buttresses; while the latter, or the Egyptian
Pyramids, had all their temporary building steps
filled in and bevelled off finally, smooth and slop-
ing outside from top to bottom, in one vast sheet
by the agency of the casing-stones.


1 ¢ The angles of the building exactly face the four cardinal points.

‘ According to Mr. Loftus (Chaldewa and Susiana) this emplacement
‘is observable in all edifices (temples?) of true Chaldean origin.’—G.
Rawlinson, vol. i. p. 96.


ai ae


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 455


Hence if there should be some points about the
Great Pyramid, which we cannot examine very
precisely there, by reason of dilapidations,—we shall
certainly not clear up those difficulties by going to
such completely alien forms of building as any, or
all, of the Chaldzean temples that have come down
to our times. Structures entirely peculiar are these
inthe matter of their materials also; which were
so wretched and perishable, as to offer now little
more than shapeless mounds, though of an age ap-
parently long subsequent to the Great Pyramid.
But the Great Pyramid again must be long subse-
quent to the Tower of Babel ; so that the last clearly
recognisable remains of that building, if composed
in its day of the ordinary Chaldzean materials, must
have perished, or ‘ altered,’ very long ago indeed.

Evidently, then, an immense amount of faith is
demanded of his readers by Baron Bunsen, when he
has no modern-tested facts, to go on, in building up
either a theory or a tower. While, on the contrary,
he as despotically requires his followers to ride
callously over well-ascertained and measured data ;
and show themselves impervious to belief when an
astronomical explanation is rendered of some, even
of the most undoubted facts, or features actually
existing, in the Great Pyramid; and forming the
wpsissima verba of its own contemporary account of
itself. For all such explanations and even the
things themselves, he stigmatizes, as ‘groundless
‘ fancies,’ flagitiously indulged in; (p. 293).


456 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


Research de novo.


There is a most depressing feeling, when one first
makes the discovery in life, that those whom we
have long implicitly followed hitherto, and re-
spected for their years, station, and higher attain-
ments, their more extensive knowledge, and greater
strength of mind,—have not the spirit of justice
within them. There is no other choice then, but to
set forth on one’s path in the world—solitary it may
be, and for certain with distressed mind and increase
of labour with painful toil,—but willing to incur all,
rather than be found voluntarily and knowingly
opposed to any right moral principle. With some
such sense of depression on our spirits do we com-
mence this humble attempt, to investigate scientifi-
cally the origination of the Great Pyramid ; cheered
only with the assurance, that it cannot be wrong to
attend to actual facts. |

Amongst these may first be noted, that all the
older Pyramids, as monuments,—call them funeral
monuments if you will,—have amongst themselves
a general community of figure and an absence of
internal decoration ; making them, as a class, stand
wide apart from the ordinary Egyptian tombs,—
which possess far other external figures, with most
showy and adorned interiors.

Second, this peculiar class of monuments, the
Pyramids, flourished only in the earlier, indeed in
the very early, dynasties of Egyptian history ; and
had disappeared completely, in favour of other


ee


T=


CHAP, VII] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 457


forms, long before the nation of Egypt reached its
culmination of empire, and peculiarity of institu-
tions both public and private. Indicating, therefore,
that the idea was not a natural one in the Egyptian
mind, growing with its growth and strengthening
with its strength; but rather an exotic,—which,
received from abroad at the very beginning of the
national existence, did at every succeeding archi-
tectural reproduction lose so much of force, or
interest for the people, as at last to die out amongst
them altogether.

Hence, to ascertain what chiefly characterized
Pyramids when they were best understood or most
appreciated amongst Hgyptians, we should not visit
the latest,—expecting there to see necessarily an
accumulation of all the excellences of its prede-
cessors ; but should rather,—either search for the
oldest; or, with more freedom from all foregone
conclusions, seek out by mechanical inspection the
most perfect and complete in its original design,
and investigate its age afterwards.

Now, simply as tested by modern scientific mea-
sure, there cannot be a moment’s doubt that as
respects size, excellence of masonry throughout, and
possession of internal chambers high up in that
masonry,—replete too, with very remarkable propor-
tions, and what may be called Pyramidal numbers,
—the Great Pyramid stands before all the other
known Pyramids. For notwithstanding that some
authors claim for the second Pyramid, that,—


458 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. TI.


though rather smaller and very badly built,—it
had a bordering of colowred granite round its base ;
and others for the third Pyramid, that,—though
very much smaller again,—it was coloured gor-
geously for more than fifty feet up its side ;—still
these things are deviations from the pure Pyramid
principle, and show endeavours to modify it by the
introduction of just so much of ornamental tomb
or temple architecture. We may fortunately too,
trace up the gradual increase, with time, of this
parasitical, but truly Egyptian growth of luxury
extending itself over the ancient pure form,-—by
looking at Lepsius’ views of the Pyramids of
Meroe. For these are very modern resuscitations
of the old Pyramid idea, after it had been left alone
for two thousand years ; and are found, though quite
trifling in size, yet furnished with channelled and
fluted corner lines, appended porticos, and outside
sculpture in the intervening Theban-temple manner.

The Great Pyramid is thus, taken all in all, by
far the largest, best, and truest Pyramid of all the
Pyramids. How long then was required, let us
therefore ask, for the idea of a Pyramid after its
first invention, or introduction to Egyptian minds,
to grow, improve, and fructify up to that point of
transcendent excellence, whence they could build
the ne plus ultra of that species of monument, or,
the Great Pyramid ?

Then comes the very strange answer from Dr.
Lepsius (see pp. 364 and 365), that he believes the


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 459


Great Pyramid was the first built of all Egyptian
Pyramids, and was even the first of their public
buildings of any kind; and that he cannot refer
positively to any remains of the Egyptian nation of
higher antiquity.

This opinion is indeed not yet allowed in full by
all authorities : though none venture to put more
than two or three items of known remains, and
these immediately preceding it, earlier ; so that the
Great. Pyramid, if not the very first, was very
nearly the first work in point of time ; and abso-
lutely the first in time and excellence combined, of
all the buildings ever erected by the Egyptian race,
—-at the strangely sudden beginning which their
national existence once experienced on the banks
of the Nile. (See p. 371.)

Hence we are driven back again, by the, in a
manner, negative testimony of all monumental re-
mains in Egypt, upon the theory of a Pyramid
having been, as before expressed, an exotic to the
Egyptian land. The idea was inserted there, evi-
dently in vigour the most extreme and extraordi-
nary,—because it was able to produce, even at the
origin of the nation, a monument which, for size,


style, and rank, has never since been equalled in any


country on the face of the earth; had no known
prototype in any other country ; and has remained
through ages, even of continually growing numbers
of the human race, of increasing size of nations, and
accumulating wealth of governments,—the emphatic


460 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


and chief wonder of the world. The idea, too, was
inserted so deeply in the Egyptian mind, that for
many generations it was never entirely lost ; and
Pyramid-building,—though in continually-decreas-
ing scale, and for some other purposes,—with very
rude, and often entirely mistaken or ignorant imi-
tation, only, of the original,—went occasionally on.
But this again confesses that the idea never grew ;
and, like a full-blown flower cut from its parent
stem, it began to decay from the moment it was
planted into a new and unaccustomed soil.


Pyramid idea, whence derived ?


If the idea, then, was exotic in Egypt, where did
it come from ?

At present there is no clue; for though there are
now occasional Pyramids and Pyramidal buildings
in several other countries of the world, they are all
held to be far inferior in age, as they certainly are
in character, to the Great Pyramid, and could not


1 That the Egyptians themselves did not understand the meaning of
the peculiar proportions introduced into the Great Pyramid, has already
been shown in Divisions I. and 11., where neither the angle of the outside
slope, the length of a side of the base, the number of construction-
steps, the commensurabilities of the coffer, nor any other points which
have been shown to have been endued with a remarkable meaning in
nature or art,—were ever again realized. Nor attempted to be realized,
—for there was abundance of manual skill to have done it, had there
only been brains enough to decide what the hands were to be employed
upon.

More strikingly still do the hieroglyphics show the want of appre-
ciation in the Egyptian mind. For look at our Plate x11. (all whose
excellences depend on Dr. Lepsius’ drawings), and see how the charac-
teristics. of hawks, owls, ibises, geese, hares, etc. etc., are hit off with a


Rey?
Bo AP eat


pital sadlet aiely Seer eee ey


$8


Vol. Il. - PIs, |


ALTEHES REICH
Dynastie I-V.
ING 4- 24:.


am We


a EBL


i ila aye


4
.
+
|


D
D


< nop


Pm)


“mee Fin’ RAENSESUR [ disires]


ROA dv y's
LPhotolithographed trom Plate V, of
D* Lepsius's “K6nigsbuch der alten Agypter;


BERLIN, 1858.


W.H.MS Farlane, Lith? Edin®


—enote


CHAP. VII. ] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 461


have originated it. All, therefore, that we can ven-
ture upon now is, to continue our mere mechanical
investigation by inquiring further, if facts permit,—
and whoever the real originator may ultimately turn
out to have been,—whether his whole intention or
purpose in designing the Great Pyramid, was fully
subserved in having that one monument erected on
his plans by the Egyptians in their Siriadic land ;
or whether any of the subsequent Pyramids were
necessary parts of the scheme to be filled in after-
wards. How this inquiry is to be efficiently carried
out, presents many difficulties; but our first pro-
ceeding must evidently be, to concentrate our atten-
tion on the numerous mechanical refinements and
speaking, though uninscribed, walls of the Great
Pyramid.

Now we have already both in this work, and else-
where,’ endeavoured to bring into notice the many
confirmations, arising from recent measures, to the
not new idea of the original purpose of the Great
line or two put in with consummate skill, and turned with admirable
truth and meaning. But then look at the little Pyramids in the same
Plate, and see what angles they have got. By John Taylor’s theory
we are taught that the angle of rise of the Great Pyramid’s side is the
all-important feature which it possesses ; and that a difference of a
few seconds, on one side or the other from 51° 51’ 14:3” would entirely
spoil its meaning. An able artist, therefore, if pervaded by this truth,
would endeavour to give that angle nearly, when representing the
Pyramid ;—yet we find by measurement, on Plate x11, that the angles
of rise of the sides of three Pyramids attributed to Shofo, are on the
paper = 72°, 72°, and 74°; of two given to Shafre = 70° and 74°;
of one to Userchres = 74°; and one to Tancheres = 76°!


1 Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. xxiv. Part 1,
pp. 385-403.


462 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIL.


Pyramid having been, to serve as a metrological
monument,—which was to testify, for some unknown
reason, but through many thousands of years, to a
particular system of weights and measures for all
subjects, and on a very grand scale. And seeing
that the various mechanical features which we have
adduced in Divisions 1. and 1. of this volume, as
typifying these things,—are all of them directly
connected with, or do actually form the radical
laying out of the foundations, and, so to speak, the
bones of the building,—they must have preceded
the employment of any of the subsequently built
and fitted-up parts for any purpose whatever.
Hence it is no objection to the metrological
theory, as that of the origination,—if a mummied
corpse was latterly deposited, either in the King’s
or Queen’s chamber, the subterranean, or anywhere
else throughout the Pyramid; nor whether the
coffer in the former, when opened by Khaliph Al
Mamoon, was either absolutely empty, or filled with
gold pieces of large size, or occupied by the body of
aman with a golden breast-plate, a sword of inesti-
mable value by his side, and a carbuncle shining
with the light of day on his forehead,—each of
which stories has one or more Arab historians to
vouch for its conflicting truth and superior credit.
Neither is it of any importance now, when both the
gold and the man, his sword and the carbuncle, if
ever there, are all long since gone,—whether they
had been deposited in that place by the first builders


CHAP. Vit.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 463


of the Pyramid or by Mencherian, Saitean, or Amo-
sian fanatics, breaking into the Pyramid, and employ-
ing it for their own purposes, in the fifth, sixteenth,
or eighteenth dynasties,—for the emptiness of the
coffer is all that remains: while the fractured ramp-
stone over the well-mouth, indicates that some one,
entering forcibly by the well from the lower subter-
ranean passage, must have burst into the upper parts
of the Pyramid, and worked his will there in minor
matters, long before the time of Khaliph Al Ma-
moon and his horde of Muslim excavators.

The intervening experiences of the Great Pyra-
mid are indeed vastly more difficult to investigate,
than its present or primitive state; and, happily for
our problem, are of little importance. For such in-
tervening effects have always been in the way of
petty degradations and mischief, never with the
view of adding to, or improving, and certainly not
of building up again from the very foundation ; so
that the work of later men can be easily distin-
guished from those of the original builders.

We put the metrological hypothesis, therefore,
upon its trial for the explanation of the original
Pyramid form, proportions, characteristics, and re-
quirements ; and find that for it, the Great Pyramid
by itself, as actually erected in geographical position
in form and parts, but without artistic ornament
inside or out, is admirably suited and _ perfectly
sufficient. Find also, that if executed once in a
thorough manner, there need be no further repeti-


464 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. Il.


tions of it,—so far, at least, as its successful inter-
pretation is concerned ; though for the purpose of
shielding the one precious monument from barbarous
mischief during long ages of war, invasion, and
revolution,—a number of successive, nearly similar
in appearance, though for the theory, or for prac-
tical metrology, really valueless Pyramids,—might
be considerably useful. And find also, in actual
measurements of the building, the long series of
coincidences working, as already detailed, into
coincidences,—which terminate at last in showing
that the Great Pyramid actually is a containing
case or setting for a grandly complete system of
metrology,—adapted to everything connected with
size, weight, heat, angle, and time,—all on one uni-
form and admirable system of referring to the most
influential and wide-spreading features in nature for
the value of its standards ; and expressing these in
the neatest and most convenient arithmetical forms
of one constant order of numbers.

That such a metrological system should be con-
tained in the Great Pyramid is no doubt a surpass-
ing wonder ; but having been proved for it by all the
preceding pages of our work in vol. ii, and Divisions
I. and 11. of vol. iii, and never having been made
out for any of the other Pyramids in the smallest
degree,—we obtain a complete solution of the par-
ticular question just proposed. That is, we find
that the scientific scheme of origination does not
depend for its full expression on any of those other


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 465


and subsequent Pyramids of Egypt, but is complete
and perfect in the Great Pyramid taken by itself,
and resting upon itself alone.

Hence comes the encouraging conclusion, that for
the still further prosecution of all the really im-
portant parts of the mystery in a scientific point of
view,—our attention and studies may be concen-
trated entirely on the Great Pyramid ; and then the
higher and more difficult personal question comes
up again with greater force than ever,—viz., Who
was the originator? Nay, who could have ori-
ginated such a building ?


Wisdom of the Egyptians fails.


Many worthy persons imagine, in an indefinite
manner, that the science of the ancient Egyptians
was something of infinite power and scope. They,
the Egyptians, had a particular deity, it is further
contended, to preside over weights and measures ;
and, therefore, if it be admitted,—as admitted, we
conceive, it must be, both from the discovery of the
quarry-marks and of superficial traces of the use of
the cubit of Memphis,—that the Great Pyramid was
erected by the hands of Egyptian workmen, while
it stands confessedly to all on Egyptian territory
—why go further, say these excellent and well-
intentioned modern men, than to Egyptian learning,
for the origination of the scheme ?

The answer is twofold—First, if the system had
been altogether Egyptian, and Egyptian means had
- VOL. IIT. 2G


466 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IU.


been employed knowingly and purposely in com-
memorating it by so expensive a structure as the
Great Pyramid,—how is it that not a single element
of the system was ever used by Egyptians at any
time of their history, early or late? For whenever
we can ascertain at any period of their empire what
their standards were in length, weight, angle, or
time, they are perfectly different,—as already dilated
on sufficiently, both in the last volume and the
present one,—from those of the Great Pyramid.
And second, let us test the depth and quality of this
mysterious learning of ancient Egyptians, and which
a special god in their pantheon was appointed—by
themselves—to assist them in.

In our attempt to give a fair abstract of their
history from dynasty four to dynasty twenty, in
chapters v. and vi, we have certainly not come
upon much of the learning. But as owr testimony
may be objected to on principle, we prefer in this
matter to appeal to Chevalier Bunsen ; whose pro-
Egyptian tendencies crop out. so vehemently to-
wards the end of his world-famous volumes,—that
all men may rest perfectly assured in finding in
him, the utmost that can possibly be said with any
regard to propriety, in favour of the respectable
appearance of ancient Egypt.


Now this deeply learned and very favourably


inclined Chevalier Bunsen, when summing up the
final statements near the end of his fourth volume,
or p. 658, expresses himself thus, under the heads of


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 467


‘Geometry and Astronomy,’ and in so doing he is
including everything that can be said not only
for the Egyptians of the fourth, or Great Pyra-
mid building, and earliest monumentally proved,
dynasty,—but for those of every other dynasty like-
wise: ‘Their knowledge of mechanics and of the
‘ cognate mathematical principles is evinced no less
‘by the artistic perfection of their buildings, than
‘ by the vastness of their masses. But this will not
“justify us in supposing them to have possessed a
“really scientific knowledge of these subjects. It
‘was ingenuity, based upon a keen natural percep-
‘ tion, guided by the elements of geometric science.’
‘Their astronomy, like everything Egyptian,
‘was strictly provincial, and calculated only 3
‘ the meridian of Egypt.’

This last sentence is indeed final, and is almost
worthy of either W. Osburn or M. Renan, in the
felicity with which it fixes on the grand national
characteristics of those quasi ‘ Chinese of the earlier
‘ages of time, to whom Egypt was the whole world,
‘and within the limits of whose Egyptian valley,
‘ their ideas were entirely confined.’

Another equally favourably disposed author to
the Egyptians, M. Brugsch, writes, in his History of
Egypt :—‘ Astronomy was not amongst them
‘ (Egyptians), that mathematical science which
‘calculates the movements of the stars, in con-
‘structing the grand systems which compose the
‘eclestial sphere. It was rather a collection of


468 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘notes of phenomena, periodical to the sky as seen
‘in the Egyptian country, and of which the reci-
‘ procal bearing could not long escape the eyes of
‘the priests, who observed, in the clear nights of
‘ Egypt, the brilliant constellations. Their astro-
‘nomical knowledge was founded on a base of
‘empiricism, and not on that of mathematical
‘ observation.’

While if we appeal to old Greek and Roman testi-
mony, we are told ‘that Strabo admitted that the
‘ Egyptian priests of his own day were destitute of
‘all scientific and astronomical knowledge ;’ and,
more searchingly still, that ‘the science of Egypt,
‘ like the wealth and power of Persia, was found by
‘the Greeks to be a nullity, when it became the
‘ subject of certain knowledge and observation.’ |

Such a people, then, as this of Egypt, never
really scientific, ‘never with minds sufficiently
‘ trained in abstract reasoning to be able to follow
‘the demonstrations of the conic sections, and
always cooped in their narrow valley, with their
narrower opinions and exclusive ideas,—could have
had no notion of founding their linear standard on
the earth’s axis of rotation ; their weight and capa-
city measure on an employment of the whole
earth’s mean density ; a temperature standard on
the mean surface-temperature of the whole earth ;
and their time standard on the precession of the
equinoxes, assisted by meridian observations com-
bining a well-chosen polar, with an equatorial, star.


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 469


The notion of Egyptians having done this, is evi-
dently absurd beyond all the usual bounds of
absurdity ; they could not have done it, and we
must look elsewhere for the habitation of the
originator or planner and well-nigh perfect carrier-
out of so remarkable a scheme.

But in that case whereto shall we look? for
Bunsen, Renan, and others discourse eloquently of
the Pyramid-building age of the Egyptians, being a
period when that nation was the one and only
community of cultivated and civilized men, de-
scending in their one and solitary bark the myste-
rious stream of time; whose current was then
unploughed by any other keel. At the date of the
Great Pyramid’s building, too, or 2170 B.c., all the
peculiarly so-called ‘ wisdom of the Egyptians,—in
reality, their more recondite idolatrous mysteries,
with statecraft and handicraft,—had not begun.
For, on referring to vol. il. p. 435 to 438, it will be
observed, that some exceedingly zealous friends of
old Egypt, do not attempt to place the invention of
the feast of the Isia, earlier than 1350 B.o.

Even too, though we descend that stream of time
to epochs when the Egyptian vessel of state, was
hustled by the rival appearance there of the Assy-
rian, Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, Phoenician, and
other nationalities——Egyptian astronomy was no
better than what has been described above; and
we shall have to descend very much further still
down the course of ages, even to within a few years


470 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIL.


‘of the present year of grace, 1866, before any human

science will be found competent to have arranged
and represented so full, philosophical, and perfect a
metrology as that of the Great Pyramid.

Who, then, could have been the originator of that
system ; and in the day of the Great Pyramid, or
when the particulars were actually inserted into that
building ; by the hands of Egyptian workmen no
doubt, but without their knowing what they were
doing; and when no real physical science existed
anywhere in all the world ?

Something beyond the usual ken of man, and even
above the power and scope of science to grapple
with, must have been here concerned (these facts
would seem to imply). And the late John Taylor
had come to the conclusion,—before he knew more
than a tithe of the evidence which the Great Pyra-
mid has since then proved itself capable of yielding,
when properly examined by measurement,—that
this wondrous monument of old had been built under
the direction of chosen men, dewinely inspired with
wisdom from on high for that purpose.


Necessity for seeking a wisdom higher than man’s.


Such an origination as that, would of course, if”
real, instantly relieve the question of all its human
impossibilities. But the mere naming of it, in the
present day, before scientific men in a scientific
subject, and connected with practical facts,—is
greeted immediately with a-storm of clamour, re-


CHAP. VII] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 471


proaches, regrets, objections, and the most determined
opposition. Not without some reason too,—because
the attribution of a Divine origin, when men find
anything either in science or early history, above
their immediate power to explain on simple prin-
ciples of human learning,—has been hitherto
generally, if not always, a sign of weakness in the
science of those employing it: so that the progress
of natural philosophy in recent years, contains not
a few cases of phenomena, once thought super-
natural, yet now shown to be amenable to
mechanical principles, as well as following ein satigl
the regular order of nature.

. Let us therefore, by all means, attend to, and
weigh carefully against the facts already accumulated
on our side,—for we cannot drop them on account of
mere clamour,—all the explicitly stated objections
by able men that we may be enabled to meet with.

First amongst these, must be placed the opinions
of men understanding mathematics, mechanics, and
practical science. And they, after having examined
the numerical admeasurements as given in vol. ii,
and discussed in the present volume,—are usually
ready enough to allow that a metrology, as alleged,
is there indicated. They are then only taken up,
with how its introduction can be attributed to
something else than Divine inspiration.

Thus says one friend, of much learning after this
kind, ‘ The capacities of the human mind, in special
‘ instances, are marvellous ; and a single great genius


472 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III


‘might think out a whole system of mathematical
‘ science in the course of a short lifetime ; and then
‘you might have from him some truly wonderful
‘ publications, although the nation he belonged to,
‘and in the midst of whom he lived, knew nothing
‘ whatever about mathematics either before or after
‘ his day.’

To this our answer is twofold :— rst, according
to the very independent testimony of M. Renan,
there was never a particle of genius in the whole
land of Egypt. ‘ Egypt,’ says he, ‘ was of all coun-
* tries the most conservative. Not a revolutionist,
‘ not a reformer, not a great poet, not a great artist,
‘not a savant, not a philosopher, is met with in its
‘history. In that sad valley of general mediocrity
‘and eternal slavery, men vegetated for thousands
‘of years, they cultivated their fields, they made
‘ good overseers, they carried stones upon their backs,
‘ they lived on very contentedly without glory. One
‘and the same level of mediocrity pressed upon
‘every one.’ Second, even if there had been such
an amount of genius in that dull land, for abstract
science, or science that can be thought out within
doors, and even within the walls of a dungeon, as
would have amounted in all actual experience, even
in lands most favoured by genius and caprice of
Nature, to a miracle in itself—the mixture on the
other hand of practical, with abstract, science, which
is requisite for finding out the several features
of the earth as employed in the Great Pyramid


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 473


metrology, is not an affair of the mind alone, but of
the general progress of all the arts and sciences of a
great nation,—combined with much travelling about ;
and extensive and accurate observations of various
kinds, over a large part of the earth’s surface, even
from the pole, or its neighbourhood, to the equator ;
and round about the equator again in many different
longitudes, And how could the earlier Egyptians
accomplish all that, confined as they were in their
narrow valley ?

Another friend of the same order of knowledge
then suggests: ‘Grant that the Hgyptians never
‘could have conceived such a metrology as that of
‘the Great Pyramid,—but why should there not
‘ have been nations,—nations whose names we have
‘never heard of,—-living long before the Egyptians
‘through many thousands of years ; attaining by
‘degrees to more knowledge than we possess at
‘present ; flourishing for long ages as we have
‘never flourished yet; but finally dying away, and
‘ leaving no other trace of their once existence upon
‘ the earth, than this single Pyramid, which encloses
‘so much knowledge 2’

To this we reply : ‘ that if they did live once, the
‘Great Pyramid is not their work,—for the quarry-
‘marks prove it Egyptian of the fourth dynasty ;
‘or decidedly, though only just, within recognised
‘Keyptian history. And as to these or any other
‘ supposititious nations performing such great deeds
‘through unchronicled thousands of years, and yet


474 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. II.


‘leaving nothing behind them, even in the land of
‘ Egypt,—where Bunsen, Lepsius, and Renan all tell
‘us “that nothing decays,’—we have become so
‘ accustomed to sound, tangible, and practical proofs,
‘as well as sterling material evidence, in our Great
‘ Pyramid investigations,—that without something
‘ of the same hard kind being brought up in favour
‘of the unknown and unnameable, theoretic, civi-
‘lized, and powerful nations long since passed
‘ away,—we decline to believe that any one of mas
‘ ever existed.’
Next come the objections of men who do not
understand mathematics, mechanics, and practical
science, but are supposed to be strong in mental
philosophy and some other subjects; and these
individuals mostly refuse to allow that anything con-
nected with metrology has been, or can be, proved,
by measures taken at the Great Pyramid. Their
reasons appear to be, that all practical sciences are
over-ridden by logic and metaphysics, which both
fix the bounds within which the others can be use-
fully employed, and have given forth this dogma,
that no number of coincidences makes a proof:
therefore, say they, no number of agreements in the
measured proportions of the Great Pyramid, with
earth-features, can ever establish that there was an
intention of the founders to typify such things,—
much less to arrange a whole scheme of metrology
upon them.
Seeing, however, that the Great Pyramid is a


CHAP. VII.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. 475


practical matter, the said logicians and metaphy-
sicians may be referred to that very frequent illus-
tration, a watch, and a good watch keeping time to
a second a day ; and asked,—whether the world at
large is likely to accept their dogma practically ap-
plied there. Or, that’all the numerous coincidences
of the watch’s wheels and pinions working exactly
into each other, and the agreement of the resulting
hour-hand’s indications with the rotation of the earth
on its axis, to such extreme closeness as only to be
1-86,400th in error—special means being also intro-
duced to prevent changes of temperature spoiling
that close approximation—that all this forms no
proof that there has been any intention on the part
of an intelligent watchmaker to produce such
coincidence !

Lastly, but more numerously, come men, not
exactly classifiable under either of the previous
heads; but so confident, nevertheless, in the teach-
ings of their own sciences,—which require time
almost illimitable for their eperations,—that they
refuse even to look at the Pyramid subject at all.
An eloquent expression of the views of this party,
as given by a master amongst them, is contained in
the address of the President of the British Associa-
tion at Nottingham, and runs thus :—

‘Can it be supposed that the inhabitants of Cen-
‘tral America, or of Egypt, suddenly, and what is
‘called instinctively, built their cities, carved and
‘ ornamented their monuments? If not,ifthey must


476 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


* have learned to construct such erections, did it not
‘take time to acquire such learning, to invent tools
‘ as occasion required, contrivances to raise weights,
‘rules or laws by which men acted in concert to
‘ effect the design ? Did not all this require time ?
‘and if, as the evidence of historical times shows,
‘invention marches with a geometrical progression,
‘how slow must have been the earlier steps! If
‘even now, habit and prejudice resulting therefrom,
‘vested interests, etc, retard for some time the
‘ general application of a new invention, what must
‘have been the degree of retardation among the
‘comparatively uneducated beings which then
‘ existed.’

To this excellent piece of writing, however, we
may answer,—that it does not attempt to prove
anything, directly, of what actually took place at
the building of the Great Pyramid ; it merely infers
what ought to have occurred there, according to
what is seen now to take place amongst men, when-
ever an opportunity occurs for positive observations.
In so far, then, it represents only, but truly, the
deductions of science as to whatever characterizes
a purely human beginning ; for whether among the
modern European nations, or the ancient Greeks,
or any other people within historical limits, their
beginnings, both in astronomy and _ architecture,
have been invariably marked by long wanderings
in littleness, rudeness, and puerility alike of concep-
tion and execution ; accompanied, indeed, by some


CHAP. VIl.] ON SCIENTIFIC GROUNDS. ATT


tendency to enlarge or advance, but developing
itself so slowly in their earlier years, as to be quite
invisible except with the long lapse of ages.

This then is, according to the growing and influ-
ential school represented by a large portion of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science,
first, the real characteristic ; and second (when it is
found to have actually occurred anywhere), the
scientific proof, of a human beginning. And if so,
what follows when we come to the Great Pyramid,
and find that its actual mode of beginning (having
been sudden, see p. 370, etc.) was perfectly different
from all the alleged characteristics of a human begin-
ning,—as comprehensively, powerfully, and truly
laid down by the above-mentioned philosophers !

Nay what can follow, but the conclusion, result-
ing in a belief,—that the Great Pyramid was not
altogether of human origination? And in that case,
whereto should we look for any supernatural assist-
ance to man, but from Divine inspiration ?

If there were any other method whatever of
solving the problem, than that of referring to in-
spiration,—or, if proofs were not multiplied on
proofs to show that this case of the Great Pyramid, is
the most remarkable instance ever submitted to the
investigations of science, and is as true and certain
as it is old and venerable,—we should have been
the last persons in the world to have dared to pro-
pose (or to adopt when others proposed it) a mode
of solution so awful to contemplate, so dread to


478 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. [DIV. III.


appeal to lightly, and so little instructive if used
without reason. But, as we have already shown,
there is no other conclusion possible with the facts.

Science, then, leads the case up, nor can it do
more, to the boundary line, bordering only on reli-
gion. So that if we would next endeavour to
ascertain whether, after being brought so far, the
subject can really be admitted within that hallowed
pale,—recourse must be had to trials and examina-
tions of a very different order.


CHAPTER VIIL.


ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, ON RELIGIOUS
GROUNDS.


No sooner have we satisfied the scientific objec-
tors (as we trust has been done in the last chapter)
that the manner of appearance and nature of con-
tents of the Great Pyramid, are not according to a
merely human beginning,—and that some assistance
from the Deity must be looked for,—than we find
ourselves assailed by many well-meaning and reli-
gious-minded persons, for presuming to look to such
a source in such a ease, example, or cause. |

Assistance, direction, instruction, in a word, 7n-
spiration from God to man, they consider to exist,
or be possible, only in the light in which it took
place upon the Apostles, and at a certain Pentecost.
And being therefore an affair of the Holy Spirit in
connexion with the highest mysteries of spiritual
religion,—they, the religious objectors, consider it
actual impiety for any one to talk about inspira-
tion in connexion with giving any man or set of
men directions about the size, proportions, and
arrangements of mere masonry work,—even though


480 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


it should be for a building, so immense, so strong,
and so enduring as to last all human time; and in
a cause connected with furnishing the metrological
symbols of justice, and practical means of honesty,
to all the nations of the earth.

We have listened patiently and respectfully to
all these objections (some of which have reached us
from friends in the southern hemisphere) ; but can
only imagine that their upholders are imperfect
readers of their Bibles ; and have read of, or remem-
ber,—which comes to the same thing,—only one
class of cases of inspiration, viz., that most impor-
tant one above alluded to; and which is, in itself,
precisely as they describe. But further reading in
the sacred Scriptures would soon show, that it has
pleased one and the same Almighty God to send
His inspiration, at different times in the history of
the world, for almost any, and every variety of pur-
pose; and sometimes for matters fully as material,
and on a very much smaller scale, than those of the
Great Pyramid. Else why do we find in Exodus
XXXL—

‘1. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying,

‘2. See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the
‘son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

«3. And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom,
‘and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of
‘ workmanship,

‘4, To devise cunning works, to work in gold, and in silver,
‘ and in brass,


‘5, And in cutting of stones, to set them, and in carving of
‘ timber,.to work in all manner of workmanship.


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. ° 481


‘6. And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab the son of
‘ Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of all that
‘ are wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that
‘T have commanded thee ;

‘7. The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the
‘ testimony, and the mercy-seat that is thereupon, and all the fur-
‘ niture of the tabernacle,

‘8. And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick
‘ with all his furniture, and the altar of incense,

‘9. And the altar of burnt-offering with all his furniture, and
‘ the laver and his foot,

‘10. And the clothes of service, and the holy garments for
‘ Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in
‘ the priest’s office,

‘11. And the anointing oil, and sweet incense for the holy:
‘according to all that I have commanded thee shall they
‘ do.’?


This then is the kind of inspiration, if we may
so allude to it, which we would seek for in the case
of the Great Pyramid. Not, however, presuming to
say of our own selves that it was exerted,—but
merely venturing to inquire what points of simi-
larity or contrariety there may have been between
the many undoubted cases which are given us in
the Bible,—and the circumstances of origination of
the Great Pyramid, so far as known, and in the
state in which its question has come to us,—after
undergoing scientific examination.


Time of tts performance suitable 2


Now with these views, one of the first pomts to
be discussed, respects the age of the Great Pyramid ;
for, as a building, no matter for almost what pur-

VOL. II. 2H


482 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


pose originally intended, or for which of the many
purposes hypothetically suggested at various times,
and by various authorities,—it must be regarded as
something verging much more on the material,
than the spiritual. Wherefore, thence comes this
precise point to be settled, viz.—was the date of
foundation of the Great Pyramid a period of the
world’s history when, according to the Bable, either
directions were given, or instructions are reported
to have been communicated, by God to man, touch-
ing the correct performance according to number
and measure, of material work ?

An examination of Scripture will soon show, that
such subjects were dealt with more frequently in
the earlier, than the later, parts of its history ; and
two special instances may be taken as including
within them, if not the most eminent, at least a very
marked period of inspiration having that character;
these instances being, the construction of the taber-
nacle of Moses, and the building of the ark under
Noah. In each of which cases the precise measures
of length, breadth, and height to be kept to, were
clearly announced by inspiration.

The date of the first-mentioned example has been
abundantly treated of by many most able writers,
on both scriptural and scientific grounds, and con-
cluded to be certainly within the limits of 1600 and
1300 B.C. ; or, as assumed in our chapter vi., with
most probability of being close to 1320 B.c.; and
no one doubts but that the Bible description there,


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 483


does really refer to work actually performed. But
with regard to the date of the latter mentioned, though
really prior example,—or the scriptural building of
Noah’s ark,—there is far greater uncertainty ; not
only by reason of science being unable to say any-
thing whatever about the operation, its date, or even
the thing itself,—but that different Biblical authori-
ties differ by almost irremediable amounts of time
from each other. By amounts, indeed, so large as to
have assisted in a notable degree to fan a very general
impression, now current in much of learned society,
to the effect—‘ that the first book of Moses is to be
‘looked on as of profound metaphysical import, but
‘not as historical, nor as dealing historically with
‘matters of fact ;’ or, as others more distinctly
pronounce upon the case,—‘ both the Noachic Deluge
‘and the Tower of Babel are myths not to be
‘taken literally as matters of physical existence,
‘ though undoubtedly embodying great psychological
‘ truths.’ red

But this is not enough for our purpose of illustrat-
ing the case of a huge fact like the Great Pyramid.
We must, therefore, make some little amount of
examination as to the reality of what we are refer-
ring to; and, as a first step, should take up the
discordances of dates amongst the Biblical scholars
themselves. To be certain that this discordance
really exists, the reader has only to look into any
good compendium of Scripture literature on chro-
nology, such as Kitto’s Cyclopedia or Smith’s


484 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IL.


Bible Dictionary, for the date of ‘the Deluge’ (as
something necessarily very close to the building of
the ark) ; and he will immediately find himself en-
tangled with disputes as to the relative trustworthi-
ness of different versions of Scripture, the Hebrew
giving one date, the Septuagint another, and the
Samaritan yet another, each different from the rest
by many centuries.

The upholders of the Hebrew version declare
that the Septuagint early dates, obtained by sum-
ming up the patriarchal lives, were wilfully altered
in the way of extension by the seventy of Alexan-
dria, to make Bible dates more harmonious with
Egyptian ideas of long chronology. But the sup-
porters of the Septuagint, on the other hand, re-
taliate that the keepers of the Hebrew copies of the
Scriptures altered them in way of contraction of
time after the taking of Jerusalem,—so as to per-
suade men that the true Messiah of the prophecies
must still be for to come ; and they further assert
that our Saviour and the Apostles in their quotations
from Seripture, always used the Septuagint version.
As for the Samaritan manuscript, no one of note
seems inclined to pin his faith on that uncertain docu-
ment: and the dispute as to the true scriptural chro-
nological date of the Deluge, or any nearly synchron-
ous event in the earth’s history,—will simply go on
to the end of the present dispensation in a series
of assertions from one side for the Hebrew, and
counter assertions on the other for the Septuagint


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 485


version,'—unless, indeed, some new material data
more exactly to the point can be discovered.
Evidence of such improved and additional kind
would it be, could a copy of the Scriptures be dis-
covered anywhere, capable of being clearly and in-
dubitably proved to be older than the date of the
Septuagint version; but such a relic, we believe,
nowhere exists. A friend, recently returned from
the Holy Land, was loud the other day in praise of
an ancient copy of the Scriptures which he had
purchased from some Jews there, under a peculiar
combination of circumstances favourable to the pro-
duction before Western buyers, of the oldest mss.
still existing in the East. And when we therefore
inquired eagerly respecting its absolute age, he went


' Out of numerous couples of opponent writers, we subjoin the
following as a fair sample of the whole :—

(1.) *.. . Our only real appeal is the Scripture. . . . And here, on
‘ the great primary question of the Patriarchal chronologies, and whether
‘it be the Hebrew text with its shorter chronology, that has by fraud
‘been robbed of eleven centuries, or the Septuagint with its longer, that
‘has had them fraudulently added (for that the difference is the
‘ result of design is a thing evident, and long since noted by Augustine),
‘the answer seems on every account to be in favour of the Hebrew
‘ text.’—P. 255, vol. iv. of Hore Apocalyptice, by the Rev. E. B.
Kuliot, A.M.

(2.) ‘The contracted scheme of the Hebrew text is rejected by the

‘ greatest names in this branch of Biblical literature, as being glaringly

¢ ‘ inconsistent not only with the records of other nations, but even
? with the history of the ancient Hebrews themselves.’—Rev. J. R.
Beard, in Kitto’s Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature.
. While the Rev. George Rawlinson, in his Bampton bastieen de-
livered in the Oxford University pulpit in 1859, seems to refer to the
Hebrew text for doctrine and the Septuagint for dates ; the latter, too,
he has so much confidence in, that he fixes without scruple the date
of building the Great Pyramid more than a century earlier than the
Deluge according to the Hebrew text.


486 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. II.


off at. first into a long account of the undoubted
proofs he had obtained as to its superior relative
antiquity to all other recently discovered ss. ; but
concluded by stating, that he had submitted his
copy to the examination of an expert in these
things in Alexandria ; and the said skilled hand had
rubbed the Ms., and wetted it, bit it, and trode
upon one corner,—and then pronounced it ‘genuine
‘ beyond all doubt, and twelve hundred years old.’

For ability, however, to throw full light on the
vexed question between the two chief modern ver-
sions of the Scriptures, a manuscript of at least
2500 years old would be required ; and proof also,
capable too of being. appreciated by ordinary men
as well as experts,—that its writing had nowhere
been tampered with in the interval ; and that the
copy in question had been originally vouched for
as to its literal correctness, if not actually written,
by an authority of no less unimpeachable a character
than one of the prophets capable of receiving the
inspired messages themselves. And all that would
be tantamount to a miracle in itself.

Yet—within its own order both of subject, and
mechanical mode of construction for the expression
of its meaning—the Great Pyramid has all these
forms of vouchers for its authenticity; and for
dating not only from 2500, but from more than
4000 years ago. No one doubts but that the huge
stones whose size, shape, and manner of arrange-
ment and junction we can still examine, are, even


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 487


by means, or on account, of these qualities, the very
ipsissima verba, in so far as they represent words
at all, of the original builders. Wherefore, in any
cause which could be so represented, and where a
power of proving at long future times the minute
accuracy of the original message, should be im-
portant,—there is evidently in practice a virtue in
a builded monument like the Great Pyramid, which
“no roll of a book’ ever has been endued with or
practically can possess,—when it is known only by
copies, from copies, and these from other copies
again,—all of which, together with the original, are
long since reduced to dust. And now comes, or will
soon come, the question, whether advantage has
been taken for true religion of that remarkable pro-
perty of almost undying authenticability, residing
in the former method of commemoration.

But our inquiries are now confined to the
simple question to state,—though rather transcen-
dental, to solve practically ; viz., that of testing one
particular illustration derived from, and depending
on the date of the Great Pyramid, by a proof to be
derived from the Holy Scriptures: which latter, in
their material form as they now exist among men,
are far younger than the Great Pyramid, and in-
finitely more difficult to authenticate literally, ver-
bally, and more especially, in their chronology.

In this last point of difficulty, finding my own
knowledge altogether insufficient, I turned to eccle-
siastical authority; and after several fruitless or


488 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. II.


unsatisfactory answers from smaller dignitaries,—
applied at length officially to the representative
head of the largest and reputedly the most learned
Established Church in Christendom, viz., the Angli-
can—requesting to know what that Church had
concluded, and did believe, as to the true scriptural
date of the Deluge ; and how far it approved of the
dates inserted in the margin of many of the autho-
rized copies of the Bible.

The exact terms of the answer very graciously
accorded, almost by return of post, are subjoined :—


‘Lampeta Pauace, 8., 14th May 1866. —
‘ Srr,—In reply to your inquiry, I write to inform
you,
‘(1.) That the Church of England has assigned
‘no date to the Noachian Deluge.
‘(2.) That the Church has not fixed any dates
‘ between which it must have taken place.
‘(3.) That the Church of England has not autho-
‘ rized the insertion into the authorized copy of the
‘ English Bible of any system of dates.—I have the
‘honour to be, etc, (Signed) C. T. Canruar’’


Cf


After receipt of such a letter, there was evidently
nothing to be done, but for ourselves to attempt an
approximate discussion, of what might seem humanly
likely to have been the original Scripture date of
the Deluge,—from a comparison of the various
results of different private workers in this most
interesting and important field.


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. — 489


So far as we can gather the numbers, they run
thus; each result professing to be scriptural :—


Authorities. Date of Deluge 3.0.
Septuagint, Alexandrine (Kitto’s Palestine), = 3246
Jackson, . ; , ‘ ‘ : = 3170
Hales, == 3150
R. Stewart Piste (Smith’s ‘Bible Dietionany, = 3129
Samaritan (Kitto’s Palestine), = 2998
W. Osburn (Monumental History of ow, = 2500
Elliot’s Hore Apocalyptic, = 2482

Browne’s Ordo Seclorum, . = 2446 |
Playfair, . = 2351
Ussher, . = 2348
Petavius (Smith’s Bible Dagan, : = 2327
Mean, Years B.c., = 2741


From all these various statements, then, what
shall we conclude as to the real date of the one
particular event which they each and all claim
to chronicle ?

We have taken a mean of the whole, and it
chances to come to 2741 Bo.; but, being derived
from numbers differing so exceedingly as 3246 and
2327, it can impart little confidence,—either as to
the accuracy of the figures themselves, or, to what
is more important still, the reality of the event
alluded to.

The actual range of the numbers, however, sug-
gests a rudely parallel character with the crucial
epochs of Great Pyramid astronomy ; for the two
occasions of a Draconis being seen in the direction
of the entrance passage, or the years 2200 and 3400
B.C., evidently circumscribe all of what can be called
the Scripture dates of the Deluge; while the time


490 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIL.


of the star’s nearest appulse to the pole, or about
2800 B.c., approximates to the mean and most pro-
bable time of the occurrence as above obtained.
Such a resemblance of mere numbers, would of
itself, be of no kind of importance ; but the manner
in which the dates are obtained, proved, and memo-
rialized by the Great Pyramid’s method of observing,
—connects itself astronomically, in a very remark-
able manner, with numerous widespread and appa-
rently genuine, independent, and authentic traditions
of the Deluge, not yet explained on any scientific
hypothesis. And yet when they are at last examined
by what we have here to offer from the Pyramid,
they are found to contain astronomical truths of
rather too recondite a character to have been alighted
on by savage tribes of imperfect civilisation.

Now traditions of the Deluge, are undoubtedly
rather too abundant in the present day ; and when
one large work, presently before us, brings up with
great rejoicing ‘the celebrated Apamean medal,’
struck in the time of the Roman Emperors; and an-
other equally ponderous volume discourses largely of
Mohammedan traditions,—which even give what the
people of the land said to Noah when he was build-
ing the ark, and what he replied to them in return,
—we object to such traditions entirely, because
without any proof that they existed in the world
until long after the dissemination of the Hebrew
Scriptures among those very peoples and countries.

But some of the annals of the Chinese, some of


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 491


the Egyptian writings, some of the foundations of
early Greek beliefs, some Chaldzean inscriptions, and
by an inference of pretty sure character, some of the
practices of Mexicans, Peruvians, Fijians, Australians,
and other New-World savages whom Greece and
Rome never knew,—these are free from the accusa-
tion of possibly being founded in latter times on the
Hebrew Scriptures. And when they all alike tell
nearly the same story, they must allude to something
founded on very broad, solid, and ancient founda-
tions; or, in other words, on truth and fact of a
most cosmopolitan kind.

Amongst such traditions, then, which we must re-
spect,—and a few of which are contained in the
quotation from Mr. Haliburton in vol. i, pp. 380 to
448,—there are not only traces of a belief in there
having been a Deluge, destructive to the human race,
but in there being some connexion between its
cessation and the stars of the constellation Taurus.
Why this should be, the traditions and their
collectors say not; they are only certain of the
fact; and of the stars in Taurus being therefore
associated with ‘ sweet influences, and favourable to
mankind. Wherefore, we take up the case at that
point ; and suggest, by the light shed on the subject
from Great Pyramid astronomy, that this is in the
direction of being a reason :—

Compute for the lower limiting date, or 2200 Bc.
when a Draconis was last seen in the direction of
the entrance passage of the Great Pyramid,—and


492 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


when, both traditionally and scripturally, the
dangers were over, and evil effects of the Deluge
all subsided,—compute, we say, what equatorial and
zodiacal constellation was on the meridian above the
pole at the instant ; and, as abundantly described
on pp. 279, 283, it was Taurus and the Pleiades.
But compute for the upper limiting date, or
3400 B.C., (z.e.) Pyramidally the penultimate occa-
sion when a Draconis was similarly seen in the same
angular direction from the pole,—and when both
traditionally and scripturally the threatened punish-
ment of the Deluge was impending over the human
race,—and, as indicated on p. 2777, the equatorial and
zodiacal sky was as diverse from the epoch of 2200
B.C. as anything can be under the whole heaven ; for
Taurus and the Pleiades were nowhere visible, while
Scorpio and Serpens occupied the dominant position.
For almost any period, moreover, previous to
3400 B.c., Scorpio and Serpens were nearly similarly
dominant,—just as for ages after 2200 B.c., Taurus
and the Pleiades were also, as at that epoch, the
generally dominant stars; and characterized post-
diluvian, just as essentially as the former stars ex-
pressed antediluvian, times. But they did this only
through means of that most peculiar feature of the
Great Pyramid astronomy,—a feature most certainly
known to exist, though entirely neglected by modern
astronomers hitherto,—viz., the feature of the Pyra-
mid visibly memorializing its polar star only at its
lower culmination. We, however, having attended


CHAP. VIII.| ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 493


to that clear principle of the builders connected with
the lower, and not the upper, culmination,—have
obtained for the earlier time-limit, something that
seems to explain the maledictory names so generally
bestowed by all early Eastern nations on the stars
in Scorpio and Serpens; and for the later time-
limit, an explanation of the rejoicing, fond, and
grateful epithets similarly applied to the stars in
Taurus.

But what shall we obtain, on similarly comput-
ing for the middle epoch, or that of a Draconis
being at its closest proximity to the pole (yet still
not at the pole, and therefore having a circumpolar
daily circle, though an exceedingly small one, to
describe, and with an upper and lower culmination,
in principle as before) ; 2.e., compute for 2800 B.o.,
which is so nearly the mean of all scrzptural dates
of the Deluge itself, as to come within sixty years
of it? Why, this is what comes out,—that when
a Draconis was then crossing the meridian below the
pole, the zodiacal constellation crossing the meridian
above the pole was Aquarius! At that very date,
the meridian line crosses the mouth of the water-
pot whence the stream is issuing; and thence, in
the course of a short time, traverses through the
water-stream ; next, the constellation of Pisces, then
Aries, and finally—at the marked period of the Pyra-
mid, or 2170 Bo. or when a Draconis was 3° 42’
from the pole,—is found as already detailed in
Taurus. Not only so too, but the Pleiades seems to


494 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


form almost the lamits of the movement of the
meridian opposite to a Draconis ; so that that circle
must have hung on those stars, as it were, almost
inalterably for ages near to and about the year 2200
B.c.; and then have begun only slowly to retro-
grade, even as it is doing now.’

So here, we have a series of genuine early tradi-
tions, rendered ina manner vocal, or endued with
a meaning, through the agency of ideas embodied
in the constellations (to be presently shown prim-
eval, prophetic, and memorial), in combination with
a monument built not only before the dissemination
of the Hebrew Scriptures over the world, but before
even the writing of them had begun.

Wherefore can there be any other explanation
of so many mutually explanatory circumstances of
opposite natures and independent origin, and now
first brought together,—than that the Deluge to


1 Hence, we may see an additional proof of the actual wisdom of the
Pyramid’s arrangements: for the Pleiades merely opposite to a Draco-
nis in right ascension, would have been exceedingly indeterminate in
date ; but the above, combined with a Draconis at 3° 42' from the pole
(though that again by itself has uncertainties spreading over twelve
hundred years), is precise in the extreme.

A star-map, specially adapted for tracing such changes as these, is
now being prepared by Colonel Sir Henry James, R.E., Director of the
Ordnance Survey at Southampton ; it will form the fifth of his series
of star-maps, and being on his peculiar projection of the sphere, which
gives much more than half at one view, or as he both exactly and
classically entitles it, ‘ Cali, besse tenus, liceat convexa tueri,’—both the
ecliptic pole, and the whole of the constellations, whether zodiacal or
at any date equatorial, will be commanded on a flat surface, The maps,
which are splendidly engraved on copper, are published, and may be
obtained at the Ordnance Survey Office, Se sae ; or by apply-
ing through any bookseller.


CHAP. VIII. ] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 495


which they all refer must have been, at least as re-
gards all mankind then living, a real and material
phenomenon, and within the limits of time assigned
by Scripture authorities? And if so, of course, it
follows that the building of the ark of refuge is to
be looked on as historical likewise. So that we then
have from the Scriptures, first in this ark, and then
in the subsequent ark of the testimony or of the cove-
nant, two cases of real, practical work actually per-
formed ; and in each case according to linear measures
and proportions previously announced by Divine
inspiration,—while the middle date between these
two cases, falls very nearly on the time of the build-
ing of the Great Pyramid. |

We might indeed now, not unreasonably, put
forward some further claims for the inspired origin
of the Great Pyramid, depending on the manner of
its memorializing a primeval and scriptural pheno-
menon,—but will content ourselves with merely re-
marking, that so far as the one point of chronology
is concerned, there need be no objection to the in-
spiration hypothesis being tried further. And then
there immediately arise some other and more directly
related features, as well as some of a higher order,
to be examined into.


Metrology suitable as a Subject ?


Whether metrology at large, or some special means
for the typification and regulation of weights and
measures (which we now look on as the chief ori-


496 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIT.


ginal purpose of the Great Pyramid), was a subject
likely in the earlier ages of human society, to have
formed the burden of any inspired commands from
the dread God of all nature,—whom no man could
expect to behold and live-—admits of quick general
settlement ; for, from the time of Paucton in France
to John Taylor in England, very frequent reference
has been made to passages in the earlier portions of
Scripture, as in Leviticus, Deuteronomy, Proverbs,
and Ezekiel, directly stating in the words of inspira-
tion that such was the fact :—


Leviticus xix. 35-37.—‘ Ye shall do no unrighteousness in
‘ judgment, in mete-yard, in weight, or in measure.

‘ Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall
‘ ye have: [am the Lord your God, which brought you out of
‘ the land of Egypt.

‘ Therefore shall ye observe all my statutes, and all my judg-
‘ ments, and do them: I am the Lord.’

Deuteronomy xxv. 15.—‘ Thou shalt have a perfect and just
‘weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy
‘ days may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God
‘ giveth thee.’

Proverss xi. 1.—‘ A false balance is abomination to the
‘Lord ; but a just weight is his delight.’

Proverss xvi. 11.—‘ A just weight and balance are the
‘ Lord’s; all the weights of the bag are his work.’

Ezextrer xly. 9, 10, 11.—‘ Thus saith the Lord God, Let it
“suffice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and
‘ execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from
‘ my people, saith the Lord God.

‘ Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just

* bath.
' ¢The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the
‘bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah
‘ the tenth part of an homer; the measure thereof shall be after
‘the homer.’


CHAP, VIII. ] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 497


These words,—as we have attempted to set forth
in Chapter iti. Part 5, of Our Inheritance in the
Great Pyramid,—tfew though they be, yet compen-
dious, imply that much besides was, and had been,
actually done, performed, and completed practically,
—before they could be, in any spirit of justice and
mercy, issued as binding commands on a people just
escaped from a grinding slavery.

But rather than go over that identical ground
again, it may be more satisfactory to the reader, as
well as more within the bounds of this division of
our whole question, to quote the testimony, now
one hundred years old,—and perhaps not so gener-
ally known as it deserves to be,—of the learned
John David Michaelis of Guttingen.

An unusually good Hebrew scholar, his contribu-
tions to Biblical and Oriental learning are said by
competent judges to be invaluable, especially when
he treats of subjects capable of illustration from
history and philosophy. In following up these views,
and in order to throw more of the light of modern
investigation on Biblical science, Michaelis planned
the expedition to Arabia and India which was after-
wards conducted by Carsten Niebuhr, and other
travellers chiefly selected by Michaelis. His most
celebrated work, however, is his Mosdisches Recht,
in six volumes, in which his object is described by
his English translator to be,—‘ to investigate and
‘illustrate the philosophy of the Mosaic laws, to
‘ show their wonderful adaptation in every respect

VOL. IIL. 24


498 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘to the very peculiar circumstances in which the
‘ people to whom they were given had been placed
‘ by Providence ; and, while he takes every opportu-
‘nity of establishing the claims of Moses to the
‘ character of an ambassador from heaven, to incul-
‘cate upon human legislatures the important lesson
‘ of studying those particulars respecting the nature
‘and political situation, the ideas and prejudices,
‘the manners and customs of their countrymen, by
‘ attention to which alone they can ever hope to make
‘ them virtuous, prosperous, and happy.’

Strong, then, in the principles of the subject,
though unacquainted with some important features
of absolute fact, as well as of characteristic differences,
in the Egyptian and Hebrew metrologies,—such as
we have attempted to set forth in vol. ii. pp. 454-
470, ‘On the Sacred Hebrew Standards of Weights
‘and Measures,—the worthy Michaelis expresses
himself thus, in an extract which we are indebted
to kind friends at Brighton for bringing to our at~-
tention :—


‘Or tHE Pians wutch Moszs Took For THE REeguLATION OF
‘ Wuiauts anp Muasurss.


‘ Here, then, we have a remarkable specimen of legislative
‘ policy; and when I consider Moses merely as a man, without
‘any reference to his Divine mission, he must, methinks, have
‘ profited by his education among the Egyptians ; but he has, at
‘the same time, far surpassed them, and acted with much more
‘ honesty, than their policy,—which was so thoroughly interwoven
‘ with mystery and priestcraft—permitted them to do. For


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 499


‘ although he constituted the sacred tribe guardians of the sacred
‘ standards, and imposed upon them the duty of acquiring a
‘ knowledge of weights and measures with mathematical accuracy,
‘ —yet of things in which all were thus interested, he made no
‘ priestly mystery, but placed certain models of them all in the
‘ view of all; besides describing these in the books which were
‘ put into the hands of the whole people. Considering him, on
‘ the other hand, as sent by God, it appears to me, that he had
‘in this matter, by God’s express command, done the very same
‘thing that a wise people had done of their own accord; but ina
‘much more honest and open manner, and, at the same time, in
‘a much higher degree of perfection.

‘In the first place, then, the weights and measures were pre-
‘served in the tabernacle of testimony, in more ways than one,
‘and partly in the view of every individual, for at least many
‘hundred years. Some of them, it is true, might by use and
‘time suffer some change; but for that very reason, there were
‘ various standards, so that the error of any one could always be
‘ rectified by the others, and some of them were kept within the
‘ sanctuary itself, and were thus less liable to variation.

‘In the description of the tabernacle, we may, perhaps, have
‘read, with some degree of weariness, many particulars relative
‘to measures, in which we took no interest, and have often
‘ thought with ourselves in the meantime, ‘‘ Why did not Moses
‘“yather leave this out? I should have dispensed with it.’’
‘ Some people, in order to assigu some use to these mensurations,
‘ endeavour to discover in them a variety of types and mysteries.
‘ But, although I am very far from denying the typical nature of
‘many of the Mosaic ceremonial laws, yet I cannot here agree
‘with such people, nor comprehend what moral, doctrinal, or
‘ spiritual meaning there can be in ten ells long, one and a half
‘ell broad, and a half ell thick. Others, again, equally short-
‘ sighted, are so vexed at finding that these things are of no use
‘to them, as to conclude, with great theological depth, that they
‘could not be written by the command of God, because they
‘ contain nothing useful or edifying; just as if God should have
‘had the Bible written for them alone (a requisition, by the
‘ way, which they would never think of making in the case of
‘any human work), or as if in a book written by the immediate
‘ command of God, there ought to be nothing that did not mini-


500 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. II.


‘ ster to moral edification; and as if revealed religion did not
‘ inform us that God had condescended to become a civil legisla-
‘ tor to the people of Israel. This very specification of longitu-
‘ dinal measures, which we find so frequently repeated, answered
‘ one of the most important purposes of police to the Israelites,
‘and as a masterpiece of legislative wisdom in this respect, it
‘ merits our admiration.

‘I shall now speak of their measures of length, measures of
‘ capacity, and weights, separately and in succession.

‘1. The longitudinal measure was fixed for future ages in a
‘ great variety of ways. The measures of the court of the taber-
‘nacle and its hangings (Exodus xxvii. 8-19); of the curtains
‘ that covered the tabernacle (Hxodus xxvi. 1-13); of the boards
‘that framed it, which were made of a wood very little apt to
‘alter (Exodus xxvi. 15, 16); of the tabernacle itself, which
‘ was 80 ells long, and 10 broad; of the altar of burnt-offerings,
‘ overlaid with copper (Exodus xxvii. 1); are all specified in ells,
‘and that in a book which every Israelite was to read. It is
‘true, that the curtains and the wood might be affected by ex-
‘posure to the atmosphere, although one error would correct
‘another; but still every Israelite that came to attend Divine
‘ service, in any future age, would here obtain a pretty accurate
* view of the ell, and might, at any rate, measure some of those
‘ things with more perfect accuracy, and thus judge whether the
‘nation still retained in common use the ancient original ell
‘ or not.

‘ Still less variation was to be dreaded in those archetypes of
‘ the ell, that were kept in the sanctuary itself. Of the table of
‘ shew-bread (Exodus xxv. 23), the altar of incense (Exodus
‘ xxx. 2), and the ark of the covenant (Hxodus xxv. 10), all the
‘ dimensions are specified. These were made of acacia wood,
‘ and only overlaid with gold. But the most invariable of all the
‘ standards of longitudinal measures, as being made entirely of
‘ gold, is the lid of the ark, which was two ells and a half long, and
‘ one ell and a half broad (Exodus xxv. 17). No doubt, this ark
‘always remained in the obscurity of the sanctuary, unless it
‘ happened to be brought into the light by any rare occurrence,
as during a campaign in the time of war. But for that very
reason it was so much the more invariable, and could thus, if
necessity required, serve, after many centuries, to ascertain


¢


‘


¢


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. | 501


‘ whether any errors, and what, had affected the other standards
‘ of the ell.

‘I admit, that at last a time would come, when all those
‘standards of longitudinal measures would become useless,
‘because nothing on earth endures for ever. But then new
‘standards could be previously made from them; and we find
‘ that this was actually done. When the tabernacle (according
‘ to the reading in the printed Hebrew text) was 480 or (accord-
‘ing to another reading which Josephus and Paul found in the
‘ Bibles in common use in Palestine in their time) 592 years old,
‘and must certainly have been pretty much decayed, Solomon
‘began the building of his temple. At this time they would,
‘from the remains of the tabernacle, still be able to ascertain
‘the Mosaic ell. This measure was transferred to the temple ;
‘ and that edifice which, being built of stone, was liable to still
‘fewer changes, particularly in a southern country, where no
‘ severe frosts make the stones of a building separate from each
‘ other, was 60 ells long and 20 broad ; and thus, without taking
‘into account other expedients that Solomon might have em-
‘ployed for the purpose, the ancient Mosaic ell was preserved
‘until the time of Nebuchadnezzar, by whom this temple was
‘ destroyed. The numerous golden utensils which it contained,
‘ the vessel called the brazen sea, and the two copper columns,
‘ Boaz and Jachin, of which the altitude and circumference are
‘ specified, answered the same purpose. Now the question is,
‘ Have we ourselves such ancient and such authentically attested
‘memorials of our ell, as it was 480, 592, or, reckoning to the
‘time of Nebuchadnezzar, 903, or 1015 years ago? (I know
‘not whether we have or not; and I merely ask : for my readers
‘ will not be offended at me for my ignorance of many things),
‘and are these (I really do not ask this question, for I well know
‘the contrary) specified in a book, that is in every one’s
“hands ?”

‘ From what I find merely in the details relative to the struc-
‘ture of the tabernacle, where it is so manifestly his object to fix,
‘in different ways, one uniform standard of measure, I am led to
‘ conjecture, that Moses had done still more with that view, and
‘had given to the priests other special patterns of the ell, which
‘ they were ordinarily to use, and moreover, one archetype which
‘ they were sacredly to preserve. Of this, however, he does not


502 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DTV. III.


‘ himself inform us; but if it was the case, the models mentioned
‘in his writings, would always serve the purpose of preventing
‘ any alteration from being made upon them, either from care-
‘ lessness or fraud, without its being quite manifest to posterity.
‘ This is actually more than what the author of the excellent
‘ Essay upon Money and Coins projected in the year 1758, and
‘ Parliament took into consideration. And if the British Legis-
‘ lature were desirous to insure to future ages the true measure
‘ of the ell, on the Mosaic principles and plan, they ought to have
‘ it ascertained by the mathematicians of St. Paul’s Church, with
‘ the most perfect accuracy, and to have an authentic record of
‘ the mensuration drawn up in the plainest and briefest terms,
‘and published in a book, which every Briton might read, as
‘easily, at any rate, as the Israelite heard the law read, once
‘every seven years,—in the Catechism, for instance, or the
‘ Calendar, which should not be allowed to be printed without
‘ this appendix concerning St. Paul’s.’

‘It is to be hoped that my readers are, by this time, some-
‘ what reconciled to the Mosaic measures; and that they will no
‘ longer seek for types in the numbers; nor from the mensura-
‘ tions, whence they can derive neither edification nor amendment,
‘ deduce any more objections against the Divine mission of Moses,
‘ and the inspiration of his writings; else must I class them with
‘the man who could not comprehend what could be the use of
‘ the rampart of a fort, because he saw no crop of either rye or
‘ wheat upon it, and therefore could not be persuaded, by all the
‘ assurances that were given him, that it was formed after a plan
‘drawn by the king himself. ‘It is not,” persisted he, “for
‘“ yse as a corn-field; neither wheat nor rye grows upon it;
‘“ and our most = a can have had no hand in
‘ “ any such thing.”

‘2. The measures for corn and wine (mensure aridorum et
‘ fidorum) were among the Hebrews more uniform in their
‘ contents than ours are. For their ephah or bushel, and their
‘ bath (for liquids) were equally large.’

‘ It is very certain that there was a standard of these measures
‘in the sanctum sanctorum, and that it stood before the Ark of
‘the Covenant. Moses was ordered to place an homer of manna
‘ (and the homer is the tenth part of an ephah or Hebrew bushel)
‘ before God ; and it appears that the vessel was not of wood,


CHAP. VIII] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 503


‘but of gold (Exodus xvi. 33, 36; Hebrews ix. 4). It is
‘ probable that there were various other measures in use, although
‘ Moses has not inserted in his writings any account of their
‘contents. At this no one need be offended, who joined in
‘ finding fault with the too frequent repetition of the ells ; for, in
‘ fact, measures of this description could not properly be specified
‘in the Book of the Law, because the standard vessel, which was
‘ of gold, could not, without risk of being injured or stolen, be
‘ put in view of every Israelite, as the tabernacle was, in all its
‘ specified dimensions.

‘To notice, however, some probable examples of standard
‘measures of capacity which may have been described in the
‘ catalogue by which the sacred utensils were delivered to the
‘ priests and Levites (Numbers i. iv.), I would remark that, be-
‘ longing to the table of shew-bread, there were not only golden
‘tankards in which wine stood, and from which it was to
‘be poured out, but also small drinking vessels, shaped like
‘ cups, likewise of gold. Now, considering Moses not as sent
‘from God, but as merely versed in the learning of the Egyp-
‘ tians, we must think it probable that all these vessels had their
‘ contents very accurately determined, I presume that the very
‘same was the case with regard to the basins belonging to the
‘altar of burnt-offerings; and for regulating the baking of the
‘ shew-bread, the flour for which the law fix’t by bushels, there
‘ may have been a standard ephah within the sanctuary. Before
‘ the tabernacle stood the brazen laver. In the more particular
‘ description of the vessels delivered to the priests, it was pro-
‘ bably specified how much water this laver contained, both when
‘ quite full and when filled only to a certain mark ; and accord-
‘ingly we find that the contents of this brazen sea, as it was
‘ called, are mentioned in both respects, in the historical books
‘ of Ist Kings (vii. 26), and 2d Chronicles (iv. 5).

‘3. As to weights, Moses specifies them in the following man-
‘ ner—20 gerahs make one shekel of the sanctuary; see Hxodus
‘ xxx. 18, Leviticus xxvii. 25, Numbers iii. 47, xviii. 16.

‘3000 such shekels make one kickar, or talent. This appears
‘from Exodus xxxviii. 25, 26; where 301,775 shekels are
‘reckoned 100 talents, and 1775 shekels more. Moses gave no
‘ statute relative to the talent, as he did in the case of the gerah
‘and shekel; probably because there was no dispute about the


504 ORIGINATION-OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV, III.


‘ talent, every one reckoning it at 3000 shekels; whereas the one
‘ shekel might comprise more and the other fewer gerahs.

. “By this information alone, however, posterity would not have
‘been much benefited ; for the question would be, How much is
‘a gerah? and if it was replied, The twentieth part of a shekel,
‘the question would recur, And what is a shekel ? and if the
‘ answer was, Z’'wenty gerahs, they would have been in the very
‘same predicament in which the evil spirit stood, when he
‘ eatechised the orthodox collier on the subject of his belief. If,
‘in the course of time, the shekel became smaller, so likewise
‘ would the gerah diminish in the same proportion.

‘But here, too, a standard was provided. The fifty boards
‘ of which the walls of the tabernacle were composed, rested each
‘ upon two silver sockets, and every one of these hundred sockets
‘ was of the weight of a talent (Hxodus xxxviii. 27). Here, there-


‘ fore, they had no fewer than a hundred standards for the talent,


‘ by which the shekel could at any future period be determined.
‘If they lost anything by friction it was in proportion very
‘ trifling; whereas in the case of smaller weights, like the shekel
‘and gerah, the loss by wear or friction amounts to something
‘more material. The golden candlestick in the sanctuary, to-
‘gether with all its appurtenances, in like manner, weighed a
‘ talent (Hxodus xxv. 31-39); and in the catalogue according to
‘ which the different pieces of furniture belonging to the taber-
‘nacle were given in charge to their keepers, it was doubtless
‘ accurately specified what was the weight of the golden candle-
stick by itself, as well as of every golden pair of snuffers, and
‘of whatever else belonged to it; and likewise that of all the
‘ golden articles belonging to the table of shew-bread, and of the
‘ golden lid of the ark with its cherubims. In this way they had
‘a great variety of standards for their weights, and if in any of
‘ them, by the wear of the gold, any small diminution of weight
‘took place, others were always at hand to rectify the defect.
‘ But it is not to be forgotten that these standards, of which
‘some, at any rate, could certainly lose nothing by wear in the
‘ course of thousands of years, from their being so very sacredly
‘ preserved, were not of iron and copper, which in process of
‘time are corroded by rust and verdigris, if exposed to damp-
‘ness or even to acids, but of gold and silver, which defy
‘moisture and the common acids. Nor was there any reason to


‘


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 505


‘ apprehend that the gold would ever be wilfully and feloniously
‘ filed down, for the profit of such sacrilege would have been too
‘ inconsiderable for people so rich as were the priests; and even
‘ though we should represent them to ourselves as ever so destitute
‘ of principle, they could scarcely have run the risk of being stoned
‘for a few grains of gold. Besides, they must have had to de-
‘ liver the articles under their charge, according to their weight,
‘ when required ; not to mention that the sanctity of the golden
‘standards would make them shudder at the very thought of
‘ committing theft upon them in any shape. The best possible
‘ provision, therefore, was made for unalterable and authentic
‘ standards of weight.’

‘ And now, as to the superintendents of weights and measures.
‘ These were, much in the Egyptian style, priests and Levites.
‘To them the standards were delivered ; and, indeed, article by
‘ article, to particular persons, that so, if of gold or of silver, they
‘might re-deliver it by weight; besides, the whole tribe of Levi
‘were maintained by the public in return for their devoting
‘themselves to the sciences. Nay, more, we find it expressly
‘mentioned in Ist Chronicles xxiii. 29, that David, when he
‘assigned to each Levite his department, appointed some to
‘ superintend the weights and measures.’

‘ Thus were these things really consecrated; and thus are
‘ the words of Solomon in Proverbs xi. 16 true, in a sense which

‘readers seldom think of: A just balance is dicen to Jehovah ;
‘and all weights are his work,

‘ At the same time, however, Moses nowhere prohibits the
‘ use of foreign weights and measures; at least I can recollect
‘no such prohibition; and from his so often mentioning the
‘ sacred shekel, and in Leviticus xxvii. expressly saying, Al
‘ estimations of vows shall be made by the sacred shekel, it would
‘ appear, that there had been another shekel, which he did not
‘ prohibit, but only meant that everything in his laws relative to
‘ imposts, penalties, etc. etc., should be understood in reference to
‘ the shekel of ‘the sanctuary. At any rate, there seem, besides
‘ this sacred shekel, to have been many foreign ones, and, more-
‘over, a royal shekel, established by later laws (2 Samuel xiv.
‘ 26), and of a smaller weight than that of Moses; concerning
‘ which I have treated in another place, and the origin of which
‘may have been the following. Ag it was not forbidden to deal


506 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IT.


‘in common life by different weights, there arose, in process of
‘ time, a much smaller, but variable shekel; and to prevent un-
‘ certainty and imposition, the kings fixed the weight of this
‘ common shekel more accurately ; so that from this time there
‘were two lawful shekels current among the Israelites, the
‘sacred and the royal. Hven Moses himself, in his historical
‘ relations, does not seem to adhere uniformly to his own mea-
‘sures; as, for instance, where he describes the coffin of Og,
‘ king of Bashan, as nine ells long, and fowr broad, measured by
‘ the elbow of a man (Deuteronomy iii. 11); concerning which
‘ passage, I request that the remark in my German version of
‘the Bible mny be perused.
‘ It is no doubt an imperfection of police to permit the use of
‘ different weights and measures; and it may be asked, Why


‘ Moses did not go a step further, and expressly prohibit all but:


“one set? We must here, however, take into consideration the
‘ circumstances of the Israelites, and bear in mind, that, not
‘ being themselves a commercial people, they were dependent for
‘trade upon other nations; upon the Phoenicians for maritime
‘commerce, and upon the Arabs for the caravan trade that
‘passed through Palestine. A people in such circumstances
‘cannot altogether avoid making use of foreign weights and
‘ measures, if they would avoid being over-reached by the foreign
‘ merchants, in whose hands the whole trade is; only they should
‘have one invariable standard of their own, to which all others
‘ can be reduced, and that they ought in justice to use in dealing
‘one with another. This standard may, no doubt, be departed
‘from by an abuse, and other foreign weights, ete., become


‘ current among the citizens; and I suppose it was some such ~


‘abuse that gave occasion to the establishment of the royal
‘shekel. Some writers, however, look upon the royal and sacred
‘ shekel as the same; and if that be admitted, much of what I
‘ have here written falls to the ground.

‘ That Moses enjoins the use of just balances, and just weights
‘ and measures, is very obvious. The statutes relative to this point
‘occur in Leviticus xix. 85-37, and Deuteronomy xxv. 14-16.
‘Tf it is forbidden there to have a great anda small bushel, a
‘ great and a small weight, the meaning is not, that beside the


‘ shekel of the sanctuary, they were not to have any other, nor:


‘ even in their dealings with foreigners to use ther shekel; but


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 507


‘only, that they were not to have two different weights of the
‘same denomination, a larger to purchase by, and a lesser to
‘sell by.

‘It would appear, that these statutes were, in the time of
‘ Moses, pretty sacredly kept, because he does not once mention
‘ any punishment as being annexed to their violation ; but deems
‘ it sufficient to say, Whosoever committeth such unrighteous deeds
‘ts an abomination to Jehovah. thy God. . The very circumstance
‘of their regarding balances, weights, and measures, as conse-
‘ crated to the Deity, might keep a people, while yet honest and
‘religious, from fraudulent practices, as being offences in the
‘sight of a holy God. In later times, however, we find the’
‘ prophets often charging them with the use of false weights,
‘ ete.’


So far the venerable Michaelis, on the proceed-
ings of an inspired teacher among the Israelites and
his method of illustrating, exhibiting, enforcing, and
preserving extreme exactness with regard to one
particular system of weights and measures; a
system too, which was considered so sacred, that
any deviation therefrom was declared to be imme-
diately and peculiarly obnoxious to Jehovah. All
this description refers, indeed, to a period long
subsequent to that of the building of the Great:
Pyramid; but at another period much preceding that
event,—or when the commands were delivered to
Noah with regard to the formation of the ark,—a.
knowledge of what the cubits, so called, ‘ of Jehovah’
are equal to, was evidently pre-supposed as then
existing on the part of the patriarch. We have
shown too, already, the commensurability (vol. ii.
p- 470) of Solomon’s still later, ‘ Molten Sea,’ with
Moses’ Ark of the Covenant; and everything that


508 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. ILI.


we know concerning the continuity of the scheme
of revelation from one end of the Bible to the other,
allows us to admit of no other, than one; constant,
length as the cubit of the sacred people of God in
every age and in every clime.

Hence we cannot but see, that not only the sub-
ject of metrology, but more especially the formation
of a sufficient monument to preserve the length of a
certain set of sacred standards in a practicable and
reliable shape,—from the time of the very Deluge or
its proximate epoch, down to the ends of the world,
—in a religious point of view,—is most agreeable
to scriptural enunciations on the case. Nay, in-
deed, something of the kind would appear to have
been, and to be, absolutely necessary ; for how
otherwise (see vol. ii. pp. 455 and 456), unless the
original standards of inspiration are set before us,
can we have full confidence in a supposed cubit of
the present day being of the same length as the
sacred cubit, and not more like any of the numer-
ous other cubits of profane nations,—the employ-
ment of any one of which the Hebrews were
especially taught, would have been abomination to
Jehovah thy God. The scriptural family of the
Hebrews, indeed, living in the earlier ages of the
world, and only for a definite epoch,—could, for such
period, be supplied and kept safe by a temporary set
of standards ;—but the Christian nations of the world
three thousand years after the inspired Hebrew time,
could only be served by something very different


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 509


from, and much more lasting than, Moses’ standards


of wood and gold.


Style of the Metrology suitable ?


Although sufficing reasons may now be considered
to have been produced, illustrating both the expe-
diency and propriety of some grand and lasting
monument of sacred origin having been erected, for
the purpose of conveying to present and still future
times the originals of the standards employed by
Moses and Noah,—yet we are not thereby imme-
diately justified in concluding that the Great
Pyramid zs that monument.

The Great Pyramid is indeed the worthiest build-
ing for the purpose yet known to man, being the
largest, the most purely scientific in form, the most
accurately and solidly constructed, the most capable
of resisting alike fire and water, storm and earth-
quake; and actually does span all the immense
interval, stretching from the latter days of Noah
of the Hebrew Scriptures, down to—what many
writers on the prophecies look on as the proximate
termination of the Christian dispensation, and near
approach of the second glorious advent. But we
must pass all these things by for a time, while we
put the building through another more searching
test still—by inquiring whether its peculiar and
now well-ascertained metrology is likely to resemble
very closely, that one sacred system of weights and


510 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


measures with which alone, Jehovah of the Hebrews
desired to be served.

This point, however, we have in effect already
settled, by the concluding memoir in vol. ii. ; where,
founding on Sir Isaac Newton’s admirable disser-
tation on cubits,—and agreeing with him that the
sacred cubit was quite different from the profane
Egyptian cubit,—we have yet found it (the sacred
cubit), to be precisely the same as the cubit of the
Great Pyramid. Found also that the most sacred
Ark of the Covenant, was the same lidless-box mea-
sure, identical in cubic contents with the coffer of
the Great Pyramid; and found still further that
Solomon’s Molten Sea was of the same cubical capa-
city as the lower marked-off course in the King’s
chamber. Beyond this too still, we have shown at
p. 240 in this volume, that the week of the Queen’s
chamber is identical with the sabbatical week, alike
of the second chapter of Genesis and of the book of
Exodus; and is just as entirely different from the
profane Egyptian week of old, as from the decadal
week of the modern French metrical system ;—and
all this being so,—why, the Great Pyramid is
simply a representation of the sacred Hebrew
weights and measures, so far as known,—and is in
large opposition to either ancient pagan, or modern
atheistical, measures. Hence our present titular
argument is proved entirely.

There still remains, however, quite open, the
further very important question,—whether the


CHAP. VIII] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 511


people employed in the building of the Great
Pyramid were those who, on scriptural grounds,
may be considered likely to have been made the
channels of inspired commands from God to man;
and for producing a then world’s wonder, but ulti-
mately a benefit in many ways to the whole human
race. Wherefore we must next advance to the dis-
cussion of the


Suitability of the men concerned ?


Nearly all the recorded cases in Scripture, so far
as we are aware, of inspiration having been granted
for the purpose of promoting either directly or in-
directly the revealed religion,—were confined to men
conspicuous above their fellows for piety, morality,
and amenability to the doctrines of that religion of
which they were to become either the mouth-pieces
or exemplars ; and the number of mortals so highly
favoured, in post-diluvian times, seldom travelled
far out of the direct line of the family of Shem.

But how does this principle suit the case of the
Great Pyramid, if built, under instructions from the
same inspiration, but in Egypt, and by the hands of
Egyptian workmen,—Egypt being the most wofully
idolatrous of all countries; while its people were
exclusively descendants of Ham ?

Several answers in mitigation somewhat of this
extreme view of the Egyptian idolatry,—everything
else being allowed as above stated,—have been at-
tempted by various hands.


512 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


In the first place, for instance, there has been a
growing feeling of late——among those men who
have made a special pursuit of Egyptian hierogly-
phics, sculptures, and paintings, and who consider
deep and curious investigations into the detail of the
animal-headed Pantheon of ancient Egypt, a most
worthy and elevating study for Christian men of the
present day,—that it was not all so bad as it looks.
They have strong impressions, say these well-mean-
ing students, that the old Egyptians were not so
very far from the truth; and that all these idolatrous
figures on the temple-walls which offend the eyes of
casual observers,—were deep-meaning mysteries and
symbolical expressions of something really very dif-
ferent in its nature. And in fact, these modern
students not only endeavour to show that Moses
formed the chief part of the Hebrew worship on the
model of the Egyptian ; but that the latter faith, on
receiving ‘its expansion into the world, became the
effective origin of the Christian religion as well.
‘At the present day, says one of these authors,
‘ Christianity, Judaism, and Mohammedanism keep
‘ the conscience of the world, and as each of these
‘religions was merely the Hgyptian wea carried
‘ (colportée) into another country, it is in reality
‘the Egyptian idea which still rules the world.
‘In stating this fact,’ proceeds the author in ques-
tion, ‘we conceive we have been acting in a very
‘ Christian manner ; for it belongs to a Christian to
‘know how to render to Ceesar that which belongs


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 513


‘to Cesar, and to God what belongs to God; and
‘similarly to the Egyptians what belongs to the
‘ Egyptians, instead of robbing them.’

Now very far be it from us, to refuse to the
Egyptians whatever really belongs to them; and
with regard to all their sculptures of animal-headed
gods, and actual worship of animals, we know of no
reason whatever why Egyptians should not have
the full credit, and responsibility too, of having in-
vented them. On the very same principles, indeed,
whereby we could not allow Egyptians to have con-
ceived the idea of the Great Pyramid as a metrolo-
gical monument,—because its birth was not after
the necessary manner of all human beginnings
(p. 371),—we are specially bound to let them, the
Egyptians, take to their share all their false gods ;
—for the number of these did increase with their
own growth and strengthen with their strength as a
nation, according to the law of human inventions
and national commencements. So that although in
the earlier monuments such idolatrous figures are
few and far between, they abound exceedingly in
the later days of the eighteenth and nineteenth
dynasties ; and have even forced from M. Renan the
remark we have already given, as to the temples of
that period seeming, when contrasted with the earlier,
to have been ‘invaded by a whole Pantheon, the

1 Les Divinités Egyptiennes, leur origine, leur culte, et son expansion
dans le monde. Par Olivier Beauregard. Paris, 1866. See p. 604.

VOL. IIL. 2K


514 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘most horrible and ridiculous that the human mind
“has ever conceived.’

‘Ah!’ but say others of the Egyptologists, ‘though
“the figures appear repulsive or silly, that is only
‘ because they are mysteries to the uninitiated.’

When these gentlemen have tried to prove their
case openly, in some other manner than by myste-
rious assertion,—it will be quite time enough to
examine their reasons; but in the meanwhile it is
sufficient for all the plain-speaking world, that
neither the Mosaic nor Christian religions either
copied or permitted such a pictorial or sculptorial
method as that of the Egyptian temples, for con-
cealing grand ideas of religion from the people.
The adoption, indeed, of such devices as figures of

animal-headed gods in every city of the land, by the

Egyptians, even for a good purpose momentarily
allowed, placed them in antithesis to the religion of
inspiration. But we have only to read the accounts
of what the religion of the Egyptians actually was,
by those who saw them engaged at it—to perceive
that their purpose was not good, and that they did
worship animals as gods; for thus, as merely one
among hosts of similar witnesses, did Clemens Alex-
andrinus write 1600 years ago :—

‘Among the Egyptians, the temples are sur-
‘rounded with groves and consecrated pastures ;
‘ they are furnished with propylea, and their courts
‘ are encircled with an infinite number of columns;
‘ their walls glitter with foreign marbles, and paint-


CHAP. VIII. ] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 515


‘ings of the highest art; the naos is resplendent
‘with gold, and silver, and electrum, and variegated
‘stones from India and Ethiopia ; the adytum is
‘veiled with a curtain wrought with gold. But if
‘you pass beyond into the remotest part of the en-
‘closure, hastening to behold something yet more
‘excellent, and seek for the image which dwells in
‘the temple, a pastophorus (or shrine-bearer), or
‘some one else of those who minister in sacred
‘ things, with a pompous air, singing a pean in the
‘ Egyptian tongue, draws aside a small portion of
‘ the curtain, as if about to show us the god; and
‘makes us burst into a loud laugh. For no god is
‘found within, but a cat, or a crocodile, or a serpent
‘sprung from the soil, or some such brute animal ;
‘the Egyptian deity appears,—a beast rolling him-
‘ self in a crimson coverlet.’

Even if we euter still more into the inner life of
their religion, and take for our guide, not an ancient
Greek living in the time of the Egyptians, but a
modern European ‘ Egyptologist, translating re-
cently exhumed papyrus rolls,—the religious phrases
and ideas are again found as opposite as they can
well be to the religion of the Bible. This one fol-
lowing illustration will probably suffice. We choose
it because it is found more elaborated in the later,
than the earlier, papyri; indicating it, in so far, to
be the growth of the Egyptian mind; and it con-
sists in these two points mainly, ‘ first, the rejection
‘ of any idea of an atonement ; and second, the self-


516 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. Il.


‘assertion by every man, of his own absolute and
‘ complete righteousness.’ (See p. 430.)

Hence, our examination of the first apology for
the Egyptians, ends in showing them more than
ever, as not the people likely to have received any
inspiration for Bible purposes.

But then arises a second class of apologists,—
who allow freely that in the latter days of the Egyp-
tian monarchy, their religion did become very gross,
—but state their belief that in the Pyramid-build-
ing age, there was no idolatry in Egypt; and that
even down to the visit of Abraham, or the close of
the old empire, ‘ the one God was still invoked at
‘ the altars of the Nile land.’? Others further assert,
there was no animal-worship in Egypt until after
the Exodus.?

‘ There are even passages in the inspired volume,’
continues one of the apologists, ‘ which seem to hint
‘ at a special revelation to the sons of Ham, anterior
‘to the call of Abraham. Horeb would appear to
‘have been known as the mountain of God, before
‘it was made the scene of a Divine manifestation to
‘Moses. The Syrian nation in an earlier and purer
‘stage of its history seems to have been favoured
‘with a peculiar presence of God ; and the Syrians
‘ being Cushites, were nearly allied to the children
‘of Mizraim, or the Egyptians. The families there-
‘fore of Cush and Mizraim, Palestine, Egypt and


1 Rev. George Trevor’s Ancient Egypt.
2 Rev. H. Browne’s Ordo Seclorum.,


CHAP. VIII. ] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. Boy:


‘ Ethiopia (z.e. Arabia), might keep their religious
‘ festivals at Horeb, as the children of Israel after-
‘ward went up to appear before the Lord in Jeru-
‘salem. The Mount of God would thus be the
‘centre of worship to a band of kindred nations,
‘ scattered beween Libya and the Persian Gulf, tilla
‘ gradual apostasy vitiated their covenant, and an-
‘ other law, another priesthood, and another people
‘ were chosen out of the families of Shem.’?

With the latter part of the argument we shall not
attempt to deal, having no contemporary monu-
ments wherewith to compare it, and considering it
therefore altogether above our powers. But with the
former part, or that asserting Egyptian idolatry to
be a growth entirely subsequent to the time of
Abraham, or later,—we enter into direct antago-
nism ; for the Sinaitic tablets of the kings of the
fourth dynasty, or two hundred years at least before
Abraham,—show animal-headed gods as rampant:
besides which, Manetho expressly states, that earlier
still, or in the time of the second dynasty, ‘ the bull
‘ Apis in Memphis, and Mnevis in Heliopolis, and
‘the Mendesian goat, were appointed to be gods in
‘ Egypt.’

In addition to which we may announce, from find-
ing a large greenstone statue of a baboon god, half-
buried in the sand at the north-east corner of King
Shafre’s tomb,—and from picking up a fragment in


1 Ancient Egypt, by the Rev. George Trevor, M.A., Canon of York,
pp. 113-115.


518 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIv. IIl.


diorite, apparently the shin of a figure of Pthah,
—near the temple in front of the second Pyramid,—
that the Egyptians had then loose and portable
idolatrous images, like Laban’s gods, though the
standing walls of their temples were not as yet carved
and sculptured.

True it is, no doubt, that the Pyramids generally
are without either idolatrous decorations or contents ;
but that is at once shown by the above to depend,
not on idolatry being as then uninvented, but more
probably because each Pyramid was a blind copy
from another Pyramid; and the origin of them all
was the Great Pyramid, in which the reasons,
whatever they were, for omitting idolatrous allu-
sions, concentrate themselves.

To that vast and admirably preserved monu-
ment, all men can still go, and undoubtedly see
that there is no idolatry within it at all. While the
traditions of 2300 years old,—relating how that
freedom was procured ; viz, by Kings Shofo and
Nu-Shofo of the hieroglyphics, or Cheops and Che-
phren of Herodotus, shutting up the temples and
forcibly stopping the animal-worship of the people for
the time,'—these traditions, we say, in so far as they
can be trusted, only make it more certain than ever
that the people of Egypt, were no more at that
period than at any other of their history, like those
whom Jehovah was accustomed to favour; from
Noah who was a preacher of righteousness, or Job


1 Compare Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Manetho, and others,


CHAP. VIIL.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 519


who was the servant of God, down to Moses and
the prophets of Israel.

It might have been expedient, in the ‘ Divine
economy, to employ the people of Egypt in the
building operation, on account of their remarkable
talent for mechanical work of an enduring order.
The descendants of Shem, certainly had no leading
capacity that way ; so that centuries after the great
Pyramid had actually been built, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob lived in nothing more substantial than
tents; each of them being emphatically described
as ‘a Syrian ready to perish ;’* a mere wanderer on
the face of the earth, without settled or solid
habitation.

The sons of Cush are indeed honourably noted in
Scripture,—and more prominently than their cousins,
the Mizraites, and all others,—as adepts in building ;
so that even before the dispersion, Nimrod’s king-
dom is at once defined by his four great cities :—

‘And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel,
‘and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of
‘ Shinar.

‘Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded
‘Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, and
‘ Resen between Nineveh and Calah : the same is a
‘ great city.’

But not only were these cities,—in so far as we may
judge from the remains of some, and of the successors
of others, in the same Cushite or Chaldean land,—


1 Deuteronomy xxvi. 5.


520 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


built of very perishable materials; but there were
none of them either in, or even near, a country of
appropriate latitude for the Great Pyramid. That
remarkable monument demanded to stand in the
parallel of 30°; and Egypt was the only country of
the then world containing both that latitude, and
a people clever in building after a permanent
manner.

But then, it was by no means necessary for the
mere performance of the masonry part of the oper-
ation, whereat they were already skilful, that the
Egyptian workmen, when employed on the Pyramid,
should have received inspiration from on High.
Enough, if those who kept them to the Great Pyra-
mid, rather than any other work, and more especially
those who told them what lengths, breadths, heights,
and angles to make the several parts of the Great
Pyramid,—were so assisted.

Now all traditional and monumental testimony
assure us, that the Kings Shofo and Nu-Shofo were
at least those who kept the Egyptians to the work
of the Great Pyramid. Were they then also those
who were gifted with the superhuman knowledge
for the time, of being enabled to lay down the pro-
portions requisite to cause the Great Pyramid to
become the wonderful metrological monument which
modern science, after four thousand years, is proving
it to be ?

There seems at first to be something in favour of
the idea ; because, even by the confession of their


Vol. Ill. PI. £3.


Of the XIV DYNASTY cont?
Fourth and neighbouring


DYNASTIES. 3
, PQoite cont.#


Shofo. |


XIX™ DYNASTY,


Vserchre’,
|


A SY) senrans.


Of the
xXIV™ DYNASTY,


tof


VaR ro) Later Loue


monarcd.


ROYAL QUARRY MARKS AND OVALS REFERRED
TO IN THE HISTORICAL SECTIONS.


CHAP. VIIL] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. Sa


enemies, those kings did stop animal-worship for a
time; and sundry tomb-inscriptions, translated by. W.
Osburn, show them to have been, in all other things,
beneficent monarchs, attending to the solid interests
of their people,—and not by any means such bar-
barous rulers and profligate tyrants as the priests of
the idolatrous temples in after times used to love to
. represent them. But then again, these same traditions
going on to describe Shofo and Nu-Shofo (Plate x11.)
as having before the end of their lives become repent-
ant towards the gods,—z.e., the animal-gods ; or, in
other words, become favourers of animal-worship
once again,—we are induced, therefore, to fear, that
the good courses of the kings during the time of the
Pyramid building, were temporary only, and due to
some peculiar pressure for the time being ; or that,
in fact, they were not the original, immediate, and
worthy recipients of that inspiration, under which,
and under nothing short of which, the arrangements,
proportions, and measures of the Great Pyramid
could have been received.


(The inspired messengers, were foreigners ?)


Whereto then shall we look for any known _his-
torical medium, that would be recognisable on Scrip-
ture experiences of inspiration, wherever certainly
enjoyed ?

John Taylor found, that on the Hebrew chrono-
logy, Noah must have been still living when the
Great Pyramid was built; and felt inclined there-


522 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


fore to expect that so venerable a character, already
experienced on the ark in building according to
measures divinely communicated, may have had
some share in the operation. And whoshall say that
he had not? We hardly know, unless it be those
ordained priests in the Established Church, ;who
declare that the chronology of the authorized English
Bible, as being translated from the Hebrew, is
entirely false for all the earlier periods ; and that
according to the Septuagint, which alone is true in
time particulars, Noah must have been dead for
several centuries before the Great Pyramid began to
be built. But it is hardly worth our while to enter
into discussion on this question at present, because,
let the death of Noah have occurred at almost any
time, there is no direct mention in the Bible of his
having been engaged in building a Pyramid in the
land of Egypt.

Much the same, too, may be said for the claims of
‘Peleg and the sons of Joktan.’ For though John
Taylor* has shown with much learning, that the
former name signifies ‘ division, with probable refer-
ence to geographical science ; and that ‘ Almodad,’
the eldest of the latter, signifies ‘the measwrer;’ while
in an old Chaldzean paraphrase, the same personage
is even declared to have been ‘the inventor of
‘ geometry, and one who measured the earth with
‘ cords ;’ and though much Divine favour appears to
have been shown to the family (each of the thirteen


1 Great Pyramid, chapters xxiv., xxv., and xxvi.


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 523


sons of which has his name expressly given in the
Bible,—the last of them, Jobab, being thought to be
Job, in whose majestic book, as will presently be
shown, there do appear some allegorical allusions to
the Great Pyramid) ; still none of these things are
sufficiently to the point, or capable, by ourselves at
least, of being considered as contemporary Scripture
authority, for any one of the personages named
having been sent down to the land of Egypt: nor
for their being instructed from on High to build a
Pyramid in that land; and gifted with eloquence to
persuade, or power to control, the men of the region
to act according to his orders.

Yet though we can find no direct authority from
Scripture for any one being thus sent to Egypt dur-
ing the Pyramid-building age,—there is a very note-
worthy allusion in the sacred pages respecting some
persons, families, or people being brought back from
Egypt, and planted in Palestine about that time,
and under the Divine favour. There is the well-
known tradition, moreover, on the other hand, col-
lected in Egypt by Herodotus—of a remarkable
shepherd, or Palestinian, having been encamped near
the Great Pyramid during the time of its building ;
and having had, in the estimation of the people,
much to do with the progress of the work.

The first of these notices is to be found in Deute-
ronomy, second chapter ; where Moses,—when en-
couraging the Israelites to be of good heart in their
march under Divine favour out of Eeypt and into


524 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


Palestine,—mentions two other and preceding cases
where God had been pleased to conduct other
nations into a new country, and had given them the
lands of the previous inhabitants, as thus :-—

‘ As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt
‘in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before
‘them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in
‘ their stead, even unto this day :

‘And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even
‘unto Azzah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out
‘of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their
‘ stead.’

Now these Caphtorims are usually (for there
have been other theories broached) supposed to be
Egyptians ; or persons at least out of Caphtor, which
is considered to be the north-western part of Middle
Egypt, or the very locality of the Great Pyramid.
And, that they were positively brought out of that
region under Divine favour, and in a manner typical
of the subsequent bringing out of the Israelites—
is still further to be inferred from the following :~-

‘ Have not I (the Lord) brought up Israel out of
‘ Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the
‘ Syrians from Kir?’ (Amos ix. 7.)

The second again, of the above notices alluded to,
is the very unintended and incidental tradition in
Herodotus, to the effect,—that the Egyptians so ex-
ceedingly detested the kings under whom the Great
Pyramid was built, that rather than mention their
names when asked who erected the colossal monu-


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 525


ment, they would say,—either that it was built
when the shepherd Philition fed his flocks there-
about ;* or that the Great Pyramid was called after
him, and that he was ‘the great enemy of the
‘ Keyptian gods.”

Now any servant of the Almighty must have
been necessarily obnoxious to the gods of Egypt
and their worshippers ; and while no man of humble
calling amongst the Egyptians would ever have
been allowed any separate existence or identity
under their oppressive government,—we may he
assured, from all their traditions and history, that
the name ‘Shepherd,’ implied a Palestinian, or one
from Palestine, and arriving in Egypt through the
Isthmus of Suez. The particular name of ‘ Philition,’
implying, moreover, as John Taylor was disposed
further to imagine, a remembrance of the feasts
whereat there is a shedding of blood for the propi-
tiation of sins; or a characteristic of the first shep-
herd Abel, and the religion subsequently taught to
mankind through the descendants of Shem: but
hated even to ‘ abomination’ by the Egyptians.

The shepherd Philition, then, with his friends and
flocks at the Great Pyramid, looks exceedingly like
a Scripture character ; and if he would preserve his
descendants in the true religion, and free from
bondage to the Pharaohs of Egypt,—it was abso-


1 See Rawlinson’s Herodotus, volume ii. p. 207, with Sir Gardner
Wilkinson’s note.
2 Ancient Egypt, by the Rev. George Trevor, p. 118.


526 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. ITI.


lutely necessary that he should leave that land
again, as soon as possible after he had performed
the business for which he originally journeyed there.
Hence, if he went to it charged with the message of
the Almighty, we need not be surprised that the
Almighty’s assistance was given in bringing him
out of the tyrant’s clutches again; even in such
manner as the Lord expressly states that He did
bring the Philistines and Caphtorim out of Caphtor
or Egypt.


(Cuseans retire from Egypt, northwards ?)

This pre-Mosaic bringing-out, then, for which in
itself there is direct Scripture authority, we are
inclined, on account of the mutually explanatory
facts, to connect with the shepherd Philition, and
his friends of Great Pyramid Pagan fame ; and
there appears to have been, after a most noteworthy
manner, from that time subsequently,—a continued
series of successions between those Philitian shep-
herds from Egypt and the Israelites,—in several
important parts of the world. The principal steps
too in this remarkable chain of coincidences, were,
—independently of all Pyramid allusions, and with
sometimes needless digressions to the subsequent
shepherds of the fifteenth Heyptian dynasty,—dis-
covered by the learned Jacob Bryant, and published
by him in his Dissertation on Ancient History in
the year 1767.

Sons of Chus, Cuseans, and Cushites, he appears


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 527


to consider them,—shepherds too, of Egyptian story,
though not of the Egyptian nation or faith either,
—in their first retreat from Egypt, they retired
towards the Amalekites, and the country to the south
of what was afterwards Judah’s portion of the Holy
Land ; ‘for there are many names of places that
‘ correspond exactly with others in Egypt, which we
‘ have shown,’ says Bryant, ‘ to have been of Arabian
‘original. There is in the first place to be found
‘the name of the very country they had deserted,
‘Goshen or Gushin, as testified twice over in the
Book of Joshua, with the further indication in
Chronicles, ‘ that they of Ham, or out of the land of
‘ Egypt, had dwelt there of old.’

But these Philitians from Egypt did not remain
in these parts so long as to be involved in the sub-
sequent destruction of the Canaanite nations by
Joshua ;—for they seem, on the contrary, to have at
an early period betaken themselves further north-
ward, or into the upper parts of Mesopotamia.
Because, ‘here too,’ says Bryant, ‘was a land of
‘ Goshen, and ariver Gozan, the same as the Chabor.
‘ Also the river Seghor, or Sehor, which was the
‘name of the Nile in Egypt. All these circum-
‘stances prove that the sons of Chus forced them-
‘selves very early’ (after their sojourn on the Nile),
‘into the upper provinces of Mesopotamia.’

‘In this country also, were the tribes of Israel
‘ (afterwards) placed ; at least a great part of those
‘who were carried away captive by Shalmanasser ;


528 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV, II.


‘ who took Samaria, and carried Israel away into
‘ Assyria, and placed them in Halah and Habor
‘ by the river Gozan, and in the citres of the Medes
‘(2 Kings xvii. 6). Halah and Habor, called like-
‘wise Chala and Chabor, were, as I have in part
‘ shown, in the upper region of Mesopotamia between
‘the Tigris and Euphrates ; both upon the Gozan,
‘ called likewise the Chabor ; the cities of the Medes
‘were beyond. There was something very signal
‘ in the catastrophe of those tribes, that were carried
‘into the country, which I have been describing.
‘It is well known how the Israelites, after their
‘servitude in Egypt, were conducted to the land of
‘promise, which they enjoyed above seven hundred
‘years. Upon their repeated rebellion and idolatry,
‘ ten of the tribes were carried into a second bondage ;
‘and, what is remarkable, many of them went into
‘ another land of Goshen; but not like that of old,
‘to another Avaris ; and in succession to the same

‘people, to whom their fathers esti succeeded in
‘ Egypt, even Cuseans.’


(Egyptians punished in the Great Pyramid ?)


In this reiterated manner do the destinies and
successive local habitations of the Israelites and the
Philitian shepherds of the Great Pyramid, appear
to be interwoven; and it is possible we have not
come to the last of their accompaniments and mutual
illustrations even yet. But these things belong to
another chapter ; and meanwhile, if we have been


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 529


enabled with regard to the very distant past alone, to
indicate something of the course actually taken by
Divine inspiration, for propounding amongst men
and. carrying out the laborious plans of the Great
Pyramid,—our readers may probably be struck with,
on one side, the scriptural appropriateness of the
manner in which the idolatrous and Cain-like
Egyptians were made, without being at all aware of
it, to carry out other ideas than their own.

This undoubtedly remarkable people, had in its
first origin as a nation, fled from before a judgment in
the land of Shinar ; but arrived on the banks of the
Nile, unsubdued, unrepentant, and still determined
‘not to be scattered abroad.’ They repeated, there-
fore, their coercive political system ; and for a time
they throve and waxed exceeding mighty, above all
the then nations of the earth ; they wrote, they built,
they ploughed, they sculptured, they painted, they
warred, and they tyrannized ; but at the moment
they held everything vile before them, and asserted
that they were indebted for their greatness to them-
selves alone, and their own purity,—then were they
made to erect the most toilsome monument which
the whole world has ever seen; not for their own.
glory as they thought, but really, and in the latter
end, for the honour of the God whom they had de-
spised, and even dethroned, in favour of bulls and
goats.

‘Egypt, in fact,’ says Chevalier Bunsen, and here
with the utmost truth, ‘ Egypt appears as the instru-

VOL. III. 21


530 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIL.


‘ ment of Providence for furthering its eternal pur-
‘pose, but only as forming the background and
‘ contrast to that free, spiritual, and moral element
‘which was to arise out of Israel.’ *

_ Even as perfect part of such a scheme, does the
manner of erection of the Great Pyramid now
appear ; for it tells in more than speaking terms of
the marvellous talents in constructive art, and for
administration, which the Lord had bestowed. on
Egyptians through their progenitors, and intended
them to use them well. But they forgot wherefore
these gifts were received, and in place of devoting
them to the service of the God of all nature, they
employed them to strengthen themselves against
Him.

The spirit, then, of the Egyptians at the building
of the Great Pyramid, was the same which marked
them, both at the oppression of the children of Israel
afterwards ; and, in conjunction with other peoples,
at the building of the tower of Babel before. In so
far as the Eeyptians could accomplish it in their
new work on the banks of the Nile, and as they
flattered themselves, too, for ages. that they had
accomplished it even to the full,—the Great Pyramid
was a resurgence in a new land; and with a com-
munity speaking a new language,.of their thwarted
ideas in another place ;? but through the humble


1 Bunsen’s Hyypt’s Place in Universal History, vol. iv. p. 104.

2 ¢And they said, Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower whose
‘top unto heaven ; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered
‘ abroad upon the face of the whole earth. —Genesis xi. 4.


2 > eae


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 531


agency of the shepherd Philition, their labours were
made really to tell against themselves; and have
eventually caused the Great Pyramid to become in
these latter days a most distinguished protest against
the ancient tower, and all the principles of false
religion connected therewith or descended there-
from.

On the other hand, if the inspiration afforded on
this remarkable occasion, was vouchsafed not to a
descendant of Shem, but to a Cusean, ze. if
Philition was a son of Cush,’ some other momentous
openings thence arise.


(Early Shemites not chosen? )

From Abraham downwards, for instance, as every
one knows, the race of Shem in his line was
peculiarly favoured ; in so far fulfilling not, only the
promises of the Almighty made to Abraham, but
those also through Noah to Shem himself. But
from Shem to Abraham is a long and dreary genea-
logical journey ; during the latter part of which, at
the least, even the lineal ancestors of Abraham had
become so engrained in idolatry, and so given to the
worship of other gods than the true God,—that
Abraham had. to be called out from amongst them,
in order to live a pure life and receive the blessing.

Hence, while there is reasonable doubt, whether in
the year 2170 3.c. a descendant of Shem was then


1 In subsequent times the name of Cush was applied to Ethiopia ;
but we here employ it in accordance with Genesis chap. x. verses
8-12.


532 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV, III.


worthy, on the score of faith and religion, to be
charged with any message of the Almighty,—-there is
on another point almost a certainty, that no Shemite
was so fit for the peculiar Pyramid work, as a
Cushite. For the Shemites were originally dwellers
in tents, and had at that early period no more
notion of masonic art or practical science, than any
Bedouin Arabs of the present day,—who are still
living under both the tent-poles and tent-cloths of
Kedar; and, if cultivating and developing any -
scientific faculties at all, it is rather those connected
with logic, metaphysics, moral philosophy, and
other mental affections, —than any of those branches
of natural philosophy which might enable men to
execute mathematical forms on a large scale, in a
solid material, with exceeding accuracy, and with a
power for enduring through all human time.

True it is, no doubt, that the Almighty has it in ©
His power to inspire any man, and for any work
whatever, though never so strange to his previous
constitution and knowledge. But, judging from
Scripture, that is not the manner in which it has
generally pleased the Lord to exert His inspiration
gift ; for in the instances recorded there, that man
was almost invariably taken for either anointing
or gifts who was nearer than his fellows to the
quality required ; and who could perhaps on that
very account, be afterwards permitted so much free
agency even under inspiration, that the prophetic
messages are generally found tinged more or less


CHAP. VII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 533


with the previous life-experiences of each particular
prophet.

The defect, then, of the Shemites, in not having
early improved their faculties for practical science,
may have lost them an opportunity indeed, in the
history of the world ; and in that case, gave it to the
Cuseans. Of these we have not hitherto been hear-
ing much ; but if it be true that their chief work
remains behind them, and speaks in a language of
which modern science is the simple and yet power-
ful key, more will be known concerning them as the
centuries roll past.


(A new objection.)


But now, that so much connected with Divine
inspiration has been approximately made out,—an
objection to the whole subject of this chapter
may probably arise in some minds ; and, if Cuseans
were really employed, such objection will be greatly
strengthened, and probably stated thus :—

‘In the early ages of the world there were, and
‘even must have been, many inspirations from God
‘to man; but being connected merely with giving
‘to him in his infancy the beginnings of useful arts,
‘ they were not deemed appropriate to be mentioned
‘in the Bible, which records alone things necessary
‘to salvation. Now,’ continue these objectors, ‘ even
‘if the architect of the Great Pyramid was inspired,
‘still the subject of the Great Pyramid being con-
‘nected with precisely such useful arts, its inspira-


534 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘tion cannot be looked on as a religious inspiration,
‘has no place in the Bible, and need claim no regard
‘from any Christian in the present day.’

In reply to this, let us see what the Bible, which
says so little about the builders of the Great Pyra-
mid, may say about the Great Pyramid itself; for
from the Bible alone can a safe opinion be formed. |


Pyramid itself, whether Scripturally acknowledged?


This branch of the religious bearings of the sub-
ject we owe almost entirely to John Taylor. He it
was who first perceived an allusion to the Great
Pyramid in the Book of Job—a work arranged in
its present shape by Moses,—but descriptive of the
life-events of one who had flourished seven hundred
years earlier, or at the very time nearly of the
building of Great Pyramid. |

In the chronology of the margin of some: Bibles,
the date B.c. 1520 is inserted against the Book of
Job, but more to represent the time of Moses writ-
ing, than the age of Job’s living: while Townsend,
in his Chronological Index to the Holy Scriptures,
gives the date of Job himself as Bc. 2130, xe.,
within forty years of the Great Pyramid’s founda-
tion ; and appends the following note :—

‘ The life of Job is placed before the life of Abra-
‘ham, on the authority of Dr. Hales. Job himself,
‘or one of his contemporaries, is generally supposed
‘to have been the author of this book, which Moses
‘ obtained when in .Midian, and, with some altera-


CHAP. VIiL.] | ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 535


‘tions, addressed to the Israelites. But my chief
‘reason for assigning to the life of Job its present
‘ date, is derived from a consideration of the manner
‘in which God has condescended to deal with
‘ mankind. ,

‘ Idolatry, as we read in the preceding part of
‘this period, had occasioned the dispersion from
‘Babel. It was gradually encroaching still further
‘on every family which had not yet lost the know-
‘ledge of the true God. Whoever has studied the
‘conduct of Providence, will have observed that
“God has never left himself without witnesses in
‘the world to the truth of his religion. To the
‘latter times of patriarchism, Abraham and _ his
‘descendants; to the ages of the Levitical law,
‘ Moses, David, and the Prophets ; and to the first
‘ages of Christianity, the Apostles and the Martyrs,
“were severally witnesses of the truth of God. But
‘we have no account whatever, unless Job be the
‘man, that any faithful confession of the one true
‘ God arose between the dispersion from Babel and
“the call of Abraham. If it be said, that the family
‘of Shem was the visible Church of that age, it
‘may be answered, that it is doubtful whether even
“this family were not idolatrous, for Joshua tells
‘ the Israelites (Joshua xxiv. 2) that the ancestors
‘of Abraham were worshippers of images.’

The times of Job then were evidently remarkable
ones in the history of God’s government of the earth,
even as Job himself was especially ‘the servant of


536 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. lll.


‘God ; and we may also imagine those times (with-
out any guiding reference derived from their date,
as above, and that of the Great Pyramid), to have
been contained within the period of smaller Pyramid
building for sepulchral purposes,—from the improved
translation in Job iii. 13 and 14, as given now for
several years past by Mr. Gliddon and other leading
EKgyptologists ; wherein we read after Job’s expressed
wish to have died, his further exclamation :—

‘ For now should I have lain still and been quiet,
‘] should have slept : then had I been at rest

‘ With kings and counsellors of the earth, which
‘ built Pyramids (desolate places) for themselves.’

The manner of mention here contrasts rather
noticeably with another, recently pointed out by Dr.
Horatius Bonar, in Jeremiah’s Lamentations iii. 6.
This Prophet wrote his inspired Lamentations in
Egypt, so that it is perfectly possible that he may
have seen the Pyramids, and included the Great one
amongst those ‘signs and wonders set in the land
‘of Keypt, by the Lord of Hosts, great in counsel
‘and mighty in work :’ and which signs and wonders
being made to last there, even up to his, Jeremiah’s,
day,’ may be inferred to have been of a material
order. But that day was long subsequent to the
time of Job; probably in 588 B.c., when Pyramid
building had long ceased throughout all Egypt ;
and such specimens as still existed, were separated
at their foundation by more than twenty dynasties


1 Jeremiah xxxii. 18-20.


CHAP. VIII] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 587


of kings from that late period of the new empire
in Egypt. Wherefore the mention of them by the
Prophet of the Lamentations appears peculiarly
appropriate in the words,—

‘ He hath set me in dark places (or Pyramids), as
‘ they that be dead of old.’

While some of Job’s descendants are moreover
often looked for among the Sabeans of Arabia, Mr.
Palgrave mentions, in his volumes of recent and
very instructive travel there, that old Arab writers
relate of the Sabeans, ‘that they had a special
‘veneration for the two great Pyramids of Egypt,
‘believed by them to be sepulchres of Seth and
‘Idrees; that their stated prayers recurred seven
‘times a day (although some others say five,—a
‘ divergence which may admit of easy explanation),
‘and that during their devotions they turned their
‘ faces to the north, —the direction of the entrance
passages of those Pyramids, and 90° distant from
the ancient western opening of tombs, or the
general eastern direction of prayers.’

But with the further and more authoritative
Biblical notice of the Great Pyramid, in the para-
graph quoted from the marginally corrected transla-
tion by John Taylor,—describing indeed ostensibly
the Divine creation of the earth, though under the

1 Idrees, or Edris being, moreover, said to be a name among the
Arabians for Enoch ; traditionally, merely, the third with Adam and
Seth in the invention of astronomy, and particularly connected with


the polar star. (See Mazzaroth, or the Constellations, pp. '7 and 34, of
Part 11. ; see also Howard Vyse’s vol. ii. pp. 842, 349, 358, and 360.)


538 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. IIL.


figure, as he contends, of the mechanical foundation
of the Great Pyramid,—there the description con-
tains nothing sepulchral in its allusions; bearing
indeed rather on metrology, and of a very signal
and unusual kind, as thus :— |
‘Where wast thou [the Lord answers Job out of the whirl-
‘ wind], where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
‘earth? declare, if thou knowest (hast) understanding.
‘Who hath Iaid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or
‘ who hath stretched the line upon it ?
_ ‘Whereupon are the sockets thereof made to sink (the founda-
‘ tions thereof fastened)? or who laid the corner-stone thereof,


‘When the morning-stars sang ae and all the sons of
¢ God shouted for joy ?’?


This description, if applied to the earth, that
well-known ball of dense and heavy matter, revolv-
ing in its endless course through thin ether or prac-
tical vacuity,—is not only not exactly, but not in
any degree, agreeable to the teaching of modern
science ; nor indeed to another account of the earth
as a whole, and in its position in space, in J ob
xxvi. 7, where of God the Creator it is said :—

_ ‘He stretcheth out the north over the empty
“ place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.’

Hence the presumption is with John Taylor, that
in chapter xxxvill. of the Book of Job, we have the
creation of the earth under a type of something
else, more human, more understandable, and more
practical ; this type might be, indeed, in the earlier
part of the description, the building of an ordinary


1 Job xxxvili, 4-7.


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 539


house,—but the successive features elicited, the lay-
ing the measures thereof; the stretching a line upon
it, as on its sloping sides, not vertical walls; and
above everything, the one and final corner-stone, as
contradistinguished from the lower corner, or founda-
tion, stones at the commencement of the building,
—these seem to single out a metrological Pyramid,
of all other real or hypothetical buildings whatever.

‘The sockets thereof being made to sink,’ is evi-
dently a most peculiar phrase ; and would probably
never have been fully appreciated, as it certainly
was not correctly interpreted in the authorized
Bible,—but for the perfectly independent discovery
by Bonaparte’s savants in 1799, to the effect that
the Great Pyramid had at least two such sockets,
ue. at its north-eastern and north-western base
corners. Sockets these were, neatly cut out, or
‘ made to sink,’ with the chisel in the levelled sur-
face of the living rock ; and the foundational corner-
stones of the casing, at these angles, were placed
therein. An inimitable discovery was this, and
never to be forgotten, though some great men do
forget it; for at once those two sockets (so far at
least as concerned the northern side. of the Great
Pyramid), enabled the measures thereof, as originally
laid out in primeval times, to be recently recovered ;
and gave thereby the holding turn both to the
theory of the Great Pyramid as being a metrological
monument, and to the practice of the same, in
showing it to be a good reference for base-line


540 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [D1V. III.


measures still ; besides illustrating this terse Scrip-
ture phrase of ‘the sockets thereof being made to
‘ sink,’

Hence, as we have ventured to express in our
Dedication, the features thus discovered at the Great
Pyramid,—by what one of Napoleon Bonaparte’s
politically opposed historians could only call, years
after, ‘a singular accompaniment to a military ex-
‘ pedition,’ viz., a corps of first-class savants,—these
features, we say, are really ‘not unalluded to in
‘Holy Writ.’

By the Scriptures thus assisted and made plain to
our comprehension, we ourselves concluded the fur-
ther existence of other two socket-holes, making up
four equidistant sockets for the four lower corner-
stones of the base of the Great Pyramid ; and such
sockets were found last year by the first person who
excavated intelligently for them, as already de-
scribed in vol. i. chap. xvii.

So much then for the four lower corner-stones at
the commencement, and completing the founda-
tions, of the structure ; and after them comes the
final test of a methodically constructed stone Pyra-
mid being alluded to, in another still, and therefore
a fifth, corner-stone being mentioned. Though men-
tioned as being placed, not anywhere near the
bottom or beginning of the Pyramid, but as forming
its topmost corner or summit; so that when that
top corner-stone, emphatically the corner-stone, is
laid,—the building is thereby finished, its symmetry


CHAP. VIII] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. 541


perfected, and in commemoration thereof, ‘the morn-
‘ing-stars sang together, and all the sons of God
‘shouted for joy.’ Or, as in Zechariah iv. 7, where
it is said that the ‘ bringing out the head-stone of
‘the great mountain,’ was greeted with shoutings,
‘ Grace, grace, unto it.’ |

And now let us ask our readers, or our readers
their hearers, how a series of men living in tents, as
the Shemites of the period seem certainly to have
done, were of their own experiences to acquire so
much technical knowledge of the mode of building
a stone Pyramid; and to grow in such righteous
enthusiasm therein, as to look on its final completion
with rejoicing ideas of pure and high religion, unless
they were assisted by inspiration? And is it likely
that acknowledged prophets of religious inspiration,
would have employed again and again the features
of a Pyramid head-stone (which they had never
seen) as a symbol of the Messiah himself,—unless
such a use of the figure should have been approved
of by the Author of all inspiration ?

And that such a use was made of the chief or top-
most corner-stone of a stone-built Pyramid, by both
the Psalmist of Israel, and the Apostles of the New
Testament,—the late excellent John Taylor showed ;
for their words, said he, apply to nothing else.

Thus David,-Psalm exviii. 22 and 23, ‘The stone
‘ which the builders refused, is become the head-stone


1 «The Great Pyramid, the nearest approach to a mountain that
‘ the art of man has produced.’— Dean Stanley’s Syria and Palestine.


542 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID, [DIV. III.


‘of the corner; this is the Lord’s doing, and it is
‘ marvellous in our eyes.’ | |

And more particularly St. Paul, in Ephesians ii,
20, distinguishing between the lower corner-stones,
which are the foundation,—and the upper corner-
stone, which is the summit, head, and finish, and
therefore the last; the noblest, and most essential
part of the whole structure of a Pyramid,—but of a
Pyramid alone, of all buildings under the sun,
writes thus—

‘ Ye are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the
‘household of God; and are built upon the fownda-
‘ tion of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ him-
‘self being the chzef corner-stone, in whom all the
‘building, fitly framed together, groweth unto an
‘holy temple in the Lord.’ |

The same stone, before its visible elevation to the
chief or topmost corner of the Pyramid, has likewise
been recognised as ‘the stone of stumbling and rock
‘of offence’! to all disbelievers ; physically, on
account of its inconvenient, many-cornered figure,
always lying on the ground, with one acute angle
stuck up in the air,—untoward among the other
regular-shaped, flattish building-blocks,—forming
therefore the very image, according to John Tay-
lor, of the dangerous stone, ‘on which, whosoever
‘ghall fall, shall be broken, but on whomsoever it
‘ shall fall’ (especially if it be from the top of the
Great Pyramid), ‘it will grind him to powder.’”

1 1 Peter ii, 8. 2 Matthew xxi. 44.


CHAP. VIII.] ON RELIGIOUS GROUNDS. © 543


An early medizeval traveller, M. Belon, reports
having been shown, in the valley of Jehoshaphat,
near Jerusalem, the stone to which our Lord alluded:
in the preceding sentence, and states that it was
‘triangular. The mere general circumstance of a.
relic being shown in any Palestinian locality is
usually thought now to be more against, than for,
the probability of its genuineness. But in this case,
the alleged triangular shape, which is a very usual
popular method of describing a Pyramidal figure, is
a curious coincidence at the least, with what John
Taylor had concluded from his theory of a Pyramid
topmost corner-stone ; and may have some connexion
with mementoes of Egyptian experiences left behind
them by Philition and the other Cusean shepherds,
at the various spots which they inhabited for a time
in South Judeea, and particularly in Hebron, before
proceeding farther north. |

Should the Cave of Machpelah, among ‘its long-
hoarded contents, ever reveal to Europeans such a
pyramidal stone in good preservation,—there can be
no doubt that scientific examination would be able
to distinguish, with extreme accuracy and conse-
quent certainty, whether it could have once formed
the head-stone of the Great Pyramid or not. From
the earliest times of history, that head-stone has
been removed; and one. is greatly inclined to
imagine that its removal may not have been alto-
gether accidental, but that it will be rediscovered
some day, a silent: yet unimpeachable witness of


544 ORIGINATION OF THE GREAT PYRAMID. [DIV. III.


events which took place four thousand years ago ;
and may have still to subserve a part in the history
of the world.

Meanwhile, however, as this is only a fond hope ;
and as we trust that proof has now been abundantly
adduced, illustrative of the inspired authors of the
Bible both having been familiar, in the spirit, with
characteristic features of the foundation, construc-
tion, and finishing of the Great Pyramid; and having
looked on it with the utmost allowable religious
respect,—making use of its similes for the noblest
religious purposes known to Christianity, only ;—the
argument of this last branch of our present subject,
or that the Pyramid building in itself, and quite
independent of any particular agency employed in
its building, is owned and acknowledged in the
Scriptures, both of the old and new covenants,—
may be considered, like every other section in the
chapter, to have been settled in the affirmative.
Wherefore the next step should be, to take up the
whole elements of the case, and endeavour to ascer-
tain to what end, all these ancient facts and modern
discoveries, culminating just at this time, may pro-
bably be leading. Yet for one moment more, and
in the course of a very short chapter, we must re-
quest our kind reader’s attention to the bearing on
the case of one more item of lay learning, partly
astronomical, but unfortunately not altogether so.


CHAPTER IX.
ON SOME POINTS IN PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY.


Who invented the oldest Constellations ?


In preparing the star-maps of Plates vit. VIII,
and Ix., certain figures of the constellations were
introduced, to assist the reader in identifying the
stars concerned in the problem then laid before
him. Such being the sole purpose, the figures were
those ordinarily received in the present day; ex-
cepting only, that Canes Venatici, Lynx, Camelo-
pardahs, and a few lesser asterisms, had been
omitted, on account of their extremely modern
Kuropean invention.

The other figures, however, which had been
allowed to remain, although generally reputed ‘ the
* ancient constellations,’ are not, for comparison with
Great Pyramid astronomy, much more satisfactory
than the above rejected ones; being to a great ex-
tent not older than the time of the Greeks, and in
their present form, of the Alexandrine Greeks only.
They were, too, even at that date, so evidently per-
verted in scientific ignorance and poetic presumption’
from a, still older system, and one of more scrious as
well as solemn import,—as to give remarkable illus-

VOL. III. 2M


546 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. III.


tration to that maxim of Scaliger, ‘Graeculorum est
‘ mentiri, et falsa veris affingere. Or, as the labo-
rious Bryant feels compelled to write, after extensive
investigations into the antiquities of history and
geography,—

‘Great part of the knowledge that we are pos-
‘sessed of, in relation to ancient times, has been
‘ transmitted to us through the hands of the Greeks ;
‘for which we are to make proper acknowledgment.
‘ But when we consider how much more they might
‘have transmitted, and how foul and turbid the
‘streams are that are derived to us, it takes off
‘much from the obligation.’

And again: ‘Sometimes they (the Grecians in
‘ transmitting primeval history) only translated the
‘names of places; which was something tolerable ;
‘ for there was then a chance of recurring to the
‘ primitive language, and recovering the original ;
‘as the meaning would lead one to the truth. But
‘they were too vain to be consistent even in this;
‘and what one advanced another confounded ; each
‘thinking that he had a right to change things, and
‘new-model them to his taste. Above all things
‘ they strove to introduce their own gods and heroes ;
‘and to attribute everything to their performance,
‘ wheresoever transacted. Their vanity was so great
‘in this respect, and their prejudices so strong, that
‘it led them into a thousand childish errors ; but,
‘when they were not originally mistaken, they wil-
‘fully deviated ; imposing names on places, and


CHAP, IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 547


‘adding legendary stories, which they must know
‘ were foreign to the countries where they introduce
‘them. Hence we are informed that one branch of
‘the Nile was denominated from a sailor of Mene-
‘laws, and another from Peleus of Thessaly; that
‘ Perseus gave name to Persia ; and that the Medes
‘received their name from Medea; and what hap-
‘ pened on the occasion. For they were never guilty:
‘ of amistake, but they framed some story to support
‘it. Or, as a more recent author puts it, a shade
more philosophically,—‘ it was a part of the Greek
‘ character to frame systems on insufficient know-
‘ledge, and to explain false systems by false hypo-
‘ theses.’*

Unfortunately, in the present state of astronomy
and literature, it is much easier to find proofs
demonstrative of the Greek and Greek-Alexandrine
constellations not having been first in the field, than
to show what the more ancient system precisely
was. With exceeding truth and judgment, there-
fore, the author of the article Constellation in the
Penny Cyclopedia writes :—‘ It is sufficient for us’
‘here to say, that it is certain we derive our constel-
‘ lations from the Greeks, and that it is nearly as cer.
‘ tain that they derived them from the East, though
‘it is highly probable that they altered the legends
‘ to suit their own mythology, and in some instances
‘even the figures. Their firmament, if it confined’
‘itself to recording the vast and striking events of

1 Saturn and its System, p. 194. By Richard A. Proctor, B.A.


548 ON SOME POINTS IN {DIV. ITI.


‘their mythic system, as in Argo or Hercules,
‘ might bear an external presumption of originality,
‘which it wants altogether while so prominent a
‘ constellation as the Great Bear represents nothing
‘but the unimportant and irrelevant story of
‘ Callisto.’

Even if we begin with known and scientific times
not very distant from our own, we cannot feel
greatly impressed with either the dignity in spirit,
or worthiness of the objects, of modern constellation-
makers. For thus writes the celebrated Hevelius,
whom all men are now so content to follow, that
they have placed his new constellations side by side
with those which have descended to us of old :—

1st,‘ Because Bootes is regarded as a caller, brawler,
‘and hunter, who pursues the bear in hunting, and
‘raises his hand and arm as if in the act of slipping
‘ his dogs, I could not find a more suitable place for
‘ Canes Venatict. One of them I have called A sterion,
‘because the name is very pleasing to me, and is
‘ well known tothe poets. The other I have called
‘ Chara, because most likely to Bootes, after the
‘manner of huntsmen, a female dog, on account of
‘its greater fleetness of foot, would be more chara,
‘ or favourite.’

2d, ‘ Of certain nine stars I have formed between
‘the Great Bear and the Greater Lion, a less or
‘junior Lion, and the reason was this :—I wished
‘to disturb the arrangement of the astrologers as


1 From the Prodromus Astronomice.


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 549


‘ little as possible ; and seeing that the Bear and the
‘ Lion are usually considered the most violent and
‘ferocious of animals, [ put in between them an
‘ animal of the same order, that the stars of which
‘it is composed might retain the same qualities.’

3d, ‘The Fox and Goose ( Vulpecula et Anser)
‘ constellation was made on this principle, that being
‘composed of stars between the Eagle and Lyre,
‘ both of them over rapacious and voracious animals,
‘it (the Fox and Goose) should pursue the same
‘nature. This fox, then, has stolen a goose, which
‘he carries in his mouth at a run to Cerberus, that
‘three-headed, infernal, and devouring dog, by
‘ which he may have a breakfast and some comfort,
‘before he is killed by Hercules, already raising his
‘club for the purpose. Thus I have been able to
‘locate the Fox and Goose in this position as appro-
‘ priately to the fables of the poets as conformably
‘ to the rules of the astrologers.’

The Lyre, though we all know it to be a perfectly
innocent musical instrument, is here spoken of as a
voracious animal,—because the medizeval astrono-
mers made the Lyre a heraldic blazon on the breast
of a certain ‘falling eagle; but the classical poem
of Aratus, and a very ancient Ms. in the British
Museum, are generally considered to decide for the
claims of the musical instrument, pure and simple ;
while the Cerberus alluded to above has in most
modern maps been replaced by a mauy-headed snake
of small size.


550 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. III.


According, in the next place, to a rather earlier
authority, or Thomas Hood of Trinity College, Cam-
bridge, in A.D. 1590 and author of a discourse on
the celestial globe, the following is an explanation
of the length of tail possessed by the Great Bear :—

‘Scholar—I marvel why (seeing she hath the
‘ forme of a beare) her taile should be so long.

‘ Master.—I imagine that Jupiter, fearing to come
‘too nigh unto her teeth, layde holde on her tayle,
‘and thereby drewe her up into the heaven ; so
‘that shee of herself being very weightie, and the
‘ distance from the earth to the heavens very great,
‘there was much likelihood that her tayle must
‘stretch. Other reason know I none.’!

If again we seek the earliest transmitted Greek
legends of the same constellations,—we are told
there, much of the amours of Jupiter with the frail
Callisto ; of her metamorphosis into a bear by Diana
for her breach of chastity; of Jupiter saving her
from hunters. by transferring her to the skies ; and
of her then component stars not being allowed, in
describing their circumpolar revolutions, to dip
below the horizon,—because the ocean deities re-
fused to let their pure waters be polluted by the
presence of the concubine of Jupiter.’

For the earth was at the time considered among
the Greeks as being an extensive flat, reaching to
the very heavens on the horizon ; while the omphalos


1 Admiral Smyth’s Celestial Cycle, vol. ii. p. 310.
2 Sir G. Cornewall Lewis’s Ancient Astronomy, p. 64.


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 551


or navel-stone, marking the centre of such earth-
flat, was proudly shown in the temple of Delphi;
to prove that Greece was in the centre of the
whole world.’

In fact all prosecution of the subject of the con-
stellations amongst, or from, the schoolmen of the
present day, up to and including the classic authors
of Alexandria, Rome, and Greece,—ends only in
shame of soul, vexation of spirit, and prejudice,
probably, that even the most ancient, or pre-Gre-
cian, constellations never had any noble meaning
or scientific use. And as the author of Mazearoth’
says, on viewing the proceedings of one very
learned man in this country,—‘ Therefore it is
‘ evident that this great astronomer had not, in the
‘course of his studies, met with any account of
‘ their (the older constellations’) possible significa-
‘tion which appeared to him worthy of notice.’

Hence a different track altogether requires to be
taken, if we would arrive at an acquaintance with
the primeval wisdom of the earth touching the
heavenly constellations. And while the Great Pyra-
mid has now recently proved that, quite agreeably
with much of ancient tradition, such knowledge
did once exist,—the author of Mazzaroth has for
some years past, indicated that the most probable
road to it would be found in the Hebrew language.


1 Sir George Cornewall Lewis’s Ancient Astronomy, p. 4.
2 Mazzaroth or the Constellations. By Miss F. Rolleston. London,
1862.


552 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. III.


‘For it is in the Hebrew antiquity alone,—says
that most learned linguistic writer, after deep re-
searches into the most ancient forms of Hebrew,
Arabic, and other Eastern languages,—‘ in the
‘ Hebrew antiquity only, that we find any vestige
‘ of a received, connected, and respectable meaning
“being attached to the names of constellations.’
And as an illustration that such an improvement
does take place there, besides there being in that
language a higher antiquity to rest upon, than
amongst any of the classics,—the same author pro-
ceeds to describe the signs of the zodiac as borne on
the standards of the tribes of Israel,—and with
meanings partly retrospective and partly prophetic
attached to them,—in their, the Israelites’, march
under Moses through the wilderness ; besides claim-
ing the same signs as being also alluded to in the
blessing of Jacob, as early as 1700 B.c., or fully one
thousand years before the Greeks were known as a
people.

If too, we deviate at all from this well-marked
Hebrew road, and try another very different lan-
guage, though equally pre-Grecian, such as the
Eegyptian,—we lose sight of the early constellations
immediately. For even that eminent Philo-Mizraite,
Baron Bunsen, has been constrained to record, at
p. 353 of his fourth volume of Hgypt’s Place in
Universal History, that the signs of the zodiac were
‘wholly unknown to the Egyptians till the reign
‘of Trajan.” And although M. Arago and a few


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 553


other academicians used to believe in the extreme
ancientness of the zodiacs at Denderah, Esneh, and
elsewhere on the Nile-—the researches of all modern
hierologists have united in fixing them to the later
part of the Roman period only.

A claim, however, is put in by the learned M.
Ideler, for the zodiacal figures, and perhaps some
extra-zodiacal ones also, having been known to the
‘ Chaldees, at a very early period ;’ and we may
fortunately pursue this important, though rather too
indefinite, statement, a little further, by referring to
Mr. Proctor’s admirable book on Saturn and tts
System, published in 1865. For that most original
author, dealing with ancient as well as modern
astronomy, feels compelled to look through the
Chaldees of subsequent history,—when their astro-
nomy was degraded to astrology, and they them-
selves were enslaved to do the will of Assyrian
despots on the banks of the lower Euphrates,—and
to trace the rise of their old characteristic science,
as well as their own best days, to earlier times, when
their Cusean forefathers enjoyed freedom and self-
government, in a land situated somewhere-about the
fortieth degree parallel of north latitude.

This result, again alluded to in his ‘star-maps,’
Mr. Proctor deduces with much skill from calcula-
tions, which he bases on features taught subse-
quently in both the Greek and Hindoo astronomies ;
but features evidently not belonging to the dates of
those systems, or even to those countries at any


554 ON SOME POINTS IN _ (DLV. IL


time. Those countries were in fact only making
use, and rather ignorant use, of the discoveries
of an earlier age, another part of the world, and a
different race of men,—-or the Chaldeans ; at that
period of Chaldee history too, when they ‘ resided
‘in Armenia, between the rivers Cyrus and Araxes,
‘not very far from Mount Ararat; and at a date
‘ somewhere between 2200 and 1800 B.c.’

Now these dates include the probable time of the
Cusean and Chaldzean shepherd Philition, of Great
Pyramid story, immigrating, perhaps returning,
through Palestine to that same Armenian and
Median region above indicated (chap. viil p. 527),
after his remarkable sojourn in the land of Siriad,
or Egypt. And after his eventful occupation there,
in superintending the construction of both an astro-
nomically placed, and a generally scientific, build-
ing ; in which, too, the chief metrological standards
commemorated, were the same as those possessed in
after days by the Hebrews,—as well when they went
down into Egypt under Jacob (see Sir Isaac New-
ton on Cubits), as when they came up therefrom
under Moses.

Hence, even from the metrology alone, there ap-
pears a something of possession in common between
the early Chaldzean knowledge on one side, and the
Hebrew on the other,—as to certain useful and
accurate practical deductions from both astronomical
and geographical science of a very high order.

But much more remarkably still does this con-


CHAP. IX. |] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 555


nexion come out in the astronomical part of the
memorializations. For there, the Great Pyramid
does, by its peculiar combination of a polar star—
taken on the meridian below the pole——with an
opposite zodiacal constellation above the pole, very
remarkably single out for world-wide notice and
time-long attention, the several asterisms of Scorpio,
Aquarius, Pisces, and the Pleiades. Not only so too,
but it assigns them to exact and precise dates ;
which, when combined with the Biblical history for
the same period, vivifies and renders vocal the char-
acteristic expressions of all those figures (p. 493).
Here then, is a wonderful agreement in mind
between, (1.) the building of the Pyramid, (2.) the
invention of the constellations, and (3.) certain
grand primeval phenomena recorded in Scripture.
The agreement too, will appear yet all the more
striking, when we consider that there is no attempt
made to assign any physical effects to the stars in
these or all other constellations, and no endeavour
to explain, in any manner, the production of the
Deluge ; but that the stars were taken as they
were, and as they are still, by the architect of the
Great Pyramid, and simply an observing method
invented, by which they were made to fix certain
dates. Similarly, too, the stars were taken as they
were, by the inventor of the constellations, whoever
he was or whenever he lived ; and out of his mind
(not from the arrangement of the stars themselves, for
there is nothing of the kind traceable there), certain


556 ON SOME POINTS IN {DIV. III.


figures were invented and attached to those stars.
And there those figures have remained ever since,
with a preternatural fixity ; for, with very little
alteration at any time,—either of character, mode
of action, or name,—they have outlived all the suc-
cessive great monarchies of the earth.

Hence the date of invention, of at least the above
specified constellations, cannot be less than that of
the building of the Great Pyramid, or 2170 B.c., and
may not improbably be more. Whether the learned
author of Mazzaroth is justified, from the quarter of
language and old tradition, in taking them up,
through the survivors of the Deluge, to a very much
higher epoch still, we are not prepared at present to
give any opinion. —

But having already laid before our readers both
medizeval and Grecian ideas of certain well-known
asterisms, it may be only right to exhibit also a
specimen of the kind of results imagined to have
been arrived at by the writer just mentioned,—
when studying the same celestial phenomena from
a mainly Hebrew point of view. We conclude this
section, therefore, with Miss Rolleston’s last
page :— |

‘In the time of Seth and Enoch (the supposed
‘originators of the ancient constellations under
‘ Divine inspiration, and for prophetic purposes of
‘ religious comfort to all mankind after the fall), the
‘pole was among the stars of Draco, the emblem of
‘the enemy ; the constellation of the Lesser-sheep-


CHAP, IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 557,


‘fold? had no relation to it. But by degrees the
‘ pole drew nearer to the brightest star in that con-
‘ stellation ; the sheep represented by three of its
‘other stars, as quitting their earthly fold (the
‘ believing Church) seemed going forth to the cyno-
‘sure, faintly typifyng Him who was and is the
‘ object of their faith. In the brilliant intensifica-
‘tion of this emblem of the fold and sheep going
‘forth, the Greater fold (now miscalled the Great
‘ Bear), it is strikingly represented that their course
‘is tothe Great Shepherd and Guardian of the flocks:
‘ typified in Arcturus, He who cometh and returneth.
‘The three stars, daughters of the flock, seem fol-


1 Notes from Mazzaroth, pp. 29 and 30, on the Great and Lesser
Sheep-folds, miscalled Bears :—

‘It has been remarked by Oriental scholars, that the Arab astronomy
‘abounds with allusions to cattle, but without observing that the:
‘camel, the peculiar possession of the desert tribes, does not exist
‘among the emblems, Only once, if at all, does even the name occur
‘among the more obscure names of minor stars, as it is said to do in
‘Cancer. Were proof needed that astronomy did not originate in
‘ Arabia, this circumstance would afford it. The cattle with which the
‘nomenclature of the stars abound, are the lamb and the kid of sacri-
‘ fice, the flock of the shepherd, the sacrificial ram and bull of the
‘ zodiac, where the western nations still behold them; but besides
‘ these are the magnificent emblems of the greater and lesser sheep-folds,
‘with their sheep, long obscured by fable and misconstruction of the
‘names by which they were originally distinguished—names perverted
‘ by the Greeks and Romans, but still to be traced in the records of
‘ Oriental astronomy. Most people know the remarkable constellation
‘called by some the Great Bear, by others the Plough, or Charles’s
‘Wain. In reference to the starry host, the Book of Job mentions
‘ Ash :—‘‘ Canst thou guide Ash and her offspring?” where the Eng-
‘lish has ‘* Arcturus and his sons,” according to the confessedly imper-
‘ fect Greek translation of this most ancient and difficult book. It is
‘not, however, far wide of the real meaning in this place, as Arcturus,
‘though not in the same constellation, appears to lead or govern the
‘ three stars, where we still find the name Benet-naish, the daughters


558 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. III.


‘lowing, seeking Him; but two, representing the
‘boundaries of the fold, point above to the star
‘typifying Him in the earlier dispensation, the
‘ Lesser, and as it were further removed fold. There
‘ He, the Great Shepherd of the sheep, is figured
‘above, gone before; and below in Arcturus, as
‘ about to return in greater glory. The foot of the
‘ other figure, the suffering Mighty One, is on the
‘ head of the Dragon below.

‘These emblems made part of the ancient astro-
‘nomy, but the guiding star was not the Pole-star
‘then, nor will it always be. Still, while to us it
“seems to be so, it is well to connect it with Him to


‘of Ash, the assembled. The Arabs still call this constellation Al-
‘Naish, or Annaish, the ordered or assembled together as sheep in a
‘fold. The ancient Jewish commentators on Job, say that Ash is the
‘ seven stars in the Great Bear. Inthe three stars, miscalled the Tail,
‘where we find the name Benet-naish, there is also Mizar, a guarded
‘or enclosed place. Another name is Alioth, the ewe or she-goat, near
‘ which is the star celebrated in modern astronomy, Al Cor, the lamb.

‘ Among other names in this constellation, El Acola also is a fold :
‘Phacad is a watched or guarded place; Dubhé, in Hebrew, a she-
‘ bear, is still written on our globes ; but in Arabic, Dubah is cattle,’
‘and in Hebrew Daber is a fold, either of which might easily be mis-
‘taken for Dubhé by the Greeks, and understood as a bear.

‘In the name of the nymph Calisto, by Greek fable said to be
‘changed into the constellation, we find the Semitic root, which we
‘meet again in the west as Caula or sheep-fold. With the idea of
‘a sheep-fold in the mind, it needs but to look at these seven re-
‘markable stars to perceive how well is imaged there the fold, and
“the sheep proceeding from the corner of it, as if following the bright
‘ star Arcturus, always said to be the guardian of these stars, whatever
‘they might be called. Arcturus means, He cometh the guardian
‘or keeper.

‘ As in Ursa Major, so in Ursa Minor, the Semitic names show
‘that here also were set forth the fold and the flock, in Scripture
‘metaphor the Church ; and its chief star Al Gedi, the kid or lamb
‘ of sacrifice ; called also Arcas, the son of the Supreme Deity.’


CHAP. 1X.]} PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 559


‘ whom the hearts of His people turn as the needle
‘ to the Pole.

‘These leading or guiding stars, Arcturus in
* Bootes, and Kochab or Cynosura in the Lesser
‘ sheep-fold, have both symbolized the Great Shep-
‘ herd of the sheep,—Him whom they follow in life,
‘ and trust in, to attain to His side in departing to
‘be with Him, which is far better,’


Proposed Reforms among the Constellations.


Modern astronomers have little true love for the
constellations, as usually accepted and fixed by
modern public opinion ; for they are of no acknow-
ledged use to them when actually observing, and
have even become rather ridiculous in their eyes.
There was a well organized and rather sweeping at-
tempt a few years ago, headed by the first astrono-
mer of the age, to reform those strange figures—at
least for the southern hemisphere,—altogether. The
outcry at the Astronomical Society was very loud ;
‘ for, had said their intellectual leader, Sir John
Herschel, in his Outlines of Astronomy, ‘ the con-
‘stellations seem to have been almost purposely
‘named and delineated to cause as much confusion
‘and inconvenience as possible. Innumerable snakes
‘twine through long and contorted areas of the
‘ heavens, where no memory can follow them ; bears,
‘lions, and fishes, large and small, northern and
‘ southern, confuse all nomenclature,’ etc. etc.

These were among the points, the reform of which


560 ON SOME POINTS IN - [DIV. III.


was to be attended to in future ; and the improved
arrangement was therefore to have consisted, in
dividing and subdividing the surface of the heavens
by lines, defined for the most part by circles of
right-ascension and declination ; names being given
to such areas or sectional spaces, and also to the
principal stars therein, culled from the neutral liter-
ary ground of classical antiquity and mythology ;
on some well-considered general system too, so that
the name of a star, or its section, should always give
some idea of its place in the sky.

Had this attempt been successful,—it would have
been a triumph to the furtive Greeks and their
heathen gods and goddesses, who would have been
thereby re-established with new force on the minds
of all educated men. And it would have been creat-
ing greater dithiculties than ever in the way of re-
covering the truly ancient constellations, or what
came down to the Greeks from the purer light of
primeval times; and which they, before passing on
for the use of posterity, sophisticated, metamor-
phosed, and mythologized, for their own and their
false gods’ glory. We are rather glad, therefore,
that modern astronomy was not allowed to assist at
so untoward an improvement; though we must
acknowledge that the arguments on which the at-
tempted reform finally foundered, were not the right
ones ; and are very little satisfying still, to the soul
of the astronomer pursuing his science for itself
alone. It was said, for instance, ‘no modern im-


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 561


‘ prover must presume to disturb an ancient dis-
‘coverer, therefore the modern astronomer must
‘not remove the long-established Greek names of
‘ both stars and constellations.’ But as we have just
seen, the Greeks were not the original discoverers,
earliest observers, or first namers of the stars and
groups of stars; and for us to be keeping up ther
nomenclature, is only confirming the success of
their unjust appropriation of the works of their
predecessors ; and approving their anticipatory
fracture also of our well-considered rules and
principles of just procedure.

Again it was said, and said triumphantly, in
opposition to the proposed reformation, ‘ that the
‘ existing system of constellations maintains the cor-
‘respondence between the old astronomy and the
‘new ; while, moreover, the ancients having looked
‘to the rising and setting of certain constellations,
‘for their times of ploughing, sowing, sailing, and
‘ ailing, a general knowledge of the scheme is neces-
‘sary for understanding their poets, historians, phy-
‘siclans, and writers de Re Rusticd” But this
apology evidently fails, in the first place, by, as
before, not going far enough back on the stream of
time to reach the real ancients ; for Greek authors
are the earliest ones alluded to in this extract :
and in the second place, by indicating that the
method of observing the constellations then in vogue
amongst the Greeks, was so weak in execution and
erroneous in principle, that no working astronomer

VOL. III. 2N


562 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. II.


of the present day would care to inconvenience him-
self very much in his daily practice, for the sake of
keeping up the glorious memory of such very poor
ancients as those, in the matter of practical astro-
nomy.


With whom rests the right to name, or re-name.


Especially too will this be the feeling among
workers of the present day, when they discover that
the much earlier races of men who really invented
those constellations which the Greeks afterwards
appropriated, had far more accurate ideas and more
successful methods of making astronomical observa-
tions ; for they observed stars, not at their risings
and settings, but at their meridian transits. So
that in times far before those of the Greeks,—the
mere existence of this method at once indicates, that
there were then a more exact astronomy, better
knowledge of physics, and truer understanding of
mechanics actually in practice, than that ingenious
people of Hellas in after times ever possessed a
notion of ; in fact, an astronomy as much superior
to the early Greek, as the primitive religion of man-
kind (whencesoever that might have been derived)*
was purer than the Grecian mythology. We can indeed
hardly paint in words sufficiently powerful the not
decline merely, but the positive catastrophe, which
befell the practice of astronomy when, from the hands


1 See Thoughts on the Doubts of the Day, by the Dowager Lady
Shelley : London, 1864 ; especially pages 16 to 20.


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 563


of those who directed the building of the Great
Pyramid,—in part to commemorate the then
polar star, equatorial star, and equinoctial point
being all on the meridian together (see Plate
VIIL)—it passed on to Pheenicians, Egyptians, and
Greeks, to be by them employed not only on
less well selected stars for chronological purposes ;
but, on risings and settings, in place of meridian
passages !

This method of meridian observation, which so
signally marked the pre-Grecian astronomy of the
Great Pyramid, and generally of the Pleiades year,
—is a main feature likewise of modern astronomy ;
even as we hope the worship of the true God, the
God of the earliest patriarchs of old, is by the grace
of God, the inheritance renewed of the present age.
So that in seeking, on the score of astronomy, to
produce an acquaintance between the earliest and
latest times of man upon earth, we find a remark:
able resemblance between these two chronological
extremes ; for on each occasion, the true religion is
accompanied by right and learned principles in the
orandest of all the sciences. In the last instance
indeed, the admirable meridian observation-method
was arrived at by the slow development of human
learning, gradually working its way through many
thousand years of toil, towards the light; but in
the former, at least in the case of its chief practical
manifestation, or at the Great Pyramid, it was
accompanied by proofs both scientific and religious


564 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. IIT.


of having been given at once, and suddenly, to
chosen men by Divine inspiration.

This similarity in practical religion and observing
methods in astronomy, of either end of man’s career,
or rather of his earlier, with the present age,—
for when the end is to come we know not,—and the
total contrast of both of them to all that has been
prevailing among nations and people in the interval,
—is strangely illustrated in the polar stars of the
sky. We have now for the northern hemisphere,
a good pole-star, a Ursee Minoris, and the accuracy
of modern meridional astronomy is greatly promoted
thereby ; five thousand years ago, too, more or less,
there was another good pole-star, viz., a Draconis,
respectable in brightness, and inimitable for proxi-
mity to the pole ; but in all the intervening period
there has been nothing to compare with either ; as
may be instantly perceived on reference to our star-
map, Plate vit.

We do not certainly pretend to know any sufii-
cient reason why true astronomy should flourish
only when the northern heavens show a good pole-
star,—but it has apparently, somehow or other, been
go as yet ; and though much is still talked in litera-
ture about Greek and Pheenician pole-stars, as used
in navigation, they were from six to twelve degrees
from the pole, and therefore mightily inexact if
looked on as rotation-point references. Neither can
we give the mariners of those nations all credit for
making the best possible use of what nature placed


CHAP. 1X. ] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 565


at their disposal in that age of the world ; for if, as
Chevalier Bunsen states,! the Phoenicians employed
8 Ursee Minoris, under the name of Astarte, Has,
and Hastoreth, queen of the Zidonians, for their
polar star, as early as 2000, or even 2200 B.c.,—
making as much use of it, and regarding it as holy to
them, as the Egyptians did of Sirius to themselves for
their ends and their purposes,—we can only say that
the Phoenicians did not take the best star, seeing that
a Draconis was then at only half the distance from
the pole that @ Ursee Minoris was; and this last
star, never even in subsequent years came within
some six degrees and a half of the rotation point of
the heavens. 7

Chevalier Bunsen indeed contends in favour of
the Phcenician preference, that a Draconis could not
compare against @ Urse Minoris in the matter
of brightness; for according to him, the latter
star was of the first magnitude, ‘the brilliant one
of the first magnitude, Beta of the Little Bear,
he writes (vol. iv. p. 350); and again, ‘this same
‘ brilliant star 8. But we are quite unaware of his
having the smallest authority for asserting that
that star was ever above its present size, or of the
third magnitude only; and as a little further
on, he makes the star belong to the Great Bear,
we fear that this part of his text, whether by
printer’s error or otherwise, is not much to be de-
pended on.


1 Kgypt's Place in Universal History, vol. iv. p. 353.


566 ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. IID.


The Constellations as means for perpetuating
Ideas.


But while we are thus showing the similar stellar
facilities for exact astronomy, which the heavens of
five thousand years ago, and these alone in all time
past, were offering in their day,—to what they are
again affording now ; and the similar ideas which
then prevailed amongst men as to the best method
of making astronomical observations, for either the
absolute fixation of place, or accurate determination
of time,—with what are newly approved of in the
world at present,—we are involuntarily affording
grounds for an argument, and one of no mean
importance, for the continued use of constellation
arrangements of some kind.

The modern astronomer in a meridian observatory,
working on from year to year, finds the right
ascension and declination of a star, spite of the
small alterations by precession in such short lengths
- of time, to be abundantly sufficient, and even very
convenient, both for distinguishing the star as by a
name, and for directing a telescope to its place in the
heavens. But when the most important question for
solution, both by that observer and all astronomers,
comes to be, the connexion of the present astronomy
with that of four thousand years ago,—then, right
ascension and declination will neither serve the pur-
poses of a name, nor the uses of a ready finder ; for
truly we may say, a Draconis we know, and the


CHAP. LX. ] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 567


Pleiades we know,—but who are right ascension
12h. 4m. 268., with declination 86° 18’ 0’, and right
ascension 23h. 58m. 45s., with declination 4°11'55"?
They are certainly not the present places of the
previously mentioned stars, even to the most ap-
proximate naked-eye observation ; for these places
are respectively, right ascension 14h. 0m. 46s,
with declination 65° 0’ 53’, and right ascension
3h. 39m. 31s., with declination 23° 41’ 17"; yet
are the former very diverse numbers the places
after all of the self-same stars about four thousand
years ago |

Although these vast variations of numerical posi-
tions, would be lessened by adopting ecliptic latitude
and longitude in place of right ascension and decli-
nation,—the movements of the plane of the ecliptic,
in periods so enormous as four thousand years,
would prevent such variations disappearing alto-
gether, besides introducing many other incon-
veniences ; but the ‘ Pleiades in the shoulder of the
‘ Bull, remain in that situation age after age,
without any sensible change. Hence, if any one
had wished to preserve the same names of the stars,
and hand down the same ideas unchanged on certain
subjects from primitive man to the most distant
posterity,—he could not have selected amongst all
objects in nature, anything so appropriate and so


permanent as the constellation figures of the stars.


As we have these figures now, puerile and
absurd though many of them, after repeated altera-


568 - ON SOME POINTS IN [DIV. LIL


tion, may have become,—they have lasted some
two thousand five hundred years or more ; and have
been employed by hundreds of thousands of millions
of men. But in proportion as we are enabled, and
the Great Pyramid has now enabled us with several


of the constellations, to rise above those adventitious.


accompaniments which medizeval nations introduced,
—so do we find the original figures bring us at once
into mental companionship with those who lived
five thousand years ago, and even with some who
enjoyed the privilege of Divine inspiration.

‘From the names and emblems of ancient
astronomy, says the author of Mazzaroth, referring
to the meanings of the words describing the constel-
lations in a primitive language, and confirmed now
very remarkably, in some cases (see p. 493), by the
Great Pyramid,—‘ we may learn the all-important
‘ fact, that God has spoken ; that He gave to the
‘ earliest of mankind a revelation, equally important
‘to the latest; a revelation even of those truths,
‘ afterwards written for the admonition of those on
‘ whom the ends of the world should come.’

If it be true, as the late lamented Dr. Arnold re-
marked, ‘ that modern history is not only a step in
‘advance of ancient history, but the last step, and
‘ appears to bear marks of fulness of time, as if there
‘ would be no future history beyond it,’/—then every
symptom of the extreme beginning being brought
by a higher power to be compared with the latter
end, and the intervening clouds and mystifications


CHAP. IX.] PRIMEVAL ASTRONOMY. 569


of heathen nations passing away as a tale that is
told, becomes of most intense interest.

But it is time now, that we should leave this
single question of the ancient constellations, their
origin, character, and meaning,—for a broader con-
sideration of the whole contents of that most
authentic book of primeval science, which the Great
Pyramid proves itself more or less in essence to be.


CHAPTER X.


INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE GREAT PYRAMID’S
MANIFESTATION,


Ir, in the course of volumes i. and ii. of this work,
we have now succeeded in showing, that both the
grandeur and stability of the Great Pyramid, as
well as the minute perfection of its parts, are a
marvel to all practical working men; and if we
have also been enabled to prove in Divisions 1. and
1., and the earlier chapters of Division m1. in the
present volume, that the original metrological and
chronological plans,—in memorializing which after a
permanent manner all that unrivalled amount and
unequalled skill of workmanship were spent ;—that
those original plans, we say, must have been based
on a knowledge of astronomy, geography, and
physics, so vastly beyond the powers of unaided man
in the day when the Pyramid was built, or indeed
within several thousand years therefrom,-—that scien-
tifically there is no resource for us, but to allow that
the planners of the building must have been assisted
by Divine inspiration ; and if we have also been


CHAP. X.] INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES. 571


able to set forth in chapter viii. of Division 11, that
there are both good historical, and sound religious
reasons for believing in such Divine inspiration
having actually been afforded, or rather perhaps,
that Divine commands were given for the work,—
then we are arrived at the threshold of a more
difficult question still ;—viz., why a divinely origi-
nated system of weights and measures, should have
been constructed in the earlier ages of the world, to
be made known to man only at the present latter
day? Or, as others choose to express it,—‘if the
‘ Pyramid system be really all that has been repre-
‘sented, why was it locked up for so many ages,
‘ instead of being published as speedily as possible,
‘to confer its choice advantages on men of all
‘ times 2”

This form of the question travels, we fear, beyond
its legitimate ground; for, on the principles ap-
parently taken for granted, men might equally well
inquire, why sundry events appointed to special
times in the Biblical history of the human race,—
were not carried out earlier; especially when St.
Paul tells us, that they had been prepared from the
beginning of the world. But such principles being
evidently erroneous, in a religious point of view,—all
inquiries based on them would prove to be in vain.
Our time will therefore at present be more safely, as
well as more profitably, occupied in investigating,—
not why the Great Pyramid metrological system was
not published sooner,—but in ascertaining what are


572 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. II.


the accompanying features observable in the.world
in our own times, when the publication is at last
apparently taking place; and in endeavouring to
apprehend what wants of humanity may thereby be
supplied, what purpose served, or what good pro-
moted. There are, too, several proposed solutions
of this part of the case, already in the field, and
highly deserving of attention.


Solution 1 2


The first of these proposed solutions says—If the
Great Pyramid is—throughout every part of its
buildng—a monument devoted to memorialize a
system of weights and measures, it must have been
intended to be used as such; and if the standards
of its system are based on grand earth-features com-
mon to all nations alike, giving to no one people an
advantage over another,—the system must, by the
logic of facts, have been intended to be a universal
one, and to be employed by all nations.

This universality is further contended for by the
same party, on account of the geographical position
of the Great Pyramid in Egypt; which land,
‘situated between Africa and Asia, and in easy
‘communication with Europe, was long ago de-
scribed ‘ag the centre of the ancient civilized world ;’
and has been more recently computed by modern
science, to be the effective surface-centre of all the
_ inhabited regions of the globe taken together, and
treated according to the number and importance of


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION, 573


their populations. Wherefore, if the special question
is then put, as to why so admirable and universal
a system is only just now produced,—an answer
comes to the effect—that mankind was not prepared
for general peace and universal brotherhood sooner ;
and under these social circumstances alone, can one
system of weights and measures ever be expected to
obtain all the wide world over. Steam-navigation,
railway-travelling, the electric telegraph, universal
expositions, and international commerce, are now
progressing at such accelerated pace, it is contended,
that one weight and one measure will soon be re-
quired for the merchant princes trafficking over a
whole world ; and here, just at this very point of
time, the Great Pyramid,—situated precisely at
the crossing of all the many roads employed by
modern commerce, in passing between the Hast and
the West, the North and the South,—has disclosed
its system—the most universal in its arrangements
and the most scientifically founded in its standards
of any that has yet appeared ; leaving even the
metrical system of the French savants a long way
behind it. What, then, can the Great Pyramid
system be disclosed for, it is argued, at this juncture,
but to supply the new wants of humanity, and
herald in some of the accompaniments of the pro-
mised millennial peace and good-will to all men ?
In answer to this statement, it must be confessed,
we imagine, that if there is ever to be one weight
and one measure for all nations, the Pyramid system


574 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. III.


would be the fairest and best; and is in so far
worthy the earnest attention of all good men who
look towards the future, and desire the ultimate
benefit of the whole human race. But we are not
sure that the occasion for such a system as painted
in the last paragraph, is likely to occur for an
indefinite length of time yet. Sager persons than
ourselves have doubted long since, whether the
growth of mere material prosperity and increased
means for driving the wheels of commerce faster
than ever, are of themselves doing much for
peace and good-will to all men. Wealth is accumu-
lating in special localities and for the few, much more
rapidly than of-old,—but the poor remain as miser-
able as before. A commercial treaty with a new or
weak people, is soon followed up by an armament.
Insurrectionists carrying fire and sword with them in
one country, are contributed openly by the citizens
of another pretending to be at peace with it; and
in the very centre of Europe and learning, wars are
plunged into, neutral nations invaded, non-com-
batant peasants maltreated, and hecatombs of fight-
ing men are slaughtered with far greater speed than
in any earlier epochs of the world, and apparently
with less compunction on the consciences of the
slaughterers, regal and subject alike. So that,
whether by crowned kings, or arrayed nationalities,
or needy political conspirators,—war, in this year of
grace 1866, is levied at a moment’s notice or without
it ; man’s blood is freely taken by his fellow-man ; not


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION, 575


a nation considers itself safe except surrounded with
its armed hosts, more numerous than at any pre-
vious stage of its history, even in open war; and
every new invention out of which peace had been
expected, has been turned to increase the destruc-
tion of battle; while in the eyes of the people at
large, success in war, whether just or unjust, has
been recently held to take the place of charity in
absolving their rulers from every sin, whether of
commission or omission, against the laws and in-
stitutions of their country.

In presence then of this scene, which the Ger-
many, Bohemia, Italy, Poland, Canada, Mexico,
Crete, and even Siberia, of the year 1866, are exhi-
biting ; and in presence of this failure of mere
human learning and modern science to put an end
to wars and the tumults and destruction of war,—
we must express our entire dissent from the suppo-
sition of the disclosures of the Great Pyramid
metrology having been zntended to be so timed, as
to greet a state of general amity and peaceful com-
munication already existing, and accomplished by
themselves, amongst all mankind.


Solution 2?


Well, remarks another solutionist of the case—
granted that the revealing of the Great Pyramid’s
long-kept secret, was not intended to greet a general
peace already accomplished over the earth by man,
—but why should it not have come to enable him to


576 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE  [DIV. III.


accomplish so great a good, by supplying to his
hand such a general means for universal amity, as
a system of weights and measures, calculated to be,
and worthy of becoming, universal to all mankind ?

To this question, probably, many persons besides
ourselves will be inclined to answer,—that any new
instrument suddenly put into the hands of man, as
man merely, is not likely in the next few years to
have a totally different effect, from all his previous
proceedings and developments during the last four
thousand years. He has indeed now, and has had for
many centuries, the gospel of Christ to assist him in
his endeavours after what is right. But it is even
with its assistance, as already described, that the
so-called peace-establishment of Europe has grown
to be something like four millions of armed men.
According to gospel principles, too,—as further
abundantly shown in the antithesis, by Egyptian
history,—no further assistance from the same
quarter need be looked for, until there has been
full confession on man’s part as to his total inability,
of himself, to make a reign of general peace and
good-will over the whole earth—any more than to
work out his own salvation.

How, too, is such an instrument, or one pretending
to the same character of a universal metrology, but
not from the same source,—being used at this very
moment? Why, we are told in the public papers,
that Napoleon m1, seeking recently to join the
South German States to France as a counterpoise to


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 577


the late agglomeration of North German States
about Prussia,—proposed to them to adopt the
French metric system, in place of their old here-
ditary weights and measures. And we are also
informed, that the said South German States fired
up with indignation at the proposal ; looking on it
as neither more nor less than a proposition to them,
to abandon everything national and traditional that
they had derived from primeval times,—and to
become Frenchmen: Frenchmen, too, of the order
of those amongst whom the metric system was pro-
duced, who publicly as a nation abolished religion and
set up atheism, in their capital city, and finished with
consigning all their liberties to a military despotism.


Solution 3 ? |

Then says a third solutionist,—All the alteration
needed in the last proposition is merely this,—that
the revealing of the Pyramid’s information is to
help man to do, what he would never have been
able to bring about by his own powers.

There is a very great deal though in that altera-
tion, if it really comes from the Christian heart.
We might then too take account, of the unex-
pected and confirmatory light which the Great
Pyramid has thrown,—not only on the question so
disputed amongst Churchmen, and in which they
were not receiving any more light by the progress
of their disputations, viz., as to whether the Sabbath
had ever been heard of in the world before Moses;

VOL. III. 20


578 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE _ [DIV. III.


—but also on the reality of the still more widely
disputed, we might even say, of late, generally
doubted, phenomenon of the Noachian Deluge. And
any further insight whatever into these things must
be of extraordinary importance, and possess a rami-
fying influence through many departments of re-
ligious life and progress.

But the main substance of the Great Pyramid, so
far as at present ascertained, is metrological ; and
though we must confess to be quite unable to see
our way as to how its system is ever, notwithstand-
ing all its excellences, to become universal amongst
men under the present dispensation,—yet we fancy
that there may be traced another part which the
Pyramid standards are actually fulfilling ; and not
so much in combining, as in singling out, or render-
ing more distinct, both certain classes of men and
particular characteristics of nations.


Solution 4?


Of olden time, all the mental and physical dis-
tinctions between Hebrews and Egyptians, sacred
and profane, revealed religion and man-invented
idolatry,—were in a manner typified to the eye
under the different lengths of the cubits of the two
nations. Each of those nations keeping to its own
eubit faithfully or pertinaciously ; and thereby still
further illustrating their inmost thoughts and even
principles of action. For the one people adhered
to their 25-inch standard, because they believed


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION, 579


that they had been taught by inspired prophets to
observe it as a duty appointed of the Lord their
‘God ;—while the other people kept to their 20-7-
inch standard, merely because it was a species of
custom amongst themselves; and, if traditionally
‘traced up, through the Flood, to Cain, and to his
invention of it merely as a means of hasting to be
rich at the expense of all his neighbours,’ they saw
no particular objection in that. |
In later times, however, a third party has appeared
on the metrological field, evidently diverse from
either of the former; for while it repudiates the
mere mammon-acquiring character of the last ex-
ample, it pronounces still more strongly against the
revealed religious origin of the other. This party
is, of course, that which originated the French
metrical system ; whose 39°37-inch metre standard
was expressly brought out as the product of modern
‘science alone ; and as being infinitely more grand in
its earth-commensurability, and more ennobling to
the soul of man to contemplate, than any other pre-
viously known national measures. ;
But the introduction of this third system on the
scene, instead of either confusing the distinctions of
the other two chief systems already in possession of


1 «He, Cain, augmented his household substance with much wealth,
‘by rapine and violence. . . He also introduced a change into that
‘ way of simplicity wherein men lived before ; and was the author of
‘measures and weights; and whereas men lived innocently and
‘ generously while they knew nothing of such arts, he changed the
‘ world into cunning craftiness.’—Josephus, Book i. chap. ii.


580 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. III.


the ground, or throwing them both hopelessly into
even shade,—has only made them more broadly
and visibly diverse than ever: while it has more
especially invested the Hebrew system with new
claims to admiration ; and such as can be shared in
by the whole educated Christian world of the
present day. For now has it been discovered,—-and
mainly through the Pyramid investigations,—that
not only does the ancient Hebrew standard possess
all the earth-commensurabilities claimed for the
French metre,—but it possesses them in a far higher
spirit and of a purer kind: while the Egyptian has
nothing whatever of the sort.

Hence we might arrange the three systems, or
Hebrew, French, and Egyptian,—as representing,
best earth-commensurability, indifferent earth-com-
mensurability, and no earth-commensurability at
all, Or by looking to what lies at the grounds of
the reasons for their having such qualities,—they
might be taken as representing attention to the
dictates, or a giving way to the domination, of,
revealed religion, modern science without any re-
ligion, and old idolatry. This, too, will probably be
the more instructive manner in which to look at
them ; for it illustrates strikingly the direction of
the progress of society at the present time, and the
principles under which both individuals, and even
nations, are now classing themselves. 7

The carrying out, however, of so general a review
of the whole world, is for other minds than ours, as


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 581


well as for works especially devoted to such ques-
tions. Here, we merely attempt to elucidate the
subject of the Great Pyramid, so far as may be in our
power, or may lie within the compass of a moderate
practical astronomer’s professional employments,—
leaving many other sides of even the Pyramid ques-
tion to be prosecuted hereafter by other men better
adapted therefor. Hence there remains now but one
topic which falls within our province to attempt; but
this has so much of both home interest and national
importance about it, that we do not scruple to ask
the reader’s attention for a few minutes longer.


Anglo-Saxon Originals in Metrology.


Not only have we shown, in the last pages of
vol, ii. and in chapter viii. of this volume, that the
sacred Hebrew and Great Pyramid standards of
weight and measure may be regarded as identical,—
but we have had again and again to point out,
that the Anglo-Saxon measures come, in many of
their features, so exceedingly close to the above, that
the coincidence cannot be accidental. This fact
had not escaped John Taylor, nor indeed the
anonymous author of the Pyramid book of 1706
(see p. 117),—but they had not advanced very far
in ascertaining whence, or how, so remarkable a
triple agreement arose amongst three nations or
parties now widely removed in both time and
geographical limits.

We ourselves have indeed set forth already, in


582 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. III.


chapter viii. and elsewhere, reasons for believing
that both the Great Pyramid and the Hebrew mea-
sures were communicated by inspiration ; at very
various times in history, but from the same eternal,
all-wise, unchanging Source; and therefore they
are found to be the same, or, that continwity pre-
vails with regard to them.

_ But in such case where, how, and when did the
Anglo-Saxons receive their traditional and heredi-
tary measures; so closely alike, that they must
either have been copied from one or other of the
above,—at a date something more than two thou-
sand years ago,—or have been similarly derived from
the same high and original Source as theirs. This
latter idea will probably be forbidden by every one,
or found by them without any proofs to support it ;
while, again, the Great Pyramid was a sealed book
to all the world, until this present day, when modern
science,—aided in part by the dilapidation of the
building and the structural features thereby opened
up,—has at length been able to assign the chief in-
terpretations. There remains, therefore, only the
Hebrew origin as likely or possible; but still ex-
tremely distant as well as difficult, and partly
because so little is known of the Anglo-Saxon race
at any very early dates.


Anglo-Saxons, where from, of old.


At present, indeed, we all appreciate the name as
applying to a majority of the. inhabitants of Great


CHAP, X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 582


Britain and the United States, with their roots
among the Scandinavian, German, and Gothic popu-
lations of the Continent ; but the Anglo-Saxons are
no more the aborigines of these European, than of
the American, countries where they are now found.
They came, indeed, confessedly, according to all
history, to these regions from the eastward, within
the last eighteen hundred years ; and if we inquire
of the ethnologists what all the Anglo-Saxon, Scan-
dinavian, German, and Gothic nations are called in
their science, we are told ‘Indo-Germanic,’ or that
they all had an eastern and southern origin.

This subject has been followed up more particu-
by Mr. John Wilson of Brighton,’ for the English-
speaking races of the Anglo-Saxon, with some
remarkable results; one of the first being, that
though in the dark ages constituting a part of the
Gothic immigrating hosts, and in so far Goths, with
whom we are accustomed to connect everything
barbarous and savage, they, the Anglo-Saxon por-
tion, and some others too of the Goths, were not
savages ; but had, on the contrary, the physiological
testimony—in large well-formed brains and fine hair
—of a race long nurtured in superior intellectual and
social culture, besides political proofs of the same in
the possession of very complete and wisely devised


systems of laws, with orderly manners and customs.


1 Especially in his monthly serial of 1866 and 1867, entitled The
Watchman of Ephraim. See Language as a Criterion of Race, p. 202,
and other papers. Fede


584 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. III.


That all Goths were necessarily barbarians, is an
idea that has grown up from our first descriptions
of them having been unfortunately written for us
chiefly by their enemies, whom they were conquer-
ing ; viz., the pampered and enervated sons of Rome
in her decline and decrepitude. To such luxurious
debauchees, the simple and regularly-living Goths
were of course mere so-called savages, and yet might
be more highly appreciative of moral virtue. While
as for artistic feeling, and in architecture, where the
Romans did little else than servilely follow the
Greeks, the Gothic peoples produced an entirely
new variety of the art; and so exceedingly exquisite
as to oblige all the present world, by the fact, to use
the name of Gothic in connexion with the beautiful,
just as systematically and frequently as erroneous
literary and Roman-derived prejudices have hitherto
made us inclined to appropriate it also, to everything
the very opposite of beautiful.

The Anglo-Saxons, then, are not, as a Jewish
author lately tried to make out, a mere recently
sprung horde of northern savages, emerged only the
other day from a mud-hole in a German forest ; but
a race who had been already long accustomed to
virtues and refinements in some land, said by the
ethnologists to be south and east of that which they
now occupy ; and of that one also where they first
appeared to astonished Europe in the midst of carry-
ing out their great military migrations in the
several centuries following the Christian era.


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 585


What was the country, then, whence the Anglo-
Saxons started on that occasion? This is the second
point on which Mr. Wilson has reached some most


noteworthy results, and by the method of language,


applied in a very safe and thoroughly inductive
manner; for he distinguishes ‘the traces of the
original foundation of a language from the often
very numerous facts and sometimes preponderating
mass of substance introduced into it at subsequent
times ; an effect witnessed to the utmost degree in
the present day on the Jews in Russia, who all speak
German, not because they are of the same original
race and stock as the Germans, but because they
sojourned in the cities of Germany for several cen-
turies in the middle ages before going to Russia.

The chief importation of this nature which Mr.
Wilson finds in the Anglo-Saxon, is from the Persian
or Median. In this conclusion he was indeed pre-
ceded, as he also acknowledges, by Sharon Turner,
and many other writers on the Germanic and Scan-
dinavian languages and peoples.

In so far, indeed, there is nothing contradictory
either to ancient tradition or modern science, in de-
riving the Anglo-Saxons, with some portion of Scan-
dinavians, Slavonians, and Germans, from Persia or
Media, as one station merely of a more extensive
journey, either by the southern or northern route
from thence. In fact, the generally acknowledged
theory of the German philologists, given expression
to in Bunsen’s third volume of Hgypt’s Place in


586 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE  [DIV. III.


Universal History, p. 459, brings the modern Ger-
mans from further cast still than Persia or Media,
or from what he terms ‘ the primeval land, Iran
‘ proper, Azryana Vaego,’ or the high land about
the sources of the Oxus and Jaxartes, between the
fortieth and thirty-seventh degrees of north lati-
tude and eighty-sixth and ninetieth of east longi-
tude, or in Eastern Central Asia ; that, says he, was
‘ the aboriginal Iran proper, inhabited by the fathers
‘of the Arians (and consequently our own, as we
‘ speak the same language.’)

But Mr. Wilson does not trace up the Anglo-
Saxons,—before they arrived in Media and Persia,
—to that primeval land of the Arians; nor to an
intervening residence in the Indian Punjaub, whereto
Chevalier Bunsen traces his own more immediately
connected portion of the great Indo-Germanic
peoples. On the contrary, Mr. Wilson finds a
separate and distinct line of experiences for the
Anglo-Saxon tribes, which begins with traces of
greater proximity between the Anglo-Saxon and
Persian, than between any other modern European
language and Persian; implying for the Anglo-
Saxons, and perhaps also the Danes, a longer resi-
dence in that part of the world, than for the majority
of the Indo-Germans. This remarkable fact, fairly
arrived at by an inductive examination of the lan-
guages, forms an apparent anomaly in the general
ethnological problem, of the highest importance as
such, for any philosophical mind to trace up to its


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 587


source and explanation. And Mr. Wilson does follow
it up further, showing satisfactory indications, after
eliminating the Persian and Median imported addi-
tions, that there is a small portion of Egyptian or
Coptic similarly imported ; but that the structure
and foundation of the language is Hebraic; one of
his closing paragraphs having the following words,
‘ indeed, the basis of the English language may, to
‘a remarkable extent, be found in the Hebrew.
‘Many of our most common words, and names of
‘ familiar objects, are almost pure Hebrew. I have
‘ observed this particularly with regard to the Low-
‘land Scottish.’ 7

Not only, too, does Mr. Wilson show that this
Hebraic foundation of our language could not, as
such, have been introduced into it by our copying
from the Jews subsequent to our Persian and Median
period of residence,—and since the time that the
Jews, expelled from Jerusalem, have been a homeless
people, scattered abroad amongst all nations,—but
he further shows that the Hebrew of the English lan-
guage specially appertains to one tribe of Israel, who
never belonged to the kingdom of Judah at all, and
were never therefore to be termed Jews; a tribe, in-
deed, which formed the head of the historical oppo-
sition to Judah, viz., Ephraim,—with its capital
city of Samaria, and the kings thereof, usually
termed Kings of Israel! Hence the Hebraic por-


1 As an illustration of what the Ephraimite feature of the Hebrew
was, the reader may be reminded that the Bible mentions (Judges xii.)


588 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES. OF THE [DIV. III.


tion of the Anglo-Saxon language may be called
either Ephraimite or Israelite with historical truth,
but never Jewish."

Now, this is without doubt a very capital point ;
because as clearly as extensive linguistic connexions
can make them so, and agreeably with all the prin-
ciples of language applied to ethnological science,—
and which indeed seldom has such broad and ample
foundations to work upon, in its ordinary discussions
and conclusions,—the Anglo-Saxons are shown to


that the men of Ephraim could not say Shibboleth, but only Sibboleth ;
Samaria also for Shemar; and Mr. Wilson gives the following list of
English words derived from the Hebrew, but by an Ephraimitic road,
or a dropping out of the difficult ‘A’ after the ‘s’ at the beginning
of the word.


: Meaning in English of th
English Word. Hebrew Word. ont Hebrew Word. *


Sever, : : F Shaver, To break or tear.
Sabbath, . i j Shabath, To rest.

Sad, . : - : Shad, Desolation.
Scaith, ; i FH Schacath, Destruction.
Steep, . 2 2 : Shatap, To drown.
Slake, . » F Shalak, To lay.

Saim (fat of swine), ; Shaman, Fat.

Sons 2 : : Shanah, Repetition.
Sift, . . ; . Shafat, To judge.
Speak, : ‘ Shpak, To pour out.
Soak, suck, sack, , Shakah, To give water.
Scale, , ; : Shakal, To weigh.
Settle, . Shathal, To plan.


1 For the correct use of the terms Jsraelite and Jew, see Mr. John
Wilson’s many publications; where, founding on a most extensive
study of the appropriate portions of Scripture, he has been able to de-
fine the terms almost with the rigidness of mathematical demonstra-
tion,—and at the same time to give more expressiveness to the histories
of these two most diverse and hostile nations, though they did, indeed,
at one time march together under Moses, and were both originally
sprung from Israel.


Se


CHAP. X.}| GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 589


be compounded of the very Israelite people of old ;
in fact, they are the representatives of those Israelites,
or may be said themselves to be of Israelite descent ;
and therefore heirs of whatever portions of Hebraism
were retained, when the more particular religious
rites of Mosaicism were abolished and superseded
by Baalim, under King Jeroboam.

This is the conclusion from the side of language ;
and is remarkably confirmed by history. For the
Israelites were carried away captive from Samaria
some two thousand five hundred years ago; and
though they have been lost to sight, as such,’ ever
since,—yet it is known (see p. 528), that they were
taken northward to the cities of the Medes, and
beyond them still. Whence, excepting some very
few stragglers, they not only never had any oppor-
tunity of returning southward to their Palestinian
land,—but they found themselves compelled to
move away westward, in that grand current of the
human race, by which their then surrounding
neighbours, the Arians, Germans, and subsequently
many other nations, were in long ages perpetually
passing on towards Europe; and never stopped
until, in the fourth and fifth centuries after Christ,
they had reached the westernmost coasts looking
upon the Atlantic. Mixing then with these nations,

* Mainly because they have always been looked for as Jews, or a
people with Jewish institutions, and those distinguishing religious rites
of the Mosaic creed,—which they, the Israelites, had most formally


abandoned, and made particular war against from the instant that they
set up their separate kingdom.


590 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. III.


—the Israelites, always a people of strong vitality,—
must have prospered in mere numbers ; and if the
two tribes of Jews in the present day have eight
millions of descendants to show, in spite of all their
sieges, wars, and persecutions,—and the continual
filtering away also from amongst them of their best
minds by conversion to Christianity, and subsequent
amalgamation with their European neighbours,—
the Israelites, could they only be recognised, ought
to have with their ten tribes, no less than forty
millions. A large amount of leavening to be intro-
duced amongst the present or medizeval inhabitants
of Western Europe.

This conclusion, however, of who are the Anglo-
Saxons,—viz., a people largely partaking of Israelite
admixture,—although it is something of infinite
mystery to man, seeing that its chief facts and
phenomena ascend to ages far beyond the powers of
any Heralds’ Office, or the genealogical rolls of the
proudest aristocratic, or even royal, family of Hurope,
to presume to say anything whatever about,—this
conclusion, we say, making out a lineal descent for
the mass of the nation during no less than two
thousand five hundred years, and then attaching
them to the most favoured branch of all mankind,
and the longest known to history,—has further and
most remarkable testimony afforded to it from the
Scriptures. !

Most ably, and with eminent success, has this
side of the general question been treated by Mr.


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 591


Wilson, in the several works mentioned below ;* to
such an extent, indeed, that not only would it be
uncalled for in us, to attempt to throw any addi-
tional ray of light upon its foundations ;—but we
rather believe that there are contained already, and
introduced unintentionally, perhaps, in Mr. Wilson’s
works,—arguments, illustrations, and indications
quite sufficient to help forward all religiously in-
clined minds, towards appreciating not only how the
Anglo-Saxons are now found in popular possession
of both old Hebrew words, and the ancient Hebrew
metrological standards,—but why there should have
been Divine inspiration afforded for the first estab-
lishment of the Great Pyramid metrology,—and
why also it was sealed up in such impenetrable
mystery from the time of its primeval realization,
to be opened and appreciated only in these latter
days, in which we live.

Nevertheless, there is one part of the question
which is so purely in the way of inductive inquiry
on metrological grounds,—that it seems to fall within
our positive duty to attempt,—and we make its study
therefore the concluding portion of our book.


1 Our Israelitish Origin.
The Book of Inheritance.
The Millennium.
The Mission of Elijah,
The Watchman of Ephraim (Monthly).
By John Wilson, 34 Norfolk Road, Brighton; and published by
W. Macintosh, 24 Paternoster Row, London, E.C.


592 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. IT.


Metrological Test of the European Races.


The case may be stated thus,—

If the Ephraimitic Israelites are mixed up in all
the nations of modern Europe,—and if it is through
the former having preserved their old Hebrew
standards (as well as many other of their Hebraic
-peculiarities—though not all, for causes explained
by Mr. Wilson in the works already quoted) ; if it
is for these reasons that the now hereditary weights
and measures of the said nations are found with so
many resemblances to the Hebrew (or the Pyramid
standards, which are the same in principle, and more
accessible in fact),—then the resemblance ought
always to be closer and closer, according to the
amount of Ephraimitic blood in each nation. This
is evidently only concluding from weights and
measures, what has already been deduced from
language, and with highly approved results in all
educated society. We at once, therefore, proceed
to consider, which of the metrologies of modern
Europe, comes closest to that of the Great Pyra-
mid.

Now, the metrologies to be discussed in such a
case, are, as with the languages previously considered,
the popular ones ; or those commonly employed by
the mass of the people of each country. We turn,
therefore, for information upon what they are,—not
to any deep or difficult treatise upon the arcana of
science, as understood, and understandable only by


CHAP, X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 593


a few philosophers ;—but to some book of com-.
mon information for all classes of society. Many
such works there are before the public ; and among
them, few are more commendable for the care with
which it is compiled, than that excellent literary,
commercial, and general intelligencer, the Hdinburgh
Almanac, by Messrs. Oliver and Boyd. We con-
sult its well-filled interior, accordingly, and find, on
page 83, the popular weights and linear measures of
each country given in a compendious form, and ap-
parently accurate manner.’ ;

Each of these several weights and measures we
then compare with the Great Pyramid standard
weight and measure ; viz., the Great Pyramid pound
weight, equal to five cubic inches of the earth’s mean
density ; and the Great Pyramid cubit, equal to one-
ten-millionth of the earth’s semi-axis of rotation ;
and the popular quantities of each nation are then
(by our own proportions between the Pyramid and
British systems, established in Division 11) given
in terms of these Pyramid quantities taken as unity.
In this manner we obtain—a Table 1, exhibiting in
its final column, the comparative distance of each
Kuropean country from the Pyramid, in weight mea-
sure. A Table 11, exhibiting the same for linear mea-
sure. And a Table 111,—to which most importance
is attachable,—exhibiting the countries similarly in


1 Title,—‘ Foreign Weights and Measures.—General Table of Metri-
‘ cal Equivalents, showing the Contents of the principal Weights and
‘ Measures in the Standards of Great Britain and France.’


VOL. III. 2 P


594 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. ITI.


order, but for the combined mean influence of both
weight and linear measures ; as thus :—


TABLE [.—WEIGHT.


pet,


quivalent in Distance from


P E :
Name of Country Name of ae terms of Pe dei is
or Place. Weight. grains. framd t erm 8 of th _

Great Pyramid,} Pound, . 7,196 1:000 0
Prussia, ‘ Pound;.. 7,219 1:003 003
Spain, . . | Libbra, . 7,101 0-987 013
Portugal, . arratel, . 7,083 0:984. 016
Great Britain, Pound avoir. 7,000 0:973 027
Denmark, . ‘Poundcas 7,720 1:073 073
Sweden, Fi Skalpund, 6,563 0912 088
Russia, ‘ Pound, . 6,318 0:878 122
Austria, 5 Pound,- 8,645 1-201 201
Leghorn, . Libbra, . 5,240 0°728 "272
France, i Kilogramme, 15,432 2°144 17144
Turkey, : Oke, : 19,800 2°752 1°752


TaBLE I].—LENGTH.


Equivalent in Distance from


= f Equivalent nt Pyramid
See r Tinos Pas Bae Eynamia z be: aS rn
=e same = 1.
Great Pyramid,| Cubit, . 25:025 1:000 ‘0
Denmark, . Ell, . = 24°71 0:987 ‘013
Ordnance
Great Evitnin, |-2 MAP MHC) ongss ie apis 013
represen-
tative,
Prussia, : El, . i 26:26 1:049 049
Sweden, : Ell, . , 23°38 0:934 066
Turkey, : Pik, ? 27-00 1:079 079
Leghorn, . Braccia, . 22°98 0-918 082
Russia, ‘ Archine, . 28:00 1:119 119
Austria, : Ell, . , 30°66 1:225 "225
Spain, . : Vara, : 33°38 1334 ‘334
British Yard, Yard, : 36:00 1-439 439
France, : Metre, . 39°37 L573 ‘573


Portugal, . Vara, : | 43°18


—
wT
to
lor}
wT
bo
for}


—


a ae eee


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 595


TABLE III.—WeIGHT AND LENGTH COMBINED,


: Distance from Pyramid
Heme cours try Nomis of Welgnts and in terms of Pyramid
. ; Pound and Cubit = 1.


Great Pyramid, . Pound and cubit, . ‘0
Pound avoir. and
Great Britain, Ordnance Map mile 020
representative,
Prussia, . : 2 Pound and ell, .. 026
Denmark, : ; Pound and ell, ; 043
Sweden, ; : Skalpund and ell, . 077
Russia, . a ‘ Pound and archine, 120
Spain, . : Libbra and vara, . 174
Leghorn, ‘ ; Libbra and braccia, a7
Austria, : : Pound and ell, : ‘213
British Yard, : Pound av. and yard, 233
Portugal, F : Arratel and vara, . ‘371
Traces, Kilogramme and 858
metre, x ;
Turkey, : : Oke and pik, ; 916


In this last table, of cumulative importance, it is
not a little striking to see all the Protestant
countries standing first and closest to the Great
Pyramid ; then Russia and her Greek, but freely
Bible-reading, Church; then the Roman Catholic
lands ; then, after a long interval, and last but one
on the list, France, with its metrical system—volun-
tarily adopted under an atheistical form of govern-
ment, in place of an hereditary pound and ancient
inch which were not very far from those of the Great
Pyramid ; and last of all, Mohammedan Turkey.

It is not always easy for a subject to break away
entirely from his old allegiance: and when the
French nation formally, or rather with a sudden
violence, abolished, so far as they could, both Chris-
tianity and the week of seven days, adopting decades


ea,


596 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. IIL


of ten. days instead, and in everything almost
worshipping decimals,—whose crowning expression
was thought to be the new metre standard, or the
one-ten-millionth of a quadrant of the meridian,—
they probably did not see that they had chosen a
number which is the 7th power of 10; or expres-
sible as 10’.*

This is the number which was likewise selected
of old, in both the Great Pyramid and primitive
Hebrew systems, for fixing the proportion of the
cubit of the Sanctuary to the semi-axis of rotation
of the earth ; 2.¢., 10’ sacred cubits = earth’s semi-
axis of rotation; and is there quite appropriate.
But in the French metrical system, which in nume-
rical symmetry and meaning should rather have had
10”, the actual 10’ is altogether out of place. Yet
there it is, established in dominant force over the
self-called pure decimal system: and while it must
ever remind all Frenchmen of what they once
resisted and tried to break away from,—it may
typify what the better spirits among them, will by
and by be coming back to, in the repentant frame
of mind, and with the forgiveness, it is to be hoped,
of the accepted though once prodigal son.


Britain in particular, and Israelitic warning.

But with Great Britain, too, we must have a
word. Great Britain stands at the head of our
scale, and it stands low down as well. The low


* From an anonymous letter, received by post on 16th March 1867.


CHAP. X.]| GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 597


entry is due to accepting the yard for the country’s
popular measure of length; and it zs the present
legal leneth ; but as John Taylor, Sir John Her-
schel, and ourselves, have endeavoured to show, the
yard is an invention of a few men in recent times,
unauthorized by the spirit or antiquities of the
nation ; and if other persons ever had any doubt of
the importance of the remark, let them look at this
Table 111., and see Great Britain, by means of the
yard, hurled out of all the Protestant countries,
driven away from the Saxonic, Allemannic, and
Scandinavian nations, and forced to a low position
among Latins and Roman Catholics.

The inch, said Sir John Herschel lately, with
infinite truth, is the real unit of linear measure in
Great Britain ; and therewith he proposed a length
of 25°025 British inches as a new and far better
standard of length for the country, scientifically,
than the present anomalous yard of 36 inches. Now
25°025 British inches form the length exactly of
the Great Pyramid cubit, so that had the country
adopted what was proposed, by its first and fore-
most scientist, it would have stood near indeed to
the Pyramid test of the sons of Joseph. But our
Government has not adopted it. . We therefore
insert instead 25°344 inches, as being the length
introduced a few years ago, and now largely em-
ployed, in the Ordnance Survey Maps of the whole
country, on the scale of 1-2500th of nature,—for
the representative of one mile.


598 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DIV. ITI.


In this manner,—we fear we should say by this
mere side-wind,—Britain has been placed at the top
of the column. But let the island kingdom look
well that it does not fall; for not only has the
25°344 inch length not yet travelled beyond the
region of the Ordnance Maps,—but the Government
has been recently much urged by, and has partly
yielded to, a few ill-advised, but active, men, who
want these invaluable hereditary measures (preserved
almost miraculously to this nation from primeval
time, for apparently a Divine purpose), to be in-
stantly abolished a toto,—and the recently atheisti-
cally conceived measures of France to be adopted in
_ their stead. In which case England would have to
descend from her present noble pre-eminence in the
metrological scale of nations, and occupy a place
almost the very last in the list ; or next to Turkey,
and in company with some petty princedoms follow-
ing France, and blessed with little history and less
nationality.

‘How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
‘son of the morning!’ might then indeed be ad-
dressed to England with melancholy truth! Or, -
more plainly, and in words seemingly almost in-
tended for such a case, and uttered with depressing
grief of heart, ‘O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself!’

Well, therefore, might the venerable John Taylor,
a few days before his death, exclaim, in reference to
the Gallicising attempts then being made before the
British Parliament‘ If the people of this country


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 599


‘ does allow its hereditary weights and measures to
‘ be abolished in favour of the recent French inven-
‘ tions, it will richly deserve to be driven forth from
‘its ancient land, like the Jews of old, and made a
‘ homeless and abhorred race.’

Some very well-intentioned gentlemen affect to
be shocked by such expressions ; and argue sooth-
ingly that there is no reason to feel any alarm at
the prospect of ‘the French metrical system ever
coming into vogue in this country,—for that the
people of Great Britain would never submit to have
foreign weights and measures forced upon them.
But this is much like the more than proverbial at-
tempt to cry ‘ Peace, peace, when there is no peace.’
For at the present moment there is in force what is
called the ‘Permissive Bill’—rendering it legal
throughout the length and breadth of Great Britain
to appeal either to French weights and measures, or
English, in all commercial transactions on paper ;
and the last month (February 1867) has witnessed
Chambers of Commerce in London, and a meeting
at the London Society of Arts, passing resolutions to
recommend Government to have the French weights
stamped, and rendered in every way of equal force
with the English, in all practical buying and selling
in shops, both wholesale and retail.

A good example of the mode in which de-
nationalizing schemes of this order are attempted
to be pushed, and what the effects would be on the
nation adopting them, has recently been obtained


600 INTENTIONS AND PURPOSES OF THE [DTV. IIL.


from Russia. For having heard rumours upon
rumours perseveringly spread through this country,
to the effect that Russia was on the eve of adopting
the French: metrical system,—I wrote lately to
M. Otto Struve, the Imperial Chief Astronomer, at
Pulkova, near St. Petersburg; and received from
him the information, ‘that some years ago there
‘had been a little talk about the project, though it
‘was soon after entirely dropped on finding,—that
‘the proposed change would be to the advantage
‘only of a few hundreds of merchants, mostly
‘ foreigners, but to the damage of seventy millions
‘ of Russian subjects,

This is, in fact, the true way of looking at the
question of any national metrology ; for it is a
something which refers to the comforts, conveni-
ences, and most useful employments of the mass of
the nation, and especially of the many and the poor.

Yet in Great Britain, those who should feel most
directly and immediately concerned, do not seem in
any way sufficiently awake to the dangerous crisis
which is passing. The heart, indeed, of the mass
of the people, we are happy to believe, is not
on the wrong side in these metrological matters ;
it is only apathetic. They have a fond regard
of old for their hereditary or national measures ;
and when they are told of those standards’ further


connexion with the ancient Hebrew, and descent


from the Great Pyramid, metrologies—with all their
truly superhuman earth and heaven-commensura-


CHAP. X.] GREAT PYRAMID’S MANIFESTATION. 601


bility—they exclaim, ‘How curious! how interest-
‘ing! what astonishing coincidences! what wonderful
accuracy !’ But they do so with folded hands, and
allow these more than national heirlooms to be daily


removed or destroyed, from before their eyes, by


eager, industrious innovators, in fatal league with
revolutionists from the other side of the Channel.
Now to have good ideas, but to employ them
merely in refraining from doing active evil, was a
charge brought against Israel in the time, and by
the mouth, of the prophet Elijah. And it is also
similar to the judgment pronounced in the New
Testament against the seventh and last Church ;
or, as some interpret it, the Church of these the last
times, and which is described in pages of infallible
authority as being ‘lukewarm, and neither cold nor
‘hot. Wherefore the first reforming command ad-
dressed to it was, ‘ Be zealous, therefore, if its mem-
bers would enjoy in the future new and better days.


POSTSCRIPT.


Waite the last of the above pages were going through the press,—
two letters reached me, without signature, but containing so much
valuable matter connected with the Great Pyramid,—as to require
more than a passing notice here.

The first of them refers to some arithmetical errors in my former
book, Our Inheritance in the Great Pyramid. These errors had
indeed already been discovered by me, and corrected in the present
work; their numerical magnitude too was at no time sufficient to
interfere materially with the principal results deduced ;—but they
were errors which should not have been committed; for which I
alone am responsible; and if, perchance, there should be something


602 POSTSCRIPT. - [DIV. TI,


of the same kind, though of lesser degree, in these volumes,—I
trust that whoever may alight on such mistakes, will follow the ex-
ample of the above letter-writer,—viz., ‘repeat both the calculations
‘and the reference to original sources for physical data,’—and then
he may find with him, ‘ that the theories advanced in the book, are
‘ corroborated by some further striking analogies.’

One of these, we have already introduced into the text on p. 596 ;
and another, the contents of his second letter, we now append in the
unknown author’s own words :—


‘MEMORANDUM ON THE DIGITS IN x.


‘A matter thought worth notice in connexion with w as a leading
‘ Pyramid-proportion, and with the digits 3 and 7, which are peculiar
‘in m (as see below), being also elements in some parts of the Pyramid-
‘ analogies, and especially in the hidden and 7 connected part—its ver-
‘ tical height taken with extreme footing in encastrements, {100 S.


Mo kL
* cubits. 18 March 1867.
‘ PECULIARITY A.


‘Three and a Seventh is the nearest simple approximation to the
‘ratio 7.


‘ PECULIARITY B.


‘3 and 7 recur exceptionally among the 9 digits (of decimal arith-
‘ metic, which is man’s numeration, and therefore the matter is with
‘ reference to man) in the decimal fraction of 7,—so far as we can at
‘ present verify it, that is, to 608 places.

‘ Most of the digits recur with the usual degree of irregularity in
‘ their relative frequency. But 3 and 7 are peculiar. 3 recurs with
‘strikingly more frequency, and 7 with more rarity than any other
‘ digits. The following table shows the details of this fact :—


Ratio per 1000 of each Digit’s re-


Frequency of its


Name of Digit. Tacaeranoe ounce, te ee oe 100
0 60 99 |
Nes 62 102
2 67 110
3 68 112
4 64 105
5 56 92
6 62 102
a 44 72
8 58 96
9 67 110 ; |
Totals, 608 1000 |


1 4.¢., = 5833°33, etc., Pyramid inches ; or implying a height reckoned from a horizon-
be plane, 14 inches nearly beneath the ‘ pavement-surface ;’ see pp. 82 and 140 of this
volume.


SSS Ee —


DIV. 11. | POSTSCRIPT. 603


‘ PECULIARITY C.


‘ This greater frequency of 3 and greater rarity of 7, than any other
‘ digits, not only holds true thus in the one long decimal of 608 places ;
‘ but it is a more remarkable fact, as holding true very persistently in
‘the shorter subdivisions of the decimal; even where few digits are
* concerned, and we should expect to find some other digits taking a
* turn at leading the frequency and rarity.

‘ Thus, if we go repeatedly through the decimal, and each time stop
‘ at—say 21 digits further (3 x 7 digits, characteristic of 7; for want
* of natural divisions in the fractional expression), we have as follows :—


Length of Decimal
3141592, ete. y Average of all digits. Threes. Sevens.


In the first 21 digits, the | average occurrence is 255, but there are,| of threes 4, and | of sevens 1


” 42 ” ” 4y5 ” ” 7 ” ” 3
” _ ” ” or6 ” ” ts ” ” :
” ” ” 10 ” ”? ” ”
9 105 ” ” 10,55 ” ” 12 ” ” 8
”? 126 ed ” 12.5 ” 29 15 ” ” 9
” 147 ” ” 14,5 ” ” 17 ” ” 10
pe LS aa 55 A 16, ;
” 189 ” ” 1875 fa
” 210 ” ” 21 2
” 231 ” : ” 23545 ne #

°
” 252 ” ” 25 iB a
» 273 5, ” 27 es
sie o OA 53 . 29 caves
» 315 ,, Riche we 22
” 336 ” ” 33 3 FI
es are ” 35 Pee
» 378 5, ” 38 S 3
ig BOD A 40 S 5
” 420 ” ” 42 =, 5
kee % 44 5 a
» 402 a a es
» 483 ee ae a
ae ” 50 25
» 525 % ” 52 FA 8
ae ; 55 é
» 967 4) - e 57
” 588 ” ” 59
” (608) 0 ” 60°8 ” ” 68 ”? ” 44
» 609 ,, » 61


‘The table of Peculiarity B is taken from a letter of Professor De
‘ Morgan, in the Atheneum for October 27, 1866, page 543, and that
‘letter induced its reader to make the further examination here shown
‘—Table C.


604 POSTSCRIPT. [DIV. IIT.


‘Tf it be asked, How are we to regard the foregoing mathematical
‘ facts 2—as mere casual coincidences, such as, according to the laws of
‘ probabilities, must take place sometimes, or as in any sense designed ?
‘The true reply is, That the idea of casual coincidence and laws of
‘ probability exist only in relation to the human intellect ; not in ex-


‘ternal creation taken apart from the intellect which examines it ; so


‘ that, in one sense, and a very important one, there is no such thing
‘as casual coincidence, or mere general probability. Every physical
‘ fact (whether mathematical or physical) is a necessary consequence
‘ of the working of an established order of creation ; but it is not the
‘less pre-arranged, in all its details of relations and consequences ; and
* yet in harmony with that impression on human intellect which men
‘term “laws of probability.”

‘Not a sparrow falls to the ground, nor a hair from our heads,
‘ without the Living intelligent God—the T’rue God!—foreknowing it,
‘ pre-arranging and attending to it; not merely in general terms, but
‘down to the most minute detail of each atom and each event in
‘ creation, the play of its forces and motions as they be influenced by
‘every other atom and event in creation, however insignificant, at
‘every moment of time. This perfect forecasting and knowledge and
‘attention baffles the utmost stretch of our imaginations. Can it
‘then be true? but so also do the undeniable facts themselves, as
‘they exist in creation,—perfect action of mutual atomic influences
‘in endless complication and indefinite minuteness. The true God
‘must be such, as baffles our intellect.’


1°¢That is, the Living intelligent God, not an impersonal abstract deity, Pan (all
‘ things), Fate, or the unsentient laws of nature,—the rationalist’s idea of God.


INDEX.


AcE of the Great Pyramid, iii. 282.

Sphinx, i. 332.

Air and sand together, i. 162.

Aiton and Inglis, Messrs., Pyramid mea-
sures by, ii. 302-308.

Mr., had the four corner sockets

excavated, i. 526.

Mr., visit to East Tombs, i. 524.

Alee Dobree’s descent, i. 401.

Al Mamoon’s accident, i. 158.

hole, i. 75.

Altitude-azimuth instrument, i. 428,
429.

Amateur quarrying, i. 214.

American missionaries, visit from, i. 34.

Americans on the top of the Great
Pyramid, i. 464-466.

Analysis of Pyramid materials, ii. 295-
298.

Ancient ventilating channels, i. 91-94.

vertical height of Great Pyramid,
iii. 67-70.

Andro-Sphinx, i. 324,

Angle of entrance passage, i. 167, 168 ;
ii. 38.

of second Pyramid, ii. 275.

Angle of Grand Gallery, ii. 154-161.

importance of, i. 301.

inclination of passages, iii. 34.

—— sides of Great Pyramid, iii. 19-
33.


standards of, iii. 202-215,
Angles and passages, i. 141.
from sockets, i. 531.
lecture on, i. 215, 216.


Anglo-Saxon originals of metrology, iii.
581.

Anglo-Saxons, where from, of old, iii. 582.

Angular proof, i. 217.

Annual mean temperature in Scotland,
iii. 192, 200, 201.

Anomaly discovered, i. 152.

Antechamber, grooves in the, i. 362-365.

its passages, ii. 92-100.

Antechamber, King’s Chamber, i. 355.

portcullis, i. 363-366.

Ants, i. 406, 407.

Arab funerals, i. 229, 230.

Arab gun, i. 401, 402.

house, interior of an, i. 499, 500.

mode of treating a wound, i. 115.

nature excused, i. 35.

roughs and Turkish rule, i. 392-
394,

Arab sawing, i. 113.

Arab tales of tourists’ ways, i. 77.

tricks on travellers, i. 394-400.

—— unchanged, i. 496, 497.

village described, i. 503, 504.

surrounded with sand, i. 171,

Arabs and the French consul, i. 129.

Arabs on English justice, i, 130.

Arcadia in Egypt, i. 95.

Architects’ modern plans of the Pyramid,
iii, 138.

Are sides of Great Pyramid equally in-
clined ? iii. 13-19.

Ark of the Covenant, ii. 463-467, 470 ;
iii. 507-510.

Arragonite chambers, i. 341.


606


Ascending passage, first, il. 36.

Ascent of Great Pyramid, i. 447.

A secret sign, i. 153, 154; iii. 310.

Astronomicalangular measures, li. 177,etc.

date for the building of the Great

Pyramid, iii. 322.

observations, i. 425, ete.

observations, the last, i. 548, 552.

Astronomy and chronology, proof from,
ii, 424-448,

close truth of Pyramid, i. 434, 438,

439.

of the Egyptian’s provincial, iii. 467-

469.

of the Pyramid symbolical, iii. 251.

Authorities, consequence of their being
no contemporary, iii. 367-370.

demanded for contemporary monu-

ments, iii. 363-366.

for date of Deluge, iii. 489.

for the eighteenth and later dynas-

ties, iii. 418-423.

historical, iii. 340-355.

Authority for the number twenty-five,
iii. 236-240.

for twenty-five inches, iii. 232-236.

Ayrton F., Pyramid measures by, ii. 299-
301.

observations on angle of Great

Pyramid, iii. 14-16.

thermometers lent by, ii. 198.

Azimuth of entrance passage of Great
Pyramid, ii. 189-192.

— second Pyramid, ii. 276, 277.

Azimuths of Great Pyramid corner soc-
kets, ii. 193-196.

rounds of, ii. 184.

Azimuth trenches, ii. 125-127, 185-188 ;
iii, 28-33.


BaBy.on of Egypt, i. 31.

Barometer indicates a storm, i. 160.

Basalt, black, i. 291.

Egyptian, i. 284-287.

standard, ii. 9-10.

Base of the Great Pyramid, a square, iii.
10-13.


INDEX.


Bats of the Pyramid, i. 552.

Beard, Dr., on Scripture weights and
measures, ii. 456.

Beauregard, Olivier, on Hebrew worship,
iii. 512, 513.

Bedouin Arabs, two sides to their char-
acters, i. 393.

Belon, M., on triangular stone in the
valley of Jehoshaphat, iii. 543.

Belzoni’s discovery of the entrance to
the second Pyramid, i. 265, 266.

opinion on the casing-stone, i. 205.

Benihassan, tombs of, iii. 402-406.

Bevan, Rev. W. L., on Scripture weights
and measures, ii. 456.

Birch, Mr. Samuel, on translating hiero-
glyphics, i. 316, 317, 320, 321.

translation on the tablets of the
Sphinx, i. 329-333.

Birds of the desert, i. 296-298.

Bones and burials, i. 313.

Boolak, Museum of, i. 8-15.

Britain in particular, and Israelitic warn-
ing, iii. 596.

British Consul, i. 1, 2.

Browne’s Rev. H., Ordo Seclorum, iii.
516.

Bruce’s account of the simoom, i. 421.

Brugsch, M., date of the Great Pyramid,
iii, 242.

on the astronomy of the Egyptians,
iii. 467, 468.

Bryant, Jacob, Dissertation on Ancient
History, iii. 526-528.

Builders of the Great Pyramid, names
and dates of the, ili. 314-339.

Bunsen, Baron, date of the Great Pyra-
mid, iii. 241.

on the astronomy and geometry of

the Egyptians, iii. 466, 467.

on the difference between the Great

and other Pyramids, iii. 449-451.

on the scientific objects of the

Great Pyramid, iii. 293-295.

views of the Exodus, iii. 445-447.

true Egyptian history, iii. 359.

Business, a new, i. 523.


INDEX.


CAIRENE PHILOSOPHERS, i. 311.

Cairo, daybreak in, i. 21.

opinions of, i. 20.

seat of the Egyptian and Scientific
Institute, i. 2.

—— theories on casing-stones, i. 209, 210.

waiting in, i. 16-19.

Calendar, our, corresponds with the
primitive year, ii. 424-428.

Calm after the storm, i. 310.

Camel nature, i. 41.

Camels photographed, i. 482.

Camera described, i. 475-481.

Campbell’s Tomb described, i. 315-320.

Candle-carrying, modes of, i. 69.

Canterbury, letter of Archbishop of,
iii, 488.

Capacity measure, Pyramid, iii. 174.

standard, sacred Hebrew, ii. 460-
470.

Caphtorims, the, iii. 524,°526-531.

Casing-stones, angular proof in frag-
ments of, i, 217.

existence of, denied, i. 209, 210.

doubted, i. 204-206.

—— fitted into a model at theoretical
angle, iii. 18, 19.

fragments of, i. 213, 216-218 ; ii.

167-170.


or


second Pyramid, ii. 277, 278.

Catastrophe, the, i. 239, 240.

Cattle disease, i. 18.

Causation, objects of, iii. 313.

Causeway theories, i. 291, 292.

Caviglia’s excavations at the Sphinx, im-
portance of, i. 329.

Ceiling of King’s Chamber, ii. 111-113.

Chaldzan temples, iii. 453-455.

Chambers of construction, ii. 113.

Chesney, Colonel, expedition to the
Euphrates, iii. 452.

Chippings of stones at Great Pyramid,
what became of them ? i. 185, 186.
Circle observations inside the Great

Pyramid, i. 442, 443.
Cireular clinometer, ii. 145-147, 156-158.
Clarke, Captain, A.R. (R.E.), computa-


607


tions on the figure of the earth,
ii. 450, 451].

Clarke, Dr., on Al Mamoon’s hole, i.
159, 160.

on ascending the Great Pyramid,

i, 450-452.

on Egyptian pebbles, i. 177.

on the French troops in Egypt,

i. 508, 509.

on the tribe of Egyptian lizards,
i. 405.

Clayey soil of the Nile, i. 46.

Cleaning in the Pyramid, i. 114, 115.

Clemens Alexandriuus on the religion of
the Egyptians, iii. 514, 515.

Coffer belongs to the King’s Chamber,
iii. 161, 163, 167-169.

—— hitting the, i. 90. “

in King’s Chamber, ii. 104, 105,

114-124.

ledge cut in the, i. 86-89.

measured, i. 377-388.

various accounts of the, iii. 146-150.

Compass points, iii, 211-215.

Composition of the Pyramid hill, iii.
84-86.

Concluding week, i. 517.

Constellations as means for perpetuating
ideas, iii. 566-569.

with whom rests the right to name
or re-name ? iil. 562-565.

Consular introduction to the Viceroy, i. 4,

Consultation, a serious, i. 125-129.

Cooking fuel of Cairo, i. 24.

Corner angles of the Great Pyramid,
ii. 171-176.

sockets, azimuth of the, ii. 193-196.

diagonals of the, i. 529, 530.

—— —— importance of the, i. 528.

in theory, i. 524, 525.

measures of the, ii. 134-136.

Cotton fever, i. 17.

growing in Egypt, i. 17.

Country between Jeezeh and the Pyra-
mids, i. 44-45,

Courses, number of, in Great Pyramid,
i. 452, 453 ; iii. 62,


608


Coventry, A., Esq., circular clinometer

presented by, uu. 141.
- description of clinometer, i.

166.

clinometer prepared to measure the
Grand Gallery, i. 302, 303.

clinometer, satisfactory working of,
i. 304, 309-311.

Cross the Nile, i. 39.

Cubit, sacred, ii. 454-460.

Cubits, Sir Isaac Newton on, ii. 341-366.

Cumberland’s, Bishop, idea of Scripture
weights and measures, ii. 455.

on Pyramid weights and measures,
iii. 116, 117.

Cuseans retire from Egypt northward,
iii, 526.

Cush, sons of, honourably noted in Scrip-
ture, iii. 519.

Cycle of a day, ii. 260.

Cyclone without rain, i. 163.


165,


DasHoor PYRAMID, account of, important,
iii, 26, 27.

Data, hypsometrical, iii. 60-81.

Date of the Great Pyramid, iii. 240, 246.

Date-palms, i, 44.

Datum plane to refer all levels at Great
Pyramid, iii. 60.

Deaths frequent, i. 230.

Deluge, date of, iii. 276, 482-495.

Departure, final, i. 561-563.

of cleaning party, i. 137.

Derivation of the word ‘ Pyramid,’ i.
120-122.

Desert birds, i. 296-298.

precautions, i. 106.

swallows, i. 298.

vegetation, i. 521.

Deserted in the Grand Gallery, i. 305.

Determination of weight on the Pyramid
system, ili. 175-177.

Diagonal joints in entrance passage, i.
152, 153, 156.

Diagonals of the coffer, ii. 123, 124.

of the sockets, i. 529, 530.

Diorite, iii, 100, 101.


INDEX.


Diorite, fragments of, 1. 188.

sculpture, i, 14.

Dip of entrance passage of second Pyra-
mid, ii. 276.

Discordance of Scripture chronology, iii.
483-485.

Discovery of fragments of casing-stones,
i, 216.

Disturbances in measuring, i. 149, ete.

Division of scientific labour agreed on,
i. 536, 537.

Dogs, Egyptian, i. 335.

Domestic countings, i. 104, 106.

Dynasty, eighteenth, scenes in the, iil.
423-429,


EARLIEST CONTEMPORARY MONUMENTS OF
Eeyet, ii. 374-379.

Early Shemites not chosen, iii. 531.

Earth’s surface, has it moved? ii. 52-60.

East Tombs, admirably protected from
wind, i. 160.

excitement at, 1. 380-383.

first dinner at, i. 99, 100.

getting settled at, i. 97, 98.

position of convenient, i. 121.

selected for residence, i. 63.

Ecclesiastic stranger, i. 198.

Efforts of nature, i. 522.

Egypt, effects of heat and drought in,
ie J

has never liked strangers, i. 169.

justice to, i. 15.

kind of hero developed in Egypt,

iii. 433-441.

treasures of,-scattered over the
earth, i. 9, 10, 15.

Egyptian and Hebrew metrology, differ-
ences of, ii. 454-470 ; iii. 498.

dogs, i. 335, 336.

forward politics, i. 109.

fowls, i. 103.

genius for doing nothing, i. 407.

history, earliest proved point of,

356-373.

labourers, i. 108.


ete
pte
e


i


—— methods of justice, i. 128.


a


INDEX.


Egyptian monuments, characteristic of,
iii. 351-355.

morale, i. 101.

Scientific and Literary Institute,
EZ.

—— taste for wigs, i. 326.

travellers, iii. 349-351.

— wisdom of, fails to explain the
Pyramid, iii. 465-470.

Egyptians, origin of the, iii. 370-373.

punished in the building of the Great
Pyramid, iii. 528.

Elements of the figure of the earth, ii.
450, 451.

Engineering of Nile banks, iii. 386-390.

Englishwoman in Egypt, Mrs. Poole’s,
ii. 330.

Engravings of great French work on
Egypt, ii. 318-320.

Entrance passage and polar star, i. 433.

angle, ii. 144, 145.

beginning of, ii. 37.

blocked up, who did it? i. 76. |

breadth and height of, ii. 36.

holes in floor of, i. 74.

linear measure of floor of, ii. 11-16.

masonry, i. 146.

of Great Pyramid, azimuth of, ii.

188-192.

of roof of, ii. 17-20.

of second Pyramid, i. 260-262 ; ii.

274.

of walls of, ii. 21-30.

peculiar line in, ii. 27.

position of joints in, ii. 34.

relative lengths of stones in, ii. 33.

shaft of the, ii. 37.

view of errors of perpendicularity
of axis in, ii. 35.

Eratosthenes’ claim as a chronological
authority, iii. 348, 349,

Escorted to the city, i. 561.

Ethiopian lake, iii. 411.

Ethological researches by R. G. Hali-
burton, ii. 370-448.

Excavations, M. Mariette’s talent for,
i. L133.


VOL. III.


609


Exhibitions of photographs, ii. 280-284.

Experiments at the air-channels, i. 411-
416.

Exterior faces of Great Pyramid, ii. 165,
166.

substance of the Great Pyramid,

iii. 93, 94,


Frast oF SHEMM-EN-NESEEM, i. 488, 489.

Features in the Grand Gallery, ii. 68-70.

Festival of the Dead, by G. R. Halibur-
ton, i. 371-403.

Festivities after Ramadan, i. 234-236.

Figure of the coffer, ii. 117.

Final departure, i. 561-563.

result of clinometer measures, i. “
311.

First ascending passage, breadth and
height of, ii. 51.,

total length of, ii. 52-54.

Floor-blocks of stone in entrance passage,
i, 149.

Floor-joints in entrance passage, i. 152,
157.

Floor of antechamber, ii. 92, 93.

of entrance-passage, ii. 11-16.

of King’s Chamber, ii. 103, 104.

Floors of the chambers, height of, iii.
71-74.

Forbes, Principal, on latitude mean tem-.
peratures, i. 418.

on mean temperatures, iii. 188, 189.

Former and present prices in Egypt,
i. 542, 543.

Fossil shells, extraordinary number of,
i. 410, 411.

Fragments of casing-stones, i. 217; ii. 167.

Freemasons, letters of the, ii. 367-369.

French discovery of sockets, ii. 317, 318.

Institute in Egypt, Dr. Clarke’s

account of the, i. 86-88.

measures of the Great Pyramid’s

height in 1800, ii. 309-317.

savants allude to the metrological

purposes of Great Pyramid, iii. 118.

work, engravings of, ii. 318-320.

Fresh-water levels, iii. 74-78.


2Q


610


Gaz, Rev. T., Finis Pyramidis, i. 201-
203 ; iii. 118-132.

Gala, native party, i. 135, 136.

General holiday-making, i. 236.

proportions of King’s Chamber, ii.
101, 102.

Genius, ways of a, i. 278-280.

Geological rock of the region of the
Pyramids, i. 171-177.

specimens brought home, ii. 293,
294.

Gezeereh, description of the palace of, i.
5, 6.

Gods invented, i. 321.

Goshen, place of, i. 28, 29.

Grand clinometer prepared, i. 303.

satisfactory working of, i. 304,
309-311.

Grand Gallery, ii. 68-91.

angle, ii. 154-161.

importance of, i, 300, 301.

breadth of, between and above

ramps, i. 81.

deserted in the, i. 305.

invaded in the, by travellers, i.

306-309.

measures, i. 237, 238.

overlappings of, at north end, ii. 87-


91.

ramp holes on west side, ii. 81.

roof of, ii. 86, 87.

total length of, ii. 78.

upper or south end of, ii. 73, 74.

various measures of the, iii. 221.

vertical height of, ii. 84-86.

week in the, iii. 219, 222.

Grand Joseph canal, crossed by an Arab
stone bridge, i. 56.

Granite, iii. 101, 106.

block, size of special, i. 345.

coffer, ii. 114,

coffer made of, i. 85.

constructions contested, i. 356-361.

halls, i. 340.

leaf, ii. 99, 100.

so named by Professor Greaves,


i. 365.


INDEX.


Granite, square beams and pillars of,
i, 342, 343.

Great Pyramid, age of the, iii. 481-485.

apparent steps of the, i. 448.

ascent of the, i. 448-454.

astronomy, iii. 277-285.

attestations, iii. 286-291.

cemetery, 1. 312-314,

chippings of the stones at the,

i. 184-186.

different from all others in Egypt,

iii, 141.

exterior and substance of the, iii.

93-95.

first visit to the, i, 68-96.

internal substance of the, iii. 86-92.

is the, to be regarded as astronomi-

cal? iii. 246-251.

latter-day tomb, i. 317.

manifestation, proposed solutions of

the, iii. 570.

metrological monument, iii, 115-122.

mode of ascending the, i, 449, 450.

night spent on the top of the, i.

454-465.

orientation of the, iii, 106-111.

preparation of report on the, i.

102.

required higher wisdom than man’s

to originate, iii. 470-478.

report on the, i. 67.

the beginning of monumental his-

tory, iii. 364,

the four sides of the, incline at equal

angles, iii. 13-19.

unity of masonry in the, i, 252,

253.

various authorities for date of the,
iii, 241-246.

Greaves’, Professor, cubit deduced from
measures, ii. 337.

on the beauty of the architecture

of the interior of the Great Pyramid,

i. 79,

relates a Frenchman’s account of

lizards, i. 405, 406.

standard of measure, ii. 334.


INDEX.


Greaves’, Professor, weights aud mea-
sures of the Pyramid, iii, 117.

Greek inscriptions versus Egyptian, i.
328, 329.

Grinding-stone establishment, i. 293, 294.

Guards again give trouble, i. 138.

on a cold night, i. 120.

question of, i. 64, 65.

Gypsum and its use, i. 553.


HAtgs, Dr., on the times of Job, iii. 534,
537. ;

Haliburton’s, Mr., letter to Mr. M‘Gre-
gor, ii, 368.

on the Year of the Pleiades, i. 330.

researches bearing on the Pleiades’
year, ii, 370-444,

Hamilton’s, Sir W., ode on quaternions,
i, 453.

Hartnup, J., Esq., instruments tested by,
ii. 197.

Hassan, an old Arab, described, i. 228, 229.

Hawk photographed on the wing, i. 483.

Heat measures, ii. 197, 198.

question, iii, 193-202.

standards, iii, 177-202.

— whence does such heat come? i.
418-420.

Heights of chamber floors, iii. 71-74.

Height, vertical, of Great Pyramid, ii.
128-133.

Hekekyan Bey’s chronology of Siriadic
monuments, iii. 7.

on Egyptian dynasties, iii. 320.

Hero, the kind of, developed in Egypt,
iii. 433-436.

Herodotus as a traveller and chronolo-
gist, iii. 349, 350.

describes the Pyramid as cased, i.
208.

Herschel’s, Sir John, a Draconis theory,
iii. 260, 261.

—— blue-fluid, adjusting actinometer,
i, 124.

date of Great Pyramid, iii. 242-244.

on unit of linear measure, iii. 597.

outlines of astronomy, iii, 559.


611


Heth, children of, i. 126.

Hieroglyphic note, i. 246, 247.

Hill, Pyramid, theories, i. 180-187.

south of the Pyramids, geology of
the, i. 179.

Historical authorities, iii. 342-355.

History, notes in Great Pyramid, iii. 303.

Holes in floor of entrance passage, ii. 14-
16.

Horizontal angles at the corner base of
Great Pyramid, ii. 176.

passage, breadth and height of, ii.
58-61.

Humble, on nummulite rock, i. 172, 173.

Hyksos, invasion of, iii. 406-410.

Hypsometric table of the Great Pyramid,
iii. 82.

Hypsometrical reference of the Great
Pyramid by M. Jomard, ii. 321.

Hypsometry of the Great Pyramid, iii.
60-81.


IsRAHEEM, engagement and description
of, i, 42.

Igneous agency, no traces on the Pyra-
mid hill of, i. 176.

Importance of the angle of the Grand
Gallery, i. 301.

Inclined passages, how much inclined ?
iii, 32-40. :

Inglis, Mr., measures of base of Great
Pyramid, ii. 134,

four sides of the Great Pyra-

mid base, iii. 124-127,

levels of corner sockets, ii. 136.

superintended the excavation of the

sockets, i. 526-535.

uncovered the four corner-sockets,
iii, 11.

Inscriptions,
331-352.

on the interior walls of the Pyra-

mid, i. 84,

on the Sphinx, i. 327-331.

Inspiration, iii. 479-481, 511, 532-534.

Inspired messengers were foreigners, iii.
§21.


conclusions from the, i.


612


Instrumentals, i. 272.

Instruments used in measuring the Great
Pyramid, ii. 139-148.

Intentions of the Great Pyramid’s mani-
festation, iii. 570-572.

Interior of an Arab house, i. 500, 501.

Internal measures of coffer, ii. 121.

substance of the Great Pyramid,
iii. 86-92.

Inundation effects, i. 47.

disappearing, i. 143.

Invaded by travellers in the Grand Gal-
lery, i. 306, 307.

Invasion of the Hyksos, iii. 406-410.

Invented gods, i. 321.

Trrigation by wells, i. 28.

Israelitic warning, Britain in particular,
and, iii, 597.

Itinerary measures, iii, 209-211.


JAMES, StR HENRY, on the specific gravity
of the earth, ii. 452, 453.

preparing a star-map, iii. 494.

Jasper pebbles, formation of, i. 177.

Jeezeh, town of, i, 40.

Jomard, M., angle of Grand Gallery
given by, i. 302.

—— hypsometrical reference of Great
Pyramid by, ii. 321.

Joseph period, iii. 410-414,


Kaxtrpo At MAmoon’s HOLE, i, 158, 159.
Kater’s, Captain, yard standard, ii. 9.
King’s Chamber, ii. 101-113.

caution on entering, i. 366, 367.
—— difficult to illuminate, i. 367.
magnesium photography in, i. 490,
etc.

peculiar masonry of, i. 371-373.
place of the, in the Pyramid,
iii, 169-172.

various accounts of the courses in
the walls of the, ili. 163-166.

walls of, i. 83.

King Shafre’s tomb. i. 338.

——- a sun-dial, i. 440, 441.

—— who first discovered it? i. 462, 463.


INDEX,


Lane, Mr. E. W., Pyramid measures by,
ii, 330-333.

Last of the holiday, i. 238.

Latitude observations, ii. 180-183.

observations, check on, i. 447-462.

of Great Pyramid, iii. 40-47.

Laws of phenomena, iii. 3-9.

of Pyramid decaying, i. 183.

Ledge of coffer unrepresented in the
French engraving, i. 86, 87.

date of the, i. 89. —

Lepsius, Dr.; date of the Great Pyramid,
iii, 242.

inscription on the Great Pyramid,

iii, 94.

on the permanency of Egyptian

buildings, iii, 369.

opinion regarding the trenches,

iii, 32.

Pyramid building theory, i. 183.

Letters, arrival of, from the Consul and
Consul-General, i. 115.

Levels, fresh-water, iii. 74-87.

of King’s Chamber, ii. 162, 163.

sea-water, iii. 78.

Lewis, Sir C., ancient astronomy, iii.
550, 551.

date of the Great Pyramid, iii. 240,

241.

examination into the methods of
Egyptologists, iii, 325-327.

Lieder, Dr., death of, i. 59.

desert Pyramid, i. 455, 456-464.

Life under the New Empire, iii. 400-448.

Old Empire, iii. 374-399.

Linear measures, ii. 1, etc., 128, ete.

Lines, particular, on either wall of en-
trance passage, i. 150, 151.

List of positive photographs, ii, 284-292.

Little girls in Cairo, i. 23, 24.

Lizards, i. 405.

Locusts again, i. 520.

arrival of, i. 486, 487.

Longitude, attempt to get the, i. 461,
462.

Long nights and short days, i. 102, 103.

Lordly traders, i. 36, 37.


"INDEX.


Lyell, Sir C., on nummulitic formation,
i, 174.


MAcHPELAH, Cave of, ili. 543.

Magnesium photography, i. 469, 487,
496, 518-521.

the last of, i, 554, 555.

Mahmoud Bey’s date of the Great Pyra-
mid, iii. 244, 245.

measures of the Pyramid’s base, iii.

124, 125.

Siriadic theory, iii, 251-260.

Manetho’s Egyptian dynasties according
to various authors, ili. 321-333.

Manifestation, intention of the Great
Pyramid’s, iii. 570-572.

Manner of sound coming out of the Pyra-
mid, i. 444-446.

Marble, what is it? i. 206, 207.

Mariette Bey, i. 8, 9.

interview with, i. 7, 8.

statue of the Pyramid king, i. 344.

tablet of Memphis discovered by,
ig:12.

Masonry of the entrance passage, i. 146,
147.


fineness of the joints, i. 147.

Material for standard scales, i. 288.

Materials of the Great Pyramid, iii, 82-
106.

Maundeville, Sir John, on his introduc-
tion to the Sultan, i. 4, 5.

on the Pyramids, iii. 120.

Mazzaroth, by Miss F. Rolleston, iii. 551,
556-559.

Mean daily temperature in the shade, ii.
265, 266.

density of the earth, iii..151, 152.

Measurement, style of, in the entrance
passage, i. 147,

Measurer, a lost, i, 280.

Measuring, how to begin, i. 145.

Measures connecting porteullis block
with passage, ii. 41-43.

——— in Queen’s Chamber, ii. 64-67.


—— of first ascending passage, ii. 44-
54,


613


Measures of Grand Gallery, ii. 70-91.
of niche in Queen’s Chamber, ii. 66,


67.


of ramp-holes, ii. 80-83.

of second Pyramid, ii. 271-278.

on a slope, i. 148.

Medieval Sultans, i. 5.

Members of Cairo Institute, i. 3.

Memorial to the Viceroy, i. 4-8.

Memphis, length of the cubit of, ii. 337-
340.

Men of the fourth dynasty, iii. 379-383.

Meteorological abstract, ii. 263.

inquiry, conclusion of, iii. 291-299.

—— instruments set up, i. 119.

—— journal, ii. 210-259.

aso commenced, i. 118.

—— observations, reduction of, iii. 190.

Society of Scotland, ii. 264.

Jerusalem station of, ii.


270.

Meteorology of a mean day at East
Tombs, ii. 261.

the months, ii. 262-264.

Metrological test of European races, iii.
592.

Metrology, style of it suitable, iii. 509-
51l.

suitable as a subject, iii. 495-498.

Michaelis, on the plans taken by Moses
regarding weights and measures, iii.
498-507.

Minister of antiquities, i. 7.

Model of Pyramid, iii. 18, 19.

Modern measures of the coffer, iii. 146.

paint misused, i. 84,

Moens’ English travellers and Italian
brigands, i. 393.

Mohammed’s use of sand, i. 163.

Mokattam hills described, i. 50-57.

limestone, i. 207.

Molten sea, ii. 467-470; iii. 507-510.

Monumental documents still to be pro-
cured, iii. 303-309.

history, Great Pyramid, the begin-
ning of, ili. 364.

Morning in Cairo, i. 22.


614


Morning in the desert, i. 105.

Moses the adopted son of Queen Thuoris,
iii, 441-444.

Mulqufs, described, i. 22.

Murchison, Sir R., on the nummulitic
formation, i. 174.

Museum of Boolak, i. 10-13.


Names and dates of the builders of the
Great Pyramid, iii, 314-339.

Nature, efforts of, i. 522.

_ Neat quarrying, i, 246.
“Newton, Sir Isaac, deduction from Pro-
fessor Greaves’ measures, ii. 337.
Dissertation on Cubits, ii. 341-
366; iii. 134, 135, 510.

Niche in Queen’s Chamber, ii. 66-67.

in wall of Queen’s Chamber, what
for? i. 200.

Niebuhr, M. on casing-stones, i. 206.

on the granite of the third Pyramid,
i, 259, 260.

Night comes on before journey is com-
pleted, i. 51.
guards described, i. 66.
troubles about, i, 227.
view from the top of the Pyramid,
i. 456-462.

Nile birds, i. 49.

cross the, i. 39.

Nile valley, clayey soil of, i. 46.

Norden’s, Captain, rules for visiting the
Pyramid, i. 368-371.

North air-channel, water experiment in,
ii. 207, 208.

Northern air-channel, experiment at, i.
411-414.

Notes on character of surface of east and
west walls, ii. 26-28.

floor of entrance-passage, ii. 13-16.

measures of the walls, ii. 31, 32.

roof of entrance-passage, ii. 19, 20.

Nouet’s, M., observations on Pyramid
latitude, iii. 44, 45.

Nubian slave, pursuit of, i. 227.

Number twenty-five, authority for, iii.
236-240.


INDEX.


Nummulites, i, 172, 173.


OBJECTION, a new, iii. 533.

Observations, check on latitude, i. 447.

with the Playfair instrument, i. 547.

Observed angles of casing-stones, ii. 169,
170.

Old Empire, conclusion of the, iii. 397.

life under the, iii. 374-399.

Oliver and Boyd’s Edinburgh Almanac,
ili. 593.

Opinion, theory gives an, i. 534.

Optical measure with Playfair alt-azimuth,
ii, 147, 148.

Opticians, i. 275-277.

Ordnance Survey Maps, iii. 597, 598.

officers, size and figure of the earth
by the, ii. 449, 450.

Original opinion of nummulites, i. 172-
174,

Originate, Great Pyramid required higher
wisdom than man’s to, iii. 470-478.
Origination of the Great Pyramid on reli-

gious grounds, iii. 479-544, |
scientific grounds, iii. 449-478.
Origin of the Egyptians, iii. 370-373.
- Sphinx, i. 333; iii. 417. |
Orientation of the Great Pyramid, i. 434, |
435; iii. 106-111.
King Shafre’s tomb, i. 439-442.
Ornament on granite leaf, ii. 100.
Osburn, W., as an Egyptian historian and
philologist, iii. 340-348.
critical acumen of, iii. 434-436.
views of the Exodus, iii. 444, 445.
Ovals in the quarry-marks, i. 347-349.
of King Shafre, i. 348, 349.
Overlappings of Grand Gallery, ii. 87-91.
Owls, i. 304.
Oxoniensis, letter from, ii. 367.


PALACE TomB, i. 337.

Palgrave’s experiences of the simoom,
i. 420.

Passage, first ascending, ii. 149-151.

horizontal to Queen’s Chamber, ii.

152, 153.


INDEX.


Passages and angles, i. 141, ete.

how much inclined, iii. 35-40.

Paucton, M., on Pyramid metrological
purposes, iii. 118, 127-129.

Pavement found, Great. Pyramid, ii. 136,
137.

Period of Joseph, iii. 410-414.

Perring’s, Mr., idea of the use of the
trenches, iii. 32.

Phenomena, laws of, iii. 3-9.

Philition the shepherd, iti. 525, 526, 531.

Photographed, group of Arabs, i. 400.

Photographic subjects, qualities of, i.
480-485.

witness, i. 351-353.

Photographs, exhibitions of, ii, 280-284.

negative, ii, 279, 280.

positive, ii. 280-292.

Photography, a witness, i. 351-353.

degrees of quickness in, i. 478, etc.

effect of a flight of locusts on, i.

486.

self-willed notions of, i. 470, etc.

—— under many difficulties, i. 518, 519.

Playfair alt-azimuth instrument, i, 425-
431, 435, ete.

—— in Grand Gallery, ii. 159-161.

circle again produced, i. 538.

Pleiades and the Pyramid, iii. 271-277.

year a prehistoric tradition, i. 330.

Plumb-bob, Arabs admiration of the, i.
538.

Plunderers plundered, i. 508-511.

Pococke, Dr., observations on the second
Pyramid, i. 253, 254.

Points of compass, iii. 209-215.

Polar star and entrance passage, i. 433.

Pole-star, Great and second Pyramid
compared with the, i. 438, 439.

more observations of the, i. 444-
446, 461, 462.

Polyspaston, as mentioned by Vitruvius,
i. 186.

Ponderous doors, i. 346.

Poole’s, Mrs., Englishwoman in Egypt, i.
204.

Portcullis, granite, ii. 40-43, 52-54.


Porterage, mode of, i. 432.

Position of second Pyramid, i. 249.

Prepare to use grand clinometer, i. 302,
303.

Preparations for leaving the Pyramid, i.
546, 555-561.

Present vertical height of Great Pyramid,
iii. 61-67.

President at the British Association,
Nottingham, quoted, iii. 475, 476.

Prices in Egypt, former and present, i.
542, 543.

Primeval astronomy, iii. 545-569.

statue, i. 13, 14.

Proctor, R. A., Saturn and its system,
iii, 547, 553.

Prodromus Astronomic, iii. 547, 548.

Proportions of King’s Chamber, ii. 101,
102.

Proposed reforms amongst the constella-
tions, il. 559.

solutions, iii. 572-581.

Psammetichus the Second, tomb of the
time of, i. 319.

Piickler Muskau, Prince, account of, i.
193, 194.

Pyramid and modern workmen, i, 438,
439.

astronomy, close truth of, i. 434,

438, 439.

base, length of sides, ii. 133, 134.

—— builders and Greek workmen, i.
436, 437. .

chambers compared, i. 268-270.

cleaning, difficulties of, i. 132, 133.

competing inscriptions on, i. 72-84.

derivation of the word, iii. 120,

121.

entrance passage, i, 73.

—— hill, composition of the, iii. 84-86.

idea, whence derived? iii. 460-

465.

king, statue of, i. 344.

latitude, iii. 40-52.

linear measures, ili. 142.

materials, analysis of, ii. 295, 296.

mean temperature, ii. 192.


616


Pyramid measures by Aiton and Inglis,
ii. 302-308.

—— Ayrton, ii. 299-301.

Lane, ii. 330-333.

Vyse and Perring, ii. 322-329.

of Suphis, iii. 103.

passage blocked up, i. 73.

present uses of, i. 71.

reach the Great, i. 58.

stones, raising, i. 182.

theoretics, i. 189.

—— theory, i. 89, 90.

—— two dominant angles of, iii. 204-
207.

weight measure, tables of, iii. 174,
175.

Pyramids and their kings, iii. 391-396.

own rubbish heaps, i. 212-214.

pictorial qualities of the, i.

516.

progress of modern discovery, i,

506, 507.

view of the, described, i. 48.


——


514-


QuADRANT, structural reference to the,
iii. 207-209.

Quarry-marks, ii. 113.

Quarrying, neat, i. 246.

Queen’s Chamber, i. 92, 196-201; ii.
62-67.

horizontal passage to, ii. 55-61.

measures of the, iii. 229-232.

Sabbatical week in the, ii. 222-229.

saline incrustation on walls of, i.

199 ; ii. 56, 63.

niche in wall of, i. 200.


RAMADAN, arrival of, i. 118.

boasting against, i. 139.

comes, i. 140.

ends, i. 232, 233.

its first effects, i. 219.

its probable influence, i. 220,
rejoicings at the conclusion of,
i, 234-236.

surpassed, i, 222,

troubles of, i. 225.


INDEX.


Radiation effects, i. 273.

Raising Pyramid stones, i. 182.

Ramp-holes in Grand Gallery, ii. 78-84.

Rawlinson’s, Rev. G., Five Great Mon-
archies of the Ancient Eastern World,
ili, 453, 485.

Reception at Sheikh Deadar’s, i. 52, 53,
ete.

Reference scale, i. 274; ii. 6-9.

scale constructed, i. 294, 295.

scales, first and second, i. 282-284.

system intended, i. 275, 281, 282.

Reis Alee Shafee and his little men,
is AD, er,

Atfee’s appeal, i. 142.

Relations of Pyramid capacity and weight
measure, ili, 174, 175.

Religious principles of the Egyptians,
iii, 429-433.

Remarkable fragments of stone, i. 290. -

Renan, M., assertion on the verticality
of the walls of King’s Chamber tested,
i. 376.

date of the Great Pyramid, iii. 245,

—— ideas on Egyptian antiquities, i.
10, 11.

—— on the idolatry of the Egyptians,
iii, 426.

on the most ancient of

tombs, i. 339.

on the Sphinx, i. 332, 333. :

—— theory touching the Sphinx, i. 350-
353.

Research de novo, iii. 456-460.

Results of Pyramid cleaning, i. 136.

Revue des Deux Mondes for April 1865,
ai:


temple


*| Rise of the Theban power, iii. 414-418.


Rocks and ancient rubbish, i. 170.

varieties of, i. 175.

Rolleston, Miss, Mazzaroth, by, iii. 551,
556-559, 568.

Roof of entrance passage, east and west
sides compared, ii. 19.

Grand Gallery, ii. 86, 87.

Romé de l’Isle, M., on Pyramid metrical
purposes, iii. 118, 130, 131.


fn


INDEX.


Royal Egyptian fly, i. 295.


Society of Edinburgh, specimens
presented to, ii. 294.

Rougé, M. le Vicomte de, mission to
Egypt, i. 12.

Rounds of azimuths, ii, 184.

Rubbish-heaps, examine their composi-
tion, i. 187.

Pyramid’s own, i. 212-214.

Rumours ascending, i. 24, 25.

Russian metrology, iii. 600.


SABBATICAL WEEK, iii. 222-229.

Sacred Hebrew standards of weights and
measures, ii. 454-470.

Saline incrustations on walls of Queen’s
Chamber, i. 199; ii. 56, 63.

Salt inside the Pyramid, iii. 95-98.

Sand ribbings, i. 163-165,

storm, i. 161-165.

Sands of desert advancing on cultivated
land, i. 171.

Sandys, George, describes the Pyramids,
i, 505.


on the Sphinx, i. 325.

Sarcophagus covered, i. 320.

of second Pyramid, ii. 271-273.

Savi, Dr. Paolo, explanation of the camel
red-bladder phenomenon, i. 41.

Scale-slider of 400 inches, ii. 84, 85.

Scales employed for linear measure, ii. 2.

Scenes in the eighteenth dynasty, iii.
423-429.

Scheme of assistance at the Great Pyra-
mid, i. 7, 8.

Scientific requirements versus artistical,
i, 472, 473.

Scotland, Meteorological latitude of, ii.
264.

Screw steamer ‘Thessalia,’ loading of,
1 278,

Scripture chronology, discordances of,
lil, 483-495,

Sculpture of diorite, i. 14.

Search for a stone for a standard scale,
i, 287-293.

Sea-water levels, iii. 78, 79.


YOu, Tit.


617


Second Pyramid, i. 243-265.

Secret sign, i. 153.

Servants in Egypt, i. 32, 33.

deserted by, i. 37, 38.

Sesostris Ramses, monumental history of,
iii. 434-441.

Sextant horizon instrument, ii. 144, 149.

method of measuring, i. 168.

Shafre’s, King, tomb, well in, 1. 204.

temple tomb, i. 339-347.

Shaft of entrance passage, ii. 37.

of first ascending passage, ii. 46.

Sheikh Abdul Samed’s misfortunes, i.
127-131.


how he managed the travel-
lers, i. 491-494.

invited to visit, i. 498, 499.
Deadar’s arrival at, i. 52.

—— Murri’s present, i. 545.

of Kafr-el-Batran imposed on Col.
Vyse, i, 192.

Omer’s visit, i. 226.

Shelley, Dowager Lady, Thoughts on the
Doubts of the Day, iii. 431, 432, 562.
Siculus, Diodorus, on building the Pyra-

mid, i. 184.
Side holes in Grand Gallery, ii. 72-73. .
Sidebotham, J., on the use of measuring-
rods, i. 423.
procured organ-pipes for scales, ii. 7.
Sign, an uninterpreted, iii. 310-313.
Signals just secured, i. 550, 551.
Sieur du Mont descending the Great
Pyramid, i. 465.
description of Arab character, i.
392, 393.
Simoom, i. 420-422. :
Size and figure of the earth, ii. 449-453.
of coffer, ii, 123.
of various Pyramids, iii. 141.
Sizes of special granite blocks, i. 345.
Skaife’s, Mr., pistolgraph, i. 477, 478.
Skulls, price given for, in Cairo, i. 312.
Slave merchant, i. 485.
Slider scales, ii. 3-6.
Slope of Pyramid, i. 446.
Small owls at the Pyramid, i. 304.


2k


618


Smyth’s, Admiral, celestial cycle, iii. 550.

Rev. Mr., measured south air-chan-
nel, i. 415; ii. 164.

Snakes, i, 403, 404, 423, 424.

Social relations, iii. 383-386.

Sockets, discovery of, by the French,
ii, 317, 318.

peculiar lines marked in the, ii.


27.


portraitured, i. 546, 547.

Soil of the Nile valley, i. 46.

Solar radiation, i. 123.

Solitary tree group, i. 178.

Solomon’s molten sea, ii. 467-470.

Solutions proposed, on the Great Pyra-
mid’s manifestation, iii. 572-581.

South air-channel, water experiment in,
i. 414-416.

South hill top, view from, i. 408.

Special qualities of Egyptian basalt, i.
284-287.

storm, ii. 267-270.

Specific gravities, iii. 176, 177.

Specific gravity of the earth, ii. 452, 453 ;
iii, 151, 152, 157-161.

Specimens brought home, ii. 293, 294.

Sphinx, an andro-Sphinx, i. 58.

described, i. 322.

first view of, i. 57, 58.

oldest known representation of a,

i. 332; iii. 417.

various authors on the, i. 324-333.

Spring, signs of, in the desert, i. 402.

Standard of basalt, ii. 9-10.

Standards of angle, iii. 202-215.

of heat, iii. 177-202. -

of measure of Professor Greaves,

ii. 334-336.

of size, iii. 123-143.

of time, iii. 215-218,

of weight, iii. 143-177.

Star-maps, explanation of, iii, 283-285.

Starting from Cairo, i. 31-38.

Statue, oldest in the world, i. 13, 14.

Stewart, Mr. Balfour, on specific gravi-

Stone, remarkable fragments of, i. 290.
ties of limestone and sand, i, 322.


| Summit of Great Pyramid,


INDEX.


Stone standard scale intended, i. 284.

Stukeley, Dr., on Stonehenge, iii. 92.

tempera-
ture at the, i. 209. -

Sun and shade observations, i. 124.

Suspected fragments of casing-stones,
i; 213,

Swallows of the Desert, i. 298.


TABLES OF METRICAL EQUIVALENTS, Ili.
594, 595.

Tales of snakes, i. 423, 424.

Taylor, John, first to discover the true
angle of sides of Great Pyramid,
iii. 20.

metrological purposes for the Great

Pyramid, iii. 118-120, 133-137.

on the origination of the Great
Pyramid, iii. 470.

Taylor’s, John, opinion of King Cheops,
i. 468.

—— Pyramid angle theory, ili. 30-33.

religious bearings of the Great

Pyramid, iii. 534, 537-543.

theory developed, iii. 286.

Temperature, i. 417-420.

observations in second Pyramid,

i, 262.

of wells in Cairo, i. 26-28.

Temperatures, Great Pyramid, ii. 206,
207.

of room of second Pyramid, ii. 274.

of summit of Great Pyramid, ii.
209.

Temple tombs, most ancient of, i. 339-
347.

Time observations, ii. 177-179.

Time of Great Pyramid’s performance
suitable, ili. 481-495.

standards of, ili. 215-218.

Theban power, rise of, ili. 414-418.

Theories of causeways, i. 291, 292.

Theory, angular proof of casing-stone,
in 2

appealed to, i. 533.

gives an opinion and is justified,

i. 534, 535,


INDEX.


Theory, Rev. Mr. Gabb’s Pyramid, i. 201-
204.

Thickness of coffer, ii. 120, 121.

Third Pyramid, i. 257-260.

Three methods of observation for the
angle of Grand Gallery, ii. 161.

Thuoris, Queen, iii, 441-444,

Tourists, increase of, i. 144.

nationalities distinguishable, i. 122.

on hot days, i. 121.

Tombs, advantages of, i. 272-275.

choosing a home amongst the, i. 59-


61.

—— fitting up, i. 113.

old and new, i. 312.

varieties of, i. 59-63.

Traditions of the Deluge, ili. 490-494.

Travellers, a torrent of, i. 194, 195.

confounded, i. 308.

on the top of the Pyramid, i. 464-

466.

on the wall-joints, i, 151.

ways, i. 368-371.

Treasure, little found at the Jeezeh
Pyramids, iii. 7.

Trenches, azimuth, ii. 125-127.

clearing out of the, i. 134, 135.

Trevor, Rev. G., Ancient Hgypt, iii.
516, 517, 525,

Triangular stone in roof of entrance
passage, i. 155.

Truth of wall-joints in entrance passage,
“i. 150.

Turkish rule and Arab roughs, i. 392-
394,


UNEXPECTED RESULT OF ENTRANCE PAS-
SAGE ANGLE, i. 167, 168.
Uses made of the casing-stones, i. 210.


VaLEnTIA, Lorp, on the object of the
Pyramids, i, 265.

Vausleb, M., on the non-squareness of
the Great Pyramid, iii. 10.

Pyramid theory, i. 181.

Variations of masonry in second Pyra-
mid, i, 254, 255,


619


Various reported angles of Grand Gal-
lery, i. 302.

Vassalis, M., idea adopted, i. 111.

on the Pyramid report, i. 107-110.

suggestion, i. 110.

superintendent of excavations, i.


65.

Vegetation, desert, i, 521.

Ventilating channels, ii. 164.

Vertical height of Great Pyramid, ii.
128-133 ; iii. 61-70.

Veryard, Dr., on descending the Great
Pyramid, i. 465.

Viceroy, His Highness the, introduction
to, i. 4-6.

Highness the, gracious decision, i.


30.


scheme of assistance proposed, 1.
Te

Visit to the fossil-shell hill, i. 407-411.

second Pyramid, i. 243-257.

Visitors, measuring hindered by, i. 190-
194.

Vyse, Colonel Howard, and Mr. Perring,
Pyramid measures by, ii. 322-329.

discovery of casing-stones by, i.

208, 209.

excavation of Campbell’s tomb, i.

317-320.

experiences of Egyptian Govern-

ment assistance, i. 110, 111.

first to clear out lower entrance of

second Pyramid, i. 267.

intelligent visitor’s account of, i.

191-193.

opened up Al Mamoon’s hole, i.
159.

—— Pyramid experiences, i. 189-190.

thoughts on the Pyramids, i. 512-

516.


Wattace, Dr., of Pyramid materials, ii.
295-298 ; iii. 97-100.

Wall-joints in entrance passage, i. 150,
151.

Walls of King’s Chamber, i. 372-377 ;
ii. 105-111.


620


Walls of Queen’s Chamber, i. 197-199.

Watching for the Citadel guns to fire,
i. 139, 140.

Water experiment, i. 298-300.

of sepulchre well, i. 344, 345.

Weights and measures, sacred Hebrew,
standards of, ii. 454-470.

on the Pyramid system, iii. 174,
175.

Week, symbolized in the Grand Gal-
lery, iii. 219-222.

Week, concluding, i. 517.
Well, particulars of, in Grand Gallery,
rina gi Pees
Well-temperature near the Pyramid, ii.
203-205.

Cairo, ii. 201, 202 ; iii. 191.

What an angle of 26° can do, i. 379,
380.

is exactly the angle of sides of
Great Pyramid, iii. 19-23.

What is Great Pyramid’s latitude? iii.
40-52,

is marble ? i. 206, 207.

What the carpenter said, iii. 18, 19.


INDEX.


When history was born, iii. 448.

Who invented the oldest constellations,
iii. 545-550.

Wilde, Dr., on Egyptian hawks, i. 297.

Wig, the Sphinx’s, i. 326.

Wilkinson, Sir Gardner, date of Great
Pyramid, iii, 241.

on certain royal

Thebes, i. 466, 467.

on the casing-stones, i. 210.

on the Sphinx, i. 324.

Wilson, Mr. John, on Anglo-Saxons, iii.
583-591.

Winds of the desert, i. 418.

With whom rests the right to name or
re-name the constellations? iii, 562-
565. ;

Woodcut views of second Pyramid, i.
254.

Working preliminaries, i. 97.

Workmen rebellious, i. 532.


sandals from


YEAR OF THE PLEIADES, i. 330, 331 ; iii.
263-271.
—— by R. G. Haliburton, ii. 370-448.


EDINBURGH : T. CONSTABLE,


PRINTER TO THE QUEEN, AND TO THE UNIVERSITY.


C5 50 MDI BR
198114.


02/94


4225 |


