On the Antiquity of Intellectual Man (Smyth, 1868)
==================================================
C. Piazzi Smyth — On the Antiquity of Intellectual Man, from a practical and astronomical point of view (Edinburgh, 1868), public domain. Smyth's pyramid-chronology polemic against Darwinian timelines. Scan via Internet Archive (onantiquityinte01smytgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.



CHRONOLOGICAL  CHART

or  STILL   EXISTING  EARLY

CONTEMPORARY  ARCHITECTURAL  TESTIMONY


^J>i


IJVX

uaalt-

Year

of

date/.


LOCALITIES     OR    NAT10M3.


I"


S"^


>^l


1.


Is


ii


500


A.D.
1500


i


;    j


i


1  =  Qujkt  PnuBiD  4iti  Miars
a  =  Tanu  »D  Uppi*  Batm.

S  =  UlkOI  ARb  Etsiopu.

4  =pK<no-C8AUijii.


0  =  Bi*tbo>,  llu>n  i>D  Pbksuks.
r  =  Ltbu  ud  Aiu  Mmoi  oinMUT.

8  =  PnuatcakHcikBrftniiiiplTiLT.

9  =  FkUKII,     SP*I«,     N.W.     AFKIOi,

Quus  Bmtui,  tiD  Ibilud.


ON  Tilli-ANTiOl  ri'\

OF  iNTrLL]-:Ti  a;    man.


ON  THE  ANTIQUITY
OF   INTELLECTUAL    MAN,

FEOM  A  PEACnCAL  AND  ASTRONOMICAL
POINT  OF  VIEW;

BY

C.  PIAZZI  SMYTH,  F.RSS.  L  &  K,


EDINBUEGH;

EDMONSTON    AND    DOUGLAS:

1868.


KDISBUBOB  :  PRIKTED  BT  THOMAB  CONSTABLE,

FOR

EDM0N8T0N  AND  DOUGLAS.

LONDON HAMILTON,  ADAMS,  AND  CO.

CAMBRIDOE MACMILLAN  AND  CO.

OLAHOOW JAMBS  MACLEHOSE.


TO  THOSE  FEW,


BUT  EARNEST,  FKIBNDS


WHO  ARE  WORKING  WITH  ME


FOR  THE  ELUOIDATION  OF  THE  IMPORTANT  HISTORY


AND  IMPRESSIVE  TEACHING  OF


THE   GREAT   PYRAMID,


THIS   BOOK,


IS  AFFECTIONATELY  DEDICATED


BY


C.  PIAZZI  SMYTH.


Edinbuboh,  June  1868.


PREFACE.

The  present  little  work  may  be  regarded  as
a  sequel  to  the  author^s  recent  volumes  on  the
Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt.^

The  mode  of  inquiry  adopted  there,  produced,
within  the  limits  of  errors  of  measurement,  such
satisfactory  answers  touching  the  mental  ideas
and  intentions  of  the  long-departed  designer  and
builders  of  that  ancient  structure, — that  a  desire
was  naturally  felt  to  try  how  far  the  same  prin-
ciple could  be  carried,  as  a  general  method  of
investigation,  wherever  any  remains  of  very  high
antiquity  still  exist

From  many  such  attempts,  during  twelve
months  past^  the  materials  have  been  obtained
for  the  present  essay  upon  the  Antiquity  of  Intel-
lectual Man.     An  essay  of  no  very  great  length,

*  Z/j/c  and  Work  at  the  Oreat  Pyramid  of  Effypt,  during  the  Months
of  January f  February^  March,  and  April,  a.d.  1865,  vnth  a  Diacus-
Hon  of  the  Facta  ascertained;  by  C.  Piazzi  Smyth.  Edinburgh:
Edmonston  and  Douglas,  1867.


Ti  Preface.

and  admitting  doubtless  of  much  fdture  improve-
ment as  well  as  extension,  but  based  on  a  more
direct  series  of  solid,  trustworthy,  and  contempo-
rary ancient  facts,  than  have  ever  yet  been  uti-
lized on  a  re£:ular  system  for  this  special  purpose ;
vi.,  to  app-ZL^  .owarf.  realLoan  wl^.
whatever  that  may  have  been,  at  the  most  distant
periods  of  time.

As  those  epochs  embrace  dates  at  upwards  of
1000  and  even  2000  years  before  the  birth  of
all  school  science ;  t.e.,  before  man  began,  either
amongst  the  priests  of  Egypt  or  the  poets  and
philosophers  of  Greece,  to  endeavour  to  acquire  a
knowledge  of  nature  by  his  own  observations
and  measures, — they  inevitably  belong  to  those
very  early  ages  of  the  world,  concerning  which
it  is  asserted  just  now,  in  too  many  quarters,
that  the  Sacred  Scripture  says  one  thing,  and
modem  science  the  very  opposite.

At  this  particular  stage  then,  in  the  progress  of
education  and  learning, — and  when  the  old  cirgu-
ments  on  either  side  of  the  controversy  appear  to
have  been  abundantly  displayed, — a  new  method
of  investigating  some  of  the  same  questions
has  appeared,  and  is  employed  in  the  following


Preface.  vii

pages.  A  method  sufficiently  scientific,  because
based  chiefly  on  practical  astronomy  ;  and  abun-
dantly direct,  because  dealing  only  with  the  very
contemporary  remains  of  the  times  actually  con-
cerned.

What  this  method  therefore  says, — within  such
limits  as  it  has  the  opportunity  of  testifying, —
not  only  cannot  be  insignificant  to  any  man  now
living,  but  will  probably  be  foimd  to  throw  a
new  and  explanatory  light  upon  several  passages
in  Genesis,  usually  considered  as  serious  diffi-
culties.

The  author  would  have  had  far  less  confidence
in  submitting  the  results  of  his  labours  in  so  rich
and  considerable  a  field,  to  the  public  thus  soon,
— ^but  that,  while  two  items  of  these  labours  have
had  the  misfortune  to  excite  personal  feelings
which  he  sincerely  regrets,  and  even  to  entail  a
vindictive  opposition  carried  on  before  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh  and  elsewhere  during  the
past  winter, — there  has  resnlted  thence  a  most
signal  advantage  to  a  new  theory; — ^viz.,  that
of  being  speedily  and  thoroughly  tested  by  the
able  heads  and  very  unsparing  hands,  of,  as  they
say  themselves,  many  opposing  mathematicians,


viii  Preface.

arithmeticians,  doctors,  and  engineers,  both  mili-
tary and  civil ;  and  every  assailable  point,  even
do-vn  to  an  unimportant  printing  error,  has,
it  may  be  hoped  and  expected,  been  discovered
ere  this,  aod  made  the  most  of.

So  material  has  the  author  considered  these
involuntary  co-operations  with  him  in  revising
his  pages,  correcting  his  language,  and  freeing
his  calculations  from  stray  errors, — that  he  has
laboured  everywhere  to  give  to  such  critiques
almost  as  frdl  space  and  representation  as  to  his
own  views  of  the  same  cases.  Where  the  objec-
tors have  gloried,  and  still  glory,  in  their  remarks,
and  have  printed  them  publicly,  considering  them
apparently  as  triumphant  representations  of  their
side  of  the  question, — the  author  has  not  hesi-
tated to  attach  their  names  to  their  writings,  and
this  whether  he  agreed  or  whether  he  disagreed
with  them ;  but  where  the  critics  have  been  more
doubtful  about  the  correctness  of  their  opinions,
— and  he  has  himself  been  able  subsequently  to
prove  them  in  error, — he  has  kept  back  the  name,
but  employed  inverted  commas  on  the  words  used,
in  order  to  indicate  that  such  opinions  are  actu-
ally floating  about  in  society  at  present.


Preface.  ix

There  will  thus  be  found,  the  author  trusts,  a
fulness  and  fairness  about  every  part  of  the  book,
— ^which  will  be  approved  as  much  by  those  hold-
ing opposite  opinions  to,  as  those  thinking  with,
himself;  while  the  reality  and  directness  of  its
style  and  results,  are  only  a  necessary  conse-
quence of  the  practical  method  here  employed,
for  investigating  a  subject  usually  rather  hazy
when  treated  of  from  the  literary  side  only.
Many  points,  as  the  author  is  only  too  well
aware, — and  points  quite  proper  to  be  discussed
according  to  the  method  of  the  book, — are  touched
on  too  shortly,  and  perhaps  superficially,  by  him.
But  some  of  these  topics  have  been  fortunately
taken  up  in  a  series  of  Appendices  (pp.  393-502),
contributed  chiefly  by  a  few  very  earnest  inquirers
into,  and  able  prosecutors  of,  that  paramount  pro-
blem, the  antiquity  of  intellectual  man;  and  their
thoroughly-searching  and  conscientious  labours
in  the  cause,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  not  soon
cease.


XI


CONTENTS.


PAOB

Preface, v

Contents  Table, xi

Explanation  of  Fbontibfieoe  Plate,    .       .  xvii

BODY  OF  THE  WORK.

C?HAPTER  1.

Of  the  Contemporary  Method  of  Inquiry,  into  the  Antiquity  of

Intellectual  Man, 1

CHAPTER  2.
Buildings  almost  the  sole  available  Conternporary  Monuments,       .  4

CHAPTER  3.

Astronomy,  the  First  Problem   to  be  grappled  with  in  Ancient

Buildings, 8

ARCHITECTURAL    DATA.

CHAPTER  4.

Valley  of  the  Nile-
Low  er  Egyptian  Pyramids, 10

Figure  of  the  Pyramids, 12

Astronomical  Emplacement, 15

Table  of  Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt, 20

Variations  with  Time, 2

Dates  of  Egyptian  Pyramid  Building, 24

Egyptian  Chronology, 29


xii  Contents.


CHAPTER  5.

PAOB

Vallbt  of  the  Nils,  continued—

Theban  Temples, 80

The  Astronomical  Test, S8

CHAPTER  0.

Vallet  of  the  Nile,  concluded—

Pyramids  of  Ethiopia,  37

Astronomical  Emplacement, 39

Last  Days  of  Nile  Architecture, 43

CHAPTER  7.

Vallet  of  the  Euphrates—
Babel  Remains  ? 45

CHAPTERS.

Vallet  of  the  Eufhbates,  continued —

Proto-Chaldaea, 49

Astronomical  Emplacement, 55

CHAPTER  9.

Vallet  of  the  Extphbates,  continued—
Assyria, 59

CHAPTER  10.

Vallet  of  the  Eufhbates,  continued—

Babylon, 65

The  Birs-i-Nimrond  Tower, 68

Astronomical  Emplacement, 71

Babylonian  Generalities, 75

CHAPTER  11.

Vallet  of  the  Eufhbates,  concluded—

Media,  79

Persia, 80

CHAPTER  12.

CiBOULAR  Builders, 84

Geographical  Tracings, 87

Pelasgic  and  Etruscan  Remains, 90

Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 92


Contents.  xiii


CHAPTER  18.

PAOB

FnuT  Residual  ABomrEOTURs—

Hebrew, »7

Greek,           100

Roman, 101

Buddhist, 104

CHAPTER  14.
SSOOKD  Rkidttal  Abchitbotube, 106

CHAPTER  16.
ABcmTBOTUBAL  Results, 109

ARCH/EOLOGICAL    DATA.

CHAPTER  IS.

Fldtts  OF  THE  Drift, 118

Chipped  Flints,  120

CHAPTER  17.

Ptramids  of  Europe, 127

Tested  by  Geometry, 181

Tried  by  Astronomy, 138

Proved  by  Mechanics, 189

Questioned  for  Age, 148

CHAPTER  18.
Eotttian  Potsherds, 157

CHAPTER  19.
Eotftiav  Date  Multiplier, 162

CHAPTER  20.

EoTPTiAW  Written  History, 166

Latest  Excavations, 170

CHAPTER  21.

ARCHiBOLOGiOAL  Results, 174

Opinions  on  the  Final  Result, 180


xiv  Contents.


INTELLECTUALITY   OF   THE    Q.    PYRAMID,

CHAPTER  22.

PAGE

Its  Shape, 183

The  Goveming  Idea, 186

The  Ooveming  Idea  Attacked, 188

Testimony  of  the  Trenches, 191

CHAPTER  23.

Its  Numbers  ;  a  Corollary  to  Shape, 194

The  Facts  Derided, 196

Subsidiary  Numbers, 200

CHAPTER  24

Its  Size, 202

Depreciating  Theories, 205

A  Determined  Attack, 208

Elevating  Ideas, 213

General  Considerations  thereon, 219

CHAPTER  25.

Its  Position—

Latitude, 226

Orientation, 227

Classical  Illustration, 231

CHAPTER  26.

ITSWXIOHT,  233

CHAPTER  27.

Its  Heat, 236

CHAPTER  28.

Units  and  Standards  of  Great  Ptraiod  Measure.

Linear, 239

Counter  Opinions, 247

A  Higher  Earth  Reference, 258


*  Contents.  xv

CHAPTER  29.

PAGE

Weight  and  Cafacitt  (Units  and  Standards  of  G.  Pyramid— etm^.),  262

The  Attack, 264

The  Defence  begins, 266

The  Coffer's  Material, 277

Tombic  Hypothesis  tried, 280

Metrical  Hypothesis, 285

Capacity  of  the  Coffer, 291

Tlie  Coffer  on  its  own  Capacity, 294

Why  of  that  Capacity,  .                                802

The  latest  Discovery, 807

CHAPTER  80.

HxAT  (Units  and  Standards  of  Great  Pyramid— con/tnu«(2),     .  811

CHAPTER  81.

Akolb  (Units  and  Standards  of  Great  Pyi-amid — continued),   .  815

CHAPTER  32.

Chbonoloot  (Units  and  Standards  of  Great  Pyramid— cotM^uiof), .  817

First  Order  of  Objections,  and  their  Answers,       ....  819

Further  Objections  and  New  Answers, 328

Summation  for  a  few  of  our  Readers,            327

CHAPTER  88.

INTEIiIiECTTJAIi  CONTBAST, 833

Babylonish  Example,            885

Other  Competitors, 342

The  Great  Pyramid  solemnly  alone, 345

CHAPTER  34.

IHTEKVENING  OBSTRUCTIONS, 348

Number  1, 349

Number  2, 351

Number  8, 863

Number  4, 855

Number  5, 861

CHAPTER  85.

CONSIDE&ATIONS  IN  CHBONOLOOT, 864

Check  on  Prodigality  of  Time, 367

The  Science-interdicted  Hypothesis  tried, 371

Language, 876

The  Deluge  generally, 379

Date  of  the  Deluge, 884


xvi  Contents.

APPENDIX  1.

PAOB

Colonel  Sir  Henry  James^  R.E.,  on  the  Great  Pyramid,  ...  89
Conrideration  of  the  Evidence,  by  William  Petrie,  Esq. —

No.  1, 896

No.  2, 400

No.  8, 409

APPENDIX  2.

Discourses  at  the  Royal  Society,  Ed. ,  on  the  Great  Pyramid  Subject,      414
Bemarlu  on  some  of  the  Same,  by  various  hands,    ....      487

APPENDIX  8.

IL  A.  D.  Wackerbarth,  M.A.,  of  Upsala,  on  the  Great  Pyramid

Metrical  Theory, 447

Thoughts  thereon,  by  Mr.  William  Petrie, 451

APPENDIX  4.

Account  of  Maeshowe,  Circular-based  Tumulus— Extracted  from  the

Proceedings  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,       .        .      461

APPENDIX  6.
Weights  of  Great  Pyramid  and  the  Earth, 468

APPENDIX  6.
On  the  Great  Pyramid  Scientific  Theory  and  its  Critics,  by  J.  G.,  .      476

APPENDIX  7.

Hebbew  Scripture  Criticism,  in  connexion  vrith  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, by  W.  A.  P.,— No.  1, 486

No.  2, 487

No.  8, 489

No.  4, 495

APPENDIX  8.

list  of  Ehrata  in  the  Book  L4fe  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,

so  far  as  discovered  up  to  April  1868, 496

APPENDIX  9.
Note  on  the  Question  of  further  Exploration  of  the  Great  Pyramid,      501


Ikdex, 505


xvu


EXPLANATION  OF  PLATE.

The  Plate  which  forms  the  Frontispiece  is  intended  to
show  the  rise  and  progress  of  ancient  architecture  in  many
various  countries,  and  through  all  times  extending  from
2500  B.C.  to  1500  A.D.  To  this  end,  the  first  column  on
the  left  hand,  contains  a  scale  of  dates,  beginning  with
the  earliest  at  the  top,  and  ending  with  the  latest  at  the
bottom ;  and  each  date  marked  in  this  column  is  supposed
to  extend  transversely  or  horizontally  across  the  whole  table.

In  the  successive  vertical  parallel  columns  extending  to-
wards the  right,  from  the  date  column,  the  amount  of  archi-
tecture existing  in  the  world  is  shown  by  the  amount  of
black  markings  in  the  said  columns.  The  date  of  such
architecture  is  ascertained  by  reading  off  its  level  on  the
scale  of  dates  in  the  left-hand  column ;  and  its  geographical
position  by  looking  to  the  title  at  the  head  of  the  column
where  such  black  marking  may  occur.

Example  1.

In  the  4th  column  (first  half)  of '  Localities,'  a  maximum
breadth  of  black  marking  appears  very  decidedly  at  one
point.  The  level  of  that  point  on  the  left-hand  Time  scale
is  *  1000  B.C.  j'  while  the  name  at  the  top  of  its  own  part
of  the  colunm  is  *  Palestine.'  Hence  the  maximum  indi-
cated, refers  to  the  buildings  carried  on  by  King  Solomon.

Example  2.

In  the  7th  Locality  column,  under  head  of  North  India,
the  higher  part  of  the  black  marking  is  in  thin  dots  only.

h


xviii  Eocplanation  of  Plate.

That  is  to  indicate  that  the  traces  of  ancient  architecture
there,  rest  only  on  tradition,  long  subsequent  literary  re-
cords, and  other  uncertain  data.  Where  the  line  of  dots
swells  out  into  a  black  line  or  band, — ^there  are  absolute,
material,  and  still  existing  proofs  to  refer  to.

Example  3.

In  the  2d  Locality  column,  under  head  5,  or  Assyria,
the  black  band  which  begins  at  the  top  gradually  from  a
point,  near  2000  B.C,-— ends  suddenly  near  600  B.C.,  in
order  to  denote  the  total  destruction  of  Nineveh,  and  the
termination  of  the  Assyrian  empire  at  that  time.

Example  4.

In  the  1st  Locality  column,  under  1,  or  *  Oreat  Pyramid
and  Memphis,' — ^the  black  marking  begins  at  once  very
broadly,  and  decreases  as  it  descends,  through  long  periods
of  time.  That  is  to  indicate  the  suddenness  with  which
the  Great  Pyramid  appears  on  the  scene  of  the  world's
history ;  the  highest  of  all  buildings  ever  erected,  even  up
to  the  present  time, — one  of  the  best  constructed  too ;  and
without  any  certainly  known  or  worthy  predecessors  in
stone  architecture ;  while  its  successors  gradually  dwindled
down  both  in  size  and  quality  of  composition.


MENE,   MENE,  TEKEL,   UPHARSIN,

mJMBER,  NUMBIB,  WEXOHT,  DIYISIOIT.


Dakiel  v.  25.


CHAPTER  1.

OF  THB  CONTEMPORARY  METHOD  OF  INQUIRY,  INTO
THB  ANTIQUITY  OF  INTELLECTUAL  MAN.

Not  seldom  has  it  been  remarked,  that  the
longer  man  lives  upon  the  earth,  and  the  more
the  ground  grows  ancient  beneath  his  feet, —
so  much  the  more  does  he  desire  to  become
acquainted,  if  it  be  possible,  with  the  history  of
the  first  of  his  species.

Nor  have  his  earnest  desires  in  this  direction
been  altogether  ungratified ;  for,  notwithstanding
that  the  immense  abyss  of  time  which  separates
any  existing,  from  the  primitive,  race  of  mankind,
is  perpetually  widening, — ^yet  the  fact  is  certain^
that  much  more  is  known  now,  and  coming  to  be
known  year  after  year,  concerning  the  early  days
of  the  earth  and  its  first  intelligent  inhabitants, —
than  during  many  centuries  and  even  tens  of  cen-
turies that  have  preceded  us.

This  successful  example  of  hoping  against  hope;

A


i


2  Conterryporary  Method  of  Inquiry    [cH.1.

and  succeeding  to  overcome  even  apparent  im-
possibilities, is  with  little  doubt  due  to  the  general
advance  of  modem  science,  to  the  adoption  of
sure  methods  of  research,  safe  principles  of  philo-
sophizing, and  especially  to  a  more  accurate
knowledge  of  nature,  'in  number,  weight,  and

*  measure.'

To  such  things  certainly  is  more  particularly  due
that  increased  call — ^which  has  been  so  extensively
experienced  of  late — ^for  renewed  examinations
into  old  traditions  and  even  long  established
beliefs.  While  we  all  know,  that  such  examina-
tions have  not  seldom  resulted  in  freeing  the
necessary  history  of  the  world,  from  a  vast  amount
of  classical  fables,  and  legends  of  romance,  very
difficult  to  believe  in.  They  seem  to  have  estab-
lished also,  the  generally  sound  principle, — that
no  man  is  much  to  be  trusted  when  he  is  writing
about  any  other  than,  either  his  own  times,  or
those  of  whicb  he  has  contemporary  informa-
tioiL  Or  again,  as  some  eminent  Continental
philosophers  have  phrased  it, — *  the  history  of  no
^  country  can  be  securely  carried  back,  much
^beyond  the  date  of  its  earliest  contemporary

*  monuments.'


CH.  1.]    into  Antiquity  of  IntdUctucd  Mom.       8

This  is  the  expressed  opinion  of,  amongst  others,
the  erudite  Dr.  R.  Lepsius ;  and  no  one  will  ven-
ture to  accuse  him  of  want  of  scholastic  power  to
appredate  the  letter,  or  spirit,  of  any  classical
author  who  has  written  on  primitive  times :  whUe
his  more  impetuous  friend,  the  late  Baron  Bun-
sen,  after  wading  deeply  through  many  such  old
historians,  exclaimed  bluntly — 'but  now  it  is
'  high  time  that  we  should  leave  all  this  chaffs
•and  turn  to  the  monuments;'  t.e:,  to  things
contemporary  in  their  origin  with  the  ancient
events  he  was  investigating.


4        Buildings  almost  the  sole  avaHahle    [gh.  2.


CHAPTER   2.

BUILDINGS  ALMOST  THE  SOLE  AVAILABLE  CONTBM^

FORART  MONUMENTS.

Now,  when  we  look  around  for  any  such
contemporaiy  remains  of  the  earliest  possible
ages, — it  is  not  books  or  rolls  of  writing,  but
something  more  or  less  in  the  shape  of  huitd'
ings,  which  answer  to  our  calL

No  doubt  Hindoos  may  boast  of  the  20,000
years  of  age  of  some  of  their  sacred  hymns,  and
Egyptians  of  the  30,000  years  of  their  books  of
Hermes ;  but  they  cannot  show  contemporary
copies  either  of  that  time  or  of  its  mere  twentieth
part  Yet  are  there  buildings  in  the  world,  still
standing  open  to  examination,  which  were  erected
several  thousand  years  before  any  known  copy
of  any  of  those  books  was  transcribed.

Ancient  buildings,  then,  if  they  still  exist  at
all,  have  both  antiquity  and  contemporaneous-


CH.  2.]  Contemporary  Monuments.  6

nesB  extreme,  on  their  side.  But,  seeing  that  our
title  restricts  us  to  the  antiquity  of  intellectual
man,— do  they  (these  ancient  buildings)  possess
also  legible  traces  of  mind,  and  proofs  of  true
intellect  ?

Several  writers^  whose  studies  have  been  much
in  that  direction^  seem  now  inclined  to  answer
affirmatively ;  at  least  for  all  the  oldest  instances.
And  one  of  these  very  advancing  students,  an
architect  by  profession,  and  personally  acquainted
with  the  grandest  expressions  of  his  art,  through-
out three-fourths  of  the  habitable  globe, — ^has
particularized  in  forcible  language  why  and
wherefore  this  jmost  important  science  of  ancient
buildings^  or  to  him  archcBology — ^has  not  been
allowed  hitherto  all  that  importance  to  which
he  thinks  *  it  is  undoubtedly  entitled.'

'  We  live,'  says  he,  '  in  an  age  when  all  art  (at  least  bu3d-
'  ing  art)  is  a  chaos  of  copying  and  confusion  ;  we  are  daily
'  masquerading  in  the  costmne  of  every  nation  of  the  earth,
'  ancient  and  modem,  and  are  unable  to  realize  that  these
'  dresses  in  which  we  deck  ourselves  were  once  realities.

*  Because  architecture,  since  the  Beformation  in  the  sixteenth
'  century,  has  in  Europe  been  a  mere  harttu  siccus  of  dried
'  specimens  of  the  arts  of  all  countries  and  all  ages,  we  cannot
'  feel  that,  before  that  time,  art  was  earnest  and  progres-

*  sive  ;  and  that  men  did  what  they  felt  to  be  most  appropri-


6       Buildings  almost  the  sole  available    [ch.  2.

'  ate,  by  the  same  process  by  which  nature  works.  We  do
'  not  therefore  perceiye  that,  though  in  an  infinitely  lower
'  grade,  we  may  reason  of  the  works  of  man  before  a  given
'  date,  with  the  same  certainty  with  which  we  can  reason  of

<  those  of  natore. — ^When  this  great  fact  is  once  recognised —
'  and  it  is  indisputable — Archaeology  and  Pal»ontology  take
'  their  places  side  by  side,  as  the  guiding  and  Tivifying  ele-
'  ments  in  the  sister  sciences  of  Ethnology  and  Qeology ;
'  and  give  to  each  of  these  a  value  they  could  never  otherwise
'  attain.'  ^

The  same  writer  then  explains  more  precisely,
thus —

'Ahnost  all  men  who  have    hitherto  written  on  these

*  (primeval  history)  subjects,  have  derived  their  information
'  from  Greek  and  Roman  texts ;  but,  if  I  am  not  very  much

<  mistaken,  these  do  not  suffice.    The  classic  authors  were

*  very  imperfectly  informed  as  to  the  history  of  the  nations
'  who  preceded  or  surrounded  them ;  they  knew  very  little  of
'  the  archaeology  of  their  own  countries,  and  less  of  their

<  ethnography.    So  long,  therefore,  as  our  researches  are

<  confined  to  what  they  had  written,  many  important  problems
'  remain  unsolved,  and  must  ever  remain  as  unsolvable  as
'  they  have  hitherto  proved.'

As  a  remedy  therefore  for  so  hopeless  a  state
of  things,  that  writer  urges  what  he  calls  *the

*  lithicy  or  the  early  contemporary  building
method  of  investigation ;  and  protests  of  it  that —

^  A  HUtory  qf  ArchUectwrt  in  ail  Cauntriu^  from  the  BarUest
Timet  to  the  PreteiU  Day,  By  James  Fezgaason,  Esq^  F.R.S.  Lon-
don, 1865.


GH.  2.]  Contemporary  Monuments.  7

'  WHen  properly  stadied  and  understood,  tbere  in  no  lan-
'  goage  BO  clear,  or  whose  testimony  is  so  nndonbted,  as  that
'  of  those  petrified  thoughts  and  feelings  which  early  men  have
^  left  engraved  on  the  walls  of  their  temples,  or  buried  with
<  them  in  the  chambers  of  their  tombs.  Unconsciously  ex-
'  pressed,  but  imperishably  written,  they  are  there  to  this
*hour.  And  no  one  who  can  translate  them,  can  for  one
*  moment  doubt,  but  that  they  are  the  best,  and  frequency
'  the  only,  records  that  remain  of  bygone  races.'

With  these  very  elevated  views  of  his  profes-
sion^ Mr.  Fergusson  has  examined  almost  all  the
existing  remains  of  architecture,  and  with  a  suc-
cess and  discrimination  which  leave  very  Uttle
indeed  to  be  added  by  any  one  else.  In  fact^
hardly  anything  more  could  have  been  desired,
had  that  excellent  artistic  and  thoroughly  profes-
sional architectural  writer,  only  been^  on  certain
occasions^  more  widely  scientific.

Some  attempt,  therefore,  to  supply  this  omis-
sion at  one  point — and  only  for  the  beginning  of
that  vast  stock  of  important  data  belonging  to
many  ages,  which,  both  his  admirable  industry  has
collected  together,  and  his  method  and  acumen
have  marshalled  into  a  clearness  of  order  never
presented  before — is  all  that  I  now  propose  to
venture  upon  ; — ^the  first  collateral  branch  of  in-
quiry referred  to,  being  the  astronomical


8  Astronomy^  the  first  Problem       [cH.  3.


CHAPTER  3.

ASTBONOMY,  THE  FIRST  PBOBLEM  TO  BE  GRAPPLED
WITH,  IN  ANCIENT  BUILDINGS  ?

In  the  early  part  of  last  year,  a  statement  was
put  forward  very  confidently*  in  one  of  the
larger  dass  of  quarterly  reviews,  to  the  effect
that—

'  Pyramidal  piles  of  earth  aBd  stone  are  the  peooliar  marks
'  by  which  we  may  discover  the  sites  of  the  earliest  setde-
'  ments  of  mankind.  The  idea  of  such  piles  first  appeared  in
'  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates,  and  culminated  in  the  valley  of
'  the  Nfle/

This  is  remaxkable  enough  as  an  assertion,  and
most  extensive  in  its  range.  But  the  author  adds
still  further,  and  more  remarkably —

'Whatever  their  forms,  or  wherever  situated,  in  Asia  or
'  Africa,  one  condition  is  common  to  them  all ;  intended
'  primarily  for  astronomical  observatories,  the  sides  of  each
'  accurately  correspond  with  the  cardinal  points.'


^  The  Edinburgh  (by  nAme,  though  published  in  London)  for
April  1867 ;  in  an  article  upon  *  Amoican  Antiquities.'


CH.  3.]  to  he  grappled  with.  9

The  intentdon  implied  above,  may  well  be  put
on  one  side  just  now;  while  we  examine  into  the
condition  asserted  to  exist ;  for  that  is  decidedly
the  first  point  to  be  proved,  before  anything  else
can  be  entered  upon  safely.  And  such  condition
— as  to  the  correct  astronomical  direction  of  the
walls  or  foundations  of  a  building — ^is  precisely
one  of  the  facts  which  can  be  determined  much
more  easily  and  accurately  in  the  present  day,
than  it  could  be,  or  have  been,  in  the  times  of
Herodotus,  Strabo,  Diodorus  Siculus,  or  their
many  followera

Without  therefore  at  this  time  subscribing  in
any  degree  to  the  opinions  of  the  learned  essayist^
— ^let  us  cany  his  asserted  astronomical  law,  or
condition,  of  ancient  buildings  along  with  us;
and  use  it  as  a  proposition  to  be  tested, — while
we  glance  over  a  general  arrangement  and  classi-
fication of  the  several  structures  themselves  ;  tak-
ing first,  whatever  may  be  more  or  less  strictly
included  within  the  domain  of  Architecture.


10  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [ch.  4,


ARCHITECTURAL  DATA.


CHAPTER  4.


VALLEY  OF  THE  NILE.


Lower  Egyptian  Pyramids.

After  travelling  over  the  whole  extent  of  his
important  and  varied  subject,  and  even  attempt-
ins:  by  its  means  some  special  excursions  into  the
olLrirfe  differen  J  of  prixniMve  r^  and
supposed  varieties  of  mankind,  Mr.  Fergusson
gives  it  as  the  settled  result,  of  aU  impartial  and
practical  investigation  from  his  professional  point
of  view,  that, — do  what  we  like,  or  *  stretch  the
'  history  of  architecture  how  we  will, — we  cannot
'  get  beyond  the  epoch  of  the  Pyramid  builders '
(of  Lower  Egypt).

With  those  Pyramids,  therefore,  as  the  earliest
remaining  buildings  of  the  whole  earth,*  he  begins

^  'The  earliest  known  architecture,  the  Pyramids  of  the  4th
*  Dynasty,  exhibit  simple  forms  of  vast  magnitude,  and  of  the
'  minutest  finish.'— »j9ynop«i«  qf  British  Museum^  60th  edition.


OH.  4.]       Lower  Egyptian  Pyramids.  11

his  most  philosophic  and  vividly  ethnographic
history  of  architecture.  Nor  does  he  stand  alone
in  such  a  view ;  for,  with  aXl  the  great  Egypto-
logical scholars  of  modem  times, — ^Lepsius,  Bun-
sen^  Gardner  Wilkinson,  Osbum,  Mariette  Bey,
Benan,  Bawlinson,  Lesueur,  and  many  others,
— ^E^ypt  is  held  to  be  the  most  ancient  civil-
ized   country   with   monuments   still    existing.

*  EgypV  says  Baron  Bunsen,  '  is  the  monumental

*  land  of  the  earth,  as  the  Egyptians  are  the

*  monumental  people  of  history.'  The  first  and
the  earliest  of  all  architectural  nations,  and  living
in  a  climate  superior  to  tiiat  of  any  other  country
for  preserving  material  fabrics  once  erected,  its
monuments  are,  therefore,  remarkable  storehouses
of  contemporary  records  of  early  time ;  and,
of  all  those  monuments,  the  Pyramids  represent
Egypt's  most  ancient  days  of  human  life  and  toil.

The  absolute  dates  for  those  very  early  times,
as  given  by  the  several  Egyptological  authors,
are  indeed  often  at  variance  amongst  themselves ;
but  they  agree  well  in  their  relative  chronologies,
and  assign,  therefore,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel,
to  all  other  practically  known  buildings  in  Egypt,
and  even  in  every  other  part  of  the  world,  a


12  VaUey  of  the  Nile.  [oh.  4.

lower  date  than  they  attribute  to  the  chief  of
those  wonderful  pyramidal  remains,  which  are
stiU  found  in  remarioible  preservation  on  the
Lower  Nile  Valley.  On  a  very  small  part  of  it
too ;  for  they  are  all  confined  to  its  western  desert
flank,  and  within  the  latitudes  of  30"*  S\  and
29'  17',  north.

How  then  do  these  most  ancient  of  all  existing
buildings, — and  which  we  have  here  in  an  isolated
and  easily  accessible  group^ — correspond  to  the
proposed  astronomical  law  ?

A  simple  question ;  and  yet,  before  entering
upon  its  answer,  it  may  not  be  inexpedient  to  set
in  order  our  ideas,  touching  both  the  pervading
shape,  and  general  appearance,  of  the  buildings
concerned.

Figure  of  the  Pyramids.

Of  all  mathematical  solid  figures^  few  are  so
easily  defined  as  '  a  Pjrramid  ;*  while,  of  all
human  buildings,  none  have  ever  been  erected
80  extremely  near  to  being  exact  representations
of  a  pure  geometrical  idea,  and  of  nothing  elsCi
as  *  the  Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt/

But  there  axe  varieties  among  the  Pyramids  of


CH.  4.]         Figure  of  the  Pyramids.  13

pure  mathematics ;  and  all  the  Egyptian  practical
examples  represent  one  of  these  varieties  only,
viz.,  that  possessing  a  square  base.  EquaUj
would  they  have  been  *  Pyramids,'  had  their  bases
possessed  three,  five,  six,  or  any  other  number  of
sides;  but  four  was  chosen,  and  is  repeated
unerringly  in  every  known  case.

The  sloping  faces  or  flanks  of  such  a  Pjnramid,
will  next  be  equal  in  number  to  the  sides  or  edges
of  its  base ;  and  in  form,  will  be  flat  or  plane
triangles,  fastened  broadly  on  to  the  base-sides
below,  and  meeting  together,  with  their  upper
acute  angles,  or  vertices,  in  a  point  above.  These
triangular  faces  may  be  of  any  degree  of  acute-
ness  or  obtuseness  towards  their  summit,  accord-
ing to  the  desired  height  of  the  Pyramid,  propor-
tioned to  its  breadth  of  base;  but  every  such
sloping  flank  in  one  Pjrramid,  must  be  closely
similar^  to  its  fellows ;  just  as  it  is  also  necessary,
that  the  lengths  of  the  several  sides  of  the  base
should  be  equal,  and  the  said  base  decently  flat.

Theory  further  requires,  that  a  Pyramid  shall
be  a  solid  figure ;  and  the  early  Egyptian  archi-

^  Theory,  indeed,  insistB  on  abeolnte  exactness,  bnt  practice  mnst
be  content  when  the  error  of  constmction  does  not  amount  to  more
than  a  ■mall  proportion  of  the  whole.


14  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [cH.  4.

tects  so  fax  complied  with  the  demand,  that,
although  some  of  their  Pyramids  are  the  largest
buildings  in  the  world,  their  only  hollow  internal
spaces  are  two  or  three  small  rooms ;  and  certain
narrow  passages  of  access, — ^so  low  that  they  can
only  be  entered  by  men  in  a  stooping  posture.

These  veiy  limited  hollow  spaces,  do  not  form
much  more  than  one  thousandth  part  of  the  whole
mass,^  all  the  rest  of  which  is  built  solid  with
stones  regularly  squared  and  laid  in  cement ;  or
with  bricks,  and  then  usually  cased  in  stone,— stone,
too,  of  a  very  fine  order ;  and, — except  when  par-
tially of  red  granite, — white,  compact,  admirably
worked,  true  at  the  joints,  and  planed  down  or
ground  flat  on  the  surface,  with  astonishing  success.

This,  then,  was  the  pristine  appearance  of  the
earlier  Egyptian  Pyramids  ;  viz.,  square-based
below,  pointed  above,  and  triangularly  flat-sided  ;
fair  and  bright  to  behold,  like  a  snow-capped
mountain  peak  shaped  in  a  crystalline  mould.

Time,  however,  has  worked  many  changes  with
them ;   lightning  has  split  the  tops  of  some ;

^  In  all  ordiiuury  architectare,  both  ancient  and  modem,— eveiy-
thing  large,  in  fact,  but  the  Pyramida, — ^tbe  hollow,  vastly  exceed
in  balk  the  solid,  parts ;  the  latter  only  forming,  especially  in  recent
times^  a  thin  and  too  perishable  aheU.


CH.  4.]       Astronomiccd  Emplacement.  15

earthquakes  at  one  age,^  and  at  another  the  de-
stroying hand  of  man,  during  many  laborious
years,  have  pulled  off  the  fine  casing  from  others ;
and  those  built  originally  of  brick,  though  by  no
means  the  oldest  of  the  series,  have  fallen  down
into  round-topped  mouldering  heaps.  But  in  all
these  instances,  the  very  ruins  of  the  upper  part
have  been  the  direct  means  of  preserving  both
the  bases  and  the  beginning  of  the  sloping,  and
triangular,  sides ;  so  that  a  moderate  amount  of
excavation  now,  often  reveals  at  once  the  original
fiducial  points  of  commencement;  and  enables
VB,  besides  recoveriBg  the  primeval  ^ur6  of  the
monument  as  above,  to  study  ite  asteonomical
emplacement, — our  question  of  page  8,  so  long
delayed.

Astronomical  Emplacement.

Already  it  wiU  be  seen  that  the  characteristic,
four  sides  of  the  Lower  Egyptian  Pyramids'  bases
make  them  suitable  to  being  tested  by,  or  upon,

1  In  the  year  90S  A.D.9  seventy-eiglit  yean  after  Al  Mamoon's
forcible  entrance  into  the  Great  Pyramid,  Egypt  was  yiaited  with
■o  aevere '  a  tempest  and  earthquake,'  as  to  form  the  chief  historical
event  of  the  time,  and  not  improbably  to  have  assisted  in  bringing
down  the  outside  casing-stones  from  many  of  the

See  also  Lift  and  Work  by  the  author,  yoL  iL  p.  103.


16  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [ch.  4.

the  four  cardinal  points.  And  if  it  now  again  be
inquired,  how  they  suit  the  asserted  law  of  these
sides  being  directed  accurately  on  those  natural
and  geographical  points  or  directions,  the  first
general  answer  is, '  remarkably  well'  For,  with  a
single  exception,  all  these  Pyramids  are  described
and  stated,  by  nearly  every  scientific  traveller
who  has  visited  them  within  the  present  century,
to  be  as  truly  on^ited  (as  to  their  sides,  upon  the
cardinal  points)  as  the  respective  modem  en-
gravers employed  by  these  travellers  have  been
able  to  represent  them  on  paper.

This  illustration,  indeed,  must  not  be  taken  in
the  present  day  as  a  proof  of  perfect  accuracy,
though  it  indicates  a  probability  of  the  errors
being  small  But  in  the  case  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  which  for  other  reasons  is  generally
considered  almost,  if  not  absolutely,  the  oldest
of  all,— I  can  say  firom  my  own  express  astro-
nomical  observations  upon  it,  that  the  errors  of
its  eastern  and  northern,  if  not  also  its  western
and  southern,  base-sides,  are  under  5  minutes  of
angle  ;^  a  smaller  quantity  than  most  engravers*

^  See  Life  and  Work  at  the  Qrtai  Pfpramid,  yoL  I  p.  648 ;  ToL
u.  p.  196  ;  and  yoL  iiL  p.  107.


CH.  4.]       Astran(yimcdl  Emplacement.  17

plans  are  capable  of  showing.  Less  too  is  this^
than  one-third  part  of  the  error  committed  in
the  astronomical  emplacement  of  the  most  cele-
brated European  observatory  of  the  latter  part
of  the  middle  ages;  viz.,  the  paktial  structure
of  Tycho  Brahe  at  Uranibourg ;  and  not  inten-
tionally  approached  by  any  other  known  building,
through  3700  years  downwards,  from  the  Great
Pyramid's  date  of  foundation.

Now  the  rest  of  the  Pyramids,  not  having  been
examined  with  the  same  accuracy,  neither  as  to
seeking  out  the  original  fiducial  markings,  and
comer-sockets,  of  the  builders,  nor  with  the  same
power  of  astronomical  instrumentalism,— we  can*
not  assign  to  them,  unquestioned,  the  same  full
amount  of  exceeding  excellence  in  a  difficult
scientific  feature.  From  some  partial  measure-
ments, indeed,  of  my  own,  on  the  second  Pyramid,
we  may  safely  infer  that  it  is  not  far  from  as
accurate  as  the  Great  Pyramid ;  while  we  may
not  improbably,  but  in  a  more  distant  degree,
conclude  that  the  third  and  other  smaller  Pyra-
mids, though  evidently  built  with  less  pains  and
skill,  and  more  attention  to  the  ornament  of
colour  and  costly  material,  than  the  Great  Pyra-

B


18  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [cm.  4.

mid, — are  yet  of  the  same  school;  followeia^
though  in  a  most  humble  degree,  of  their  mighty,
but  plain  and  scientific  prototype.

All  the  above  Pyramids,  are  those  which  form
the  well-known  group  of  Jeezeh,  in  a  mean  lati-
tude of  29**  59'.  But  if  we  vidt  the  other  groups
further  south,  although  there  is  still  a  family
resemblance, — all  square-based  Pyramids,  and  all
set  with  their  sides  approximately  directed  to
the  cardinal  points, — yet  their  variations  from
the  angular  slope  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  and
from  its  materials  of  construction, — go  on  con-
tinually increasing ;  while  one,  at  least,  of  their
number,  the  so-called  Great  Pyramid  of  Sakkara^
is  reported  by  Howard  Vyse  and  Mr.  Perring  to
be  no  less  than  4"*  35'^  from  the  cardinal-point
direction.

We  need  not  suppose  that  any  others  are  quite
so  far  from  the  truth  of  nature  and  the  example
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  as  this   one.     But  the

^  This  Pyramid,  for  some  time  thought,  on  accoant  of  its  miiiOM
condition,  to  be  the  oldest  of  all  the  Pyramids,  has  more  reoontlj
been  shown  to  have  acquired  that  character  from  bad  oonstnictifla
and  worse  material ;  and  to  be  considerably  more  recent  than  tht
Great  Pyramid,  or  that  of  Jeezeh;  as  Dr.  Lepsius  according
places  it,  in  the  folio  volumes  of  his  Denhmcteler,

^  By  a  pure  misprint,  the  quantity  is  given  in  Mr.  Fer^^onoii't
plate,  p.  90,  as  only  4'  35^


CH.  4.]       Astronomical  Emplaoement  19

Sakkara  case  is  neverihelesB  a  Inminous  example
of  the  growing  n^lect  with  which  following
men  treated  the  higher  scientific  conditions.  For,
while  Dr.  Lepsius  is  very  confident  in  placing
the  Gieat  Pyramid  as  the  oldest  monument  of
Egypt,^  and  William  Osbum  successfully  shows
that  firom  that  Jeezeh  hill  point,  or  the  crown  of
the  Delta  as  a  beginning,  the  early  progress  of
Egyptian  agriculture  and  architecture  (zscended
the  banks  of  the  Nile, — we  may,  in  an  approxi-
mate manner,  conclude  every  Pyramid  more
recent,  in  proportion  as  it  Ues  further  south ;
and  then  we  have  the  following  tabular  view  of
never^nding  deviations :«—

1  See  p.  21  of  Dr.  LepniiB*fl  Letters  from  Egypt  in  1842,  and  1845.
See  alao  Hfe  and  Work  at  the  Cfreat  Pyramidf  voL  iiL  p.  364.

^  This  table  is  composed  almost  entirely  from  the  data  procured
by  Colonel  Howard  Vyse,  and  Mr.  Perring ;  and  published  by  the
former  in  his  celebrated  volumes  on  the  Pyramids  of  Jeezeh.

His  first  so-called  Pyramid,  or  that  of  Abou  Roash,  in  lat.  n.
3(f  3\  is  indeed  here  omitted.  Partly,  because  he  himself  states,
'  that  no  part  of  the  external  casing  is  to  be  found ;  indeed,  the
'  edifice  was  not  probably  ever  completed,  or  even  raised  to  a  con-
'  siderable  height ;  for  scarcely  any  materials,  and  very  little  rubbish
'  are  to  be  seen,  although  the  situation  is  very  difiScult  of  access.'
And  partly,  because  his  attempted  identification  of  the  site,  with
that  of  the  Pyramid-famed  Cochome  of  Ancient  E^^t,  has  been
since  displaced  by  Lepsius  and  Osbum  in  favour  of  Sakkank


Valley  of  Hie  Nile.  [ch.  4.

Pysauss  or  Lowut  Eot?t,  affeoxdutelt.


,^„^^

Norm.

DerlkUoB
ofKldeaol

point!.

aritlnh  lachH

Great  pyramid  of  Jeezeli

29°5fl'

ei"  61'

9142

ff'4'35'

Second  otdo.

29

69

63    20

8493    i

t^^

Third         „           .     .

29

58

61      0

4254

Do.

Fourth      „            .     .

29

68

inrteps

1230

Do.

Fifth         „            .     .

29

68

52°  16'

1749

Do.

Sixth      „        .   .

29

S8

inrtepa

1230

Do.

Seventh    „            .     .

29

69

52°  10'

2070

Do.

Eighth      „          .    .

29

69

62    10

2070

Do.

Ninth        „          .    .

29

69

62    10

1920

Do.

Zonyet  el  Anun,

29

67

rained

3600

Do.

Pynmid   of    Beegah  )

(with     a     granite  (
basement  at  aaglal

29

S8

62°    ff

1480

Do.

of  76=201,    .     .     .)

NorthemPymmidotJ

29

64

61    43

3084

Do.

Middle  Pyiaiaid  from)
Abooseer,      .     .     .  )

29

64

81  in

328S

Do.

Great    Pyramid,!
Abaoseer,     .     ■     ■  j

29

54

62   (I)

4312

Do.

Pyramid  2at8akkara,

29

C3

62   (t)

4775

Da

GpeatFjTamidofSak--)

kara   (the   base  of

m

thia     Pp-omid     ia

29

63

73=30'

4'  35'  0"

larger  from  K.  to  w.

(in  .tep.)

than  from  n.  to  s.

Pyramid*  4,  5.  6.  7,
8,and9,at3«kliara,

29

63

nu»ona

3000  (T)

Bnppnjed

Maitabat  cl  Faraoon,

29

63

■tep«(T)

3708

Do.

North  Brick  Pyramid

29

49

51"  20

4200

Do.

North  Stone  Pyramid
ofDashoor,       .     .

29

49

43    36

8633

Do.

South  Stone  Pyramid

of     Duhoor ;     the  (
opper    half  flatter  1

29

48

i64      5

j42    59

}    7400

Do.

than  lower,  -     ■     - 1

South  Brick  Pyramid  ]
of  Daahoor,       .     .  ]

29

4S

57    20

4110

Do.

Pyramids  ot  Liaht,    .

29

minona

6000  (!)

Do.

Pyramid  of  Meydoom,

29

27

74°  10
(inoliS.

m

Do.

Pyramid  of  Illahoon,

29

17

minou.)

4320

Do.

CH.  4.]  Variations  with  Time.  21

Variations  with  Time.

To  the  particulars  given  above  we  might  add,
that  aknost  from  the  first,  or  the  Great  Pyramid
itself,  a  desire  to  introduce  ornaments,  foreign  to
the  mathematical  theory,  appears;  so  that  the
second  Pyramid  has  a  thin  red-granite  basement-
course,  and  the  tlurd  Pyramid  haB  a  siniilaT  richly
coloured  granite  casing,  mounting  a  long  way
up  its  slopes.^  On  the  east  side  of  the  second
Pyramid,  too,  but  much  removed  from  it,  stands
a  peculiar  kind  of  temple.  On  the  same  side  of
the  third  Pyramid  stends  something  of  a  similax
kind,  better  preserved,  and  not  so  far  off.  And
vnik  some  of  the  southern  Pyramids,  similar  hoi-
low  temples  are  brought  much  closer  up  to  their
respective  Pyramids-perhaps  into  contact^  and  '
on  their  north  as  well  as  east  sides,  and  have
more  or  less  painted  and  decorated  interiors.

While  again  the  Great  Pyramid  enters  only  at
the  north  side,  and  that  flank  is  constituted  gene-


^  The  original  third  Pyramid,  as  I  belieye,  first  shown  by  Baron
Hansen  upon  Colonel  H.  Vyse's  and  Mr.  Perring*s  drawings,  was
enlarged  subsequently,  and,  according  to  Dr.  Lepsios,  yeiy  long  sub-
sequently, to  its  first  building.  Whatever,  therefore,  we  now  see
oatsidcy  belongs  to  this  later  age.


22  VaMey  of  the  NUe.  [ch.  4.

raUy  the  entrance  side  of  all  the  Pyramids^  theie
are  some  later  ones  which  enter  from  two  or
more  sides,  and  have  very  conflicting  suites  of
apartments  within.  Used,  indeed,  they  always
were,  more  or  less  as  tombs,  and  probably  royal
ones:  but  not  according  to  the  principles  origi-
nally set  forth  in  the  first  of  these  most  pecu-
liar geometrical  buildinga

Hence  then  this  most  remarkable  line  of  square'
hosed,  but  symmetrically  triangular-sidec^  Pyra-
mids of  Lower  Egypt,  after  having  begun  most
successfully  with  an  example,  wherein  (as  we  shall
hope  to  show  presently)  both  its  shape,  siise,  and
astronomical  emplacement  include  important  data
of  science,  pure  as  well  as  applied, — ^this  line  of
^  imitations  fell  wofolly  away  afterwards,  from  all
such  high  and  characteristic  ends  and  aims.  In-
deed, it  would  appear  by  the  enduring  facts  of
their  successive  constructions,  that  the  ancient
Egyptians  must  have  writhed  under  and  resisted,
much  more  than  have  willingly  and  spontane-
ously cultivated,  the  idea  of  their  primitive  most
mathematical  Great  Pyramid ;  wherever  that  idea
was  originally  obtained  from,  or  whatever  pur-
pose it  waB  first  invented  for  and  ordered  to  be


CH.  4.]  Variatums  with  Time.  23

constructed  to  subserve^  on  so  enormous  a  scale,
as  well  as  in  so  enduring  a  manner.

Occasionally,  as  the  facts  indicate,  the  people
worked  themselves  up  into  some  amount  of  en-
thusiasm, or  were  flogged  into  harder  labour  by
a  more  than  usually  despotic  king,  so  as  to  build
rather  a  bigger  Pyramid  for  the  said  monarch's
future  more  glorious  entombment,  than  their  last
architectural  performances.  But  these  were  mere
dry  revivals^  which  brought  out  no  new  thoughts,
while  allowing  many  of  the  old  ones  to  perisL
After  a  few  such  spasmodic  flashes,  therefore,  at
separate  distant  intervals,  the  light  of  practical
Pyramid-building,  as  any  vital  influence,  went
out  for  ever  to  that  land  and  that  people.  Their
Pyramids  had  become,  through  several  centuries,
continually  smaller  and  less  perfect,  even  construc-
tively and  mechanically ;  while  they  had  entirely
lost  every  trace  of  science  symbolized  for  distant
posterity.  Then  the  sons  of  Mizraim  left  off
building  Pjrramids  altogether,  and  turned  their
attention  to  an  entirely  different  style  of  archi-
tecture. Nor  did  they  ever  return  to  the  Pyra-
mid idea,  though  they  had  the  most  splendid
period  of  their  empire,  to  be,  in  wealth,  extent


24  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [ch.  4.

of  population,  and  showy  architecture,  still  before
them.

Dates  of  Egyptian  Pyramid-Building.

THie  period,  then,  during  which  tliis  strange
light  of  Pyramid-building  shone  on  Egypt,  was
limited,  and  rather  sharply  defined  in  the  history
of  that  country.

Beginning  with  a  most  grand  example,— or
perhaps  with  one  or  two  imperfect  attempts  pre-
liminary to  that  triumph  of  art  and  early  science
'the  Great  Pyramid,'  (though  that  will  be  a  point
for  elucidation  in  the  subsequent  portion  of  our
book) ;  and  then,  after  a  period  during  which
every  succeeding  monarch  imitated  his  prede-
cessor in  building  a  Pyramid, — sometimes  lazily,
sometimes  energetically,  never  wisely, — after  such
a  period,  pretty  active  for  a  time,  but  always
with  a  downward  tendency, — ^then  came  the  last
puny,  despised  example ;  after  which  Egyptians
washed  their  hands  of  the  art,  and  acted  as
though  they  would  have  the  world  believe,  that
through  all  their  history  they  never  had  had  any-
thing to  do  with  the,  to  them,  for  some  unknown
reason,  accursed  thing  of  Pyramid-building.


CH.  4.]       Dates  of  PyramidrBuilding.  25

The  date  of  both  that  most  noteworthy  begin-
ning  and  peculiar  ending  in  Coptic  architecture,
Mr.  Fergusson  would  place  between  3900  kc.  and
2600  B.C. ;  Lesueur,  Benan,  etc,  between  6400
B.a  and  4D00  B.C. ;  Lepsius,  nearly  as  Fergusson ;
Gardner  Wilkinson  and  Rawlinson,  between  2500
B.C.  and  2200  B.C.  But  William  Osbum^  plaices
it  between  2300  B.C.  and  1900  B.o. ;  and  as  his
dates  are  sustained  by  astronomical  deductions
begun  by  Sir  John  Herschel  and  continued  by
myself,' — ^from  what  may  truly  be  called,  in  Mr.
Fergusson's  own  words,  *  the  very  petrified
'  thoughts,  feelings,  and  intentions  of  the  Great
*  Pyramid  builders '  when  employed  thereon,  as
a  contemporary  monument, — of  course  I  shall
adhere  to  Mr.  Osbum's  numbers ;  which  are  be-
sides, the  result  of  a  very  rigid  and  thorough
examination  of  all  specially  hieroglyphic  and
Egjrptologic  data.

Two  remarks  further,  however,  may  be  advis-
able here,  before  descending  the  stream  of  time
to  see  what  the  Egyptians  took  to  building,  after
they  deserted  the  Pyramids.

^  MontanenUU  History  qf  Egypt,  voL  i    Gkirdner  WilkinsoQ  also,
io  his  earlier  Works.

>  L^e  and  Work  <U  <Ae  Qrtal  Pyramid,  yoL  iii  pp.  215-299.


26    ,  Valley  of  the  NUe.  [ch,  4.

Tk^  first  such  remaxk,  is — seeing  that  the  enor-
mous differences  of  dates  among  the  Eg3^to-
logists  are  chiefly  due  to  some  sort  of  stretching
out,  more  or  less,  of  the  very  same  number  and
order  of  positive  events,  so  as  to  occupy  more»  or
fewer,  years;  and  as  this  Procrustean  method
prevails  increasingly  during  the  earlier  part  of
Mizraite  hi8tory.-we  must  never  take  a  date
from  one  of  those  modem  Egyptological  gentle*
men,  and  put  it  down  in  the  chronology  of  an-
other of  them,  without  first  reducing  the  former%
system  to  the  value  or  terms  of  the  latter.  For,
without  such  a  necessary  reduction,  the  whole
facts  of  kings  and  reigns  would  presently  be  dis-
placed relcUivdy ;  and  posterity  might  be  set  above
their  ancestors,  with  the  most  disastrous  facility.

We  shall  close  this  chapter,  therefore,  with  a
tabular  view  of  the  first  twenty  Egyptian  dynas-
ties, as  dated  by  the  several  Egyptological  autho-
'  rities ;  hoping  to  supply  therein  a  simple  inspection
method  of  making  the  correction  just  mentioned.
And  now  comes  our  second  word  of  advice.

Though  there  are  at  present  such  large  discre-
pancies amongst  the  Eg3rptologists^  they  follow
some  sort  of  law ;  and  there  is  a  science  binding


CH.  4.]       Dates  of  Pyramidr Building.  27

them  to  a  certaiii  extent  together^  and  making
them  a  very  respectable  body  of  learned  men^
Philosophers  they  are,  who  wiU  no  doubt  go
working  on  and  on,  until  they  have  brought
their  mutual  differences  within  a  smaUer  com-
pass, and  have  much  improved  the  whole  world's
knowledge  of  their  most  peculiar  subject.  But  on  or
near  their  confines  are  to  be  f oimd  stray  geniuses,
erratic  stanf,  meteors  blazing  up  here  and  there
anomalously  :  in  fstct,  Egyptological  analogues  of
anti-Newtonian  gravitaltion  men,  and  seekers  after
perpetual  motion.  Of  and  against  all  such,  let  the
earnest  student  be  forewarned  and  forearmed.

One  of  these  soliteries,  who  has  written  much
on  the  history  of  Egypt,  and,  when  touching  on
her  periods  of  Soman  bondage,  very  socially  and
pleasantly, — ^actually  makes  King  Suphis  of  the
4th  dynasty  and  the  Great  Pyramid,  go  forth  from
his  home  in  Memphis,  to  fight  against  kings  of
the  12th  dynasty,  in  Thebes ;  and  this  about  the
year  1650  B.c. ;  that  is,  at  a  date  long  after  the
widely  removed  lives,  and  far  separated  deaths,
of  both  elder  and  younger  monarchs ;  or  when
they  could  certainly  do  no  harm  either  to  each
other  or  to  their  respective  kingdoms.


28  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [cH.  4.

Another  of  these  disturbers  of  history  is,  how-
ever,  a  man  of  higher  mark,  being  no  other  than
the  late  Sir  Greorge  Comewall  Lewis ;  an  excel-
lent classic,  but  more  Greek  than  all  the  Greeks
in  this  one  point  of  their  national  weakness^  viz.,
thinking  aU  the  rest  of  mankind  iUiterate  bar-
barians,  and  deeming  nothing  older  than,  or  half
so  good  in  the  world  as,  themselves.  Hating
therefore,  and  despising  also,  the  Egyptians  in
his  Grecian  heart,  knowing  nothing  of  their  prac-
tical constructions  or  hieroglyphics,  but  deriving
some  slight  account  of  them  from  the  Greeks  only,
and  they  writing  merely  for  their  national  pur-
pose of  exalting  themselves, — Sir  George  Come-
waU  Lewis  rather  comically  informs  his  readers,
that  the  first  Greek  Olympiad,  or  776  B.C.,  is  the
earliest  date  on  which  we  can  rely  for  any  event
in  the  past  annals  of  mankind.

For  the  Egyptian  Pyramids,  indeed,  he  does
go  a  little  farther  back ;  but  thinks  that  they  can-
not be  older  than  1012  B.O.  How,  therefore,  he
stands  among  the  modem  hardworking  Egypto-
logists, who  gather  their  knowledge  of  Egypt  by
applying  their  own  brains  to  Egyptian  monu-
ment£f, — ^the  following  table  will  show ;   t.e.,  as


CH.  4.]       Dates  of  Pyra/midrBuilding.


29


touching  the  usual  ^  dynasties ;'  for,  though  some
writers  begin  their  Egyptian  histories  long  before
even  the  first  Manethoan  reign  proper,  we  shall
discuss  them,  in  a  separate  chapter.


Egyftian  OEOtoNOLOOY,  showing  the  Date  of  the  Beginning
of  each  Dynasty  a/pproximatdy^  aooording  to  various
authorities.


irvmbvoT
I>yBM<7.

XtttotteBir.

ftegaHon.cta.

LuML  Gwinar
inildnaaa.

WnUam'Oslmra
and  Aatranani-

fltf  CUfBBlAttOB.

Axdiltootenw

B«wUiiMii,«ta

B.O.

B.a

B.O.

B.a

1

5735

3892

2700

2429

1

2

5472

3639

2480

2420

3

5170

3338

2670

2329

1

4

4956

3124

2440

2228

•3

6

4472

2840

2440

2228

1

6

••  •

2744

2200

2107

4

7

•••

2592

1800

...

'    ■

8

••  •

2522

1800

••  •

9

•■  •

2674

2200

2107

10

•••

2565

■••

1959

11

••  ■

2423

2200

2107

12

3435

2380

2080

•  •  •

13

•••

2136

1920

•  •  •

i<

14

•  a  •

2167

2080

■  a  •

^

15

•  ••

2101

2080

1900

1

16

•  ••

1842

1800

1900

1

17

•  ••

1684

1776

••  •

18

•  •  ■

1591

1520

1674

19

1314

1443

1324

1394

1

20

••  ■

1269

1232

1314

P^

.  •


30  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [ch.  6.


ARCHITECTURAL   DATA-cofUmued.


CHAPTER  5.

VALLEY  OF  THE  NILE— ocm/tntied.

Theban  Temples.

A  BLANK  follows  in  the  history  of  Egypt  after
the  last  degenerate  specimens  of  the  Pyramids
had  been  erected, — a  long  stretch  of  Nile  banks
nearly  devoid  of  architectural  remains  is  passed,
as  a  modern  traveller — all  unconsciously  pur-
suing the  path  of  early  Egyptian  empire — ascends
the  river  towards  the  south  :  and  then,  in  the  one
case,  we  arrive  at  the  Theban  kingdom,  flourishing
in  its  chiefest  glory  from  1800  to  1200  B.a
according  to  most  of  the  chronologies,  here  not
very  different  from  each  other ;  and  in  the  other
case,  we  practically  reach  the  plain  of  Thebes  in
Upper  Egypt,  imder  the  parallel  of  25°  40'  n.
latitude ;  with  the  effect  of  finding  it  all  gorgeous
with  temples  and  palaces.


CH.  5.]  Theban  Temples.  31

Grandly  shine  those  ancient^  glories  of  archi-
tecture in  sandstone  and  limestone,  granite  and
porphyry,  basalt  and  alabaster.  But  there  are  no
Pyramids  amongst  thenu

Some  archddologists,  catching  at  the  remem-
brance of  a  form  which  had  set  for  ever,— will
persist  in  calling  attention  to  the  slightly  pyra-
midal, or  inclined,  faces  of  many  of  the  public
buildings,  and  to  the  outer  surfaces  of  Theban
door-posts  and  ^  pylon' towers.  These  last  being
strong,  yet  decorated,  hollow  structures  near  the
entrance  of  every  temple,  and  forming  the  glory
of  Thebes  in  its  days  of  renown  :  for  it  was  then
the  *  city  of  a  hundred  temple  pylons,'  not  city
gateSf  as  Homer  and  his  translators  erroneously
phrased  it.'  But  the  slope  of  these  buildings,  is
not  even  approximately  the  slope  of  the  Great
Pyramid ;  while  instead  of  an  almost  solid  fabric
(with  1^0  only  of  hollow),  they  have  merely
apparent  masses,  which  are  one-half  or  more
of  hollow  space  within,  or  only  positive  open
colonnade.

^  Not  ancient  as  to  the  Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt,  though  ex-
tremely so  as  compared  with  the  temples  of  Greece  and  Rome.

*  Thebes  had  no  surrounding  walls,  and  therefore  no  city  gates.
Its  temples  were  its  strongholds,  and  were  separate  and  isolated
holds ;  the  houses  of  the  citizens  being  scattered  loosely  abroad.


32  Valley  of  the  Nile.  [CH.  5.

In  place  too  of  smooth,  flat,  simple  walls^  those
palace  temples^  or  temple-palaces, — for  no  one
seems  to  know  exactly  which, — show  obeliaka^
pillars,  capitals,  cornices,  and  pediments,  sculpture
in  various  degrees  of  relievo,  as  well  as  the  roimd ;
with  multitudinous  engraved  adornments  of  eveiy
kind,  and  all  of  them  painted  with  vivid  pigments
up  to  the  very  eyes.  In  place  also  of  silence  and
purity  as  of  old,  they  are  covered  (these  Theban
temples)  from  end  to  end,  and  from  top  to  bottom,
with  enormous  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  bearing
the  praises  of  their  despotic  and  murderous  kingei^
such  as  Thothmes  and.Amenophis  and  Rhamses
Sesostris ;  and  are  polluted  with  all  the  abomina-
tions of  the  religious  worship  of  a  thousand  animal*
headed  gods,  each  one  more  vile  than  another.

This  ia  the  ordinary  ^ancient  Egypt*  of  most
of  our  historiographers.  It  is  that  also,  whose  re-
mains both  our  travellers  so  rave  to  see,  and  oar
collectors  delight  to  bring  home  pretty  specimens
of  the  idols  of, — from  little  green  images  the  size
of  a  fly,  up  to  the  monster  granite  colossi  in  the
British  Museum.


CH.  5.]  The  Astronomical  Test.  33


7%6  Astronomical  Tea.

In  the  midst  of  so  mucli  falling  away,  then,
into  their  own  deceitful  religious  inventions,  how
fiEtied  the  asserted  astronomical  condition,  touch-
ing the  orientation  of  the  walls  of  these  showy
buildings  by  Egyptians  of  the  second  empire  ?

Mr.  Fergusson  says,  that  'they  were  placed

•  •  •  '

*  anywhere,  facing  in  any  direction,  and  generally
'  affected  with  a  symm^riphohia  that  it  is  difficult
'  to  understand  The  pylons  are  seldom  in  the
'  axes  of  the  temples ;  the  courts  seldom  square  ;
'  the  angles  frequently  not  right  angles,  and  one
'  court  succeeding  another  without  the  least  re-

*  ference  to  symmetry/^

Checking  this  account  by  reference  to  the
plates  in  Dr.  Lepsius's  large  work  on  Egypt,^  a
most  ample  confirmation  is  found  there ;  for,  if

1  And  again,  at  page  109  of  his  Architectural  History: — 'The

*  palace  of  Luxor  ia  farther  remarkable  as  a  striking  instance  of  how

*  regardleaa  the  Egyptians  (of  the  Theban  age  of  kingdom)  were  of

*  regolarity  and  symmetry  in  their  plans.     Not  only  is  there  a  con-

*  cidarable  angle  in  the  direction  of  the  axis  of  the  building,  but  the
'  angles  of  the  oonrt-yards  are,  in  scarcely  any  instance,  right  angles.

*  The  pillars  are  varionsly  spaced,  and  pains  seem  to  have  been  gra-

*  toitonsly  taken  to  make  it  as  irregular  as  possible  in  nearly  erery
'respect.'

'  Denkmaeler  aua  JSffypten  un  JEihiopen  ;  12  folio  vols. ;  Berlin.


34  VaUey  of  the  Nile.  [oh.  6.

the  direction  of  the  look-out  of  each  temple  be
taken,  as  defined  by  the  longer  general  axis  of  the
whole,  passing  out  from  the  inner  penetralia  and
proceeding  forth  through  the  pylon  towers^  the
following  numerical  results  are  obtained  for  their
astronomical  directions : —

On  Wist  Sn>i  or  Nqjl

Koithemmost  temple  of  Sethos  L,        •  s  &  52^  s.

WeBtemmoft         ditto  ■■  8.64  s.

Temple  farther  eouth,  of  Thothmei  iil,  ■■  &  61   b.

Ditto  ditto,  Bhamses  ii.  a  g.  44  i.

Ditto  ditto,  BhamteeiiL  «  8. 43  &

On  Eabt  Smi  or  NnjL

Kamak,  great  temple,  a  v.  64*  w.

grand  avenae,      •  •  ■■  &  19  w»

■mailer  aTenae  and  temple^  ■■  &  26  w.

Luxor,  north  part  of  temple  of  Bhamses  IL  a  x.  40  B.

„      south  part,  or  of  Amenophis  m.  »  K.  30  B.

Besides  these  temples^  all  of  them  large,  there
are  many  smaller  ones  more  variously  placed
still ;  while  the  tombs  which  honeycomb  the  hills
over  miles  and  miles  of  rock  and  ravine,  are
truly  almost  scattered  at  random.

A  lamentable  change  is  this,  firom  the  regu-
larity and  order  observable  on  the  ancient  hill  of
Jeezeh,  where  the  Great  Fjnramid  faces  the  cardinal
points  so  truly,  that  it  is  difficult  to  discern  any
error ;  where  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  down


If


GH.  6.]  The  Astronomical  Test  35

to  the  eighth  and  ninth  PTramidB,  closely  follow
the  same  emplaceihent^  and  are  themiBelves  suc-
ceeded in  a  similar  manner  by  every  tomb,  large
or  small,  on  the  slopes  of  the  hill  around  them ;
and  where  even  every  narrow,  though  deep,
sepulchral  well,  is  square  in  plan,  and  its  sides
axe  duly  oriented,*

Order,  method,  and  regularity,  with  a  dose
attention  to  the  leading  facts  of  astronomy,  con-
joined with  an  appreciation  of  geometrical  excel-
lence and  mechanical  exactitude, — ^rule  over  the
first  expressions  of  Egypt  amongst  its  Pyramids
near  the  Delta.  But  garish  display,  luxurious  liv-
ing, contempt  of  science,  as  well  mathematical'

^  lliis  refen  in  strictneM  only  to  inoh  of  the  Imfldings  on  the
Jeeseh  hill,  aa  can  be  safely  and  securely  identified  with  the  earlier
Hemphian,  or  ante-Theban,  dynasties.  Buildings  of  other  and  far
different  dates  are  unfortunately  amongst  them,  and  require  to  hp
aedulonsly  guarded  against  in  any  critical  inquiry.  These  subsequent
Architectural  growths  connect  themselves  chiefly  with  the  revival  of
Memphis,  after  the  glories  of  Thebes  had  passed  away,  in  the  26th
dynasty ;  when  the  memory  of  King  Suphis  of  the  4th  dynasty  was
converted  into  a  god ;  when  similar  honours  were  conferred  on  the
Great  Sphinx, — a  work,  as  Mr.  Osbum  shows,  commenced  in  the
14th  dynasty  ;  and  when,  or  by  which  period,  the  whole  figment
of  Osiiis  and  Typhon  had  been  fully  elaborated,  with  all  its  endless
processions  of  animal-headed  gods  and  mythical  demons,  quite
unknown  to  the  earlier  empire  of  the  Pyramid-building  kings.

'  M  Renau,  in  Bevue  des  Deux  Mondest  April  1865,  remarks
on  the  inferior  stones,  badly  chosen,  and  worse  put  together,  as  if
by  slave  labour  and  under  compulsion  of  the  stick,  in  the  over-


36


VdOey  of  the  Nile.


[CEL  5.


as  astronomical,  and  idolatry  rampant, — mark
the  second  stage  of  Egypt's  national  existence  on
the  fertile  plains  of  Thebes.

adomed  temples  of  Thebes,  while  he  can  never  pniae  mfficieBtlj  tiie
conadentioiiB  labour  and  mechanical  ezcellflooe  of  the  Gmt  Fjfra-
mid's  plain  comtraction.


GEL  6.]  Pyramids  of  Ethiopia.  37


ARCHITECTURAL


CHAPTER  6.

VALLEY  OF  THE  NILE-eonc^iuied.

Pyramids  of  Ethiopia^

Higher  still  up  the  Nile  we  next  ascend, —
thiougli  all  Egypt  and  into  Ethiopia^  or  Upper
Nubia  beyond ; — and  then,  in  the  latitude  of  17*"  N.,
or  near  the  cities  or  stations  of  Meroe,  Baxkal,  and
Nourri,  more  groups  of  Pyramids  are  met  witL

But  we  have  now  descended  the  stream  of
time  to  the  days  of  Tirhakah,  King  of  Ethiopia,
and  conqueror  of  Eg3rpt  under  the  25  th  dynasty ;
or  to  about  the  date  700  B.C.

Was  it,  that  that  energetic  king  had  seen  the
Pjrramids  of  Jeezeh  in  the  north,  and  wished  to
repeat^  vdthout  understanding,  them,  in  his  south-
em  home!  Or  did  he  propose  to  improve  on
what  appeared  to  the  rich  profusion  of  his  Cushite
taste,  the    pale  meanness   of  the    undecorated


38  VdUey  of  the  Nile.  [gh.  6.

memorials  of  primeval  time  ?  Or  again,  did  he
desire  to  combine  into  one,  the  angnstness  of  the
Pyramids  with  the  splendours  of  Thebes  ?

We  know  not  the  idea  which  actuated  the  royal
builder,  imless  it  be  expressed  in,  and  by,  lus
works  themselves ;  and  there,  we  jSnd  FyramidB
numerous  and  square-based,  but  small  (t.e.,  seldom
more  than  1000  inches  long  in  the  side  of  the
base) ;  and  very  badly  built,— consisting  merely
of  an  outside  casing  of  showy  masonry,  fiUed
inside  with  veritable  loose  rubbish.  They,  %.e^
these  little  Ethiopian  Pyramids,  are  likewise  thin,
steep  in  their  sloping  triangular  sides,  and  slender,
though  often  slightly  flat-topped  intentionally;
they  stand,  too,  in  groups  together,  like  cypress-
trees  in  a  Turkish  bmial-ground ;  and  are  adorned
with  pedestals,  roll  mouldings  along  their  comer
edges  or  arris  lines ;  and  with  occasional  minia-
ture belfiy-like  windows,  or  circular*  and  other
ornamental  markings  near  the  summit;  while
below,  th^  are  still  further  decorated  with  a
temple  kind  of  hollow  propylaeon  or  porch,  at-
tached to,  and  projecting  from,  one  side.

^  This  beginmng  of  drcles  put  in  at  random,  for  apparentlj
mere  idle  thoughtless  ornamentation,  is  noteworthy,  and  will  be
alladed  to  again.


GH.  6.]        Astranomiocd  Emplacement.  39

These  porches  are  indeed  often  so  rich  and
architectural,  as  to  be  neither  more  nor  less  than
small  Theban  temples;  with  pylons  and  pylon-
towerSy  and  two  or  three  snccessiye  diminishing
conrts.  But  their  ceilings  axe  characteristic ;  be-
ing formed  rain-proof  and  complete,  sometimes  in
a  roond,  and  sometimes  in  a  Grothic,  {.e.,  a  pointed
arch,  within.  Nicely,  too,  nay  even  gorgeously,
painted,  are  the  interiors  of  these  Pyramid  ap-
pendages ;  generally  in  a  blue  ground  scattered
over  with  golden  stars  on  the  said  ceiling ;  and
upon  the  walls,  with  the  animal-headed  gods  and
mystic  abominations  of  later  Egypt, — as  well  as
with  full-length  portraits,  again  and  again,  of  the
reigning  Ethiopian  monarch  and  his  large-bodied,
thick-lipped,  negro  wives.^

Astronomical  Emplacement

And  now,  amongst  these  many  architectural
indulgences,  how  about  the  asserted  rigid  law  of
astronomical  orientation  1

^  Feigii88on*8  woodcats  of  these  Ethiopian  PyramidB,  taken  from
Hoekin's  work,  hardly  make  enough  of  the  porches.  These  are
better,  as  well  as  far  more  abundantly  given,  in  Dr.  Lepsius's  folio
Denkmaeler;  both  as  to  general  views  of  the  buildings  in  the
earlier  volumes,  and  large-sized  copies  of  the  almost  innumerable
paintings  on  the  internal  walls,  in  voL  x.


40


Valley  of  the  NUe.


[oh.  6.


Our  excellent  general  authority,  Mr.  FeigOBSQii,
says, — ^that  it  is  carried  out  among  those  Ethiopian
Pyramids,  with  even  more  than  Theban  iziegn*
larity.

That  opinion  being  founded  apparently  alto-
gether upon  Mr.  G.  A.  Hoskin's  travels  in  Ethiopia,^
— I  have  checked  it  by  referring  to  Dr.  Lepdus^s
large  work,  descriptive  of  his  subsequent  visi-
tation of  the  same  places :  and  on  correcting  his
magnetic  bearings  given  in  all  the  plates,  for  the
amount  of  9"*  variation  which  is  entered  in  some,
— ^the  following  results  appear.

At  Meroe,  where  the  porch  looks  out,  or  enters
in,  at  the  centre  of  the  side  of  the  Pyramid,  and
at  right  angles  to  the  base  side  of  the  same, — ^the
direction  of  such  look-out  ii


For  one,  two,  or  more  Pyramidi,
Another,       ....


-  &  70  I.
«  8.  73  ■.

-  s.  74  B.
«  s.  75  I.
«  &  80  B.

-  s.  86  I.

«  8.  89  B.

«  v.  82  B.

»  N.  76  B.


Similarly  at  Nourri, — ^and  where,  in  one  of

^  A  T«7  good  book,  for  an  original  oxplorsr ;  quarto^  1S8S.


CH.  6.]  Pyramids  ofEthiopicL  41

Mr.  HoBkin's  plates,  no  less  than  thirty-six  Pyra-
mids are  represented, — they  are  all  square-based,
but  only  a  portion  are  supplied  with  porches;
and  the  look-out  of  these  bears, —

Id  some, ■■    &  41**  K.

Othen, ■>     &  44  1.

And  ofehen  still,    .  ■■    &  61   B. ;

while  at  Barkal,  where  all  the  Pyramids  are  square
based,  and  all  are  furnished  with  porches^  the  look-
out of  these  is  found  to  be, —

Forsome^ a     8.  SI**  k.

Oihfln, a    8.  39  ■.

n  B>      8.  51    B.

„  .  .  .  .  .  »      8.  67    K.

And  a  large  temple  dose  by,  .         b     &  53  B.

Hence,  if  there  be  any  law  at  all,  it  is  rather  for
pointing  to  as  far  as  possible  from,  than  close  to,
the  cardinal  points.  So  that,  after  a  course  of
1800  years^  we  find  that  the  architecture  of  the
valley  of  the  Nile,  though  beginning  in  the  north
and  ending  in  the  south  with  Pyramids, — had
entirely  departed  from  the  primitive  characteristic
of  astronomical  emplacement  At  the  same  time,
the  structures  themselves  were  so  altered  in  figure,
— that  in  place  of  resembling  the  combined  sim-
plicity of  a  mathematical,  and  organic  mystery  of
a  natural,  cr]rstalline  figure, — ^the  Ethiopian  Pyra-


42  y alley  of  the  Nile.  [CH.  6.

mids  were  such,  that, — only  increase  their  already
commenced  deviations  a  little  more,  or  e.g.^  pull  up
the  Pyramid  portion  a  little  higher,  ornament  its
sides  more,  and  slightly  enlarge  the  hollow  porch,
— and  you  have  a  northern  Christian  church  with
its  spire  :  or,  raise  the  pylons  in  an  equal  degree
and  you  have  the  two  western  towers  of  a  (xothic
cathedral^

This  idea  may  be  a  little  overstrained;  bul^
looking  to  the  high  importance  which  has  been
attached  in  some  quarters^  to  Sir  Gardner  Wilkin-
son's demonstrations  of  the  much  hier  pointed
arches  of  the  Rhoda  Nilometer  near  Cairo, — ^being
yet  several  centuries  older  than  the  earliest  known
Gothic  example  of  similar  pointed  arches  in  the
north; — there  may  be  importance  in  directing
attention  to  the  same  forms  occurring  in  Ethiopia^
both  in  greater  profusion,  and  full  1000  years
before  even  the  Rhoda  example.  The  architec-
tural problem  too  seems  easier,  to  account  for
the  first  invention  of  the  figure  of  our  churches

^  Mr.  Fergosaon  had  already  remarked  in  his  ffistory  of  ArM'
tecture,  p.  104,  of  the  Bhamession  at  Thebes,  built  by  Rhameaes  the
Great — '  Ita  facade  formed  by  two  great  pylons  or  pyramidal  massei
'  of  masoniy,  which,  like  the  two  western  towers  of  a  Gothio
*  cathedral,  are  the  appropriate  and  most  imposing  part  of  the
'  structure.'


OH.  6.]    Last  Days  of  Nile  Architecture.         43

in  that  maimer,  (though  it  does  imply  an  adapta*
tion  of  Pagan  forms  to  Christian  purposes,)  than
to  obtain  it  out  of  the  doctrines,  injunctions,  or
descriptions  of  early  Christian  worship  contained
in  the  New  Testament^

Last  Days  of  Nile  Architecture.

Beyond  those  just  mentioned,  only  a  few  isolated
antique  structures  in  African  deserts,  are  occa-
sionally spoken  of  by  some  wandering  travellers ;
— but  even  the  best  of  such  remains  are  taken  for
ever  out  of  the  course  of  our  research,  by  the
following  condemnatory  sentence  from  Fergusson's
discriminating  history :»-

'  The  rains  of  Wadj-El-Ooatib,  a  little  further  up  the  Nile
'  than  Heroe,  should  perhaps  be  also  mentioned  here,  if  only
'  firom  the  importance  giyen  to  them  by  Horen,  who  thought
'  he  had  discoyered  in  them  the  ruins  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter


^  The  principles  of  much  PogiDian  colouring  may  also  be  seen  in
these  Ethiopian  pyramid-porches  of  2500  yean  ago ;  especially  in
the  iavonrite  background  of  deep  and  pure  blue, — ^when  on  the
oeiHng,  heightening  the  effect  of  the  golden  stars  ;  aud  on  the  walls,
throwing  forward  the  figures,  human  or  otherwise,  of  the  artistic
design,  tricked  out  always  cunningly,  more  or  less  in  warmest  tints
of  yellow,  orange,  and  brown.

s  EzoeptiDg,  what  may  be  to  be  excepted,  about  the  supposed  Dr.
Leider^s  Pyramid,  several  miles  west  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of
Jeezeh.  See  Ltfe  and  Work  at  the  Oreat  Pyramid^  vol.  i.  p.  455,
and  ToL  ii  p.  184.


44


Valley  of  the  Nile.


[CEL  6.


'  Ammon.  Thej  are,  however,  all  in  the  debased  style  of  the
'  worst  age  of  Ptolemaic  or  Boman  art  in  that  coontrj.  They
'  are  wholly  devoid  of  hieroglyphics,  or  any  indication  of
'  sanctity  and  importance,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that
'  they  are  the  remains  of  a  carayanserai  on  the  great  oommer-
'  cial  route  between  Egypt  and  Azoum,  along  which  the
'  greater  part  of  the  trade  of  the  East  arrived  at  Alexandria
*  in  the  days  of  its  magnificence.'

Hence  we  have  now  exhausted,  for  our  purposes^
all  the  architecture  of  the  valley  of  the  Nile ;  and
far  away  indeed  &om  these  latter  degraded  ex-
amples of  it^  must  we  look  to  other  lands, — if  we
would  hope  to  alight  on  more  of  the  really  early
traces  of  mankind.


CH.  7.]  Valley  of  the  Euphrates.  45


ARCHITECTURAL  D AT A-^cantinued.


CHAPTER  7.

VALLEY  OF  THE  EUFHRATE&

Babd  Remains  ?

Veey  generally  tliroughout  the  world  runs  a
belief,  that  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates  and  the
plains  of  Shinar,  formed  the  first  habitat  of  in-
tellectual man;  and  an  eloquent  author  whom
we  have  already  quoted  (page  8),  even  goes  so
far  as  to  assert,  that  the  idea  of  Pjnramidal  struc-
tores,  and  the  practice  of  orienting  them  astro-
nomically,  arose  there.

K  belief  alone  could  be  admitted  in  this  in-
quiry, the  Tower  of  Babel,  as  described  in  the
Scriptures,  might  be  brought  up  in  part  testi-
mony; and  would,  if  so  discovered,  be  found  with
little  doubt  to  be  older  than  the  Great  Pyramid
of  Lower  Egypt,  the  oldest  example  of  all  the
architecture  which  has  thus  far  crossed  our  path.


46  Valley  of  the  Eupkrates.         [CH.  7.

On  the  contemporary  monumental  examina-
a.n  principle,  howL.  whereon  we  are  now  «n.
barked,  no  mere  beliefs  can  have  any  place.  We
must  appeal  rather  to  the  positive  excavations
or  ground  surve3rs  of  Loftus^  Layard,  Taylor,  Sir
Henry  BawlinsoUi  and  other  modem  explorers ;
and  are  informed  thereby,  that  though  '  Babylon'
be  the  reputed  site,  very  nearly,  of  the  Tower  of
Babel,  and  though  many  ruins  have  been  dieh
covered  there, — ^they  are  all  much  more  recent^
and  far  less  notable,  than  anything  which  could
be  worthUy  identified  with  that  primeval  tower
of  beliet^

Most  unlike  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh,
which,  standing  on  the  hard,  solid,  living  rod^
is  stiU  on  ite  own  sure  foundationa,  with  nothing
perisbably  human  below,  and  nothing  elevated
above  it, — the  Babylonian  buildings  are  im-
mersed,  rather  than  founded,  in  all  the  insecurity
of  illimitable  depth  of  alluvial  mud ;  such  as  the
Euphrates  brought  down  ages  ago,  and  such  as  it

^  '  It  is  by  no  means  impoesible  that  the  rich  allayial  plam  ni
*  Shinar  may  have  been  inhabited  by  man  as  early  as  the  yiUey  ol
'  the  Nile  ;  but  if  this  was  so,  it  is  certain  that  the  early  dweUen
'  in  the  land  have  left  no  trace  of  their  sojourn  which  has  as  yet
'  rewarded  the  search  of  modem  investigators.* — Fergosson'a  Hutory
of  Architecture,  p.  130.


CH.  7.]  Babel  Remains  f  47

is  bringing  down  still,  with  tiie  effect  of  continu-
ally and  even  rapidly  extending  its  banks  into
the  head  of  the  Persian  Qul£  Hence  all  those
Lower  Mesopotamian  buildings^  seem  more  or
less  endued  with  a  tendency  to  sink  beneath  the
surface  of  the  ground  ;  and  one  looks  in  vain  for
the  mighty  walls  of  even  medisdval  Babylon ;  ic,
the  Babylon  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  city  whose
mural  crown  was  one  of  the  wonders  of  the
earth ;  with  walls  two  hundred  cubits  high  (ac-
cording to  Herodotus),  of  a  width  at  the  top  for
seven  chariots  to  drive  abreast,  and  famished
with  a  himdred  lofty  gates  of  costly  bronze.^

Much  digging  amongst  the  ruins  has  taken
place  of  late  years,  and  has  discovered,  Jirst,
many  traces  of  historical  Babylon ;  and,  second,
beneath  them,  has  come  upon  the  remains  of  a
very  much  earlier  Chaldsean  monarchy.  Beneath
these  still,  could  the  excavations  be  pushed  so
far,  we  might  perhaps  expect  to  find  the  foun-
dations both  of  the  Tower  of  Babel,  and  that
city  of  the  same  name  which  we  are  told  was

^  See  Bawlinson's  Ancient  Monarchies,  toL  iiL  pp.  348,  349,  for
many  varying  aocotmtB  of  the  ImmenBe  heights  and  breadths  of
these  walls ;  and  at  page  338  for  the  testimony  that  '  no  vestige
'  of  the  walls  of  Babylon  has  yet  been  discovered.'


48


VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.         [ch.  7.


the  beginning  of  the  kingdom  of  Nimrod,  did
it  ever  really  stand  on  the  surface  of  the  ground
in  that  precise  locality.  But  as  no  such  foun-
dations have  yet  been  found  or  certainly  iden-
tified,— ^we  must  for  a  time  discharge  even  the
memory  of  these  ancient  names  from  our  collection
of  data ;  while  we  proceed  to  the  consideration  of
whatever  remains  actually  have  rewarded  the  zeal
of  excavators  in  various  sections  of  the  Interam-
nian  country,  and  are  known  now  to  archaeologists
as  'the  Pjnramidal  temples  and  burial  cities  of
*  Proto-Chaldsea/


CE.  8.]  Jhf^aUhGhaldcBO.  49


ARCHITECTURAL   DATA-^^^imud.


CHAPTER  8,

VALLB7  OF  THB  EUPHRATES— «NiKiiiierf.

Prat(hChald(Ba.

The  cliief  period  of  activil^  and  importance  in
the  Proto'Chaldaean  kingdom,  seems  to  be  reckoned
by  the.Bev.  George  Rawlinson,  in  his  Five  OrecU
MancmJUes  of  the  Ancient  Eastern  Worlds  as
ranging  between  chronological  limits  of  2200  B.C.
and  1600  B.C.

But  then  as  his  date  for  the  Great  Pyramid  of
Jeezeh,  though  far  from  so  extravagant  as  those
of  many  other  literary  men^  is  yet  some  300  years
greater  than  that  derived  from  the  only  irre-
proachable astronomical  data, — we  shall  probably
be  justified  in  slightly  diminishing  his  earlier
numbers;  and  caUing  his  2200  B.C.,  2000  B.O.
astronomical.  In  this  manner  his  dates  will  fit
symmetrically  into  those  already  ascertained  for

D


62  VaUey  qfihe  Euphrates.         [ch.  8.

tiling  aceorate,  liiereforei  was  known  in  modem
times,  touching  the  said  fiducial  details,  until  the
explorers  above  named  eommenced  extensLve  exca-
vations into  the  said  mounds  <;  and,  after  cutting
de^ly  llutyi^h  l&e  sci|N&rmcumbent  maas  of  clay
and  soil,  readbed  some  perdon  of  the  actually
standing  lowest  walls.

Such  structoies^  then  proved  to  have  been  fiBisIy
lectengolar  » to  tiieir  angles  in  ground-plam  but
deddedly  oblong  as  to  thdbr  sides.  The  lowest
tenace  (for  the  f ormation  was  always  in  suck
terraces^  decreasing  in  sbe  as  th^  juscended)  iib-
variably  exhibited  enormous  external  walls,  which
were  eith^  deeply  pannelled,  or  provided  with
enormous  buttresses,  giving  hoik  strength,  stiff*
nesfif,  and  variety  of  U^  and  shade  under  a  bright
sun.  Upon  this  was  placed  a  isecond  terrace^
smaller,  of  more  refined  architectural  features,
but  oblong  ako  in  its  xectaagular  ground-plan,
and  eccentrically  situated  as  to  the  lower  terrace.
On  this  second  terrace  was  placed  sometimes  a
third  one,  of  similar  order;  and  on  the  top  of
that  again,  a  small  hollow  apartment  or  shrine,
exceedingly  ornamented,  often  with  precious
metal,  but  also  founded  in  eccentric  position.


CH.  8.]  Frot(hChaldcKL  63

These  aeveral  eccentricities  were  all  so  airangedi
as  to  push  eveij  successiyely  higfaw  tenace  or
ti^wer  more  and  more  towards  one,  than  the  other;
end  of  the  genMal  mas&  One  end  of  the  same
fadnDtg  thereby  madd  to  rise  from  the  plain  (though,
still  by  the  terrace  steps),  more,  and  the  other
iBBB^steeply, — ^the:  greats  roominess  of  the  latter
end.  wa&  nidlized  by  having  large  flints  of  steps;
Tarionsly  and  showily  arranged,  so  that  whole
ccDwds  of  worshippers  mighty  if  necessajy,  ascend
aaddieAcend  with  all  comfdrt  and  decorum.

The  sides  of  these,  terraces  were  generally
acraoged  at  a  large  angle;  of  slope,  or  c^ivergr
enoc:  iaward,  aa  they  ascended ;  but  that  was  all
tiiey  had  of  the  true  Pyramid  Bhape  ^  and  th^pe
were  no  nearer  approaches  to  that  most  peculiar,
and.  easily  definable,  form  throughout  all  Froto-
ChaldsBa.

Oblong  rectangles  then  in  plan,  built  in  succesr
sive  eccentric  stages,  with  unequal  sides  of  trape^
aoid  shape,  protruding  with  buttresseef,  deeply  cut
into;  with  staircases^  and  surmounted  by  a  flat-
topped  hollow  chamber, — ^the  Proto-Chaldsean
temples  evidently  were  no  rivals  to  the  mathe^
matical  perfection  of  realization  shown  by  the


66  VaUey  of  the  EupKrcUes.  [ch.  8.

This  statement  is  repeated  so  often  and  so  posi-
tiyeLy  by  both  Loffcus  and  Rawlinson,  tliat  they
would  seem>  to  liaye  overboked  the  impossibilily
of  cdl  the  comers  of  a.  long  leetangular  building
being  directed  truly  to  the  four  CArdinal  points,
and  to  tiiere  b^jig  a  difference  of  many  degrees
to  be  disposed  of  somewhere^  as  error,  on  two
cdmersi  if  other  two  had  been  set  true,  asi above
indicated,  from  one  central  poiat,  on  a  ground-
plani  of  the  very  longr  rectangular  proportdons
which :  they  give^.  .

The;  bettec  practical  methods  of  proceeding
would,  probably  have  been,  for  our  explorers  to
have  recorded  the  direction  of  the^  sides,  of  a
structure  (eliminating  the  buttresses) ; ;  and  then,
in.  stating  that.t^  (the.  sides)  point,  half -way  be^
tween  all  the  four,  cardinal  directions,  there  would
have  cropped  out  more  prominently  the  astrono^
mical  antithesis  of  these  ChaldBean  buildings  to
all  Egyptian  P3aumids ;  viz.,  that  instead  of  being
oriented,  as  those  are,  to  or  upon  the  cardinal
points,  they  are  as  far  from  them,  angularly,  as
they  possibly  can  be.

That  at  least  would  be  the  case,  did  the  walls
run  accurately  at  45"*  from  those  directions ;  which


OD..  8.]  Proto-ChaldaxL  67

is:  what,  has  been  implied  for  them,  and  even
daimed  poflitlyely  for  the  goyeming  intention  of
thehnildaRU  But  within  what  limits  of  accuracy
an  the  temple  remains  actually  found  to  do  so  ?

lif  .  Loftud's  plate  of  Mugheir,  as  closely  as  I  can
tOBt  it^  gLTSB  a  ZTiL^  orK.  37  w.,  for  the  direc-
tion cf  the  two  larger  parallel  walls ;  and  another
Car  Wadka>  gLves  n.  SO""  e.,  or  s.  39""  w.;  the
cntiy^to  the  former  being  certainly  represented  on
tike  south-eastern  side,  and  of  the  latter  appar
xently  on  the  north-eaatem.  la  either  case  veiy
different,  fixxm  the  Egyptian  Great  F3rramid's  en*
tnoicei,  from  due  north ;  and  its  error  less  than  h\
in  place  of  these  8"*  and  Q"*  fallings-short  on  what
was  desired  and  intended,  whether  religiously,
scientifically,  or  symbolically,  in  these  earliest
known  beginnings  of  Lower  Mesopotamia.

But  for  whatever  purpose  the  temples  were
designed,  there  can  be  no  doubt  what  the  neigh-
bouring cities  were  used  for ;  viz.,  as  places  holy,
or  gifted  with  some  pecuUar  virtue,  for  burial,
and  resorted  to  on  that  account  by  large  popu-
lations  from  even  distant  countries  and  through
manj  ages.  Giaves,  graves,  graves,  therefore,  fiU
all  the  aiiviions  of  these  primeval  cities.    Not


58


Valky  of  the  Euphrates.  [oh.  8.


costly  tombs  like  tibie  Egyptian  grand  and  £Eir-
between  sepulchres^  but  eveiy  kind  of  compen-
dious coffin  made  in  baked  and  unbaked  clay ;
perfect  models  of  gigantic  earthenware^  stuffing
the  ground  as  full  as  it  can  hold  on  every  side.

The  same  idea  still  lives  in  the  same  region,
aa  shown  by  lie  pertinacity  with  which  aU  the
rich  throughout  Persia  send  their  dead  in  cease-
less streams  throughout  every  yeari  to  be  buried
witibin  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  city  of  Ker-
bela.^  A  Mohammedan  martyrdom  of  Hassein,
son  of  Ali,  sanctifies  the  practice  immediately  in
their  eyes ;  but  the  custom  is  evidently  inherent
in  the  region,  and  dates  from  a  period  up  to
which  no  historian  has  ever  penetrated.

1  Lat.  32*  40'  V. ;  long.  43^  40'  i.


OH.  9.]  Assyria.  59


ARCHITECTURAL   D AT A-cantinued.


CHAPTER  9.

YALLET  OF  THE  EUPHRATES— conliRiMii.

Assyria*

After  the  decay  of  that  most  ancient,  or  Proto-
iChald»an  IdBgdom,  tiie  seat  of  Interamnian
empire  appears  to  have  passed  north-westward
up  the  Tigris;  or  to  that  region  where  Layaid,
in  the  mounds  of  Nimroud,^  uncovered  what  he
thought  at  first  to  be  Nineveh, — but  which  is  now
recognised  as  ancient  Calah ;  and  where  M.  Botta
at  the  same  time  uncovered  in  the  mounds  of
modem  Ehorsabad'  what  he  also  thought  must
have  been  Nineveh,  and  published  as  such, — but
which  is  now  generally  recognised  as  Bit-Sargina ;
and  where  Layard  again  in  subsequent  years
excavated  at  Eoyunjik,'  what  appears  to  have

1  liKt  36''    9^  V.  and  long.  43**  26'  i.  approzimftteljr.
s  Lai.  36''  35'  n.  and  long.  43^*  18'  i.  „

s  Lat  36"*  22^  V.  and  long.  43^*  16'  i.  „


60  Valley  of  the  Buphrates.         [ch.  9.

been  the  trae  Nineveh :  all  of  them,  however,
being  cities,  and  very  splendid  ones  too,  of  that
one  Assyrian  empire  which  flourished  under  weU-
known  kings  from  about  1600  b.C.  to  625  B.C.

An  allied  race  to  the  old  Chaldseans,  would  the
Aflsyrians  appear  to  have  been  from  their  archi-
ZTmeSX-though  notebly  differing  in
their  objects;  which  indicate  a  ruling  tendency
to  make  all  their  greatest  buildings  palaces  for
their  kings,  rather  than  temples  to  their  gods.^
Comparatively  little  did  they  care  for  the  glori-
ficstibn  of  their  dead,  whose  tombs  nowhere
appear ;  and  indicate  thereby  more  of  the  Semitic,
than  the  Turanian,  element  of  race, — ^according
to  the  Fergussonian  principle,  fii  manner  of
construction  too,  they  aimed  at  more  use  of  stone ;
I^e  supplies  of  which,  in  shape  of  alabaster
dabs»  were  comparatively  close  to  t^em  in  the
Assyrian  hills.

In  the  matter  of  orientation,  the  greater  part  of
the  buildings  at  Nimroud,  particularly  those  of


^  At  p.  169,  Mr.  Fergnaioii  speaka  diibm pyramid  of  'Kimroad,*
but  a  Utile  further  on  he  allows  that  it  rises  in  successive  terraces
like  the  lower  Chaldsean  temples ;  though  he  does  not  see  evidence
either  of  temple^  or  tomb  oharaoter  ia  tiiis  one  pyramidal  building
at  Nimroud.


HJl  Assyria.  61

the  Bordi^weBt  palace,  are  lepresented  by  Layard
m  baling  tlieir  walls  directed  to  the  cardinal
poiixtB;  althcfugh  thoae  of  his  south-east  palace
are  placed  diagonally.  At  Ehorsabad,  again,  in
IC.  Boftta's  fine  plates,  the  walls  of  oU  the  palace
efamibers  inyanably  ran  diagonal  fashion ;  gt^m
meaBmed  on  one  of  Mr.  Bawlinson's  plates,  k.  41*
X^  with  &  4V  w^  and  x  49''  w.,  with  &  49*  B.

While  finally  at  Koyunjik,  or  Nineveh  itself
^e  palace  walls  in  Mr.  Layard^  plates  :all  crosa
the  cardinal  directions ;  and  in  one  of  the  most
measurable  instances,  at  angles  of  k.  67*  x,,  with
&  6T  w.,  and  N.  23*  w.,  with  s,  23*  K,  while
another  indicates  K.  60*  k  with  its  consequences.^

No  great  accuracrjr  therefore  in  keeping  to  any-
thing astronomical  is  manifested  by  the  buildings
of  the  great  empire  which  terminated  witb  the
fEite,  classically,  of  Sardanapalus,  or,  according  to
the  cuneiform  inscriptions,  with  Asshur-emid-ilin ;
but  they,  the  builders,  decidedly  were  against  the
asserted  theory  of  accurate  orientation  with  the
cardinal  points ;  and  indicate  very  plainly  on  the
whole,  a  desire  to  fall  in  with  the  opposite  idea,


^  See  Layard's  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  Svo,  1853 ;  also  His  Monu-
menu  qfNmevth^  folio,  1849 :  and  a  aeoond  aeries  in  1853.


62  Valley  of  the  EuphrcUes.         [gh.  9.

or  that  already  produced  on  the  lower  Euphrates ;
viz.,  of  making  their  walls  point  azimuthally  a&
&r  88  possible  froai  the  said  eartih-axial  direc-
tions.

Magnificent  restorations  of  these  Assyriaa
palaces  have  been  published  by  the  accomplished
Mi^  Fergosson,  enabling  us  to  realize  much  of
their  highest  character  and  their  asstlietic  eflfect
on  the  mind,  by  virtue  of  form,  size,  and  chro-
matic, joined  with  sculpturesque,  decoration.

•  «

'Judged,'  he  oajs,  ^by  the  same  roles  of  criticism  which
'  we  apply  to  classic  or  medisBval  art,  the  architecture  of  tha
'  Assyrians  must,  it  is  feared,  rank  very  low.    Bat  for  gor-

<  geons  barbaric  splendour  of  effect,  it  seems  difficult  to  imagine

<  anything  that  conld  well  have  been  grander  or  more  impos-'
'  ing  than  the  palaces  (tf  Ninereh  most  have  been,  when  entire

*  and  filled  with  the  state  and  magnificence  of  the  monarch  of

*  Assyria.'

To  acquire  a  notion,  too,  of  the  condition  of
mind  of  these  worthies,  we  may  refer  to  the  very
words  which  one  of  these  kings  himself  recorded,
about  950  B.C.,  as  trenskted  by  Mr.  Fox  Talbot^
(the  inventor  of  British  photography,)  thus : —

'  Within  the  oironit  of  this  fortress  I  oonstrocted  a  fine

*  house  of  cedar ;  a  house  of  cypress  wood ;  a  house  of  taprani
'  wood ;  a  house  of  Jeer  wood ;  a  house  of  meshkant  wood ;  a
'  house  of  terebinth  wood  and  of  tarpMii  wood,  for  the  resi-


9.]  Assyria.  63

'  denoe  of  my  migaflfy,  and  for  a  remembnaoe  of  my  reign
*  jEv  oramoTB.'

'  Imade  toolptiires  of  the  animalB  of  the  lands  and  seas,
^  ear?ed  in  fari  stone  and  jparuti  stone,  and  I  set  them  up  at
'  tlia  doors  of  my  iwlace.'

^I  made  it  grand;  I  made  it  splendid,  and  with  images  of
'  bri^t  copper  I  adorned  it'^

Thufl^  indeed,  things  went  on  at  NineveL
There  was  war  and  the  slaughtering  of  captives ;
building  of  palaces,  and  taskmasters  to  smite  the
builders  at  their  tasks ;  the  chase  for  the  king^s
diversion ;  the  many  ladies  of  his  hareem  for  his
entertainment,  and  a  continual  wine  cup-bearer
at  hand,  the  most  honoured  official  of  all  his
officers,  to  keep  him  constantly  served  up  to  the
highest  stage  of  physical  enjoyment.  How,  then,
could  science  enter  there  I  Not,  indeed,  that  scir
ence  is  a  forbidden  inquiry  or  pursuit  to  kings ;  for
a  century  before  Asshur-akhbal  flourished,  a  wiser
monarch  than  he  had  written  in  another  land, —

'  It  is  the  glory  of  Gt)d  to  conceal  a  thing ;  but  the  honour
'  of  kings  is  to  search  out  a  matter.'

The  kings  of  Assyria,  however,  in  their  infinite
pride  of  never-ending  luxury,  cared  not  to  search

^  AflSTrian  inscription  of  ABshar-akhbal,  a  monarcb  of  the  tenth
oentory  b.c.— translated  by  H.  Fox  Talbot,  Esq.  ;  p.  202,  voL  vi
part  1,  of  Proceedings  of  the  Society  qf  Antijuariea  qf  Scotland,


64  VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.  [oh.  9.

otft  any  of  those  difficult  or  wondrotu,  or  bouI-
instructiye  secrets  of  nature^  which  now  form  the
bulk  of  modem  science ;  and  which  were  con-
cealed in  the  beginning  by  the  Ahnighty^  only  in
such  manner  as  to  place  the  rudiments  of  dis-
covery within  the  range  of  man,  if  be  will  but
exert  himself  honourably  and  mentally.

Science,  therefore,  lost  nothing  when  Nineveh
fell ;  though  mere  royalty,  based  on  slave  power
and  luxurious  Uving,  received  a  heavy  blow  and
cQre  discouragement^  in  the  funeral  pile  which
was  liglited  on  a  fatal  day  in  Hxq  treasure-house
of  the  grandest  of  Assyrian  palaces.  Most  com-
plete, indeed,  was  the  destruction  then  wrought :
so  that  the  earth  itself  refused  to  tell,  through
2500  years,  the  place  where  that  monarchy,  so
useless  to  the  progress  of  mankind  in  general,
had  flourished  so  proudly  and  so  long  ;  and
whatever  advances  men  liave  made  since  then,
whether  in  science  or  art,  in  war  or  peace,  in
religion  or  morals,  they  owe  little  indeed  to  the
subjects  and  descendants  of  Asshur  the  Great

But  something  better,  it  is  often  affirmed,  can
be  said  of  the  neighbouring  dty  of  Babylon.  By
all  meanef,  then,  let  us  see.


CH.  10.]


Babylon.


65


ARCHITECTURAL   D AT A-cofUinued.


CHAPTER  10.


VALLEY  OF  THE


BahyloTL

Babylon,  which  had  long  been  in  existence,*
and  slowly  growing  through  a  chequered  career
of  alternate  independence  and  subjugation,  revolt
and  certain  defeat,'  seems  to  have  sprung  up  into
immediate  and  magnificent  sovereignty  about
626  Ra  ;  that  being  the  date  of  the  destruction
of  Nineveh,  Babylon's  formidable  rival  of  old,
and  even  tyrannic  oppressor,  in  the  north-west.

^  '  The  original  Chaldaan  monarchy  perished  through  an  Arab
'  invasion  about  1500  B.a,  and  the  invaders  held  possession  of  the
•  country  till  1273  b.o.  Their  rule  was  then  superseded  by  that  of
'  the  Assyrians,  who  became  masters  of  Babylonia  under  the  first
'  Tiglathi  Nin,  and  governed  it  for  a  short  time  from  their  own
'  capital.* — Rawlinson's  Ancient  MonarchieSf  voL  iii.  p.  469.

'  '  The  middle  period  of  Babylonian  history,  the  time  of  obscurity
'  and  comparative  insignificance,  when  the  country  was,  as  a  general
'  rule,  subject  to  Assyria.' — Ihtd,

E


66  Valley  of  the  Euphrates.        [CH.  10.

Babylon  therefore  then^  and  from  thence,  formed
for  itself  the  second  Chaldsean  kingdom,  and
nearly  on  the  site^  though  rather  to  the  west  and
north  of  the  more  ancient  one ;  or  with  a  central
latitude  of  32''  32^  N.,  and  longitude  44''  28^  E.

This  being  not  far  from  the  position  assigned
by  general  tradition  to  the  scriptural  Tower  of
Babel,  the  more  modem  Babylon, — ^besides  its
own  latter-day  glories  of  palatial,  templar,  and
mural  architecture, — ^inherited  the  fame,  not  only
of  a  previous  race  of  truly  ancient  Chaldseans,
but  of  the  most  primeval  men,  in  post-diluvial
times,  of  all  religious  story  as  welL

The  Arabs  even  point  to  an  isolated,  extensive,
and  now  rather  flat-topped  hill  of  rubbish,  lying
north  of  the  veritable  palace  mounds  of  Babylon,
and,  calling  it  Babil,  declare  that'  it  is  the  rem-
nant of  the  very  Babel  Tower  itself.  Modem
excavation  researches,  however,  have  shown  it  to
be  more  probably  that  temple  of  Belus  which  was
completed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  about  605  B.C.,  or
four  centuries  later  than  Solomon's  Temple  at  Jeru-
salem, and  one  century  after  the  Ethiopian  Tirha-
kah's  attempted  resuscitation  of  burial  Pyramids
on  the  banks  of  the  Upper  Nile.


OH.  10.]  Babylo7i.  67

Of  its  latter  history,  M.  Oppert  writes : —

^The  niooeflflon  of  Nabnohodonosor  ooeapied  theiiiBelyes

'  eqiudly  with  the  embelliBhmeDt  of  the  Pyramid  and  Tower.

'  Xerxes,  on  returning  from  Greece,   decorated  the  Pyra-

' '  mid,  which,  according  to  the  historians,  contained  the  tomb

*  of  iba  god;    Ctesias  and  .Mian  report  that  the  king  of

*  Penia,  greedy  of  treasures,    found  there  a  sarcophagos

*  half  .full  of  oil.  Alexander  employed,  daring  two  months,
'  10,000  soldiers  to  open  up  the  ruins  of  the  Pyramid.  A
'  Side  time  after,  the  great  Macedonian  died,  and  with  him
'  was  interred  the  idea  of  the  reconstruction  of  this  ancient
<  monument.'

Besides  this  mention  of  the  tower  as  originally
a  Pyramid,  M.  Oppert,  in  one  of  his  restored  maps
of  Babylon,  copied  by  Mr.  Rawlinson,  represents
the  building  in  plan,  as  a  perfect  mathematical,
qoadrangolar-based  Pyramid,  having  four  trian-
gular sides,  whose  vertices  meet  in  a  point  above.
But  this  shape  is  most  absolutely  denied  by
the  Bampton  Lecturer,  who  insists  that  recent
examinations  have  proved  that  the  structure  was
similar  to  most  or  all  other  Mesopotamian  tem-
ples, in  having  consisted  of  a  series  of  terraces
eccentrically  placed,  and  diminishing  in  breadth
as  they  ascended ;  while  Mr.  Fergusson  con-
siders that  its  base  may  have  been  a  parallelo-
gram  of  about   600  feet  square;  for  although


68  Valley  of  the  Euphrates.        [gh.  10.

some  measures  have  given  657  feet  for  the  south,
and  408  for  the  west  side,  he  describes  it  as  being
too  ruinous  for  anything  more  than  the  merest
approximation  to  its  original  size  or  shape.

Hence,  to  form  any  certain  idea  of  the  templar
architectural  style  of  neo-Chaldseay  we  must  pro-
ceed to  other  examples ;  and  the  best  of  these,
known  chiefly  by  its  Arabic  name,  '£ira-i-Nim-
roud,'^  lies  some  twelve  miles  south  of  the  city  of
Babylon  itself,  and  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
Euphrates.

The  Birs^-Nimroud  Tower.

In  this  most  notable  mass,  Sir  Heniy  Rawlin-
son  excavated,  and  discovered  not  only  the  com-
memorative inscribed  cylinders  of  King  Nebu-
chadnezzar himself  but  a  sufficient  length  of
several  of  the  walls  to  determine  that  most  im-
portant, yet  often  utterly-disputed,  point  of  the
astronomical  emplacement.

This  building,  too,  is  all  the  more  appropriate
for  our  present  inquiry  into  a  reported  astro-
nomical   condition    of  Pyramidal    and    general

^  To  be  carefully  diatingnished  from  the  AnTrian  Nimroud,  the
■oene  and  the  making  of  Layard's  early  fame.


GSB.  10.]     The  Birs^^Ninmmd  Tower.  69

airangement ;  for,  while  it  is  fully  as  dose  an
approach  to  a  pyramidal  building  as  anything
ever  known  to  have  been  arected  in  Mesopo-
taxnia^  it  was  also  intended  by  its  founders  and
finishers  to  be  an  astronomical  building;  viz.^
tibie  temple  of  Nebo  at  Borsippa,  dedicated  to
the  seven  planets  or  heavenly  spheres  of  Baby*
Ionian  astronomy.

In  fact,  if  we  may  trust  the  findings  of  recent
literary  research,  we  have  now  to  deal  with,  both
in  this  pyramidal  temple,  its  architect,  and  its
builders^ — yea,  indeed,  not  only  to  deal  with,  but
perhaps  be  guided  by — the  most  serious,  and  cer-
tainly most  promising,  case,  which  has  yet  come
before  modem  astronomers  in  the  recognised
history  of  the  learning  of  the  world*  For,  of  the
Babylonians  of  those  times,  writes  the  Bev.  Mr.
Eawlinson,* —

'  InheritiDg  a  legacy  of  scientific  knowledge,  astronomical
'  and  mathematical,  from  the  proto-Chaldseans,  they  (the
'  Babylonians)  seem  not  only  to  have  maintained,  but  con-
'  dderably  advanced,  those  sciences  by  their  own  efforts.
'  They  were  good  observers  of  astronomical  phenomena,  care-
'  fbl  recorders  of  such  observations,  and  mathematicians  of  no
'  small  repute.'

^  P.  328,  vol  m.  of  Andent  MaiuurehieB,


70  VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.        \cR.  10.

Nay^  he  even  transcends  everytliing  that  has
ever  yet  been  established  of  ancient  science,  by
stating^  that  some  of  the  Babylonian  cuneiform
inscribed  cylinders^  now  in  the  British  Museum,
seem  to  indicate,  so  far  as  they  have  yet  been
interpreted,  that  the  four  satellites  of  Jupiter  and
seven  of  Saturn  had  been  observed  in  Babylon ;
a  proof,  he  considers,  that  the  small  and  simple
lens  of  rock-ciystal  discovered  in  an  earlier  As-
syrian palace,  had  developed  in  the  hands  of  the
sages  of  the  southern  city,  into  a  telescope ;  and  a
surpassingly  good  telescope  too,  even  in  our  days
of  achromatic  glasses,  every  modem  practical  as-
tronomer will  allow,  if  seven  satellites  of  Saturn
had  really  and  certainly  been  observed  through  it.
All  these  things,  however,  depend  on  literary
interpretations,  wherein  I  am  no  authority ;  or
on  literary  histories,  which,  being  by  no  means
contemporary  with  the  events  they  assume  to
decide,  can  have  no  effect  in  our  present  work.
Let  us  therefore  turn  instead  to  the  positive
accounts  from  modem  examinations,  and  especi-
ally respecting  that  feature  at  once  so  practical
and  yet  so  refined;  viz.,  the  astronomical  orien-

^  p.  424,  ToL  iiL  of  Andieia  Momrehki,


COBL  10.]     Astronomical  Emplacement.  71

tation  of  the  existing  walls  of  this  temple  of  the
heavenly  spheres.

Astronomiccd  Emplacement.

As  with  many  other  remnants  of  Eastern  an-
tiquity, a  cardinal  direction^  had  long  been
assigned  by  our  earlier  travellers  to  the  walls  of
die  Borsippa  building ;  and  assigned  because  there
was  apparently  a  foregone  conclusion  that  it  must
be  so,  and  could  not  be  otherwise.  In  most  of
the  Babylonian  cases,  extensive  ruin  has  prevented
either  proof  or  disproof;  but  at  Borsippa,  Sir
Henry  Bawlinson,  after  having  made  far  more
extensive  explorations  and  careful  measures  on
the  spot,  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  repudiates
the  cardinal  idea  in  these  most  positive  terms  :—

'  I  must  here  obsen^e  that  Rich  and  Porter  have  both  been
*  goiltj  of  a  most  singolar  error  in  desoribing  the  sides  of  the


^  Sach  a  direction  has  always  been  assigned  by  the  Rev.  G.
Bawlinson  to  the  walls  of  '  Babil  ;*  and  it  may  be  so  ;  bnt  we  mnst
oertaialy  object  to  his  note  in  p.  367»  voL  iiL  of  his  Ancient  Manor'
ehkSf  where,  while  he  sllows  that  such  a  direction  woold  be  ano-
malons  amongst  the  usually  diagonal  astronomical  emplacements  of
Babylon,  he  disposes  of  the  anomaly  by  saying,  that  for  the  astro-
nomical purposes  which  the  towers  subserved,  it  was  '  indifferent
'  which  ammgement  was  adopted.'  We  can  only  hope  that  at  the
Oxford  Obsenratory,  it  is  fio<  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the
meridian  circle  is  parallel  to  the  meridian,  or  46°  therefrom.


72  Valley  of  the  Euphrates.        [ch,  10.

'  Bin  as  facing  the  four  cardinal  points.  In  reality,  it  is  the
'  four  comers  which,  with  a  slight  error,  face  these  points ;
'  and  the  titles  of  Kerr  Porter's  plates  must  be  thns  altered
'  throughout  the  series ;  his  western  face  being  s.w. ;  southern
'  face,  S.X. ;  eastern  face,  n.b.  ;  and  northern  face,  n.w.  The
'  north-east  &ce  is  the  front  of  the  temple  (and  enters  with
'  stairs),  the  south-west  the  back,  and  the  other  two  the


The  Birs-i-Nimroud,  from  platesf,  both  by  Raw-
linson  and  FergussoD,  is  evidently  much  more
nearly  square  than  the  proto-ChaldsBan  temple  of
Mugheir;  but  yet  its  successive  terraces  are
eccentrically  situated  upon  each  other, — ^though
the  sides  are  apparently  parallel  or  intended  to
be  so, — and  it  is  not,  therefore,  the  most  correct
method  of  describing  its  astronomical  emplace-
ment, to  speak  of  the  orientation  of  the  comers ;
moreover,  it  is  not  so  easy  to  observe  accurately
on  the  comers^  as  on  the  sides,  of  an  ancient
structure,  as  any  one  would  soon  find  out  on
tiying.  Sir  Henry  Rawlinson  too  does  not  seem
to  have  proceeded  in  that  manner  at  Borsippa ;
but  to  have  actually  observed  the  trending  of
the  sides,  and  then  concluded  from  them  for  the
comers;    being  perhaps  involuntarily  moved  to

^  Journal  qfthe  AsiaUc  Sodety^  yoL  XTiiL  p.  5.


CSH.  10.]     Astronomical  Emplacement.  73

give  them  so  much  prominence,  because  the
glorification  of  the  comers  of  a  building  was  a
peculiarly  Babylonish  method :  and  in  two  of
the  comers  of  iMs  very  buUding  he  had  just
discovered,  to  his  own  great  fame  among  the
Arabs,  the  commemorating  cylinders  of  King
Nebuchadnezzar.^

That  king,  however,  had  in  this  case  only
completed  a  structure  previously  begun  by  an-
other monarch;  or,   as  Sir  Henry  puts  it,  the

foundation    platform  'was   left   untouched   by

«

Nebuchadnezzar'  when  he  rebuilt  the  upper  stage.^
And  then  follow  his  (Sir  Henry's)  important  re-
marks on  the  orientatioD,  determined  fortunately,
as  already  stated,  by  observation  of  the  trending
of  the  lines  of  the  walls.  Observed  indeed  only
with  an  azimuth  compass,  but  this  seems  to  have
been  efficiently  used ;  corrected  for  its  errors  and
variation ;  and  mounted  for  the  time  upon  sharp

^  *  That  matt  be  a  very  powerful  instrament  for  finding  treaenre,'
■aid  one  of  the  Arabs,  pointing  to  the  azimuth  compass,  wherewith
Sir  H.  Rawlinson  had  taken  a  bearing  from  the  comer  of  the
wall,  just  be/ore  a  farther  digging  into  it  discovered  the  cylinder.
And  Sir  H.  R.  was  inundated  immediately  after  that,  with  appli-
cations to  assist  both  Pashas  and  Bedouins  to  find  treasures  of
gold,— discoveries  more  after  their  hearts  than  any  inscribed
cylinder.

>  Journal  of  the  AwUic  Socktiy^  voL  xviiL  p.  13.


74  VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.        [ch.  10.

edges  of  the  wall,  only  recently  excavated  clear
of  the  rubbish  which  had  covered  them  ior  2500
years.

Hence  we  may  put  more  trust  in  the  following,
than  in  any  general,  statements  about  the  orienta-
tion of  any  other  Mesopotamian  building  what-
ever ; —

'  A  onriotiB  illostration  of  this  difference  of  age  (at  Birs-i-
'  Nimrud)  is  also  found  in  the  varying  direction  of  the  linee
'  of  brick-work,  as  occarring  in  the  foundation  and  in  the
'  temple  which  it  supported,  the  comers  in  the  upper  building
'  nearly  facing  the  four  cardinal  points,  while  the  lines  of  the
'  sun-dried  bricks  at  the  base  are  deflected  16^  to  the  east.  It
'  is  impossible,  of  course,  that  this  great  discrepancy  between
'  the  two  designs  can  have  anything  to  do  with  astronomical
'  variation ;  but  for  the  small  error  from  the  true  bearing,
<  amounting  to  4°  or  5°  which  is  apparent  above,  a  natural
'*  -explanation  may  very  well  be  sought  We  may  assign  the
'  error,  it  is  true,  to  imperfect  instruments,  but  I  should
'  prefer  explaining  it  by  supposing  the  lines  to  have  been
'  laid  on  a  day  when  the  sun  had  4°  or  5°  of  eastern  ampli-
*  tude;

And  then  follows  in  a  note, —

'  Mr.  Fresnel  gives  the  error  from  the  cardinal  points  at  5°
'  or  6°,  and  supposes  this  to  be  the  magnetic  variation  of  the
'  spot.  The  true  magnetic  variation,  however,  at  Babylon
'  (July  1853),  determined  by  a  series  of  azimuths,  is  4^  The
'  compass  which  I  used  had  an  error  in  itself  of  1^  the  other
'  way ;  and  as  my  magnetic  bearing  was  52^  5'  for  the  line


OH.  10.]        Babylonian  Generalities.  75

'  of  iiie  8Ji.  free,  I  thus  gaye  the  true  error  of  the  boHding

Babylonian  Oenerdlities.

Hence  the  actual  contemporary  facts  of  their
astronomical  buildings,  do  not  speak  much  in
favour  of  the  practical  skill  of  the  Babylonian
astronomers;  nor  indeed  of  their  theoretical
intentions  either^  as  evidenced  in  the  diagonal
emplacement  of  all  these  walls,  which,  in  a  car-
dinal direction,  might  have  aided  many  exact
determinations  of  the  places  of  stars  and  planets.

But  the  truth  is,  probably,  that  pure  science
was  no  more  thought  of,  for  its  own  sake,  in
Babylon,  than  was  pure,  self-denying,  righteous
reUgion.  Even  some  of  their  best  modem  friends
confess  that

'  the  Babylonians  were  astrologen,  no  less  than  astronomers,
'  wont  to  ezponnd  dreams,  and  to  foretell  events  bj  means  of
'  the  stars.  The  ancient  writers,  Biblical  and  other,  state
'  this  fact  in  the  strongest  way ;  and  the  extant  astronomical
'  remains  distinctly  confirm  it.  The  great  majority  of  the
'  tablets  are  of  an  astrological  character,  recording  the  snp-
'  posed  influence  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  singly,  and  in  con-
'  junction,  or  in  opposition,  upon  all  sublunary  affairs,  from
'  the  fate  of  empires,  to  the  washing  of  hands  or  paring  of
'nails.'*

^  Rawlinson's  Andmt  Swphre^  vol  iii  p.  425.


76  Vdttejf  of  the  Euphrates.        [ch.  10.

Their  fine  art,  whether  painting  or  sculpture,
though  evidently  derived  from  the  more  or  less
grand  conceptions  of  the  ABsyrian  artists  of  the
earlier  time,  degenerated  amongst  the  Babylonians
to  the  most  puny,  wretched,  and  contemptible
representations  of  humanity, — ^whether  on  their
gems,  or  clay  cylinders,  or  the  few  colossal  figures
known  (see  especially  their  short-legged  Hon,  with
the  thick  tail ;  and  the  shapeless  man  under  him),
— that  were  ever  perpetrated  by  a  civilized  people.

Painted  by  themselves,  the  rich  Babylonians
certainly  look  like  what  one  might  expect  of  an
upper  ten  thousand,  who  fed  their  poor  chiefly
on  'pickled  bats;'  and  who  indulged  themselves
in  magnificent  banquets  that '  generally  ended  in
drunkenness.'

'  Not  that  these  were  scenes  of  coarse  indulgence/  says  one
of  their  apologists, — '  for  bands  of  performers  entered  with
'  the  wine,  and  entertained  the  guests  with  the  soul  of  music ;
'  and  rich  odoor  of  perfumes  floated  around ;  the  eye  was
'  delighted  with  the  display  of  gold  and  silver  plate ;  while
'  the  splendid  Babylonish  vestments  of  the  guests,  the  ez-
'  quisite  carpets  and  hangings,  the  numerous  attendants,  gave
'  an  air  of  grandeur  to  the  scene,  and  seemed  half  to  excuse
'  the  excess  of  which  too  many  were  guilty.'^

^  Bawlinaon's  AndaU  MonarMu,  voL  iii.  p.  329.


CH.  10.]        Babylonian  Oeneralities.  77

This  implies  wealth,  and  wealth  there  was  in
Babylon,  for  its  pursuit  was  followed  with  all  the
keenness  and  avidity  which  has  become  the  evil
characteristic  of  the  Jews  of  latter-day  time ;
descended  now  from  an  ancestry  partly  mixed
with  Babylonians,  and  partly  with  Edomites»  since
the  days  of  their  greatest  known  kings.

But  the  Semitized  Babylonians  were  still  more
unscrupulous,  and  absolutely  stuck  at  nothing
which  should  be  thought  good  for  the  immediate
profits  of  trade,  and  the  attraction  of  moneyed
strangers  to  the  place.  Whence  arose  the  vilest
feature  of  all  in  their  degrading  customs;  and
which  rendered  virtue  an  impossibiHty  for  every
Babylonian  woman,  whether  rich  or  poor ;  making
the  vice  even  a  religious  duty,  and  setting  apart
a  special  temple  for  the  purpose.  That  temple,
too,  Herodotus  contemporarily  relates  from  his
own  observation,  was  always  crowded  with  those
coming  or  leaving,^ — yet  now  its  place  knows  it
no  more,  and  the  whole  city  has  become  mere
'  shapeless  and  ruinous  heaps/

This  thoroughly  corrupted  city's  statues,  con-
sisting often  of  plates  of  gold  laid  on  a  structure

^  Bawlinflon'f  Andeni  Monarchies,  vol.  iii  p.  465.


78  Vdtteyofihe  Euphrates.        [CH.  10.

of  rotten  day,  deceived  and  dazzled  many  in  days
of  old.  Even  now,  one  author,  though  too,  an
English  clergyman,  has  recently  written,  in  ter-
mination to  a  general  chapter  of  special  pleading
in  fetvour  of  almost  everything  Babylonian, — that

'  Babylon  was  the  source  to  which  the  entire  stream  of  Eastern
'  civilisation  may  be  traced.'

'  To  Babylon,  £ur  more  than  to  Egypt,  we  owe  the  art  and
'  learning  of  the  Greeks.'

'  And  it  is  scarcely  too  mnch  to  say  that,  bat  for  Babylon,
'  real  civilisation  might  not  yet  have  dawned  npon  the  earth/

But  though  these  whitewashing  opinions  have
recently  emanated  from  Oxford  and  been  printed
in  London, — ^and  though  certain  practices  con-
nected with  numbers  and  sexagesimal  division,
and  certain  prophetical  ahnanacs  still  existing
.^  «.  LyU  .^  for  the.  o^n.  J
up  to  Babylon, — ^yet  everything  Babylonish  that
can  be  tested  by  true  science,  is  evil  continually ;
a  thorn  in  the  side  of  honest  philosophy,  and  an
obstacle  to  healthy  progress.  Certainly  thus  do
we  find  it  with  the  astronomical  emplacement  of
their  buildings — ^and  certainly  thus  may  all  men
prove  it  to  themselves  for  true  civilisation,  as
dependent  on  a  pure  and  true  religion.


00. 11.]  Media  and  Persia.  79


ARCHITECTURAL   DATA-cone»nW.


CHAPTER  11.

VALLEY  OF  THE  EUPHBATES— omc^Mied

Media  and  Persia.

Mepla  occupied  the  hilly  country  north-west
and  north  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris^  but  fre-
quentiy  descended  with  ite  immigrants  or  armies
into  the  great  valley  of  the  plain  of  Shinar -so
as  to  acquire  much  historic  connexion  therewith.
To  Media  also,  some  historians  are  inclined  to
give  a  special  appearance  on  the  scene  of  human
actions  from  2458  B.c.  to  2234  B.C.  (probably
2100  to  1934  B.c.y  true  and  astronomical) ;  and
then  a  long  oblivion  until  it  rose  to  notice  once
again  in  835  B.C.,  just  before  its  junction  with
the  Persian  rule.

But  these  earlier  times  seem  to  be  merely
mythic  and  traditional;  for  Ecbatane  with  its
coloured  walls,  and  all  the  other  cities  of  the


80  VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.        [CH.  11.

*  Medes'  that  have  yet  been  discovered,  are  iden-
tified only  with  the  later  historic  period ;  have
furnished  no  data  for  their  orientation ;  and,  even
if  they  had,  can  afford,  from  their  comparatively
recent  dates,  no  contemporary  proofs  of  the  prac-
tice in  vogue  amongst  the  '  origines'  of  mankind,
in  these  parts.

Persia.

Similarly  of  Persia,  occupying  the  country  north
and  north-east  of  Shinar  proper, — as  it  only
flourished  imperiaUy  and  arcHtecturally  from
Cyaxares  in  538  B.C.,  to  Darius  Codomanus  in
336  B.C. — ^there  is  little  use  in  referring  to  any
of  ite  known  bmlding  remains,  for  proofe  of
primeval  orientation.

Towards  the  beginning  of  the  present  century
the  ruins  of  PersepoUs,  Shushan,  and  Passaigadse
used  to  be  regarded  as  some  of  the  grandest  and
most  mysterious  remains  of  ancient  times.  But
Mr.  Fergusson's  Architectural  Philosophy  has
reduced  them  to  their  true  proportions.

They  are  merely  the  forms,  he  says>  of  older
Babylonian  and  Assyrian  buildings,  erected  in  a
more   durable  material,   or  stone,   in  place    of


CH.  llj  Persia.  81

bricks,  wood,  metal  and  clay, — that  use  of  stone,
having  been  learned  by  the  Persians,  in  their  ex-
pedition to  Egypt  under  Cambyses  in  525  b.c.

But  the  Persians  had  then  entirely  ceased  to
be  the  energetic,  virtuous,  mountain-people  they
had  appeared  under  their  first  great  ruler  Cjmis ;
and  what  they  erected  under  the  successors  of
Cambyses,  with  the  assistance  of  degenerate
il^yptian  art,  was  little  else  than  sumptuous  piles
of  pakce  apartments ;  fit  for  their  barbarian  mon-
archs  to  revel  in,  and  not  unfit  for  Grecian  Alex-
ander to  reduce  to  ashes.

The  wealth  and  the  military,  as  well  as  slave,
power  of  Persian  monarchs  caused  the  buildings
to  rise  from  the  ground.  And  thousands  of  pri-
soners of  war,  led  along  from  their  distant  homes,
stripped  naked,  with  their  hands  tied  behind
them,  and  connected  together  in  long  lines  by  a
rope  attached  to  rmgs  passed  through  their  noses,
or  knotted  on  spiked  collars  fixed  round  their
necks,^ — were  glad  to  exchange  such  corporeal
pains  as  these,  for  the  wasting  labour  of  masonry
and  earth  work,  even  under  barbarian  task-masters.

But  such  treatment  could  not  procure  genius ;

^  See  Plate  in  RawHnaon*!  Ancient  Emptrea^  voL  iii.  p.  436.

P


82  VaUey  of  the  Euphrates.        [ch.  11.

and  the  sculptnied  adornments  of  these  ill-founded
palaces,  were  only  debased  copies  of  older  Assyrian
designs ;  or  mere  mechanical  repetitions  of  trifles
wearying  to  behold.  Some  apologists  have  indeed
appeared,  for  the  often  met  gronp  at  Persepolis,  of
the  lion  and  the  bull  Such  a  lion  as  that,  they
say,  so  tremendous  in  power,  was  never  seen  in
the  best  representations  of  Nineveh  or  CalaL

No,  indeed  I  for  who  ever  saw  a  lion  half  as
large  again  and  three  times  as  heavy  as  a  bull  ?
But  to  represent  such  a  lion,  leaping  on  the  poor
bull,  and  tearing  away  visibly  with  all  its  teeth,
and  two  great  spreads  of  fore-feet  claws  all  work-
ing at  once  into  the  tender  flesh  of  the  hind
quarter  of  the  bull, — ^who,  poor  animal,  can  only
jaise  up  its  fore-feet  in  anguish  and  look  round
dismayed  at  its  ferocious  enemy ; — ^to  make  such
a  representation  of  unnecessary  cruelty  as  this,
and  to  have  so  much  pleasure  in  beholding  it,  as  to
have  it  repeated  again  and  again,  on  every  stair-
case, and  almost  every  spare  portion  of  the  palace
walls, — that  surely  argues  a  people  culminating
in  themselves  all  the  harder-hearted  features  of
the  several  preceding  nations  of  the  Interamnian
valley.    For  whUe  they  were,  amongst  themselves.


CH.ll.]  Persia.  88

•given  to  pleasures.'  'exceeding  in  dyed  attire
'  upon  their  heads,  painting  their  faces,  wearing
•ear-rings,  and  clothing  themselves  in  soft  and
•  rich  material,' — yet  were  they  to  others,  bitter
and  hasty,  'terrible  and  dreadful,  and  more
'  fierce  than  evening  wolves ;  smiting  the  people
'  in  wrath  with  a  continual  stroke,  the  hammer  of
'  the  whole  earth ;'  transplanting  conquered  races,
mutilating  prisoners,  and  massacreing  non-com-
batants with  all  refinement  of  violence  and  cruelty,
beyond  even  the  ordinary  Asiatic  limits.^  And
finally,  they  were  themselves  at  last  extinguished
by  a  perpetual  judgment,  which  makes  it  need-
less for  us  to  look  among  the  subsequent  inhabit-
ants of  the  region,  for  any  direct  continuations  of
the  alleged  early  astronomical  science  in  the  valley
of  the  Euphrates.

^  Bawlinaon'f  AndaU  Manarchki,  toL  iii  p.  333.


84  Circular  Builders.  [ch.  12.


ARCHITECTURAL  D KV k-cominued.


CHAPTER  12.


CIRCULAR   BUILDERS.


Ws  have  been  thus  long  and  fall  hitherto,
in  tracing  each-  of  the  two  systems  of  axchitec-
tur^  the  Egyptian  and  Euphratean, — from  their
first  known  examples,  about  2000  B.c.  or  more,
down  to  their  loss  or  degradation  a  few  centuries
before  the  Christian  era, — because  they  are,  in  the
opinion  of  those  best  calculated  to  judge,  the  two
which  ascend  up  most  nearly  to  the  origines  of
intellectual  man.  Thus,  Mr.  Fergusson,  after
freely  giving  to  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt  a  de-
cided pre-eminence  in  time,  over  whatever  build-
ings have  been  discovered  as  yet  in  the  valley  of
the  Euphrates,  says  of  the  latter, —

'  There  is  nothing,  certainly,  in  India,  that  approaches  these
<  monuments  in  antiquity,  nor  in  China  or  the  rest  of  Asia ;
'  and  in  Europe,  whatever  may  be  maintained  regarding  prim-
^  eyal  man,  we  can  hardly  expect  to  find  any  building  of  a  date


CH.  12.]  Circular  Builders.  85

*  prior  to  the  Trojan  war  (1190  B.a)  All  our  histories  must
'  therefore  begin  with  Egypt  and  Assyria.  Beyond  these  all
*'  is  speculation,  and  new  fields  can  hardly  be  hoped  for.'

Yet,  if  we  ourselves  are  not  mistaken,  there  is
a  third  variety  of  architecture,  which  should  come,
in  almost  equal  chronological  rank  with  Egypt
and  Assyria,  and  share  their  admitted  claims  to
the  honour  of  descending  from  very  ancient  times.
This  third  architectural  division,  too,  is  abundantly
distinguishable  by  specialities  of  type.

The  two  conmiencements  of  each  of  the  Biver
systems  we  have  ahready  noted,  viz.,  the  Great
Pyramid  of  Egj^t  on  one  hand,  and  the  pyramidal
temple  of  proto-duddsea  on  the  other,  were  suflB-
cientiy  distinguished  from  each  other  in  geometry ;
the  former,  being  a  pure  mathematical  figure  of
regular  shape  and  easy  definition ;  whereas  the
latter,  was  an  unequal  sided  structure,  built  in
broken  and  eccentric  terraces.  They  were  also
clearly  separable  by  astronomy ;  the  former  being
oriented  cardinally,  the  latter,  at  the  utmost  oppo-
site thereto,  or  diagonally.

But  the  two  varieties  of  buildings  had,  not-
withstanding, these  other  qualities  in  common ;
viz.,  that  they  were  straight-sided,  or  rectilinear ;


86  Circular  Builders.  [oH.  12.

— ^and  rectangular  aLso^  or  nearly  so,  in  the  ground-
plan  of  their  basements ;  besides  being  terminated
eztemally^  on  all  their  walls  or  surfaces^  by  some
of  their  best  and  hardest  stone  or  brick

A  direct  contrast^  therefore,  to  both  the  recti-
linear and  rectangular  arrangement,  is  offered  by
those  antique  builders,  who, — wandering  appa-
rently from  land  to  knd,— erected  circles  of  great
stones ;  which  circles,  whether  in  Palestine,
Greece,  or  Italy,  were  almost  as  mysterious  to
Greeks  and  Bomans,  as  are  to  ourselves  the
similar  structures  to  be  seen  in  France,  England,
and  Scotland.  Nor  should  the  arrangement  of
the  class  be  confined  to  mere  megalithic  open-
air  rings,  for  its  important  circular  characteristic
is  found  equally  among  the  closed-in  structures  of
tumuli,  which  are  not  only  circular  themselves  in
plan,  but  are  frequently  surrounded  by  either  a
circular  ditch,  or  a  circular  bank,  or  again  a  circu-
lar ring  of  tall  pillar-stones ;  while  the  Pyramids
of  Jeezeh  are  just  as  rectilinear  and  rectangular
in  the  earthen  banks  that  bound  them  south  and
west,  as  in  their  own  masonried  bases.

In  these  *  tumuli,'  also,  we  meet  with  another
radical  feature  of  opposition  to  the  Nileian  and


OH.  12.]  Circular  Builders.  87

Euphratean  examples ;  for  the  tumulus  has  char*
acteristically  its  only  defined  and  built  portions
within^ — while  mthout,  it  ends  merely  in  soft
or  perishable  eartL  A  tumulus  may  have  been,
equally  with  a  pyramid,  almost  invariably  a  tomb ;
but  has  this  constructiye  distinction,  or,  that
it  was  fized  chiefly  by  the  place  of  its  centre ;
while  the  pyramid  was  defined  by  the  position
of  its  bounding  outside  surfaces.  A  pyramid
was  thus^  as  it  were,  a  mathematical  definition, —
which  settles  by  a  distinct  circumference,  what-
ever  is  rigidly  ea^luded  from  its  bounds :  while
a  tumulus  of  antiquaiian  architecture,  is  rather  a
natural-history  type,  which,  by  showing  the  place
of  the  centre,  indicates  whatever  is,  by  its  posi-
tion, likely  to  be  eminently  incltided,  within  a
circle  whose  size  cannot  be  vouched  for.

Or  again,  a  Pyramid  is  Promethean,  t.e ,  care-
ful, well-measured  thought  before  the  act ;  while
a  Tumulus  is  Epimethean,  or  sudden,  thriftless
thought  after  the  act.  The  one,  in  classic  fable,
brought  fire  down  from  heaven,  for  the  benefit
of  the  human  race ;  the  other,  hid  the  candle  of
humanity  under  a  bushel  of  ills.


88  Circular  Builders.  [ch,  12.

Geographical  Tracings.

One  of  the  earliest,  as  it  is  certamly  one  of  the
remarkable,  spots  on  the  earth  for  circular  tumuli,
— is  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Gygaean  Lake,  near
Sardis,  the  capital  of  Lydia,  in  Asia  Minor.

There  are  several  ages  evidently  apparent
amongst  these  circular  heaps;  and  one  even  of
the  most  recent  of  them  is  that  described  in  443
B.C.  by  Herodotus,  as  the  tomb  of  King  Alyattes,
who  died  about  570  B.c.  It  is  a  prince  of  tumuli,
having  at  present  a  circular  base  3700  feet  in
circumference,  within  which  a  square  might  be
inscribed,  sensibly  larger  than  the  base  of  the
Great  Pyramid  of  Egjrpt.  Considerable  skill  too
has  been  shown  in  levelling  the  native  rock  over
some  parte  of  that  area,  and  erecting  supporting
masonry  in  others,  so  as  to  make  a  platform  60
feet  higher  than  the  lowest  ground  outside.

On  that  platform  a  burial  chamber  seems  to  have
been  erected, — ^and  then  the  whole  was  covered
with  layers  of  earth,  rubble,  and  concrete,  in  a
rounded  manner,  to  a  height  of  140  feet, — some
masonried  omamente  being  added  at  the  top.

So  far,  the  recent  explorations  by  M.  Spiegel-


CH.  12.]         Geographical  Tracings.  89

thai,  the  Prussian  consul  at  Smyrna,^  agree  well
with  the  description  of  Herodotus  as  to  the  facts
seen  and  measured  by  him ;  but  the  Halicamas-
sian's  determination  of  the  age  and  history  of  the
monument,  may  be  just  as  erroneous  and  as  much
reduced  and  cooked  up  to  please  Grecian  vanity,
as  was  his  account  of  the  Great  Pyramid ; — and
there  is  certainly  something  very  similar  in  both
cases^  touching  his  talk  about  the  folly  of  monarchs
and  the  immoraUty  of  damsels  of  the  period —
which  more  than  excites  suspicion.

Still,  however,  both  at  Sardis,  at  Ilion,  and  at
Tantalais,  on  the  north  shore  of  the  Gulf  of
Smyrna,  are  sufficient  numbers  of  these  circular-
based,  central-chambered,  tumuli, — to  enable  Mr.
Fergusson  to  lay  down  ethnographicaJly  that  their
builders  were  a  Turanian  race ;  and  that  thaJi  is
why  we  find  no  other  traces  of  them  than  the
tombs  of  their  much-revered  ancestors ;  and  to
say  also,  that  the  Smyrniot  remains  appear  as  if

*  left  there  most  opportunely  to  authenticate  the

*  tradition  of  the  Etruscans  having  sailed  from  this

*  part  of  Asia  Minor,  for  Italy,  about  1200  B.C.'

^  See  Lydischen  Konigsgr&ben  bei  Sardee,  by  J.  F.  M.   Olfen.
Berlin,  1859.    4to,  18  pages,  with  a  map  and  four  plates.


90  Circular  Builders.  [CH.  12,

Pelasgic  and  Etruscan  Remains.

Both  Pelasgi  and  Etroscans^  equally  tomb-build-
ings art-loving  peoples^  and  equally  Turanian  or
ultra-Celtic  in  origin, — Mr.  Fergusson  derives  from
Asia;— and  finds  them  to  have  migrated  in  the
13th  and  12th  centuries  B.C.,  into  Greece  and  Italy
respectively :  building  there  often  massive  city
walls,  Cyclopean  gateways,  horizontal-stoned  arches ;
but,  above  all,  circular  tumuli  to  their  progenitors.

Of  these  latter  constructions,  were  the  so-called
treasuries  at  Mycenss  and  Orchomenus.  The
former,  known  also  as  the  tomb  of  Atreus,  ex-
hibits the  earthen-heap  exterior,-~an  interior  bee-
hive dome  of  horizontal  stones,  and  a  small
rectangular  sepulchre  hewn  out  of  the  rock  on
one  side.  The  internal  chamber  likewise  betrays
the  symptom,  of  having  been  once  lined  with
plates  of  bronze, — a  very  Asian  style  of  decora-
tion ; — and  still  shows  the  lower  half  of  a  column
bedizened  with  zigzags  and  frequent,  thoughtless,
inscribed  spirals.

The  counterpart  of  this  purely  Asiatic  form,
says  Mr.  Fergusson,  may  be  found  in  Assjrria  or
PersepoUs,  but  nowhere  else  in  Greece.   He  notices


OH.  12.]    Pdasgic  and  Etruscan  Remains.       91

alBo,  that  '  the  same  (spiral  or)  scroll  ornament
'  exists  at  New  Grange  in  Ireland,  in  the  island
'  of  Gozo  near  Malta,  and  generally  wherever
'  chambered  tumuli  are  found.'*

It  was  likewise  connected  in  a  peculiar  manner
with  the  statues  of  the  Syrian  goddess,  Astarte^
or  Mylitta;  whence  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson  in-
fers, that,  fix)m  the  same  volute  *  being  sculptmred
'  on  the  waUs  of  Crendi,  in  Malta,  those  singular

*  Druidical-shaped  ruins '  (the  Hagar  Keem,  *  or
upright  stones')  '  are  of  a  people  whose  religion

*  bore    some  relationship  to  that  of  Phoenicia,

*  though  they  are  not  Phoenician,  for  the  Phoe-
'  nicians  would  not  have  made  such  rude  monu-
'  ments/  ^

The  figure  of  Astarte,  however,  volute  and  all,
has  b^en  discovered  in  Etruria ;  and  there  also,
— ^besides  many  fine  city  walls,  dearth  of  temples,
but  tombs  innumerable, — are  thousands  of  cir-
cular tumuli ;  chambered  within,  a  low  retaining
basement  wall  without,  and  a  conical  earth-heap
over  the  top  ;— while  bronze  utensils  figure  abun-
dantly amongst  the  discovered  contents.*

^  FerguMon'fl  History  of  Architecturef  vol.  i.  p.  216.

'  In  Rawlinson*!  Herodotus,  voL  ii  p.  fi44.

*  See  Canini's  Eirwria  AnHcay  for  its  fine  plates,  but,  from  his


92  Circular  Builders.  [CH.  12.

The  historic  tomb  of  Porsenna  is^  indeed,  de-
scribed  as  made  up  of  'pyramids,'  which  one
would  expect  to  be  square-based  and  triangular-
sided;  but  the  cut  given  by  Mr.  Fergusson  on
p.  266  of  his  vol  L  shows  that  other  alleged  Etrus-
can  pyramids  were  merely  circuhr-haBed,  and
moderately  conical,  pillars.

Greai  Britain  and  Ireland.

Besides  certain  examples  in  the  countries  be-
tween, as  at  Kamac  in  France,— circular  buildings
abound  in  our  own  country,  witness  Stonehenge,
Abury,  Stenness,  and  other  examples  of  open-air,
erect  stones ;  while  New  Grange  in  Ireland,  and
Maeshowe  in  Orkney,  possess  covered  tumuli.
Sir  William  Wilde,  too,  in  his  remark,  that, —

*  were  we  to  strip  the  chamber  and  passage  of
'  New  Grange  of  the  surrounding  mound,  to  re-

*  move  the  domed  portion  of  the  cave,  and  to

*  replace  the  outer  circle  of  upright  pillar-stones

*  at  those  parts  where  it  is  deficient,  we  should

*  have  presented  to  us  a  monument  not  unlike

*  Stonehenge,' — has  given  a  strong  connecting  link

Egyptian  work,  I  sbould  say,  often  doubtful  restorations.  Not  a
single  compass  drawing  either  is  given  in  any  plan  of  a  tomulus,  to
test  the  direction  of  its  entrance-passage.


CH.  12.]      Qreat  Britain  and  Ireland.  93

between  the  two  most  strikiiig  vaxieties  of  cir-
cular  buildings.^

Another  such  connexion  is  found  in  the  sepul-
chral character  of  both ;  while  the  tumuli,  with
their  hive-shaped  domes,'  are  compared  again  and
again  by  different  authors  to  the  same  shaped
apartment  in  the  tomb  of  Atreus  at  Mycense  ;
though  all  our  native  examples  are  lamentably
rude,  and  built  in  general  with  entirely  unworked
stones.

Theories  of  the  dates  and  builders  of  these
monuments  are  rife,  as  every  one  knows;  and
various.  But,  excepting  some  additions  to  Stone-
henge,  evidently  of  an  anomalous  order  and  recent
period, — opinions  seem  now  generally  converging
towards  a  pre-Christian  date  and  a  people  from
the  East.  Nor  is  there  much  difficulty  in  ima-
gining these  circular-builders  of  our  present
chapter, — who  fled  from  Asia  Minor  in  about  1300
B.C.,  from  Greece  in  900  RC,  from  Etruria  in
500  B.O.,  as  Pelasgi  and  Etruritos,  to  have  been

1  Beauties  of  the  Boyne,  by  Sir  W.  R.  Wilde,  p.  203.

'  The  central  chamber  at  Maeshowe  is  square  in  plan,  not  im-
probably in  consequence  of  the  long  natural  Blabs  of  stone  piocurable
there,  and  easily  forming  that  shape.  But  the  tumulus  outside  is
conical,  the  surrounding  ditch  circular :  and  the  neighbouring  stones
of  Stenness,  arranged  in  a  circle.     See  Appendix,


94  C^cteZor  Builders.  {CB.  12.

preceded  by  the  Cimmerii,  Cymbri,  or  Cymry,
who  are  traceable  also  in  a  similar  number  of
saccessiye  habitats^  b^inning  on  the  shores  of
the  Euxine,  and  ending  in  Wales  and  Ireland, —
there  is  Utde  difficulty,  we  say,  in  contempkting
the  weaker  members  of  these  commuiities  driven
westward  by  their  foes  in  a  continual  migration ;
losing  more  and  more  of  their  Eastern-made
implements  and  Eastern  refinement,  and  gradually
arriving  in  Western  Europe,  a  degraded,  hungry,
and  forlorn  race ;— but  still  keeping  up,  what  Mr.
Fergusson  maintains  is,par  exceUence,  the  abiding
feature  of  afl  Turanian  origins,  viz.,  tie  tomb-
building  tendency  for  their  dead.

Phoenician  navigation,  and  the  tin-trade  to
Britain,  may  have  done  a  Uttle  for  this  westward
movement ;  but  the  chief  part  of  it  must  have
depended  on  the  advance  by  land  of  large  masses
of  population;  hunting,  cultivating,  or  fighting,
and  fi^uently  occupying  for  a  generation  or  two
as  they  went  That  lie  Druid  priests  and  many
of  their  reUgious  dogmas  of  proved  Eastern  pro-
clivities,  were  thus  derived  and  descended,  is  also
probable  enough.^     So  likewise  those  puzzles  to

^  See,  for  a  plain  and  excellent  popular  digeet  of  the  preaent  state


(m.  12.]      Great  Britain  and  Ireland.  dS

Iiidb  antiquarieB  and  historians  of  architecture^
the  round-iioweTB  of  Ireland,  standing  side  by  side
"with  aGrothic  angular  structure,  yet  more  alien
than  a  negro  amongst  a  northern  people ; — and
because,  they  are  a  remnant,  or  are  the  sole  re-
maining copies,  of  now  extinct  originals,  once
erected  in  that  land  by  the  furthest-travelled
westward  branches  of  the  circular  builders.

That  these  men  were  not  mathematically  minded
we  have  already  shown  (p.  87)  by  the  composition
of  their  chief  structures ;  that  they  were  inclined
to  barbaric  ornament,  their  platings  with  metal,
and  abimdant  decoration  by  concentric  circles
and  spirals  (fit  predecessors  of  the  tattooing  of
South  Sea    savages), — suflBiciently   demonstrate;

of  qaetiions  touduDg  the  'Ancient  Britons,' — two  papers  in  the
^ortntghUy  Review,  vol.  ziy.     1866.

See  also,  chapter  5,  by  Dr.  Thumam,  in  Barnard  Davis's  and
Thumam's  large  work,  Crania  Britannica,  where  the  data  are  gone
into  at  great  length  and  treated  with  eminent  ability  and  impar-
tiaUiy.

Dr.  Stukely's  SUmehenge  a  BrUish  Temple  restored  to  the  Drtdds,
(1740  A.D.)  was  a  book  far  before  its  age ;  and  perhaps  not  yet
snfficiently  appreciated.  His  attempt  to  show  by  measurement,
that  such  megalithic  circles  had  always  been  arranged  on  even  and
round  nnmbers  of  the  profane  Egyptian  or  Babylonian  cnbit  (20*7
inches  in  length  nearly),  and  not  in  feet  or  any  other  known
northern  standard  of  length, — was  both  excellent  in  itself ;  and
though  it  has  been  pooh*poohed  by  more  recent  antiquaries,  I  have
never  heard  of  any  of  them  having  ascertained  by  actual  measure  at
the  place,  that  the  Stukeleian  theoiy  would  not  hold.


96  Circular  Builders.  [ch.  12.

and  that  they  were  not  astronomical,  at  least  in
their  latter,  or  British.  8tage,-the  utterly  varying
azimuthal  directions  of  their  entrance-passages  to
the  tumuli,  incontestably  establisL^  For  it  was
neither  an  attempt  to  be  cardinal,  as  with  the  Egyp-
tian pyramids ;  nor  diagonal,  as  with  Chald^n
temples ;  but  a  free  and  easy  determination,  like
that  of  Gallio,  to  care  for  none  of  these  things.

^  Masehowe  entraDce-paasage,  from  a  plate  in  Mr.  ]iGtchell*a  volume
on  liaaehowe,  enters  in  from  s.  40^  w.,  nearly.

New  Grange,  similarly  enters,  according  to  (Governor  Pownall,
from  K.  24^  w.  And  its  neighbouring  tumulus,  Dowth,  as  marked
on  the  Ordnance  Map,  from  the  west ;  while  two  smaller  neighbours
enter  from  the  east.

The  tumulus  of  Alyattes,  as  given  in  plan,  in  M.  Olfer's  plate  3,
has  no  entrance-passage  proper ;  though  there  is  a  modem  farced
passage  entering  from  nearly  iouth;  and  other  older  ones  inside,
crossing  each  other  in  all  directions  like  the  streets  of  a  Saxon
town.  These  efforts  have,  however,  discovered  the  sepulchral  cham-
ber ;  in  a  position  far  from  central  to  the  mound,  and  with  an  axial
direction  of  North  9^  k  The  chamber  is  oblong,  rectangular,  flat-
roofed  with  stone  beams,  and  reminding  one  of  the  King's  Chamber
in  the  Great  Pyramid  ;  though  not  so  well,  or  methodically,  built,
and  very  much  smaller ;  being  in  lengthy  only  132 ;  breadth,  93 ;
and  height,  82  British  inches ;  against  412,  206,  and  230  respec-
tively for  the  Egyptian  room.  Outside  the  Alyattian  chamber  is
a  portion  of  an  old  passage,  exhibiting  a  curious  mixture  of  rec-
tangular masonry,  marble  inlayings,  and  a  rounded  roof  of  mere
grouted  rubble  and  small  pebbles, — which  would  have  horrified
the  Pyramid-builders  of  Egypt.


OH.  13.]  Eebrew.  97


ARCHITECTURAL  DATA-con/mwA


CHAPTER    13.

FIRST  KESIDUAL  ABCHITECTUBE.

*

ffehrew.

The  Hebrews  being  the  most  Semitic  of  all
nations  descended  from  Shem, — original  and  early
architecture  is  not  to  be  expected  from  them ;  for
the  Semites,  Mr.  Fergusson  tells  us,  never  were
builders.*  But  then,  again,  the  Hebrews  at  an  early

^  '  Neither  the  FhoeniciaiiB  nor  any  of  the  Semitic  races  were  ever
'  bnilders,  and  we  look  in  vain  in  Spain  or  at  Carthage,  or  at  Tyre
'  or  Sidon,  for  anything  to  tell  us  what  their  architecture  may  have
'  been.' — Feigosson's  History  of  ArehUecture,  vol.  iL  p.  121.

Again,  in  his  first  toL,  p.  58,  Mr.  Fergusson  appends  a  note,
which,  though  it  allows  in  a  manner  that  certain  hybrid  architec-
tural traces  all  round  the  Mediterranean  may  be  '  Fhcenician  art,' —
yet  describes  it  as  copying  only,  from  other  nations ;  and  copying
without  understanding :— or,  as  he  cruelly  adds,  but  with  perhaps,
after  all,  extreme  ethnographic  acumen  touching  the  recently  sup-
posed Semitic  origin  of  Anglo-Saxon  peoples — *  Something  like  our
'  own  architecture,  imitating  everything,  understanding  nothing.'
Making  '  sarcophagi  at  Tyre,  of  Egyptian  form,  but  with  Phoenician
'  inscriptions  and  for  Tyrian  kings ;  Greek  ornaments  in  Syria
*  which  are  not  Oreek ;  and  Roman  architectural  details  all  over
'  Northern  Africai  which,  however,  are  not  Boman.'


98  First  Residual  Architecture,      [ch.  13.

period  of  their  patxiaxchal  life  went  down  to
Egypt ;  and  were  put  there  through  a  long  and
weary  apprenticeahip  to  buUding  undera  Turanian
race ;  becoming  thereby  what  they  would  other-
wise never  have  been.

Even  then,  however,  a  very  distinct  architec-
tural  place  from  all  other  Semites^  must  be  given
to  the  Hebrews, — ^because  in  their  two  earliest
examples,  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  (about
1500  B.C.),  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon  (1012  rc.)
—the  designs  of  those  buildings  were  not  their
own,  but  were  given  by  Divine  inspiration.

The  Bible  is  most  distinct  on  this  point.  For,
as  to  the  former  building  or  portable  structure, —
chapter  after  chapter  in  Exodus  contains  the  de-
scription of  the  materials,  and  the  forms  into  which
they  were  to  be  made  up,  according  to  the  Divine
commands.  Commands  often  expressed  in  nume-
rical measures ;  with  the  repeated  solenm  injunc-
tion also  to  Moses,  *  And  look  that  thou  make  them
*  after  their  pattern,  which  was  showed  thee'  (or
thou  wast  caused  to  see)  '  in  the  mount'^  And
then  comes  the  conclusion  of  the  work,  in  the

^  Exoduf  xxv.  40 ;  xvL  30 ;  and  Ntiinben  viiL  4.     See  also,  in
the  New  Testament,  Acts  vii  44 ;  and  Hebrews  viii.  5.


CH.13.]  Hebrew.  99

words, '  And  Moses  did  look  upon  all  the  work,
'  and  behold,  they  had  done  it  as  the  Lord  had
'  commanded,  even  so  had  they  done  it,  and
'  Moses  blessed  them.'

And  as  to  the  latter  building,  we  read  with
equal  clearness —

*  Then  David  gave  to  Solomon  his  son  the  pattern  of  the
'  porch,  and  of  the  houses  thereof,  and  of  the  treasories
'  thereof  and  of  the  upper-chambers  thereof^  and  of  the
'  inner- parlours  thereof,  and  of  the  place  of  the  mercy-seat,

^  And  the  pattern  of  all  that  he  had  by  the  Spirit,  of  the
'  ooorts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  of  the  chambers  round
'about.'

'All  this,  said  David,  the  Lord  made  me  understand  in
'  writing  by  his  hand  upon  me,  even  all  the  works  of  this
'  pattern.

'And  David  said  to  Solomon  his  son,  Be  strong,  and  of
'  good  courage,  and  do  it :  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed ;  for
'  the  Lord  Ood,  even  my  Gtod,  will  be  with  thee ;  he  will  not
'  Mi  thee,  nor  forsake  thee,  until  thou  ha6t  finished  all  the
'  work  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord/^

Those  works  have  now  all  of  them  disappeared
from  the  face  of  the  earth,  as  known  to  man;
but  their  contemporary  Biblical  descriptions  and
specifications  remain,  and  will  be  found  of  infinite
importance  in  some  of  the  questions  which  we
have  to  discuss  in  the  latter  part  of  our  volume.

1 1  GhroniclcB  xzviiL  11,  12,  and  19,  20.


100  First  Residtud  Architecture,      [ch.  13.

Greek

That  Greeks  were  simply  and  no  other  than
Greeks,  from  before  the  siege  of  Troy  down  to
the  days  of  Alexander  the  Great, — even  the  philo-
sophers of  the  porticoes  in  Athens  itself,  might
have  strenuously  insisted  Yet  the  durable  logic
of  architectural  facts,  enables  Mr.  Fergusson  to
separate  the  early  days  of  Pelasgianism,  from  the
totally  distinct  ones  of  subsequent  Hellenism,  or
Greek  proper ;  and  even  to  place  several  centuries
of  dark  ages  between.

Under  the  former  period  were  built  cyclopic  walls,
circular  tumuli,  and  debased  oriental  frippery ;-
but  then  came  in  the  Aryans  followed  by  the
Dorian  invasion ;  when  the  Pelasgi  were  stricken
down,  partly  compelled  to  emigrate  westward,
and  partly  combined  with  the  conquerors.  This
mixture  of  peoples  heaved  for  an  unknown  time
in  a  new  national  birth,  and  then  suddenly  the
architectural  result  appeared  before  the  world  in
the  temples  of  Corinth  and  Athens — temples  which
had  nothing  whatever  Pelasgic  about  them  ;  were
Egyptianesque  rather  in  derivation,  and  were
rectilinear,  rectangular,  and  columned  in  rock-


CH.  13.]  Roman.  101

like  simplicity  and  grandeur.  So  elevated  too
above  foreign  Egyptian  predecessors,  as  to  be
freely  allowed  the  honour  of  beipg  national  and
peculiar  to  Greece  ;  and  worthy  also  of  all  that
highest  of  architectural  praise,  which  they  have
been  receiving  from  the  whole  of  the  civilized
world  ever  since.

But  this  extreme  genius  in  the  most  permanent
of  all  the  fine  arts,  lasted  only  from  about  660  B.O.
to  330  B.G.,  and  passed  off  as  quickly  as  it  came ;
for,  having  been  dependent,  in  the  Fergussonian
philosophy,  on  the  progress  of  transition  of  an
Aryan  race  into  a  Turanian  stock, — the  nation  sub-
sided  into  ordinary  humanity  when  the  change  was
completed,  and  has  remained  there  ever  since.

Roman.

What  the  Pelasgi  were  to  Greece,  such  were
their  Etruscan  neighbours  and  predecessors  to  the
Romana  But  in  an  increased  degree;  for  the
Etruscans  lasted  much  longer  as  an  independent
people,  and  modified,  almost  as  a  parent,  the
stripling  State  that  was  ultimately  to  possess  the
ancient  world.

When  Rome  from  200  B.c.  to  400  a.d.  had


102  Finl  Residmal  Arekiieetvre.     [CH.  13.


neaity  fiilfilled  ber  miflBOB,  and  faeeome  dbenuK-
taij  tjraDt  and  rmirhfA  pooBeaBor  of  all  odier
Heditenanean  ccmntiie^ — then,  wbattrer  bad
been  inyented  daeiriiexe,  and  Gtetk  azchhectore
of  comae  amongst  die  real,  waa  brought  in  bj
wealth  and  power  to  contribute  to  Bome's  faixo-
riouB  enjoyment  Bot  the  tastes^— imbued  deeptj
into  her  inmoat  feelings  daring  her  long  foster-
norsuig  hy  the  ciradar  baQden  of  the  Etroscan
cities,— are  perpetoaUj  doping  oat  And  hence
the  liking  in  Borne  for  drcular  temples ;  then,
if  not  the  invention  of  the  arch  proper,  jet  its
popalarization  and  development;  certainly  the
invention  of  the  Dome,  whereof  the  Pantheon  is
still  the  finest  example  the  whole  world  can
show ;  and,  finally,  earth-topped  tombs.

Canini's  restoration  of  the  tomb  of  Augostus —
taken  by  itself,  and  measured  by  our  own  ideas  of
cleanliness  and  propriety, — is  inconceivable.  A  cir-
cular arrangement  of  exquisite  porticoes,  columns
and  decorated  walk  facing  to  nearly  every  de-
gree of  the  circle, — ^resplendent  in  all  the  carving
and  polish  that  marble  can  receive, — ^and  yet  with
a  huge  earthen  mound  on  the  top,  deep  enough
to  grow,  and  actually  growing,  trees  in !


OH.  13.]  Soman.  103

But  that  is  the  very  essence  of  the  old  Etrus-
can tumulus ;  viz.,  a  circular  containing  wall  of
masonry  below,  and  a  heap  of  earth  abova  And
if  every  rain-  shower  brings  down  defiling  streams
of  eardi  over  the  fair  face  of  the  lower  wall, —
developed  though  it  may  have  been  into  exquisite
architecture — why,  what  is  that,  other  than  the
well-known  Eastern  custom  of  women  who  weep
over  a  corpse,  throwing  earth  on  their  heads,  and
drawing  streaks  of  mud  down  their  cheeks  ?  A
building  visibly  wailing  for  the  dead,  with  a
perpetual  sign  of  lamentation, — so  long  as  a  par-
ticle of  the  earthen  mound  above,  remains  to  be
washed  down  by  the  rains  of  heaven,  over  its
rounded  cheeks  of  architectural  design  below, —
such  was  the  Boman  devised  tomb  of  Augustus
Caesar.

We  strive,  and  strive  in  vain,  to  keep  the  tombic
monuments  of  our  loved  ones,  fair  and  bright
against  the  influence  of  all  weather;  but  the
Romans,  taking  a  hint  from  mound-building
Etruscans,  used  the  bad  weather  itself,  in  com-
bination with  their  monument — half  of  masonry
and  half  of  earth, — as  a  manufacturing  arrange-
ment, for  keeping  up  a  never-ending  appearance


104  Pint  BeMuoi  ArchiUcture.     [CH.  13.

of  one  of  the  ancient  accompanimentB  of  weep-
ing out  of  respect  for  the  dead.

Only  join  to  sach  a  Bomano-Etroacan  tomb,  a
perpetual  water-wheel  on  a  neighbouring  stream,
set  to  turn  for  ever  a  Buddhist  cylinder  inscribed
with  prayers ; — and  the  applied  mechanics  of
jtio^religious  grie^  would  be  complete.  But  of
these  Buddhists  now,  we  must  speak  separately.

Btiddhist.

Buddhist  architecture  is  essentially  circular,
domical,  tombic,  memorial,  and  ancestral ;  in  so
£ftr  therefore  Turanian  and  Pelasgic — or  of  the
school  of  the  circular  builders, — even  to  the  ex-
tent of  surrounding  their  topes,  or  solid  domes,
with  columnar  pillar  stonea  But,  if  really  de-
scending from  some  of  the  south-easterly  moving
branches  of  that  once  central  family, — this  repre-
sentative of  it  soon  became,  in  an  Indian  climate,
wealthy,  enervated,  given  to  gaudy  display,  re-
fined  without  taste,  and  deUghting  in  mere  pro-
fusion  and  intricacy  of  commonplace  designs.

Some  writers  will  insist  on  the  Buddhist  reli-
gion, which  is  still  professed  by  the  largest  mere
numbers  of  men  in  the  earth,  being  that  of  those


CH.  13.]  Buddhist.  105

early  patriarchs  who  were  immediately  out  of
the  direct  Hebrew  line ;  and  therefore  with  some
traditional  claims  to  the  remembrance^  at  least,
of  ethnic  Divine  inspiration.  But  others  attribute
its  formation  to  subsequent  human  enthusiasts,
between  600  and  300  B.C.;  and  much  of  its
literature  and  so-called  history,  to  times  subse-
quent to  the  Christian  sera.

Be  this  however  as  it  may,  seeing  that  its
earliest  architectural  remains  do  not  go  back
further  than  250  B.C.,  nor  come  down  much  later
than  900  A.D., — ^Buddhism  can  fiU  no  important
position  in  our  present  inquiry.^

^  Baahan.  From  a  recently  published  work,  entitled.  The  CfiarU
CUiea  o/Bashan,  and  wherein  the  author  spealia  confidently  of  hav-
ing aeen  all,  and  visited  some,  of  *the  threescore  great  cities  with

*  wattSf  gcUeSf  and  brazen  bare  of  the  Bephaim,  or  giants  who  dwelt

*  in  that  land  both  before  Moses  and  before  Abraham,' — I  had  hoped
to  procure  contemporary  particulars,  of  those  very  early  times  in
that  interesting  part  of  the  world.

But  out  of  seven  plates  (including  the  gilt  stamp),  six  represent
confessedly  i?oman-columned  ruins ;  while  the  seventh, — ^though
purporting  to  exhibit  *  a  giant's  house,  with  stone  ceiling,  door,  and
window-shutter,* — ^yet  betrays  a  Roman  colonnade  running  along
the  middle  of  the  room,  in  order  to  support  an  original  joint  in  the
stone  ceUing,  where  the  half-length  slabs  of  which  it  is  composed,
meet  in  the  middle  1

We  can  only  hope,  therefore,  that  some  future  explorer  may  be
more  successful  in  arriving  at  traces  of  the  original  architecture,
really  contemporary  with  the  primeval  Bephaimites  of  Syria  and  the
region  round  abouti


106        Second  Residual  Architecture,     [ch.  14.


ARCHITECTURAL   DATA  ^continued.


CHAPTER  14.

SECOND  fiESmUAL  ABCHITEOTUBE.

Of  all  other  existing  varieties  of  reputed  olden
architecture  (see  the  Frontispiece),  we  read  in
Mr.  Fergusson's  carefully  prepared  volumes, — that

CeyhnesCj  dates  fix)m  161  b.o.  to  1235  A.D. ;

Jaina  in  India,  from  900  a.d.  to  1580  A.D. ;

Southern  Hindoo^  with  its  so-called  *  Gopuras,'
or  'Gate  Pyramids,'  from  800  a.d.  to  1600  a.d.  ;

Northern  Hindoo  from  600  a.d.  to  1700  A.D. ;
and

Cambodian, — ^recently  discovered  and  much
admired  for  its  superior  taste  to  ordinary  Indian
and  Malayan  productions,  from  980  A.D.  to  1500
A.D. ;  (being  the  work  of  an  emigration  from
Cashmere,  driven  thence  by  the  early  Moham-
medan emperors, — and  carrying  with  them  many
reminiscences  of  the  later  Greek  art  from  Bactria


OH.  14.]     Second  ReddiLol  Architecture.         107

and  Alexander  the  Great's  other  central  Asian
conquests).

Chinese  architecture  should  afford  ancient  ex-
amplesy  as  the  people  themselves  have  been
permanent  inhabitants  of  the  same  land  from  the
very  eariiest  times.  But,  whether  from  their
building  materials  being  bad,  their  weather  un-
propitious  and  destructive,  or  European  explora-
tion stiU  in  its  infancy,— nothing  is  known  of
that  land's  structures  earlier  than  240  B.C.,  the
date  of  *  the  great  walL'

While  finally,  the  Mexican  and  other  American
built  remain8,-mcluding  Bome  erroneouBly  named
pyramids,^ — but  much  more  like  the  terraced,

^  In  A  recent  publication,  snoh  nndne  prominence  htts  been  given
amongst  tnie  and  well  bailt  stone  pyramids,  to  the  mere  terraced
monnd  of  Cholola  in  Mexico, — as  being  *a  pyramid'  which  has
'  abont  twice  the  length  of  basis  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh,' —
that  it  may  be  worth  while  to  quote,  from  Mr.  Fergusson,  that  if
the  Cholula  mass  is  really  so  very  large  in  the  base,  it  is  less  than
half  the  height  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;  is  broad  and  flat  on  the  top,
(where  it  was  intended  to  support  a  hollow  temple,)  '  is  composed
'  of  badly  burnt  bricks  and  mud,  and  is  now  so  overgrown  with
'  trees,  that  it  is  difficult  to  make  out  its  form.'

America  has  abo  mounds  of  pure  earth,  which  are  occasionally
older  than  her  built  remains.  These  mounds  are  often  round,  but
sometimes  in  the  shape  of  a  ground  plan  of  snakes,  tortoises,  and
other  animals.  Sufficiently  original  therefore,  but  neither  equal
in  age,  to  many  of  the  works  of  the  circular  builders  in  Europe  and
Asia ;  nor  similar  to  them  in  possessing,  as  a  rule,  internal  chambers
and  entrance-passages,  whether  sepulchral  or  otherwise.


108        Second  Remdvud  Amhitecture.     [ch.  14.

stair-cased,  and  temple-bearmg^  stractnres  of  Meso-
potamia, than  the  burial  pyramids  generally,  or
the  Great  Pyramid  in  particular,  of  Lower  Egypt,
— date  only  from  500  A.D.  to  about  1500  A.D.*

These,  therefore,  close  the  list  of  all  the  remain-
ing known  architecture  that  we  need  appeal  to,
for  assisting  our  special  inquiry  into  primal
times.

^  With  reference  to  tlie  oft-mooted  qaestion  of  the  origLa  of
Americaa  architecture,  and  its  aboriginal  inhabitants  as  well ; — ^the
following  particolars  were  recently  oommnnicated  to  me,  by  Mr.
George  Davidson ;  Astronomer  to  the  United  States  Coast  Survey,
^and  just  returned  from  an  inspection  of  the  Coast  of  Alaska : —

'The  whole  north-west  coast  is  peopled  by  the  same  race  of
'  Indians  that  extends  certainly  to  the  northern  boundary  of  Cali-
'  fomia.  North  of  Alaska  Peninsula  are  the  Esquimaux.  But  the
'  whole  of  the  Aleutian  Tslands,  part  of  Alaska  Peninsula,  and  the
'  Archipelago  of  Kadiak,  are  inhabited  by  the  **AletaiaM"  a
'  different  race  from  either,  and  partaking  in  many  characteristics
'  and  features  with  the  Japanese.  It  is^a  fruitful  theme  for  in-
'  vestigation,  and  I  intend  to  pursue  it  when  on  the  Pacific  this
'  spring.  The  Kamtschatka  branch  of  the  Great  Japanese  Warm
'  stream  runs  into  Behring*s  Sea  on  the  western  verge  of  the  Aleutian
'  Islands,  and  in  1862  (Sept)  a  Japanese  junk,  carried  by  this  stream
'  from  Japan,  was   wrecked   on  Alton,   the  westernmost  of  the

*  Aleutians.  They  were  rescued  in  1863.  The  main  stream  has
'  carried  Japanese  junks  to  the  coast  of  Oregon  and  Washington  so

•  late  as  1833.'

For  plates  of  the  American  mounds  and  pyramidal-based  temples,
together  with  similar  constructions  in  Europe,  Scythia,  and  Africa,
see  a  paper  read  by  Mr.  St  John  Vincent  Day,  C.R,  in  February
1868,  before  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Glasgow,  upon  Some  pomti
in  certain  Theories  concerning  the  Purpose  and  Primal  Condition  qf
the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh,


CH.  16.]  Architectural  Results.  109


CHAPTER  15.
ARCHITECTURAL  RESULTS.

If  we  should  now, — after  our  rather  extensive
review  of  all  the  oldest  known  remains  of  archi-
tectural skill  in  any  and  all  the  countries  of  the
earth,— resume,  with  increased  powers,  our  first
investigation  touching  both  the  recently  alleged
invariable  pyramidal  form,  and  one  constant
method  of  astronomical  emplacement,  asserted  as
common  to  all  primal  structures  ; — an  unexpected
answer  comes  fortL

For,  on  making  such  examination,  we  immedi-
ately  find,  not  only  that  there  is  amongst  all  known
architectural  works^  only  one  territorial  instance
— ^viz.,  the  Lower  Egyptian, — of  true  and  pure
geometrical  Pyramids  ;  but  that  it  is  only  there,
that  the  asserted  astronomical  orientation  has  any
place.

Elsewhere,    either  no    astronomical    intention


110  Arckitectural  Results.  [oh.  1 5.

whatever  appears,  as  at  Thebes  and  Meroe,  and
with  the  circular  buildings  everjrwhere  ;  or,  as  in
the  Chaldsean,  Assjrrian,  and  Babylonian  struc-
tures, an  opposite  orientation  law  crops  out ;  i.e.,
in  the  basement  walls  there  being  directed  not
on,  or  towards,  but  away  £rom,  the  cardinal
points ;  and  to  the  utmost  possible  extent

This  very  defined  and  signal  fact  of  astro-
nomical opposition  in  Euphratean  practice  to
Nileian  precedent, — ^is  further  shown,  by  a  con-
sideration of  all  the  data,  to  have  been  most  in-
tentional, settled,  and  determined  on  the  part  of
every  branch  and  age  of  the  Interamnian  popu-
lation. For,  however  the  various  successive  em-
pires there  rose  or  fell,  and  whether  their  remains
are  first  met  with  on  the  sites  of  the  great  burial
cities  near  the  Persian  Gulf;  or,  whether  after-
wards they  are  found  coming  out  in  splendour  in
the  cold  north-western  regions  of  the  Assyrian
empire,  and  its  severer  metropolis  of  Nineveh  ;
or  after  that  again  flourishing  once  more  in  the
burning  south,  within  the  mighty  ramparts  of
gaudily-decked,  and  almost  tropically-heated,  Ba-
bylon the  magnificent ;  and  whether  the  tastes  of
the  local  sovereigns  and  their  people  ran  now  on


CH.  1 6.]  A  rchitectural  Results.  Ill

temples  to  their  gods,  and  now  on  palaces  for
their  kings, — still  that  determination  to  hold  on
to  a  peculiar,  and  scientifically  a  most  incon-
venient, orientation,~i8  predominant  in  aknost
every  case.

Something  alsa  of  a  growing  or  accumulating
and  Btrengthening  feeling  was  this  in  Mesopo-
tamia,  being  realized  on  a  larger  and  larger  scale
on  every  successive  occasion;  so  that  while  in
IWpt  we  discover  the  best  and  grandest  of  its
I^<U  a.  the  l^gimuBg  of  to  eZ  (eee  JVou-
tispiece), — in  Mesopotamia,  on  the  other  hand,
the  largest  and  most  typical  of  all  its  peculiar
terrace-based  temples,  is  the  latest  of  the  whole.
In  everything,  therefore  (except  where  the  cir-
cular builders  differ  from  both,  and  show  so  little
care  for  any  species  of  science,  that  science  can
hardly  include  them  in  her  intellectual  ranks),
the  Euphrates  series  of  buildings,  though  nearly
parallel  with,  but  not  quite  so  ancient  as,  the
series  of  the  Lower  Nile, — is  clearly  their  very
opposite  in  both  manner,  arrangement,  external
appearance,  internal  intention,  and  even  whole
history  of  birth,  invention,  and  development

Now  something  so  marked  as  this,  and  when


112


Arx^itectural  Results.


[oh.  15.


we  had  been  led  by  literary  men  to  expect  close
uniformity, — makes  it  well  worth  our  while  to
inquire,  whether  there  be  not  some  other  data
which  can  be  referred  to  for  additional  testimony ;
something  equally  contemporary  with  the  archi-
tectural, perhaps  older,  certainly  varying  the  point
of  view,  and  otherwise  also  proper  to  be  intro-
duced into  the  present  inquiry.


CH.  16.]  FUfitsofihe  Drifi.  118


ARCHyEOLOGICAL   DATA.


CHAPTER   16.

FLINTS    OF    THE    DRIFT.

'Whilb  we  have  been  straimng  our  eyes  to

*  the  East,'  says  Sir  John  Lubbock/  '  and  eagerly
'watching  excavations  in  Egypt  and  Assyria,
'  suddenly  a  new  light  has  arisen  in  the  midst  of
'  US ;  and  the  oldest  relics  of  man  yet  discovered

*  have  occurred,  not  among  the  ruins  of  Nineveh
'  or  Heliopolis^  not  on  the  sandy  plains  of  the
'  Nile  or  the  Euphrates,  but  in  the  pleasant  val-
'  leys  of  England  and  France,  along  the  banks  of
'  the  Seine  and  the  Somme,  the  Thames  and  the
'  Waveney.'

The  supposed  new  light  thus  eloquently  referred
to,  was  that  lit  in  1846,  when  M.  Boucher  de
Perthes  published  his  first  account  of  certain  flint
weapons,  found  in  special  gravel,  and  drift,  beds

^  PrthitUmc  Times,  Vy  Sir  John  Lubbock,  F.R.S.,  p.  268.

fi


114  FUnt$  of  the  Drift.  [ch.  16.

near  Abbeville  in  France ;  and  be  was  soon  fol-
lowed, imitated,  and  confirmed,  by  half  the
geological  world.

These  drift-beds  have  bew  estimated'  by  geo-
logical processesy'to  be  30,000,  50,000,  or  any
greater  number  of  years  old;  and  contain  the
bones  of  both  the  mammoth  and  sundry  other
now  extinct  animals  (forming  therefore  a  post-
pliocene,  or  post-tertiary  geological  formation);
and  though  no  bones  of  man  are  findable  therein,
yet  hundreds  and  even  thoxisands  of  flints^  chipped
with  an  evident  intentional  mental  purpose,  have
been  collected,— and  are  held  by  those  most  skUful
in  such  inquiries  to  testify  to  a  human  origin.

Man,  then,  argues  this  new  school,  must  have
lived  when  these  gravel-beds  were  being  deposited ;
when  the  mammoth,  the  woolly  rhinoceros,  the
cave^bear,  and  divers  other  now  extinct  animals,
roamed  over  the  earth.  Man's  own  bones  have
disappeared,  probably  because  they  were  small,
especially  seeing  that  no  bones  of  animals  smaller
than  man,  have  come  down  to  us  in  these  gravels ;
but  man's  lasting  weapons  of  durable  flint,  still
remain  to  bear  testimony  both  to  his  skill  in
manufacturing  them,  and  his  contemporary  exist-


GH.  16.]  FlifUs  of  the  Drifi.  115

ence  with  a  Fauna  and  Flora  essentially  different
fieom  what  now  prevails  over  Europe.

In  the  midst  of  all  the  ecstasies  of  delight,
with  which  these  verj  recent  discoveries  have
been  hailed,  there  has  perhaps  not  been  sufficient
remembrance^  tibat  so  far  back  aa  1824,  the  late
Bev.  Dr.  Fleming^  maintained  the  oo-existence
of  man  with  the  above-mentioned  now  extinct
geological  animals.'

Alto  that  their  remains  occurring  only  in  super-
ficial strata,  are  connected,  according  to  him,  with
the  last,  or  modem  epoch  only,  of  the  earth's  his-
tory ;  itnd  that  their,  the  animals',  final  extinction
was  greatly  accelerated,  or  even  entirely  brought
about,  by  human  hunting.  Hunting — indicates
the  learned  minister— formed  the  inveterate  occu-
pation of  men,  firom  the  earliest  days ;  and  con-
tinued in  full  force  so  long  as  there  was  anything

^  In  Jameaon's  Edinburgh  PkUoiopJUcal  JcumoX^  toL  zL,  1824 ;
and  voL  ziv.,  1826.  ^

'  VoL  XL  p.  303. — '  (ff.)  The  remains  of  those  extinct  animals
'  occnr  only  in  the  superficial  strata,  and  in  fresh- water  gravel  or
'  day,  and  may  be  viewed  as  connected  with  the  last  or  modem
'  epoch  of  the  earth's  history.  (6.)  Man  was  an  inhabitant  of  this
'  country  at  the  time  when  these  animals'  (mammoth,  elk,  rhinoceros,
hippopotamns,  cave-bear,  hyena,  etc),  'now  extinct,  flourished,
'  his  bones  and  his  instruments  having  been  found  in  similar  situa*
'  tions  with  the  remains.' — Bev.  Dr.  Flxmiko,  1824.


lU  FlmtM  0flkt  DnfL  [ck  1«.

well  wotA  AarhmiMg:  aad  keevcm  cnnwiff^
Ae  proem  to  be  »  Anp  aad  povofal  k  an
wtfiWiiiatflu;  dofc  ke  a{HMtcalljr  sees  no  remaa
wljaDdie  anhiHilB  kaovn  to  ]is¥eb^  at  anj
liflK  coDtCBipoaijr  widi  mai^  bat  ikiv  ritinrt^


diould  not  ]ia¥edicdy  or  been  kiDed  oa^  widdn
tbe  kafc  6000  yeaEn

Some  tmfiMihp  and  geoenlljr  tbe  kige^  are  ex-
♦frmhifttfi^  F'Pif^  «Mwi>  ijfiiAiy  iii«i  ^1m»p«     So

tbat,  as  we  know  bj  our  own  peraonal  ezpenence
at  the  CSope  of  Good  Hope, — tbe  Hon,  dqihant,
ifainoeeroi^  dand,  and  many  other  laige  anhnaJa,
bare  entirety  and  reoentty  Yaniahed  oat  of  a  tract
of  conntrjr  far  larger  than  all  Great  Bntain, —
while  the  leopard,  hyasna,  jackal,  duiker,  stein-
bok,  etc.,  remain.  Only  two  hundred  years  ago,
tiie  extreme  aoathem  point  of  Afiica,  was  a  fit
representation  of  the  great  mammal  ages  of  geo-
logy— ^from  the  number  and  variety  of  huge  and
ponderous  beasts  that  roamed  over,  and  grew  so
astonishingly  large,  upon  its  plains  of  scanty  ver-
dure. Two  centuries  however,  assisted  no  doubt
by  fire-arms  and  the  migration  of  a  civilized  race,
have  sufficed  to  produce  there  a  zoological  change,
akin  to  those  which  are  generally  attributed  to


CH.  16.]  Flinta  of  the  Drift.  117

uncountable  numbers  of  years^  by  the  pure  geo-
logist^

No  one,  however,  was  more  instant  in  season
and  out  of  season  than  Dr.  Fleming,  in  pressing
upon  the  attention  of  the  learned  world,  the  rapid
manner  in  which  divers  birds  and  animals  have
been  thinned  down  in  their  numbers,  within  the
period  of  Saxon  history,  and  thereby  brought  to
the  verge  of  geological  extinct  species ;  and  yet
even  he  was  not  able  fully  to  realize  the  rapidity
of  the  process.  For  while  we  have  all  been  taught,
almost  to  shed  tears  over  the  fate  of  the  Dodo,
which  no  man  on  earth  shall  ever  see  again, —
and  to  inveifi^h  as^ainst  the  unscrupulous  destruc-

navigators; — the  'great  auk,'  we  are  now  told,
has  died  out  of  existence  within  the  present  cen-
tury, and  amongst  ourselves ;  and  Dr.  Fleming
himself,  had,  in  a  tamed  condition,  the  very  last
known  member  of  the  race ; — though,  apparently
without  being  fully  aware  at  the  time,  that  the

^  For  a  plain,  nnvamished  statement  of  these  great  animalian
facts,  as  they  existed  so  short  a  time  ago,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
what  is  now  the  peaceful  city  of  Cape  Town, — see  '  The  Keoord  ;  or
'  a  Series  of  Official  Papers  of  the  Dutch  Oovemment,  from  1649
*  to  1720  A.D.,'  published  in  Cape  Town  in  1838,  under  the  editor-
ship of  Lieut.  D.  Moodie,  B.N.


118  PUfds  oj  the  Drift  [CH.  16.

poor  individiial  bird  before  him,  was  in  truth  the
canier  of  such  a  weight  of  destiny  almost  accom-
plished.

Dr.  Fleming,  then,  was  ezceedingfy  inclined  to-
wards short  dates  for  the  contemporaneousness  of
man  with — not  the  whole  duration  of  the  species
of  the  mammoth,— but  merely,  some  of  the  later
members  of  it.  And  perhaps  he  would  have  re-
tained those  short  dates,  even  though  he  had
lived  down  to  the  present  day, — ^when  almost
eveiy  one  is  demanding  more  time,  wherein  to
place  in  order  the  real  or  supposed  fsu^ts  of  the
early  history  of  the  earth.

Mr.  W.  Carrutheis  has  no  doubt  pointed  out,^
that  there  is  a  permanent  and  characteristic  dif-
ference between  all  zoologists  on  one  hand,  and
geologists  on  the  other,  as  to  the  ages  which  they
assign  to  the  same  natural  and  primeval  facts:
the  former  men  of  science  being  inclined  to  com-
paratively small,  and  the  latter  to  enormously
great,  periods  of  time.  But  then,  so  many  other
natural-history  students  have  recently  gone  along
with  the  popular  geological  current  of  the  day,

^  «Th6  Antiquitj  of  Bfan,'  in  toL  xtL  of  British  and  Foreign
EvcmgtUeal  Review,  p.  883,  tia


CH.  16.]  Flints  of  the  Drift.  119

that  we  cannot  be  certain  jDf  what  the  minister
of  flisk's  opinion  would  have  been  7U)Wj  in  pre-
sence of  the  later  facts  and  papers^  before  which
80  many  of  his  friends  have  succumbed.  Indeed
we  rather  suspect,  if  the  mean  judgment  could
be  taken  of  all  existing  natural  historians,  zoolo-
l^usts^  and  othergf, — and  specially  those  selected
examples  of  them  filling  places  of  honour  in
metropolitan  scientific  societies, — it  would  un-
doubtedly be  found  to  attribute  to  the  rough
'  flint  hatchets,  knives^  and  spear-heads'  of  the  drift
— iEi  vastly  superior  age  to  that  of  any  of  the
architectural  monumenta  we  have  yet  reviewed.

Such  an  age,  indeed,  that,  if  some  of  the  earlier
of  these  latter  objects  date  from  4000  years  ago,
— the  flint  implements  of  the  drift,  say  these
gentlemen,  must  date  from  40,000  or  80,000  years
since,  or  more.  Whether  these  scientists  are  right,
or  wrong,  in  this  view,  we  do  not  now  pause  to
inquire, — but  shall  only  examine  the  case,  on  its
own  advocates'  showing,  in  order  to  ascertain
what  may  be  its  best  and  most  favoured  claims
to  enter  into  our  present  investigation.


120  FlinU  of  the  Drift.  [Cfl.  16.


Chipped  FUrUs.

We  should  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  the
said  flint  weapons  being  merely  chipped  into
shape, — ^and  not  ground  on  the  edges  or  polished
over  the  soifiEu^es,  as  with  most  of  the  stone
weapons  of  known  savage  tribes  in  modem  times,
belong, — according  to  those  who  make  savage
manners  and  customs  their  stady  in  the  present
day, — to  the  very  lowest  conceivable  stage  of
savagedom.  And  this  main  fact^  combined  with
the  inferred  vast  age  of  the  specimensf,  is  thus
employed  by  Sir  Charles  LyeU  in  throwing  a
most  powerful  light  on  the  nature  and  time  of
origination  of  inteUectucd  man  (our  very  title  and
subject),  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  We  give
the  whole  of  Sir  Charles's  long  paragraph  fix>m
end  to  end,^  so  that  there  may  be  no  mistake  in
gathering  his  real  meaning  : —

'  It  has  sometimes  hi^peiied  tkmt  one  natioii  bas  been  oon-
'  quered  by  another  less  ciyilised  though  more  warlike,  or
'  that,  during  social  and  pditical  rerolations,  people  have
'  retrograded  in  knowledge.  In  snob  eases,  the  traditioDS  of
'  earlier  ages,  or  of  some  bigho'  and  more  educated  caste

»  Annuity  qf  Mam,  by  Sir  Cbariea  LyeD,  tbizd  editioii,  reused,
PIK  37S  and  379.


CH.  16.]  Chipped  Flints.  121

wldoh  has  been  destroyed,  may  giye  rise  to  the  notion  of
degeneracy  from  a  primal  state  of  superior  intelHgenoe,  or
of  Boienoe  sapematorally  commnnioated.  Bat  had  the  ori«-
gvaal  stock  of  mankind  been  really  endowed  with  such  superior
intellectual  powers,  and  with  inspired  knowledge,  and  had
possessed  the  same  improyable  nature  as  their  posterity,  the
point  of  advancement  which  they  would  have  reached  ere
this  would  hare  been  immeasurably  higher.  We  cannot
ascertain  at  present  the  limits,  whether  of  the  beginning  or
the  end,  of  the  first  stone  period,  when  Man  co-existed  with
the  extinct  mammalia,  but  that  it  was  of  great  duration  we
cannot  doubt.  During  those  ages  there  would  have  been
time  for  progress  of  which  we  can  scarcely  form  a  concep*
tion,  and  yery  different  would  have  been  the  character  of  the
works  of  art  which  we  should  now  be  endeavouring  to  inter-
pret,' — ^those  relics  which  we  are  now  disinterring  from  the  old
gravel-pits  of  St.  Acheul,  or  from  the  Li^ge  caves.  In  them,
or  in  the  upraised  bed  of  the  Mediterranean,  on  the  south
coast  of  Sardinia,  instead  of  the  rudest  pottery  or  flint  tools,
so  irregular  in  form  as  to  cause  the  unpractised  eye  to
doubt  whether  they  afford  unmistakable  evidence  of  design,
we  should  now  be  finding  sculptured  forms,  surpassing  in
beauty  the  masterpieces  of  Phidias  or  Praxiteles ;  lines  of
buried  railway  or  electric  telegraphs,  from  which  the  best
engineers  of  our  day  might  gain  invaluable  hints  j  astrono-
mical instruments  and  microscopes  of  more  advanced  con-
struction than  any  known  in  Europe,  and  other  indications
of  perfection  in  the  arts  and  sciences,  such  as  the  nineteenth
century  has  not  yet  witnessed.  Still  further  would  the
triumphs  of  inventive  genius  be  found  to  have  been  carried,
when  the  later  deposits,  now  assigned  to  the  ages  of  bronze
and  iron,  were  formed.     Vainly  should  we  be  straining  our


122  FtifOs  of  the  Drift.  [ch.  16.

*  imaginations  to  goess  the  possible  uses  and  meaning  of

*  Buoh  relics — ^machines  peiliape  for  navigating  the  air  or
'  exploring  the  deplths  of  tiie  ooean,  or  for  oaloolating  arith-
'  metioal  problems,  beyond  the  wants  or  even  the  conception

*  of  living  mathematicians.'

Now  after  iieading  tiiis  most  important  judg-
ment by  one  of  the  first  geologists  of  our  age^  and
apprehending  fully  his  grounds  of  argument^-^t
will  appear  clearly,  that  his  total  conclusion  will
only  be  intensified,  by  any  further  discoveries  or
discussions^  which  may  either  prove  or  imply,  a
very  much  greater  age  still,  for  the  flint  imple-
ments dug  out  of  the  drift,  than  what  we  have
yet  recorded.  So  that  if  any  particularly  go-a-
head geologist  shall  draw  still  more  largely  on
those  stores  of  untold  time,  which  cost  him  and  his
brethren  so  very  little, — and  put  millions  and  even
billions  of  years  where  we  have  put  thousands
only, — ^that  will  but  make  it  infinitely  more
certain  than  ever,  according  to  the  involuntary
testimony  of  Sir  C.  Lyell, — ^that  man,  at  that
excessively  removed  period  of  time,  could  not
by  any  possibility  have   been   then   *  endowed

*  with  superior  intellectual  powers,  science  super-

*  naturally  communicated,  inspired  knowledge,  and
'  the  present  improvable  nature  of  human  kind/


OH.  16.]  Chipped  Flints.  123

In  &cty  though  whole  ahiploads  of  chipped
flints  may  be  dug  out  of  any  number  of  gravel-
bedsy  and  may  also  be  claimed  by  anthropologists
as  oontewpoTory  remains  of  those  who  shaped
them  ages  ago, — ^th^  testify  nothing  as  to  irdelr
Uctual  man ;  and  therefore  have  little  more  to  do
with  the  subject  of  our  investigationi  than  the
mere  gravel  itself.

What  we  alluded  to  under  our  title  as  inteir
lectual  man,  and  meant  to  imply  thereby,  was, —
man  as  he  is  now,  or  with  the  mind  wherewith  he
was  akeady  endued  in  the  days  of  Job,  of  Abraham,
and  of  Moses; — and  that  state  which  certain
eminent  anatomists  are  inclined  to  distinguish,
within  the  limits  of  their  science, — as  implying
an  organized  creature  with  an  immensely  prepon-
derating amount  of  brain,  to  that  possessed  by
all  other  known  living  creatures ;  or  again,  as  a
being  with  an  almost  unlimited  capacity  for  mental
improvement.

This  last  feature  or  form  of  the  statement,  is
evidently  a  part  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell's  means  of
distinction;  but  when  he  adds  thereto,  'science
'  supematurally  communicated,  and  inspired  know-
*  ledge,'  though  only  as  mere  traditions  and  notions


124  FtifOs  of  the  Drift.  [ch.  16.

that  may  have  originated  out  of  the  accidents  of
human  histoiy, — ^it  is  evident  that  he  brings  on  the
field  the  teachings  of  religion^  with  regard  to  the
Divine  creation  of  man.  The  teachings  of  many
systems  too  of  religion^ — though  he  does  not  point
out  anything  better,  or  essentiaUy  diflferent,  in  one,
than  another.^

Yet  inasmucli  as  the  Egyptian  and  Assyrian
religions  have  given  dates  of  several  tens,  or  even
hundreds,  of  thousands  of  years  for  man  Uving  on
the  earth  under  kings,  princes,  and  civilized  rule
very  much  as  at  present ;  and  one  of  the  dates
for  *  Ikswaku  and  Buddha'  of  the  Indian  religion,
goes  back  so  £ar  as  to  2,183,102  years  b.c.,* — it  is
perfectly  impossible  to  square  such  dates,  with
the  most  important  integration  which  Sir  Charles
Lyell  has  performed,  upon  all  that  we  know,  by
geology  and  otherwise,  of  former  and  present
works  of  man.     Those  Grentile  dates  therefore,

^  'The  inyenton  of  nBefal  arts,  the  poets  and  prophets  of  the
'  early  stages  of  a  nation's  growth,  the  promulgators  of  new  systems

*  of  religion,  ethics,  and  philosophy,  or  of  new  codes  of  laws,  have

*  often  been  looked  upon  as  messengers  from  Heaven,  and  after  their
'  death  haye  had  divine  honours  paid  to  them,  while  fabulous  tales
'  have  been  told  of  the  prodigies  which  accompanied  their  birth.' —
P.  504,  dd  edition  of  Lyell's  Antiquity  qf  Man.

'  Usrful  T<Mes  of  Indian  Metrology  and  Chronology ^  by  James
Prinsep^  Boyal  Anatio  Society,  Calcutta.


0&.  16.]  Chipped  Flints.  125

according  to  the  general  tenor  of  his  whole  para-
graph, cannot  be  true ;  or  the  character  of  geo-
logical findings  would  be  totally  diverse  from  what
they  are.  Wherefore  it  is  well  to  remember,  that
the  Bevealed  religion  of  the  Bible  tells  a  very
different  story,  as  to  the  true  and  limited  era  of
man's  early  civilization.

Several  worthy  men, — ^indeed  Dr.  Frichard,  in
his  ethnological  researches,  amongst  others, — have
confessed,  that  the  earlier  chapters  of  Geneciis
hardly  seem  to  them  capable  of  a  very  definite
interpretation  as  to  the  exact  chronology  of  man ;
— though  they  all  agree  that  the  Bible  date  of  the
Divine  inspircUion  of  man,  or,  when  '  man  became
a  living  soul,' — ^the  important  point  in  a  work
on  religion, — cannot  be  put  further  off  from
our  times,  on  any  rendering  of  the  Biblical  text,
than  between  6000  and  7000  years  ago.

Until,  therefore,  intellectual  monuments  equal
to  those  of  the  present  day,  or  to  those  much  more
advanced  constructions  which  Sir  Charles  Lyell
has  sketched  out, — shall  be  discovered,  nature
placed  in  drift,  gravel,  or  clay-beds,  which  geolo-
gists shall  testify  or  prove  to  be  older  than  7000
years^ — there  will  have  been   nothing  yet  dis-


126  FlifOs  of  the  Drift.  [ch.  16.

covered  by  geology  to  impugn  the  Bible  date  of
the  Inspiration  of  num.  ^

Almost  xieedlcfls  is  it  to  say,  when  our  readers
can  examine  idv  themselves^  as  well  as  we  can,
both  Sir  C.  Lyell's  work  on  the  Antiquity  ofUan^
and  Sir  John  Lubbock's  on  Prehistoric  Times, —
that  neither  of  these  very  comprehensive  works  on
recent  geological  discoveries^  contains  the  slightest
allusion  to  any  such  high  intellectuality  charac-
terizing the  works  of  any  times^  which  they  say,
are  more,  more  in  any  way,  certainly  not  much
more,  than  6000  years,  or  even  4000  years  old:
certain  possibilities  in  Egypt  being  excepted,  and
which  we  shall  discuss  in  chapters  18, 19,  and  20.

Yet  what  neither  of  those  great  leaders  in  their
respective  subjects  has  ventured  to  hint  or  even
hope  for, — ^has  very  lately  been  asserted  elsewhere
so.  roundly,  repeatedly,  and  positively — both  in
print,  and  in  speech  before  scientific  societies —
that  we  must  devote  the  next  chapter  to  its
careful  consideration.


GH.  17.]  Pyrcmids  ofEwope.  127


ARCH^OLOGICAL  DATA-eon<»m*«i.


CHAPTER  17.

PYBAMIDS  OF  EUROPE.

Meetinq  unexpectedly,  in  a  work  published
last  year/  with  the  striking  phrase, — *  those  mag-
«  nificent  though  rude  western  Pyramids  that  con-
'  sttttUe  the  g^^and  old  numsolea  of  Ireland  and
*  Brittany  I — I  could  not  but  wonder  how  Mr.  Fer-
gusson  had  omitted  all  mention  of  such  apparently
important  monuments,  from  the  otherwise  com-
prehensive pages  of  his  Architectural  History!

Very  soon  too,  another  recent  work  was  found*
speaking,  not  only  freely  and  confidently  of  the
'  Boyne  Pyramids,'  but  giving  to  one  of  them,  at
present  known  by  the  name  of  New  Grange,  the
following  glorious  title  of  praise  : —

^  Archaic  Sculpturtngs  qf  Cupa,  Cireka,  etc.,  by  Sir  James  Y.
Simpson,  Bart  and  M.D.;  1867  ;  p.  115.

s  BeauUes  qfthe  Bayme,  by  Sir  William  R.  Wilde,  F.£.LO.a  and
M.B.LA.,  1849.    F^  202,  203,  224.


128  Pyramids  of  Europe.  [CH.  1 7.

'  The  most  splendid  specimen  of  this  description,  wbich  we
'  know  0^  in  Central  or  NorUi- Western  Europe,  is  the  magni-
'  fioent  mausoleum  at  New  Grange,  which  may  well  be  deno-
'  minated  the  Great  Pyramid  of  the  WesL\

Thus  much  for  its  architectural  character ;  and
then  for  its  age,  the  same  author  writes  of  New
Grange,  *  it  may  be  coeval  or  even  anterior  to  its .
'  brethren  on  the-  Nile/  So  that  the  Scriptural
indications  of  Shinar  and  Egypt  being  the  oldest
scenes  of  man's  architectural  triumphs,  would
seem  to  require  alteration  ;  and  the  name  of  Ire-.
land  should  be  read  in  their  place.

Some  other  localities  have  also  much  glory,
both  architectural  and  intellectual,  claimed  in
their  favour.  For,  of  the  Brittany  so-called  *pyra-
mids '  it  has  recently  been  stated,^  that  *  they  are
'  perhaps  older  than  those  of  Egypt,  for  they  con-
'  tain  implements  and  weapons  only  of  stone, —
'  not  of  bronze  or  iron.    They  were  reared  in  the

*  stone  age, — the  Egyptian  tombs  were   reared

*  after  metallic  tools  were  invented.'

While  with  still  greater  boldness  was  it  said  on
the  same  occasion, — '  But  if  not  content  with  the
'  age  of  these  enormous  western  tombs  or  pyra-

1  At  a  meeting  of  the  Royal  Society,  Edinburgh,  December  16,
1867 ;  tee  Appendix  2.


CH.  17.]  Pyramids  of  Europe.  129

*  midfii^  we  had,  beeddes  cromlechs  and  megalithic

*  circles^  other  lemains  of  intellectual  man  in
'  Europe  undoubtedly  older  than  the  oldest  Eg]^

*  tian  Pyramid'  And  a  piece  of  carved  ivoxy,
described  as  '  that  accurate  piece  of  drawing  or

*  sculpture/  was  then  alluded  to,  as  being  *  far,
'  &r  oldar  than  the  age  of  the  oldest  Pyramid.'

But  even  these  claims  of  enormous  antiqidty
for  intellectual  man,  in  this  north-western  part  of
the  world,  are  oveipassed  by  certain  others  made
here  also  for  certain  sculptured  stones  (some  of
them  similar  to,  if  not  also  identical  with,  many
in  the  interior  of  New  Grange) ;  and  whose  age
their  admirers  mostly  express  in  a  series  of  dim
and  misty  allusions  to  archaeological  periods  of
bronze  and  of  stone  ahnost  interminable,  having
intervened  since  they  were  executed ;  as  well  as
to  huge  physical  changesf,  such  as  the  time  '  when

*  possibly  England  was  still  geologically  united  to
'  the  Continent,  and  the  Thames  was  only  a  tri-

*  butaiy  of  the  Rhine  /^  ages  and  changes  these
last,  for  which  geologists  usually  demand  tens,  and
even  hundreds,  of  thousands  of  years.

Here  then,  we  have  positively, — ^though  in  the

^  Archaic  SaUpturmffM,  p.  145 ;  by  Sir  James  T.  Simpton.

I


130  Pyramids  ofBwrape.         [ch.  17.

last  chapter  we  liad  not, — ^modern  science,  as
practised  hj  some  persons,  in  direct^  and  unapolo-
gized  for,  antagonism  to  Seyelation.  More  com*
pletely  so  too,  the  further  the  case  is  examined
into, — ^for  these  laige  assertions  of  archsBological
time  for  anything  bearing,  or  supposed  to  bear,  &
highly  intellectual  character,  are  almost  invariably
found  to  underlie  still  larger  demands,  by  the
same  persons,  for  comparatiyely  unintellectual
remaina  For  these,  they  daim  indeed  the  most
enormous  periods ;  but  during  which  they  argue
that  man  may  have  been  developing  or  improv-
ing himself  by  slow  degrees,  out  of  a  primal
state  of  bestial  ignorance  and  simplicity — bright  up
to  his  highest  condition  in  modem  times,  without
having  either  required,  or  received,  any  inspira-
tion or  other  supernatural  aid  from  his  Creator.

Now  with  the  general  question  of  whether
these  writers  are  religiously  right  or  wrong, —
whose  minds  find  such  pleasure  in  pushing  off
into  the  remotest  distance  of  time  all  symptoms
of  the  direct  action  of  a  personal  God,  and  deny-
ing every  trace  of  the  Scriptural  Deluge,  on  the
affairs  of  all  human  kind, — we  have  not  here  to
do.    But  we  cannot  avoid  taking  scientific  note.


OB.  17.]  Testedby  Geometry.  131

that  both  an  egceffom  diflference  of  opinion  from
the  Biblical  narratiyey  and  an  astonishing  state-
ment of  absolute  &ot,  in  the  matter  of  what  ooun-
tries  first  were  inhabited  b;r  intellectaal  man^  and
when, — ^has  been  brought  up  before  us.  Brought
up  «too  in  a  manner,  and  by  parties^  we  cannot
ignore;  and  maintained  not  a  little  upon  the
strength  of  many  asserted  qualities  and  charao-
teiistics  of  ihe  sensed  Irish,  as  oontaining  the
finest  examples  of  all  the  European,  Pjnramids,
and  some  of*  their  component  stones.  There  is
no  other  course  therefore  possible  to  us,  as  mere
searchers  after  scientific  truth,  than  to  examine
what  are  the  observations,  examinations,  or  argu-
ment^ upon  which  the  existence  of  the  said  most
remarkable  qualities  and  characteristics  of  these
structures,  is  asserted.

Tested  by  Oeometry.

Vfe  have  already  shown,  p.  13,  and  partly  re-
peat below,^  the  strict  geometrical  definition  of  a

^  (1.)  A  Pyramid  is  a  solid  whose  base  is  a  regular  rectilinear
plane  figure,  and  wliose  sides  are  plane  triangles,  having  all  their
▼ertices  meeting  together  in  a  point  above  the  base,  called  the
vertex  of  the  Pyramid.

(2.)  Pyramids  take  particular  names  from  the  figure  of  their  base,
as  triangular,  square,  rectangular,  pentagonal,  etc.,  etc. — Ordinary
Geometrical  D^nUkne.


132  Pyramids  of  Europe.  [oh.  17.

Pjrramid.    How  near  thereto^  then,  come   the
Irish  Pyramids  ?

In  Sir  William  Wilde's  woodcut  view  of  New
Orange, — the  chief  of  these  monimientSp^ — ^we  see
merely  a  low,  broad,  straggling,  mound,  partly
overgrown  with  a  hazel  plantation,  and  sprawling
over  a  field  whose  surface  dips  exceedingly  to-
wards one  side.  But  as  this  is  the  present  state
only,  and  may  be  very  different  from  the  build-
ing^s  original  condition,  we  refer  to  the  more
methodical  account  by  Governor  Pownall,  in  the
second  volume  of  the  ArcfuBohgia,  date  1770  :  a
description  extending  tiirongh  forty  quarto  pages,
discussing  several  previous  accounts,  and  fortified
with  measures  expressly  taken  for  the  Grovemor,
by  a  Mr.  Samuel  Bovie,  a  land-surveyor:  these
measures  too,  being  the  latest  we  can  hear  of

Now  in  his  Plate  20,  where  Grovemor  Pownall
gives  both  a  plan  (to  be  taken  in  connexion  with
the  explanatory  letterpress  on  p.  253),  and  a  re-
stored sectional  elevation, — it  appears  that  the  base
of  New  Grange  was — ^in  ground  plan — not  a  rec-
tilinear figure  of  any  kind,  but  circular ;  and  its
top,  not  pointed,  but  broad  and  JlcU ;  the  attached

^  BeaiUiei  ^the  Boyne^  p.  189.


OH.  17.]  Tested  by  Geometry.  133

scale  giving  a  height  from  the  lowest  part  of  the
base  =  67  feet ;  ^  with  a  hoiizontal  breadth  at  top
of  monument  =  118,  and  at  bottom,  of  some
319  feet

All  this  is  evidently  the  very  antithesis  of  a
Pyramid ;  and  while  the  circular  base  receives  a
£^)ecial  confirmation  from  the  remains  of  a  con-
centric and  environing  ring  of  standing  pillar-
stones  still  to  be  seen,— the  broad  flat  top  testifies
to  its  having  been  an  (niginal  feature,  by  showing
a  similar  large  pillar-stone  upon  it,  in  the  time
of  Mr.  Lhwydj  the  first  post-medisBval  describer.'

Now  such  a  sort  of  lithic  top-knot  existed  on
the  sunmiit  of  the  circular  tumulus  of  Alyattes,
in  Lydia^'  and  on  most  of  the  Etruscan  tumuli ;
— while,  as  for  the  outside  circle  of  stones  sur-
rounding the  base,  that  is  exactly  borne  out  by

1  The  Smreyor's  strict  meaaure  gave  only  42  feet  for  height,  and
it  ia  not  quite  clear  that  Mr.  Po¥mall  was  justified  in  alteriog  hia
figores.— ^See  p.  252  of  Archaologiaf  toL  ii

'  Much  material  had  been  removed  in  previous  yean,  for  mending
roads,  but  Mr.  Pownall  shows  that  it  was  taken  from  the  side,  and
not  the  top  of  the  monument.

'  '  The  upper  portion  is  sand  and  gravel,  apparently  brought  from

*  the  bed  of  the  Hermus.'     On  the  summit  are,  '  the  remains  of  a

*  foundation  nearly  18  feet  square,  on  the  north  of  which  is  a  huge

*  droular  stone,  10  feet  in  diameter,  evidently  placed  there  as  an

*  ornament,  on  the  apex  of  the  tumulus.' — Description  of  the  tomb
of  Alyattes,  in  Besearche$  in  Atia  JUnor,  by  W.  J.  Hamilton,  1842 ;
▼oL  L  p.  146.


134  Pyramids  of  Europe.  [Ch.  17.

another  and  undoubted  tiimulus  or  harrow  in
Arcadia^  deacribed  of  old  hy  Pausanias;  and
tiius  ttanalated  by  Pownall, — 'I  contemplated

*  the  tomb  of  Mpytw  with  a  studious  and  curious

*  reverence^  because  Homer  mentions  it  in  so
'  marked  a  point  of  ^iew.  It  is  a  tumulus^  of
'  earth  of  no  great  suge,  suiroimded  at  the  foot  or
'  base  witii  a  circle  of  stones.'

Hence  New  Grange,  though  said  to  be  com-
posed of  loose  pebble  stones  chiefly,  rather  than
mere  soft  earth, — but  yet  having  enough  of  such
earth  and  garden  soil,  as  to  be  able  to  grow  a
flourishing  plantation  of  hazels  on  its  sur&ce, —
can  evidently,  by  virtue  of  its  shape,  only  claim
the  name  of  tumulus,  heap,  hillock,  or  moat, —
as  indeed  the  Ordnance  Survey  both  defines  and
expresses  it,' — and  is  a  work  of  the  circular,  not
the  Pyramid,  builders.  So  too,  seem  to  be,  from
the  best  descriptions  yet  published^  all  the  other
lesser  archsBological  forms«  heaps,  or  barrows  in
its  neighbourhood.

^  The  word  vaed  bj  the  old  Greek  itinerant  is  not  wvpofUt,  which
he  would  sorely  have  known  how  to  apply, — ^hut  x*^ '»  that  ii»
offger  or  tumuiui,  in  Latin ;  and  heap  or  kUlodt,  in  Rngliah.

>  See  Mapa  19  and  20,  of  Oidnanoe  6-inoh  acale,  for  oonnty  of
Meath.


OE.  17.]  Tested  by  Oeametry^  135

Not  one  of  these  either  i%  or  ever  was,  %  ^Fyra-
mid,'  in  shi^pe,  or  according  to  the  geometrical
defitdtion  thereof;  or  has^  or  ever  had,  the  least
right  to  the  term.

With  inost  persons  this  would  settle  the  Irish
Fyilamid  questicm  at  once  and  completely;  not
80  however  with  two,  in  particular,  of  the  aichs^
ologifits  already  mentioned ;  for  they  seem  to  have
decided  for  themselves  and. a  few  foUoweref,  that
tiieword  'Pyramid' means  aspecies  of  sepulchre;
and  also  that  such  sepulchre,  if  it  affects  one  ex-
ternal form  rather  than  another,  is  more  likely  to
be  rounded,^  than  what  all  the  rest  of  the  world
would  call,  pyramidaL

But  though  a  sepulchre  be  undoubtedly  one
of  the  uses  to  which  the  Egyptian  Pyramids  were
put^ — ^the  name  is  most  assuredly  not  applied
there  to  sepulchres  in  general;  nor  in  fact  to
anjrthing  else  than  aiigular  masses  of  masonry
built  in  the  well  recognised  external  form,  or

^  'Fint  Mid  most  notable  it  a  dome-roofed  slione  chaiQber,  con*

*  taming  tlie  lemains  of  one  or  more  bodies,  and  approached  by  a

*  eorered  way,  the  whole  being  enclosed  in  a  large  earthm  tumulm

*  or  harrow,  and  generally  inrroonded  by  a  drde  of  apri^t  pillar-

*  stones.    TlUi  is  the  true  PffranUd^  modify  it  as  we  please,  of  whidh

*  the  type  is  to  be  found  in  those  great  oriental  monuments,  with

*  the  characters  of  which  all  are  acquainted' ! — BeauUei  qftke  Bayne,
by  Sir  W.  R.  Wilde,  p.  224


136  Pyramids  of  Europe.  [ch.  17.

dosely  approximatmg  thereto^  of  mathematical
Pyramids;^  and  tiiis,  whether  they  contain  inter-
nal tombs  or  not  That  such  tombs  are  not  held
to  be  necessary  there  to  the  name  of  a  Pyramid,
is  well  seen  in  the  case  of  the  '  second  Pyramid '
of  Jeezeh;  which,  though  it  was  thought,  before
its  opening  by  Belzoni,  to  have  no  chambers  at
all  in  it^  and  to  be  an  entirely  solid  mass  of
building — ^was  yet  called  by  all  nations  a  Pyra-
mid, just  as  well  as  the  known  chambered  and
tombic  structures  near  it.

More  extensively  still, — ^what  are  called  by
divers  authors  the  *  Assyrian  Pyramids,' are  merely
somewhat  pyramidally  shaped  masses  of  brick  or
masonry ;  always  supporting  on  the  top,  a  hollow
temple  for  living  worshippers  to  attend  at,  but
seldom  known  to  contain  sepulchral  chambers,
with  entrance-passages,  undemeatL

The  same  precisely  may  be  said  of  the  so-called
Mexican,  and  other  American,  Pyramids  (Fergus-
son's  History,  voL  ii  pp.  764-768) ;  for  the  chief

•

*  That  some  of  the  Egyptian  Fynmida,  IiaTing  been  badly^buHt
and  of  poor  material»— «re  now,  after  3500  yean'  ezpoeore,  reduced
to  mere  rounded  heaps  of  rubbish, — is  evidently  not  against  our
aignment ;  for  that  bases  itself  entirely  on  what  the  original  builders
intended  to  make,  and  did  succeed  in  making,  whether  in  Egypt  or
Ireland,  or  elsewhere^  in  their  own  time.


CH.  17J  Teried  by  Qeometry.  137

known  use  of  the  pTiamidically  shaped  part  of
the  stractuie  there^  was  to  act  as  an  elevated
base,  to  give  dignity  to  a  temple  raised  on  the
top;  and  to  allow  the  religious  ceremonies  per-
formed tiiereaty  to  be  witnessed  by  crowds  of
people  in  the  plains  below.  Wherefore,  even  as
r^ards  the  popular  use  of  the  word  '  Pyramid,'
apart  from  its  geometric  definition,  the  name
has  been  most  abundantly  employed  by  Anglo-
Saxons  both  in  the  New  and  Old  Worlds,  to  in-
dicate a  peculiar  external  shape,  and  not  some
one  possible  intemobt  use,  of  many  and  many  a
building,  or  other  mass  carved  out,  or  made  up,
of  solid  and  dense  materials.

Nor  is  this  great  fact  altogether  unknown  to,
and  unadmitted  at  times  by.  Sir  W.  Wilde,  and
we  suspect  most  of  his  school  as  well;  for,  in
the  former's  work  already  referred  to,  there  is  an
extract  quoted  with  apparent  approbation  from
Dr.  Mol3nieux,  1699  a.d., — as  to  there  having
been  found  lying  on  the  floor  of  the  inner  cham-
ber of  New  Grange,  when  it  was  first  entered  in
recent  times,  '  a  slender  quarry  stone,  five  or  six
*  feet  long,  shaped  like  a  Pyramid.'^

^  BtcwOkB  qfthe  Boyne,  by  Sir  W.  Wilde,  p.  202.


188  Pyramids  of  Europe.  [ch.  17.

The  little  baXid  of  archseologists  jnfit  men-
tioned, may  indeed  assert  thereon,  that  thsy  hold,
that  said  stone  was  therefore  shaped  like  a  hend^
spherical  tamtdus^  or  heap,  of  soft  earth  just
emptied  ont  of  a  bushel ;  and  had  a  little  sepxd-
chral  chamber  and  entrance-passage  woiked  in-
side  it  But  others  believe,  that  the  common  sense
of  the  world  will  be  dead  against  such  an  idea ;
and  will  hold  Mr.  Fergusson  perfectly  blameless
for  not  having  put  New  Grange's  circular  harrow
at  the  head  of  all  triangvh/r^ded  Pyramids,  in
his  careful  History  of  Architiectural  Forms.

Tried  hy  Astronomy.

Yet  New  Grange  and  its  fellows  need  not  lose
any  of  their  alleged  high  intellectual  character,
merely  on  being  called  by  another  name  than  that
of  'Pyramid,' — ^if  solid  proofe  of  said  high  and
noble  mental  qualities  are  really  there.  But  in
that  case,  where  precisely  are  they ;  or,  in  what
do  they  consist  f

They  are  not  in  external  shape, — for  there  is
no  science  in  imitating  the  form  of  an  earth  heap,
and  with  earth  materials — ^which  easily  dispose
themselves  in  that  shape,  when  thrown  together


CH.  17.]  Proved  by  Mechanics.  189

almoBt  anyHow.  But  then  New  Grange  has  in  the
confefiflion  of  all  men  a  sepulchral  chamber^  and
that  chamber  an  'entrance-passage/  with  the
aatronomical  direction  of  '  very  nearly  north  and
south  ;*^  and  that  is  precisely  the  ground  of  much
astronomical  praise  of  the  Great  Pyramid  and  its
entrance-passage.

True ;  and  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  the  ordinary
popular  term  of  *  very  nearly/  is  found  by  care-
iul  measure  to  mean  something  less  than  one-
thirteenth  part  of  a  degree,  from  due  north  and
south.  But  how  much  does  the  same  phrase
imply  at  New  Grange  ?

On  turning  to  Governor  Pownall's  treatise,  we
find  24'  I

While  this  quantity  too,  is  given  as  being  to
the  north-west, — the  entrance-passage  of  another
of  the  Boyne  heaps,  is  said  to  open  out  to  the
west,  and  another  to  the  east

Proved  hy  Mechanics.

If  not  in  its  astronomy,  then,  does  the  intel-
lectual  force  of  New  Grange  reside  perhaps  in  its
mechanical  style  of  structure  and  composition  ?

^  BeanUiM  of  (he  Bayne,  bj  Sir  W.  Wildd,  p.  194.


140  Pyramids  ofEwrope.  [ch.  17.

To  this  end,  we  may  well  examine  Plate  21,  p.
264  of  Governor  Pownall,  and  the  several  wood-
cuts of  Sir  W.  Wilde's  most  effectively  and  charm-
ingly illustrated  volume.  The  former  gentleman
is  frequent  in  finding  constructive  resemblances
between  New  Grange  and  the  well-built  Great
Pyramid  of  Egypt ;  and  at  his  page  268,  notices —
that  a  few  feet  within  tiie  entrance  of  the  latter,
the  passage  is  reduced  to  so  narrow  a  strait^  that
travellers  can  only  creep,  or  be  pulled  through,
lying  down  at  fuU  length,  prostrate  and  serpent-
like.^  Now  there  is  a  similar  strait,  says  Governor
Pownall,  just  within  the  entrance  of  New  Grange ;
and  though  he  first  thought  on  looking  at  it,  that
it  was  caused  by  some  of  the  stones  lining  said
entrance  having  tumbled  over, — ^yet  hearing  of
so  similar  a  strait  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  he  con-
cluded that  it  must  have  been  intentional  and
important :  and  that  the  same  architectural  idea
had  governed  both

Yet  though  that  strait  or  narrow  part  of  the
entrance-passage  did  so  long  exist  to  trouble
visitors  at  the  Great  Pyramid, — ^it  was  artificially
produced  within  the  passage  wall  by  mere  impor-

^  See  alflo  L^€  cmd  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  yoL  I  p.  370,  by
C  Piani  Smyth.


GEL  1 7.]  Proved  by  Mechanics.  141

tation  of  sand  and  stones  from  without,  by  modem
Arabs ; — and  these  adventitious  and  gratuitous  ob-
structions having  been  at  last  removed  by  Colonel
Howard  Yyse^ — ^behold  the  real  entrance-passage
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  a  long,  rectilinear,  rectan-
gular tube,  of  well  prepared,  truly  planed,  and
exquisitely  dose-jointed  masonry, — admitting  of
measurements  for  breadth  and  height  to  tenths  and
even  himdredths  of  an  inch ;  and  with  no  approach
to  any  narrowed  or  «trai<  part  in  it  at  alL  The  dif-
ficulty then  vanishes  at  Jeezeh.  But  how  about
the  other  strait  at  New  Grange,  supposed  to  have
been  made  by  a  similar  mental  intention  of  the
original  builders  ?  Alas  I  it  seems  in  so  far  a  real
case  of  that  entrance-passage  itself, — never  very
truly  rectilinear,  and  with  many  ins  and  outs  in
its  course — ^becoming  much  worse  at  one  point,
through  the  very  bad  masonry  there  altogether
giving  way.

Some  of  the  stones  of  New  Grange  gallery,  are
big  enough  to  require  much  manual  force  to  have
moved  them  to  their  present  positiona  But,  rude
to  an  inconceivable  degree,  unworked,  indeed  un-
touched by  any  instruments  of  the  mason, — ^though
scrawled  over  with  the  engraved  tattooing  marks


142  Pyramids  of  Bvrope.  [ch.  17;

of  the  3avage^ — even  the  best  of  these  stones
limng  the  passage,  and  forming  the  lower  walls,
of  the  central  be^ve-shaped  chamber  of  New
Grange,  are  mere  mis-shapen,  natural  pillars  or
slabs ; — ^placed  in  wriggling,  uneven  iiEtshion^  and
filled,  in  between,  more  or  less,. with,  loose^  un-
oemented  rubble-work  of  small  boulders.^

The  sight  is  distressing  to  any  one  who  has  the
smallest  idea  of  using  the  rule  and  the  level,  or
of  practically  realizing  any  of  the  mathematical
splids  or  plane  sur&cea.  One  and  only  one  re-
presentation speaks  of  something  better ;  it  is  the
picture  of  a .  diagpnal-brace  ornament  on  a  stone
over  the  doorway — as  given  by  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson,
in  the  Plate  29,  fig.  5  of  his  Archaic  Sctdpturings.
I  had  looked  and  looked  again  at  that  engraving,
feeling  that  there  was  indeed  therein  a  proof  of
higher  mechanical  knowledge  and  technical  edu-
cation, than  what  all  the  other  reproductions
throughout  that  well-filled  worl^  of  early  British
and  Irish  art,  display.  But,  alas  again  I  Sir  W.
Wilde's  book  contains  at  p.  193,  what  is  I  fear
the  original  of  Sir  James's  engraved  figure,— and

^  See  FUte  21,  p.  264,  of  Arehaologia,  yoL  a  Also  Sir  W.
Wikle*!  Beauties  qf  the  Boyne^  and  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpeon*!  Arehak
SdttptmHiiffi,


OS.  17»]  Questioned  far  Age.  148

flhowB  that  all  the  mathematical  acearacjr  of  the
latter  dnwing,  was  put  into  it  b7  the  Edinbuigh
engraver  last  year.

Questioned  for  Age.

High  intellectaalily  therefore,  we  search  for  at
New  Gkaage  in  vain,  in  vain.

But  then  its  defenders  retreat  into  the  strong-
hold of  its  uncountable  great  age ;  and  its  supe-
riority therein,  to  any  remains  of  buildings  known
to  exist  in  the  more  ancient  lands  of  Biblical  fame
and  story.

Of  course  this  exceeding  age  should  be  an  in-
tensely interesting  and  noteworthy  feature,  if  it
jcaji  really  be  made  out.  But  what  are  the  argu-
ments and  facts  on  which  it  is  supposed  to  be
founded  ?  So  far  as  we  can  collect  them,  they
are  as  follows : —

1st.

'  New  Grange  was  plundered  by  the  Danes,  within  thirty  or
^  forty  years  of  the  time  that  the  Chreat  Pyramid  of  Jeeieh
'  wiMEi  entered  by  Khaliph  Al  Mamoun,  or  in  862  a.d.'

Now  what  does  this  prove,  except  that  New
Grange  was  standing  when  the  Danes  entered  it
in  862  A.D. ;  as  they  probably  did  likewise  with


144


lOLlV.


too


avoj


tt^SSl


1300


of
itB  own


BomieaSjr  fiv  1600  yon  eidicr  HaH  But  dMte
it  ttapB ;  and  does  not  iBTidc;  cillier  bj  itad^  or
bj  hi^iiiig  New  Gmi^ — tbit  most  mptenaoB
of  BiUe  q»clii^  liiL  tiie  time  befcR  die  Deli^

2d.

'The  Gnsft Ffn«d of  B^jptTO bdk  a
'took,  or  a  ^  «ra»  ofe;  talNev  flfi^f
'be&relkti;  beftnefca  ^bvoBMap;  or
<  iCMe  age  of  ^  woiU.'^

This  aaieition  is  made  up  paidy  of  fact  and
partly  of  theory.  Fact^  in  that  iron  tools  were
known  to  the  bmlderB  of  the  Great  Pyramid;
and  perhaps  hct,  that  at  New  Grange,  what  few


baftkag


•totcuMBt  111*7  not  be  intendad  for  tlie  wliole  of  New
Onuigt  barrow,  but  onl j  for  mme  of  tbe  eanred  stones  oontainod  in
i%  i  tbooi^  its  oongenera,  tbe  BrttUoj  ^Pyramidi,'  are  Tciy  oon-
fldantlj  olaimed  for  tbe  'akone  age : '  and  it  is  our  bnsinesB  heie^
not  to  nodsrstate  aaj  of  tbe  daims  that  etther  hare  been,  or  can
bey  made  lor  New  Chraage  or  aaj  of  ita  leDow%  by  their  admirera.


GH.  17.]  Questioned  for  Age.  145

toob  there  were>  may  have  been  of  stone.  But
theory  alone^  that  a  stone,  a  bronze,  and  an  iron,
age  Buccessiyely  existed  on  all  the  face  of  the
earth ;  and  that  each  in  torn  prevailed  ove^  the
whole  of  its  surface  similarly  at  the  same  time^
and  for  indefinitely  bng  ages.

The  fSacts  then  maybe  allowed :  but  the  theory
is  the  flimsiest  ever  put  forth  by  mortal  man,  and
is  of  daily  disproof  within  every  one's  experience.
When  Captain  Cook  sailed  forth  from  Britain  in
the  iron  age  here,  did  he  not  find  Pacific  island
savages  still  living  in  the  stone  age  ?  that  is,  in
the  use  of  stone  and  bone  implements  only,  and
ignorant  of  metal  Are  not  some  Australians
living  in  that  state  still  ?  And  was  one,  regular,
and  uniform,  state  of  civilization  ever  known  to
spread  and  prevail  equally  at  the  same  time  over
all  the  nations  and  tribes  and  peoples  of  the  earth,
from  extremest  east  to  remotest  west  ?

Of  course  not  When  Julius  CaBsar  came  to
Britain,  he  found  its  natives  a  long  way  behind,
or  beneath,  the  refined  and  polished  status  of  his
own  nation.  And  had  Alexander  the  Great  visited
Ireland,  i.e.,  come  from  further  east  to  still  remoter
west,  how  many  grades  of  civilization  would  he

K


146  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.       [ch.  17.

not  have  discovered  amongst  all  the  several  nations
and  tribes^ — barbarians  all,  in  the  language  of  the
Greeks, — that  lay  between.

No  reason  is  there  then, — that  in  the  still  earlier
days  of  the  Egyptian  Pyramid-builders, — ^men  in
Ireland,  if  in  truth  Ireland  was  then  peopled
at  all,  should  have  been  as  fax  advanced  in  civi-
lization as  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.
When  builders  at  Noph,  were  using  iron  tools,—-
bronze  was  still  in  vogue  in  Syria  and  Asia
Blinor ;  Greece  was  probably  in  the  stone  age  of
Eastern  backwoodsmen  discoverers;  and  no  Aryan,
pre-Celtic,  or  even  Cymbric  wave  of  population
was  likely  to  have  yet  made  settlements  on
Ireland's  fertile  shore.

Zd.

'  It  is  asserted  Uiat  the  tattooing  style  of  the  ornaments  on
'  some  of  the  stones  at  New  Grange,  and  put  on  divers  of  them
'  hefore  they  were  fixed  in  their  present  sitoations, — is  of
'  that  mde,  roHgh,  primitive  or  archaic  type,  which  justifies  a
'  reference  to  times,  only  describable  by  geological  changes,
'  dimly  shadowing  forth  to  astonished  historians  whole  myriads
'  of  untold  years.'

That  some  of  the  said  ornamentations  are  in-
deed symptomatic  of  as  idle,  thoughtiess  and
barbarous  natures  as  man  is  ever  known  to  have


CE.  17.]  Questioned  for  Age.  147

exhibited  in  all  the  melancholy  chronicles  of
human  oavagedom, — is  likely  enough;  but  that
they  are  therefore,  and  without  further  proof,  to
be  considered  pre-eminently  archaic,  and  as  if
man  were  then  raising  himself  by  his  own  un-
aided efforts  at  the  beginning  of  all  things,  out  of
a  mere  bestial  and  uninspired  condition ; — ia  not
a  necessary  conclusion  at  alL  Such  an  idea  is
lather,  only  the  wilful  prejudice  merely  of  those,
who  like  to  deny  that  a  Divine  inspiration  of  man,
as  related  in  the  second  chapter  of  Genesis,  ever
took  place ;  and  who  prefer  to  believe  in  spontane-
ous development,  natural  selection,  the  straggle
fot  life,  and  some  other  similar  animal  principles.
In  any  case  almost,  of  savage-like  traces  of
man's  handiwork,  executed  in  unknown  •  ages  or
circumstances,  being  alighted  upon, — two  hypo-
theses  seem  equaUy  worthy  of  being  tried,  to  ex-
plain  them  :  first,  if  modem  men  wiU,  that  they
"were  the  doing  of  archaic  tribes,  the  progenitors  of
subsequently  civilized  nations ;  and  second,  that
they  were  produced  by  the  posterity  of  once  civi-
lized people,  but  long  since  ruined  by  war,  or
famine,  and  degraded  by  unfortunate  emigrations,
or  idolatry  and  sin.


148  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.      [ch.  17.

The  fiost  of  these  hypoUieses  is  the  fiivonrite
generally  with  most  of  our  titled  anthoia  Their
present  coontiy  has  been  on  ti^  whole  r^olarly
improving  in  civilizalion  and  advancing  in  wealthy
power,  and  importance,  doling  the  last  thousand
jeais  at  least ;  and  they  themselves  are  the  latest
and  most  distinguished  expression  of  the  fact.

But  if  some  nations  are  going  up,  others  are
coming  down,  in  the  world.  For  where  are  now
the  merchant  princes  of  Tjnre ; — ^where  the  strong
monarchies^  and  industrious,  warlike,  and  building,
populations  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon?  Where
are  the  once  intellectual  inhabitants  of  Asia
Minor;  where  are  vanished  the  virtues  and  the
genius  of  the  Greeks ;  and  more  particularly,
what  has  become  of  the  practical  arte,  as  well  as
the  wisdom,  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  ?

8ir  John  Lubbock,  speaking  for  the  archseo-
logists,^  declares  that  man  can  never  lose  any-
thing useful  he  has  once  discovered;  his  pro-
gress must  therefore  be  continuous,  like  winding
at  a  ratchet-wheel ;  that  the  most  advanced  state
anywhere,  is  therefore  the  latest,— and  the  earliest
condition  of  men  must  have  been  as  low,  if  not

*  PrehitUnic  TitMS,  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  p.  476.


CH.  17J  Questioned  for  Age.  149

lower,  than  the  veiy  lowest  state  of  existing
savagedom  in  any  land  whatever.^

Yet  were  he  to  make  a  careful  survey  of  Egyp-
tian monuments  from  the  earliest  known  times  to
the  present^ — it  would  be  found  a  history  of  con-
tinued degradation  in  artistic  excellence,  from  a
high  original  status  of  exact  masonry,  truthful
drawing,  majestic  sculpture ;  until  now,  the  de-
scendants  of  the  same  men  can  do  little  more
than  build  mud  huts,  and  daub  over  the  lintel  of
the  doors  some  execrable  coloured  ornaments,  or
ridiculous  imitations  of  a  railway-train  of  chil-
dren's trucks,  with  a  black-faced  man  holding  out
a  red  flag.  And  the  melancholy  thing  is,  that
these  latter-day  representatives  of  the  old  Egyp-
tians, think  these  infantine  performances  of  theirs
are  splendid.

These  unhappy  men,  then,  have,  without  doubt,
lost  an  infinity  of  things  which  their  fathers
knew ;  and,  in  a  second  childhood,  are  far  weaker
than  their  fathers  are  ever  known  to  have  been
in  their  first  historical  birth.

Are  then  the  idle,  scrawling,  curving  lines,  rings,
and  holes  so  abundantly  engraved  on  the  stones

^  Prehistoric  Times,  by  Sir  John  Lubbock ;  concluding  chapter.


1 5  0  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.       [ch.  1 7.

at  New  6ran£[e,  and  other  British  and  Irish  mega-
Uthio  erJtiZ-a»  work  of  man  in  his  fb^  or
-second,  state  of  childishness  ?

Asserts  Sir  J.  T.  Simpson,'— in  a  book  upon
the  ring  and  spiral  cuttings  in  Scotland,  Ireland,
and  France,  chiefly  : —

'  From  the  very  earliest  historical  periods  in  the  arohitec-
'  tare  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Qreece,  etc.,  down  to  our  own  day,
^  circles,  single  or  doable,  and  spirals,  have  formed,  onder
^  varioas  modifications,  perhaps  the  most  common  fundamental
'  types  of  lapidary  decorations.'

But  answers  thereto  William  Osbum,  specially
for  Egypt,  the  first  of  the  countries  mentioned,
and  for  whatever  formed  the  examples  of  archi-
tecture there  in  its  very  primal  historic  period : —

'  The  earliest  monaments  in  Egypt  are,  in  point  of  drawing,
'  the  best.  It  is  the  same  in  Nineveh  and  Babylon,  as  Layard
^  and  Rawlinson  have  repeatedly  told  me.    Whereas,  concen-

*  trie  circles,  spirals,  and  other  geometrical  figures,  are  the
'  last  expiring  efforts  at  lapidary  ornamentation  among  de-
'  graded  hordes  of  mankind,  just  before  their  lapse  into  utter

*  barbarism.  No  such  occur  on  any  of  the  most  ancient
'  Egyptian  monuments  with  which  I  am  acquainted.'

But  this  most  mature  and  well-considered
judgment,  is  confusion  indeed  to  those  archaeolo-
gists,— ^who  would  hold  that  the  New  Grange,  and
other  similar,  stone  ornaments  were  engraved,  not

^  Archak  Scidpturings^  p.  115.


GH.  1 7.]  Questioned  for  Age.  151

onlj  long  before  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt  had
been  thought  about,  but  ages  also  before  the  crea-
tion of  Adam*  Yet  Mr.  Osbum  firmly  implies,
£rom  large  Eastern  experience,  that  those  scrawls
are  not  ancient  at  all ;  but^are  more  probably  the
work  of  the  second  and  worse  childhood  of  men,
long  c^er  the  Egjrptian  Pjrramidal  day.

Up  therefore  once  again  rises  the  champion  of
North  Eiuropean  antiquity,  to  prove  the  perfect
truth  of  the  specially  doubted  part  of  his  former
assertion ;  or,  that  the  architectural  monuments  of
the  very  earliest  historic  periods  of  Egypt, — are
decorated  with  'circles  single  or  doubly  and
spirals:'  such  things,  according  to  him,  forming,

*  under  various  modifications,  perhaps  the  most

*  common  fundamental  types  of  their  lapidary

*  decoration.'  ^

The  question  is  evidently  a  momentous  one  for
some  archaeological  theories  of  New  Grange.  Be-
cause, under  our  searching,  but  we  hope  impartial,
examination,  that  monument  has  lost  every  ves-
tige of  the  high  intellectuality  once  claimed  for  it.
Its  two  first  assertions  of  high,  overweening,  and
ante-BibUcal  antiquity  have  already  gone  by  the

*  Royal  Society,  Edmbnrgh,  January  6,  1868,  and  Appendix  3.


152  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.       [cfl,  17.

board,  and  now  the  third  and  last  is  hanging  only
by  a  thread.

The  archsaologically-leained  Baronet,  therefore,
had  his  friends  haoging  breathlessly  on  his  words,
when  he  propounded,  at  the  Boyal  Society  of
Edinburgh,  on  January  6,  1868 —

'  that  at  the  Northern  Pyramid  of  Dashoor,  as  described
'  by  Howard  Yyse  and  Perring,  the  stones  of  which  that
'  monnment  is  composed,  haye  abundance  of  concentric  circles
'  as  ornaments ;  proving  the  case  therefore  for  times,  not  the
'  yery  earliest,  bat  still  considerably  early,  of  Egyptian  archi-
<  tectnre ; '  and  a  drawing  of  concentric  circles  on  one  frag-
ment of  a  stone,  was  handed  round  the  meeting.

'Bat  his  second  case,'  the  eminent  speaker  considered,
'  would  be  allowed  by  all  the  members  of  the  Royal  Society,'
before  whom  he  read  it,  '  to  be  quite  unanswerable,  and  eyen
'  for  the  very  earliest  Egyptian  known  example ;  for  it  was  the
*  account  given  by  Professor  Piaod  Smyth  in  the  first  volume
'  of  his  Zjtfe  and  Work  at  the  Cheat  Pyramid,  of  two  concentric
'  circles  or  semicircles  on  the  granite  leaf  of  the  antechamber
'  to  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid ;  such  admirable
'  concentric  figures  too,  as  gave  that  building  over  at  once  to
'  the  archsoologists  of  rings,  and  spiral  markings.'

And  he.  Sir  J.  T.  Simpson,  added,  that  he  seized  the  Great
Pyramid  immediately,  as  his  own  peculiar  possession,  the
moment  he  saw  them.*


^  The  newB^Miper  report  of  this  address,  which  occupied  its  able
author  nearly  half  an  hour  in  delivering, — is  so  exceedingly  short,
and  no  other  having  i^peared, — I  am  obliged  to  trust  to  my  memory
for  what  I  heard,  and  saw  on  the  occasion ;  but  a  very  impressive
occasion,  not  soon  to  be  foigotten  by  any  one,  aud  least  of  all  by
myseli^  when  beholding  my  own  book  perverted  to  such  a  use.


GH.  1 7  J  Questioned  for  Age.  153

The  answer  to  the  first  case  is, — ^that  tlie  stones
alluded  to,  formed  no  part  of  the  north  Pyramid
of  Dashoor  itself,  which  is  a  brick  Pjrramid, — ^but
of  the  propylcBon  in  £ront  of  one  side  of  it,  and  a
very  diflFerent  sort  of  building  indeed;  probably
not  earlier  than  the  15th  dynasty,  or  1900  KO.,
and  perhaps  vastly  later.  While  as  to  the  con-
centric circles  found  on  a  portion  of  one  of  these
stones^  tliey  are  not  put  in,  as  are  those  at  New
Change,  purely  as  such  and  by  themselves,  but  as
mtegral  parte  of  an  artistic  design,  representing  a
natural  object.^  The  design  there,  is  the  very
frequent  one  of  early  Egyptian  decoration, — ^viz.,
a  series  of  little  pillars  or  posts  of  a  balustrade,
formed  out  of  the  stems  of  some  reedy  water-
plants,  tied  together  at  intervals  of  their  length,
and  with  the  flowering  head  of  the  plant  plucked
off,  and  stuck  with  its  stalk  through  part  of  the
vertical  bundle,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  present
the  said  flowering  head,  end  on  to  the  spectator ;
and  very  effectively  then  designed  or  indicated

^  The  case  in  qaestion  may  be  seen  as  one  of  eight  figs.,  on  a  plate
without  number,  but  entitled  '  North  Brick  Pyramid  of  Dashoor,*
opposite  to  p.  63,  and  described  at  p.  72,  of  toL  iiL  of  Colonel  Vyse's
Pyramids  of  Oizeh.  It  was  a  copy  of  said  figure,  out  of  said  plate,
which  was  handed  about  among  the  members  of  the  Royal  Society,
Edinburgh,  on  the  above  occasion.


154  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.       [ch.  1 V.

in  line  drawing,  by  two  or  three  concentric  (urdea.
But  these  little  circles  ore  no  more  put  in  for
themselves  and  bj  themselves  alone,  than  are  the
two  concentric  circles  of  the  human  eye,  in  every
modem  portrait-painter's  representation  of  the
'  human  face  divine/

And  the  answer  to  the  second  case  is, — ^that  a
drawing,  numerical  measures,  and  description  of
the  supposed  discovery  of  Sir  James  T.  Simpson,
on  the  granite  leaf  of  the  Great  Pjrramid,  are
given  in  the  second  volume  of  Life  and  Work
at  the  Great  Pyramiidy  p.  96-100 ;  showing  that
there  are  no  concentric,  or  any  engraved,  circles ;
but,  an  anomalous,  smooth,  semi-oval,  raised  patch,
seven  inches  wide,  seven  inches  high,  one  inch
thick,  terminated  rectangularly  and  rectilinearly
below,  but  bevelled  and  curved  at  top  and  sides.
A  very  peculiar-looking  affair  no  doubt,  something
mysterious  even,  and  possibly  carved  in  situ  at
a  later  time ; — but  totally  unable  to  furnish  the
whole  twenty-one  acres  of  the  Great  Pyramid's
weU-dressed  original  stone  surface,  witii  enough
of  engraved  circles,  'single  or  double,  and  spirals,
'  to  form  perhaps  the  most  common  fundamental
'  type  of  its  lapidary  decoration.'


€H.  17.]  Questioned  for  Age.  155

In  fiact^  one  has  to  wander  down,  down  in  his-
tory, through  the  long  past  Pjrramid  monumental
ages  of  Egypt,  imtil  one  arrives  at  the  more  re-
cent barbarous  and  debased  Ethiopian  structures
of  Meroe, — ^before  anything  like  little  circles,  put
in  for  apparently  nothing  but  idle  ornament,  can
be  discovered.  Fourteen  hundred  years  of  con-
tinued degradation,  dropped  out  all  the  science
and  most  of  the  art ;  and  at  length  allowed  mere
circle  ornaments  to  crop  forth  on  the  architec-
ture of  the  banks  of  that  Nile,  whose  earlier
years  had  witnessed  the  glories  of  the  old  Em-
pire, in  the  act,  or  course,  of  formation  and
erection,  by  the  hands  of  the  first  Pyramid
builders.

And  it  may  be,  who  knows,  that  a  somewhat
similar  period  of  deterioration  occurred  amongst
some  tribes  of  the  first  circular  builders ;  who,
fljring  before  their  enemies,  contending  with
want  and  hunger,  heat  and  cold,  in  their  con-
tinually western  migration, — at  last  reached  the
shores  of  Ireland,  some  very  few  centuries  be-
fore the  Christian  era; — and  both  scrawled  on,
and  prepared,  pillar  stones — of  which  some  were
afterwards  used  by  the  Tuatha  de  Danaan,  in


156  The  Pyramids  of  Europe.       [ch.  17.

making  up  their  great  burial  mound  of  Brugh,^
now  known  as  New  Grange.

Sculptured  scrawls,  however,  axe  these,  which
present  no  memorials  of  artistic  glory ;  form  no
grounds  for  boasting  of  the  intellect,  or  wealth,
or^  powerful  industry,  or  warlike  renown  of  Ire-
land in  archaeological  days ;  but  rather  mark  the
lowest  and  darkest  point  to  which  the  race  that
made  them,  ever  descended.  A  dismal  depth
indeed,  of  misery,  ignorance,  and  woe,  which
had  reached  its  extremest  grade  of  calamity,  when
the  races  which  bore  it,  arrived  in  that  Island  of
the  West,  destined  of  old  to  be  their  asylum ;
and  in  which,  under  the  blessing  of  Providence,
they  have  been  ever  since,  slowly  but  steadily,
and  we  trust  will  long  continue  to  be  surely,
emerging.  Emerging  too,  towards  far  happier
days  and  prosperous  times  than  Ireland  has  ever
known  yet,  or  than  it  has  entered  into  the  minds
of  the  warmest  of  her  patriots  to  conceive.

^  '  The  nobles  of  the  Taatha  de  Danaan  were  used  to  bury  at
Bmgh.' — ^fVom  the  Senchas-na-Keleo,  or  History  of  the  Cemeteries,
contained  in  the  Leabhar-na-h-Uidhre,  a  work  compiled  in  the  tenth
oentnry  a.d.     BeautUa  of  the  Boyne,  by  Sir  W.  Wilde,  pp.  184,  187.

For  farther  Plates  of  New  Grange  and  its  congeners,  see  Mr.  St.
John  Vincent  Day's  Oreat  PyranUd  paper  before  the  Philosophical
Society  of  Glasgow,  February  1868.


CH.  1 8.]  Egyptian  Potsherds.  157


ARCH^OLOGICAL    D kJ k-conHnued.


CHAPTER  18.


EGYPTIAN    POTSHERDS.


After  having  fared  so  badly,  i.6.,  gathered  so
little^  in  oiu:  search  after  high  intellectual  anti-
quity in  the  north  and  west, — ^it  may  be  prudent
to  return  to  some  of  the  Biblical  regions  of  early
civilization  in  the  south  and  the  east

To  Egypt  then,  once  more  we  direct  our  atten-
tion ;  for,  even  there,  has  modem  archaeological
science  found  something  new,  and  nearly  incre-
dible as  well  as  new,  to  assert

A  few  years  before  his  death,  the  late  highly
respected  Mr.  Leonard  Homer  prevailed  both  on
the  Eoyal  Society  of  London,  and  the  then  Vice-
roy of  Egypt,  to  have  certain  borings  performed
in  the  alluvial  soil  of  the  land  on  either  side  of
the  Nile.  This  was  done ;  and  at  divers  depths
of  many  feet,  say  60,  or  70,  or  any  other  number,


168  Egyptian  Potsherds.  [ch.  18*

burnt  bricks  and  pottery  were  found.  Then,  on
the  assumption  that  the  alluvial  soil  increases  by
surface  additions  of  fine  mud  derived  from  every
annual  inundation, — at  the  rate  of,  say  3  inches,
or  6  inches,  or  otherwise,  per  century, — ^the  dates
at  which  these  fragments  were  deposited  on  the
then  surface  of  the  ground,  is  computed  to  be
16,000,  or  28,000,  or  almost  any  other  large  num-
ber of  years  ago.

This  conclusion  has  been  attacked  by  several
writers  as  faulty,-

1st,  Because  irrigation  wells  being  frequent  in
every  field  of  Egypt ;  occasionally  falling  into
ruin,  and  then  filled  up,  while  new  ones  are
opened  elsewhere, — broken  pottery  may  easily
have  fallen  into  them  when  open,  and  thus  be
found  now,  far  below  the  once  historic  and  cour
temporary  surface  of  the  ground.

2d.  The  Nile  having  frequently  changed  its
course  in  the  vaUey,  silting  up  rapidly  in  flood-
time  its  old  channels, — ^has  easily  thus  placed
many  things  at  unnaturally  low  levels.

3d,  The  burnt  bricks  frequently  brought  up  in
the  borings,  are  considered  by  Egyptologists  to  be
much  oftener  Boman^  than  Egyptian.    And,


CEL 18.]  Egyptian  Potsherds.  159

4<Aw  Some  workmen  have  large  proclivities,  over-
Beers  relate,  when  not  particularly  well  looked
after,  for  astonishing  their  highly  educated  em-
ployers^ by  what  they  make  the  machinery  under
their  charge  bring  up  from  an  unknown  depth  to
the  light  of  day.  Whence,  almost  in  anticipation
of  the  care  that  shoidd  have  been  exerted  in  these
recent  Egyptian  borings, — Colonel  Howard  Vyse
thus  relates  in  his  Pyramid  book,  voL  i.  p.  232,
his  experiences  in  Italy, —

'When  I  was  employed  in  1832,  in  an  ezcaTation  at
'  BoBco  Tre  Case,  near  Mount  Yesavius,  the  same  piece  of
*  broken  pottery  was  brought  up  from  a  shaft  five  successive
'  times,  by  way  of  an  inducement  to  go  on  with  the  work.'

To  this  series  of  objections  may  also  be  added,
— ^that  the  whole  geological  principle  involved,  is
wrong  in  its  foundation ;  for,  while  it  assumes  that
the  pottery  or  bricks  as  found  now,  are  still  in
the  very  same  stratum  of  soil  where  they  were
originally  deposited — popular  experience  or  belief
tells,  that  any  large  lumps  of  matter,  sink  through
the  alluvial  soil  of  Egypt,  when  well  wetted  and
stirred  up  by  the  inimdation,  as  though  it  were  a
quicksand.

This  peculiar  effect  seems  to  arise  mainly,  in


160  Egyptian  Potsherds.  [ch.  1 8.

consequence  of  the  extravagantly  fine  or  minute
nature  of  the  atoms  composing  the  said  alluvial
mud ;  proverbially  black,  because  so  minute  in  its
particles.  Small  enough  indeed  are  these  to  float
in  the  air  as  vapour;  and  therefore  excessively
movable  by,  and  disinclined  to  settle  in,  the
denser  medium  of  water.  But  a  big  fragment  of
a  potsherd,  or  anything  in  tie  shape  of  a  brick-
bat,  of  course  sinks  down  through  the  sludgy
medium  when  it  is  acting  more  like  a  fluid  than
a  portion  of  solid  earth.^  Hence  the  depth  at
which  a  brick  is  now  found  under  the  surface  of
the  ground  in  Egypt,  is  much  rather  the  effect  of
its  sinking  in  a  few  years,  through  an  impalpably
fine  rae^L  duAedwiti.  water  L  «veral  M^tli
every  year, — rather  than  because  a  civilized  nation
lived  on  that  spot,  20,000  years  before  the  touching
story  of  Joseph  had  been  enacted  under  the  sun.

The  Egyptian  potsherds,  then,  of  Mr.  Leonard
Homer,  though  duly  brought  up  in   a   recent

^  See  in  Dr.  Clarke's  TravelB,  his  account,  in  the  voyage  from  Acre
to  Alexandria,  of  how  the  mud  of  the  Nile  is  occasionally  heaped
up  almost  to  the  surface  of  the  sea  by  chance  combination  of
currents,  forming  apparent  rather*  than  real,  shoals ;  for  a  ship^
he  says,  striking  on  one  of  them,  even  out  of  sight  of  land,  is  never
wrecked,  or  even  stuck  f ast^  so  extremely  light  and  mobile  is  that
mud  material


CE.  18.]  Eg^ian  PoUherds.


161


•

lectuie  bj  Mr.  Huxley  at  Sion  College,  in  aigu-
ing  confessedly  and  boldly  for  immense  anti-
Biblical  periods  of  dvilization  in  Egypt, — are  of
rather  less  support,  than  Egypt's  broken  reed,  of
eld,  to  lean  upon  for  any  of  these  purposes.


162  Bgypticin  Date  JfuUipUer.       [ch.  19.


ARCH>EOLOGICAL  DATA-cantinued.


CHAPTER  19.

SOYFTIAK  DATE  MULTIPLIEB.

Wbites  the  eminent  Sir  Charles  Lyell,  in  the
third  edition  of  his  Antiquity  of  Man,  p.  383 —

<  In  the  temples '  (of  Thebes) '  are  fbnnd  pictorial  repreaenta-
'  tiona  of  batdes  and  sieges,  processions  in  which  trophies  are
'  carried  and  prisoners  led  captive ;  and  if  it  be  tme,  as
'  Sir  O.  C.  Lewis  contends,  that  throughout  the  historical
'  period  the  Egyptians  were  a  peaceful  and  never  a  conquering
'  people,  the  wars  to  which  these  monuments  would  then  refer
<  must  be  so  ancient  as  to  confer  on  the  Egyptians  &r  higher
'  claims  to  antiquity  than  those  advanced  by  Bunsen  and
'  Lepsius/

An  extraordinary  paragraph;  for,  beginning
with  the  Theban  temples,  which  Egyptologists
seldom  put  higher  than,  if  so  high  as,  1800  B.C. —
a  fecile  under-current  of  argument  is  indulged  in.
which  presently  makes  those  buildings  witness
to  Egyptian  military  government,  and  highly
iivrought    civilization   having   lasted    something


CH.  19.3       Bgyptian  Date  Multiplier.  163

mot6  ihiuti  lOyOOO  jeaiB.  Such  a  rapid  mode  of
getting  tip  an  enormous  antiquity,  which  may
then  be  quoted  in  subsequent  discussions  against
Biblical  students  trith  a  bewildering  effect^  is
worth-while  to  look  into,  if  only  to  ascertain  how
it  is  aecompHshed.

•The  coitltnencement,  as  akeady  mentioned,  is
made  with  tfaeHieban  temples;  whose  dates  are
moderiate,  their  existence  certain,  their  preserva-
tion adttiirable,  and  their  walls  so  abundantly
eorered  with  sculptures  and  long  inscriptions —
called  by  M.  Renan,  the  Government  Gazette  of
the  time,-^1hat  they  tell  whatever  tales  they  do
tell  (viz;,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  the  contempo*-
rary  doings  of  King  Rhamses  the  Great,  in  1400
B.c.);'^almo6t  as  clearly,— as  did  the  London  news-
papers of  their  day,  tihe  events  of  the  Crimean  War.

But  then  Sir  C.  Lyell  ignores  the  interpretation
of  these  Theban  inscriptions  by  every  Egyptolo-
gist ;  takes  the  scidpture  part  only,  as  represent-
ing a  war,  or  some  war, — and  prefers  to  trust
for  ascertaining  what  war,  to  a  man  who  hated,
despised,  and  misrepresented  the  Egyptians;
mainly  too  because,  while  he  knew  next  to  nothing
of  them,  he  had  read  up  deeply  and  ardently


164  Egyptian  Date  Multiplier.       [ch.  19.

about  the  Oreeks,  and  blinded  himself  with  their
selfish  pride  and  ethnic  conceit  This  man  is
no  other  than  the  late  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  whom  we
have  alreadyshown  to  be  asortof  anti-Newtonian
kind  of  genius  amongst  philosophers,  in  his
Egyptian  dates.  He  then,  Sir  G.  0.  Lewis^  simply
writes  to  the  effect  of  the  Egyptians  having
always  been,  during  the  historic  period,  a  charac-
teristically peaceful  people;  and  immediately
thereon.  Sir  C.  Lyell  (quite  regardless  of  the
wars  both  to  the  north-east  and  south  of  Egypt;
which  national  etiquette  expected  every  new
Egyptian  sovereign  to  wage),— declares  that,  if
Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  is  right  in  stating  the  all-peace
characteristic  of  Egypt  throughout  its  historic
days^ — ^the  wars  shown  in  the  sculptures  of  the
temples  at  Thebes,  must  have  been  pre-Historic  !
So  far,  however  good, — ^as  to  the  strict^  me-
chanical inference,  to  be  drawn  from  the  approxi-
mate dictum  of  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  quite  wrongly
assumed  to  be  absolutely  true.  And  if  Sir  0.
Lyell  had  only  been  content  to  take  his  date  for
the  begirming  of  such  Egyptian  History  of  Sir
0.  C.  LevnSf  £rom  the  same  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis
himself, — no  very  serious  error  in  time  would


OH.  1 9.]       Egyptian  Date  Multiplier.  165

have  occurred.  For,  he  would  then  merely  have
implied,  that  the  wars  described  on  the  Theban
Temples, — ^being  prehistoric  for  the  Egypt  of  Sir
Q.  C.  Lewis^ — ^must  have  taken  place  somewhere
before  1500  B.C. ;  that  being  nearly  the  date,
wherein  that  eminent  classic  scholar  places  the
beginning  of  Egypt's  historical  period.

Unfortunately,  however,  at  that  most  critical
point  of  his  argument.  Sir  C.  Lyell  suddenly
changes  his  Philo-Hellenic  reference  Lewis, — ^for
those  two  thorough-paced  Egyptologists,  *  Bunsen
and  Lepsius;'  of  whom  Bimsen  claims  for  the
antiquity  of  Egypt's  historic  and  civilized  begin-
nin^  something  more  than  10,000  years  B.c.  The
Egyptian  moderate  peacefulness  then,  first  seen
through  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis,  being  next  transferred
to,  and  made  to  over-ride  absolutely,  Bunsen's  long
chronology,  as  it  had  before  done  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis's
short  system, — is,  by  that  one  act  of  the  pen,
made  to  begin  8500  years  earlier  than  it  would
have  done,  by  means  of  Sir  G.  C.  Lewis  alone.

Hoping  that  this  is  not  a  general  date-method
among  geologists, — we  now  pass  on  to  a  distincter
literary  assertion  of  some  other  very  long-Uved
glories  of  royal  Egyptian  history.


]iS«


Mjggltimk  Vj


[ex.  30.


ARCH^OLOGICAL


CHAPTER  20.


Is  the  coone  of  a  p^xz^  leid  last  wimmer
before  the  Irtish  ABBocutkm  mt  Dundee,  its
refiowned  author  (Mr.  Crawfbid,  Presideiit  of  the
EthniJogical  Socie^  of  London),  adduced,  among
oUier  arguments  for  the  imTnAimft  antiquity  of
man, — both  some  aUusions  to  the  Pyramids  of
Egypt ;  and,  more  particularlj,  a  statement  to  the
effect  of  the  first  series  of  'dynastic  writers'
(newsfiapcr  report)  having  lived  and  flourished
on  the  bonks  of  the  Nile,  at  a  date  of  8976  B.C.

On  inquiring,  by  letter,  his  authority  for  the
assertion, — I  was  frankly  referred  by  Mr.  Craw-
furd  to  M.  Lesueur's  Chronology  of  the  Kings  of
Egyj)t ;  and  on  procuring  that  handsome  quarto
book| — published  in  Paris  in  1848,  and  as  a  prize


GH.  80.]     Egyptian  Written  History.  167

essay  that  had  been  crowned  by  the  Academy  of
Inscriptions  and  BeUes-Lettres  of  the  Institute  of
France^i^-bebold  Mr.  Orawford,  in  so  far^  com-
pletely justified  For,  in  tihte  broad  pages  of  M.
Lesaeur,  you  may  read  the  names  of  kings,  ruling
for  thousands  ofiy^ars  with  that  complex  and
hi^y  orgjanized  duplex  stylii  of  govemment,  of
Upper  and  Lower  Egypt ;  and  3^01!  may  also  make
yourself  acquainted  with  their  hierogljrphic  signa-
turefif,  and  the  .exact  lengths  of  their  reigns— ^ven
to  the  minutiae  of  odd  months  and  days  as  weQ
as  years,-and  this,  for  all  the  mighty  period  be-
ginning  with  11,504  years  b.c.,  and  ending  with
Alexander  the  Great,  in  the  year  382  B.O.

Now,  inasmuch  as  this  grand  result  for  proving
a  long  established  Egyptian  goverimient  and  his-
tory, is  brought  out  with  due  form  and  multitude
of  plates  and  woodcuts  in  a  first-class  prize  essay,
written  to  the  express  requirements  of — ^A
'  critical  examinoUion  of  the  Egyptian  Dynasties,
'  after  historical  texts  and  the  national  monu-
'  ments.'

And  as  this  statement  of  the  theme  is  further
intensified  and  pointed  with  puipoae,  by  the  addi-
tion  to  it  of  that  most  effective  phrase  of  the


168  Sgypttan  Written  History,     [ch.  20.

French  poet,  so  truly  descriptive  of  mighty  and
Egyptian-like  monuments  of  stone, —

'  Lenr  masse  indeetraotible  a  fatigai  le  temps/

— seeing  all  these  allusions  to  monuments, — I  did
expect  that  the  several  main  points  at  least,  of
that  long  series  of  chronological  records  would  be
founded  on,  or  referred  to,  something  or  other
made  oi^  or  cut  into,  enduring  stone.  Yet  after
looking  the  book  through  from  one  end  to  the
other,  what  has  not  been  my  utter  surprise  to
find,  that  there  is  not  a  single  contemporary
monument  cited  for  all  the  earlier  7000  years  of
that  astonishing  series  of  Egyptian  kings.

Nor  does  M.  Lesueur  pretend  that  he  has  any
such  monuments.  He  states  perfectly  fairly,
loyally  and  truly,  that  the  earliest  monuments  he
can  quote  are,  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh  and
its  adjacent  tombs;  while  for  the  7000  years
previous  to  them,  he  has  nothing  but  some
wretched  fragments  of  MSS. ;  or  scraps  of  Manetho,
and  the  so-called  Turin  papjnrus,^  written  and  in-

^  The  foUowing  interesting  particolara  are  from  a  ms.  by  William
Osborn,  anther  of  The  Monumental  History  of  Egypt,

'  As  to  yonr  question.  What  was  the  date  of  the  original  writing
'  of  the  Turin  papyrus  ? — ^I  answer,  as  to  the  existing  oopy  at  Turin,
'  very  late  indeed ;  oeztainly  not  before  our  A.D.  50 ;  probably  a
'  oentnxy  later.    (A  German  has  found  the  name  of  Ckriti  in  more


OH.  20.]      Egyptian  Written  History.  169

dited  bjr  not  very  honest  or  able  scribes  some
9000  years  after  many  of  the  events  they  pre-
sume to  describe.

In  £eu^  there  is  no  authority,  that  we  can  for
one  moment  give  credence  to  (under  our  settled
principles  in  this  book  of  referring  to  contempo-
rary records), — ^for  all  that  grand  account  of
Egyptian  government  and  political  economy  pre-
vailing through  a  mjrriad  of  years ;  though  it  was
all  laid  off  as  fact  before  the  British  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science.  We  may  per-
haps thank  M.  Lesueur  for  his  toilsome  literary
labours  in  collecting  tales  that  were  old  to  him,
though  infinitely  young  compared  to  the  times
they  ambitioned  to  speak  of; — but,  in  accordance

'  tluui  one  of  the  later  clmpten.)  I  said  this  at  Turin  twenty  yean
'  ago,  when  I  saw  the  original  I  repeat  it  after  more  than  fifteen
'  years'  study  of  Lepidus's  very  exact  copy.  The  writers  were  the
'  itinerating  Egyptian  priests,  mentioned  by  Petronius  Arbiter,  who
'  trayersed  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  Roman  Empire  with  ass-
'  loads  of  images,  spells,  periapts,  and  other  gewgaws,  which  they
'  sold  in  the  several  cities  they  visited  at  remunerative  prices  !  The
'  man  who  was  so  befooled  as  to  pay  the  king's  ransom  they  would
'  doubtless  demand  for  120  feet  of  pap3mis,  was  one  of  their  con-
'  verts  or  perverts,  whom  they  had  persuaded  to  leave  the  pleasant
'  city  in  Asia  Minor,  in  which  he  was  bom,  and  remove  to  Thebes,
'  in  order  that  he  might  have  his  gods  about  him.  Petronius  men-
'  tions  this  as  a  case  often  oocunring  in  his  times.  The  Temple  of
'  1818  at  Pompeii,  the  obelisk  at  Beneventum,  and  the  many  pseudo-
'  Egyptian  antiques  at  Bome,  were  all  the  works  of  these  vagabond
•  priests.'    1868  A.D.


170  Egyptian  Written  Eiitory.     [cH.  20.

with  the  contemporary  method  of  inquiiy,  we
must  wipe  out  unsparingly  from  the  proved  his-
tory of  the  world,  all  the  names  of  all  his  races  of
kings  from  11,504  B.a,  down  to  a  few  centuries,
or  years,  preceding  the  Great  Pyramid.

A  whdesale  murder,  some  may  insinuate,  but
not  of  the  innocents ;— for  even  their  best  friends
make  out  all  those  kings  to  have  been,  if  they
ever  existed,  idolaters  through  the  whole  period.


Latest  Excavations.

'But  does  every  one  agree  with  you,'  many
earnest  friends  may  ask,  'in  saying  that  there
'  are  no  monuments  in  Egypt  earlier  than  the
'  Great  Pyramid  ?  Was  not  that  building  erected
'  under  kings  of  the  4th  dynasty  ?  Surely  then
'  there  must  have  been  three  dynasties  previous,
'  without  going  to  all  those  other  tribes  of  pre-
'  vious  kings  contained  in  Lesueur  V

The  question  looks  specious.  There  otight  to
be  the  monumental  remains  of  three  previous
dynasties  lasting  for  about  as  many  centuries,^

^  Certmin  Pyramids  near  Sakkara  are  by  some  authors  attached
to  the  2d  and  dd  dynasties  but  Lepsins  in  his  DetUanaeUr  classes


GH.  20.]  Latest  Excavations.  171

if  l^gyptiaii  hifitoiy  really  began  with  the  first
long  of  that  series  of  Manetho's  dynasties^  named
Menes;  and  the  archaeological  world  has  long
been  looking  forward  with  extraordinary  avidity,
to  hail  the  discovery  of  some  contemporary  monu-
ment of  that  greatest  name  in  early  Mizraite
story.  M.  Kenan  too  says^  ^  that  he  has  no  doubt
but  that  such  remains  will  be  found  /  and  Mari-
ette  Bey,  the  present  'Minister  of  Monuments'
in  Egypt,  states  in  his  lately  published  Catalogue
of  the  Museum  at  Boolak,  that  his  excavators
are  digging  at  a  certain  spot  between  Jeezeh
and  Sakkara^  in  order  ^to  make  to  appear  the
statue  of  Menes.'  But  it  has  not  yet  come  to
light

A  startling  discovery  of  another  kind  has
indeed  been  announced,  to  the  effect,  that  an
engraved  tablet  has  been  found  on  the  Pyramid
hiU, — setting  forth  how  King  Shofo,  Suphis,  or
Cheops  of  the  Great  Pyramid, — ^had,  amongst

them  as  of  the  5th  and  6th ;  and  begins  aU  his  magnificent  collec-
tion of  detailed,  and  chronologically  arranged,  plates  of  Egyptian
documents,  with  the  qnarry-marka  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid.

More  strikingly  still,  in  his  published  LeUera  from  Egypt^ — ^he
testified  that  he  has  found  nothing  yet,  earlier  than  the  Great  Pyra-
mid ;  and  that  that  monument  must  therefore  form  the  beginning
of  history,  not  only  for  Egypti  but  for  all  the  world.  •


172  Egyptian  Written  History,      [ch.  20.

many  other  public  works, '  repaired  the  figure  of
the  Great  Sphinx*'

Such  a  statement  shook  the  faith  of  many,  as
to  the  long  subsequent  age  of  the  Sphinx  to  the
Pyramid  For  here  was  monumental  testimony
that  the  Sphinx  had  become  dilapidated;  and
must  therefore  have  been  so  old,  in  the  days  of
the  builders  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  that  he,  King
Shofo,  had  to  repair  it.  But  on  submitting  the
inscription  to  William  Osbum,*  his  thorough
Egyptological  knowledge  pronounced  it  to  be,
'  nothing  but  a  rigmarole  about  the  god  Suplus,
'  agreeably  with  the  Suphis  and  latter-day  Osiris
^  worship,  set  up  upon  the  Jeezeh  hill  in  the  time
*  of  the  25th  dynasty,  or  about  600  B.c/

While  as  to  another  statement  of  two  ear-rings
having  been  found,  *  which  belonged  to  the  wife
of  Menes,' — Mr.  Osbum  shows  that  story  to
have  aiisen.  partly  out  of  the  true  discovery  of
ear-rings  with  a  hieroglyphic  on  them  signifying
simply  mn;  but  partly  also  out  of  the  erroneous
assumption,  that  these  letters  are  found  only  in
the  name  of  Mra  Menes  :  whereas  they  occur  in

1  still  liying  at  Leeds,  1868.    Author  of  the  Monumental  HUtory
of  Egypt.


OH.  20.]


Latest  Excavations.


178


hundreds  of  other  words ;  and  the  ancient  Egyp-
tians inscribed  every  article  of  their  ingenious
manufactures^  with  multitudinous  particulars  of
the  events  and  circumstances  of  the  time, — re-
quiring the  use  of  many  words^  some  of  them
necessarily  including  the  letters  m  n.


174  Archaological  Results.         [ch.  21.


CHAPTER  21.
ARCHyEOLOGICAL   RESULTS.

Again  then  we  have  to  sum  up  a  long  list  of
inquiries^ — ^arcliseological  now,  though  architec-
tural before ; — ^but  the  result  comes  out  strikingly
closer  to  what  we  had  previously  concluded,  firom
architecture  alone.

For  here,  we  are  brought  back  once  more  to
the  valley  of  the  Nile,  as  the  scene — all  Euro-
pean  so-caUed  Pyraonids  notwithstanding-of  the
earliest  known  existing  traces  of  intellectual
man.  And  the  earliest  monument  in  these  Nile
lands,  which  we  can  positively  lay  our  hands  on,
— is  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh.^

In  so  far  as  that  notable  fact  is  concerned,  all

^  '  Nor  liAYe  I  yet  found  a  single  cartouche  that  can  be  safely
'  assigned  to  a  period  previous  to  the  fourth  dynasty.  The  boildeni
'  of  the  Great  Pyramid  seem  to  assert  their  right  to  form  the  oom«
<  mencement  of  monumental  history,  even  if  it  be  clear  that  they

*  were  not  the  first  builders  and  monumental  writers.

*  The  Pyramid  of  Cheops,  to  which  the  first  link  of  our  whole

*  monumental  history,  is  fastened  immovably,  not  only  for  Egyptian,


CB.  21.]         Arehm>U>gical  Resutti.  175

hail  to  Mr.  PeigniaBon,  on  whoae  architectoral
liisfary  we  leaned  so  much  at  the  commencement
6f  ouir  investigation,  and  whom  we  hare  now
fomid  to  be  so  trustworthy  a  guide  both  within,
and  for  a  considerable  space  without,  the  actual
limits  of  his  professional  science.

He  too  admires  the  Great  Pjrramid  in  point  of
construction  as  much  as  we  can  do : —

'  No  one/  Bays  he,  ^  oan  possibly  examine  the  interior  of

*  ike  Great  Pyramid  without  being  struck  with  astonishment
'  aft  the  wonderful  meohanioal  skill  displayed  in  its  oonstruction.

*  Nothing  more  perfect  mechanically  has  ever  been  erected
'  since  that  time/

'Nor  is  our  wonder  less  when  we  ask  ourselves,  how  it
'  happened  that  such  a  people  became  so  thoroughly  oiganized

*  aft  that  early  age,  as  to  be  willing  to  undertake  the  greatest
'  architectural  works  the  world  has  since  seen,  in  honour  of
'  one  man  from  among  themselyes  9  A  king  without  an  army,
'  and  with  no  claim,  so  fur  as  we  can  see,  to  such  an  honour

*  beyond  the  common  consent  of  all,  which  could  hardly  have
'  Jbeen  obtained  except  by  the  title  of  long  inherited  services
'  acknowledged  by  the  community  at  large.*

All  this  account  is  as  admirable,  as  it  is  elor
quent,  and  we  must  agree  with  our  great  historian

*  but  for  nniYenal  history.' — ^Dr.  Leprios's  LeiUn  from  JSffypt  ih
1843.

See  abo  the  chronological  arrangement  of  Lepsina's  onriYalled
coUeciion.of  folio  Bgyptiaa  platet,  in  the  Denkmaeler,


176  ArchcBological  Remits.         [oh.  21.

of  architecture  perfectly  in  tliia. — ^that  the  earliest
^ne  buOding  which  ^  he,  and  «.  en  find,-
is  one  of  the  grandest,  best-constructed,  and  most
enduring,  ever  erected  by  man.  We  may  also
agree  with  him,  that  the  political  circumstances
under  which  the  arrangements  for  such  an  un-
precedented building  could  be  entered  into,  have
something  very  mjrsterious  about  them.  But
when  he  next  considers  it  to  be  demoDstrated,
by  the  mere  fact  of  so  large  and  excellent  a  work
being  constructed  then, — ^that  there  must  neces-
mrily  have  been  long  and  uncounted  previous
ages  of  civilized  life  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile, —
we  must  take  leave  to  differ ;  for  he  is  then  going
entirely  on  a  theory,  that  architecture  must  have
been  developed,  somewhat  according  to  the  Dar-
winian laws  of  man's  development,  by  slow  con-
tinued steps  out  of  the  simplest  original  atom.

To  the  theory,  as  such,  or  rather  as  a  proposi-
tion to  be  inquired  into, — there  is  of  course  no
objection.  But  we  cannot  admit  its  right  to  pro-
nounce infallible  decisions  on  what  took  place  on
the  earth  in  archaic  times^— until  it  has  been
satisfEictorily  and  scientifically  proved,  to  have
prevailed  at  those  periods  without  a  break.


OS.  21.]         Archaological  Results.  177

Now  if  Egyptian  dyilizatdon  did  really  exist
for  80  long  a  period,  that  its  duration  before  the
building  of  the  Qreat  Pyramid,  makes  all  the
years  which  have  elapsed  since  then  (though
there  are  more  than  4000  of  them)  sink  into  utter
insignificance,^ — the  question  naturally  arises^
what  has  become  of  all  the  architecture  and  other
contemporary  monuments  of  all  those  countless
ages?  And  this  question  is  80  much  the  more
necessary  to  ask,  seeing  that  the  multitudinous
Egyptian  monuments  since  the  Great  Pyramid's
day,  are  generally  so  admirably  preserved  by  the
dry  and  rainless  climate, — that  some  Egyptologists
are  inclined  to  boast,  that  nothing  whether  in
stone,  or  even  brick,  ever  decays  in  that  wonderful
region, — formed  by  nature  to  be,  and  actually
made  by  an  industrious  population  into,  the  very
monumental  land,  and  enduring  record-keeper,  of
the  whole  eartL*

Mr.  Fergusson  himself,  we  believe,  admits  the
diflBcully.  If  his  theory  is  true,  there  oicght  to
have  been  interminable  quantities  of  pre-Great
Pyramid  buildings  erected  in  Egypt ;  and  if  they

^  Ferga88on*8  History  of  ArchUedure,  p.  81.
*  BoDsen's  Egyp^s  Place  in  UniveracU  History,

M


*
«


178  Art^ciologioai  ReimUs.        [ch.  21.

were  bo  erected,  why  cannot  we  find  some  traces
of  them  1  It  must  surely  be  a  pain,  a  grie^  and
an  anxiety  of  no  mean  order  to  so  honest  a  man
as  tiisA  able  historian,  that  he  cannot  show  even
a  single  example  of  the  architectural  style  sup-
posed to  be  in  vogue  for  ages  throughout  all
E^ypt,  before  the  Great  Fjnnunid.

He  hopes  indeed,  that  that  architecture  will
be  found  some  day;  and  he  meanwhile  deiives
a  litd^  though  rather  sorry,  comfort  from  one
feature  of  his  general  researches  in  architectural
history,  showing — that  the  Jirst  specimens  of
each  style,  were  always  and  iuvariably  the  best
of  their  kmd.  As,  that  the  Pantheon  at  Bome,
both  was  the  first,  and  is  stlQ  the  largest,  and
best,  dome  in  the  world;  while  the  earliest  of
the  rock-cut  temples  of  India,  are  also  the  most
beautiful  which  that  land  still  possesses.

But  the  amount  of  originality  in  these  cases
was  small;  for  Theban  tombs  had  been  cut  in
Theban  rocks,  2000  years  before  the  Jains  began
their  work  in  India;  and  as  for  the  Pantheon,
which  dates  only  from  the  late  Emperors  of  Im-
perial Bome, — ^where  architects  had  for  ages  been
brought  in  from  all  other  countries  to  contribute


CR.  21.]         Art^oBoloffical  Results.  179

toward  the  glorification  of  the  mistress  city  of  the
whole  Mediteoanean  world, — ^it  was  no  great
stretch  of  invention,  from  the  flat-stone  domes
and  radial  arches  without  number,  which  botii
I^araseans  and  Romans  had  delighted  in  for  ages,
«— to  rise  up  to  the  ideal  of  a  radial  dome.

At  the  Qreat  Fyramid,  on  the  other  hand,  with
ita  very  early  date,  there  was  no  predecessor
building  of  any  kind,  pyramid  or  otherwise,  of
which  we  can  find  any  traces — ^whether  in  I^pt,
or  over  all  the  rest  of  the  world  Building  in
stone,  was  then  a  perfectiy  new  art;  and  the
Great  Pyramid  is  far  larger  and  more  signal  as  a
lithic  structure,  than  any  of  the  leading  examples
of  long  subsequent  mere  varieties  of  architecture.

K  ever,  therefore,  there  was  anything  done  on
the  earth,  not  on  the  development  principle, — it
was,  so  far  as  our  present  knowledge  of  all  the
fecte  of  observation  go -the  designing  and  build-
ing  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  Its  sudden  manner
and  perfect  appearance  on  the  earth  when  it  did
come,  can  only  be  paralleled  in  Pagan  literature,
with  the  fabled  birth  of  Minerva,  full-grown,
learned,  and  armed  at  once,  on  first  springing
forth  from  the  brain  of  Jupiter ;  or,  more  to  the


180  Archaologicdl  Results.        [ch.  21.

point  still,  and  in  the  sacred  pages  of  our  own
Bible, — with  what  we  read  there  both  of  the
Divine  inspiration  of  man,— by  which  he  be-
came  at  once  a  living  soul  of  a  high  order, — and
the  communication,  at  sundry  other  times,  by
Divine  wisdom,  to  certain  chosen  men,  of  the
designs  of  several  buildings  according  to  match-
less patterns,  measures^  and  methods  of  execution.

Opinions  on  the  Final  ResuU.

The  bringing  forth  of  such  an  origin,  for  the
beginning  of  all  archaeology  and  all  architecture,
has  been, — just  as  might  be  expected  in  the
present  day, — ^the  signal  of  attack  from  the  *  de-
velopment'  men  in  natural  history,  from  upholders
of  the  inviolability  of  nature^s  laws  even  by  the
Framer  thereof ;  from  deniers  of  the  Inspiration
of  Scripture  ;  and  repudiators  of  the  truth  of  any
or  all  the  miracles  related  there.

But  what  are  the  arguments  or  facts  brought
forward  by  these  gentlemen,  against  the  above
result  obtaining,  as  the  real  and  true  origin  ?

One  says,

^  that  we  know  that  civilization  must  always  Haye  been  a  slow
'  process ;  and  particularly  slow  in  Egypt,  because  the  Egyp-


GH.  21.]    Opinions  an  the  Final  Result.         181

'  tians  being  always  ocmfined  to  their  narrow  valley,  had  no

*  aocial  advantages  for  seeing  and  conversing  with  foreigners.'

Another  says,

'  thai  it  is  so  perfectly  impossible,  according  to  all  theories,

*  and  even  known  laws  of  human  progress,  for  anything  very
'  great  and  ori^^nal  to  be  done  suddenly, — that  the  alleged
'  sudden  appearance  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  is  an  infraction
'  of  natural  laws.  In  so  £ur,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  true ;  or,
'  if  true,  it  must  be  miraculous.    But  in  that  case,  he,  the

*  speakeri  does  not  see  the  object  of  such  a  miracle.'

While  another  still,

'  would  not  limit  the  definition  of  a  miracle,  to  his  own  powers

*  of  comprehension  as  to  its  purpose, — ^but  thinks  that  any
'  interference  with  the  laws  of  nature  is  something  so  momen-
'  tons,  that  all  the  facts  yet  ascertained  with  regard  to  the
'  Great  Pyramid  should  be  looked  on  wWi  suspicion,  or  at
'  least  be  held  in  abeyance, — until  something  more  has  been
<  discovered  which  may,  he  thinks,  completely  alter  the  case.'

Though  we  cannot  agree  with  this  last  objector
in  fore-casting,  as  he  does,  the  tendency  of  any
additional  further  evidence  which  may  still  come
to  light,  touching  the  manner  in  which  both
civilization's  dawn  broke  upon  Egypt  and  its  first
great  work  was  executed ; — ^yet  we  do  allow  the
case  to  be  so  extraordinarily  momentous,  that  the
utmost  degree  of  caution  should  be  used  in  weigh-
ing and  sifting  the  evidence  on  either  side.    More


182  Archaologicdl  Results^        [ch.  21.

&cts  may,  perhapB,  still  be  discovered  in  Egypt,
and  will  liave  their  weight;  but  not  an  over-
whelming weight,  because  the  stock  of  facts
already  ascertained  with  regard  to  that  country
is  exceedingly  large ;  larger  than  for  any  other
ancient  people  whatever;  and  indeed  so  large,
as  to  be  the  frequent  point  of  reference,  either
for  enthusiasm  or  envy,  held  forward  by  the
promoters  of  even  Palestine  exploration,  to  a
public  whom  they  think  not  so  ready  with  their
subscriptions  as  they  shoidd  be.

But  meanwhile,  seeing  that  discoveries  can
neither  be  made  to  order  on  the  moment,  nor
prejudged  with  success  or  propriety,— we  may  do
well  to  put  the  existing  known  facts  of  the  Great
Pyramid, — as  being  the  first,  largest,  and  best
built  mere  building  in  Egypt  (and  perhaps  in  the
world),  through  a  severer  scrutiny  than  it  has
yet  undergone,  for  its  claims,  to  the  still  higher
attribute  of  intellectuality  of  design,  as  well  as
execution.


CH.  22.]   IrOeUectuaLity  of  Great  PyramicL    188


INTELLECTUALITY  OF  THE
GREAT  PYRAMID.


CHAPTER  22.

ITS  SHAPE.

Hence  all  our  desire  now  concentrates  into  this^
viz.,  to  ascertain  by  unprejudiced  methods  what
the  Great  Pyramid  individually  is,  or  was  made
by  labour  and  art,  to  be ;  and  also,  what  it  may
mean,  by  being  precisely  what  it  is.

This  should  surely  be  a  pretty  safe  path,  in  so
far  as  it  can  be  followed  through  means  of  all
the  most  trustworthy  measures  and  examinations
actually  made  at  the  place,  upon  the  very  build-
ing itself  in  modem  and  accredited  times.  And
yet  certain  authoritative  objectors  appear,  re-
commending  us  rather  to  take  account  only,  of
whatever  vague  or  indistinct  characteristics  may
be  found  common  to  many  and  various  p3nramids.

In  favour  of  proceeding  thus^  it  is  alleged,


184    Intellectuality  of  Great  Pyramid,   [cel  22.

'  that  the  Pyramids  of  Lower  Egypt  are  more  like

*  each  other,  thaa  are  European  cathedrals  like  one

*  another.    But  these  cathedrals^'  they  add,  *  we

*  know,  were  all  built  for  one  and  the  same  mental

*  intention.    Much  more  then  must  all  the  Pyra-

*  mids,  with  their  stronger  co-resemblances,  have
'  been  built  to  express  one  and  the  same  purpose

*  of  mind.    And  we  shall  get  at  that  purpose,

*  and  test  its  intellectuality  much  more  speedily
'  and  powerfully  by  taking  note  of  all  the  Pyra-
'  mids, — ^rather  than  by  confining  ourselves  to

*  one  of  them  only ;  whether  that  one  be  the

*  Great  Pyramid  or  any  other.'

A  suitable  answer  to  this  doctrine,  however,
appears  to  be, —

Cathedrals,  with  their  floriated  architecture,
belong  to  art.

But  Pyramids,  when  pure,  are  simply  geome-
trical, and  belong  to  science  only.

In  art,  and  under  one  division  of  it,  say  the
name  of  '  ode,'  what  a  crowd  of  diversities  both
in  composition  and  sentiment  are  indulged  in
there.  But  in  science,  what  is  admitted  as  a  de-
monstration of — say  the  47  th  problem  of  Euclid's
geometry, — except  the  demonstration  itself;  and


CH.  22.]  Its  Shape.  185

how  totally  inapplicable  to  supply  the  place  of
ihal^  would  be  a  general  mixture  of  all  the  other
demonstrations  of  all  the  other  problems  in  Euclid^
excepting  the  47tL

In  truth,  seeing  how  intensely  mathematical,
rather  than  artistical,  the  form  of  the  Great
Pyramid  most  assuredly  is, — in  its  original  day,
simply  a  huge  white  Pyramid,  with  smooth  tri-

too,  than  all  the  other  known  Pyramids; — we
might  do  almost  anything  else  whatever,  with
more  reason,  than  attempt  to  explain  the  Great
Pyramid's  precisely-built  and  grandly-unique  pro-
portions—by confounding  them  with  the  perfectly
different  proportions  of  a  host  of  contradictory
pyramids,  of  subsequent  ages,  different  parts  of
the  country,  aud  inferior  construction  in  every  way.
We  purpose  therefore  now,  to  appeal  to  no-
thing but  hard  measured  facts  at,  and  in,  the
Great  Pyramid  itself ;  no  matter  what  differently
shaped  building  may  stand  in  some  other  part  of
the  world.  And,  if  such  sturdy  data,  on  being
compared  with  modem  exact  science, — as  now
conducted  in  our  best  schools, — do  not  then  dis-
cover of  themselves,  and  unassisted,  some  argu-


186    Intellectuality  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [oh.  22.

ments  for  high  intellectaalilyy— we  ahall  willingly
drop  the  Great  Pyramid  entirelyi  and  cease  to
conaider  it  a  combined  monument  of  mind  and
matter.

The  Ooveming  Idea.

We  have  already  stated  that  all  the  Pyramids
of  Lower  Egypt^  when  duly  restored  from  present
decay  to  their  primitive  condition,  are  quadran-
galar-based  structures;  but  differing  one  from  the
other  in  shape,  i.e.,  chiefly  in  so  four  as  regards  the
proportion  of  vertical  height,  to  breadth  of  base.

The  particular  proportion  in  this  respect  ob-
served at  the  Great  Pyramid  is  found  nowhere
else.  Does  it  then  mean  anything  particular
there?

Herodotus  (445  B.C.)  was  told  by  the  Egyptian
priests,  that  the  proportion  was  chosen  so  that
the  area  of  one  of  the  triangular  sides  of  the
building,  might  be  equal  to  the  square  of  the
vertical  height.^  The  proportion,  when  measured
by  modem  savants,  is  evidently  something  very

1  Hie  words  of  Herodotas  on  this  point  are  rather  imperfect  and
nninteUigible  to  pore  daarical  scholars ;  and  were^  we  beliere,  first
proved  to  mean  as  above,  by  the  late  John  Taylor,  author  of  The
OrtaPyramid:  Wh^watUbmUfOndwholndUUt    1859.


coo.  22.]  The  Oovemtng  Idea.  187

doee  to  tiliat ;  so  exceedingly  cdoee  indeed,  that
instrumental  observation  could  not  have  posi-
tively disproved  the  assertion  but  ior^f/rst.  Colonel
Howard  Yyse's  fortunate  discovery  of  two  of  the
ancient  casing-«tones  of  the  exterior,  in  8U%  and
in  admirable  preservation ;  and  second,  the  mea-
sures of  the  comer  angles  of  the  Great  Pyramid
taken  in  1865,  from  the  original  comer  sockets
of  the  stmcture.^

These  and  other  observations  show, — ^that  the
angle  of  the  faces,  with  the  base  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  is  not  SI"*  49^,  as  required  to  suit  the
geometrical  idea  mentioned  by  Herodotus;  but
is  nearly  50**  51'  and  some  seconds.  The  latter
quantity,  however,  though  disproving  the  first
idea  (and  which  cannot  be  trusted  as  contem-
porary information,  when  received  by  the  HaU-
camassian  from  the  Kps  of  priests  of  a  greatly
altered  reUgion,  and  some  1700  years  after  the
building  of  the  monument) — ^yet  brings  in  an-
other mathematical  idea  of  a  still  higher  character.
For  the  angle  of  51**  51'  14*3'',  is  the  angle  which
makes  the  vertical  height  of  the  Great  Pyramid,
bear  to  the  continued  length  of  the  four  sides  of

1  See  L\fe  and  Work  at  the  Grtat  Pyramid,  YoL  ill.  p.  28.


188    Intellectuality  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  2  2  •

its  base,  the  proportion  of  radius  to  the  circum-
ference of  a  circle.

This  quantity  when  given  for  the  diameter,
instead  of  radius,  becomes  that  most  important
expression  of  modem  mathematics,  known  as  tt  ;'
so  that  the  Oreat  Pyramid  may  then  be  termed  a

whole  shape  a  type  and  lasting  memorial,  of
'a  squaring  of  the  circle'  (in  the  proper  way),
having  been  performed  ages  and  ages  before  the
question  was  ever  heard  of  amongst  the  schools  of
philosophy,  or  the  societies  of  the  learned,  whether
amongst  historic  Greeks  or  Egyptians.

The  Ghveming  Idea  attacked.

No  sooner  however  had  this  illustrious  char-
acter been  assigned  to  the  observed  shape  of  the
Great  Pyramid, — ^than  many  and  many  a  theorist
rushed  forward  with  something  else  as  preferable.
When,  indeed,  the  angles  which  their  theories
required  were  several  degrees,  or  even  minutes,

^  Mr.  St.  Jolm  Vincent  Day,  C.K,  has  recently  called  attention,
before  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Glasgow,  to  another  feature  of
the  whole  Pyramid,  giving  the  t  proportions  at  once ;  without  the
doubling  necessary  when  dealing  with  the  linear  proportions  only,  as
above.  But  as  he  is  expected  shortly  to  publish  his  essay,  I  refer
readers  to  his  own  dear  and  explanatory  pages.


CH.  22.]   The  Ooveming  Idea  attacked.         189

different  £rom  the  obseryed^  or  Tr-computed,  angle,
— such  ideas  could  be  refused  admittance  at  once.
But  when  in  the  course  of  last  autumn,  a  thought
was  brought  up  requiring  within  a  few  seconds
only,  the  very  same  angle  as  the  ir  hypothesis, —
a  new  di£Biculty  had  arisen,  for  the  case  could  not
be  discriminated  then  by  observed  angle  alone.

That  this  new  view,*  was  promulgated  by
Colonel  Sir  Henry  James,  RE.,  showed  that  so
able  a  judge  as  the  Superintendent  of  the  Ord-
nance Survey,  considered  the  observed  angle  of
the  Great  Pyramid,  to  be  by  this  time  well  mea-
sured, and  very  close  to  the  truth, — though  he
differed  as  to  the  governing  idea  in  the  mind  of
the  original  designer.

That  idea  he  considered  to  be, — ^merely  taking
for  the  vertical  height  of  the  Pyramid,  -^ths  of
the  semi-diagonal  of  the  base.  And,  as  that  gives
for  the  height,  a  quantity  different  by  only  ^tAht*^
of  the  whole,  or  two  inches  nearly  on  the  entire
height  of  the  Pyramid,  from  what  is  given  by  the

^  First  discovered  by  Mr.  Petrie,  C.E.,  and  communicated  to  me
in  MS.,  amongst  six  other  sheets  of  Pyramid  details,  October  16,
1867 ;  but  independently  discovered  very  shortly  afterwards  by  Sir
Henry  James,  and  by  him,  both  sent  to  me  and  afterwards  published
in  the  AtheruBumf  16th  November  1867.    See  Appendix  1.


190     IntdUctuality  of  Qreai  Pyramid.  [CH.  22.

»  hypcrtteeia  combined  mth  the  iiBuaUy  reodved
abeolnte  size  (whicli  latter  too  is  not  certainly
known  within  a  whole  handful  of  inches), — ^why,
two  equal  competitors  seemed  here  brought  up,
for  the  honour  of  haying  been  the  mental  inten-
tion  of  the  primeval  architect

The  occasion  was  one  for  cool  criticism  and
patient  investigation;  for  the  coincidence  of  either
idea^  or  perhaps  of  both,  with  the  observed  angle
of  the  Great  Pyramid, — ^might  be  an  afifair  of
accident  only.  Sir  Henry  James  however,  had  no
aach  difficulty ;  for  he  at  once  gave  the  decision
absolutely  in  favour  of  his  own  hypothesis,  and
announced  that  *  he  had  discovered  the  mode  of
'  construction  of  the  Great  Pyramid.'

The  grounds  of  this  decision  seemed  to  be,  that
the  ^th  semi-diagonal,  was  a  simpler  idea  than
the  TT  proportion ;  and  some  modem  gentlemen
have  a  peculiar  pleasure  in  trying  to  show,  that
the  designer  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  of  poor
mathematical  powers,  and  mean  constructive  at-
tainments ;  or,  as  unable  to  conceive  a  high
thought,  as  to  put  it  into  practical  execution.

Now  there  is  no  harm,  but,  on  the  contrary,
much  positive  merit,  in  always  trying  Jirst,  the


OD.  22.]      Testimony  of  the  Trenches.  191

flinpileBt  possible  hypothesis^  for  explaining  any
giTen  jdieuomenoiL  But  we  have  no  right  to
fiiTOnr  such  simple  hypotheses,  by  keeping  out
of  view  any  additional  observations  of  collateral
fiwsta.  Such  facts  did  ezist  in  this  case,  in  the
shape  of  the  an^es  of  the  very  curious  system  of
descending  and  ascending  passages  inside  the
Qieat  Pyramid, — for  they  had  already  been
fdiown  to  be  conformable  to  a  further  developr
ment  o^  or  to  constitute  a  corollary  to,  the  tt
theory  of  the  outeide.'

This  by  itself,  was  more  than  doubling  the
daim  to  intention,  for  the  w  hypothesis ;  though
the  measurement  of  the  precise  angle  is  a  difficult
one.  Yet  at  the  instant  of  despairing  what  to
search  for  nexl^  or  that  could  be  better — ^behold
Mr.  William  Fetrie,  alights  upon  a  discovery
which  seems  to  make  the  matter  plain  for  all
men  now  to  read  easily,  even  as  they  run.

Testimony  of  the  Trenches.

Huge,  deep,  and  long  rectangular  cuttings  in
the  rock  of  the  hiU,  he  before  the  eastern  face  of

^  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyrtmidf  by  C.  Piaui  Smyth,  voL
iu.  pp.  34-44,  and  219.


192     InteUectuality  of  Great  Pyramid.  [cH.  22.

the  Great  Pyramid ;  variously  destined  according
to  previous  authors^  but  denominated  by  myself
*  azimuth  trenches  /  because,  while  two  of  them
lying  north  and  south,  nearly  (or  within  19^
mark  a  meridian  line^ — the  others  radiate  out  &om
the  middle  point  between  these  two,  at  horizontal
angles  representing  the  simmiit  and  foot  of  the
Great  Pyramid.^  And  for  several  reasons  men-
tioned in  L^e  and  Work,  I  ventured  to  consider
these  trenches  to  have  been  originally  incised,
for  instructing  the  masons  in  the  exact  angular
character  of  the  very  mathematically  formed
building  they  were  engaged  on,  and  while  the
work  was  in  progress.

This  hypothesis  seemed  to  explain  the  angular
differences  of  the  trenches  well,  but  said  nothing
about  their  position  with  regard  to  the  Pyramid,
or  their  length.  Now,  however,  these  matters  are
answered  by  Mr.  Petrie ;  who  says^  that  if  you
take  the  Great  Pyramid,  as  it  was  when  in
masonry  progress^  or  without  its  final  casing-


^  At  p.  126,  voL  iL  of  Ltfe  and  Work  at  the  Cheat  Pyramid^  are
given  mearares  of  azimuth  trenches,  by  which  these  points  may  be
tested :  while  the  farther  information  is  now  tendered,  that  the  sides
of  the  Pyramid  referred  to  there,  are  the  present  broken  sides,  vnthin
the  area  of  the  casing-stone  socket  marked  sides.


OH.  22.]       Testimony  of  the  Trenches.  193

stone  film, — and  if  from  the  centre  of  the  then
base,  you  draw  its  proportionate  ir  circle ; — ^the
conjoined  axes  of  north  and  south  azimuth
trenchefiiy  will  form  a  tangent  to  that  circle,  at

i  ■  .  .  .       L     1    I

its  most  protuberant  point  in  front  of  thet  middle
of  the  east  side.

And  frirther,  if  from  the  points  towards  the
nort^  and  south  extremities  of  the  east  side  of
the  base,  where  the  v  circle  cuts  into  the  area  of
the  base,  you  draw  rectangular  ofisets  from  that
side,  eastwards, — ^these  oflFsets  will  be  found  to  de-
fine the  places  of  the  admirably  square-cut  outer
ends  of  both  north  and  south  azimuth  trenches,
with  as  much  accuracy  as  the  present  standing
and  broken  sides  of  the  Pyramid  admit  of,  in
their  measurement.^

No  less  than  three  special  points  of  the  ir  theory,
being  thus  found  marked,  and  in  so  magnificent
and  easily  legible  a  manner,  to  all  men — whether
usmg  microscopic  instxuments.  or  ordinary  plain
vision  and  common  sense, — ^we  may  hope  that
that  theory  is  now  firmly  established  as  having
really  been  in  the  mind  of  the  designer.

^  L\ft  and  Work  at  the  Cfreat  Pyramid,  voL  iL  p.  126.


N


194    /n<e2Zectoa^y  ^  (?rea<  iVronuii.    [oh.  23.


INTELLECTUALITY  OF  THE

GREAT    PYRMAlD-oanthmed.


CHAPTER  23.

m  SXJUBKBB  A  COBOU.ABT  TO  SHAPE.

The  previously  mentioned  satisfactoiy  concdu-
sion  as  to  shape  intention^  was  no  sooner  gained
in  our  myestigation8.-than  various  objectors
appeared  against  the  ancient  arcliitect  of  the
Great  Pyramid,  on  this  very  account; — one  of
them  asserting  with  no  Uttle  emphasis,—

'  What  a  maoh  better  figure  a  cone  would  have  been,  than
'  any  Pyramid,  to  express  the  v  relation  of  diameter  to  oir-
<  eomferenoe  of  cirole  I '

While  another  gentleman  criticises  severely
both  cone  and  pyramid,  on  important  'artistic
grounds/

'  The  upper  part  of  these  two  classes  of  figures,'  9kj%  he,
'  retreat  too  rapidly  from  the  eye,  and  are  thus  never  seen  of
'  their  true  size  or  with  their  full  dignity.    Whereas,  had  the


(is.  28.]  Its  Numbers  a  CaroUary  to  Shape.  195

*  anlitteul  Vmly  been  pioperlj  adyifled  ib  adopt  a  eylindar  in
'plaoe  of  aooae,  or  areetofi^ftttar  iiia»mplao6  of  the  oeiflo-

*  angled  pyramid,— the  aaperior  yigoor  of  outline  of  theae
'  fonnB  when  realiied  on  so  grand  a  soaloi — woald  have  pio-
'  dnbed  an  ^Eoet  pontively  aoblime.'


At  praaeat  we  oeed  Cfniy  remark  in  answer,  that
although  the  w  hypothesiB  may  have  been  proved
to  have  been  in  tiie  mind  of  the  designer  when
planning  the  Great  Pyramid  stractare, — ^we  have
arrived  at  no  proo^*  that  that  one  thought  was
the  only  thought  there.  And  although  cones^
cylinders^  and  eubes  of  certain  proportions  may
be  made  to  designate  the  ir  ratio, — ^yet  they  do  it
with  a  decided  difference  of  accompanying  quali-
tie&  A  cone,  for  instance  (taking  the  base^  as
one  side),  has  only  two  sides  or  surfaces  ;  a
cylindei^  three ;  and  a  cube  six ;  but  a  quadran-
gular-based pyramid,  reckoned  after  the  same
manner,  has  five.

Now  il^ — besides  the  w  proportion  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  and  an  acknowledged  geometrical  figure,
— that  building  was  intended  to  contain  some
system  of  numeration,  or  of  symbolization  by
number,  wherein  five  was  to  be,  if  not  the  very
radix  itself,  at  least  a  number  of  frequent  refer-
ence  and  employment,-it  is  plain  that  a  square-


196    Intdlectijudtty  of  Great  Pyramid,  [ch.  23;

based  >  pyramid  has  incomparable  advanti^es
over  a  w  cone,  cylinder,  or  cube ;  in  feet,  it  is  the
right  figure  in  the  right  place.

The  peculiar  and  characteristic  fiveness  of  its
sides  or  surfex^es,  moreover,  repeats  itself  in  the
similar  fivenesa  of  mch  a  pyramid's  angles  or
rather  corners  (viz.,  four  below  and  one  above).
So  that  then^  from  such  a  figure,  with  its  five
sides  and  five  comers,  the  coUective  number  of
ten,  is  thence  derivable :  even  veiy  much  as  all
decimal  arithmetic  is  usually  held  to  be  founded
on  the  two,  so-called,  five-fingered  hands  of  man ;
though  each  has  really  only  four  fingers  and  one
thumb.^

The  Pacts  derided.

That  any  importance  could  be  attached  to  these
two  groups  of  Jive  in  the  Great  Pyramid, — ^was
recently  the  special  subject  of  attack,  denounce-
ment, and  ridicule  before  the  Boyal  Society  of
Edinburgh,  by  a  gentleman, — ^who  quoted  as  one
of  his  most  convincing  instances  of  the  absurdity
of  what  he  denounced,— the  hint  given  to  him,

^  Somewkat  nmilarly  of  the  pyramid's  '  fire  sides,'  four  are
triangalar,  and  one  is  the  square  base  ;  while  of  its  five  comers,  it
has  four  simihur  ones  below  on  the  foundation  leve!,  and  one  above,
in  a  Texy  etorated  and  distinguished  position.


00. 23.]  The  Facts  derided.  197


he  said  by  a  firiend,  to  the  effect,— that  the  very
room  in  which  the  Society  was  then  meeting  had
five  windowEfy  and  five  divisions  in  its  ceiling,
repeated  twice,  besides  ten  chairs,  sometimes  five
benches  on  either  side,  and  certain  other  less
essential  detail

So  it  had ;  but  were  they  as  dominant  features
of  the  whole  building  they  belonged  to,  as  are  the
two  pervading  fives  at  the  Great  Pyramid  ?

At  the  Great  Pyramid,  the  whole  surface  and
the  whole  substance  of  the  building  (and  that
the  largest  and  most  massive  as  well  as  most
ancient  in  the  world),  combines  in  making  up
tliese  two  geometric  sets  of  five,  and  apparently
nothing  else  extraneous  besides.  But  at  the
Boyal  Institution  building,  wherein  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh  meets — ^what  do  we  find  ?
An  ornamental  hollow  structure  of  the  present
centuiy,  erected  on  a  rubbish-heap  ;  and  serving
a  multitudinous  set  of  purposes  for  many  men,
and  different  societies.  Outside,  you  see  porticoes,
fluted  columns,  cornices,  pediments,  lions'  heads,
chimney-pots,  windows  many,  sphinxes  mounted
up  on  the  fi*ail  rooi^  Queen  Victoria's  majestic
figure  in  stone ;  volutes  of  Grecian  vegetation,


198    InteUectuaiUy  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  23.

piotnisioiis  here  and  recesses  there, — nothing
certainly  which  leads  an  observer  to  consider,
that  a  remarkablei  or  indeed  any,  purpose  of  five-
ness  runs  through  all  the  building  and  forms  its
most  distinguished,  most  pervading,  and  most
easily  recognised  lype,  iminterfered  with  by  any
other  number.

And  inside,— we  find  a  side  suite,  only,  of  rooms
for  the  Royal  Society,  a  central  one  foir  the  Anti-
quarian Museum  of  Scotland,  and  others  upstairs,
sadly  dominating  those  of  the  Boyal  Society,
for  the  School  of  Design  under  the  Board  of
Trustees  of  ManufiEtctures;  with  divers  little  cham-
bers for  officials ;  and  with  almost  every  diver-
sity of  windows  and  ceilings^  chairs  and  benches
amongst  them.

Beally  therefore,  had  not  the  case  been  brought
forward  before  a  very  full  meeting  of  the  most
scientific  society  of  Scotland,  and  not  only  treated
with  marked  favour  from  the  Chair,  but  held  by
many  rather  thoughtless  persons  present,  to  have
proved,  as  they  termed  it,  'a  smasher'  to  the
importance  of  the  Great  Pyramid, — I  should  not
have  thought  it  worth  notice.  And  even  now  can
only  compare  it  to  some  innocent  youth  picking


OB.  23.]  The  Facts  derided.  199

0

Ike  fives  out  of  a  miQtiplication-table,  contaan'*
iiig  numbers  up  to  one  bundled  and  forty-four^
and  dedaiing  that  tiie  whde  table  was  formed
for  tbe  fives  alone ;  or  at  all  events^  that  that
little  bit  of  modem  paper^  containing  some  five%
amongst  other  numbers  up  to  12  times  12,  pos-
sessed all  the  excellencesi  in  the  way  of  grand,
primeval  fiveness,  claimed  for  the  Great  Pyramid.

When  any  earnest  inquirer  shall  have  discovered,
not  only  a  mere  page  of  various  figures,  of  which
two  or  three  are  fives, — ^but  a  large  folio  volume
wherein  every  page  throughout^  except  perhaps  on
one  small  portion,  shall  be  fiUed  with  fives,  and
nothing  but  fives, — he  will  have  discovered  both
something  very  unique  in  numerical  literature, —
and  something  that  may  give  him  an  apprecia-
tive idea  of  the  enormous  amoimt  of  fiveness
extending  uninterrupted  and  dominant  through
all  the  Great  Pyramid's  mighty  bulk.

But  until  that  volume  is  found,  or  until  an*
other  building  shall  be  discovered  somewhere  in
the  world,  as  pure,  simple,  and  extensive,  in  its
fiveness,  and  making  as  much  use  of  its  fiveness
afterwards  in  numerical  references  towards  the
noble  things  of  the  earth,  and  the  high  things  of


200    IfUeUecttudity  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  23.

heJEtven,  as  the  Oreat  Pyramid  will  be  presently
proved  to  do; — ^we  suspect  that  that  structure's
remarkable  design,  in  the  world's  early  ages,  has
not  been  very  much  injured,  or  altered,  by  this
late  attempt  to  hold  it  up  to  modem  ridicule.

Svhsidiary  Numbers.

Though  in  a  lesser  degree,  than  fives, — ^four
may  also  be  considered  as  a  Pyramid  marked-out
number ;  because  four  is  the  number  of  the  sides
of  the  square  base,  and  four  the  number  of  the
triangular  faces  or  flanks.

Three  and  seven  have  likewise  been  suggested
by  William  Petrie,  as  numbers  connected  with  the
Oreat  Pyramid.  Though,  too,  at  present  these
numbers  are  only  to  be  dimly  seen,  in  a  rather
abstruse  manner  (notwithstanding  that  they  are
general  and  universal  to  the  whole  surface),  yet
they  have  the  discriminating  merit  of  belonging
to  the  Great  Pyramid  only,  of  all  the  Pyramids
of  Egypt,  and  the  world.

This  useful  property  comes  to  the  Great  Pyra-
mid,— without  altering  the  previous  fives  or  fours
in  the  smallest  degree, — ^through  the  agency  of
the  peculiar  ir  figure ;  for  when  that  tt  fraction  is


eta.  23.]  Svbsidiary  Numhers.  201

duly  undeTstood, — and  it  has  now  been  computed
to  the  extent  of  609  decimal  places  of  our  denary
arithmetic, — it  is  found,  that  while  all  other
digits  occur  ordinarily,  3  and  7  occur  most  pecu-
liarly and  exceptionally,  yet  with  some  apparent
law  determining  them  to  do  so.*

The  numbers  3  and  7,  then,  cannot  be  seen  in-
stantly on  the  surface  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;
though  they  may  be  understood  to  be  there,  most
securely,  through  the  latest  teachings  of  modem
science  regarding  the  really  expressed  quantity  tt.
This  sort  of  presence  indeed,  of  3  and  7,  if  taken
by  itself,  would  be,  perhaps,  of  no  very  great
mental  importance ;  but  just  as  with  the  equally
necessary  fives,  tens,  and  fours  of  tie  visible  sur-
fSace ;  so  with  regard  to  the  threes  and  sevens  of
its  essential  figure, — it  is  the  itse  which  the  Great
Pyramid  system  subsequently  makes  of  them  for
high  and  noble  ends,  which  forms  the  chief  claim
for  mental  intention  on  the  part  of  the  designer,
when  he  adopted  the  ^r-proportioned,  quadrangular-
based  Pyramid ;  and  some  few  examples  of  that
use  we  shall  now  endeavour  shortly  to  set  forth.

^  See  poBt8cript»  p.  602,  toL  iiL,  of  Life  and  Work  ai  the  Oreat
Pyramid,    Also  a  fuller  recent  paper  by  W.  Petrie.


202    InteUecttuUUy  of  Ore(a  Pyrumid.   [ch.24.


INTELLECTUALITY    OF   THE

GREAT    PYRAMID-conttntiei


CHAPTER  24.

ITS  SIZE.

The  shape  of  an  accurately  formed  building  to
be,  such  as  the  Great  Pyramid  4200  years  ago,
having  once  been  settled,  with  the  attending
numerical  characteristics, — ^its  size  would  evi-
dently next  occupy  the  attention  and  require
some  new  mental  determination  on  the  part  of
the  designer.  But  seeing  that  we  have  not  him
himself  before  us  to  question  on  this  point — ^let
us  examine  his  work  in  order  to  ascertain,  as  a
first  step,  how  large  he  made  it.

As  already  abundantly  described  elsewhere,* —
the  oDly  present  existing  faace8,-by  which  the
full  extent  of  the  Great  Pyramid  in  its  early

^  Bee  Life  and  Work  at  the  OrecU  Pyrandi,  by  a  Fiasi  Smyth,
YoL  iii  p.  124.


CH.  24«]  Its  Size.  203

daySy  seems  to  be  satisfactorily  marked  out, — are,
firstt  the  sockets  worked  into  the  flat  foundation
lod^  and  intended  for  the  comer-stones  of  thb
outer  casing;  showing  therefore  the  length  of
the  sides  of  the  original  base,— and  second,  in
connexion  therewith,  the  angle  of  rise  of  the  tri-
angular fjEu^es,  from  the  sides  of  that  base.  For
with  the  distance  known  from  socket  to  socket^
and  the  angle  of  the  faces, — of  course  either  the
vertical  height,  length  pf  comer-lines,  or  any
other  feature,  can  be  immediately  computed.

The  angle  of  the  faces  we  do  know,  probably,
with  sufficient  closeness  from  many  measures,  to
justify  us  in  afifluming  the  theoretical  ir  angle  aa
the  one  intended ;  and  that  can  be  computed  to
all  required  refinement.  But  the  trae  horizontal
distance  from  the  outer  comer  of  one  socket,  to
the  similar  outer  comer  of  another, — or  rather,  the
mean  of  all  four  sides  similarly  measured, — is  still,
for  accurate  purposes,  an  unsolved  problem.  And
what  is  worse,  it  will  always  remain  so,  until  some
strenuous  efforts  are  made— by  the  rich  and  power-
ful of  the  world— to  clear  the  intervening  ground
of  the  hills  of  rubbish  which  now  prevent  scien-
tific men  from  obtaining  the  desired  accuracy.


204    IntellectuaiUy  of  Qreat  Pyramid.    [cH.  24.

Of  all  observers  who  have  yet  attempted  to  get
this  measure  of  socket  to  socket,  from  the  French
Academicians  in  1799  to  Messrs.  Aiton  and  Inglis
in  1 86 5»— their  results  have  been  somewhere  be-
tween 9168  and  9102  British  inches.^

Somewhere  between  these  two  lengths  there-
fore, the  true  one  may  be  expected  to  be  found ;
the  large  difference  between  them,  being  not  due
to  any  real  alteration  in  the  size  of  the  compact
rocky  hill  of  foundation, — ^as  rather  strangely  in-
ferred by  a  medical  gentleman  before  a  learned
audience  recently, — ^but  merely  to  the  errors  of
the  observers  themselves ;  and  which  errors  are
almost  as  likely  to  be  positive  as  negative.  Ex-
actly where  the  true  length  is  likely  to  be  found,
between  these  extremes^ — is  a  nice  question
of  mathematical  probability,  involving  so  many
unknown  quantities^  that  it  is  not  likely  to  be
settled  speedily.  In  the  work  already  mentioned,
I  have  followed,  for  reasons  there  detailed,  a
method  which  gives  9142  British  inches  as  the
probable  truth;  and  shall  therefore  use  it  now,
tiiough  with  the  due  proviso  that  it  cannot  be
considered  certain  within  limits  of  perhaps  ±25

1  L'rfe  and  Work  ai  the  QrtaJt  Pyramid,  toL  liL  p.  125.


GBL  24.]    ^     Depreciating  Theories.  205

inches.^  These  limits,  however,  only  amounting  to
the  proportional  quantity,  on  so  large  a  building;
of  shi^  of  the  whole  length,  and  exceeding  the
n^zt  largest  Egyptian  Pyramid  by  500  inches,
or  iji^th,— may  enable  us  to  approximate  to  some*
thing  important

Depreciating  Theories.

From  time  to  time  ideas  have  been  published
as  to  why  the  Great  Pyramid  was  made  of  the
precise  size  we  find  it,  sometimes  giving  rather
learned  grounds ;  and  sometimes  declaring  the
cause  to  have  been,  merely  the  result  of  ignorant^
overbearing  pride  of  a  tyrannous  king,  striving
after  brute  magnitude,  without  regard  to  quality^
mind,  or  soul.

^  William  Petrie,  after  a  much  more  extensive,  critical,  literary,
and  adentifio  investigation  of  the  authorities,  has  concluded  9165  to
be  more  probably  the  truth  ;  and  he  may  be  right ;  I  would  even
say  that  he  has  a  high  d^^ree  of  probability  on  his  side.  But  no*
thing  short  of  removing  the  rubbish  obstructions  at  the  Pyramid,
and  taking  new  measures  with  improved  apparatus,  will  be  suffi-
cient to  settle  the  point ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  the  length  of  the
base  sides  of  the  Great  Pyramid  should  not  be  measured  with  all  the
microecopic  accuracy  of  Colonel  Colby's  '  Compensation  bars;*  which
have  already  been  employed  in  several  countries  to  measure  the
length  of  base-lines  with  extreme  success, — ^but  at  vastly  more
es^pensCy  both  of  time,  labour,  and  money,  than  has  ever  yet  been
bestowed  on  the  base-mensuration  of  the  Qreat  Pyramid;  and
without  which,  no  first-rate  result  in  accuracy  can  ever  be  expected*


206    InteUectuaUty  of  Oreai  Pyramid,   [ch.  24

In  the  midst  of  these  uncertainlies^  a  few
Egjrptologists  haye  been  so  hardy  as  to  declare
that  there  was  no  reawn  at  all;  and  that  the
Great  Pyramid,  in  a  manner,  simply  grew  to  its
present  size,  and  stopped  there.  For,  according
to  the  building  theoiy  framed  for  subsequent  pure
sepulchral  pyramidcf,  by  Mr.  J.  Wild,  architect,
and  Dr.  R  Lepsiu%— each  ancient  Egyptian  king,
on  his  accession,  began  the  pyramid  which  was
eventually  to  be  his  tomb,  in  the  following
manner  :-In  the  first  year  of  his  reign  be  ex*
cavated  a  subterranean  burial-chamber,  with  an
inclined  entrance-passage ;  and  placed  a  few
blocks  of  squared  stone  over  it  In  the  second
year  he  added  another  layer  of  stones  vertically,
and  increased  the  lower  one  proportionally  side-
ways ;^  and  so  went  on,  every  year,  until  he  died.
Then  his  friends  entombed  him  in  the  subter-
ranean burial-chamber ;  and  finished  his  pyramid
outside,  by  casing  it  smoothly  with  bevelled  stones.

Hence  the  size  of  any  Pyramid,  according  to
this  theory,  is  merely  a  consequence  of  the  length
of  reign  enjoyed  by  its  king.

^  See  Plate  10  in  Our  Inheritance  in  ikt  Oreai  Pyramid,  by  a
PUszi  Smyth;  A.  Strahan  and  Co.»  1864.


OB.  24.]         Depreciating  Theories.  207

Whether  this  was  the  case  with  sabsequent
pTnmidfl^  we  do  not  pretend  to  say  or  dispute, —
bat  altogether  doubt  Ihe  application  of  sudi  a
principle  to  the  Oreat  Pyramid,  for  the  following
mnongst  other  reasons  :—

IsL  On  this  method,  the  subterranean  chamber
—the  first  begun,-Bhould  be  the  completest  part
of  the  whole  Great  Pyramid.  But  in  place  of
that,  it  is  absurdly  unfinished,  and  only  haJf  cut
out  of  the  rock.^

2d.  Herodotus  gathered,  upwards  of  2300  years
ago,  a  most  decided  and  extensive  tradition  in
Egypt, — and  in  precisely  a  matter  where  popular
tradition  may  be  trusted, — ^to  the  effect  that  the
building  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  an  nnpre-
cedentedly  great  and  well-organized  work  from
the  first:  no  less  than  100,000  men  being  em-
ployed upon  it  at  once,  regularly  reUeved  every
three  months  by  others.  These  enormous  gangs
too,  were  kept  very  energetically  to  their  tasks,
while  the  building  was  in  progress ;  though  that
was  only  for  a  limited  number  of  the  many  years
during  which  the  king  reigned.    And,

Zd.  There  is  no  appearance  of  changing  times,

1  See  Plate  4,  yoL  iiL  of  Life  and  Work  at  the  Oreat  Pyramid.


208    Intellectuality  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  24.

or  vaiying  fashions,  no  sign  of  year-to-year  work
long  drawn  out,  no  smaU  beginnings  after-
wards  expanded  or  patched  up  with  other  things^
throughout  all  the  masonry  of  the  Great  Pyramid,
so  far  as  it  has  yet  been  examined.  But  every-*
ihi^  »  fte  JL«y  mdi^te.  that  i„  dedg^
knew  beforehand  how  large  he  was  going  to  make
the  monument,  and  prepared  accordingly.  In
{act,  tiie  Great  Pyramid, — ^in  so  many  other
pointe  more  truly  and  ptirdy  a  pyramid,  than
any  other  of  the  pyramids  of  Egypt, — ^was  also
pre-eminent  in  Promethean,  rather  than  Epi*
methean,  symptoms  and  accompaniments.^

A  Determined  Attack.

An  idea  not  quite  so  slighting  to  the  scientific
claims  of  the  Great  Pyramid  and  its  architect,
as  the  previous  accidental  or  spontaneous  hypo-
thesis^— ^was  that  published  by  Colonel  Sir  Henry
James,  last  November.  For  that  eminent  officer
did  in  so  far  admit  the  unity  of  the  building,  and
the  Prometheanism  of  the  design, — ^but  coidd
find  no  better  reason  or  higher  motive  for  such
immense  organizations  of  labour  having  been  set

I  See  p.  87.


GO.  24.]         A  Determined  Attack.  209

into  train,  in  an  early  age  of  the  world,  than  merely,
this ; — viz.,  that  the  Great  Pyramid  might  have
one  of  the  sides  of  its  square  base/equal  in  length
to  360  cubits ;  each  of  them  being  of  such  a  size^
as  now  to  measure  25-488  British  inches  long.^

The  length  of  base-side,  however,  hence  result-
ing, is  not,  as  stated  by  Sir  H.  James  (in  its
equivalent  of  feet),  9168,  but  so  much  as  9176*68
British  inches ;  and  this  quantity  lying  outside
all  the  measured  lengths  just  detailed, — cannot
be  accepted  without  demur,  or  at  least  not  until
it  receives  some  further  confirmation.  We  ask,
therefore,  what  was  the  importance  to  the  builder
or  designer  of  the  Pyramid  in  using  the  number
360  ;  and  what  are  the  merits  of  a  cubit  of  the
exact  length  stated,  or  25*488  British  inches?

As  to  the  number  360,  Colonel  Sir  H.  James
does  not  give  any  testimony  in  its  favour,  but
simply  employs  it  We,  therefore,  finding  it
neither  a  very  round  number,  nor  marked  out
anywhere  very  clearly  by  nature,  nor  deduciblc
from  the  Great  Pyramid  numbers  already  laid
down, — cannot  receive  it  as  necessarily  dominant;
and  we  rather  suspect  that  its  first  use  for  the

^  AiJienceum,  London,  November  16,  1867,  p.  650.

0


210   InteUectudUty  of  Great  Pyramid,    [ca.  24.

degrees  of  a  drde,  dates  onlj  £rom  Babylonian
times,  some  1600  jeaiB  after  the  building  of  ihe
Great  Pyramid ;  and  when  ^esbagesimal  division,
absolutely  unknot  to  the  Great  Pyramid,  was
coming  into  favour.

Andy  as  to  a  cubit  of  25'48l  iiidbes  long, —
seeing  that  tiothing  is  stated  by  Sir  H.  James  in
&vour  of  that  being  an  ilaiportant  tiatural,  or
scientific,  standard, — its  oiily  chance  oi  recogni-
tion depends  on  reason  being  ishown,  for  such  a
length  of  linear  measure  having  been  employed,
and  very  highly  esteemed,  in  ancient  Egypt,  at
the  date  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  foundation.

This  essential  point  Sir  H.  James  does  attempt
to  show;  but  we  fear  decidedly  fails  in,  because, —

1st.  EQs  own  measure  of  an  ancient  Egyptian
cubit,  unites  with  the  multitudinous  determina-
tions long  since  printed  for  the  same,  by  Sir  Isaac
Newton,  M.  Jomard,  Sir  Grardner  Wilkinson,  and
almost  all  Egyptologists;  i.e.  making  it  some-
thing close  to,  perhaps  within  a  few  hundredths  of
an  inch — ^his  own  is  within  a  thousandth  of  an
inch — of  20*7  British  inches;  an  absolutely  differ-
ent quantity  from  25*488  British  inches.

2d.  He  finds  an  Arab  cubit  recorded  about


CEL  24]         A  Determined  Attack  -  211

two  ceDtuiee  ago,  88  being  21*888  Britiah  inches
in  lei^tli ;  and  on  adding  ^tb  part  thereto,  he
finds  it  come  out  26*536  ;  or  moderately  close  to
25*488  inches.  This  is  true.  But  the  plan,  fSarr
fetched  and  more  than  do^btfal  in  propriety  even
as  a  method  of  usmg  the  said  Arab  cubit  in  its
own  day,— and  which  cubit  some  modem  authors
quote  at  a  much  less  figure,  or  as  21*39  to  21*32
inches  only,^— is  utterly  powerless  to  bridge  over
that  immense  gulf  of  time  which  separates  1600
A.D.  from  2170  RC. ;  or  to  prove,  that  the  builders
of  the  Great  Pyramid  necessarily  employed  a  cubit
of  25*488  inchefif,  in  laying  out  the  base  of  their
monument,  hecausCy  forsooth,  certain  Arabs  3700
years  afterwards,  used  a  cubit  between  21*888
and  21*32  British  inches  long  I    And,

Zd.  Sir  H.  James  falls  back  on  25*488  inches,
being  the  length  of  the  modern  *  derah '  or  land
cubit  of  Egypt.  His  authority  for  the  statement
is  a  little  Manual  on  '  the  weights  and  measures
of  all  nations,'  by  Mr.  Woolhouse,  published  in
Weale's  series  of   rudimentary  treatises.      The

1  Thi«  cabit  if  that  of  the  Nilometer  at  Blioda,  itated  by  Sir
Ckurdner  WiUdnaon,  in  Murray's  Effypikin  Handbook^  to  be  21^
ISngliwh  inches  long;  bat  quoted  from  M.  Ooate  at  641*5  mille-
metres.


212    InteUecttudity  of  Great  Pyramid,    [ch.  24.

excellent  mathematical  author  of  that  Manual,
was  never,  we  believe,  in  Egypt;  vtaa  unable,
when  applied  to  recently,  to  give  his  references  for
the  numbers  :  and  stands  directly  contradicted,
by  what  is  published  in  the  works  of  two  men
so  admirably  conversant  with  modem  Egypt^  as
Mr.  Lane  and  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson.^

^  Mr.  Lftne  writes,  at  p.  671  of  hii  Modem  Bg^pOamg,  6th  edit : —
*  Of  the  meMom  and  wei^ti  in  B^gypt,  I  am  not  aUe  to  giTo  aa

*  exact  acooant ;  for,  after  diligent  aeajroh,  I  ha^e  not  snooeeded

<  in  finding  any  two  specimens  of  the  same  denomination  perf eetiy

*  i^^reeing  with  each  other,  and  generally  the  difference  haa  been

*  considerable.'

'  The    diraa  hdedee  (or   cubit  of   the  ooontiy — the  common

<  Egyptian  cnbit),  which  is  naed  for  measnriDg  the  linen,  etc.,  mann*
'  factured  in  Egypt,  is  eqnal  to  22  inches  and  two-thirds.

'  The  diraa  ffindazeht  chiefly  need  for  measuring  Indian  goods,  ia

*  abont  26  inches.

'  The  dirua  I$tamboolee  (or  cnbit  of  Constantinople),  which  is  used
'  for  measnriDg  European  doth,  etc,  is  abont  26  inches  and  a  half.
*The  Feddatif  the  most  common  measure  of  land,  was,  a  few

*  years  ago,  equal  to  about  an  English  acre  and  one  tenth.  It  ia
'  now  less  than  an  acre.'

Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,  in  Murray's  Egyptian  Handbook  for  1867,


*  Measures  ov  Levoth.
'  I  Drah  beledee,  or  cubits  equal  to  22  to  22j(  inches  English.
<  1  Drah  Stamboolee,      .    equal  to  26  to  26}  inches  English.

*  1  Drah  Hindazee  (for  doth,  etc.),  equal  to  about  26  inches  l<^g1«*^

*  Laitd  Measures.

*  22, fonnerly24. Kharoobdi )  (  ^  f^^  T^,  *?,^  l\

orKlleh,    .        .    !      -{     ai*^3l*^'''^'*

*  13}  Kassobeh  or  rods,  a     1  Keerat

'  24  Keerat,  or  333  Kassobeh,      «>     1  Feddan  or  Acre.*


GH.  24]  EkvaJting  Ideas.  213

These  authors  indeed  agree  well  together^  in
setting  forth  the  present  '  cubit  of  Egypt^'  to  be
from  22  to  22*67  inches  long.  And  though
Indian  and  Turkish  cubits  of  26  and  26'5  inches
respectively,  are  used  in  the  shops  for  Indian  and
European  silks  and  doths^ — the  only  other  cubit
that  can  now  be  considered  national  in  Egjrpt^  or
as  connected  with  the  '  land,'  and  likely  to  be
tolerably  permanent,— is  that  of  the  Cairo  and
Rhoda Nilometer ;  and  is  stated  to  be  from  21*39
to  21 '3  2  British  inches  long.  In  fact,  approxi-
mating much  more  to  the  ancient  cubit  of  20*7
inches,  than  to  this  mjrstical  one  of  25*488  inches ;
which  latter,  too,  is  not  proved  to  prevail  now,
or  to  have  prevailed,  as  the  country  cubit  and
'land  measure  cubit,'  of  Egypt,  at  any  time
whatever,— either  ancient  or  modem.

Hence  we  are  compelled  to  try  some  other
hypothesis,  than  Colonel  Sir  H.  James's^  for  having
decided  the  Great  Pyramid's  absolute  bulk.

Elevating  Ideas.

The  method  of  depreciating  the  mind  and  aims
of  the  designer  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  having
failed  in  producing  a  sufficient,  or  even  a  probable.


il4  InUUectuaJity  of  Oreai  Pyramid,    [oh.  24.

reason  for  the  choice  of  its  particular  size ; — let
us  next  ixjt  though  only  as  a  tentative  proposi-
tion, something  more  respectful  to  that  unknown,
yet  evidentiy  excelling,  personage  of  primeval
times.

In  this  point  of  view  we  would  remark, — ^that
the  method  of  looking  to  one  side  of  the  base,
when  thisre  are  three  other  sides  to  dispute  with
it^ — ^is  not  the  neatest  principle  on  which  to
describe  the  size  of  a  Pyramid  (the  angle  of  whose
faces  has  been  already  determined).  We  should
rather  look  to  secure  a  feature  which  is  unique,
central  and  governing  to  the  whole, — ^and  such  a
feature  is, — ^the  vertical  axis.

This  vertical  axis  moreover  commends  itself  to
us,  at  the  Great  P3rramid»  by  its  being  the  w
radius  of  the  pervading  symbolization  of  its
shape.  Nothing  therefore  is  more  suitable,  than
that  this  IT  radius  should  have  been  made  of  such
a  lengtii  or  on  such  a  scale  of  size,  as  to  testify
something  else  scientific.  Let  us  ask  therefore
with  what  grand,  or  small,  radius  in  nature,
does  the  ir  radius  of  the  Great  Pjrramid  measure
itself  accurately,  and  in  even  terms  of  Great
Pyramid  numbers  ?


OH.  24]  MevcUing  IdeoUu  216

William  Pelqdei  under  guid^ce  of  the  general
bearing  of  all  tl^^  syetein  of  symbols  which  he
and  others  had  found  in  the  Great  Pyraoud,  was
led  towfuxls  the  close  of  last  year  to  expect  that
such  commensurable  natviral  radius  should  be,  the
mean  distance  of  thQ  earth  frongi  the  sun ;  and  that
the  numbers  10  and  9  shoi^d  be  pre-eminently  in-
cluded ;  thou^  it  was  sonte  time  before  he  could
fully  believe,  that  the  mean  solar  distance  from
the  earth  was  really,  simply,  and  precisely  10^
{ie.  1,000,000,000)  times  the  vertical  height  of
the  Great  Pyramid.

In  a  general  manner  we  may  remark,  that  this
idea  fulfils  a  vast  amount  of  scraps  of  Eastern
tradition,  coiiQecting  the  Pyramid  with  the  sun,
or  with  solar  light.  And  while  there  was  an
ancient  fancy  of  mythical  importance  among  the
Greeks  and  Bomans  (but  descended  to  them  from
earlier  times),-as  to  the  greater  gbiy  of  the
Pyramid  when  the  sun  rose  to  so  notable  a  height
in  tiie  sky  at  noon  witi  advancing  sununer,  that
then,  as  they  expressed  i1^  the  Pyramid  '  devoured
its  own  shadow,' — or,  according  to  a  phrase  since
found  in  use  among  the  Peruvian  worshippers  of
the  sun, — 'when  the  sun  sets  with  all  his  beams


216    InteUectuaUty  of  Oreai  Pyramid,    [cm.  24.

on  every  face  of  the  Pyramid  at  once/ — ^let  us
ask  how  the  sun  does  shine  on  the  Pyramid  under
those  circumstances  1

Why,  it  shines  simultaneously  on  all  the  five
comers,  and  four  triangular  faces,— or  nine  chief
parts;  which  fact,  combined  with  the  abiding
decimal  system  of  the  whole  building,  makes  10^
a  number  worth  investigating.  All  the  more  too,
when  the  Pyramid  is  of  such  shape,  that,  with  an
error  of  only  ^^^th,  it  rises  nine  parts  towards
the  sun,  for  every  ten  parts  that  it  stretches  along
horizontally,  in  the  direction  of  its  base's  semi-
diagonal  lengtL

Now  the  vertical  height  or  ir  radius  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  has  already  been  shown,  in  Life  and
Work,  to  be  about  5819  (subject  to  error  of  deter-
mination of  perhaps  ±16)  British  inches;  and
that  quantity  being  reduced  to  miles, — the  term
in  which  sun's  distance  is  usuaUy  expressed,-
becomes  '09184.  This  again  being  multipUed  by
the  10^  of  the  above  formula  gives  91,840,000
miles  ±260,000  miles,  for  the  Great  Pyramid's
expression  of  the  sun's  mean  distance  from  the
earth.

How  then  does  this  agree  with  modem  science?


CH.  24.]  Elevating  Ideas.  217

Were  we  still  living  in  the  state  of  knowledge
prevailing  from  the  beginning  of  the  present
century,  to  about  eight  years  ago, — the  answer
of  every  astronomical  treatise  throughout  Europe
and  America,  would  have  given,  for  the  true
determination  of  the  sun's  distance,  as  computed
from  the  last  observed  transit  of  Venus,  the  exactly
defined  quantity  of  95,293,055  miles.

In  such  case  the  Great  Pyramid  quantity  of
91,840,000  ±260,000  British  miles,  would  have
been  condemned  as  utterly  too  small  Tet  the
Pjrramid  would  not  have  been  wrong ;  its  sym-
boUzation  would  only  have  been  discovered  too
soon,  and  before  the  world  was  prepared  to  re*
ceive  or  able  to  appreciate  it.

Of  all  the  material  elements  for  supporting  life
on  the  earth,  none  are  so  dominant  as  those  de-
pending on  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun ;  and
of  all  problems  in  natural  science,  none  is  so
important  as  the  true  distance  of  the  sun.  Upon
that  depend  our  knowledge  of  its  weight  and  size  ;
the  weight,  sizes,  and  distances  of  the  planets ;
and  even  the  masses,  distances,  and  light-power  of
the  fixed  stars  themselves.     The  sun's  distance


218    InteUectudUtyo/Oreat  Pyramid.    [cH.  24.

therefore  is  the  great  problem;  and  modem
science  has  spared  neither  time  nor  expense  in
^deavouring  to  settle  it«  But  the  distance  is  so
greats  and  our  baseline  for  measuring  it  (the
earth's  breadth)  so  comparatively  sioall, — ^that
modem  science  has  found  her  telescopes^  micro-
meters, divided  oircles,  and  mathematical  methods,
all  taxed  beyond  their  powers  in  accurately  de-
terming  what  the  distance  is.

Hence  on  new  observations  being  made  in  1862
(at  the  opposition  of  Mars)  the  solar  distance  was
found  to  be,  by  those  results^  not  96,293,065,  but
more  nearly  91,430,000  miles.  While  again,  ex-
tensive recomputations  of  the  old  observations
having  been  made  during  the  last  year,  in  America,
by  Professor  Simon  Newcombe, — especially  by  em-
ploying correcter  modem-determined  longitudes
of  the  places  of  observation, — ^the  most  probable
quantily  is  now  stated  to  be  92,380,000  miles.^

Modem  determinations  then  of  the  mean  solar
distance,  though  pushed  on  by  the  whole  strength
of  modem  science,  are  only  oscillating  on  either
side,  and  at  every  fresh  attempt  are  approaching

^  Mr.  Petrie's  result^  from  his  inyestigated  height  of  the  Gre«t
Pyramid,  and  without  knowledge  of  Prof eaior  Newcombe**  numbers,
amounti  to  92,098,000


OB.  24]     General  CimsidercUions  thereon.     219

closer  and  closer  to  the  Great  Pyramid  sjrmboliza-
tioh  in  days  of  old ;  and  not  until  the  next  good
observing  transit  of  Venus  over  the  sun's  disk,  or
in  1882  A.D., — ^will  any  result  be  probably  at-
tained, that  can  be  confidently  relied  on,  as  more
accurate.

General  Considerations  thereon.

The  state  of  things  just  mentioned,  is  worthy
of  the  gravest  attention.  Modem  science,  on
account  of  the  excessive  difficulties  sarrounding
the  case,  cannot  determine  the  important  problem
of  the  sun's  distance  within  moderately  close
limits.  It  is  only  within  the  last  seven  years,
that  its  numbers  have  been  even  respectabla  A
hundred  years  ago,  the  best  approved  scientific
result  was  no  less  than  10  millions  of  miles  in
error.  Two  hundred  years  ago,  it  waa  66  miUioiw
of  miles  in  error;  and  for  the  1900  previous
years,  it  was  8  7  millions  of  miles  in  error ;  and
previous  to  that  again,  92  millions  of  miles  in
error ;  or  more  than  99-hundredths  of  the  whole
quantity  concerned.*

^  These  few  particiilaxB  are  drawn  from  an  extenaiye  paper  on  the
Bnbject^  recently  oommunicated  to  the  Boyal  Society,  £dinbatgh«
by  Mr.  William  Petrie,  C.E.


220    InteilectucUity  of  OrecU  Pyramid.   [oH.  24.

That  was  at  the  dawn  of  human  science,  the
origin  of  the  Grecian  schools,  and  the  beginning
of  man's  thoughts  being  turned  towards  ascer-
taining for  himself  any  of  the  data  of  the  heavens
in  number,  weight,  and  measure.  And  yet,  1700
years  earlier  still,  or  in  2170  Ra,  a  building  was
erected  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  containing  in
its  chief  substance  a  permanent  expression  of
that  quantity, — put  in  without  hesitation,  or  de-
lay, or  apparentiy  any  sensible  error !

Some  objectors  will  indeed  say, — ^that  it  is
absolutely  impossible  for  men  who  lived  4000
years  ago,  without  telescopes,  and  without  obser-
vatories, in  the  Southern  hemisphere  as  well  as
the  Northern,  to  have  approximated  in  any
degree  to  the  real  distance  of  the  sun.  And  in
so  far  we  allow  they  have  reason  on  their  side ;
for  no  mere  men,  by  science  of  human  cultivation,
— which  is  an  affair  of  gradual  progressive  de-
velopment,— ever  could  have  done  anything  of
the  kind  accurately;  and  they  never  did  so,  at
any  date  of  the  world's  history  earlier  than  the
last  century.  The  ancient  Egyptians  too,  them-
selves, knew  nothing  of  tiie  sun's  distance,  and
hieroglyphed  the  earth  as  a  flat.


CH.  24.]  General  Considerations  thereon.       221

But  then,  while  the  Great  Pyramid  facts  are
certainly  such  as  we  have  described ; — the  Bible
tells  us,  that  in  very  early  historic  days,  wisdom,
«.dn.e«c.Ii^otioJ  for  bdldin^  were  <»-
casionally  imparted  perfect  and  complete,  for
some  special  and  unknown  purpose,  to  chosen
men,  by  the  Author  of  all  wisdom.  For  those
therefore  who  believe  the  Bible,  there  does  seem
a  possible  way  out  of  the  difficulty, — though  to
those  who  do  not  believe  in^that  Book's  inspira-
tion words, — and  trust  only  to  Darwinian  and
Crawfiirdian  theories  of  human  development  by
innate  powers  out  of  an  atom,  or  an  ape,  or  a
bestial  savage, — the  Great  Pyramid,  a  silent  but
majestic  spectator  of  the  whole  historic  period  of
man  as  yet,— is  constantly  giving  forth  a  witness
which  they  camiot  explain.

We  do  not  however  at  present  wish  to  enter
on  the  argument,  of  whence  came  the  knowledge
which  designed  the  Great  Pyramid  to  be  what  it
is,  as  ascertained  by  recent  measure ; — because  we
are  stiU  only  at  the  beginning  of  the  series  of
testimonies  which  that  building  has  to  give.
Enough  therefore  to  add  now,  that  while  modem
science  is  still  going  on  improving  its  determi-


222    InteUectuaUty  of  Oreat  Pyramid,  [oh.  24.

nations  of  the  sun-distance, — and  while  there
may  be  obtained,  by  renewed  measurement  at  the
Great  Pyramid,  some  slightly  different  value  for
its  vertical  height,^ — ^the  formula  admits  of  no
alteration.  10^  &x  instance,  would  not  suit  the
circumstances  of  the  Pyramid  when  tiie  sun  is
dominant^  and  would  make  the  solarnlistance  so
small  as  to  thrust  the  eartii  into  the  fervid  heat
inside  tiie  orbit  of  Mercury;  while  10^^  equally
unsuitable  in  principle,  would  e:q)el  our  planet
into  regions  of  cold  beyond  the  orbit  of  Saturn.

10^  is  the  only  simple  expression,  which  seems
to  be  at  once  suited  by  nature  and  art  to  be  the
expression,  and  at  the  same  time  to  give  the  true
distance  of  our  earth  from  the  sun.  That  expres-
sion, we  mean,  when  combined  witii  tiie  height
bestowed  on  the  Great  Pyramid  by  its  builder.
And  such  height,  not  only  realizes  the  solar  pro-
blem under  the  appropriate  formula,  but  is  a  veiy
unique  and  remarkable  height  in  itself

It  is  the  greatest  height,  for  example,  of  any
building  ever  yet  erected  by  man.  For,  though  the

^  While  my  own  idea  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  height,  haa  already
been  given  as  5819  ±16  British  inches ;  William  Petrie  inclines  to
a  mean  quantity  of  5835  of  the  same  inches,  with  a  much  smaller
probable  OTor.


OR.  24.]  General  CannderatioM  thereon.      223


Jirst  known  specimen  of  all  htunan  arcldteetare,
yet  the  Great  PTtamid  obeys  to  little  the  detelop-
ment  laws  of  some  modem  MvarUs,  that  it  is  the
highest  of  all  known  architectural  w<»:k8  up  to
this  day.  Man  haa  often  tried  to  erect  higher
buildings^  as  in  the  Catiiedral  of  Cologne,  which
was  to  have  had  spires  6120  inches  high ;  but^
either  from  foundations  failing,  or  some  other
difficuhy.  such  ambitious  structures  have  invari-
ably  rtiped  Aort  to  4«r  !««««,  le.™g  d»
Great  Pyramid's  height/  still,  even  in  these  latter
days,  solitary  and  supreme  ov^  all  the  architec-
tural works  of  mankind.

At  one  time  it  used  to  be  a  fashion,  from  Pliny
amongst  pagan  Komans,  down  to  very  modem
society, — ^to  admit  the  Great  Pyramid's  superior
size,  wonder  at  it  somewhat  therefore, — ^and  then
abuse  the  king  under  whom  it  was  supposed  to

^  The  following  are  the  beighte  of  aome  of  the  principal  buildings
of  the  world,  chiefly  extracted  from  Fe^guaaon's  Architecture  : —


Britiiih  Inchea.

Great  Pyramid,  originally,  .

6819±16

Straaburg  Cathedral,  .         .         .         .

5616

St.  Stephen's,  Vienna,

5292

St  Peter's,  Borne,       .        .        .        .

6184

Amiens  Cathedral,      .        .        .        .

5088

Salisbury,  ..•,..

4848

Friburg,

4620

St  Paul's,  London,     .

4382

224    InteUectuaUty  of  Oreai  Pyramid,  [oh.  24.

have  been  erected,  as  the  most  oppressive  of
tyrants;  and  so  profligate  in  expending  the
national  wealth,  as  to  have  brought  ruin  on  his
country  and  well-deserved  execrations  on  his
own  nama

A  new  system,  however,  was  illustrated  last
winter, — ^when  an  untravelled  medical  gentleman,
at  a  meeting  of  the  Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,
scofied  veiy  bitterly  at  both  the  architecture,  and
the  costy  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  Its  architecture
was  so  poor,  he  said,  as  not  to  require  an  architect,
only  a  mason ;  and  any  mason  in  Scotland  could
build  as  good  a  pyramid  as  the  Great  Pyramid.
While  as  to  its  expense,  he  had  been  assured  by
an  architectural  friend,  that  it  would  not  cost
more  than  a  million  of  pounds  sterling — a  sum
which  had  been  exceeded  two  or  three  times,  both
by  atiQ  Taje  Mahal  and  other  great  Mohammedan
tombs  in  India.  Exceeded  too  many  times,  as
all  the  world  knows,  by  our  Crimean  War,  whose
good  results  have  already  vamshed  into  thin  air  ;
eaten  up  in  a  few  months  by  the  mere  expense  of
transports  for  the  Abyssinian  expedition — and
smoked  away  by  our  nation,  in  the  form  of
tobacco,  nearly  three  times  every  year.


OH.  24.]  Oenerai  Considerations  thereon.       225

Whether  the  building  of  the  Great  Pyramid  is
rightly  to  be  inveighed  against  for  the  large,  or
ridiculed  for  the  small,  sum  it  cost^ — ^we  do  not
pretend  to  bslj}  *  Our  own  minute  examination
of  the  building  in  1866  A.D.,  remarkably  im-
pressed us  with  the  fact,  that  an  undeviating
and  most  considerate  economy y  both  of  the  best
workmanship  and  the  finer  kind  of  material,  had
ruled  throughout  the  building.  But  that  a  build-
ing, which  could  not  be  otherwise  than  expensive,
if  it  required,  for  noble,  intellectual,  and  permanent
purposes,  to  represent,  amongst  many  other  things,
that  particular  size  and  mass  which  we  now  find
it  is  so  eminently  doing.

^  'Aristotle  {PoliL  viL  11)  oonsiden  th«m  (the  Pyramids  of
« "Egypt)  merely  the  result  of  great  labour,  displaying  the  power  of
'  kings,  and  the  misery  inflicted  on  the  people ;  which  Pliny  has

*  re-echoed  by  calling  them  an  idle  and  silly  display  of  royal  wealth

•  and  yanity  (zzxvi  12).  Later  writers  haye  repeated  this,  without
'  eyen  knowing  the  object  they  were  built  for,  and  it  would  be  un-
'  just  to  suppose  them  merely  monumental.' — Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,
at  p.  207  of  Rawlinson's  Herodatui,  voL  iL


226    InteUectuality  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [oh.  25.


INTELLECTUALITY   OF  THE
GREAT   PYRAMID-^^tntierf.


CHAPTER  25,

ITS  POSITIOir.

Ldtitiide.

In  fdrtherance  of  its  general  S3rstem  of  symboli*
zation,^  the  Great  Pyramid  requires  to  stand  in,
or  very  near  to,  the  latitude  of  30  degrees ;  so  as
to  have  the  pole  of  the  sky  at  a  certain  height
above  the  northern  horizon;  and  also  to  be  on
that  dividing  parallel  of  the  northern  hemisphere
of  the  earth,  which  has  an  equal  amount  of  the
terrestrial  semi-surface  to  the  north  and  south
of  it

By  careful  measures^  with  a  powerful  angular
instrument,  in  1865  A.D.,  the  Great  Pyramid^s  base
centre  was  found  to  be,  not  exactly  in,  but  only
1'  12'  south  of,  the  parallel  of  SO"*;  while  there

^  Life  and  Work  at  Ortat  Pyramid,  by  C.  Fiaszi  Smyth,  toL  iiL
pp.  40-52  and  198.


OH.  26.]  Orientation.  227

were  constractiye  indication^  that  the  site  had
been  carried  as  &r  northward,  or  towards  the
parallel  of  30""  even,  as  the  shape  of  the  hill  on
which  the  Great  Pyramid  is  built^  would  possibly
allow;  and  that  building  is  the  closest  to  the
position  of  all  the  Pyramids.

Orientation.

Again,  the  azimuthal  arrangement  of  the  Great
Pyramid  on  its  parallel  of  latitude,  whatever  that
may  be,  or  in  other  words  the  orientation,  i.e.,
astronomical  trending,  of  the  four  sides  of  its
base,  whether  to  the  cardinal  points  or  otherwise,
— is  a  feature  of  which  a  vast  deal  may  be  made
by  an  intellectual  designer  for  scientific  purpoises.

Any  one  can  find  out  the  north,  souths  east,
and  west  points  of  the  horizon  within  a  few
degrees ;  but  astronomy,  and  sometimes  of  a  high
practical  order,  is  necessary  to  ascertain  them  to
minutes  and  seconds.  Every  modem  astrono-
mical observatory  requires  to  be  built  pretty
closely  in  these  cardinal  directions;  and  the
instruments  inside,  make  up  in  their  still  exacter
positions,  for  any  residual  imperfection  of  the
masonry.


228    InteUectucdity  of  Great  Pyramid,    [ch.  25.

In  Ty^^^  Brahe's  time  (1577  A.D.),  when  astro-
nomy was  far  less  perfect  than  now,  and  rather  more
trost  was  placed  on  the  truth  of  the  walls ;  those
parts  of  his  celebrated  observatory  of  Uranibnrg,
were  thought  sufficiently  close  to  the  truth,  when
the  errors  did  not  exceed  18^  But  the  sides  of
the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  built  4000  years
previously,  are  now  found,  by  comparing  their
'  socket'  lines  with  the  Pole-star,  duly  reduced  to
the  pole  by  astronomical  methodf^  to  be  only
4'  35*' in  error.*

All  working  astronomers,  and  all  other  men
too,  who  know  the  difficulty  of  making  near  ap-
proaches to  accuracy  in  astronomical  observations,
and  especially  in  large  practical  works  founded
thereon, — ^were  delighted  with  this  proof  of  more
than  respectable  performance  in  the  primeval
building.  For  it  was  a  proof  showing,  as  they
have  expressed  the  idea, — that  astronomy  as  well
as  geometry  had  presided  over  the  construction  of
the  Great  Pyramid.

But  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson,  Bart,  and  MJ).,
assuming  a  position  fax  above  all  astronomers,

1  Hfe  and  Work  at  Great  PyranUdf  by  C.  PiA&D  Smyth,  toL  liL
p.  109.


GH.  25.]  Orientcaian.  229

recently  inveiglied,  before  the  Boyal  Society  of
Edinbuigh,  with  a  peculiar  vigour  of  diction,
against  the  whole  practical  astronomy  of  the
ancient  Great  Pyramid  builders.  Such  a  pro-
ceeding, by  such  a  man,  and  before  such  an
audience,  is  important  testimony  for  the  guiding
of  the  public,  whether  to  good  or  to  evil ;  and
was  thus  reported  by  the  Scotsman  newspaper
next  morning : —

'  He,'  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson,  '  did  not  believe  one  word
'  about  the  Pyramids  having  been  built  on  astronomical  prin-
'  oiples.  He  had  no  faith  whatever  in  what  was  called  the
'  orientation  of  the  Pyramids ;  they  might  as  well  tell  him
'  that  the  Begister  Office  and  the  College  were  arranged  on  a
'  similar  principle/

And  then,  according  to  the  Edinburgh  Evening
Courant's  report,  concluded  with —

'  It  was  a  spurious  archssology  and  astronomy  (hat  fed  on
'  such  fancies  and  romances.'

As  I  have  nothing  more  to  add  to,  and  nothing
to  alter  in,  the  hard  facts  of  astronomical  obser-
vations at  the  Pyramid,  which  are  printed  at
length,  and  with  the  chief  steps  of  calculation,  in
Life  and  Work,  vol.  ii, — and  speak  for  them-
selves to  every  astronomer, — I  turn  to  the  Renter
Office  and  the  College  of  Edinburgh,  quoted  by


230    InteUeclualiiy  of  Great  Pyramid,  [ge.  25.

Oie  aetf-constitutcd  judge,  as  bemg  just  as  truly
oriented  astronomicaDy  as  the  Great  Pyramid.

To  any  one  wlio  looks  over  a  map  of  Edin*
bmgfay  it  will  be  seen  immediately,  that  both
these  buildings  (which  are  but  modem  structures)
aie  erected  conformably  to  the  streets  which  pass
their  fronts ;  and  hare  therefore  the  same  orienta*
tion,  whatever  that  may  be.  The  Great  Pyramid^
on  the  contrary,  being  built  out  in  the  Libyan
desert,  and  as  the  first  of  all  buildings  in  that
neighbourhood, — ^had  no  help  firom  previously-
ezisting  streets  to  decide  its  orientation ;  and  yet
it  attained  to  4f  35'  ±  V  perhaps^  of  astronomical
trutii.  How  close  then  do  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's
model  buildings  in  Edinburgh  come  to  the  same
astronomical  meridian  position  1

An  ordinary  Edinburgh  map,  indicates  that
approach  to  be  somewhere  about  16  degrees:
which  implies  an  error,  nearly  two  hundred  times
larger  than  what  was  committed  at  the  Great
Pyramid  in  its  primeval  day.

WeU  did  Hugh  Miller  show  the  importance  of
any  one  intellectual  arrangement  being  several
ttmea,  though  only  a  dozen  times,  better  than
another, — after  this  manner.


CH.  25.]  Ohmcal  lUustratioru    *  281

When  the  proportion  of  brain  to  spinal  cord  in
the  early  geological  days  of  the  earth,  amounted
in  any  individual  animal  only  to  2%  hardly  any-
thing but  fishes  existed.  When  it  amounted  to
2*5,  there  were  reptiles.  When  3*1,  there  were
birds.  When  4*1,  there  were  mammals.  But
when  the  proportion  rose  to  23*1,  then,  as  he
eloquently  expressed  it, '  reasoning  and  calculating
man  had  appeared  on  the  scene.'

Surely  then,  if  we  find  an  astronomical  result
at  the  Great  Pjrramid,  not  twelve  times  only,  but
Actually  two  hundred  times  better,  than  at  two
rivally  quoted  and  professed  modem  architectural
examples, — ^it  is  not  over  much  to  claim,  that  there
must  have  been  some  mental  intention,  and  same
exertion  of  intellect,  at  the  former  well-placed
bmlding.

Classical  Illustration.

But  we  may  also  test  the  Great  Pyramid,  under
our  present  head,  against  those  intellectual  knights
of  the  ancient  world,  the  Greeks,  in  their  best
days.

In  the  goodly  volume  on  *  Astronomy'  pub-
lished by  the  Clarendon  Press  at  Oxford,  in  1867,


232    IfUeUectuaUty  of  OrecU  Pyramid,  [gh.  25.

— ^we  read,  at  p.  463, '  Fytheas  of  Marseilles,  330
^  B.O.,  first  noticed  that  the  so-called  Pole-star  was
'  not  situated  exactly  at  the  pole.'  And  as  we
find  by  calculation,  that  the  nearest  easily  visible
star  to  the  pole,  or  in  fact  the  then  polar  star,
must  have  been  some  6*  from  the  pole, — ^why,  the
immediate  predecessors  of  Fytheas,  or  the  Greeks
at  the  very  height  of  their  civilization, — must
have  been  labouring  under  an  uncertainty  of
±  6""  at  least,  in  finding  the  cardinal  points  by  the
Pole-star.

Yet  the  builders  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  though
living  1800  years  earlier,  had  placed  their  enor-
mous practical  structure,  within  a  seventieth  part
of  the  error  and  uncertainty  attending  the  long
subsequent  science  of  the  wisest  Athenian  sages ;
and  tiie  building  stands  in  its  place  to  tiiis  day,
testifying  contemporaneously  to  that  fact  with
far  more  certainty,  than  we  know  any  other
ancient  historical  facts  whatever.


CH.  26.]  Its  Weight.  233


INTELLECTUALITY   OF  THE

GREAT     PYRAMID-conttntierf.


CHAPTER  26.


ITS  WEIGHT.


So  nearly  solid  a  body  as  the  Great  Pyramid,
must  evidently  be  very  weighty  ;  and  it  is  also
evident,  that  the  designer  mighty  within  certain
limits,  make  the  building  of  whatever  weight  he
pleased,  without  too  altering  any  of  its  other
arrangements  as  to  shape,  size,  or  position, — and
this  merely  by  constructing  the  bulk  of  it,  of  a
heavier,  or  lighter  stone.

Now  at  the  Great  Pyramid  the  prevailing  stone
of  construction  is  remarkably  light ;  far  lighter,
bulk  for  bulk,  than  granite  ;  considerably  lighter
even  than  what  goes  by  the  name  of  *  common
stone '  in  most  of  our  tables  of  specific  gravity.
Was  there  anything,  then,  intellectually  gained,  by
using  so  anomalously  light  a  stone  ?    Yes>  we


234    InteUectualUy  ofOreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  26.

may  now  answer,  after  having  made  the  calcula*
tions.  For  the  employment  of  any  other  known
stone,  or  the  building  being  of  any  other  shape
or  size  than  it  is,  or  with  much  more  hollow
space  inside, — ^would  have  prevented  the  Great
Pyramid's  weight  fix)m  forming,  the  very  round
and  even  decimal  fraction  which  it  appeals  to  do,
of  the  weight  of  the  whole  earth  I

This  fraction  is  the  l-1000,000,000,000,000th,
part ;  but  whose  denominator  may  be  more  neatly
expressed  as,  10^^' ;  numbers  which  remind  both
of  the  shape  of  the  Pyramid,  and  the  dimensions
which  are  necessary  to  express  solidity,  a  chief
element  of  weight.  Three  sorts  of  material  also,
of  different  specific  gravities,  have  to  be  taken
into  account,  in  acccordance  with  the  varying^
amounts  to  which  they  occur  in  the  Great
Pyramid.     The  calculation  can  hardly  be  any-


Bpoifto  gnvlly  la  twim  of
•Hth'a  ipaalAo  gnrUyiiBl.

^  Granite,  an  inconsiderable  amount^      •                 a.  0*479

Kmnmolite  limestone,  nearly  Hfchs  of  the  whole,*  «  0*412
Mokattam  stone  for  casing  and  linings,  Ath  of

whole.    See  yoL  iii.  p.  177  of  Life  and  Work,  «  0*367

Common  stone  of  the  usual  engineers'  tables,        «     0*442
Basalt  of  Egypt, —     0-500

*  Determined  by  myielf  on  a  fragment  of  11*5  lbs.  and  broken  oat  of  the  heart
of  a  mneh  larger  maii.— December  1807.    0.  P.  &


cot.  26.]


Its  Weight.


236


thing  but  an  approximate  one ;  and  the  accord-
ance found,  or  within  ^thr^^  ^^  ^^  whole^  was
both  more  than  had  been  expected,  and  more
than  some  of  the  data, — as  the  real  specific
gravity  of  a  great  part  of  the  interpal  material-
can  be  certainly  known  to  be.  And  yet,  on  com-
municating the  results  up  to  this  point,  to  Mr.
W.  Petrie  in  London, — ^he  found,  that  by  merely
computing  the  bulk  of  the  earth  (with  specific
gravity  assumed  as  5*7  that  of  water)  with  more
attention  to  small  corrections,  the  accordance  was
improved  many  fold.

Beferring  the  reader,  however,  to  Appendix  4,
where  the  numerical  particulars  are  given  just  as
they  have  thus  far  turned  out,  and  for  whatever
they  are  worth, — ^we  advance  to  one  more  general
characteristic  of  the  entire  Pyramid.


236    InteUectudlity  qfOreat  Pyramid,  [ch.  27.


INTELLECTUALITY    OF    THE

GREAT     PYRAMlD-continued.


CHAPTER  27.


ITS  HEAT.


Standing  as  the  Great  Pyramid  practically
does^  on  the  latitude  line  which  equally  divides
the  surface  of  the  northern  heniisphere  of  the
world,  as  a  sphere,  between  the  pole  and  equator, —
there  is  at  once  a  close  approach  of  its  climate  to
being  the  mean-climate  of  aQ  the  earth's  surface,
mile  for  mile ;  or  at  least  of  every  individual
particle  of  its  area,  duly  summed  up,  in  every
navigable  sea  and  habitable  land.

The  latter  restriction,  by  throwing  out  of  con-
sideration the  small  circle  of  unvisitable  circum-
polar  frozen  region, — would  have  the  eflfect  of
slightly  raising  the  mean  temperature  otherwise
attributable  to  the  world  ;  and  which  temperature
might  otherwise  be  rather  below  what  is  experi-


CH.  27.]  Its  Heat.  237

enced  for  the  air  at  the  Great  Pyramid;  and
much  bdow  what  is  experienced  in  that  part  of
the  parallel  of  30"*  of  latitude,  where  the  line
passes  through  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  This  large
amount  of  difference  for  the  Egyptian  valley,  is
nearly,  if  not  quite,  removed  at  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, by  its  elevation  on  a  hill  top,  2580  British
inches  above  the  sea-level.  Hence,  therefore,  it
comes  just  within  the  range  of  residual  errors  of
modem  science, — ^whether  the  mean  annual  tem-
perature of  the  air  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  does,
or  does  not,  coincide  with  the  same  important
temperature  element  for  the  entire  surface  of  the
earth ;  and  also,  whether  that  heat  quantity  does
not  amoimt  to  a  peculiar  division  of  temperature
especially  appropriate  for  the  Great  Pjrramid;
viz.,  a  temperature  of  one-fifth ;  or  one-fifth  the
space  between  the  boiling  and  freezing  points  of
water.

The  actual  temperature  observed  by  myself
inside  the  Great  Pyramid,  is  nearly  6**  Fahrenheit
too  high  for  the  above  conclusion ;  but  imder
circimistances  of  anomalous  temperature  dis-
turbance, which  might  unduly  raise  a  thermo-
meter to  that  amount ;  while  the  deductions  from


238    InteUedudUty  of  Oreat  Pyramid,    [ch.  27.

a  meteorological  journal  kept  for  four  months
outside  the  Pyramid,^  seem  to  make  the  air
climate  come  within  only  l""  Fahrenheit  of  the
expected  theoretical  temperature-point

1  Life  and  Work  at  GretU  Pyramid^  by  0.  FiAssi  Smyth,  toL  u.
pp.  205-270 ;  and  Yd.  iii  pp.  178-202.


CH.  28.]    Intellectuality  of  Great  Py^mrUd    239


INTELLECTUALITY   OF    THE
GREAT  PYRAMlD^^nued.


CHAPTER  28.

UNITS  AND  STANDABDS  OF  O.  FTEAMID  MEASURE.

Linear.

HAvma  thus  briefly  touched  on  each  of  the
five  general  qualities  of  the  whole  Great  Pyramid
building,  viz.,  shape,  size,  position,  weight,  and
heat; — ^in  every  one  of  which  traces,  and  even
consilient  traces,  of  intention  and  purpose,  highly
intellectual  have  been  found, — we  turn  now  to
some  of  that  structure's  minor  arrangements ;  and
shall  continue  to  pursue  therein,  the  same  unex-
ceptionably  contemporary  method  of  testing  the
parts  of  the  ancient  building  concerned,  by  the
most  rigorous  of  recent  measures  yet  procured,^

^  We  trait  that  our  readers  will  always  understand,  that  the  best
measures  procured  as  yet,  are  by  no  means  the  best  procurable  in
the  present  state  of  modem  science ;  if  only  Govemment^  or  the
people,  would  be  at  the  ea^penM  of  applying  the  mora  accurate


240  Units  and  Standards  ofQ.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

and  weighing  them  against  the  results  of  modem
science  applied  to  the  earth  and  the  sky.

The  absolute  size  of  any  ^r-proportioned  Pyra-
mid, having  once  been  stated  with  reference  to
its  vertical  axis, — ^the  sizes  of  any  other  parts  of
the  structure,  are  of  course  mere  mathematical
necessary  consequences  of  the  two  data  already
laid  down ;  and  we  need  not  expect  to  find  by
their  means,  any  more  intentional  coincidences
with  nature.  But,  if  we  measure  those  residual
Pyramid  lines  in  special  units  or  standards^
something  new  or  worthy  of  notice  may  come  to
light;  due  care  being  always  taken,  that  some
good  reason  in  nature,  or  expression  characteristic
of  pyramid  numbers,  shall  be  represented  by  the
absolute  size  of  such  units  or  standards.

Formation  of  Units  and  Standards.

Instructed  then  now,  by  what  many  and  vari-
ous predecessors  have  gradually  ascertained, —
we  may  put  the  case  shortly  thus, —

The  axis  of  rotation  of  the  earth,  is,  for  many

methodi  which  are  well  known  to  many  ezperto  ;  and  thereby  im-
proving  oor  knowledge  of  tome  of  the  facta  of  the  Great  Pyramid,
to  a  thonaaadth  of  their  present  range  of  uncertainty.


OH.  28.]  Fomuxtion  of  Units  and  Standards.  241

physical  and  metaphysical  reafions^  incompaiably
the  best  teirestrial  reference  that  can  be  employed
for  linear  measure.^    Let  that  axis  therefore  be

^  In  my  two  former  works,  Ovr  Inheritance  in  the  CfrecU  Pyramidf
and  L^e  and  Work  thereat^^-I  baTe  alluded  abondantly  to  what
the  late  John  Taylor,  Sir  John  Henchel,  and  othen  labBequently  to
them,  hare  written  on  this  point.  But|  as  a  sentence  on  p.  100,  in
the  introduction  to  Osllet*s  Logarithms  (Paris,  1795),  has  been  since
then  pointed  out,  as  containing  the  same  idea,^-I  gladly  annex  a
translation  of  the  chief  part  of  the  passage.  A  striking  passage  top^
to  haye  been  published  in  a  country,  all  whose  metrological  eflforti
since  then,  haye  been  directed  towards  the  propagation  of  a  stan-
dard, founded,  not  as  M.  Callet  would  recommend  for  all  nations^
on  the  aaaSf  but  on  part  of  the  eur/aeet  of  the  earth.  For  this,  is
how  that  distinguished  geometer  expresses  himself  :—

'  Men  haye  searched  a  long  time  for  a  uniyersal  measure  :  they

*  desired  that  it  should  be  afforded  by  Nature,  and  Nature  has  offered

*  one  to  which  they  haye  not  paid  any  attention.    It  was,  howeyer,

*  natural  to  say —  We  wi$h  for  a  measure  which  ehcUl  eerve  the  whole

*  earth ;  well  then !  let  us  take  the  axis  of  the  earth.  It  is  a
'  straight  line  ;  it  is  the  distance  from  one  pole  to  another ;  let  ua
'  compare  then,  to  this  diBtanoe,  all  those  that  we  wish  to  know.
'  If  men  take  up  this  yiew,  the  length  of  the  ten-millionth  part  of
'  the  earth^s  axis  being  called  the  standard,  they  will  find  for  the
'  mean  length  of  this  standard  3  feet  11  inches  French,  to  within

*  ,i,th  of  a  line.'

It  has  also  been  said,  that  in  a  work  of  CassinVe,  published  in
Amsterdam  in  1723,  there  is  a  recommendation  of  the  polar  axis  of
the  earth  as  a  reference  for  linear  measure.  I  haye  not  yet  been  able
to  meet  with  the  book  in  question ;  but  a  friend  who  has  kindly
looked  it  up  at  the  British  Museum  assures  me,  that  there  is  no
mention  of  the  polar  cucia  tor  such  purpose;  only  of  a  general
diameter,  anywhere  between  the  pole  and  equator.  Indeed,  savante
were  in  doubt  in  1723,  whether  the  earth  was  flattened  or  protu-
berant at  the  poles.  But  as  Cassini  proposed  to  diyide  such  general
semi-diameter  of  the  earth  into  10'  parts,  and  showed  certain
trigonometrical  advantages  to  flow  therefrom,  he  was  unconsciously
testifying  to  one  feature  in  the  principle  of  the  'sacred  cubit,'  as
the  10~'^  part  of  the  earth's  polar  axis.


242  Units  and  StafidcM^ofO.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

sabdivided,  illiistratiyely  of  the  pyramid  nnmbers^
into  five  hundred  millions  of  equal  parts ;  and  let
each  of  these  be  considered  a  unit  or  inck  of
Pyramid  linear  measure.

And  let  6x6,  or  26  of  these  units,  form  the
ftandard  or  cubit  of  the  same  measure ;  having
thence  the  property  of  being  the  ten-millionth
part  of  the  earth's  polar  semi-axis.  Or,  in  other
words,  10^  of  such  standards  will  measure  the
shortest  distance  fix)m  the  centre,  to  the  surface
of  the  earth,  at  either  pole.

This  is  in  so  far  an  ideal  arrangement  only ;
but  let  us  next  try  to  get  a  practical  knowledge
of  the  length  of  such  units  and  standards  by
reference  to  known  earth-measurea

The  best,  latest,  and  most  comprehensive  deter-
minations of  the  size  and  shape  of  the  earth, —
show,  that  its  polar  axis  is,  in  length,  somewhere
between  600,482,296,  and  600,622,904  British
inches;^  and  we  cannot  in  the  present  state  of
science  be  certain  of  coming  much  nearer.     If


^  See  CapUin  A.  B.  OUrke,  ILK  ;  in  the  Ordnance  Sarvey
Yolome,  entitled  Ccmpar%»on»  qf  the  Standards  qf  Lengthy  qf  Eng*
kmd,  France,  Belgium,  India,  and  Auitralia.

See  alao  Life  andWarkatthe  Qreai  Pyramid,  by 0.  Piam  Smyth,
ToL  u,  p.  450.


OH.  28.]  F(>r7ncU%(m  of  Units  and  Staruki^ris.  243

therefore,  having  reference  to  this  residual  error,
we  subdivide  the  mean  of  the  two  quantities  given
by  five  hundred  millions, — we  obtain,  for  the
length  of  one  of  the  Pyramid  unitet,  in  terms  of
British  inches,  1*00101,  with  an  uncertainly  of
±  -00004.

While  the  Pyramid  standard  or  cubil^  being  25
of  these  units,  must  necessarily  measure  in  British
inches,  25*025,  with  an  uncertainty  of  ±'001.

These  results,  in  themselves,  we  presume,  will
be  objected  to  by  no  one ;  though  some  person
may  very  properly  inquire,  what  material  con-
nexion has  either  the  theoretical  unit  or  theo-
retical standard  with  the  actual  Great  Pyramid  ? .

To  this,  we  answer,  as  a  beginning, — ^that  the
said  standard  goes  into  the  length  of  one  side  of
the  Pyramid's  base  (supposed  to  be  9142  British
inches^),  365*3  timea  Or,  so  nearly  the  number
of  days  and  portions  of  a  day  contained  in  a  year,
that  we  are  inclined  to  suspect  that  the  exact  and
true  quantity  may  have  been  intended.  We  are
prevented,  indeed,  from  pushing  the  examination
closer  at  this  point  just  now,  by  the  large  amount
of  uncertainty  hanging  over  even  the  best  of  the

^  See  CliApter  24^  p.  205.


244  UnU$andSUjmdardsqfG.Pyrmmd.laL29.

base-flide  measmes  yet  made  at  ^  Gieat  Pjriamid,
bjr  all  modem  nationa^  But  we  may  lemaik,  in
ecmnezion  with  another  feature  of  the  building^
fhatlhereare^^r  similar  odea  to  Ihe  base;  which
ndes^  expressed  in  terms  of  the  I^rramid  cnbit  or
standard  (if  perfect  &r  one  of  Ihem),  will  caose
the  whole  four  to  represent  nnmericanj,  the
nmnber  of  years  in  which  the  fraction  of  a  day
at  the  end  of  a  year,  is  practically  restored  to  a


1  ThiB  leDgtli  of  bMeride,  H  wffl  be  mambered,  b  stfll
tsbi,  aoootding  to  my  mtiimtit,  by  tha  amoant  ol  ±  25  mdMiL
Tbeae  limiU  qioio  allow  of  Mr.  Pekiia's  ooodiiaioii  from  all  tbe  ma»-
■nrai^  of  9165  Briiiah  indiea^  bciag  Tarj  prdbaUy  the  actoal  fact  of
the  bnfldiiig.  H  that  be  ao,— the  Fjrnmid  cubit  of  25-025  Britiah
inehei^  goea  366*14  timea  into  the  baae-aide;  and  all  that  we  are
feaaooiDg  on  toochiog  aojor  d*ya,  appUea  really  to  the  earih'a  sidereal
daya,  or  timea  of  ita  rerolvtion  roiuid  tta  mjom,  aa  meaaaied  by  the
recarrence  of  a  diataat  fixed  atar  to  the  meridian  of , any  place.  Thia
quantity  would  be,  under  many  pointa  of  yiew,  the  higher  acientific
eonoeption  to  hare  expieaaed  in  the  boildiBg ;  bnt  the  aober  doubt
Immediately  ariaea,— '  ia  it  ao  expreaaed  ?'

The  anawer  cannot  be  rendered  with  practical  certainty,  until
iome  Ooremment^  or  nation,  haa  ordered  the  baae  of  the  Great
Pyramid  to  be  meaanred  with  the  aame  care  (and  for  that  end  at
iomething  like  the  aame  expenee)  aa  the  uaual  baae-linea  employed
in  moat  of  our  large  trigonometrical  annreya.  The  operation,  when
performed  (say  to  the  accuracy  of  ±  1-lOth  of  an  inch,  or  less,  on
n  run  of  9000  inches),  might  of  course  show,  that  the  Great  Pyramid
baae-aide  was  neither  365-24,  nor  366-24  times,  25*025  British  inches,
—bnt  some  awkward,  unscientific,  and  non-symbolizing  number;  and
such  a  proving  of  non-intellectuality  against  the  building's  original
designer,  would  delight  some  persons  extremely.  Would  that  it
might  happily  prevail  with  those  who  are  in  power  in  high  places,
to  have  the  work  performed  forthwith,  and  by  three  independent
seta  of  observers,  instruments,  and  prooeases  I


CH.  28.]  Formation  of  Units  and  Standards.  246

whole  number:  a  knowledge  of  whicli  fraction
and  which  cycle,  is  a  necessary  beginning  and
foundation  for  all  the  chronological  reckonings  of
mankind.  And  this  very  admirable  result  ap-
pears only,  when  the  base-side  is  measured  by  a
standard,  whose  length  is  founded  on  an  even
Pj^ramid  portion  of  that  axis  of  the  earth,  whose
existence  is  a  function,  and  necessary  accompani-
ment, of  the  diurnal  rotation  itself.

Such  coincidence  working  into  coincidence,  and
with  the  effect  of  developing  yet  farther  those
earth  and  solar  relations  already  commenced  in
other  portions  of  the  building, — cannot  be  merely
accidental

The  Pyramid  cubit,  which  brings  out  so  many
of  these  things  when  applied  to  the  Pyramid, —
is  no  doubt  a  very  scientific  standard  in  itself;
and  far  above  the  human  science  of  that  day,  or
the  following  3800  years  of  the  world's  history,
to  have  obtained  from  nature ;  and  is  not  known
to  have  been  in  use  among  any  Gentile  nations.
But  then  Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  shown  long  since,
that  a  length  very  much  like  that  of  the  Pyramid
cubit, — certainly  on  the  mean  of  all  his  data,
duly  weighted,  much  closer  to  it  than  the  amount


246  Units  and  Standards  o/G.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

of  his  probable  error, — ^was  the  sacred  cubit  of
the  Israelites ;  t.e.,  a  cubit  known  to,  and  appre-
ciated by  that  peculiar  people,  as  sacred  to  them,
before  they  entered  Egypt  under  Jacob,  and  after
they  leffc  it  under  Moses.^  A  cubit  too,  supposed
to  have  been  given  to  them  by  Divine  inspiration ;
used  by  them  for  none  but  sacred  purposes ;  and
distinguishable  only,  but  abundantly  and  easily,
ttom  the  profane  cubits  of  Egyptians,  Babyloni-
ans, and  all  other  Pagan  nations,  by  its  length,
without  necessary  reference  to  anything  else.

My  own  researches  also,  on  direct  Biblical
notices  of  the  'Ark  of  the  Covenant — the  most
solemn  portion  of  the  contents  of  the  Tabernacle,
— ^tend  strongly  to  confirm  Sir  Isaac  Newton's
views ;'  and  perhaps  even  to  settle,  far  within  the
present  residual  imperfections  of  our  knowledge
of  many  portions  of  the  data^ — that  the  scientific
cubit  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  the  sacred  cubit
of  the  Hebrews,  defined  to  them  by  inspiration,
~were  identical  as  measures  of  lengtL


^  See  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  '  Bissertatioii  on  CubitB,'  in  Professor
Greaves*  Works,  collected  by  Dr.  Birch.

See  also  Lffe  and  Work  €U  the  Cheat  Pyramid^  yoL  iL  pp.  341,
866 ;  and  the  Errata  thereto^  printed  at  the  end  of  this  book.

s  L\f€  and  Work  at  the  Cheat  PyramU  yoL  ii  p.  465.


CH.  28.]  Counter  Opinions.  247

Counter  Opinions.

Amongst  those  who  dislike  the  primeval  testi-
mony of  the  Great  Fjrramid — ^such  a  result  as
that  just  mentioned,  was  not  likely  to  pass  un-
questioned,  unattacked,  and  even,  as  the  discussion
has  recently  been  carried  on,  unbattered  against.
Nor  is  there  any  objection  to  be  taken  agaiiist
gentlemen  satisfying  their  individual  and  critical
judgments  in  that  manner,  if  th@y  will, — so  long
only  as  they  use  fair  arguments, — ^honest  methods,
and  tests  allowed  by  aU  scientific  men  in  eveiy
other  branch  of  science.

But  some  of  the  arguments  recently  employed
before  the  Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh  are  doubt^
ful  indeed  ;^  ex  gr. —

1st.  The  insinuation  that  it  was  very  ^strange/
— that  Professor  Smyth,  though  in  Egypt  for  the
purpose  of  measuring  the  Pyramid,  never  measured
from  socket  to  socket.

Yet  the  reasons  are  printed  and  published
plainly  enough  in  Life  and  Work;  and  show  that  Sir
J.  Y.  Simpson  might  as  well  taunt  Consul  Cameron
and  the  Abyssinian  captives  with  not  freeing

^  See  Appendix  2.


248  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

themselves,  in  spite  of  opposition  and  difficulties,
which  other  persons  have  thought  removable  only
by  sending  a  large  army,  at  an  expense  of  several
millions  of  money,  to  their  assistance ;  as  inquire,
with  well-feigned  astonishment,  before  a  pubKc
meeting,  why  the  Astronomer-Boyal  of  Scotland,
in  his  mere  private  capacity,  did  not  perform  a
taak^  whose  proper  and  accurate  execution  is  im-
possible for  any  but  the  wealthiest  of  men,  or
most  powerful  of  nations ;  and  has  never  yet  been
performed  by  any  coimtry  or  people.  The  said
Astronomer  had  not  a  farthing  of  public,  and
very  little  private,  money  when  in  Egypt ; — and,
although  anxious  to  do  whatever  he  individually
could,  towards  measuring  parts  and  features  of
the  Pyramid  already  laid  bare  for  measurement,
he  had  no  more  notion  of  undertaking  extensive
works  which  are  the  duty  of  Government^  than
the  wealthy  Baronet  is  believed  to  have,  of  em-
ploying his  private  means  for  paying  off  the
national  debt

2d.  '  Professor  Smyth  lays  down/ — so  says  the
same  writer,  '  as  the  meaaurement  of  one  side  of

*  the  base,  the  figures  9142  inches  (which  no  one

*  ever  found  it  to  be),  because  that  figure  will  be


CH.  28.]  Caunier  Opinions.  249

*  the  result  of  multiplying  the  number  of  the

*  days  of  the  year  by  what  he  calls  the  pyramidal
'  cubit,  made  up  of  twenty-five  mythical  pyra-

*  midal  inches.'

That  the  had  reason  given  above,  was  not  that
which  influenced  Professor  Smyth  in  considering
the  most  probable  length  of  a  base-side  of  the
Great  Pjnramid  to  be,  9142  British  inches, — ^must
be  apparent  enough  to  any  one  who  will  read
Life  and  Work  at  the  Oreat  Pyramid,  vol.  iiL
pp.  123  to  143 ;  for  there,  are  all  the  measures
the  author  could  collect  of  all  persons  who  had
measured  between  the  only  fiducial  points,  viz.,
the  comer  sockets.  All  such  are  given  in  full,
simply  and  independently  at  first ;  and  then
combined  together  according  to  a  stated  principle,
for  arriving  at  the  most  probable  mean;  and
what  other  plan  could  have  been  taken  in  the
cause  of  honesty  and  uprightaessl

The  critic  did  indeed  so  far  explain  in  his  dis-
course, and  did  it  with  some  emphasis,  as  though
denouncing  a  moral  delinquency  of  the  gravest
order, — that  the  figure  9142  which  Professor
Smyth  had  laid  down  as  the  base-side  length,  was
one  *  which  no  one  (observer  V)  ever  found  it  to  6e/


250  Units  and  Standards  o/Q.  Pyramid,  [gh.  28.

Precisely  so,  because  a  mean  of  several  vatying  ob-
servations^ seldom  falls  on  any  one  in  particular ;
and  in  this  case  three  of  the  observers  had  re-
corded results  all  above  9160,  while  a  fourth  one
was  nearer  to  9110.  Wherefore,  when  the  simple
mean  of  all  their  observations  is  taken,  how  can
it  possibly  fall  anywhere  else,  than  in  that  unfor-
tunate gap  which  divides  the  results  of  one  of
these  observers  so  widely  from  those  of  the  other
three?

Perhaps  indeed  that  fourth  observer's  result
was  rated  at  too  high  a  worth ; — and  ought  to
have  received  only  a  very  small  proportional
weight  to  any  of  the  others ;  but  even  if  it  had
been  actually  rejected,  and  if  the  three  results
above  9160  had  remained  the  only  ones  to  be
used, — the  mean  amount  of  them,  might  have
also  fallen  not  on  any  one  in  particular,  but  be-
tween two ; — and  therefore  the  moral  accusation
could  have  been  still  brought  up,  against  any  un-
fortunate computer, — if  there  be  any  truth  what-
ever in  its  principle — ie.,  that  the  final  quantity
he  had  arrived  at,  *  was  a  figure  which  no  observer
had  ever  found  it  to  6e.'

In  such  case,  however,  it  is  not  Professor  Smjrth


CfH.  28.]  Counter  Opinions.  251

only  that  is  being  attacked, — it  is  the  whole  prin*
dples  of  arithmetic,  and  all  those  who  make  use
of  them,  high  and  low.

3d.  A  more  serious  part  still,  was  performed  by
the  eminent  Baronet,  when  he  stated,  inter  alia^

*  that  if  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  standard  of  the  ''  sacred  cabit"
'  be  trae,  and  if  the  polar  axis  of  the  earth  be,  as  fondly  and
^  theoretically  imagined  by  Professor  Smyth,  600,000,000
<  pyramidal .  inches,  then  the  brim  of  the  lecturer's  hat  being

*  exactly  one-half  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  *'  sacred  cubit,"  that
^  brim  was  in  measurement  one  20,000,000th  of  the  earth's
'  polar  axis.'

The  said  hat,  and  a  scale  to  go  through  the
form  of  measuring  it  with,  had  been  laid  on  the
titled  lecturer's  desk  by  his  assistant,  before  the
discourse  began ;— and  when  the  right  time  came,
the  pretended  measurement  was  performed  on  the
hat,  in  place  of  the  sacred  cubit  of  Moses  as  deter-
mined by  Sir  Isaac  Newton ;  and  performed  with
so  much  unction  of  manner  and  look,  as  to  be
received  with  cheers  by  the  large  and  learned
audience  (with  a  few  exceptions),  in  the  hall  of
the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh.

Ridicule  has  always  been  held  to  be  a  powerful
weapon,  but  exceedingly  dangerous;  especially
when  employed  against  sacred  things.    Because,


252  Units  and  Standards  of  0.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

although  these  may  stand  their  ground  unmoved
in  themselves,— the  souls  of  many  good  and
worthy,  but  not  very  strong-minded  brethren,
amongst  the  spectators,  may  be  led  away.  They
were  led  away  on  this  occasion, — and  Sir  J.  Y.
Simpson's  position  is  not  an  enviable  one,  if  he
drew  them  from  the  truth.

To  take  the  matter,  however,  only  in  its  less
serious  light, — after  higher  minds,  whether  in  the
primal  ages  of  the  world,  or  more  recently,  have
found  out  what  the  length  of  the  10"^*"*  part  of  the
earth's  polar  semi-axis  is, — ^there  remains  no  diffi-
culty  in  any  one  taking  up  some  dirty  or  ignoble
portion  of  matter,  and  showing  that  it  is  approxi-
mately the  half,  third,  fourth,  or  any  other  simple
fraction  of  the  same  10"^*"*  part.  But  does  such  a
mere  jester,  prove  that  he  is  entitled  thereby,  to
scorn  in  learned  halls,  the  labours  of  those  higher
minds  which  had  preceded  him,  and  treat  them
with  studious  insult  ?

A  nearly  parallel  case,  in  much  of  its  principles,
with  the  Pyramid  or  'sacred  cubit,'  is  oflfered
more  within  our  immediate  historical  records,  by
the  origination  of  the  French  standard  of  length.


OH.  28.]  Counter  Opinions.  258

the  rnetre.  In  so  far  as  that  is,  or  was  intended
to  be,  an  earth-commensurable  measure  (viz.  the
ten-millionth  of  the  length  of  a  quadrant  of  the
meridian,  extending  from  the  North  Pole  to  the
Equator),  it  should  be  equally  amenable  to  being
laughed  at,  insulted,  degraded,  and  abolished, —
because  some  one  should  chance  to  show  that  a  hal^
or  a  shoe,  or  any  other  absurd  portion  of  garment
or  vesture, — ^should  be  nearly  an  even  fraction  of
it,  and  therefore  some  mentionable  fi^action  of
the  earth's  meridional  quadrant.

Yet  if  a  gentleman  who  has  never  performed  any
notable  problem  in  exact  researches,  should  appear
in  the  Imperial  Academy  of  Sciences  in  Fans, —
where  for  eighty  years  the  greatest  mathemati-
cians and  geodesists  of  France  have  spent  their  best
labours  in  perfecting  the  methods,  both  theoretical
and  practical,  by  which  they  have  arrived  at  last  at
a  close  approximation  to  what  the  length  of  their
metre  (or  the  ten-millionth  of  the  earth's  quad-
rant) ought  to  be; — and  if  he  should  there
gratuitously  insult  all  the  members,  on  an  impor-
tant public  occasion,  with  his  hat-trick,  applied  to
the  metre, — will  they  thereby  be  put  out  of
conceit  with  their  national  standard  which  they


254  Units  and  SUmda/rda  of  Q.  pyramid,  [ch.  28.

now  prize  so  mucH,  and  hope  to  see  adopted  by
every  nation  of  the  earth ;— or  will  their  quick
susceptibilities  be  aroused  ?  8ir  J.  Y.  Simpson
has  been  very  bold  against  what  many  men  be*
lieve,  and  there  are  some  proofs  to  show,  must
have  been  a  divinely  originated  measure;  but
will  he  exhibit  equal  bravery  against  the  French
nation,  and  their  similarly  earth-commensurable
standard?  We  do  not  advise  him  to  try;  for
when  the  national  pride  of  our  Gallic  neighbours
is  aroused,  by  a  heartless  insult  in  an  important
matter  of  their  national  science  and  glory, — ^they
are  neither  long-sujSering  nor  merciful

Still  another  reason  was  brought  forward  by
that  same  gentleman  at  the  Boyal  Society,  Edin-
burgh,  against   the    Great   Pyramid  inch   and

*  sacred  cubit'

'It  was  too  kte  now,'  he  implied,  'to  be
'  talking  about  a  new  standard  measure  for  this
'  country,  because  Mr,  Whitworth  of  Manchester
'  had  adopted  another  size  of  inch,  and  had  been

*  making  for  several  years  past  extraordinarily

*  accurate  copies  thereof  as  standard  measurea*
Two  of  these,  a  cylinder,  and  a  hole  in  a  block,


CH.  28.]  Counter  OpinioM.  266

each  said  to  l)e  true  to  l-10,000tli  of  an  inch,
were  exhibited,  and  seemed  to  be  considered  finaL

Yet  Mr.  Whitworth's  gauges  of  one  or  many
inches  are  not  adopted  for  the  standard  measure
of  the  country  by  Government,  who  have  their
own  linear  standardff,  in  a  perfectly  different
shape; — ^nor  used  anywhere,  except  for  certain
practical  purposes  in  engineering  workshops; —
neither  do  they  lead,  on  Mr.  Whitworth's  plans,
to  any  convenient  arrangement  or  good  system
of  greater  length-measures  than  inches:  while
they  are  totally  unconnected  with  all  other  classes
or  kinds  of  measure,  as  weight,  capacity,  heal^
and  time ; — and  are,  in  themselves,  without  that
inestimable  merit,  which  the  sacred  measure  of
old  and  the  scientific  societies  of  modem  time,
alike  appreciate  and  appropriate  for  its  thought-
elevating  influences  to  man  ;  viz.,  even,  and  direct^
— earth-commensurability.

Had  any  one  said  that  it  was  too  late  to  talk
of  introducing  the  Pyramid  measures,  because  the
French  metrical  system  has  already  established
itself  amongst  us, — there  would  have  been  statis-
tical facts  on  his  side.  For,  poor  Mr.  Whit-
worth's  inches^  as  well  as  our  own  national  here-


256  Units  and  Standards  of  G.  Pyramid,  [gh.  28.

ditaxy  measures,  are  all  going  down  before  the
French  metrical  system.  Already  there  is  a  per-
missive bill  for  the  lattei^s  legal  adoption  in  cer-
tain  case^  passed  by  Parliament ;  every  meeting
of  the  British  Association  for  several  years  past,
has  re-echoed  with  the  demands  of  several  sec-
tions to  have  the  metre  taught  in  all  schools  and
employed  in  all  Government  offices;  and  not  a
few  of  the  authors  of  papers  in  the  Philosophical
Transactions  of  London,  employ  French  weights
and  measures;  even  when  dealing  with  purely
British  investigations  for  British  purposes.

To  assure  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,
therefore,  that  they  had  nothing  to  do,  in  ques-
tions of  metrological  arrangement,  but  trust  impli-
citly to  Mr.  Whitworth's  iron  gauges, — ^was  very
much  like  crying  *  peace,  peace,  when  there
is  no  peace,'  and  when  the  enemy  is  actually  in
possession  of  the  gates.  There,  indeed,  he  is
now,  and  from  that  position,  only  a  most  vigorous
resuscitation  of  the  true  national  feeling,  will
drive  him ;  for  it  has  long  been  a  settled  pur-
pose in  France,  to  leave  no  stone  unturned,  in
order  to  prevail  on  other  countries, — ^but  chiefest
of  them  all  Great  Britain, — to  adopt  her  metrical


CH.  28.]  Counter  Opinions.  257

system; — and  there  is  a  very  numerous  pro-
French  party,  ever  active  and  eagerly  pushing
amongst  ourselves.

Their  great  battle-cry  too,  is,  the  scientific
completeness  of  the  French  metrical  system,
through  every  range  of  subject  requiring  men-
suration. They  wiU  certainly  therefore  not  be
content  with  the  simple,  soKtary,  barren,  and
unscientific  mere  thickness-gauges  of  Mr.  Whit-
worth.  The  metrological  requirements  of  the
world,  in  the  present  advanced  day,  are  for  more
science,  system,  and  order ;  and  the  world  finds
more  of  all  these  in  the  French  metrical  system,
than  in  any  other  system,  or  no-system,  of  weights
and  measures,  that  has  ever  been  known  to  exist
•amongst  men  in  all  historical  time.  Yet  what,
if  there  should  now  come  forth  jBrom  the  Great
Pyramid  (which  has  already  given  us,  in  the  ten-
millionth  of  the  polar  axis,  a  better  earth-refer-
ence than  that  of  the  French  metre),  yea,  what  if
there  should  come  forth  fi:om  thence  also,  a  hetter
arranged  whole  system,  broader  even  and  more
scientific,  for  all  weights  and  measures,— as  well
SB  bearing  on  its  fi-ont  the  dignity  of  primal
time,  the  impress  of  Divine  inspiration,  and  some

B


258  UmUaMdSUmdard$qfG.PyrwmuL[€SL  28.

stmige  fioniljr  tnitB  a^and  geneial  lesemUance
to,  our  own  Tuitinm]  and  heiedilaiy  system;
which  our  nation  had  acquired  somehow,  in  a
iwMMinAr  which  no  one  has  ]ret  exidainedy  Inng
befioie  we  emeiged  into  the  h^t  of  histoij.

A  hi^^ier  Sarth-re/erence.

Ahready  the  Gieat  Pyramid  linear  system,
while  stQl  preserving  its  cubit  reference  by  10^  to
the  eartfa^s  polar  semi-axis^— has  yielded  to  the
farther  researches  of  William  Petrie, — the  know-
ledge of  a  fur  grander  reference  yet  in  nature,
and  of  a  more  comprehensive  kind  in  science  ; —
but  expressed  in  similarly  round  and  even  decimal
repetitions  of  Pyramid  numbers  and  of  Pyramid
units  of  linear  measure.

Of  all  the  higher  mechanical  properties,  and
movements  of  the  earth,  none  is  perhaps  so
mighty  in  itself,  so  terrific  in  its  momentum,  so
all-important  to  the  safety  of  humankind  to  have
preserved ;  and  so  constantly  and  uniformly  kept
up,— as  the  onward  movement  of  the  earth  in  its
orbit  round  the  sun.  Making  its  headway  at
the  rate  of  more  than  65,530  miles  an  hour,
what  an  instrument  does  it  become  for  measuring


6H.  28.]      A  Higher  Earthrreference.  259

&e  scale  of  creation !  By  dint  of  great  labour  and
e^>ense^  astronomers  may  travel  to  nearly  opposite
sides  of  the  globe,— as  to  the  respective  Observa-
tories of  Greenwich  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope ;
— and  by,  in  that  manner,  putting  five  or  six  thou-
sand miles  between  them,  they  may  determine  the
paiallaz  of  a  heavenly  body,  if  not  very  far  re-
moved But  if  we  choose  rather  to  trust  to  the
earth's  orbital  motion,  we  shall  have  gained  in
five  minutes  the  same  amount  of  space,  or  two-
thirds  of  the  earth^s  breadth,  on  our  former  posi-
tion. And  if  we  merely  delay  repeating  our
observations  for  a  fortnight,  no  less  than  twenty
millions  of  miles  will  have  been  traversed,  in
easy  company  too,  with  all  our  Mends,  and  their
houses,  and  thoughts,  and  fancies.

When  the  old  Roman  poet  wished  to  give  an
idea  of  the  most  rapid  attempt  to  escape  from
immaterial  pursuers, — ^he  placed  his  hero  on  a
horse,  a  round-sided  fat  Roman  horse,  and  set
him  galloping  along  the  Appian  Way  at  the  rate
of  eight  or  nine  miles  an  hour ;  and  then  after
such  a  magnificent  course  as  that,  the  belted
knight  turns  him  about,  and  lo — ^black  Care  is
still  seated  behind  his  back.


260  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [ch.  28.

But  that  author  was  a  Pagan  poet,  and  his
writings  were  flights  of  the  imagination ;  here
we  have  only  to  do  with  plain  facts  of  measure-
ment and  sober  realities  of  creation ;  or  with  the
world  and  all  that  is  therein  and  thereon  flying
forward  together  at  a  rate  of  10,000  times  the
speed  of  cavalry.  And  therewith  comes  the  prac-
tical question,  what  given  length  of  such  path  is
swept  over  by  the  earth,  in  that  special  period  or
standard  for  the  measurement  of  time  (so  admir-
ably uniform  in  itself,  and  so  intensely  important
in  ruling  the  affairs  of  men), — as  the  interval
represented  by  the  whole  earth  turning  upon  its
polar  axis ;  and  bringing  a  day  of  toil  and  a  night
of  rest  to  all  the  wearied  nations  of  mankind.

The  answer  is  (as  given  by  Mr.  Petrie),  if  you
employ  Pyramid  units  or  inches,  of  linear  measure,
you  may  tell  off  that  mighty  standard  of  space
and  force  in  a  round  decimal  number,  or  by  10^"*"*,
t.e.,  by  100,000,000,000  Pyramid  inches.

The  precise  proof  of  this  formula,  must  inevit-
ably wait  the  year  1882,  for  both  the  more  correct
determination  of  the  sun's  parallax,  and  also,  a
proper  and  accurate  measure  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid's real  size.    But  meanwhile,  taking  it  in  this


CH.  28.]     A  Higher  Earthrreference.  261

mere  first  approximate  way,  5819  British  inches
for  the  Pyramid's  height,  reduced  to  Pyramid
inches,  becomes  5813*2 ;  which  quantity  x  10^
gives  our  present  best  determination  of  the  earth's
radius  rector.

Then  the  circumference  of  the  earth's  mean
orbit  =  5813-2  x  10»  x  2ir  =  36,525,430,000,000  ;^
and  this  quantity,  divided  by  the  number  of  solar
days  in  a  sidereal  revolution  of  the  earth,  or
365-25636,  yields  a  little  under  the  10^^,  or
99,999,400,000  nearly.

Pyramid  inches  therefore,  do  indeed  promise
well  to  measure  off  this  wondrous  and  exalted
standard  in  nature,  in  even  and  round  decimal
numbers,  with  a  very  small  proportional  error
only,  if  not  perfect  exactness.  While  either
British  yards,  or  French  metres,  would  be  incon-
ceivably rough  and  imtoward.

^  The  Beven  last  places  are  entered  as  Os,  not  because  they  are
that,  even;  but  because  two  previous  places  of  numbers  being
already  erroneous,  it  does  not  signify  at  present  what  these  last  are ;
though  we  must  have  something  to  show  the  number  of  places  of
figures  in  the  whole  expression,  and  Os  are  the  most  convenient  for
this  purpose.  As,  for  example,  in  the  table  of  tons  weights  of  the
planets,  p.  39  of  G.  F.  Chambers's  DescripUve  Astrariomy,  in  the
Clarendon  Press  series  ;  Oxford,  1867*


262  Units  and  Stcmdards  of  G.  Pyramid,  [ch.  29.


INTELLECTUALITY   OF   GREAT

PYRAMID— emtinued.


CHAPTER  29.

UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  OBEAT  PYRAMID

MEASURE-  continued.

Weight  and  Capacity.

In  the  interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  nearly  in
the  centre  of  its  substance  and  weight,  is  a  certain
chamber,  known  vulgarly  as  the  King's  Chamber ;
and  the  only  piece  of  furniture  tiierein,  is  a
hollow,  empty  box,  or  open  trough  of  hard  stone.

Polished  red  granite  in  large  slabs  the  floor,
the  walls,  and  the  ceiling  of  the  room ;  polished
red  granite  also,  of  a  rather  darker  kind,  the  said
uninscribed,  unadorned,  and  Udlessbox.^  By  some
called  sarcophagus,  the  said  box  has  been  thought
by  that  school,  to  have  entombed  the  royal  founder
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  to  be  merely  a  coffin ;  by

^  The  material  has  been  by  lereral  Trriten  termed  porphyry,
myielf  included,  btfore  going  to  £gyi»t.  But  from  the  moment  of
seeing  it  there,  I  was  conyinced  of  the  error.


CH.  29.]  Weight  and  Cofpacity.  263

others  named  the  coffer,  it  is  thought  to  have  been
a  large  standard  measure  of  capacity  and  weight

John  Taylor  was  of  the  latter  idea ;  and  some
other  persons,  affcer  having  had  long  practical
acquaintance  with  the  thing  itself,  as  well  as
with  ordinary  Egyptian  sarcophagi,  came  to  be
generally  of  his  opinion.

That  is,  they  allowed  that  there  was  much  in  his
view ;  but  that  that  view  was  not  therefore  alto-
gether exclusive  of  the  other.  Some  laying  up  of
mortal  remains  in  honour,  may  therefore,  accord-
ing to  such  opinions,  once  have  taken  place,  in  the
long  rectangular,  granite  box.  But,  if  ever  such
remains  were  so  deposited,  not  only  has  every
trace  of  them  vanished  long  since,  and  there  is
no  inscription  of  any  kind  to  testify  for  them, —
but,  in  their  place,  distinct  footsteps  of  geometry
and  physical  science  have  been  discovered.

Now,  such  scientific  features  would  evidently  not
have  been  necessary,  had  that  vessel  been  intended
only  for  a  sarcophagus ;  but  were  eminently
adapted  for  giving  it  a  learned  character,  perhaps
symbolic  of,  if  not  actually  representing,  a  stan-
dard measure  of  weight  and  capacity ;  a  standard,
too,  as  careful    observations    and  mensurations


2M  UmiUnmd  ftiwifanfey^g,  Jj i  wmi^  [OL  St.

kig^  and  noUe

B J  a  nbaeqwnt  aoies  of  imnest^^tknii^  non-
ore^  tlie  eoUcal  eontentB  of  tlie  aud  Tend  lisfe
beea  Ibmid  to  be  a  doae  lefxaaitatioa  cf  Aoae
of  the  sacred  Aik  fi  tlie  Gnrenant,  buik  hj  Moaea
under  direct  iiupinitiaQ  ccwnmanda  of  number
and  meaaor^  recorded  in  the  Soqitme^  for  the
Tabemade  in  the  Wilderaeaa ;  or;  taking  the  two
box  atractuiea  according  to  their  respective  datea^
the  latter,  ijt.  the  Ark,  was  in  cubic  internal  ciqpa-
city,  a  vety  reprodaction  of  the  coffer  in  the  King^a
Chamber  of  the  Great  F^rramid.^

The  Attack

If  ever  the  weak  points  of  a  theory  were  likely
to  be  discovered — and  perhaps  it  may  be  salutary
that  every  theory  shall  be  tried  by  the  rudest
shaking — it  was  when  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  attacked
the  metrical  theory  of  the  coffer  in  the  King's
Chamber  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh,  before
the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  on  the  20th  of
January  1868,  Certainly  he  spared  neither  pains
nor  labour,  neither  ridicule  nor  invective,  nor

^  Sm  Hf%  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  rol  ii.  p.  465.


CH.  29.]  The  Attach.  265

considerable  mis-statement  of  facts^  nor  quotations
from  imauthoritatiye  authors,  to  overwhelm  both
the  coflfer  and  Professor  Smyth,  one  of  its-  advo-
cates for  honour,  imder  a  storm  of  utter  obloquy.
So  that  then,  when  after  concluding  an  oration,
of  whose  length  and  skill,  design  and  accompani-
ments, the  report  in  our  Appendix  2  gives  but  a
poor  idea;  and  during  which  the  speaker  kept
before  the  eyes  of  his  audience  a  neat  and  shapely
diagram  of  the  coffer,  stated  in  writing  to  be
&om  Professor  Smyth  and  extracted  out  of  his
book.  Our  Inheritance  (written  before  he  went
to  Egypt), — when  just  at  that  moment  of  cumu-
lative interest,  the  lecturer  with  a  practised  hand
dashed  up  an  intervening  screen,  and  showed  his
audience  a  great  perspective  picture  of  the  coffer,
rude,  dingy,  broken,  and  apparently  tainted  with
corruption,-as  being  the  real  thing  it8elf,-many
of  the  listeners  shouted  with  satisfaction ;  and
Professor  Smyth  found  himself  suddenly  knocked
down  violently,  by  information  chiefly  taken  out
of,  and  much  perverted  from,  his  own  published
book,  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,
written  after  he  had  visited  that  most  ancient
and  remarkable  structure.


266  Units  and  Statidarih  of  G.  Pyramid,  [oh.  29.

Following  up  this  successM  outbtust,  there  was
little  thereafter  left  for  the  titled  rhetorician,  but
undisturbedly  to  ride  roughshod  over  the  reli-
gious beUefs  of  some  other  men,— and  administer
the  coup  de  grace  in  the  following  words : —

*  In  short,  the  manrellous  metrologioal  coffer,  mathematicallj

*  formed  under  alleged  Divine  inspiration  as  a  measnre  of
'  capacity  (and,  according  to  M.  Jomard,  of  length  also),  for
'  all  men  and  all  nations, — for  all  time,  and  particularly  for
'  these  latter  profane  times, — is  in  tmth,  nothing  more  than

*  an  old  and  dilapidated  stone  coffin.'

The  Defence  begins.

*  Tell  us,'  said  to  Professor  Smyth,  the  spokes-
man of  a  little  knot  of  members  of  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh,  after  the  public  part  of  this
meeting  was  over,  *  tell  us, — just  this  one  thing  ;

*  it  is  the  only  one  we  care  to  know,  and  it  seems

*  to  our  minds  absolutely  conclusive.     Did   the

*  Arabian  writer,  Al  Hokm,  really  mention,   as

*  stated  by  the  lecturer,  that  Khaliph  Al  Mamoon

*  found  the  body  of  a  man  deposited,  with  jewels,
'  arms,  and  golden  writing,  in  the  coflFer,  when

*  he  broke  into  the  King's  Chamber  of  the  Great

*  Pyramid  V

*  No  doubt  he  did,'  was  the  answer ;  *  but  then.


OH.  29.]  The  Defence  begins.  267

'  seeing  that  the  said  Ebn  Abd  Al  Hokm  (accord-

*  ing  to  the  chronological  arrangement  of  the

*  Arab  authorities  Hj  Colonel  Howard  Vyse  and

*  Dr.  Sprenger,'  in  the  former's  second  volume  of

*  The  Pyramids  of  Gizeh),  lived  six  hundred

*  years  after  the  death  of  Al  Mamoon, — ^what  sort
'  of  safe  or  contemporary  authority  can  Al  Hokm

*  be,  for  anything  that  the  BLhaliph,  when  alive,
'  did,  saw,  or  got  hold  of,  in  a  certain  dark  room

*  in  the  Great  Pyramid  six  centuries  previously  V

Al  Hokm  testified  to  it,  we  allow ;  and  to
much  besides  of  a  necromantic  and  absolutely
impossible  nature.  But  then,  who  will  vouch  for
Al  Hokm  ?  He  was  a  follower  of  a  false  pro-
phet, a  believer  in  sorcery,  enchantment,  and  the
existence  of  Jinn ;  besides  being  an  upholder  of
a  theory  as  to  the  Great  P)rramid  having  been
built  by  a  certain  antediluvian  King  Saurid,  and
filled  by  him  chiefly  with  celestial  spheres  and
figures  of  the  stars ;  together  with  the  perfumes
to  be  used  in  their  worship.^  So  that  Al  Hokm
is  neither  a  trustworthy  writer  in  general, — ^nor  in
this  Al  Mamoon  particular  is  he  a  contemporary

^  See  in  the  first  Tolome  of  Profeasor  Greaves*  Works,  p.  115,  a
longer  translation  from  Al  Hokm  than  what  appears  in  Colonel
Vyse's  book.


268  Units  and  Standards  of  Q.  Pyramid,  [ch.  29.

authority  ;  and  that,  by  so  large  a  space  of  time
as  six  hundred  years  in  the  darkest  of  the  dark
ages ;  wherefore  Ebn  Abd  Al  Hokm  can  have
neither  place  nor  peculiar  honour  from  us  in  this
inquiry.^

Why  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  should  have  picked  out
so  very  late  an  author  as  Al  Hokm,  and  trusted
to  merely  the  last  sentence  of  his  long  and  ram-
bling account  of  the  Great  Pyramid  implicitly,  for
what  the  poor  man  could  be  no  direct  authority
for, — it  is  very  difficult  to  say.  Because,  if  the
object  was  merely  to  get  at  the  best  Arab  testi-
mony as  to  Al  Mamoon's  proceedings,  there  are
plenty  of  earUer  authorities  than  Al  Hokm ;  and
they  have  been  admirably  translated  and  chrono-
logically set  forth  in  the  second  volume  of  Colonel
Howard  Vyse's  Pyramids  of  Gizeh.

Now  Khaliph  Al  Mamoon  flourished  between
813  and  842  A.D.,  and  may  or  may  not,  have  made
his  celebrated  entrance  into  the  Great  Pjrramid

^  A  rumour  has  now  reached  ua  of  a  manuscript  note,  just  written
by  a  gentleman  of  the  British  Museum  to  say,'  that  Al  Hokm  was
nearly  contemporary  with  Al  Mamoon.  But  while  the  long-printed
authorities  of  Vyse  and  Sprenger  are  not  by  such  a  rumour  only,
instantly  proved  to  be  erroneous, — it  is  beUeved  that  this  new  refer-
ence was  not  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the  lecture  before  the
Boyal  Society  above  alluded  to.


CH.  29.]  The  Defence  begins.  269

about  830  A.D. ;  but  be  that  as  it  may, — the  im-
mediately succeeding  authors,  in  Yyse,  are  silent
on  the  point.  Thus  neither  Abou  Masher  Jafer
Ben  Mohammed  Balkhi,  who  wrote  in  about  890
A.D.,  nor  Ebn  Khordadbeh,  in  920  A.D.,  have  one
word  about  Al  Mamoon,  or  about  any  opening  of
the  Pyramid.  But  when  we  descend  to  Masoudi,
in  967  A.D.,  he,  after  an  astonishing  amount  of
romancing  on  what  took  place  at  the  building  of
the  Pyramids  300  years  before  the  Flood, — men-
tions that,  not  Al  Mamoon,  but  his  father,  Khaliph
Haroun  Al  Rasheed,  attempted  to  break  into  the
Great  Pyramid ;  and  after  penetrating  2  0  cubits^
found  a  vessel  containing  1000  coins  of  the  finest
gold,  each  just  one  ounce  in  weight,  and  making
up  a  sum  which  exactly  repaid  the  cost  of  his
operations  ;  at  which,  it  is  added,  he  greatly
wondered.

Down,  down  in  fact  along  the  stream  of  time
must  we  descend  further ;  and  at  last,  in  or  near
1170  A.D.,  or  340  years  after  Al  Mamoon's  age,
that  chief  is  mentioned  by  Abou  Abd  Allah
Mohammed  Ben  Abdurakim  Alkaisi ;  who  states
that  he  was  informed  that  those  who  went  into
the  upper  parts  of  the  Great  Pyramid  in  the  time


270  Units  and  Sta/ndards  ofO.  Pyramid.  [CH.  29,

of  Al  Mamoon,  *  came  to  a  sTnall  passage,  con^

*  taming  the  image  of  a  man  in  green  stone,  and

*  within  that  a  human  body  with  golden  armour/^
etCv  etc.

Subsequent  authors^  however,  seem  to  take  no
notice  of  this  story,  though  they  are  fond  of
attributing  to  Al  Mamoon  the  finding  of  the
emerald  pot  full  of  gold  at  the  end  of  his  quarry-
ing near  the  entrance-passage ;  until  Al  Hokm,  in
or  near  1450  A.D.,  as  already  mentioned,  gives
new  circulation  to  the  figure  of  the  man  in  green
stone  containing  the  real  man ;  but  now  as  being
found  '  in  an  hollow  stone^  and  that  again  in  a
chamber  towards  the  top  of  the  Great  Pyramid.'

The  Arab  authors,  then,  even  of  the  most  favour-
able kind,  are  both  exceedingly  scanty,  and  a  sad
long  time  after  date  in  describing  Al  Mamoon's
finding  anyhow  or  anywhere  the  body  of  a  man.
An  earlier  author  too  than  Al  Hokm,  or  Shehab
Eddin  Ahmed  Ben  Yahya  (died  1317  A.D.),
though  stating  that  the  Great  Pyramid  was
opened  by  Ehaliph  Al  Mamoon,  adds,  in  opposite

^  The  same  notice  is  given  soon  after  by  Abou  Szalt  of  Spain,  but
at  the  end  of  some  extraordinarily  romancing  stories  of  the  cabalia-
iical  and  other  wonders  inside  the  Great  Pyramid.  See  pp.  355-
357  of  vol  ii.  of  Vyae's  Pjframida  qf  Cfizeh,


OH.  29.]  The  Defence  begins.  271

testimony  to  Al  Hokm^  'that  nothing  was  dis-

*  covered  as  to  the  motive  or  time  of  its  con-

*  struction.'  And  his  own  idea  seems  to  be,  that
each  of  the  Pyramids  was  dedicated  to  a  star,
and  that  the  Sabseans  performed  pilgrimages  to
some  of  them,  but  especially  to  the  Great  one.

Other  Arabian  authors  again,  who  are  also
earlier  than  AI  Hokm^  and  much  nearer  to  the
time  of  Al  Mamoon,  have  described  very  different
findings^  but  as  actually  found,  by  Arabs ;  thus
Abou  Hajalah,  in  1390  A.D.,  writes  that —

*  In  the  days  of  Ahmed  Ben  Tonlonn '  (870  ▲.!>. — ^you  may
see  his  mosque  in  Cairo  to  this  day ;  and  he  was,  for  Egyp-
tian local  government,  the  Mehemet  Ali  of  that  early  time),
a  party  entered  the  Great  Pyramid.  They  found  in  one  of
the  chambers  a  goblet  of  glass  of  rare  colour  and  texture.
When  they  came  back  they  missed  one  of  their  party,  and
upon  returning  to  seek  him,  he  came  out  to  them  naked,
and  laughing,  said.  Do  not  follow  or  seek  for  me,  and  then
rushed  back  into  the  Pyramid.  They  perceived  that  he  was
enchanted,  and  told  the  circumstance  to  Ahmed  Ben  Touloun,
who  forbade  that  any  should  enter  the  Pyramid,  and  took
possession  of  the  goblet  of  glass,  which  was  afterwards
weighed,  and  found  to  be  of  the  same  weight  empty,  and
when  full  of  water.'

In  a  similar  vein,  too,  the  afore-mentioned
Masoudi,  in  960  ad.,  only  130  years  after  the


272  Units  and  Standards  ofQ.  Pyramid,  [cfl.  29.

times  of  Ehaliph  Al  Mamoon,  but  490  years  be-
fore Al  Hokm,— describing  the  early  discoveries  of
his  countrymen  inside  the  Great  Pyramid, — says —

that  some  of  them  found  in  the  lowest  part  of  the  Pjramidi
a  vase  containing  a  quantity  of  fluid  of  an  unknown  quality*
The  walls  of  the  chamber  were  composed  of  small  square
stones  of  beautiful  colours,  and  a  person,  having  put  one  of
those  stones  in  his  mouth,  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  pain
in  hb  ears,  which  continued  until  he  had  replaced  it.  They
also  discoyered,  in  a  large  hall,  a  quantity  of  golden  coins
put  up  in  columns,  every  piece  of  which  was  of  the  weight
of  one  thousand  dinars.  They  tried  to  take  the  money,  but
were  not  able  to  move  it.  In  another  place  they  found  the
image  of  a  shiek,  made  of  green  stone,  sitting  upon  a  sofa,
and  wrapped  up  in  a  garment.  Before  him  were  statues  of
little  boys,  whom  he  was  occupied  in  instructing ;  they  tried
to  take  up  one  of  these  figures,  but  they  were  not  able  to
move  it.  Having  proceeded  further  to  a  quadrangular  space,
similar  to  that  which  they  had  previously  entered,  they  met
with  the  image  of  a  cock,  made  of  precious  stones,  and
placed  upon  a  green  column.  Its  eyes  enlightened  all  the
place ;  and,  upon  their  arrival  it  crowed  and  flapped  its
wings.  Continuing  their  researches,  they  came  to  a  female
idol  of  white  stone,  and  lions  of  stone  on  each  side,  attempting
to  devour  her ;  upon  which  they  took  to  flight.  This  oc-
curred in  the  time  of  Yerid  Ben  Abdullah,'  supposed,  says
Colonel  Howard  Yyse,  to  have  been  a  king  of  Egypt.

Dreadfully  untrustworthy  then  as  these  Mo-
hammedan Arabs  show  themselves  to  be,  even
when  they  purport  to  be  merely  describing  what


GH.  29.]  The  Defence  begins.  273

took  place  near  their  own  tunes  inside  the  Great
Pyramid, — ^it  is  no  wonder  that  Professor  Greav  eef,
200  years  ago,  came  to  the  conclusion —

'  Thus  far  the  ArahianB ;  which  traditions  of  theirs  are

*  little  better  than  a  romance.'

Or  that  Colonel  Howard  Vyse,  our  next  Great
Pyramid  authority,  writes,  after  a  more  extensive
examination  of  Arab  writers  than  any  one  else,
either  before  or  since,  has  made, —

'  The  only  fact  which  seems  to  be  established  by  the  Eastern

*  anthers,  to  whom  we  have  now  referred,  is  the  opening  of
'  the  Ghreat  Pyramid  by  Al  Mamoon ;  and  eyen  of  that,  no
'  distinct  or  rational  account  exists.'^


^  la  the  52d  chapter  of  Gihbon's  Decline  and  Fail  qf  the  Bamam
Empire^  Khaliph  Al  Mamoon  receives  such  aboiinding  praiset  m
the  chief  mediteval  patron  of  learning, — that  we  find  it  exceedingly
difficult  to  correlate  them  with  the  aboye-mentioned  Arabian  ac-
counts of  hii  own,  and  his  Ejgjrptian  subjecti^,  doings  at  the  Great
Pyramid.  Perhaps  he  reserved  all  lus  learning  for  the  politer
society  of  lus  chief  capital  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris.  Certainly
Gibbon  writes  of  him,  mostly  as  the  ruler  of  Bagdad,  that  he,  Al
Mamoon  (or  Almamon),  '  completed  the  designs  of  his  grandfather,
'  and  invited  the  Muses  from  their  ancient  seats.  His  ambassadors
'  at  Constantinople,  his  agents  in  Armenia,  Syria,  and  Egjrpt,  col-
'  lected  the  volumes  of  Grecian  science ;  at  lus  command  they  were
'  translated  by  the  most  skilful  interpreters  into  the  Arabic  lan-
'  guage ;  his  subjects  were  exhorted  assiduously  to  peruse  these
'  instructive  writings ;  and  the  successor  of  Mahomet  assisted  with
'  pleasure  and  modesty  at  the  assemblies  and  disputations  of  the
'  learned. — They  (the  Arabs)  cultivated  with  more  success  the
'  sublime  science  of  astronomy,  which  elevates  the  mind  of  man  to
'  disdain  his  diminutive  planet  and  momentary  existence.  The
'  costiy  instruments  of  observation  were  supplied  by  the  Caliph

S


274  UnUs  and  Standards  of  Q.  Pyramid,  [cfl.  29.

While  Sir  Gardner  WiUdiisou  adds  on  the  same
side,  though  with  exceeding  gentleness  to  those
whose  posterity  he  passed  many  years  of  his  life
amongst, —

'  The  authority  of  Arab  writers  is  not  always  to  be  relied
'  on ;  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  body  of  the  King
'  was  really  deposited  in  the  sarcophagus.'^

Sir  Gardner  perhaps  also  remembering,  that
Diodoms  Siculus,  900  years  before  Al  Mamoon,
states  that  neither  of  the  Kings  of  both  the
Great  and  second  Pyramids  were  buried  therein.
And  Herodotus,  400  years  earlier  still,  said
that  King  Cheops  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was

*  Almamon,  and  the  hmd  of  the  ChaldsBans  still  afforded  the  same

*  spadouB  level,  the  same  undonded  horizon.  In  the  plain  of  Sinaar,
'  and  a  second  time  in  those  of  Cofa,  his  mathematicians  measured
'  a  degree  of  the  great  circle  of  the  earth,  and  determined  at  24^000

*  miles  the  entire  circumference  of  our  globe.'

In  a  note  the  eloquent  historian  adds,  *This  degree  contains
'  200,000  royal  or  Haahemite  cubits,  which  Arabia  had  derived
'  from  the  sacred  and  legal  practice  both  of  Palestine  and  Egypt.
'  This  ancient  cubit  is  repeated  400  times  in  each  basis  of  the
'  Great  Pyramid,  and  seems  to  indicate  the  primitive  and  universal
'  measures  of  the  East.    See  the  Metrologtt  of  the  laborious  M.

*  Paucton,  p.  101-195.'

This  very  indirect  connexion,  is  the  only  one  which  Gibbon
gives  us,  between  Al  Mamoon  and  the  Great  Pyramid.  Paucton's
error  therein  has  been  already  exhibited  in  my  Life  and  WorJ^
p.  129,  voL  iiL ;  while  Gibbon's  mistaken  idea  of  the  real  length
of  the  tacred  cubit  of  the  Hebrews,  is  illustrated  at  pp.  455,  456,
vol.  ii  of  the  same  work.

1  Murray's  Handbook  to  Egypt  (1867),  p.  168.


CH.  29.]  The  Defence  begins.  275

buried,  not  in  an  upper  chamber  like  the  Singes
Chamber  now  so  called,  but  in  a  subterranean
apartment  surrounded  by  the  waters  of  the  Nile.

Even  too,  had  the  Arab  authors  been  a  more
truth-speaking  and  science-understanding  set-
the  most  important  fact  yet  remains ;  viz.,  that
no  matter  what  the  Ehaliph  Al  Mamoon,  or  any
other  early  Arabian  plunderer  may  have  found,
or  did  find,  in  the  King's  Chamber, — ^that  would
not  necessarily  show  what  the  original  builders
had  intended  it  to  contain,  or  did  place  therein.
Because,  there  is  a  growing  certainty  amongst
Egyptologists  to  the  effect,  that  the  Arabs  had
been  preceded  in  their  plundering,  long  ages  be-
fore Al  Mamoon,  by  the  old  Egyptians ;  but  by
Egyptians  of  a  date  far  subsequent  to  the  founda-
tion of  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  having  no  reli-
gious ideafi  in  common  therewith.  What  smaller
items  of  furniture,  therefore,  the  Arabs  of  830
A.D.  found  in  the  room,  if  they  did  find  any,  de-
pends more  on  those  mediaeval  Egyptians  (pro-
bably of  600  fi.c.),  than  on  the  original  founders
of  the  Pyramid,  in  2170  B.c.

This  matter  is  unmistakably  alluded  to  by  Sir
Gardner  Wilkinson,  in  the  following  words^ —


276  Units  and  Standards  o/Q.  Pyramid.  [CH.  29.


'  That  boUi  the  Pyramids  had  been  opened  before  the  time

*  of  the  Arabfl  is  exceedingly  probable,  88  we  find  the  Egyptiaiis
'  themselves  had  in  many  instances  plundered  the  tombs  of
*'  Thebes ;  and  the  fact  of  its  (the  Ghreat  Pyramid)  having

<  been  closed  again  is  consistent  with  experience  in  other

*  places.  Belioni*s  tomb  had  been  rifled  and  redoaedf  and
'  the  same  is  observed  in  many  Theban  tombSy  when  dis-
'  covered  by  modem  excavators.'  ^

Colonel  Vy^se  also  writes,  in  the  notes  accom-
panying Mr.  Perring's  large  plates  of  the  Pyra-
mids (p.  2  of  Part  2), —

'  By  whom  the  Pyramids  were  first  broken  into,  will  pro-
'  bably  never  be  revealed ;  but,  as  they  were  apparently
'  entered  by  the  regular  passages,  their  interior  construction

<  must  have  been  at  that  time  known.  It  appears,  likewise,
'  that  the  Mahometan  Caliphs  who,  according  to  Arabian
'  historians,  made  the  forced  passages,  must  have  possessed,
'  either  by  tradition  or  otherwise,  some  information  respecting

<  them.'

And  we  ourselves  too,  were  unavoidably  im-
pressed,  on  examining  the  features  of  the  stone
at  the  place  where  the  well-mouth  enters  the
lower  north-west  comer  of  the  Grand  Gallery, —
that  the  Great  Pjnramid  had  been  entered  with
violence  long  before  the  time  of  Al  Mamoon ;
and  by  men  much  better  acquainted  with  the
interior  devices  of  Pyramid  building,  than  were

^  Mnxray'f  Handbook  to  Egypi  (1867),  p.  168.


CH.  29j         The  Cofer^s  Material  277

that  early  Ehaliph's  enthusiastic  Mussulman  fol-
lowers.^

After  trying,  testing,  and  being  obliged  to  con-
demn, therefore,  whatever  can  be  said  in  favour
of  this  new  and  forcible  bringing  up  of  a  selected
and  long-after-date  Arab  supposed  authority, —
we  find  ourselves  standing  once  again  just  where
Professor  Greaves  stood  in  1637  a.d.  ;  or,  obliged
to  reject  every  rag  of  testimony  firom  the  followers
of  a  false  prophet,  as  well  as  the  classic  accounts
of  Pagan  Greek  authors ;  and  compelled  to  trust
to  modem  observation,  measurement,  and  induc-
tion alone,  for  all  e£fective  Great  Pjrramid  research
and  expUcation.

The  Coffer^s  Material.

'Nothing  more  than  an  old  and  dilapidated
stone  coffin,'  said  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson,  when  he
displayed  his  perspective  view  of  the  coflFer, — at
the  same  time  looking  his  very  words.

The  words  are,  however,  ill  chosen.

*  Dilapidated  stone  coffin,' — implies  something
decaying  away,  possibly  built  up  once  of  several

^  Life  and   Work  at  the  OrecU  Pyramid^  by  G.  Piazzi  Smyth,
YoL  L  Plate  5 ;  and  yoL  ii.  p.  70.


278  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid.  [cH.  29^

pieces  of  stone,  but  now  falling  apart,  and  the
material  weak  and  perishable.

Yet  the  Great  Pyramid's  coffer,— ^t  present  an
open,  lidless,  box-shaped,  long  rectangular  vessel,
— ^is  cut  out  in  a  variety  of  red  granite  having
the  hardness  almost  of  a  gem.  It  is  a  very
successful  mechanical  performance  too,  in  the
largeness,  near  regularity,  and  minute  finish  of
the  hollow,  as  compared  with  the  comparative
thinness  of  the  sides, — seeing  that  it  is  aU  sawn
or  carved,  without  flaw  or  crack,  out  of  one  laige
block  of  the  said  adamantine  material.

It  still  rings  like  a  bell,  of  very  pure  and  pecu-
liar tone,  when  struck,  as  it  is,  unhappily,  by  almost
every  traveller  who  enters  the  room,  on  purpose
to  bring  out  that  bell-like  note.  And  finally,
though  it  has  been  chipped,  and  considerably
broken  away  even,  at  one  comer, — though  only
as  a  desperately  hard  material,  little  chip  by  chip,
through  years  of  chipping  administered  by  modem
men  with  hammers, — that  does  not  entitle  it  to
the  application  '  dilapidated  ;' — for  every  particle
of  it,  where  touched  only  by  nature,  is  still  so
hale,  hearty,  and  sound, — that  the  whole  strac-
ture  would  evidently  have  come  down  to  us


CH.  29.]  The  Coffer^s  Material  279

perfect,  from  its  original  axtists->— except  for  the
mischievous  pranks  of  multitudinous  visitors  dur^
ing  the  last  few  centuries^  and  especially  during
the  seventy  past  years.

One  uTon/iowever,  even  t^  eMp,  r^y
give.  For  whereas  Sir  J.  Simpson's  picture  showed
the  fractured  portions  of  the  coflFer,  exHbiting
a  dark  and  rotten-looking  material  inside,  the
outside  being  only  a  dull  brown, — and  thereby
making  the  whole  box  rather  remind  one  of  a
superficially  somewhat  whited  sepulchre  without,
but  which  is  full  of  black  uncleanness  within  ;*
— ^the  ancient  surface  of  the  coflfer  is  really  a  deep
chocolate  colour,  and  the  new  surface  formed  by
the  modem  chippings,  is  comparatively  of  a  light
pink.  So  much  lighter,  certainly,  than  the  out-
side, that  in  my  photographs  of  the  coflfer  by  the
magnesium  light,  where  the  ancient  sides,  ex-
quisitely smooth  from  the  remains  of  their  former
polishing,  are  dark  and  sombre  in  tone, — the
inside  material,  as  revealed  by  modem  hammer-
ing,   is    positively  brilliant  ;    totally    reversing

^  In  the  plan  and  elevation  of  the  coffer,  acting  as  the  fronti-
spiece of  my  YoL  i  of  L\fe  and  Worh^  and  which  plate  had  evidently
been  borrowed  largely  from  for  the  above  picture, — the  broken
parts  of  the  coffer  are  generally  represented  very  dark ;  but  only


280  Units  and  Sta/ndards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [m.  29.

therefore,  one  argument  of  the  picture  exhibited
to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  by  the  adTo-
cate  for  depreciation,  when  he  prayed  the  mem-
bers so  earnestly  to  pronounce  for  *  only  an  old
coffin '  Terdict.

Tornbic  Hypothesis  tried.

A  *  mere  coffin/  one  is  inclined  to  think,  should
not  be  very  difficult  to  recognise  anywhere ;  so
much  length,  so  much  breadth,  and  so  much
height,  are  necessary  to  contain  within,  the  full-
grown  human  form  laid  out  prostrate.  Now  the
coffer  in  the  King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyra-
mid having  about  78  inches  of  length  internally,
is  fairly  long ;  having  2  7  inches  nearly  of  internal
breadth,  is  fairly  broad;  but  having  something
like  33  or  34  inches  in  depth, — ^is  far  deeper  than
there  is  any  direct  or  known  occasion  for.

It  is  deeper  too  than  any  known  Egyptian
sarcophagus  <}f  nearly  the  same  age :  for  the
depth  of  that  in  the  second  Pyramid,  measured
from  the  top  of  its  ledge  to  give  it  the  utmost

on  the  principle  of  *  hill-iihading '  in  maps ;  Tiz.,  to  represent  soriaces
inclined  in  angle  to  the  plane  of  the  picture,  and  without  any  re-
ference whatever  to  the  physical  nature  of  the  surface.


CH.  29.]       Tombic  Hjfpothesis  tried.  281

favour,  is  29  inclies  ;^  of  that  formerly  in  the  third
Pyramid,  24*5  inches;  in  the  fourth  Pyramid,
23*5  inches ;  and  in  the  fifth  Pyramid,  25  inches.
Then  there  is  something  peculiar  about  the  top
of  the  co£fer  in  the  Great  Fjnramid ;  a  ledge  is
there  found  as  if  to  receive  a  lid,  fitting  on,
almost,  but  not  exactly,  like  those  of  the  sarco-
phagi of  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  fifth
Pjrramids.*  These  sarcophagi  all  evidently  have
a  coffin  purpose,  viz.,  to  lock  up,  and  keep  safe,
the  mortal  remains  once  enclosed ;  and  they  ac-
complish this  by  a  peculiar  combination,  first  of
dove-tailed  grooves,  which  prevent  the  lid,  after  it
is  pushed  into  its  place,  firom  being  lifted  up ;
and  pegs  arranged  to  fall  from  the  bottom  of  the
lid,  into  holes  worked  in  the  top  of  one  side, — to
prevent  the  said  lid  being  dragged  oflF  sideways.

^  See  Howard  Vyse's  Pyramids  of  Oizeh,  yoL  ii.

'  All  these  Utter  are  abundantly  described,  and  some  of  them
pictured,  in  Vyse's  and  Perring's/o/to  plates  of  the  Pyramids.  And
I  have  tested,  by  the  measures  published  in  Life  and  Work^  voL  IL
p.  272,  the  correctness  of  their  large  drawing  of  the  sarcophagus
of  the  second  Pyramid.  But  the  '*  delineation"  and  description  of
the  coffer  of  the  Great  Pyramid  by  the  above  authors  are  mistaken.
This  so-called  delineation,  is  merely  a  little  figure  introduced  as  a  sub-
sidiary feature  into  plans  and  sections  of  the  King's  Chamber ;  and
I  should  not  have  been  hard  upon  it,  or  brought  its  h'ttleness  and
superficiality  into  notice,  unless  a  public  attempt  had  recently  been
made  to  give  it  far  more  authority  than  it  is  entitled  to.


282  Units  and  Standards  of  Q.  Pyramid,  [ch.  29.

But  in  the  Great  Fjrramid  coffer,  though  there
are  holes  to  receive  such  pegs,  to  prevent  horir-
zontal  movement, — ^there  are  no  provisions  against
vertical  movement ;  for,  the  sides  of  the  grooves
being  parallel  with  the  sides  of  the  coffer  itself, —
would  offer  no  opposition  to  the  lid  being  lifted
straight  up,  if  lid  there  were.

Now  although  no  Ud  has  ever  been  described
to  have  been  seen  by  any  author  whatever,  to  the
coffer  in  the  King's  Chamber, — and  although  the
French,  in  their  great  work  on  Egypt,  engraved
the  said  coffer  as  being  in  their  day  (1799  A.D.)
without  any  ledge  whatever, — yet  we  need  have
no  difficulty  in  helping  the  tombic  hypothesis  to
a  lid ;  and.  then  seeing  what  its  friends  wiU  do
with  it.

On  looking  to  the  lids  of  sarcophagi  in  several
other  Pyramids,  they  are  found  to  be  9  to  11
inches  thick.  But  seeing  that  the  Great  Pyra-
mid coffer  has  rather  thinner  walls  than  those
vessels,  we  will  make  its  lid  thinner  also  ;  or,  say
8  inches ;  and  then  allowing  1*7  inches  of  that,
to  be  sunk  into  the  ledge  or  groove  cut  out  of  the
top  of  the  sides,— there  will  be  left  outstanding,
above  the  highest  part  of  the  walls  or  side  of  the


CH.  29.]        ToTnbic  Hypothma  tried  283

coffer,  a  thickness  of  lid  equal  to  6'3  inches.
And  this  thickness  being  added  on  to  the  outside
height  of  the  coffer,  or  41*1  inches,  gives  47*4
inches  for  the  whole  height  of  the  coffer,  when
lidded  or  acting  as  a  sarcophagus  or  coffin.

And  then  let  us  see  what  follows  &om  that.

The  entrance-passage  of  the  Great  Pyramid
being  only  47*2  inches  high, — ^the  coffer  could
not  be  got  into  the  Pyramid  at  all  qb  a  sarco-
phagus, or  with  a  lid  duly  fastened  upon  it  so  as
to  preserve  the  mortal  remains  inside  safe  from
dust,  accident,  and  vulgar  gaze !  The  difference
at  the  entrance-passage  is  certainly  only  2-lOths
of  an  inch,  and  may  be  charged  on  our  estimate,
for  the  thickness  of  a  lid,  not  being  true  to  so
small  a  quantity ; — ^but  then,  unfortunately,  the
door  of  the  King's  Chamber  (now,  by  sinking  of
certain  floor  stones,  nearly  43  inches  high), — was
anciently  closer  to  42  inches  in  height ;  or,  too  low
by  5*4  inches  of  hard,  imdeniable,  and  unimpres-
sible  granite,  to  let  the  sarcophagized  coffer  pass
into  the  chamber,  where  we  now  find  it,  unsar-
cophagized ;  i.e.,  without  a  lid,  and  empty.

Into  the  King's  Chamber,  as  a  lidless  box,  the
coffer  might  pass ;  but  would  have  only  the  frac-


284  Units  and  Standards  o/G.  Pyramid.  [cH.  29.

tion  of  an  incli  to  spare.  And  in  a  model  which
we  have  had  prepared,  of  that  massive  but  low
doorway, — in  the  reality  more  than  100  inches
thick  of  solid,  well  squared,  and  polished  red
granite, — when  a  coffer  model  is  passed  into  it;
the  fit  is  so  close,  that  it  gives  one  strangely  the
impression,  that  the  doorway  was  especiaUy  de-
signed so  as  to  admit  the  coffer  vessel,  uncovered
by  itself  or — ^lidless.

Hence,  without  presuming  to  say,  that  mortal
remains  of  some  one  or  other,  either  swathed  in
garments,  or  also  packed  in  interior  smaller  cases,
— were  not  once  deposited  in  the  smooth-sur-
faced, and  inscriptionless  coffer  of  the  King's
Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid ; — ^yet  we  cannot
close  our  eyes  to  the  fact  of  there  being  not  a
little  decidedly  wanting  in  that  vessel's  char-
acter and  claim  to  being  perfectly  and  entirely
suited  for  a  coffin  only.  Or  rather,  some  other
and  extraneous  feature  will  always  be  cropping
out,  showing  that  something  more  than  a  coffin
must  have  been  intended,  whether  alone,  or  in
conjunction  with  a  coffin-function.  But  in  either
case,  something  much  more  noble,  and  vastly
rarer  to  meet  with,  than  a  mere  burial  coffin.


GEL  2  9.]  Metrical  HypothesU.  285

,    MetrtGol  Hypothesis.

If  the  tombic  hypotliesis,  though,  could  not
explain  several  important  features  about  the  coffer
as  we  find  it  now,  modem  breakages  excepted ; —
neither,  it  is  affirmed  by  some,  can  the  metrical
idea;  because, — 'is  there  not  a  ledge  cut  near
*  the  top  of  the  sides,  as  if  for  receiving,  though
'  imperfectly,  a  sarcophagus  cover  V

True.  But,  on  one  hand,  we  have  no  proof
that  so  small  a  portion  cut  out  from  the  original
box- sided  vessel  (and  which  cut-out  might  have
been  so  easily  inflicted  afterwards), — ^was  part  of
the  original  design ;  and  it  is  not  mentioned  as
existing,  by  any  traveller  until  within  the  last
forty  years ;  while  some  of  the  older  authorities
distinctly  declare  against  anything  of  the  kind.
And  on  the  other  hand,  if  sywbolisms  of  weight
and  measure,  are  the  chief  objects  of  the  Great
Pyramid's  metrical  character,  and  not  the  furnish-
ing  to  men  actual  working  standards, — ^the  partial
ledge  cut-out, — no  matter  whether  a  primeval,
mediseval,  or  modem  feature, — is  of  no  serious
metrical  harm,  for  we  can  get  at  the  intended
idea  of  size  notwithstanding.


286  Units  and  Standards  of  G.  Pyramid.  [csE.  29.

To  thiB  end,  veiy  dose  linear  measuies  are
necessaiy.  Snch  indeed  have  been  mad^  and
fall  particulais  of  them  published  in  the  second
Tolnme  of  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid^
and  they  do  indicate  some  most  interesting  met-
rical ideaa  But  since  then,  a  learned  Baronet
has  raised  such  a  stonn  of  ridicule  against  t^
said  measores— that  the  author  has  been  left
standing  almost  alone,  by  the  side  of  his  long
and  laborious  work.

'Though  the  coffer  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was  thus  imagined,*
said  Sir  J.  T.  Simpeon  to  the  Boyal  Sooiety  of  Sdinbuq^
'  to  be  a  great  standard  of  meaanre,  Profesaor  Smyth  had
'  cited  the  measurements  of  it,  made  and  published  by  twenty-
'  five  different  obsenrers,  several  of  whom  had  gone  about  the
'  matter  with  great  maUiematical  accuracy ;  but  all  tiieae
'  twenty-five,  as  he  oignied,  varied  from  each  other  in  their
'  accounts  of  this  standard,  in  every  element  of  length,  breadth,

<  and  depth,  both  inside  and  outside.    Professor  Smyth  had'

<  measured  it  himself,  as  a  twentyndxth  measurer,  and  again
'  his  measure  varied  from  every  other/

This  statement  was  received  with  roars  of
laughter,  quite  unusual  in  a  scientific  assembly
met  for  the  prosecution  of  science  for  its  own
sake.  But  then  the  picture  of,  first,  a  confusion
worse  confounded  before  Professor  Smyth  went
out  to  make  improved  observations;  and  then,


OH.  29.]  Metrical  Hypothesis.  287

88  the  result  of  his  labours^  that  the  matter  was
made  even  more  confiised  than  before,— this  pic*
tore,  painted  in  eloquent  phrases,  and  given  forth
with  a  profusely  smiling  countenance, — ^was  too
much  for  the  risible  faculties  of  human  nature
<not  inquiring  very  nicdy  into  the  teuth  of  tie
statement)  to  withstand.

Now,  although  Professor  Smyth  in  his  first
book  on  the  Pyramid, — before  going  thereto,  and
when  he  was  striving  to  make  the  utmost  of  aU
puUished  observations  by  oth^  travelers, — did
collect  and  exhibit  the  measures  of  twenty-five
observers,  extending  from  1563  a.d.  to  1837  A-D.^
and  some  of  them  were  very  inaccurate  indeed ;
he  did  not  represent  them  as  all  equcdly  un-^
certain.  On  the  contrary,  he  showed  that  while
some  of  the  earKer  observers  varied  from  each
other  by  10,  20,  or  even  60  inches,  and  a  few
of  the  modem  ones  by  4,  5,  Mid  more  inches,-
there  were  three  observers,  whose  care  and  ex-
perience bespoke  every  one's  respectful  attention
to  their  results;  and  whose  measures,  for  the
inside  of  the  coffer,  did  in  fact  come  so  remark-
ably close  to  each  other,  or  within  a  very  small
fraction  of  an  inch,  with  one  single  exception, —


288  Units  and  Standards  of  O.Pjpram^  [gol29.

that  most  pasons  would  have  allowed,  oa  ordi-
naiy  pnociples^  that  PrafesBor  Smyth  had,  even
80  £eu-,  rescued  the  coffeivcapacily  questioa  from
extreme  micertainly,  and  teduoed  it  within  nai^
row  limits.  Say,  within  a  quarter  of  an  inch
in  each  dement^  of  length,  breadth,  and  depth ;
with  the  exception,  that  the  latter  featoie  was
stated  by  the  French  Academicians  as  being  3
inches  greater  than  what  Professor  Greaves^  and
Colonel  Howard  Yyse,  had  represented  it  to  be.

Now,  3  inches  of  difference  amongst  men
measuring  down  to,  and  often  agreeing  to  tenths
of  inches,  was  too  large  a  quantity  to  be  anything
else  than  an  absolute  blunder,  of  one  party  or
the  other;  though  which  it  was,  who  had  been
so  tmfortunate, — ^no  one  in  society  ventured  to
say, — ^until  Professor  Smyth  went  out  to  Egypt,
and  practically  found  that  it  was  the  French
savants  who  were  in  that  dilemma.

The  French  Academicians'  measures  in  1799,
reduced  to  English  inches^  for  the  depth  of  the
coffer,  gave  3 7 '285  ;  while  Professor  Greaves,  in
1638,  had  given  34*32 — and  C!olonel  Howard
Vyse  (with  the  moderate  accuracy,  but  fiill
honesty  characteristic  of  a  soldier),  merely  going


CH.  29.]  Metrical  Hypothesis.


289


to  the  nearest  half-inch,  subseqnenlly  gave  34*5
inches — Professor  Smyth's  measures,  repeated
over  many  parts  of  the  coffer,  to  detect  ineqaaK-
tiefl^  gave  34*84  British  inches.^

The  first  part  of  Professor  Smyth's  measures  at
the  coffer,  then, — ^instead  of  bringing  back  all  the
c<mfesion  of  many,  even  the  worst,  of  the  tweniy-
five  obs^^ers,  with  their  whole  armfiUs  of  errone-
ous inches,— had  the  sobering  effisct  of  throwing  out
the  only  one  err^Hr  that  remained,  greater  than  tihe
fraction  of  an  inch,  after  his  previous  discussion.

He  did  not,  however,  stop  there ;  but  entered
immediately  after,  on  a  far  more  careful  and  com-
plete metrical  examination  of  the  coffer,  than  any

^  The  actual  nnmben  m  gives  in  Ltfe  amd  Worh,  toL  11  p.  183,


Ijdupb  Depth  of  Ck>FFiB,  Mbaburkd  fbom  Lbyel  of  OBionrAL,
OB  Highest,  Tor  of  K.,  E.,  and  S.  Sidbil


ftet  «r  LMfth  vlMM  ^hMTvaltaM

Ftet  oTBTCiidth  what*  ohMnraUoiM

iMffCh.

ir«arBMt
ild*.

Nmt

VmtWmI

O-t  Brit  inebM  u,  of  Inner  v.  end,
to                    Do.          do.
6-0                    Do.           do.

10-0                     Do.           do.

M-0                    Do.           da        .

Hean  at  each  pert  of  breedth,    .

Brii-lndMS.
84-80
84*44
84*42
84-40
84  M

BHttnebM.
34  28

84  41
84^
84-88

Brlttnebm,
84*20
84  86
84-28
84-28
84-90

Bitt.  taifllMi.
84-28
84-88
84*87
84-86
84-88

84*88

84  88

84  29

84-84

General  mean  of  all  lengthi  and  breadtha  —  84 '84  Britiah  inohea.

290  Unit8aaidStcmdcmhofQ.PifrxMnid.[oEL2

one  had  ever  made  before;  and  was  enabled
thereby  to  bring  to  light,  and  has  sinee  published,
many  subsidiaiy  features  of  its  shape  and  size,
over  and  above  mere  length,  breadth,  and  depth  or
height^  measured  once  inside  and  once  outside.

In  most  inquiries^  the  circumstance  of  having
eliminated  all  large  differences  amongst  formeic
observers,  and  entered  upon  the  measurement  of
microscopic  quantities^  which  reveal  hitherto  un-
expected residual  features,  or  anomalies  they  may
b^  in  the  subject  under  examination, — is  usually
held  to  mark  an  advance  in  knowledge.  Not  so,
however,  in  the  view  of  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson,  when
that  improvement  has  been  effected  on  the  Great
Pyramid  coffer ;  for  the  person  by  whom  it  was
accomplished  on  this  twenty-sixth  occasion  of
measuring,  and  whose  measurements  do  '  differ
from  those  of  every  other  measurer,'  in  that  they
go  into  refinements  which  the  older  observers
never  thought  about, — ^is  held  up  to  public  ridi-
cule precisely  for  so  differing  from  his  predecessors ;
and  is  laughed  at  accordingly,  with  a  few  excep-
tions, by  a  learned  society  at  a  scientific  meeting.

Yet  that  despised  person's  observations,  being
both  the  last  made^  and  the  completest  yet  pub-


CH.  29.]  Capacity  of  the  Coffer.  291

liflhed  by  any  one, — we  shall  make  no  apology  for
nsing  tihem,  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  there
was  scientific  foundation  for  the  ridicule,  which
Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  next  cast  upon  the  cofier  itsel£

Capacity  of  the  Coffer.

'  Surely/  aigued  the  versatile  Baronet, '  a  mea-
'  sure  of  capacity  should  be  measurable,  but  this
'  cofier  of  the  Great  Pyramid  seemed  immeasur-
'  able — at  leasts  to  twenty-six  different  observers.'
And  then  giving  the  differences  of  some  of  these
from  others^  but  in  cubic  inches  of  computed
contents  of  the  whole  interior,  such  differences
were  made  to  look  very  overpowering ;  especiaUy
in  the  case  of  the  French  measure,  for,  as  their
actaaUy  Huree-inch  mistaken  quantity  of  depth
was  not  eliminated,  there  was  introduced  from
that  cause  alone,  on  so  large  a  vessel  as  the  coffer,
a  contents  error  of  some  6000  cubic  inches.

The  coffer  was  also  abused,  for  having  the
small  subsidiary  features  of  figure,  discovered  by
Professor  Smyth  ;  and  it  was  declared  therefore
to  have  an  interior,  ^  apparently  unmeasurable  in

*  a  correct  way  by  mere  linear  measurement — ^the

*  only  measure  yet  attempted.'    '  If  it  was  an


292  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [gel  29;

^  obj^  of  the  slightest  nrbment'  (said  the  popular
Vice^Presidettt  of  the  Antiqaarian  Society  <tf
Scotland, — ^with  &r  more  expression  of  yindictlYe
hate,  than  aichsBological  loye  towards  this  le*
markable  work  of  primal  times),  *  perhaps  liquid
'  measurements  would  be  more  successful'

How  liquid  measurements  are  to  be  applied  to
test  precisely  the  ancient  capacity  of  a  vessel,
which  has  been  broken  away  by  modem  hammers
to  nearly  a  l^iird  of  its  height  at  one  comer,  and
injured  over  most  of  its  top,— was  not  explained
to  the  meeting.  Nor  was  anything  said,  as  to
who  was  to  pay  for  having  so  much  distilled
water,  as  the  coffer  full,  conveyed  into  the  interior
of  the  Great  Pyramid,  or  what  methods  were  to
be  adopted  to  weigh  or  measure  the  said  amount
of  water,  with  something  approaching  to  perfect
exactitude,  when  it  had  been  got  there.

In  short,  linear  measure,  duly  applied  in  con*
junction  with  reason,  is  really  the  only  at  present
available  plan, — and  we  shall  soon  see,  if  it  be
not  sufficient.

Deviations,  as  discovered  by  Professor  Smyth,
ivom  a  pure  rectangular  and  rectilinear-sided
mathematical  figure,— these  undoubtedly  are  in  the


OH.  29.]    .     Capacity  ofths  Coffer.  298

coffer ;  but  the  yeiy  fiu^t  that  they  had  escaped
pievioua  observeiB^  and  were  only  found  out  by
him,  on  companng  the  results  of  his  many  mea*
Bures^  show  that  they  are  merely  slight  dispropor-
tions on  the  whole.  Being  effected  too,  usually
by  the  occurrence  of  curves  of  long  radius, — ^their
influences  are  never  so  uncertain,  as  those  of  sudden
or  lawless  inegularities  of  figure;  and  can  be
practically  eliminated  by  making  many  measures
over  many  parts  of  the  surface^  and  then  taking  a
mean.  For  a  capacity  measure,  too,  extreme  regu-
larity of  rectilinear  figure  is  not  of  any  moment ;
indeed,  it  is  rather  undesirable,  lest  it  should  lead
to  the  vessel  being  improperly  used  as  a  standard
of  length  also.  Now  the  linear  standard  of  the
Great  Pyramid  having  been  already  laid  down  in
the  Pyramid's  base-side, — we  derive  an  argument
rather  in  favour  of,  than  against,  a  capacity  mea-
sure in  the  coffer,  on  finding  that  none  of  its  three
linear  elements,  either  for  inside  or  outside,  fall
anywhere  near  an  even  round  number  of  Pyramid
inches^  in  terms  of  Pyramid  numbers.  We  are
narrowed  thereby  to  question  the  coffer  solely,  on
its  adaptation  to  capacity  purposes.
Now  this  research  having  been  already  carried


294  Units  and  Standards  of  0.  Pyramid  [ch.  29.

throagh  in  voL  iiL  of  Life  and  Work,  and  both
the  modem  fractures  and  the  *  sarcophagaa-ledge-
cnt-out'  having  been  filled  up  by  calculation, —
there  result  for  the  linear  internal  proportions  of
the  coffer  (in  Pyramid  inches) —

Length  77*85,  breadth  2670,  and  depth  34*31 ;
which  numbers  being  multiplied  together,  give  as
our  first  approximation  to  the  cubic  contents  of
the  coffer,  in  the  light  of  a  capacity-measuring
vessel,  71,317  cubic  Pyramid  inchea

But  who  will  answer  for  the  ancient  coffer,  when
thus  interrogated  in  modem  times,  telling  truly
what  were  the  original  size-intentions  of  its
founder  ?

The  said  ancient  coffer  will  answer  both  for
itself,  and  its  maker.

The  Coffer  on  its  own  Capacity.

While  the  tombic  idea  gave  a  reason  for  the
exceeding  length,  and  moderate  breadth  of  the
coffer, — it  gave  no  account  of  wherefore  its  large
depth  ;  wherefore  also  the  thinness  of  its  sides  as
compared  with  those  of  much  smaller  sarcophagi  ;
and  wherefore  the  bottom,  very  nearly  an  inch
thicker  than  the  sides.


CH.  29.]    ^6  Goffer  on  its  own  Capacity.      296

The  metrical  idea,  on  the  other  hand,  while  it
woidd  not  necessarily  demand  a  priori  so  ex*
ceeding  a  length  and  small  a  breadth,— is  quite
content  to  accept  them  from  another  source,  pro-
vided it  be  allowed  to  furnish  itself  with  sufficient
depths  to  realize  therewith  and  altogether,  a  cer-
tain predetermined  amount  of  total  capacity.
Given  therefore  the  length  and  breadth  as  already
stated,— and  then,  both  the  large  depth  and  some
of  those  other  features  also,  which  were  unamen-
able to  burial  ideas,  are  at  once  explained  by  the
metrical  hypothesis.

Only  a  few  weeks  since,  the  ingenious  Mr.
Henry  Perigal  sent  us  a  copy  of  a  card  bearing
date  1865, — and  stating  as  follows  : —

*  ObIOIKAL  DdOENSIONS  of  the  CoFFKB  IK  THE  OIUEI.T

<  Pybamid.

Length.  Breadth.    Depth.         Volmne.

•  Interior,    -  78  X  27  X  36  =     73,710         ^

•Exterior,    -  90  X  39  X  42  «   147,420  "  "2


.*.  Thickness  of  walls  ■»  6,  and  of  bottom  ■»  7.
'Bottom,     «  90  X  39  X     7  -»     24,670

•Walls,        a     2(90  + 27) X  36  X     6  »     49,140


-i


73,710

'  The  exterior  volame  being  thus  exactly  double  the  interior
'  capacity,  a  solid  exactly  filling  the  inner  space  might  be
'  formed  of  the  walls  and  bottom,  which  are  likewise  in  the
'  same  ratio  (2:1)  to  each  other.'


296  Ur^  and  Standards  of  Q.  Piframid.  [gh.29.

If  the  above  niimberB  (which  were  derived  by
their  author  taking  the  mean  of  Greave^  Jomard,
and  Howard  Vyse's  measures^  and  then  choosing
the  nearest  whole  number)  are  British  inchee^ —
they  give  a  vastly  too  great  cubic  capacity  for  the
coffer ;  but  they  are  not  such  inches ;  nor  are  they
any  uniform  unit  of  measure,  for  they  assume  a
slightly  different  proportion  to  each  other  and  to
inches,  in  every  successive  element  of  coffer  mea-
sure. Yet  are  they,  notwithstanding,  so  remark*
ably  near — ^that  ordinary  observation  would  not
have  distinguished  between  a  coffer  framed  on
such  ideal  measures  and  the  actual  coffer  restored*

The  ideal  one,  too,  has  the  merit  of  fulfilling
by  the  nearest  simple  numbers  po88ible,-certam
geometrical  requirements,  as  of  bottom  to  sides  ;
and  of  bottom  and  sides  together  to  interior
contents;  and  of  interior  contents  to  external
volume; — and  it  fulfils  all  these  with  absolute
accuracy.

This  result  constitutes  in  so  far,  a  geometrical
foundation  for  a  capacity  measure ;  and  in  so
much  as  the  block  to  form  the  ideal  coffer,  would
be  rather  larger  than  for  the  real  one  (supposing
Mr.  Perigal's  numbers  to  be  Pyramid  inches)— the


OH.  29.]    The  Coffer  on  its  own  Capacity.      297

real  coffer  Uock  might  in  a  maimer  be  formed  by
trimming  down  tiie  ideal  one,  to  8ud»  size,  as
another  and  a  quite  different  consideration  might
have  rendered  necesaaiy  for  the  abfiolntd  size  of  a
capacity  measure.  The  real  coffer  is,  we  know^
smaller ;  but  is  it  smaller  in  each  of  its  several
parte,  in  such  rather  compound  and  varying  pro-
portion% — ^that  all  the  mutual  geometric  relations
of  the  ideal  coffer,  are  still  preserved  ?

The  coffer  shows  that  it  is  so,  within  limite  of
the  errors  of  observation,  for  the  following  are
Professor's  Smyth's  results  extracted  out  of  Life
and  Work,  where  they  had  been  printed,  in  part
at  least,  under  no  expectation  of  such  a  test  as
this,^  and  expressed  in  Pyramid  inches.

Lcogth.     Breadth.       Dtpth.         Yolvine.
Coffer  Interior,  =  77  86  X  26*70  X  34-31  =    71,317      i
Coffer  ExteriOT,  »  89-62  X  38*61  X  41-13  «  142,319  ""l»«"'y-

And  here  we  come  at  once  upon  some  almost
intentional  results  in  the  residual  deviations  of

'  A  portion  of  the  test  was  contained  in  a  paper  published  by  the
late  Mr.  Jopling  in  the  Xewure  Hour  for  1863,  p.  330,  in  so  far  as
he  produced  a  ressel  with  such  sides  and  bottom, — that  the  capacity
of  the  interior,  was  half  that  of  the  exterior.  But  he  made  the
bottom  less  thick,  instead  of  more  thick  than  the  sides  :  and  was  so
far  wrong  both  in  external  length  and  height^  and  internal  depth ;
that  it  is  fntile  to  compare  the  real  coffer  with  his  theoretical  crea-
tion, thoogh  yery  ingenious  in  itself.


298  Units  and  Standards  of  G.  Pyramid.  [psL  29.

figure  discovered  by  Professor  Smyih,— for  un-
less the  measured  linear  qiuuitities  for  the  ex-
terior, had  been  duly  corrected  for  the,  only
recently  discovered,  concavity  of  some  of  the
sides^ — ^the  final  cube  quantity  would  have  been
grossly  in  error.

A  still  neater  result,  too,  follows  with  the  bottom
and  sides.  For  Professor  Smyth  had  remarked,
when  measuring  them  in  the  Pjrramid,  that  they
were  not  exactly  6  and  7  inches  respectively,  in
thickness;  but  were  on  the  whole  less,  and  by
varying  quantities,  in  either  case;— all  which
much  disappointed  him  at  the  time,  but  he  printed
the  numbers  nevertheless ;  and  now  has  appeared
a  reason  why  they  are  so  small ;  for  without  those
diminutions,  imequal  diminutions  too,  on  the  6
and  7  inches  respectively, — ^the  required  capacity
relations  would  not  have  been  obtained  even
approximately.

As  the  real  coffer,  is  an  affair  of  practice  and
human  measure, — ^there  is  no  absolute  exactitude
even  in  the  last  numbers  for  it  yet  obtained.  To
procure  the  truest  results,  therefore,  we  must  try
to  take  all  independent  observations,  of  each  and
every  component  part,  into  account.    Therefore,


OH.  29.]  The  Coffer  on  its  own  Capacity.  299
besides  getting  the  thickness  of  sides  and  bottom

Mr.  Perigal's,  manner,  and  which  is  quite  sufficient
in  his  theoretical  case) — we  also  refer  to  the
direct  measures  of  the  thickness  of  those  parts
given  in  Life  and  Work^  voL  ii  pp.  120, 121,  and
obtain  finally,  in  Pyramid  inches, —

Thicknen  of  walU  —  5*952,  and  of  bottom  —  6*866.

Employing  these  quantities  next  in  his  second
formula,  we  have, —

Bottom,  —  89-62  X  38-61 X 6*866 -^3^758 _i  (  yery  nearly
WaUa,  b2(89-62  + 26-70)  X  34-31  X5.952s47,508*~l  (      indeed.

Within  such  limits  then,  as  have  been  measured
to  practically,  in  the  present  day — ^the  geometrical
proportions  of  a  very  remarkable  theoretical  ap-
proach  to  the  shape  of  the  coffer,  are  preserved,
in  the  real  coffer, — ^its  ledge-cut-out  having  been
duly  filled  up.^  We  may  now,  therefore,  make
use  of  those  proportions,  in  combination  with
former  measures,  for  multiplying  approximations
to  the  capacity  of  the  interior.

^  The  space  contained  in  the  ledge  cnt  out  of  the  sides,  amounts
to  above  1200  cubic  inches.  And  the  amount  of  space  it  would  re-
move from  the  interior  contents  of  the  coffer,  if  allowed  to  remove
its  thickness  over  the  whole  top,  amounts  to  more  than  2380  cubic
inches.


800  Units  and  St<mdard8  of  Qi  Pf/iramd.  [ch.29.
Thus,

OoMe  tiifllias.

1.  Contentfl  of  interior  of*  coffer  by  direol  meMiire*         m   71*817

2.  Do.      by  half  the  exterior  volume,       •  »   71»160

3.  Da      by  ram  of  bottom  and  waUfl^  »   71f86d

There  are  thus  three  determinations^  by  mostly
'  separate  measures ;  and  we  may  perhaps  employ
even  a  fourth.  That  '  ledge-cut-out'  on  the  top
of  the  sides^  which  was  for  so  long  looked  on
merely  as  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  metrical
hypothesis, — ^has  now  been  found  to  be  a  most
useful  testimony  to  the  capacity  question;  for,
if  a  frame  be  made  of  such  a  size  as  closely  to
fill  the  ledge,  round  all  four  sides^ — ^that  frame
will  be  found  capable  of  just  going,  longways
and  in  vertical  plane,  inside  the  coflfer  and  dia-
gonally from  one  comer  to  the  other  of  it  More-
over, when  so  placed,  and  therefore  standing  on
the  bottom  of  the  coffer,  such  frame  seems  nicely
to  represent  the  original  height  of  the  sides ;  an
important  element  to  have  testimony  borne  to,
so  extensively  has  the  old  top  surface  been
chipped  away.    Wherefore  taking —

Mean  breadth  of  cnt-out  on'Eaatem  side  from  the

several  observationa  given  in  voL  ii.   p.  116,   of  Pjramid  laeh.

Lift  and  Work, a     1-63

Internal  breadth  of  coffer, ■■  26*70

Mean  breadth  of  West  side,  as  of  sides  already  given,  a     5*952


CH.  29.]     The  Coffer  on  its  own  Chpacity.      801

the  sum^  or  34*282,  gives  us  a  new  quantity  for
the  depth ;  and  substituting  this  in  our  first
formula,  we  have  77*86  x  26*70  x  34*282  =
71,258.

The  mean  of  which  71,258,  combined  with  the
three  preceding  quantities^-yields  71.250  cubic
Pyramid  inches.-for  our  best  determination  by
all  Professor  Smyth's  observations,  of  the  coffer's
cubical  interior  contents.  Each  result,  it  will
be  observed^  is  perfectly  certain  about  the  71,000,
and  the  imcertainties  in  the  three  smaller  num-
ber^ look  so  like  mere  errors  of  observation,  and

■

oscillate  by  such  small  proportionate  amoimts
(as  y^th  part,  or  less)  about  the  mean — that  thfe
final  result,  or  71,250  cubic  Pyramid  inches^  may
be  looked  upon  as  very  close  to  the  real  size
now,  with  the  ledge  and  modem  breakages  filled
up,  and  the  real,  as  well  as  intended,  size  of
old.

But  still  comes  the  question,  is  that  quantity
71,250  cubic  Pyramid  inches,  a  mere  accident  of
en  accident ; — or  has  it  any  standing  ground  of
importance,  when  compared  with  either  nature  or
art,  or  the  doctrines  of  mensuration  in  capacity
and  weight  ?


302  UniUcmd  Standards  of  0.  Pyramid,  [ch.29.


Why  of  that  Capacity  f

The  metrical  theory  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid  puts
forward,  that  a  combined  capacity  and  weight
measure  standard  there,  should  remind,  both  of
the  bulk  of  the  earth,  and  its  specific  gravity.

Wherefore,  taking  this  latter  quantity  at  5*7
times  the  weight  of  water  at  es""  Fahrenheit ;  and
taking  also  the  cube  of  the  10""^  part  of  the
whole  axis  of  the  earth,  or  of  50  Pyramid
inches,  and  dividing  by  10,  we  have  the  71,250
of  such  cubic  inches  at  once, —

50*  X  5-7     ^
or  thus:    — rr — =71,250.

The  5*7  for  the  specific  gravity  of  the  mean
material  of  the  whole  earth,  is  not  a  settled  quan-
tity yet  by  modem  science ;  because  the  question
is  in  fact,  rather  above  her  highest  efforts  to  do
more  than  merely  make  distant  approximations  to.
But  while  the  above  numbers  are  a  fair  representa-
tion, on  the  whole,  of  the  rather  mutually  conflict-
ing numbers  of  the  late  Mr.  Francis  Baily,  of  the
Astronomer-Royal,  and  Sir  Henry  James;  they
have  also  some  support  from  the  already  investi-
gated  relation  of  the  whole  Great  Pyramid  with


OH.  29.]  Why  of  that  Capacity?  803

the  whole  earth;  for  the  former's  proportion  of
being  the  10*^*  part  of  the  latter, — would  have
been  thrown  entirely  out,  by  employing  any  very
different  quantity  from  5 '7;  or,  as  we  should
write  it  perhaps,  5*70, — to  show  that  we  feel  sure
of  it  to  hundredths  as  well  as  to  tenths, — if  such
an  explanation  of  the  coffer  is  to  be  admitted
atalL^

This  mode,  then,  is  both  in  principle  and  nume-
rical coincidence  perfectly  sufficient  for  explain-
ing why  a  standard  of  capacity  and  weight  in
the  Great  Pyramid  should  have  its  internal  con-
tents =  71,260  cubic  Pyramid  inches.    But  is

there  any  opposing  theory  in  the  field  ?

41-46


Yes;   ^71,250  =  41-46;   and —2—  =  20-73,  or

the  length,  very  nearly,  of  the  profane  Egyptian
cubit.  Wherefore,  say  some,  the  coffer  of  the
King's  Chamber  was  made  of  just  such  a  size  that
the  internal  contents  should  be  equal  to  the  cube
of  a  length  of  two  profane  cubits.  And  of  course
they  add,  *  Therefore  there  is  nothing  scientific
*  about  it ;  metrical,  it  may  be,  in  principle,  if

^5*69  for  the  earth's  mean  density,  would  give  in  the  formula
already  detailed  for  the  size  of  the  coffer,  71,125 ;  and  5*71  =-71,375;
or  ontaide  all  our  meaiuret,  which  vary  from  71»160  to  71,317.


304  Units  and  Standards  ofQ.  Pyramid,  [gh.  29.

'  you  like,  so  as  to  contain  8  cubic  profsine  cubits^
*  but  not  of  any  higb  or  noble  scientific  order/

Here  then  we  have  once  more,  as  witb  the
shajpe  of  the  Pyramid  in  the  earlier  part  of  our
essay,  two  rival  theories ;  each  bringing  out  ap-^
parently  the  same  71,250  numbers  given  by  obfler-
vation.  How  then  shall  we  determine  which  of
the  two  ideas,  the  mind  of  the  ancient  designer
was  intent  on  memorializing  ?

Why,  by  looking  round  upon  the  accompani-
ments^ and  seeing  if  there  are  any  independent
hints  to  be  derived  icom  them.

It  has  been  said  for  the  above  profane  cubit
hypothesis, — ^that  £he  whole  Eing^s  Chamber  was
laid  out,  so  as  to  be  exactly  20  such  cubits  long
and  10  broad;  showing  also  that  the  designer
knew  of  such  cubits^  and  employed  them  in  his
work.

Doubtless  he  did  so ;  but  yet  had  no  intention
of  raising  them  to  the  honour  of  deciding  the
contents  of  the  coffer.  Modem  measure  shows  ^
that  the  breadth  of  the  chamber,  is  to  0*1  of  an
inch,  exactly  half  of  the  length ;  and  that  the
one  therefore  represents  10  of  precisely  the  same

1  L\ft  and  Work,  by  0.  PUza  SmytSi,  toL  iL  pp.  101  and  340.


CH.  29.]         Why  of  that  Ca/pacUy  f  305

linear  units  or  standards  that  the  other  contains
20.  And  being  thus  repeated  twice  with  such
perfection,  that  standard  may  be  considered
well  established.  What  then,  by  all  means,  is
the  length  of  that  standard  in  Pyramid  inches  ?

Reference  to  Life  and  Warhy  vol  ii,  shows
that  it  amounts  to  20*61  Pjrramid  inches;  and
20'61  X  2  and  raised  to  the  cube  power  =  70,036  ;
or  a  quantity  totaUy  insufficient  to  stand  for  the
71,250  of  the  actual  coffer.

The  profEuie  cubit,  then,  of  that  very  chamber,
failing  sadly, — let  us  look  for  further  hints.

1.  Over  the  entrance-door  of  the  King's
Chamber,  outside,  are  engraved  four  deep  vertical
lines,  dividing  the  space  into  five  equal  parts ;  and
forming  therefore,  apparently,  a  sign  to  those  who
enter  that  chamber,  that  they  shall  find  a  reign-
ing principle  of '  a  division  into  5/  pervading  it.

2.  The  walls  of  the  room,  all  round  and
round,  are  divided  into  5  equal  horizontal  courses ;
again  reminding  of  a  division  into  5.

3.  From  the  chamber's  lowest  course,  which
is  47  inches  high,  a  depth  equal  to  5  inches  is
taken  off,  by  the  mode  of  introducing  the  floor ;
and  this  amount  again  reminds  both  of  5,  and  of

u


306  Units  and  StcMda/rds  of  Q.  Pyramid.  [ojbl29.

Fyiamid  inches ; .  for  tiiesd  umtB,  instead  of  being
at  6'8  and  Ya,  go  into  the  earth's  axis  length  with
6'sand  lO's.

4«  The  said  6  inches  being  taken  off  that
lower  course  of  the  chamber  walls, — ^the  lemaindec
oouise  forms  a  sort  of  large  tank  enclosing  the
coffer;  and  is  equal,  in  cubic  contents,  to  60
times  the  interior  bulk  of  the  coffer/

5.  The  method  of  construction  of  the  whole
solid  substance  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  is  in  vast
layers  of  horizontal  courses,  extending  throughout
the  entire  bmlding;  and  of  those  courses  (if  the
mean  of  the  best  measures  yet  made  can  be
trusted)  60  intervene  between  the  foundation
plane  of  the  Pyramid,  and  the  floor  of  the  Eling^s
Chamber  carrying  the  coffer.

There,  then,  may  stiU  be  seen  most  striking
references,  undoubtedly  too  by  the  original
builders,  to  divisions  eitiier  by  6  or  60 ;  and
they  are  repeated  five  times  over.  And  while
no  such   division  was  known  to    tiie  profane

^  See  L^e  and  Work  for  the  particaltfo,  voL  iiL  p.  168.     Here,

we  may  merely  state  that  there  are  two  ways  of  taking  the  measure-

412*14X206*09X41*9
ments,  of  which  one  method  gives r^ ■*  71,178 ;

A  *!.      ^^.      412X206X42    ^,  ^^
and  the  other  ^ —71,292;  mean,  71,235.


CH.  29.]  The  Latest  Discovery.  307

i^gyptian  cubit, — ^it  is  the  veiy  essence  of  the
Oieat  Pyramid's  scientific  system.^  Concealed  that
system  may  ever  have  been  from  man,  and  even
Egyptian  Pagan  men :  yet  sm^ly  enshrined  in  the
veiy  foundations  of  the  building,  and  now  coming
forth  to  view,  simple,  grand,  and  duly  attested,
when  questioned  by  number,  weight,  and  measure.

The  Latest  Discovery.

Even  when  printing  these  pages^  another  nume-
rical confirmation  of  more  than  '  an  old  coffin '
object,  has  appeared.  For  whereas  satisfaction
might  well  be  felt,  at  finding,  as  in  the  pre-
vious pages,  that  the  ostensible  irregularities  of
the  coffer,  had  useful  purposes  to  perform  towards
its  final  result,  or  were  really  important  adjust-
ments of  size, — also  that  the  commensurability  of
the  room's  lower  course,  by  an  appropriate  number,
with  the  coffer, — proves  that  the  coffer  is  the  in-
tended vessel  for  that  room  (and  intended  too  with
the  ledge  filled  up) ;  and  also  that  the  similar

^  The  profane  Egyptian  cubit  was  divided  into  palms,  and  these
again  into  digits  or  dactyls.  Of  these  last  there  were  four  in  one
palm ;  but  the  number  of  palms  in  the  cubit  is  given  by  some
authors  at  six,  and  by  some  at  seven.  The  origin  it  may  be  of  con-
fusion being  at  sixes  and  sevens.


308  UniU  ar^  Standards  of  Q.  Pyramid.  [cH.  29.

number  of  the  masomy  course  forming  the  pave-
ment to  the  coffer  levels  shows  that  the  construction
of  the  whole  body  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid  to  that
height  is  both  suitable  to^  and  cfymbolical  o^  the
coffer's  theoretical  origination, — the  news  now
comes  from  Mr.  St  John  Day,  that  the  coffer  con-
nects itself  scientifically  with  the  whole  shape  of
the  Oreat  Pyramid,  and  that  a  shape  which  dis-
criminates it  from  all  other  Pyramida

The  shape  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  already  set
forth  at  p.  183  to  193,  is  characterized,  as  first
published  by  the  late  John  Taylor,  by  affording  an
indication  of  the  mathematical  quantity  ir.  And
now  Mr.  St  John  Day  finds  the  same  proportion
in  a  combination  of  the  height,  with  two  sides  of
base,  of  the  coffer.  Only  very  close  when  he  uses
the  maodmum  figures  of  the  several  lengths^
breadths^  and  heights  given  in  voL  iL  of  Life  and
Work :  but  precisely  proving  thereby,  as  he  con-
siders,— that  it  was  necessary  for  the  primeval
architect  to  construct  the  coffer  with  the  apparent
irregularities  now  found,  in  order  that  in  one  and
the  same  vessel  there  might  be, —

1st,  A  definite  amount  of  cubical  contents,
settled  by  an  earth-reference  formula.


CH.  29.]        The  Latest  Discovery.  309

2dy  A  certain  inter-commensurability  of  parts,
to  prove  the  contents,  and  disprove  the  effects  of
modem  mischief    And

Zd^  A  sign  to  show  that  the  coffer  we  now  find
in  the  Great  Pyramid,  is  the  original  one  ;  viz.,  the
right  coffer,  in  the  right  chamber,  in  the  right
Pyramid,  and  suitable  to  no  other  place  under
the  sun  in  an  equal  degree.    And

4^,  Perhaps  a  length,  breadth,  and  extra
depth,  permitting  of  a  possible  honourable  burial
to  one  who  had  worked  nobly ;  and  called  atten-
tion  to  himself  by  no  vain-glorious  inscription.

As  Mr.  St.  John  Day  is  shordy  to  publish  his
discovery  with  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Glas-
gow, it  would  be  inexpedient  to  say  more  now.

We  conclude  this  section  therefore  with  re-
stating :-lst,  that  the  coffer's  interior  volume,

-    .     ,  ^        50^  Pyramid  inches  x  5*7

derived  from r^ represents

the  intended  cubic  size  or  true  contents  of  the
Great  Pyramid  standard  of  capacity  measure.

And  that,  2d,  the  weight  of  that  volume  of
water  at  68**  Fahrenheit,  and  at  the  mean  Pyra-
mid barometric  pressure,  wiU  be  the  weight  of
the  Great  Pjrramid  standard  of  weight-measure.


310  Units  and  Sta/ndards  of  G.  Pyramid,  [ch.  29.

Therefore  — 5^7"  >  ^^  12,500,  will  be  a  num-
ber of  cubic  Pyramid  inches  of  matter,  equal  in  den-
sity to  the  mean  density  or  specific  gravity  of  the
whole  bulk  of  the  earth ; — ^and  which  12,500  cubic
inches  will  weigh  as  much  as  the  cofier's  contents
of  water,  at  the  said  temperature  and  pressure.

I^  too,  we  farther  assume,  that  such  grand
standard  of  Pyramid  weight-measure,  shall  be
divisible  into  2500  parts;  and  each  of  these
parts  be  denominated  a  pound  weight  of  the
Pyramid, — both  the  Pyramid  system  of  numbers
ia  faUy  preserved,  and  such  Pyramid  pound  wiD
not  only  measure,  within  -^th  part,  the  same  as
an  avoirdupois  pound  (either  by  the  latter^s  happy
accident  of  birth,  or  perhaps  through  the  care  of
traditional  preservation)  ;^  but  will  be  scientifi-
cally definable,  amongst  nations  in  a  high  state  of
civilization,  as,  *  the  weight  oijive  cubic  Pyramid
*  inches  of  the  eariKs  mean  density ;'  the  latter
indicating  rock-material  of  approximately  twice
the  specific  gravity  of  basalt,  taken  at  the  mean
temperature  of  the  surface  of  the  whole  earth.

^  The  late  John  Taylor's  discoveiy  of  the  near  commensnrability
of  the  Britiah  (iwirter  for  com-measnre,  with  \h»  fourth  part  of
the  ooffer  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  should  also  be  borne  in  mind,  as  it
still  hidds  good.


CH.  30.j


Eeat.


311


INTELLECTUALITY   OF   GREAT

PYRAhAlD—amUnued.


CHAPTER  30.

UNITS  AND  STAia)ABBS  OF  GREAT  PYRAMID

MEASURE— eofatiiMeft

Heat.

The  Pyramid  deduced  standard  of  heat  unites
in  itself  the  following  recommendations  : —

1.  A  truly  Great  Fjrramid  division  of  a  natural
scale ;  viz.,  one-Jlfth  the  distance  between  freezing
and  boiling  of  water,  above  the  former.

2.  The  mean  annual  air-temperature  surround-
ing the  Great  Pyramid.

3.  The  mean  annual  air-temperature  of  the
whole  earth,  taken  according  to  its  habitable  sur-
face.

4.  The  whole  scale  &om  freezing  to  boUing
being  imagined  to  be  numbered  pyramidally  in
even  degrees  from  0  to  25  0^  the  standard  point


312  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyrcmidi  [gel  30.

reads  50"*  on  that  scale,  and  the  point  of  greatest
density  of  water  reads  1 0^  All  the  notable  re-
ferring points  are  thus  marked  in  properly  Pjfra-
midal,  and  symbolical,  numbers  of  the  Pyramid ;
imlike  the  French  centigrade  and  decimal  divi-
sion,  which  has  the  greatest  density  of  water  at
4''  of  that  scale.

6.  The  standard  heat-reference  at  the  Great
Pyramid,  being  its  own  50"*  (68  FaL),  is  a  pecu-
liarly suitable  temperature  for  men  to  work  well
in,  either  with  mind  or  body.

But  the  French  metrical  system,  of  mRlring
their  heat-reference  for  some  things  the  greatest
density  of  water  (39*  Fah.  nearly) ;  for  others  the
freezing  of  water ;  and  for  others  again  some  ano-
malous temperature  (between  40*  and  50*  FaL)
— where  their  erroneous  metal  metre  becomes  by
expansion  approximately  correct — ^this  system
inTi..  ^ 'J  oWve  L.  n^bi^  .n.
toward  influences,  contributing  thereby  needlessly
to  his  pain,  perplexity,  and  trouble.

To  compare  small  things  with  very  greats  or
with  religious  :  the  heat  part  of  the  French
metrical  system,  acts  towards  men,  much  as  does
the  Hindoo  religion  towards  its  devotees.     That


GEL  30.]  Eeat.  313

reli^on  requires  its  holiest  followers  to  torture
themselves  violently,  to  sleep  on  spiked  beds,  to
stand  with  one  arm  onstretched  until  it  has  be-
come rigid ;  and  to  swing  on  poles  suspended
from  hooks  entering  their  flesh ;  and  what  sort
of  religious  notions  does  it  give  them  after  all !
But  the  Christian  religion  draws 'by  love,  gentle-
ness, cheerfulness^  charily ;  it  induces  its  devotees
to  walk  in  the  ways  which  lead  to  happiness ;
and  to  make  aU  the  good,  true,  and  pleasant
things  of  the  world  clean  and  allowable  unto
them.  So  likewise,  mutatis  mutandis,  the  tem-
perature arrangements  of  Great  Pyramid  metro-
logy.

In  the  middle  ages,  when  science  did  not
prosper,  and  when  astronomy  waned,  but  astro-
logy flourished, — ^no  man's  wisdom  was  thought
anything  of,  unless  he  put  on  large  spectacles,  an
imposing  dress,  and  taught  in  a  dead  language
which  the  vulgar  could  not  comprehend.  And
so,  a  scientific  observation  in  physics,  can  hardly
be  truly  conducted  at  the  French  centigrade
standard  therefor,  without  a  man  burjring  him-
self learnedly  in  an  ice-cooled  chamber,  far  from


314  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [cel  30;

But  the  Oreat  Pyramid  system  -of  heat-iefer-
ence  rather  encourages  each  would*be  observer,
to  seek  out, — or  remain  in,  if  he  has  already  met
withy — ^the  most  comfortable  state  of  tenqieratore
possible.  Whenever  he  finds  himself  so  situated,
whether  in  a  regular  observatoiy,  or  his  private
house, -he  is  also  under  suitable  eucumstanoes
for  observing  agreeably  with  the  Pyramid  tem-
perature standard.  And  when  the  circumstances
appropriate  for  observing  occur  thus  daily  and
without  special  effort — ^they  are  likely  to  be  used
more  frequently ; — even  as  science  is  much  more
discussed  now,  when  it  is  spoken  of  and  prose-
cuted in  our  mother-tongue, — ^than  ever  it  wsa,
when  confined  of  old  to  a  few  educated  men,
speaking  stijffly  in  Latin  or  Greek.


CH.  81.]


Angle.


315


INTELLECTUALITY    OF   THE

GREAT    FYRAMlD-cantinued.


CHAPTER  31.

UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  GREAT  PYRAMID

MEASURE— coAlifMied.

Angle.

One  of  the  least  exceptionable  parts  of  the
French  metrical  system,  was  probably  the  strenu-
ous attempt  made  to  drive  out  of  use  the  Baby-
lonish sexagesimal  degrees^  minutes,  and  seconds
for  angle — by  introducing  a  so-called  decimal
graduation  of  the  circle.  In  this  graduation,  the
degrees  were  indeed  subdivided  decimally,  but
there  were  400  degrees  in  the  whole  circumfer-
ence. Hence  perhaps,  in  part,  the  idea  failed  to
be  accepted  even  in  France.

The  Great  Pyramid  system,  on  the  contrary,
regards  the  circle  circumference  as  its  grandest
unit  of  angle,  and  divides  it  into  1000  degrees


316  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid.  [cH,  31.

accordingly.  To  these  we  may  add  decimal  sab-
divisions^—and  there  result  thereupon,  both  ex-
pressions for  the  chief  Pyramid  angles,  to  less
than  the  nearest  tenth  of  one  of  those  small
degrees^ — though  the  same  angles  are  excessively
rough  when  given  in  terms  of  any  other  angle-
graduation  system  yet  tried  by  man ; — and  there
are  also  some  facilitations  for  navigation  and
itinerary  measures,  in  the  very  near  commensura-
bility  of  what  may  be  called  Pyramid  miles  and
Pyramid  knots.^

1  See  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  voL  iiL  pp.  202-215.


CH.  32.]  Chronology.  317


INTELLECTUALITY  OF  THE
GREAT   PYRAMID— coiKmtted:


CHAPTER  32,

UNITS  AND  STANDARDS  OF  GREAT  PYRAMID

MEASURE— coiKJfiifed.

Chronology.

Thirty  years  ago,  Sir  John  Herschel  called
attention  to  the  entrance-passage  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  as  indicating  on  astronomical  grounds
the  date  of  the  building's  foundation  ;  and  if  that
be  fully  borne  out, — what  a  boon  both  to  Egyp-
tology, and  indeed  to  all  the  early  history  of
intellectual  mankind ;  for  that  is  confessedly  an
inquiry  where,  in  the  absence  of  records  of  eclipses,
or  any  other  positive  method,  even  the  best
authors  are  known  to  take  in,  or  drop  out,  of  their
reckonings,  whole  thousands,  even  many  thou-
sands, of  years ;  and  they  do  it  with  a  degree  of
freedom  which  as  much  astonishes  the  unlearned


318  Units  and  Stamdards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [oh.  32.

public,— aa  it  utterly  confounds  their  rivals  in
the  same  branches  of  research.

Sir  John  Herschel's  argument  seems  to  have
been, — so  far  as  we  can  make  out,  though  it  is
exceedingly  desirable  for  general  information  that
that  eminent  Mvant  should  re-state  his  views—

1.  The  Great  Pjrramid  is  to  a  certain  extent
unmistakably  astronomical,  from  the  near  ap-
proach which  the  sides  of  its  base  make  to  perfect
cardinal  orientation.

2.  The  entrance-passage  is  approximately  in
the  plane  of  the  astronomical  meridian,  and  looks
in  that  plane,  very  definitely  to  a  certain  smaU
angular  distance  underneath  the  polar  point  of
the  sky;  or  suitably  to  a  transit  of  the  meridian
beneath  the  pole,  by  a  circumpolar  star  at  a
given  polar  distance.

3.  At  a  certain  date  B.C.,  and  which  Sir  John
Herschel,  in  1839,  considered  was  the  most  pro-
bable, out  of  several  then  published  literary  dates,
for  being  that  of  the  foundation  of  the  Great
Pyramid, — ^he  discovered  by  calculation,  that  a
very  remarkable  star,  a  Draconis,  was  at  pre-
cisely the  angular  distance  from  the  pole  of  the
sky,  indicated  by  the  entrance-passage.


CH.  32.]      Objections  and  their  A  nswers.        319

First  Order  of  Objections^  and  their  Answers.

With  some  men  of  astronomical  knowledge
and  mathematical  ability,  the  above  considerations
seem  to  have  been  held  satisfactory.

But  with  others,  who  are  great  in  antiquities  of
the  nick-nackitarian  kind,  the  practice  of  medicine,
and  divers  pursuits,  useful  enough,  but  of  inezact
foundatioD,-a  directly  contrary  effect  appears  to
have  been  exerted ;  nor,  on  several  recent  occa-
sions, could  too  much  contempt  be  shown  by
these  gentlemen  for  the  commission  of,  in  their
eyes,  such  an  Egyptological  solecism.

*  Why,'  haye  exclaimed  members  of  this  party,  eyen  up  to
a  few  weeks  ago,  'the  slope  of  the  entrance-passage  of  a
'  Pyramid  was  intended  for  nothing  but  lowering  a  sarco-
^  '  phagos  down  to  its  final  rest  by  1  What  an  absurdity  to  be
'  inventing  astronomical  explanations  of  sach  simple  mecha-
'  nical  matters  I  Besides,  the  Egyptian  chronology,  from  one
'  end^of  the  nation's  life  to  the  other,  was  attached  to  one  only
'  star  in  the  sky,  and  that  star  was  never  seen  from  Northern
*  entrance-passages,  for  it  was  the  Southern  Sinus,  or  Sothis/

Yet  before  going  into  our  chief  astronomical
proofs  for  Northern  a  Draconis, — let  us  try  to
please  these  gentlemen,  by  testing  their  sarcopha-
gus-lowering idea  of  the  Great  Pjrramid's  entrance-
passage,  on  truly  Egjrptological  grounds ;  as  thus  —


320  Units  and  Standards  of  O.Pjfr<mUd.  [cH.  82.

1.  Said  entrance-passage  was  so  low  in  the
roof,  that  the  coffer  of  the  King's  Chamber  could
not  have  entered  it^  when  in  coffin  guise,  or  with
an  ordinary  sarcophagus  lid  fastened  upon  it.
(See  p.  283.)

2.  In  neighbouring  tombs,  sarcophagi  have
been  found  in  such  situations,  that  they  must
have  been  moved  to  them  partly  by  descend-
ing vertical  shafts,  and  partly  by  advancing
along  horizontal  galleries.  Whence  it  would
appear  that  a  special  and  peculiar  sloping  path,
like  the  entrance-passage  of  a  Pyramid,  was  not
absolutely  necessary  for  moving  a  sarcophagus.

3.  Even  granting  that  a  sarcophagus  was
taken  piecemeal  into  the  chamber,  by  the  too
narrow  passage  ;  and  the  intended  King's  corpse
introduced  in  the  same  manner,  and  packed  into
the  big  sarcophagus  there  in  the  chamber ;  also
that  that  burial,  and  the  safety  and  security  of
the  embalmed  body,  were  the  whole  objects  of  the
Pyramid, — ^then,  why  was  the  entrance-passage
left,  or  indeed  ever  made,  a  conspicuous  and  per-
manent feature  of  the  Pyramid's  architecture  ?

As  Lord  Valentia  truly  remarked  at  the  begin-
ning of   the   century — these  Pyramid  entrance-


CSL  32.]     Objections  and  their  Answers.        321

passages^  lined  with  fine  white  stone,  have  served
to  lead  plunderers  right  up  to  the  very  room^
where,  on  the  burial  hypothesis,  they  ought  not
to  be  allowed  to  go  on  any  account  While,  had
the  passage  merely  been  obliterated,  after  the
deposition  of  the  corpse,  by  being  built  up  with
ordinary  masonry,— half  the  gigantic  bmlding,  or
more,  would  have  had  to  be  knocked  down,  before
any  clue  would  have  been  obtained  as  to  the
whereabouts  of  the  corpse.

To  the  tombic  hypothesis,  therefore,  as  the  sole
object  of  the  whole  structure, — all  the  most  strik-
ing, pervading,  and  positive  characteristics  of  the
entrance-passage  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  (and  its
features  were  apparently  copied,  for  the  mere  sake
of  copjdng,  though  without  understanding,  into
other  subsequent  Pyramids,) — are  a  continual
obstacle.

Not  so,  however,  to  the  astronomical  chrono-
logy department  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  metrical
theory ;  (and  equally  whether  a  little  burjring
was  performed  inside  some  part  of  the  building
or  not).     For, —

1.  This  metrical  theory  utilizes  at  once  the
important  fact,  which  the  Egyptologists  could  not

X


322  Units  and StandarcU  of  0.  Pyrcmid.  [CB.  S2.

deny,  but  tried  to  throw  contempt  upon, — ^yle.,  the
position  of  the  entrance-passage  in  the  plane  of  the
astronomical  meridian — ^to  within  so  near  an  ap-
proach to  exactness  as  5^  of  azimuth  angle.    And,

2.  The  permanence  and  grandeur  in  design^
of  the  paaaage's  surrounding  and  formative  archi-
tecture  (though  the  passage's  own  bore  might
have  been  afterwards  filled  up  and  rendered  im-
passable for  ages  by  long  plugs  of  stone  thrust
down  it) ;  and  which  distinguishing  architecture
is  so  important  for  memorializing  to  distant  pos-
terity the  exact  direction  of  a  certain  star,  where
it  was  once  seen  at  a  certain  date,  in  a  crucial
astronomical  position.

The  metrical  theory,  starts  thus  with  an  emi-
nent claim,  in  point  of  principle,  to  whatever  is
permanent  or  peculiar  in  the  structure  and  posi-
tion of  the  entrance-passage  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid having  been  built  upon  its  account.

And  next.  Sir  John  Herschel's  citation,  as
already  given,  of  the  last^  lower  meridian  pas-
sage of  a  Draconis,  as  the  circumpolar  star  of

^  The  floor  of  the  passages  is  hud  400  inches  broad,  thoagh  on^
41  inches  thereof  are  visibly  employed ;  see  Life  ond  Work  at  ike
Great  Pyramid,  by  C.  Piazad  Smyth,  voL  ii  Plate  2,  and  pp.  11-43.

>  See  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,  voL  iii  pp.  260-286.


GH.  32.]       Otffectians  and  their  Answers.       823

the  Fyramid-boilding  day  ; — has  been  notably
strengthened  EgyptohgicaUy^  since  he  wrote,  by
the  publication  of  William  Osbum's  Monumental
History  of  Egypt  For  therein,  and  quite  inde-
pendently, that  thorough  hieroglyphic  scholar,
after  a  searching  examination  of  all  the  authori-
ties, places  the  fourth,  or  Great  Pjrramid  building;
dynasty  in  the  very  period  from  2200  to  2100
B.C.,  when  astronomers  compute  that  the  star
a  Draconis  actually  had  the  particular  polar  dis-
tance which  is  indicated  by  the  entrance-passage,
combined  with  the  latitude  of  the  place.

Further  Objections  and  New  Answers.

But  the  Egyptologists  of  the  French  and  Ger-
man schools  still  treat  Sir  John  Herschel  and
a  Draconis  with  disdain,  while  they  go  on  asserting
for  the  date  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  building,  not
2170  B.C.,  but  so  much  as  3400  B.C.,  4500  B.C.,  or
almost  any  other  large  number  of  years.  They
sometimes  too  wind  up  their  objections  by  assert-
ing, that  the  peculiar  angle  of  elevation  of  the
entrance-passage  is  architectural  only,  or  probably
accidental,  rather  than  scientific;  and  that,  as
a  Draconis  has  been  in  successive  ages  during  the


324  Units  and  Standcmis  of  0.  Pyramid,  [oh.  32.

last  5000  years  at  all  distances  from  the  pole,  be-
tween one  degree  or  less,  and  twenty  degrees, — of
course  it  must  have  been  at  some  time,  coincident
with  the  direction  of  the  entrance-passage,  which
lies  somewhere  or  other  between  those  broad  limits.

This  might  have  been  a  pretty  good  argument
at  one  time ;  and  when  excluding  every  other
consideration  than  merdy  the  polar  distance  of
a  Draconis  and  the  angle  of  the  entrance-passage ;
because  evidently,  within  certain  limits,  no  matter
to  what  angle  and  direction,  in  the  meridian
plane,  the  said  northward-looking  passage  lay,—**
a  Draconis  would  have  been  seen  coincidently
with  it  at  some  chronological  period  or  other.

But  now,  thanks  to  recent  researches,^  we  may
turn  upon  the  Egyptologists  and  a^k  them,— K
the  angle  of  elevation  of  the  entrance-passage
was  an  entirely  accidental,  or  at  least  a  perfectly
unastronomical  matter  (although  in  the  plane  of
the  astronomical  meridian),  and  might  have  been
anything  else,  as  easily  as  what  it  was  made  to
be, — ^how  did  it  come  to  pass  that  of  all  the  pos-
sible angles,  between  1  degree  and  60  d^rees^

1  See  Life  and  Work  ai  the  Cheat  Pyramid,  voL  iiL  pp.  260-285,
by  C.  Piazzi  Smyth*


CH.  32.]    Objections  and  their  Anstvera.  825

such  a  pardctdar,  most  unique,  and  all-important
angle  as  26"*  18^  was  hit  upon,  so  as  to  chime  in
precisely  with,  and  call  attention  to,  several  other
simultaneous  astronomical  phenomena  and  argu-
ments. For  in  the  year  when  a  Draconis  on  the
meridian  but  beneath  the  pole,  was  last  seen  at
precisely  that  passage  elevation  angle  of  26"*  18^
— such  polar  phenomenon  had  then,  and  only  then,
the  important  complement  for  time-observation,
that  the  Pleiades  were  simultaneously  crossing  the
meridian  above  the  pole  and  near  the  equator.
And,  what  is  even  more  important  still  for  chrono-
logical  purposes,  the  Pleiades  were  then, — ^in  that
one  year  alone,  of  all  years  for  more  than  10,000,
past  and  to  come, — ^in  the  meridian  of  the  eqid-
noctial  point ;  or  this  said  equinoctial  point,  the
beginning  of  all  reckoning  by  right  ascension  in
the  sky,  was  on  the  meridian  coincidently  with  the
other  two  then  also  mutually  agreeing  stellar  facts.
Not  only  therefore  was  a  triple  time  and  space
phenomenon  marked,  by  the  one  selected  angle  of
the  passage;  a  celestial  combination,  too,  per-
fectly capable  of  fixing  a  date  beyond  all  ques-
tion, or  all  repetition  of  the  numbers  of  the
cycle  through  human  history,  so  far  as  such  his-


326  Units  and  Standards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [gh.  32.

tory  has  yet  been  recorded, — but  a  chionological
method  for  all  years  is  indicated,  in  the  annual
increase  of  distance  of  the  Pleiades  group  bom
the  equinoctial  point,  at  the  rate  of  about  3*5
seconds  of  right  ascension  every  year.  The
Pleiades,  in  fiEu^t,^ — with  the  assistance  of  the  pie-
cession  of  the  equinoz  which  causes  them  to  pea^
form  that  apparent  cyclical  motion  in  the  akj
with  the  period  of  25,860^:0;  years, — ^form  the
Great  Pyramid  clock  ;  and  that  dock  was  begin-
ning its  mighty  round,  or  had  its  hands  at
OL  Om.  Os.  when  a  Draconis  was  last  at  the  dis-
tance  from  the  pole  marked  by  the  Pyramid's
entrance-passage ;  or,  as  we  will  foUow  Sir  John
Herschel,  and  as  he  implied  on  far  less  amount
of  data, — *  when  the  Pyramid  was  being  built.'

Still  to  persist  in  saying  that  all  this  took
place  by  accident, — and  that  the  Great  Pyramid
was  founded  thousands  of  years  earlier  than  the
date  (2170  B.C.)  thus  symbolized  by  permanent
built  lines  in  the  Pyramid,  and  computable  by
modem  astronomy — is  what  we  should  hope  that
no  one  capable  of  making  induction  from  obser-

^  See  R.  S.  HaUbaiton,  on  the  'Year  of  the  Fleiadei,'  in  Life  amd
Wcrk  at  the  Qreat  Pyramid,  voL  ii  pp.  370-448.


CH.  32.]   Swmmationfor  a  few  Readers.        327

vations  in  exact  science,  will  be  found  wilfully
doing ;— especially  as  we  may  add,  that  at  the
rate  of  a  Pyramid  inch,  for  a  year, — liie  number  of
years  in  the  whole  precessional  cycle  is  found  built
into  the  sum  of  the  two  diagonals  of  the  base  of
the  great  monument  Also  that  the  Grand
Gallery,  the  most  remarkable  of  all  the  passages
of  the  interior  of  the  Pyramid,  and  leading  away
southward,  in  the  meridian  plane,  from  the  chief
junction  of  the  pa8sage8,-i8  by  many  considered,
with  the  seven  overkppings  of  its  long  and  solemn
walls,  to  be  a  reminder  of  the  Pleiades  seven
stars,  so  famous  in  Eastern  tradition  from  the
days  of  the  patriarch  Job ;  while  the  north  end
of  the  Grand  Gallery,  subtends  from  the  centre
of  the  base  of  the  Pyramid,  the  upper  and  lower
culmination  of  a  Draconis  at  that  particular  epoch
of  temporary  time-agreement  with  the  Pleiades,

Summation  for  a  few  of  our  Readers.

This  then  \&  the  continually  rising  manner,  in
which  the  Great  Pyramid,  when  tested  against
the  severities  of  modem  science,  comes  forth  suc-
cessfully, and  forms  a  system  peculiarly  its  own ;
resting  on  no  other  basis  than  the  measurable


328  Units  and  J^ndards  ofO.  Pyramid,  [gh.  32.

mathematics  and  phjrsics  of  its  structure,  com-
bined  with  the  great  cosmical  fietcts  of  nature.

ffieroglyphics  and  Egyptology  have  no  place
in  the  affair.  Those  sounding  Uterary  studies
have  claimed  the  Great  Pyramid  for  ages — ^but
could  never  make  anything  out  of  either  its  in-
scriptionless  walls  or  peculiar  proportions.  And.
neither  ancient  Egyptians  knew,  nor  do  modem
European  literary  scholars  nor  even  the  present
inhabitants  of  Egypt  know,  anything  certainly
about  the  origin,  meaning,  or  the  exact  nature
and  numerical  measures  of  these  things.

The  scientific  symbolizations  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid,  were  not  only  at  all  times  entirely  hidden
in  profane  and  idolatrous  Egypt, — but  breathe  a
perfectly  different  spirit,  from  what  all  the  ancient
Egyptians  either  professed  or  practised.

Let  no  one  therefore  waste  his  time,  as  did  a
foreign  contributor  to  a  recent  number  of  the
Proceedings  of  the  Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh, —
by  suddenly  finding  out  that  the  Great  Pyramid's
deduced,  symbolical,  scientific,  and  earth-com-
mensurable cubit,  was  not  the  common  agricul-
tural cubit  in  use  throughout  historic  ancient
Egypt!


CH.  32.]    Swmmaiianfor  a  few  Readers.       329

Of  course  it  wa3  not:  and  that  is  the  principle,
nay  the  virtue,  of  the  whole  of  the  Great  Fyramid
metrological  arrangements,  founded  on  earth  and
heaven  commensurabilities, — ^viz.,  that  none  of
them  could  ever  have  been  discovered  by,  or  were
ever  known  to,  any  of  Egypt's  idolatrous  sons.
While  a  great  and  now  accumulated  strength  of
the  scheme  or  theory  is,  that  one  and  the  same
principle  runs  through  every  portion  of  it.

Thus  of  the  five  major  features,  already  dis-
cussed, as  the  surest  facts  pervading  the  whole
Great  Pyramid, —

1.  The  very  early  Egyptians  marked  nowhere
their  knowledge  of  w ;  or  appreciation  for  Pyra-
mid nwmbera  in  multiplication  and  division*

2.  Nor  their  knowledge  of  the  sun's  mean
distance.

3.  Nor  their  appreciation  of  latitude  with
astronomical  orientation.

4.  Nor  their  knowledge  of  the  earth's  weight

5.  Nor  their  acquaintance  with  the  earth's  mean
temperature.

And  of  the  five  minor, —
1.  They  did  not  use  Pyramid  inches,  or  Pyra-
mid cubits  of  10^  to  the  earth's  polar  semi-axis :


330  Units  and  Standards  of  G.  Pyramid.  [cH.  32.

nor  reckoned  how  many  of  them  weie  meted  out
by  the  earth  in  §,  day's  mean  motion  round  the
sun.

2.  They  did  not  use  Fjnramid  capacity  and
weight  measures:  nor  arranged  their  own  in
divisions  of  5  and  1 0.

3.  They  did  not  mark  anywhere  their  attention
to  a  special  standard  of  temperature,  and  that  in
a  Pyramid  division  of  the  water  scale  of  heat.

4.  They  showed  no  method  of  graduating  the
circle ;  much  less  in  Pyramid  numbers.

5.  Their  one  star  of  observation  was  neither
a  Draconis  nor  the  Pleiades^  but  Sothis  the  Dog-
star;  nor  was  their  great  cycle  of  lime  the
precessional  period;  but  the  wretchedly  short
Sothiac  circle  of  1461  years.

In  not  one  of  these  Great  Pyramid  points  is
the  wisdom  or  folly  of  profane  and  idolatrous
Egypt  foreshadowed  at  the  Great  Pyramid,—
but  something  infinitely  better  and  higher,  as
well  as  radically  distinct  in  every  respect,  appears.
Appears  too,  out  of  actual  modem  measured,
and  still  measurable,  facts  of  that  most  ancient
building,  the  Great  Pyramid,  when  compared,  as
already  stated,  with  modem  science,  and  her  now


CH.  32.]     Summation  for  a  few  Readers.       331

advanced  knowledge  of  nature.  These  builded
facts  too  of  the  Great  Pjnramid,  while  they  are
fSsictSy  have  had  no  other,  than  the  metrical,  ex-
pknation  ever  given  for  them ;  they  are  useless  or
objectless  to  the  tombic  theory,  and  yet  they  are
there.  No  one  can  deny  that  those  ancient  metri-
cal facts  of  form  and  size  are  there,  though  many
do  try  to  obscure  their  presence  or  conceal  their
nature,  by  throwing  them  into  averages  of  many
other,  and  very  different.  Pyramids  to  the  Great
one.  Even  this  refuge,  however,  is  now  beginning
to  fail ;  and  recourse  is  had  to  asserting,  that '  the
'  deception  of  the  case  consists  in  the  facility
*  with  which  modem  science  can  find  out  some
'  resemblances  to  some  of  its  formulae  almost
'  anywhere.'*

When  any  other  ancient  building  shall  have
been  brought  forward,  and  had  as  much  openly
proved  for  it,  on  one  grand,  consistent,  and  con-
nected theory,  teeming  with  a  similar  consilience
of  inductions^  and  within  the  same  small  limits  of
numerical  error,  as  we  here  have  been  enabled  to
set  forward  at  length  for  the  Great  Pyramid — the

^  See  Appendix  3,  for  a  powerfal  paper  on  thia  subject  by  W.
Petrie.


332  Units  and  Standards  of  G.Pjffumid.  [pa.  32«

above  objection  may  be  considered  aigament :  at
present  we  fear  that  it  flavoars  more  of  prejudice.

But  can  we  assist  its  authors^  who  have  not
yet  produced  a  practical  example  proving  tfaeir
side  of  the  question,  by  searching  them  out  some-
thing whereupon  they  may  test  their  assertions  ?

Conscientiously  we  wiU  try.


CH.  33.]  Intellectual  Contrast.  333


CHAPTER  33.
INTELLECTUAL  CONTRAST.

We  axe  now  to  look  forth  througli  all  the
world,  for  any  other  ancient  building  which  may
compete  in  intellectual  majesty  and  scientific
character,  assignable  from  modem  measure  and
discussion,  with  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh.

K  such  there  exists,  even  within  a  couple  of
thousands  of  years  of  the  date  of  that  building,
fer  be  it  from  us,  to  throw  any  veil  over  its  excels
lenciea  But  in  what  land  is  it  to  be  found  ;  for
have  we  not  already  passed  all  other  countries  in
review,  both  architectural  and  archaeological,  with-
out  making  any  such  discovery  ?  A  titled  gentle-
man  has,  indeed,  lately  asserted  before  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh,^  with  reference  to  the  mere
chambered  tumuli  on  the  banks  of  the  Boyne,  and
which  rounded  heaps  of  loose  and  soft  material,

1  On  December  16,  1867.    See  Appendix  2.


334  Intelhctual  Contrast.  [csB.  33.

lie  spoke  of  as  ' Pyramids,^^  that  'if  Professor

*  Smyth  would  visit  and  measure  them,  he  would,
'  perhaps  find  them  as  interesting  and  afltoniahing

*  as  others  he  had  visited,  or  even  more  ao/  ue^
than  the  Great  Pyramid  of  JeezeL  And  again,
on  another  occasion,'  the  same  popular  chief  of  the
medical  profession  declared  before  the  same  Society,
— '  that  at  the  time  at  which  the  Great  Pyramid
'  was  built^  probably  4000  years  ago,  mininj^
'  architecture,  astronomy,  etc.  etc,  were  so  ad-
'  vanced  in  various  parts  of  the  East  as  to  preaent
'  no  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  erection  of  such  a
'  noble  royal  mausoleum  as  the  Great  Pyramid
'  undoubtedly  is.'

Respecting  the  first  of  these  assertions^  Pro*
fessor  Smyth  can  only  look  upon  the  idea  of
applying  accurate  measure  to  mouldering  heaps
of  soft  matter  without  any  fiducial  referring
points,  or  any  fixed  external  characteristics^ — as  a
mockery ;  and  he  cannot  think  of  depriving  Sir  J.
Y.  Simpson  of  the  responsibility  of  proving  practi-
cally to  the  world,  that  he  meant  it  in  a  better
sense.     While,  as  regards  the  second  assertion,  it

^  And  has  since  inaiBted,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  same  Sodei^,
on  the  propriety  of  the  tenn.
*  Januaiy  20,  1868— conclusion  of  address  in  Appendix  2.


CH.  33  J  Babylonish  Example.  835

has  simply  been  asserted  by  the  eminent  Baronet^
and  he  is  bound,  as  a  true  and  honest  man»  to
prove  it  also  ;  calling  the  Great  Pyramid,  if  he
will,  '  a  royal  mausoleum/  but  not  omitting  to
show  his  promised  various  Eastern  habitats  of,  and
abundant  contemporary  parallel  examples  for,  all
the  astronomy  and  physics  actually  found  to  reside
in  the  Great  Pyramid's  measured  proportions;
partly  illustrated,  as  they  are,  by  the  five  major
and  five  minor  characteristics  of  surpassing  intel-
lectuality, pointed  out  in  our  chapters  22  to  32.

Meanwhile,  we  can  only  proceed  with  the
nearest  building  in  point  of  time  known  to  our-
selves, or  generally  considered  at  all  worthy  of
being  compared  against  the  ancient  wonder
standing  in  the  land  of  Egypt;  and  we  com-
mence a  comparison  accordingly  in  a  plain  man-
ner, but  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  of  the  facts.

Babylonish  Example.

The  example  we  allude  to  is  the  Planet-temple
of  Nebo  at  Borsippa ;  already  touched  upon  in
chapter  10,  but  deserving  of  some  more  notice,
from  its  high  appreciation  in  several  modem
literary  quarters.


336  Intellectual  Contratt.  [gh,  S8,

There  is  the  disadvantage,  no  doubt^  for  fiomnl*
taneous  comparison,  that  the  Bondppa  temple  is
1700  years  later  than  the  Great  Pyramid ;  bat
such  circumstance  must  be  so  manifestly  to  the
prejudice  of  the  elder,  and  advantage  of  the
younger,  building, — ^if,  indeed,  it  be  true,  as  some
popular  philosophers  protest,  that  all  scientific
knowledge  ever  found  amongst  men,  is  an  afiiEur
of  their  own  progressive  development  and  crea*
tion  of  it, — ^that  any  involuntary  partialities  of
our  own  for  the  Great  Pjnramid,  must  be  more
than  neutralized*

Is,  however,  the  Borsippa  building  the  best
example  of  that  later  age  during  which  it
flourished,  in  the  estimation  of  its  own  Mends
and  supporters  ?

What  better  answer  can  be  returned,  touching
the  architect,  at  least,  of  Borsippa,  viz..  King
Nebuchadnezzar, — ^than  the  Bampton  lecturer's
recent  eulogy  of  him  in  the  city  of  Oxford ;  an
eulogy  too,  touching  that  very  qualification  of
building ;  or  in  these  words, —

'  Nebuchadnezzar,  a  sovereign  who,  to  the  military  talents
'  of  an  able  general,  added  a  grandeur  of  artistio  conception
'  and  a  skill  in  construction,  which  place  him  on  a  par  with
'  the  greatest  builders  of  antiquity.'


CBL  33.]  BahyUmish  Example.  337

This  high  praise,  after  so  many  ages  of  oblivion,
would  have  been  sweet  indeed  in  contemplation,
to  that  awfully  vain  autocrat ;  of  whom  the
Scriptures  relate  (and  there  in  contemporary
record), — that  when  he  was  walking  in  the  palace
of  the  kingdom  of  Babylon,  the  King  spake  and
said, —

'  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  liave  built  for  the  hoiue
'  of  the  kingdom,  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and  for  the
'  honour  of  my  majesty  ? '

Or,  to  use  the  identical  Nebuchadnezzarian
words,  as  recently  read  off  from  cuneiform  in-
scriptions^^—

*  In  Babylon,  the  city  which  is  the  delight  of  my  eyes,  and
'  which  I  (Nebuchadnezzar)  have  glorified.  A  strong  fort  in
'  brick  and  mortar,  in  strength  I  constructed.  Inside  the
'  brick  fortification,  another  great  fordfication,  of  long  stones,
'  of  the  size  of  great  mountains  I  made.  And  thb  building  I
'  raised  for  a  wonder.'

This  was  what  the  king  said,  of,  and  for,  him-
self. But  what  does  modem  science  say,  touching
the  head  and  crown  of  all  this  bombast, — ^viz.,  the
Planet-temple  of  Nebo  at  Borsippa  ?

1st.  Modem  science,  we  suspect,  is  a  little  at
variance  here   with   some   scientific  men.     For

^  Chiefly  by  the  admirable  and  ontiriiig  laboun  of  Sir  Heniy
Rawlinion.


3S8  Intellectual  Contrast.         [cel  3S.

while  tlioae  in  London,  have  hitherto  praised  the
Bondppa  temple  exceedingly,  for,  'the  practical
'  success  and  neamese  with  which  it  was  placed
'  in  the  astronomical  orientation  desired,' — rthou^
they  knew  it  was  more  than  four  degrees  ouf^  and
agreed  to  consider  that  a  small  error ; — ^the  Great
Pyramid,  on  the  other  hand,  has  either  been
passively  neglected,  or  actively  abused  in  other
circles^ '  for  its  large  and  utterly  vitiating  enoia
in  orientation,' — although  they  were  equally  well
known  to  the  critics  to  be  under  five  minutes
of  a  degree.

Yet  the  fact  remains,  that  the  error  on  the  sort
of  astronomical  orientation  intended  at  the  Great
Pyramid  was  sixty  times  smaller,  than  was  com-
mitted  in  a  somewhat  similar  case,  1700  years
later  in  the  world's  history,  by  the  most  powerful
king,  learned  priests,  and  wealthy  commimity
then  existing ;  and  the  better  workmen  will  have
justice  done  to  them  some  day,  if  not  now.

2d.  Even  if  the  Babylonians  had  hit  the  sort
of  orientation  they  aimed  at,  much  more  precisely,
— that  position  was,  in  its  diagonal  character,  of
a  most  obstructive  nature  to  any  observation  o^
and  for,  what  M.  le  Yerrier  calls  '  astronomy  of


CH.  38.]  Babylonish  Example.  339

precisiQu ;'  tibat  ib,  the  aatronomy  which  by  obser-
vations in  the  direction  of  the  cardinal  points,
and  chiefly  in  the  plane  of  the  meridian,  ascer^
tains  most  accurately  the  absolute  places  in  the
sky,  of  the  stars  and  other  heavenly  bodies^  at  a
given  epoch ;  thereby  furnishing  the  only  sure
foundation  for,  either  correct  chronology  through
the  longest  intervals,  or  safe  theorizing  on  all  the
grander  secular  changes  in  both  the  solar  system
and  the  starry  hbavena

Zd.  The  Babylonian  building,  even  apart  from
its  outward  orientation,  had  no  truly  scientific
character  about  its  general  construction.  Its  sur-
face was  lop-sided,  and  broken  with  comers  of
terraces^  pannelled  walls,  dwellings  for  priests,
and  flights  of  stairs,^ — so'  that  not  even  its
warmest  admirers  have  pretended  to  say  there
was  anything  scientific  in  the  shape,  though
that  is  so  mighty  a  feature  for  proving  high
intellectuality  in  the  conception  of  the  Great
Pyramid.

But  they  do  say  for  the  Borsippa  building;
that,  being  dedicated  to   the  seven  planets  of

^  See  Mr.  Ferguiion'i  restoration  at  p.  139,  toL  l  of  hii  ArM-
ttdurcU  Hiitory,


340  Intellectual  CantraaL  [cH.  33.

Chaldadan  astronomy,  each  stage  whs  appnopii-
ately  coloured.

Appropriately  coloured!  a  sorfjEU^e  demonslza-
tion  only;  but  of  what  nature  and  with  what
object  ?

Why,  the  lowest  stage,  we  are  told,  was  coloured
black,  as  symbolical  for  Saturn ;  the  next  orange^
for  Jupiter ;  the  third  red,  for  Mars ;  the  four(2i
yellow,  for  the  Sun ;  the  fifih  green,  for  Venus ;
the  sixth  blue,  for  Mercury;  and  the  seventh
white,  for  the  Moon.

A  very  ill-assorted  list  of  so-called  planets
surely,  and  extremely  deficient  without  Uranus
and  Neptune  and  the  Planetoids, — especially  for
a  people  supposed,  by  their  friends,  to  have  dis-
covered the  vastly  fainter  6  th  and  7th  satellites
of  Saturn.  But,  accepting  the  planets  as  given
above  in  their  diverse-coloured  stages,  what  learn-
ing were  these  colours  intended  to  typify  ?

And  then  comes  the  sorry  confession,  that  each
hue  was  supposed  to  be  symbolical  of  such  planef  s
influence  on  human  well-being,  both  moral  and
physical ;  and  therefore  was  superstitious,  astro-
logical, and  nonsensical,  rather  than  astronomical
4th.  Though  some  mere  chronicling  of  eclipses


OH.  S3.]  BahyhnUh  Example.  34i

and  extra-meridian  star-gazing  went  on  from  the
npper  tower,  as  an  occasional  occupation  of  its
inhabitants^  rather  than  a  standing  feature  of  the
office  itself, — ^there  was  much  more  of  necro-
mancy, idolatry,  and  immorality.

hih.  Though  the  adventitious  claim  may  be
put  in, — ^rather  for  the  city  generally,  than  for
the  temple  of  Borsippa  in  particular  (and  certainly
not  as  provable  by  any  measures  yet  made  upon
any  Babylonian  temple's  walls  or  mass), — ^that  a
general  metrological  and  numerical  system  was
invented  and  established  there, — ^yet  that  system
was  such,  that  modem  science  cannot  approve
of  it.

»

Its  worldly  success  was  great,  no  doubt.  Com-
menced in  Babylon  in  or  about  the  neo-Chaldsean
times,  and  remarkable  chiefly  for  its  sexagesimal
arrangements  and  subdivisions,  it  replaced  there
an  older  decimal  method ;  and  so  took  the  fancy
of  the  Greeks,  who  followed  Alexander  the  Great's
army,  that  it  was  adopted  by  them,  taken  back
with  them  to  Greece,  and  allowed  there  to  enslave
the  conquerors  of  its  native  land.^

^  Dr.  J.  Brandifl  of  Berlin  (1866)  on  JfOns— J/om,— tmtf
Oewkhttweatn  in  Vorderanen,  bii  at/ Alexander  den  Orouen,


342  IfUeUectual  Contrast.  [cs.  S3.

Thence  of  course  the  Babylonish  system  was
taken  to  Alexandria ;  from  thence  to  Some ;  and
from  Rome  it  has  spread  like  a  perpetual  cancer
more  or  less  into  every  civilized  country  of  the
modem  world.

The  standards  adopted  under  the  Baibylonian
metrology, — seem  to  have  been  not  a  wide  varia-
tion from  the  profEuie  Egyptian  (the  cubit  beings
according  to  Dr.  Brandisy  between  20*866  and
20*670  British  inches), — utterly  unscientific,  so
£Etr  as  regards  any  known  earth  appropriate  cojdt
mensurability ;  entirely  unlike,  therefore^  and
totally  inferior,  to  the*  system  of  the  Great  Fyra-
mid;  and  not  known  to  be  preserved  in  any
intentional  sizes  or  proportions  for  that  purpose
of  the  Bondppa  or  any  other  Babylonian  building.
Modem  science  therefore  can  say  nothing  in
favour  of  the  Nebuchadnezzarian  standards^ —
while  she  abhors  the  employment  of  their  favourite
sexagesimal  division,  in  any  case  where  decimals
can  be  used.

Otiier  Competitors.

Hence  this  very  long  step  in  time,  that  we
have  taken  in  order  to  alight  in  more  advanced


CR.  33.]  OAer  Competitors.  343

periods  of  hnmaD  ciTilization,  on  a  more  intel-
lectual building  than  the  Great  Pyramid^ — ^has
merely  landed  us  in  a  quagmire  of  too  evidently
human  idolatrous  follies^  sdentifie  absurdities,  and
general  mental  childishness.

Nor  do  we  improve  the  opposition  by  trying
anything  of  earlier  time,'r-for  on  one  side,  the
Proto-ChaldsB^n  temples  were  apparently  no  better
than  that  of  Borsippa,  may  have  been  much  worsCy
and  were  certainly  less  elaborated ;  and  on  the
other  side,  no  Egyptian  Pyramid  can  for  one
moment  stand  comparison  with  the  Great  one.

Many  of  these  monuments  in  Egypt^  when  duly
restored  to  their  pristine  state  from  thcdr  present
ruins,  would  be  found  to  have  the  numerals  of
the  two  fives^  and  the  fours  belonging  to  their
square-based  shapes ;  but  they  have  not  the  ir
figure,  nor  the  numbers  3  and  7,  nor  the  proper
latitude,  entrance-passage  angles,  size,  material,  or
internal  ascending  passages  and  chambers,  with
their  contents,  markings,  and  structure,  nor  the
proper  size  and  shape  of  coflFer.  Their  deficiency
in  magnitude  is  grievously  against  them;  for
while  it  prevents  their  vertical  height  representing
by  10*  the  solar  distance, — it  also  prevents  the


344  Intellectual  CantrasL  [oh.  33.

base-sides  representdng  a  jear  in  temiB  of  the
Pyramid  cubit

And  even  if  we  were  to  make  a  shorter  cubits
hj  subdividing  the  earth's  semi-axi%  not  into  10,
but  into  11, 12,  or  any  other  number,  of  millmTiiy^
— the  numerical  terms  would  cease  to  be  pyra-
midal, and  might  not  even  then  be  precisely  suit*
able  to  the  measured  proportions  of  any  one  of
the  known  Pjnramids.

Our  knowledge  of  the  Great  Pyramid  may  b^
and  indeed  still  is,  considerably  defective, — but
no  other  building  comes  within  its  limits  of  error,^
which  invariably  include  the  natural  quantity
tendered  by  the  theory.  No  other  building  can
therefore  compete  with  the  Great  Pyramid  for
possessing  any  of  its  higher  qualifications.  It
stands  the  unique  building  in  Egypt  and  all  the
early  world  for  intellectual  symbolizations,  noble
thoughts,  and  physical  knowledge  pervading  ita
whole  substance,  to  an  extent  only  appreciable
to  the  science  of  the  present  and  last  very  few
years.

^  Ab, — ^ihe  limita  witliin  which  its  troe  base-side  lengUis  an
supposed  to  lie,  are  9100  and  9170  British  inches ;  while  all  otber
Egyptian  Pyramid  base-sides  are  stated  by  Colonel  Howard  Vyse
to  be  at  or  under,  and  generally  very  much  under,  8633  auch  inchesL


CH.  33.]  Cheat  Pyramid  solemnly  alone.        346

>

The  Great  Pyramid  solemnly  alone.

We  had  previously  found  the  Great  Pyramid
to  be  equally  unique,  or  even  approaching  the
miraculoufly  in  the  sudden  manner  in  which  it
appears  in  history, — the  first  of  all  stone  buildings
ever  elected  by  man;^ — and  in  many  points,  both
of  excellent  workmanship  requiring  almost  mathe-
matical truth,  and  of  absolute  height,— stiU  un-
equalled by  anything  that  has  since  been  erected
anyivhere ;  though  too  4000  years  have  passed
away — though  population  has  multiplied, — the
size  of  kingdoms  grown, — the  wealth  of  nations
increased  enormously ;  and  though  knowledge  has
long  been  running  to  and  fro  over  the  surface  of
the  earth.'

In  short,  if  the  Great  Pyramid  building  had  a
daim  to  be  considered  of  something  more  than
merely  human  origination,  regarded  architec
turally, — then  not  only  10  times,  but  probably

^  See  p.  177,  chapter  21.

'  Earthworks  of  greater  horizontal  extent  than  the  base  of  the
Great  Pyramid,  are  common  enough  in  America,  as  well  as  Europe
and  Asia.  Brick  and  stone  works  to  the  same,  or  even  a  greater,
lateral  extent,  may  also  exist,  and  are  easy  to  execute.  But  heigfU
tests  the  goodness  of  a  work, — ^and  nowhere  else  through  the  world
is  there  any  known  and  published  building  5819  inches  high«


346  Intellectual  Contrast  [cH.  38*

10^  times  more  does  it  demand  to  be  so  con-
sidered, when  judged  of  on  scientific  grounds.

In  some  thingety  modem  science  may  have
passed  beyond  the  Grreat  Pyramid's  power  iA
sjrmbolization ;  as  in  computing  to  any  number
of  decimal  places  the  value  of  tiiie  ir  fraction;
though  even  tiiien  we  should  remember  that  the
overtaking  has  only  been  very  recent  as  compared
to  the  whole  interval  of  4000*  years,  and  the
building,  with  its  necessary  mechanical  limits^
need  not  be  considered  expressive  of  aU  that  was
in  the  author's  mind.  But  in  other  matters,  the
Great  Pjrramid  is  yet  ahead;  for,  granting  for
a  moment  the  truth  of  the  Pyramid  formula, —
there  is  far  less  uncertainty  about  the  Pyramid
sun-distance,  as  influenced  by  the  probable  error
of  our  knowledge  of  the  height  of  the  structure, —
than  there  is  about  the  Astronomical  sun-distance,
as  depending  on  the  different  amounts  of  the
several  latest  determinations  of  the  solar  parallax,
communicated  to  the  Royal  Astronomical  Society
of  London,  within  the  past  year.

Still  more  is  the  Great  P3rramid  determination
of  the  Earth's  mean  density,  in  advance  of  all
that  modem  science  can  do  at  present    For  while


OH.  33.]  GreoU  Pyramid  solemnly  alone.        847

my  own  observations  of  the  coffer  show^  that  a
difference  of  ±'01  in  the  expression  5*70  cannot
be  tolerated,  and  would  fall  outside  all  my  various
coffer  determinations  of  cubical  contents,^ — the
last  two  scientific  determinations  of  the  same
natural  quantity  differ  from  each  other  by  125
times  -01.  '^

These  circumstances  will  probably,  even  in  the
opinion  of  the  highest  men  of  science  in  the  pre-
tent  day,  justify  us  in  going  on  to  some  yet
higher  considerations.

1  See  pp.  300,  301,  chapter  29.


34d  Intervening  Ohslructums.      [CBL  34.


CHAPTER  34.

INTERVENING   OBSTRUCTIONS.

Unless  the  author  has  altogether  fiedled  in  his
duly, — and  that  little  more  than  setting  down
hjcts  in  order,  facts  too  of  a  material  kind,  and
amenable  to  ordinary  scientific  observation, — ^the
reader  will  probably  now  begin  to  think,  and
with  much  ground  for  confidence,  hope,  and
content^  that  in  the  Great  PjH'amid  of  Jeezeh  we
have  met  with  the  most  remarkable  mass  of
archaeological  evidence  connected  with  intellectual
man— that  has  ever  yet  been  brought  to  light  in
modem  times.

In  proportion  too  as  discussion  proceeds,  so
does  the  noble  character  of  our  finding  continu-
ally advance.  It  is  a  pearl  of  great  price  hoik
in  the  cause  of  truth,  and  for  the  development
of  primeval  history.  A  pearl  therefore  of  in-
estimable value,  promising  to  be  worth  all  the
little  pearls  thajt  have  ever  been  strung   on  a


OH.  34.]  Nvmher  1.  349

philosopHcal  thread :  and  fairly  won,  after  the
pains  and  labour  taken,  and  the  rigid  as  well  as
open  method  of  investigation  adopted.

Tet  now,  when  we  are  just  about  to  mount
upwards  to  the  surface  of  the  ocean  of  doubts
and  fears  with  our  prize,— and  bear  it  aloft  to
the  full  light  of  an  imclouded  day — there  hoping
to  behold  some  larger  use  made  by  others  of  those
qualities  which  we  have  taken  so  long  in  endea-
voTiring  to  prove  the  existence  and  esteblidi  the
nature  of,-jU8t  now  rush  forward  once  again
determined  objectors  to  both  Pyramid  theory
and  Pyramid  facts,  and  do  aU  in  their  power  to
impede  successful  progress.  Therefore  we,  having
already  adopted  the  plan  of  listening  to  all  ob-
jections,— have  nothing  left  us  to  do,  than  to
attend  with  heed  to  wbatever  these  latest  in  the
field,  these  Neoptolemi  of  the  Pyramid  question,
may  have  to  say.  We  listen  therefore  patiently,
and  trust  that  not  one  unanswered  complainant
will  be  left  behind.

I.

What  then  says  the  first  ?

A  scholar  is  he,  nor  scrupling  to  conceal  his


350  Intervening  Ohstrudions.        [CH.  84.


scorn  of  the  Great  Pyramid  as  smatteriiig  of  %
mere  mechanic  ;  and  belonging,  for  that  mattar,
to  a  whole  crowd  of  scientific  things,  all  of  which
he  considers  low,  degrading  to  a  free  mind,  and
with  no  glorifying  impress  of  classic  antiquity
upon  any  of  them.  He  therefore  despises  ihem
all,  and  rejoices  in  logic,  metaphysics^  and  mofal
philosophy ;  which  triad  of  learning  he  proclaims
to  be  the  only  ethereal  food  for  the  soul  of  man ;
the  only  pursuit  worthy  of  the  name  of  Philo-
sophy ;  the  necessary  spinal  cord  of  every  school
that  has  ever  existed  on  any  part  of  the  earth,
even  from  where  the  blue  waves  of  the  iBgean  Sea
lap  the  yellow  rocks,  to  the  flashing  waters  of  the
Firth  of  Forth ;  and  a  thousand  swords  ought  to
be  ready  to  leap  from  their  scabbards,  in  Edin-
burgh alone,  if  only  one  disparaging  look  bo  cast
towards  her.  For  4000  years,  as  the  statement
was  given  forth,  has  philosophy  gone  on  her  ways
rejoicing  mankind  in  that  magnificent  manner.
And  when  a  recent  University  gathering,  nothing
loath,  heard  these  spirit-stirring  words  from  the
lips  of  their  eloquent  teacher,  heard  of  school
philosophy  glorious  during  the  last  4000  years^
— there  were  those  in  the  crowd  who  bethought


CH.  34.]  Number  2.  851

them;; — ^'Then  where 's   either   tiiie    wonder   or

*  antiquity  of  the  Great  Fjrramid  ?    Nay,  'what

*  more  can  your  Pyramid  measurers  say  now  in*

*  praise,  or  even  in  defence,  of  those  rude,  mate-

*  rial  stones?'  '  »

Not  much  more  indeed,  in  the  way  of  absolute
age,  than  what  we  have  said  already;  but  the
real  question  is,  can  so  much  be  truly  stated
for  philosophy  ?

So  therewith  we  wrote  to  the  learned  lecturer
in  the  zenith  of  his  popular  fiEune,  requesting  to
be  infQrmed  what  were  the  text-books  in  moral
philosophy,  logic,  and  metaphysics  4000  years
ago,  and  who  composed  them.  Whereupon  that
at  heart  honest  and  true  gentleman  instantly  sent
back  a  most  courteous  answer  to  confess  ^  that  he

*  had  made  a  slip ;  he  had  only  wanted  to  express

*  a  vaguish  number,  but  had  taken  one,  it  would
'  se^m,  that  was  too  high ;  and  he  had  no  inten*
'  tion  of  maintaining  anything  upon  it/

IL

Advances  then  a  second  opponent  cautiously ;
beginning  with  '  whereas  you  have  been  discover-

*  ing  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  with  charming  sue-


352  Inierveidng  Ob^rvctions.         [ca.  34.

'  c«s8,  SO  many  things  known  to  science  very  well
'  of  old, — we  are  hoping  now,  that  you  will  before
'  long  discover  something  new  there.'

This  gentleman  we  proceed  to  assure  imme-
diately, that  we  have  never  looked  on  the  Great
PjTamid,  as  standing,  or  ever  intended  to  stand,
in  the  place  of  modem  science.  Modem  science
for  its  own  purposes  is  unequalled ;  and  except
for  its  extreme  development  in  present  times,  the
Great  Pyramid  would  have  remwned  still  un-
interpreted and  unappreciated.  Indeed,  if  there
is  much  more  still  to  be  discovered  in  that  most
ancient  monument,  appearances  and  the  course
of  all  inductions  hitherto,  seem  to  say,  that  we
can  only  expect  to  ascertain  it  securely  and  cer-
tainly from  the  still  further  progress  of  modem
science.  No  one  therefore  wishes  so  cordially  the
rapid  and  independent  development  of  all  true
science,  as  those  who  have  laboured  in  recent
years  on  the  interpretation  of  the  Great  Pyramid.

'  Then  if  you  neither  have  discovered,  nor  ever
'  will  discover,  anything  scientifically  new  in  the
'  Great  Pyramid, — what  is  the  advantage,  or  ob-
'  jcct,  of  looking  so  much  to  the  Great  Pyramid  ?
retorts  the  questioner  with  severity  !


OR.  34.]  Number  3,  863

To  whom  however  we  reply —

Even  if  no  actually  new  fSacts  in  teiteBtrial
physics  should  have  been  discovered,  or  be  dis-
coverable,— ^yet,  Jirst,  the  giving  of  even  one  im-
proved determination  of  an  older  phenomenon,
is  invaluable  for  suggesting  thought  Second,
the  offering  of  a  collective  system  of  metrology,
eminently  suitable  to  man,  and  more  scientific
than  anything  he  has  ever  had  before  in  actual
and  material  use,  is  more  momentous  stilL  And
Jifudly,  the  extensive  proving  that  many  facte
only  recently  discovered  by  science,  had  been
intentionally  inserted,  symbolized,  or  memorial-
ized in  the  Great  Pyramid  4000  years  ago, —
appertains  to  a  new  fact  of  a  much  higher  order,
or  one  connected  with  the  actual  history  of  the
human  race  in  primeval  ages  :  and  which  history,
in  certain  of  ite  stages,  none  of  the  discoveries  of
modem  science  either  touch  upon,  or  have  it  in
their  nature  to  be  able  to  illuminate,  even  in  the
slightest  degree.

Ill

Now  history  is  always  allowed  to  be  important,
but  to  get  at  the  soul  of  histoiy,  and  in  primeval

z


354  Intervening  Obstructions.         [CB.  34.

times,  near  the  epoch  of  the  origination  of  intel-
lectual doings  on  the  earth, — that  surely  is  of
surpassing  importance  to  all  men  at  [uresent
living.

How  often  do  our  writers,  yearning  for  more
of  the  spirit  and  less  of  the  letter,  quote  from  one
of  Britain's  most  eloquent  sons, —

'  How  oold  ia  all  (book)  history,  how  lifelewi  all  (ItUnryJ
'  imagerf,  compared  to  that  which  the  living  nation  writes,
'  and  the  nncorrapted  marble  bears  1  How  manj  pa^ei  of
'  doubtful  record  might  we  not  often  spare,  for  %  few  itciM
'  left  one  upon  another."

They  sighed,  those  worthy  souls,  for  only  a  few
stones  left  one  upon  another,  aa  a  better  principle
of  investigation,  than  doubtful  essays  on  the
long-departed  past.  And  now  when  the  Great
Pyramid  offers  them  thousands  of  stones  stand-
ing regularly,  systematically,  scientifically,  and
with  a  mighty  purpose  of  profound  and  deep-
ordered  meaning,  one  upon  aoother, — forming  a
mass  auitable  to  being  compassed  in  the  neatest
geometrical  definition,  and  capable  also  of  being
extended  by  its  own  not  altogether  latent  for-
mulae into  the  mensuration  of  the  earth  and  the

^  Ruskin'B  Seven  Lamps  0/  ArchiitQlKn.


CH.34.]  Nfmber4.  S66

meting  out  of  the  heavens,-^now  these  enthued-
asts  suddenly  foiget  their  late  aspnrationi!^  their
ardent  desires^  and  hide  themselves  £ar  off  from
the  neighbourhood  of  the  ahnost  speaking  stcmes
of  the  antique  Pyiamidr

IV.

Alas  I  they  have  been  frightened.  A  medical
Baronet  has  come  down  to  the  Royal  Society  of
Edinburgh,  and  haa  violently  denoimced  Professor
Smyth's  published  measures  and  calculations  of
the  Great  Pyramid  together.  The  said  Baronet
'  of  brilliant  and  diversified  gifts^'  in  the  JfediccU
IHmes,  had  already,  according  to  that  paper/

^  IVom  the  Medical  Timu,  of  London ;  March  28,  1868  :—

'  SIB  J.  T.  8IMFS0N  ON  THB  FTBAMIDB.
'  It  ia  ehanctoiatio  of  the  hriUiant  and  diveraified  gifta  of  the
'  great  Northern  profesaor^  that  he  ahoold  have  taken  in  hand  the

*  demolition  of  a  curiona  notion  abont  the  Great  Pyramid  of  ^gypt,
'  which  haa  been  promulgated  by  Prof eaaor  Piazzi  Smyth,  and  haa

*  foond  favour  with  many  religions  peraons.  That  notion  ia,  that
'  the  Pyramid  was  constructed  under  Divine  guidance,  to  show  to  all

*  time  a  correct  standard  of  weight  and  measure,  and  that  the  coffer

*  contained  in  the  central  chamber  ia  an  inspired  measure  of  capa-
'  city,  and  the  base  of  the  Pyramid  an  inspired  measure  of  length,

*  having  a  definite  relation  to  the  earth's  polar  axis.  Sir  Jamea
'  Simpson  shows,  in  a  paper  read  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edin-
'  burgh,  that  the  Pyramid  has  all  the  characters  of  the  huge  sepul-

*  chral  monuments  scattered  over  the  earth  ;  that  the  coffer  in  the
'  King's  Chamber  was  a  sarcophagus  ;  that  it  contained  a  body  till

*  despoiled  by  the  Caliph  £1  Mamoon  about  1000  years  ago ;  that


356  Intervening  Obstructiong.        [ch.  34.

completely  demolished  the  scientific  metrical
theory  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  even  in  a  way  that
was  '  quite  a  treat '  to  see, — in  a  paper  in  tlw
75th  Number  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Sot/ed
Society  of  Edinburgh. ; — but  on  the  20th  of  April,
at  another  meeting  of  the  same  Society,  that  gi«*  j
medical  man  transcended  all  hia  former  efibrt£^  aafl  i|
beginning  upon  a  copy,  in  form  of  a  table,  of  the
coffer  measures  contained  in  our  pages  297  to  301,
— declared,  as  we  are  informed,  that  aU  ita  figures
were  wrong,  and  wrong  in  ways  and  modes  which
made  the  means  of  the  observations  worse  stilL
Professor  Smyth  also  was  declared  to  be  hope-
lessly given  to  the  'erroneous  method  of  taking
'  Tneans  of  different  measurements  of  the  same
'  thing ;  such  a  mode  of  procedure  was  denounced
'as  childish;  it  was  a  species  of  mathematical
'  aberration,  and  it  ran  through  the  whole  of
'  Professor  Smyth's  book.  .  .  .  Sir  J.  Y.   Simp-

'  it  is  irregular  in  form  ;  incapable  of  being  eiactly  meomred,  and

*  bence  no  itandard  of  measure.     In  fact,  vty  one  who  deaires  ■

•  treat  in  aeeing  how  a  thoroogb  "  oraie"  i«  melted  kwkj  befon
'  common  Bense,  should  read  Professor  Simpson's  paper.  The  kind
'  of  argument  of  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth  to  show  that  the  Pyramid
'  waa  biuJt  by  Noah,  is  one  which  we  thought  peculiar  to  the  medical
'  professioD  ; — Noah  waa  a  preacher  of  righteousness  ;  a  just  syiitem
'  of  weights  and  meosurei  is  righteons  :  trgo,  Noah  built  the  Pyrs-
■mid!"


GH.  34.]  Number  4.  367

'  son  had  not  heard  a  single  sonnd  man  say
'  otherwise  than  that  the  whole  of  Professor
'  Smyth's  theory  about  the  Pyramid  was  a  series
'  of  the  strangest  hallucinations,  which  only  a
'  few  weak  women  believed,  and  perhaps  a  few
'  womanly  men,  but  no  more.  He  had  talked
'  about  it  to  a  great  many  engineers,  mathemati-
'  cians,  and  others,  and  he  found  them  sco£Bng  at
'  and  despising  it'^

The  fEu^t  that  Professor  Smyth  was  left  alone
before  the  Society,  to  bear  the  above  torrent  of
invective — will,  in  a  future  day,  be  looked  at  in
the  same  manner  in  which  we  now  regard  the
records  of  those  old  courts  of  *  justice,'  where
learned  judges  formally  condemned  both  men  and
women  for  allegedly  proved  acts  of  necromancy,
witchcraft,  and  other  really  impossible  matters ;
and  no  one  said  a  word  against  it

For  how  can  injustice  go  further — ^than  that
when  the  method  of  means,  or  of  taking  the  aver-
age^  is  used  in  every  scientific,  statistical,  and
commercial  operation  throughout  the  kingdom
and  the  world, — that  the  application  of  it  to

1  From  the  Edinbiirgh  J>aUy  Beview,  Seotgman,  and  Covrant,  of
.21st  Apiil  1868.


368  Intervening  Obstructuma.       [cH.  34.

measures  taken  on  the  Great  Fyramid, — ib  alone
declared  to  be  erroneous^  equivocal,  childish,  and  a
mathematical  aberration  1  No  problem  in  practical
astronomy  is  ever  carried  on  without  it^  and  yet
it  is  to  be  held  a  sin  or  a  crime  in  Great-Pyramid
explanation  1  It  is  surely  to  be  hoped  that  Sir
J.  Y.  Simpson  will  publish  his  ideas  in  full ;  fixr
at  presait  he  has  only  given  his  assertion  that
the  method  of  means  or  averages  is  a  mathemar
tical  aberration ;  and  the  mathematical  world  will
expect^  that  he  who  appears  in  the  Medical  Times
as  '  the  great  Northern  professor,  of  brilliant  and
diversified  gifts,'  and  who  has,  in  that  Journal's
eyes,  demolished  the  scientific  theory  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  largely  too  by  emplojring  this  peculiar

engine,  will  either  prove  his  assertion,  or

But  then  Professor  Smyth's  published  measures
and  other  calculations  besides  merely  the  means^
were  nearly  all  declared  on  the  same  occasion  to  be
wrong.  He  has  sought  to  find  where,  but  cannot
discover.  He  has  gone  through  all  the  cofiier
multiplications  and  divisions  whose  results  were
exhibited  to  the  Society  at  the  time, — and  can
find  no  error  in  them,  to  the  last  place  of  figures
represented.    And  he  laid  on  the  table  of  the


CH.  34.]  Nwnher  4.  369

Society  a  printed  list  of  enata  in  the  volumes  of
his  Life  and  Work,  containing  all  the  corrigenda
he  had  been  able  to  discover  therein  up  to  that
datei  and  thejr  are  reprinted  in  the  Appendix  to
the  present  book.  There  may  be  some  stray  errors,
as  there  are  in  all  large  books  of  any  private  author,
and  notices  of  them,  when  discovered,  will  be  gladly
received  by  him; — ^but  where  are  tiiose  nearly
universal  errors  which  were  denounced  to  the
Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  or  errors  to  an  ex-
tent which  make  it  futile  to  found  any  theory
upon  those  measures  of  the  Great  Pyramid  ?

We  have  not  shrunk  from  giving  these  de-
nunciations by  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson,  Baronet,
at  length, — ^in  order  that  if  they  are  true,  he  may
gain  due  honour  therefor ;  receive  the  thanks  of
aU  who  are  interested  in  the  progress  of  Pyramid
knowledge,  and  even  achieve  the  £une  of  St
George  for  slaying  the  very  dragon  of  Egjrpt
But  meanwhile  we  have  a  strange  doubt  as  to
the  whole  attack.  Every  numerical  expression,
we  have  re-examined  as  yet,  has  proved  correct.
Even  so  pointed  a  case,  as  Professor  Smyth  being
dragged  up  in  italics,  and  with  a  (sic)  in  paren-
thesis, in  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's  *  Proceedings '  paper.


SCO  iMemmmg  OSifrwfiMUL        [oL  34


as  lumng  used  die  Tvl^vxtjr  of  *  eMinMurdimtry
*  cpDTffinfflit/ — was  pnTwd  fac&R  m  c^en  ^—^^^"'g
of  the  aame  Bojal  Sooetj  of  Edmlmigli  to  be
the  Bnonet^a  own  txpaaatm, — whfle  his  mift-
gtgtementB  and  poreiaunB  of  genml  wM^M»tiy
were  shown  to  be  abundant  In  htt,  we  ntber
anspeet  that  the  whole  attack,  oraeiies  of  attado^
canied  on  thzongh  sereial  months  past  bj  the
above  chief  of  medical  men,  on  both  the  Metrical
theory  of  the  Great  Pyramid  and  Professor  Piaai
Smyth,  is  an  attempt  simply  and  shortly  to  stamp
them  out,  in  the  style  so  much  landed  jnst  now
in  veterinary  circles  firom  its  recent  practical
success  in  the  case  of  the  cattle-disease.

In  such  an  operation,  of  course,  no  great  nicety
of  treatment  need  be  looked  for  by  the  parties  on
whom  the  stamping  is  to  be  performed.

Hence  perhaps  it  may  be,  that  besides  some
reckless  assertions  of  arithmetical  and  grammatical
errors  which  do  not  exist,  the  stamper-out  gave
his  own  ipse  dixit  to  the  Eoyal  Society,  Edin-
burgh, that  engineers^  mathematician£f,  arithmeti-
cians, and  others,  scorned  the  theory,  scoffed  at
and  despised  it  For,  as  a  friend  has  since  re^
marked, —


CH.  34.]  Nvmber  6.  361

'  What  an  ill-mannered  thing  to  tell  ihai  to  the  Royal
'  Society  of  Bdinbnrgh  as  a  reason  to  them  ;  as  if  they  were

*  not  necessarily  themselves  the  Slite  of  the  professionals
^  whose  opinion  he  ihos  asked  them  to  adopt ; — as  if  they

*  were  not  met  expressly  to  judge  far  IhemaelveSf  from  his  and

*  yoor  discussion  then  and  there.     A  jury  would  not  feel

*  flattered  if  counsel  for  the  pUdntiff  urged  as  an  argument
'  to  move  them,  that  all  the  people  outside  the  court  thought
'  defendant  guilty.'

But  when  once  the  idea  of  'stamping  out'  is
indulged  in,  the  stamper  is  not  particular  on  whom
he  stamps,  so  long  as  he  does  stamp  far  and  wide
over  all  the  obnoxious  region;  wherefore,  not
content  with  denouncing,  without  proving,  Pro-
fessor SmjTth's  book  as  containing  'more  extra-
'  ordinary  hallucinations  than  had  appeared  in

*  any  other  three  volumes  published  during  the
'  past  or  present  centuiy,'-Sir  James  Y.  Simpson
went  on  to  deride  all  who  believed  in  the  theories
and  discoveries  mentioned  in  that  book ;  and  de-
clared such  persons  to  be — *only  a  few  weak  women,
'  and  perhaps  a  few  womanly  men,  and  no  more.'

V.

Of  course  a  scientific  discussion  can  hardly  be
satisfactorily  conducted  amongst  wen,  after  one
of  the  parties  has  begun  to  indulge  in  such


362  Intervening  Ohstructums.       [oh.  34.

phrases  as  the  above.  But  a  young  lady  may
always  be  beard  with  advantage  and  pleasure;
and  the  newspaper  containing  the  so-called  Fyia-
mid  discussion  of  the  20  th  of  April,  having  reached
a  well-ordered  home, — a  daughter  of  ihe  housei
who  had  both  seen  the  Oreat  Pyramid  of  Jeezeh,
visited  its  darksome  interior,  and  also  read  most
of  the  recently  published  books  on  that  and  other
Egyptian  subjects, — ^took  up  her  pen  and  wrote
off  next  morning,  amongst  other  very  apposite
remarks : —

'  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson  does  not  seem  to  htLve  preyed  a
single  objection  to  the  printed  Pyramid  theory,  with  the
exception  perhaps  of  a  few  printer's  errors ;  and  his  whole
attack  shows  anything  but  a  scientific  spirit ;  while  his  soom
of  women,  and  his  epithets  on  those  who  differ  in  opinion
from  him  and  his  friends,  are  mnch  to  be  lamented  for  what
they  reveal,  beneath  his  smiles,  of  his  inner  nature.  Be
it  observed,  however,  that  he  involuntarily  gives  women
credit  for  more  learning  and  science  than  he  possesses  him-
self,— if  they  are  capable  of  comprehending  and  appreciating
for  themselves  such  deep  questions  as  those  involved  in  the
Metrical  theory  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid.  For  Jie  gets  opinions
on  it  from  other  persons,  and  retails  them  to  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh  ;  but  some  women  who  have  had  time
and  opportunity,  read,  think,  and  reason  on  these  matters
for  themselves,  and  in  that  case  they  ought  not  to  be  termed

'  It  is  a  pity  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson  should  waste  his  time


CH.  34]


Nwnher  6.


363


in  trying  to  diflproYeasobjeotwliicliisnotatall  in  his  sphere,
and  about  which  he  shows  himself  so  ill-informed,  haying
neither  had  time  nor  opportonitj  thorooghly  to  examine  the
grounds  and  foundation  of  the  Pyramid  and  its  teachings ;
and  indeed,  unless  he  goes  to  work  with  a  more  disinterested
and  truly  philosophical  spirit,  I  fear  that  the  recent  prescrip-
tion exhibited  to  him,  of  ascending  and  descending  the
Pyramid  itself^  and  measuring  on  every  side  and  every
arris-line  of  the  structure, — ^will  not  cure  him.  Truly  of
him,  on  the  present  topic,  may  it  be  said,  and  with  an  extra-
ordinarily  dose  application —

"'  ^e  w  proudy  knaunng  noOiing^  lut  doting  about  questiom
and  strifes  of  words^  whereof  oometh  envy,  strife^  railinffs^
evU  surmisingsJ* — 1  Tm.  vi.  4.

*  The  best  advice  that  can  be  given  to  Sir  James  Y.  Simp-
son is,—"  to  study  to  he  guiety  and  to  do  his  oum  husinesSy  and
to  work  wUh  his  oum  hands" — ^1  Thxss.  iv.  11.'


364  Considerations  in  Chronology.    [oH.  36.


CHAPTER  35.
CONSIDERATIONS  IN  CHRONOLOGY.

Wh7,  so  calm  an  inquiry  as  the  study  of
ancient  masoniy,  and  the  scientific  measuring  of
the  shapes  or  sizes  of  quiescent  stones — still  rest-
ing where  they  were  deposited  by  their  original
workers,  but  in  days  removed  from  our  present
worldly  scenes  of  human  strife  and  trouble  by
4000  long  and  eventful  years, — should  have  been
greeted  with  the  apparent  hatred,  and  attacked
with  the  persevering  vindictiveness,  shown  of  late
towards  investigations  into  the  Great  Pjnramid, —
seems  on  many  accounts  passing  strange.  And  yet,
on  reviewing  the  quarters  whence  the  opposition
has  chiefly  come,  the  matter  nearly  explains  itselt

Rationalism  is  the  prevailing  tone  of  the  day,
whether  in  science,  or  religion,  or  both  together.
Even  with  regard  to  the  Book  of  Inspiration,  the
question  on  too  many  sides  is  no  longer,  *  What
^  readest  thou  V  but  ^  What  thinkest  thou  ?     Are


OH.  36.]    Cansideratuma  in  Chronology.  366

'  these  the  sort  of  words^  sentiments  and  ideas
'  which  should  be  found  in  a  book  written  nnder
'  Divine  inspiration  ?  Nay^  if  the  book  do  not  fully
'  meet  thy  a  priori  ideas  of  inspired  wisdom,  cast

*  it  from  thee  I'  While  as  regards  many  walks  of
science,  the  dogma  recently  stated  there  is,  ^  We  may
^  be  sure  that  Grod  does  not  teach  by  miracle,  any*
'  thing  that  the  unaided  intellect  of  man  can  find

*  out ;'  and  then  there  are  certain  savants  who  cap
that  with — *  Give  us  only  liberty  to  use  plenty  of
'  time  in  our  theories,  and  we  will  show  you  how

*  the  mere  brain,  or  natural  organization  of  man,
'  could  have  worked  out  for  himself  everjrthing
^  which  he  at  present  possesses.'

So  extensively  does  this  idea  of  the  mighty
things  which  man  can  accomplish  by  merely  hav-
ing plenty  of  time  to  work  in,  prevail,  that  before
most  of  the  scientific  societies  in  the  land,  we
believe  no  other  hypothesis  is  allowed  to  appear.
And  each  successive  difficulty  connected  with
human  history,  and  the  present  condition  of  any
of  the  sciences,  is  got  over, — by  merely  pushing
the  real  origin  of  man  still  farther  back  by  some
thousands,  or  hundreds  of  thousands,  of  years,
than  it  had  already  been  pushed  back  by  similar


366  Gansiderations  in  Chronology,    [oh.  35.

theorizers,  beyond  the  Bible-reputed  date  of  his
creation.

Of  course  we  are  told  bj  those  who  are  natu-
rally inclined  to  such  a  mode^  that  there  is  no
harm  in  it ;  it  is  only  what  they  are  entitled  to
do ;  for  time,  they  hold,  is  something  you  may  be
prodigal  of  and  waste  to  any  extent  you  like.  '  I
'  know  of  no  moral  or  religious  truth,'  says  a  noble
Duke,  writing  recently  on  the  antiquity  of  man,
'  which  depends  on  a  short  estimate  of  man's  anti-
'  quity.     On  the  contrary,  a,  high  estimate  of  that

*  antiquity  is  of  great  value  in  its  bearing  upon
'  another  question,  much  more  important  than  any

*  question  of  time  can  ever  be.'

Again,  his  Grace  testifies  for  the  science  of  the
day,  that  ^  there  is  a  weight  and  concurrence  of
'  authority  in  favour  of  a  long  chronology ;'  and
for  himself,  ^  that  for  his  own  part,  he  sees
'  no  reason  to  be  jealous  of  the  conclusions  of
'  science  in  this  matter.    The  question  is  after  all

*  a  small  one.     It  is  a  question  of  a  few  thousand

*  years  more  or  less ;  and  thousands  of  years  are
^  as  less  than  seconds  in  the  .creative  days.'  And
again :  *  The  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  narra-
^  tive  of  Genesis  with  an  indefinitely  older  date.


CH.  35.]  Che€k  on  Prodigality  of  Time.  367

'  is  a  Tery  small  difficulty  indeed,  as  compared
'  witii  the  difficulty  of  reconciling  it  with  a  very
'  limited  destruction  of  the  human  race/

Time  is  thus  indicated  as  a  something  which
the  titled  author  has  a  marvellous  power,  and
despotic  control,  over.  He  disconnects  too,  after
an  arrangement  of  his  own,  the  question  of  tim^
as  regards  man's  antiquity,  from  either  his  origin,
or  primitive  condition;  and  then,  in  that  com-
pendious form,  carries  back  the  time  of  man's
creation  or  introduction  into  the  world,  to  certain
eras  of  geological  history  and  preparation  of  the
globe,  when  there  was  no  tim&<ibsolute  (as  within
the  historical  period,  and  which,  according  to  him,
only  goes  back  to  2000  B.c.) — but  only  <ime-
rdative ;  where  the  sole  limit  appears  to  be,  that
you  are  not  allowed  to  assume  actual  infinity,
though  no  one  can  chide  you  for  taking  as  many
myriads  of  years,  as  may  suit  your  convenience
or  purposes.

Check  on  Prodigality  of  Time.

Now,  to  our  humble  apprehension,  Time  is  one
of  the  God-created  'four, — Matter,  Force,  Space,
and  Time  ;  whereof  Time  is  just  as  valuable  as  any


368  Considerations  in  Chronology.    [cH.  3  5.

of  its  compeers,  and  as  vastly  above  the  power  of
man  to  supplant,  appropriate,  or  do  away  with  ;
and  all  of  them  must  have  been  created  in  perfect
economy  as  well  as  power,  and  completely  foreseen
in  all  their  characters,  extent,  and  bearing,  by  the
infinite  wisdom  of  their  Creator.  Wherefore  we
ask,  why  all  this  contempt  of  Time,  alone  ?

'Beoatuie/  says  a  weU-meaning  Soriptare  believer — ^'gire
'  us  only  plenty  of  time,  and  then  we  can  derive  all  the  exist-
'  ing  varieties  of  men,  as  Negro,  Oaacasian,  Mongol,  and  Bed
'  man  from  a  single  original  pair :  and  that  is  agreeable  with
'  the  Biblical  statement  of  how  man  was  created.  It  is  there-
'  fore  for  the  actual  support  of  the  Bible,  in  its  more  important
'  relations,  that  we  demand  such  long  periods  of  time  rinoa
'  the  creation  of  the  first  human  pair.'

We  rather  fear,  however,  that  trying  to  support
the  Bible  in  that  manner,  is  too  near  an  approach
to  the  spirit  of  Uzzah,  when  *he  put  forth  his
'  hand  to  the  Ark  of  God,  and  took  hold  of  it ;
'  and  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against
*  Uzzah ;  and  God  smote  him  there  for  his  error.*

The  method,  moreover,  of  demanding  the  crea-
tion date  of  man  to  be  pushed  back  enormously,
has  been  found  only  too  congenial  for  those  who
openly  profess  disbelief  in  the  inspired  character,
or  Divine  truth,   of  the  Scriptures ;  who  boast


OH.  35.]     Che(^  an  Prodigality  of  Time.        369

that  there  is  no  trace  throughout  all  nature  of
any  of  these  interferences  with  natural  laws  which
the  Bible  alludes  to;  and  who, — caring  little
about  origin  from  one  pair,  or  shoals  of  pairs,  and
one  place,  or  many  either  simultaneous  or  sue*
cessive  places,  of  creation,— direct  all  their  atten-
tion to  the  kind  of  origin  they  find  for  man ;
and  rejoice  to  place  that  origin  as  low  in  the  scale
of  animated  being  as  possible ;  so  that  some  would
trace  all  present  men  from  an  ancestor  lower  than
that  of  the  lowest  savage  anywhere  existing;
some  would  bring  him  from  the  fax  lower  depths
of  the  nearest  anthropoid  animal :  and  some  from
the  vastly  lower  depths  still  of  the  romotest
monad,  or  atom,  of  any  kind  of  physical  exist-
ence  whatever.

This  seems  rather  an  untoward  mode  for  deriv-
ing the  Godlike  mind  of  man ;  but,  with  only  plenty
of  time,  these  'advanced-thinkers' declare  that  they
can  do  it.  That  is,  they  can  show,  on  paper,  how
man  could  have  risen  from  any  of  these  states,  to
his  present  condition,-merely  by  his  own  animal
organization  exerting  itself  always  in  one  direc-
tion, for  a  suflBciently  long  period  of  time  ;  but  in
accordance  with  natural  laws,  and  in  modes  com-

2  a


370         Consideratians  in  Chronoloffy.    [cH.  36.

pletely  amenable  fo  ecienoe,  and  wholly  without
the  range  of  interference  of  a  peESonal  CSieator.

So  successful  too  has  tliis  paper  demonstzatiaa
been,  to  many  minds, — ^that  its  cap  of  gloiy  has
somewhat  overflowed  of  late;  and  many  well-
meaning  men  who  began  witii  demands  for  onty
a  little  more  time,  and  some  also  who  were  even
scandalized  at  any  more  time,  than  that  allowed
by  the  Bible  dates,  being  asked  for, — are  £rand
now  fireely  consenting  to  this  other  Inspiirati0n
subversive  proposition, — ^viz.,  that  man's  earliest
position  on  earth  must  necessarily  have  been
infantine,  rude,  and  savage  to  the  lowest  degree.

If  we  ask  them,  why  that  low  beginning  must
have  been : — ^they  answer —

'  Because  there  was  then  as  little  as  possible  to  be  done  bj
'  the  Creator  at,  or  after,  the  creation  of  man,  in  a  manner
'  which  no  modem  scientific  society  can,  or  does,  allow;  bst
'  as  much  as  possible  left  for  man  to  work  out  by  his  own
'  powers  on  the  principles  both  of  rational  science,  our  pre-
'  sent  modes  of  improvement,  and  progressiTe  development
'  methods,  whose  truth  and  sufficiency  all  €ulvanc«d*ihiiiker$
<  admit.'

Needless  to  point  out  what  a  limiting  of  the
power  of  the  Creator  is  here  implied ;  what  a
dropping  out  of  view  some  of  the  most  cmcial


CO.  36.]  ScUnce^nterdictedhgfpoihesis  tried.  371

statements  in  the  Bible  touching  the  Inspiration
divinely  afforded  to  the  first  Man ;  what  a  case
of  improperly  putting  forth  the  arm  of  Uzzah  to
assist  Him  whose  power  is  infinite.  Needless  we
say  for  us  to  point  out  these  things  here,— because
it  is  neither  our  responsible  duty  so  to  do ;  nor
are  we  contemplating  any  discussion  of  the  case
on  theological  principles,  or  even  Biblical  grounds.
All  we  are  professing  to  do»  is  merely  to  compare
the  general  resultant  of  all  our  Architectural  and
Archaeological  securely  ascertained  testimony,
with,— on  one  side,  the  doctrines  of  rationalism ;
and  on  the  other,  the  leading  and  simple  state*
ments  in  Scripture  history ;  taking  this  latter  for
the  time,  merely  as  an  hypothesis  to  be  tried ;  or
precisely  in  that  form  in  which,  however  innocent,
and  though  perhaps  just  and  true  in  fact,  no  first-
class  scientific  society  of  the  country  will  allow
any  appearance  to  be  put  in  for  it.

The  Science-interdicted  Hypothesis  tried.

First  then,  let  us  remind,  that  our  preceding
chapters  2  2  to  3  2  tend  to  show,  that  although  there
may  have  been  generally  advancing  school  science
in  the  world  during  the  last  2000  or  2500  years;


372         Considerations  in  Chronology,    [gh.  36.

— and  that  such  species  of  knowledge  must  ibisn-
fore  have  been  at  a  far  lower  position  at  the  date
of  500  B.o.»  than  now  amongst  ourselves^  or  at  a
positively  very  low  level  indeed, — yeti  1600  yean
previously  to  that  again,  or  in  2170  B.a,  there
were  built  into  the  Great  Pyramid  BjrmbolizatiQDB
of  astronomical  and  physical  data,  expressed  to
such  surpassing  accuracy,  as  to  be  raiher  in  ad-
vance of,  than  behind,  the  scienceof  tiie  present  day.
This  great  fact,  or  general  induction  firom  many
facts,  instantly  strikes  at  the  root  of  one  rational-
istic doctrine ;  viz.,  ^  that  man  never  forgets  any-

*  thing  good  or  important  that  he  has  once  ascer-

*  tained;  and  that  his  course  is  therefore  necessarily
^  always  an  advancing,  gaining,  and  triumphant
one/  That  doctrine  we  say  is  overturned  by  our
broad  facts,  because  man  evidently  did  fall  away,
somehow  or  other,  from  the  knowledge  which  he
had  at  the  time  of  building  the  Great  Pyramid, —
and  which  knowledge  he  has  not  recovered,  after
ages  of  slow  and  painful  climbing  upwards  from  an
intermediate  state  of  ignorance,  imtil  within  these
last  few  years.

'  Well  I '    some    honest    advanced-thinkera    may    confess,
<  granted  that  human  progress  Juu  met  with  oooasional  re-


CH.35.]  Science^tnterdictedhjfpothesis  tried.  373

'  Yenes ;  tJiese  are  mere  accidents,  occurring  from  war,  pes-
*  tilence,  or  other  calamities.  But  the  really  important  qoes-
'  tion  is,  how  was  that  old  knowledge  at  the  Great  Pyramid
'  date  acquired ;  was  it  slowly  on  our  rationalistic  methods,  or
'  suddenly  by  Divine  Inspiration  ?'

Preciselj  there,  we  too  allow,  is  the  mam  ques-
tion to  be  settled.

On  rationalistic  principles,  the  knowledge  of
astronomical  and  other  sciences  in  the  Great
Pyramid,  could  hardly  have  been  acquired  by  man
for  himself  under  a  previous  career  of  something
like  4000  years,  even  if  he  had  then  started, — at
the  beginning  of  that  very  early  time,  or  8000
years  ago, — from  a  state  of  general  knowledge  and
civilization  equal  to  what  was  enjoyed  in  Eastern
countries  in  the  time  of  Joseph.  Nor  could  it
probably  have  been  attained  under  40,000  pre-
liminary  years,  if  man  had  had  to  start,  and  plod
on  upon  his  course  unassisted  by  a  higher  power,
fix)m  a  state,  as  some  maintain  it,  rather  lower  than
that  of  an  Australian  savage.  Nor  in  400,000
years,  if  ever,  supposing  that  he  had  had  to  work
up  from  a  gorilla  or  monkey  condition  ;  and  how
long  from  a  monad,  we  will  leave  the  advanced-'
thinkers  to  say  for  themselves.

But  we  need  not  now  attempt  to  discriminate


374  Cimsideratums  in  Chronology,    [gs.36.

between,  or  choose  any  one  of  these  origins^  rather
than  another ;  because  the  last  4000  years  of
each  of  them,  if  successful  in  producing  the  Great
Pyramid  in  the  end,  would  be  nearly  or  precisely
similar.  For  these  last  4000  pre-Pyramid  years,
therefore,  on  any  rationalistic  system,  there
should  have  been,  and  there  should  now  be,  the
remains  of  innumerable  stone  buildings^ — ^gradu-
ally approaching  the  maturity  of  excellence  seen
in  the  Great  Pyramid ; — such  monuments  should
indeed  be  in  exceeding  profusion,  scattered  up
and  down  in  various  countries  of  the  earth  ;  and
containing  within  them  interpretable  proofs  of  con-
stantly advancing  science,  knowledge,  and  power.
This  is  what  should  be,  and  oh  I  how  abun-
dantly, according  to  rationalism ;  but  scientific
examination  of  the  actual  facts  existing  in  the
world,  whether  the  reader  may  take  such  examina-
tion from  Fergusson's  History  of  Architecture,  or
from  our  own  previous  pages, — declares,  that
excepting  some  problematical  and  not  very  im-
portant structures  ^  of  a  few  centuries  earlier  only,
— the  world  has  no  material  and  contemporaiy
record  of  intellectual  man,  earlier  than  the  Great

^  See  page  170,  ohapter  20.


CH.36.]  Sciencerwterdioted  hypothec  875

Pyramid ;  t.e.,  no  earlier  architecture  and  no
earlier  adence  tracesfi  even  of  anj  kind.  The
Great  Pyramid  opens  human  architecture,  not
witii  a  gradual  beginning  slowly  growing  up
firom  a  series  of  almost  invisibly  small  and  weak
attempts,  improving  through  countless  ages,  but
with  a  sudden  burst  of  height,  breadth,  majesty,
science,  and  excellence,  to  an  extent  which  is  £or
all  practical  purposes  even  perfection  itsel£

This  extraordinary  difference  &om  the  ratwnr
aUy  expected  result,  is  not  merely  a  defeat ;  it  is
a  catastrophe  approaching  to  annihilation  for
rationalism.  Not  indeed  of  our  doing,  or  even  of
Mr.  Fergusson's  either ;  but  simply  by  the  actual
facts  of  the  earliest  histoiy  we  can  get  at, — and
as  taken  account  of  by  modem  scientific  exa-
mination of  the  only  undeniable  evidence^  viz.,
contemporary  records^ — ^being  antagonistic  to  the
doctrine.

We  have  shown,  at  pp.  183-332,  what  the  Great
Pyramid,  with  its  science,  was  at  the  time  of  its
building,  or  in  2170  B.O. ;  and  advanced-thinkers
must  now,  either  prove  why  there  is  a  perfect
vacuity  of  monuments,  in  place  of  their  required
plenum,  before  the  Great  Pyramid  era ;  or  they


376         Considerations  in  Cfhronology.     [cH.  35.

must  cease  to  advocate  lationalistic  philosophy,
as  able  to  explain  the  actual  course  of  inaD's  real
histoiy  under  the  sun, — ^whatever  thej  may  make
it  do  for  a  mere  paper  system  of  a  Utopian  crea-
tion.

Language,

Some  veiy  strenuous  efforts  have  been  made
recently,  to  cry  up  the  newest  forms  of  the  science
of  philology,  as  composed  of  glottology  and
mythology  ;^  the  leading  principle  of  which,  is
nothing  but  an  extremely  advanced-thinking  en-
deavour to  show  how  man  could  make  language,
out  of  mere  power  of  animal  sounds^  in  sufficiently
long  ages, — in  place  of  having  had  it  at  once
given  to  him  complete  by  the  Almighty.  That
such  a  hypothesis  should  be  tried  on  paper,  we
presume  will  not  be  objected  to;  but  that^
because  it  has  apparently  succeeded  there,  with
the  gift  conceded  of  unlimited  time, — which  man
has  not  in  his  power  really  to  make  free  with,
— ^that  therefore  certain  scholars  should  boast
they  have  proved  that  their  h}rpothesis  was  both

^  '  Glottology,  the  science  of  elementary  vocalizfttionfl,  their  origin,
'  significance,  and  combination  historically  into  speech  :  and  Mytho-
*  logy,  the  science  of  the  primitive,  transmitted,  and  perhaps
'  organic  imaginations  and  conceptions  of  the  human  race.'


CH.  36.]  Language.  377

the  law  of  nature  and  the  fact  of  man's  early
history-is  what  mere  practical  observers  must
positively  demur  to.

Wherefore,  although  those  advanced  schokrs
write  triumphantly  amongst  themselves,  that  they
are  akeady,  by  means  of  their  favourite,-and
which>  if  the  youngest,  they  say  is  the  most  scien-
tific, of  all  the  sciences, — already  twining  their
hands  into  the  mane  of  back-rushing  time^  and
compelling  the  monster  to  stand,  and  extracting
from  her  some  of  her  obscurest  secrets  : — also

*  that  they  find  their  science  promises  to  be  a
calculus  of  as  great  potency  for  solving  problems
of  the  human  past,  as  geology  has  been  for
solving  those  of  the  pre-human  past,  but  of  still
greater  exquisiteness  and  complexity  : — also

'  that  the  evidence  of  philology  in  language  is
irrefragable,  and  is  the  only  evidence  worth  listen-
ing to  with  regard  to  the  pre-historical  periods  : —

'  that  philology  afibrds  the  most  conclusive  evi-
dence of  all  the  sciences  yet  employed  in  the
inquiry,  for  showing  that  the  articulate  voice  of
man  has  been  sounding  in  the  world  during  vast,
though  indefinite  periods  of  time  : — and

'that  those  who  have  studied  the  growth  of


378  Consideraiians  in  Chronology.    [cH.  35.

langaageSy  and  the  mTsterious  laws  by  which
that  growth  is  regulated,  are  lost  in  conjectnie  as
to  the  lapse  of  time  which  may  probably  have
been  required  to  account  for  the  wonderful  eiea-
tions  of  human  speech  :' —

though  all  this,  and  very  much  more  tod  is
asserted  in  vigour  of  grammatical  phrase,  and
deeply  resounding  periods  of  apparently  tzaa-
scendent  philosophic  wisdom,  inimitable  except
by  equally  great  scholars  with  those  who  have
pronounced  them, — still  we  do  not  see  that  those
gentlemen  have  proved  a  single  philological  &ct
in  primeval  history,  by  earlier,  or  even  ao  early,
contemporary  evidence  as  the  Great  Pyramid
Nor  do  we  apprehend  that  all  their  learned
schemes,  are  representing  anything  more  than
merely  modem  lucubrations  of  iugenious  building
up,  on  paper ; — and  no  higher  position  can  well
be  allowed  them,  until  they  have  discovered  a
method  of  raising  their  theoretical  predecessors  out
of  that  woful  pit  of  perdition  whereinto  they  have
fallen,  by  having  no  real  monuments  to  show  for
all  the  ages  preceding  the  rise  of  that  august
witness  to  modem  times,  of  what  really  did  take
place  4000  years  ago ;  viz.,  the  Great  Pyramid.


OH.  35.]  TJie  Deluge  generally.  379

The  Deluge  generally.

'  But  mj  theoiy:  fiEtiling  does  not  oblige  me  to

*  believe  in  yours,' — exclaimed  a  sufficiently  clever
advanced-thinker  to  us  recently.  '  You  say/  he
went  on,  '  that  nothing  but  the  admission  of
'  Divine  inspiration  to  man,  and  of  interference,

*  so  far,  with  the  order  of  nature,  will  suffice  to
'  explain  the  observed  Great-Pyramid  facts.  But
'  these  facts  do  not  suit  the  Bible  history  either ;
'  because  according  to  that, — and  if  Adam  was
'  reaUy  inspired,  and  his  descendants  endued  at
'  once  with  all  the  wisdom  and  capacity  thereby
'  implied, — then  there  were  some  2000  years  of
'  intellectual  life  before  the  date  of  the  Great
'  Pyramid.  Where*  then  are  all  the  monuments
'  of  that  long  period  V

Now  this  is  indeed  a  question  to  which  we
would  desire  to  draw  the  earnest  attention  of  alL
The  Bible  does  no  doubt  place  the  creation  of
man,  and  the  breathing  into  him,  by  Almighty
power,  both  the  breath  of  life  and  apparently
much  spirit  of  wisdom,  language,  religion,  and
many  of  the  arts  of  industrial  life,^  say  some  six

1  Amongst  these  may  be  reckoned  the  pastoral  pursmts  of  Abel ;
for  although  they  are  considered  by  some  persons  as  the  ocoupa-


380  Considerations  in  Chronoloffy.    [CH.  36.

or  seven  thousand  years  ago ;  for  we  are  not  comr
petent  to  interpret  the  numbers  perfectly  there ;
but  at  all  events  nearly  two  or  three  thousand
years  before  the  building  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;
and  we  believe  the  account  true,  in  all  its  largest
and  most  understandable  features.  But  then  the
Bible  also  recounts  the  terrific  stoiy  of  the  Deluge,
BS  having  occurred  only  a  few  centuries  before  that
Oreat  Pyramid-building  date;  and  having  also^
both  removed  all  traces  of  the  previous  popular
tion,  and  reduced  mankind  again, — so  &r  as  mere
numbers  were  concerned, — to  the  condition  of  the
first  created  family,  with  all  the  earth  before  them
to  people  with  their  descendants  to  ba

Take  therefore  the  Biblical  account  of  the
Deluge,  as  a  necessary  and  true  part  of  the  Bib-
lical history  of  man  from  his  creation,  downwards
to  ordinary  historical  times, — and  all  the  main

tion  of  a  primitive  savage, — they  could  not  at  once  be  pnt  into  exe-
cution at  any  one  epoch  of  time,  unless  animals  had  been  prepared
heforfhaml  in  their  nature  and  inward  parts  willing  and  suitable  to
become  the  domesticated  animals  of  man.  In  the  earlier  of  the
Egyptian  tomb-paintings,  though  that  Cain-following  people  were
abundantly  provided  with  the  fattest  of  oxen,  sheep,  and  goats,
yet  they  were  alwa^'s  striving  to  domesticate  large  antelopes,  appa-
rently in  place  of  oxen,  and  hyaenas  in  place  of  dogs.  Bat  all
those  long-continued  human  efforts  totally  failed  in  adding  either
one  or  other  of  those  wild  beasts  permanently  to  the  stock  of  the
animal  companions  and  servants  of  man.


CH.  35.]  The  Deluge  generally.  381

features  of  both  the  Great  Pyramid  architectnre
and  Great  Pyramid  symbology — all  the  main
story  in  fact  which  the  Great  Pyramid  has  to
tell,  is  more  than  ever  in  favour  of  the  Scriptural
version.  And  the  Great  Pyramid  is  a  monument
not  of  the  creation  and  first  inspiration  of  man,
but  of  the  Deluge,  and  some  of  the  first  steps  con-
nected with  the  spreading  of  population  some
centuries  afterwards  ;  possibly,  or  even  probably,
after  the  dispersion  at  Babel.

There  are  no  doubt  serious  difficulties  in  the
way  of  understanding  the  precise  interpretation
of  every  Bible  detail  connected  with  the  Deluge  ;
though  that  event  may  be  more  simple,  as  it  is  also
more  recent,  than  the  creation  of  man ;  but,  as  to
the  general  fact  of  a  miracle  of  such  an  inundation
order,  with  the  purpose  too  of  removing  an  apos-
tate population  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,  and
with  an  unprecedented  destruction  of  the  human
race  in  effect,  and  as  having  taken  place  some-
where between  2300  and  3300  B.a — the  admitted
texts  of  both  Old  and  New  Testaments  are  most
positive  and  unequivocal.  Prophet  and  Apostle,
and  our  Saviour  himself,  all  testify  to  the  general
leading  fact  of  a  sudden,  and  anti-natural  watery


382  CoMideratians  in  Chronology,    [gel  35.

destruction  of  all  men  but  one  selected  family ;
and  there  is  no  possible  caose^  compatiUy  widi
honest  belief  in  the  Bible,  for  either  pofiOiing  back
the  date  of  the  Deluge  to  an  indefinite  number  of
myriads  of  years  ago;  or  making  it  partial  amongrt
a  small  portion  only  of  mankind;  or  again  for
giving  to  the  visitation  anything  else  than  a  mim-
culous  and  nature-interference  characteristic

Yet  some  men  do  any  or  all  of  these  three  tiiingi^
and  actually  profess  (in  a  manner  we  cannot  mlde^
stand,  though  it  is  becoming  a  pre  vailing  feature  of
the  present  day)  to  be  firm  believers  in  the  Bible
all  the  time.  They  daim  to  act  in  all  things  as
the  best  of  Christians^  to  hold  the  Bible  as  tiidr
Sacred  book, — and  yet  delight  to  turn  into  lidieok
any  one  who  believes  in  the  personality  of  Noaih,
or  the  reality  of  the  Deluge  at  anything  near  tlie
Biblical  recorded  time.

Herein  indeed,  as  connected  with  attacks  on  that
Biblical  Deluge  and  its  date, — is  another  of  the
strongholds  of  advanced-tiiinkers ;  though  it  is  one
which  may  now  be  visited  and  tested,  as  it  never
has  been  before,  from  the  vantage-ground  of  the
Oreat  Pyramid.  Rationalism,  in  all  her  examina-
tions of  nature  and  the  world,  can  discover  no


CH.  36.]  The  Deluge  generally.  883

traces  of  the  Biblical  Ddug^  and  therefore  dis-
belieyes  its  having  ever  occurred.    Her  followers,
too,  had  rather  an  easy  victory  put  into  their  hands
on  ODB  point  of  1i»e  discnadon,  by  the  iU-judged
ardour  of  certain  Scripture-following  scholars  of
the  last  generation  or  two.    For  these,  being  far
too  prone  to  think  the  Deluge  must  have  been
material  and  natural,  rather  than  miraculous, —
invariably  hastened  to  seize  on  every  case  of  a
geological  elevation  of  the  bed  of  an  old  sea,  or
any  traces  of  accumulated  water-weaiing  action,  as
proofs  positive  and  direct  of  the  Noachian  Deluga
Bationalism  therefore  triumphed  gloriously  then,
when  geology  showed  the  true  nature  of  these
particular  phenomena,  and  the  manner  of  their
occurrence  without   the    aid    of    any  universal
flood.    But  now  that  the  same  party  has  gone  on
since  then  to  declare,  and  even  boast  itself  in  de-
claring, the  further  supposed  geological  discovery,
— or  that,  so  far  as  the  surface  of  the  earth  is
concerned  and  all  the'  mutations  it  has  been  ex*
posed  to  through  countiess  ages, — modem  science
can  find  'no  sign  of  a  beginning,  no  prospect  of
an  end,' — why,  the  advanced-thinkers  have  fallen
into  the  worse  scientific  error  of  the  two.


384  Ccnsideraticni  ui  Chronology.    [csL  35.

A  kiUing  error :  because,  not  only  does  the  cal-
culating natural  phflosofphv  of  the  present  day,
declare  that  sach  a  uniform  system  in  natme
is  just  as  impossible  as  peix>etnal  motion  in
mechanical  art ;  bnt  now,  the  metrically  scientifie
examinations  which  have  been  recently  made  of
the  Great  Pyramid,  combined  with  traditions  of
ancient,  and  calculations  of  modem,  astronomy —
tend  to  throw  a  peculiar  light  upon  the  veiy
epoch  of  the  Deluge ;  and  prove  that  time  is  no
more  to  be  trifled  with  in  its  grandeur,  when  con-
nected with  the  Biblical  history  of  intellectaal
man,  than  any  other  of  the  particulars  with  regard
to  him  contained  in  the  Sacred  book.


Date  of  the  Deluge.

We  have  already  set  forth  the  confirmation
which  the  mere  fact  of  the  existence  of  the  Great
P3rramid,  in  its  size,  excellence,  and  unpreceded
appearance  gives  to  mankind  having  then, — t.d,
in,  or  near  to,  2170  B.C.,— only  recently  emeiged
from  a  period  of  very  small  numbers,  but  with
supernatural  assistance;  and  now  we  have  to
detail  the   further   and   more    particular  testi-


OH.  35.]  Date  of  the  Deluge.  885

mony  as  to  the  date  of  the  terrible  catastrophe
itseli'

Recent  exploration  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  has
shown  that  the  distinguishing  feature  of  its  astro-
nomy, was  the  simultaneous  observation  of  an  equa-
torial star  crossing  the  meridian  above  the  pole,
when  a  certain  chosen  circumpolar  star,  viz.,  a  Dra-
conis,  was  crossing  tiie  meridian  below  the  pole.

It  was  this  system  which  gave  to  the  Pyramid
the  Pleiades,  with  all  their  traditional  associations
of  grateful  memories,  from  2170  B.C.,  and  for  a
long  time  downwards  after  that  date.  It  was
that  system  also  which,  according  to  calculations
based  on  modem  astronomy,  would  have  given  to
any  man  observing  stars  on  that  Great  Pyramid
principle,  in  antediluvian  periods,  or  from  3400
B.C.  and  upwards, — ^the  stars  most  maligned  by
tradition  as  connected  with  times  of  evil  fate,  viz.
the  stars  of  Scorpio.^  And  it  is  finally  the  same
system,  which  must  have  given  to  the  middle  of
the  intervening  time,  say  2800  B.C.,  as  the  domi-

^  See  the  opening  pages  of  W.  Osbarn's  The  Religiona  qf  the  World,
for  some  apposite  details  of  the  earliest  form  of  religion  practised
amongst  the  ancient  Egyptians.

'  See  Life  and  Work  at  the  Cfreat  Pyramid^  by  C.  Piazzi  Smyth,
▼oL  iiL  p.  492.

2B


386         ConsidercUions  in  Chronology,     [ch.  3

nant  constellation  of  that  age,  A  quaritts ;  or  a  con-
stellation alwaya  connected  in  the  minds  of  men
with  ideas  of  a  flood  of  8(tae  kind  or  another.

Not  that  there  is  any  6ort  of  virtue,  good  or
bad,  in  any  of  these  stars,  enabling  them  to  pro-
duce physical  effects  upon  the  earth,  in  and  by
their  own  power ;  but  that  certain  historical  ideas
were  attached  to  them  either  by  names  or  descrip-
tiona  of  figures  in  appropriate  actions,  aa  memo-
rials to  men,  long  before  the  days  of  clBaaB"4
science  began;  ao  lon^  ago  indeed  as  to  have
extended  into  the  traditions  of  almost  all  lands,
and  to  have  been  already  attributed  to  certain
branches  of  inspired  teaching  in  the  early  days  of
the  world,  uttered  for  prophetical  purposes  closely
connected  with  revealed  religion,'  And  now  the
Great  Pyramid  gives  us  the  key  to  some,  at  least,
of  these  most  primeval  asterisms  ;  and  makes  the
date  of  the  Deluge,  by  the  manner  in  which  it
singles  out  Aquarius  from  all  the  other  zodiacal
constellations,  to  be  as  surely  very  near  to  2800
B,c.,  as  the  date  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  own
building  is  close  to  21'70  B.C.

In  point  of  time  then,  behold  the  Bible  date

'  See  Maz:arotli,  or  lite  Coraldtationi,  by  tho  late  MisB  RoUestoo.


ca.  35.J  DcOe  of  the  Deluge.  ZBt

smgularly  fulfilled.  For  2800  B.a  is  dose  to  the
mean  of  the  dates  of  the  two  chi^f  Tendons  of
the  Scriptures,  the  Septuagint  and  Hebrew;
whereon  every  Church  tibtoiighout  Christendom
sees  its  sons  utterly  divided  in  opinion,  as  to  which
of  the  two  copies  is  the  more  trustworthy.  Hither^
to  divines  have  generally  held  either  to  the  3300
of  the  Septuagint^  or  the  2300  of  the  Hebrew,
and  have  accused  the  opposite  version  of  having
been  either  subtracted  from,  or  added  to,  by
the  whole  amount  of  the  difference.  But  now
the  Great  Pyramid  offers  its  well-authenticated
and  remarkably  preserved  original  testimony,
declaring  the  truth  to  be  nearly  in  the  middle
between  the  two ;  and  gently  reminding,  that  if
man  had  trusted  the  catholic  and  whole  spirit  of
all  the  Scripture  versions  which  have  come  down
to  our  times, — ^he  would  never  have  been  sensibly
far  from  the  truth.

Hence  the  final  result  of  all  our  research  into
the  antiquity  of  Man,  by  the  most  certain,  nay
only  certain,  plan  of  contemporary  data,  is, —

First,  an  admirable  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the
Scriptures,  in  the  dates  therein  given,  from  his-
torical times  up  to,  and  including,  the  date  of  the


388        CoMidercUions  in  Chronology,     [ca.  36.

Deluge ;  further  thou  which  the  Great  Pyramid
does  not  enable  us  to  go :  and

Second,  that  no  traces  of  intellectual  man^  eariier
than  2800  B.O.,  will  be  found  anywhere.^  Any
traces  earlier  which  may  ever  have  existed,  would
seem  to  have  been  purposely  made  away  with  by
a  supernatural  catastrophe,  into  whose  modui
operandi  it  is  in  vain  for  man  to  inquire  by


^  We  may  be  exooaed  for  pointiiig  oat  here,  how  the  date  of  2800
B.a,  relieves  some  believers  in  the  sappoeed  Hebrew  Deluge  date  of
2300  B.C.,  from  a  difficulty  which  they  had  met  with,  and  honestty
confessed.  In  George  F.  Chambers's  Attronamif,  Oxford  darendon
Press  Edition,' p.  42,  we  read —

'  The  earliest  record  we  possess  of  an  occunenoe  of  this  kind  (a

*  dose  apparent  conjunction  of  several  planets)  is  of  Chinese  origia.

*  It  is  stated  that  a  conjunction  of  Mars,  Jupiter,   Saturn,  and

<  Mercury,  in  the  constellation  Shi,  was  assumed  as  an  epoch  by
( the  Emperor  Chuen-hio,  and  it  has  been  found  by  MM.  Desvignoles

*  and  Kirch,  that  such  a  conjunction  actually  did  take  place  on

<  February  28,  2446  B.C.,  between  lO""  and  18°  of  Piscee.     Another

*  calculator,  De  Mailla,  fixes  on  February  9,  2441  B.G.,  as  the  date

*  of  the  conjunction  in  question ;  and  he  states  that  the  four  planets

<  named  above,  and  the  moon  besides,  were  comprised  within  an

<  arc  of  12°,  extending  from  15°  to  27°  of  Pisces.     It  deserves  men-

*  tion  that  both  the  foregoing  dates  precede  the  Noachian  Deluge.
'  It  can  therefore  only  be  that  the  planetary  conjunction  in  question
'  was  after-ascertained.'

The  last  two  sentences  are  evidentiy  now  rendered  unneoessaiy,
by  the  mean  Biblical  date  and  the  Pyramid  date  both  giving  the
Deluge  earlier  by  several  centuries  than  2446  B.a  But  it  still
remains  to  be  proved,  whether  the  Chinese  statement  may  be  re-
garded as  an  old  contemporary  record,  or  a  modem  composition.
We  fear  the  latter :  though  always  expecting  that  some  important
chronological  discoveries  may  still  be  made  amongst  that  very
ancient  and  most  incomprehensible  people.


CH.  36.]  Date  of  the  Dduge.  889

of  any  or  all  the  varieties  of  modem  science,
which  is  essentially  sub-naturoL  While  of  all
immediately  sabsequent  traces  of  intellectual
man's  handiwork,  only  that  one  has  well  sur-
vived to  the  present  time, — ^where  the  Divine
£Etvour  was  extended  to  the  builders  thereof  both
in  method  and  design ;  for  a  purpose  never  yet
distinctly  revealed  in  words,  though  it  is  now
apparently,  like  the  fulfilment  of  an  ancient
prophecy,  gradually  coming  into  view.

Precisely  too  as  more  and  more  of  the  intended
end  is  accomplished,  so  will  man  be  allowed  and
enabled  to  see  more  clearly  what  were  the  original
aims  and  intentions  of  the  whole  design.

Sadly  may  the  Oreat  Pyramid  be  now  already
broken  and  injured  beyond  repair ;  and  social  op-
position in  our  own  community  may  run  strongly,
nay  violently,  against  any  worthy  national  effort
being  put  forth,  even  for  the  monument's  full  men-
suration, before  decay  proceeds  much  further.  But
we  may  nevertheless  rest  perfectly  assured,  that
enough  of  it  will  still  be  left,  to  show, — and
when  the  right  time  comes,  to  prove, — that  every-
thing was  foreseen,  and  pre-arranged  in  every
particular,  from  the  beginning.


890        Chnrnderatitms  in  C^ihmologjf.     [CH.  35.

Of  other  mtiqiiitieB^  and  tfaoee  tbo  'wiiich  up
to  ihe  pieflent  time  lutTe  eineAy  oeeapsd  eveij
Antiquarian  Society, — an  doqaent  author  has
written,  in  apparent  despair  at  aiich  Rnudna  dis-
closing only  taraces  of  confiisian  widi  lamentable
want  of  method,  eaq^erience,  and  skill, —

'We mart g^iiiqi,fluit8peedilen pert;  wliedier in fiM(

*  or  dinmologj)  doetrine  or  mjihotogr;  whrther  in  Borope,
'  Aflu^Afiriofty  or  America;  at  Thebes  or  Paknqiie,  on  Lydaa

*  shore  or  Salisbury  Plain:  lort  is  lort;  gone  is  gone  fir

*  erer.'

It  may  be  so,  with  all  old  wodcs  of  merely
human  origination  ;  but  it  will  not  be  so  with  the
still  older  Great  Pyramid,  if  a  Higher  Power  has
otherwise  willed  it  And  certainly  firom  the
moment  of  man  having  addressed  himself  to
examine  that  particular  monument  with  respecl^
earnestness,  and  science,  it  has  begun  to  yield  a
series  of  results,  which  completely  separate  it
from  all  that  is  so  comprehensively  alluded  to
in  the  thrilling  confession  of  human  insufficiency,
just  quoted.


APPENDICES.


.■■.


'  Again,  if  it  were  said  that  thai  (only)  ii  a  fact  wlucli  our
'  perceive,  the  question  must  be  asked,  Whoee  aenaea  ?  One  bub
'  watches  the  stars  all  the  night,  and  sees  them  describe  (appareat)
'  circles  about  the  pole ;  another  looks  at  them  carelessly  and  at
*  intervals,  and  sees  no  circles. — ^And  thus  what  is  matter  of  theoiy
'  (or  even  total  disbelief),  to  one  observer,  is  matter  of  fact  to
<  another.' — ^Whxwxll's  PhUMophy  qf  the  Inductive  Sdenoee,  vol  i
p.  20.


AFP.  1.]  Sir  H.  James  on  the  Great  Pyramid.  393


APPENDIX  1.


CX)LONEL  Sm  HENEY  JAMES,  RK,  DirecUyr  of  the
Ordnance  Survey,  ON  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID.

IV'om  the  Athenceumfor  November  16, 1867,  p.  660.

ASDA

,  CONSIDERATION  OP  THE  BVIDBNCB,  BY  W.  PETRIE,  Esq.,

A    CIVIL    SNOINSSB.^


•THE  GEE  AT  P  YE  AMID  OP  EGYPT.

'.OBDNAKOI  BuBYXT  OtFIOS,  SOUTHAMFTOir,

Novettd>er  9, 1867.

'The  publication  of  the  elaborate  work  on  the  Great
Pyramid  of  Egypt,  by  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth,  has  led  me
to  an  examination  of  the  proportions  and  dimensions  of
this  Pyramid,  in  which  I  have  been  assisted  by  Mr.
OTarrell,  of  the  Ordnance  Survey.  The  result  of  this
examination  is  curious,  if  only  for  showing  the  simple
principles  on  which  the  Pyramid  vku  constructed,^  and  which
have  been  so  strangely  overlooked  by  so  many  ancient  and
modem  authors  who  have  written  on  this  subject.

'First,  I  find  that  a  pyramid  having  a  square  base  and  a

^  At  p.  189  I  have  referred  to  my  friend  by  name,  as  lir.  Petrie,  C.K  ;
bnt  he  writes  to  correct  me  in  the  use  of  those  terminal  letters,  as  he  states
that  he  is  not  a  member  of  the  '  Institution  of  Civil  Engineers.'  His  pro-
fessional tastes  are  for  mechanics  and  chemistry  equally,  and  they  bring
him  as  much  engineering  employment  in  connexion  with  chemical  factories,
both  at  home  and  abroad,  as  he  cares  to  undertake. — C.  P.  8.

s  The  ItaUcs  are  now  added.— C.  P.  H.


894  Appendix  1.  [AFP.  1.

rise  at  its  comers  of  nine  parts  in  ten,  has  the  exact  pro-
portions of  the  Oreat  Pyramid.

*  Secondly,  that  the  length  of  one  of  the^  sides  of  the  bass
of  the  Oreat  Pyramid  is  precisely  360  diaraht,  or  onhits  of
Ilgypt.

*  This  can  scarcely  be  regarded  as  a  mere  aocidentil
numerical  agreement.

*  The  derah  is  a  land  measure  stQl  in  use,  and  is  stated  hj
WoolhousCy  in  his  WeighU  <md  Jfeoiures  of  aU  Natiom^  to
be  25*488  inches  in  length;  but  25*488  inches  x  360  =
764  feet,^  which  is  the  exact  length  of  one  side  of  the  base
of  the  Pyramid,  ^  with  the  casingHstones,"  as  measured  l^
Colonel  Howard  Yyse.

*  But  the  side  of  the  square  base  being  764  feet  (9168
inches),  the  diagonal  is  1080  feet^  the  half  of  which  is  540
feety  from  which  deducting  iV^h9=54,  we  have  486  feet
for  the  height  of  the  Great  Pyramid ;  and  this  is  the  exact
height  given  by  Yyse,  and  in  the  Diagram  which  forms  the
frontispiece  to  Taylor^s  work  on  The  Great  Pyramid.  For
the  construction  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid,  the  architect^  there-
fore, had  only  to  set  up  profiles  at  the  four  angles,  which
had  a  vertical  height  of  9  feet  or  9  cubits  to  a  horizontal
length  of  10  feet  or  10  cubits,  for  such  profiles  would  be
sufficient  to  guide  the  masons  at  every  stage  of  the  work
from  the  base  to  the  apex.

^  A  pyramid  with  a  square  base,  and  a  rise  at  the  oomen
of  nine  parts  in  ten,  is,  therefore,  what  has  been  called  a
IT  pyramid,  its  height  being  equal  to  the  radius  of  a  drde
whose  circumference  is  very  approximately  equal  to  the
length  of  the  four  sides  of  the  base.

'In  the  Oreat  Pyramid  these  dimensions  are  486 X2x
3*1416=3053*6  feet;  4x764=3056  feet

*  In  the  hope  of  being  able  to  ascertain  the  true  lengths
of  the  ancient  Egjrptian  measures,  I  have  recently,

1  Not  exAottj  10 ;  It »  764-64  Mt »  9176  -9%  indiM.-  a  P.  a


jcpf.  1.]  Sir  E.  James  on  the  Great  Pyramid.  895

the  aasktanee  of  Gomniaader  Bailey,  SJ7.,  of  the  Topo-
graphical Stafl^  and  in  presence  of  the  very  obhgmg  gffieen
of  the  British  Museum,  very  cajre&i%  measured  the  d<Hihle
rojal  cubit  of  14  palms  which  was  fouBd  at  Eamak,  and  is
presenred  in  the  Museum.  The  length  of  the  digit  is  0*739
inches ;  palm  of  4  digits,  3<'957  inches ;  span  of  3  palmi^
S'871  inches;  foot  of  4  pahns,  11*828  indies;  cubit  pf  6
palms,  17*742  inches ;  royal  cubit  of  7  pahns;  20*699  inches.

*  The  length  of  the  royal  cubit  was  inferred  by  Sir  Isaac
Newton  from  the  measurements  of  the  King's  Chamber  and
passages  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  which  were  taken  in
1638-9  by  Mr.  Oreaves^  to  be  so  nearly  20*699 — (one  of
his  results  was  20*700) — ^that  we  may  feel  certain  that  the
interior  measurements  were  set  out  with  a  cubit  of  the
exact  same  length  as  that  of  Kamak.

*  The  inference  that  this  is  the  true  length  of  the  royal
cubit  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  cubits  on  the  Nile-
meter  at  Elephantine,  as  given  by  Sir  Gardner  Wilkinson,
and  many  others,  are  virtually  of  the  same  length  as  the
royal  cubit  of  Kamak.  It  would  seem  also  that  to  get  the
cubit  of  the  Nilometer  measured  by  Le  P^re=21*289,  they
divided  the  six-palm  cubit  of  Kamak,  17*742  inches,  into  five
parts,  six  of  which  parts  is  equal  to  Le  Pore's  cubit.  So  that
the  graduations  of  this  Nilometer  are  also  derived  from  the
Kamak  cubit,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Elephantine  Nilometer.

*  I  was  much  struck  with  the  great  accuracy  of  the  divi-
sions on  the  Kamak  measuring-rule,  which  is  much  greater
than  we  find  in  general  in  the  divisions  of  our  own  measur-
ing-rules j  and  I  therefore  think  the  lengths  of  its  several
parts,  as  I  have  given  them,  may  now  be  safely  adopted  as
the  true  lengths  of  one  set  of  the  ancient  measures  of  the
Egyptians.

*  But  the  measures  for  the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid
were  ut  <nU^  on  the  ground  with  the'derah  or  cubit  of  26*488

^  The  Italiet  added  now.— G.  P.  S.


396        ^  Appendix  1.  [an.  1.

inches,  and  Mr.  Oreayes  sajB  he  found  a  eabit  in  hm  m
Egy^t  of  2 1  *888,  which  D'Anyille,  Orobert^  and  othen  fionnd
to  be  as  near  as  possible  the  length  of  the  cabits  of  a  Kb-
meter  measured  by  them  on  the  island  of  Bhodai  at  Caiia

*  The  ratio  of  25'488  to  21*888  is  so  nearly  that  of  7  to
6,  or  25*488  to  21*847,  that  we  may  safely  infer  that  Hw
derah,  or  land  cubit,  is  also,  like  the  Kamak  cabit^  divided
into  seven  paltns,  and  that  the  Nilometer  measured  bj
D' Anville  and  others  was  graduated  from  a  cubit  of  six
palms  of  the  derah.

*  That  the  derah  should  have  been  preserved  unaltend
firom  the  time  of  the  building  of  the  Pyramid  to  the  pie-
sent  day  is  not  so  much  to  be  wondered  at  when  we
remember  that,  on  account  of  the  annual  inundaticms  of
the  Nile,  a  verification  of  the  land  measures  was  annual^
necessary.  Henry  Jakrs,  CoL  B,BJ


Copy  of  Letter  sent  on  4th  December  1 867  to  the  Athenaim^
and  h^re  given  because  publicity  was  not  accorded
by  that  Journal  to  any  observations  on  Colonel  Sir
H.  James's  Letter  published  therein.

THE  GREAT  PYRAMID  :

Colonel  Sir  Henry  Jabies,  RK,  Director  of  the  Ordnance
Survey;  and  Professor  PlAZZI  Smyth,  Astronomer^
Royal  for  Scotland.

Letfer  No.  1  BY  William  Petrie,  Esq.

The  Great  Pyramid  monument  is  of  surpassing  interest  if
it  be  regarded  merely  as  the  most  ancient  of  existing  struc-
tures, still  in  remarkable  preservation,  favourable  to  detailed
research :  it  is  unsurpassed  for  vastness  with  height,  also  for
skQl  in  some  respects,  and  with  evidence  of  sound  and  deep
physical  knowledge,  thou^  dating  from  hoar  antiquity :  it


APP.  1.]      Letter  No.  Iby  W.  Petrie.  897

•peaks  to  us  distincilj,  not  merelj  through  the  whole  historic
period  of  ancient  timeSi  but  from  1400  years  further  back.

Unique  as  a  memorial  of  our  race,  and  as  an  aid  to
antiquarian  research, — muit  then  this  structure  be  aban-
doned by  modem  ciyilisation  for  purposeless  and  reckless
destruction  by  tourists,  who  (chiefly  brought  by  British  con-
y^ances)  annually  obliterate  more  and  more  of  its  instruo-
tiye  features)  This  question  arises  irrepressibly,  on  our
writing  at  the  head  of  this  paper  the  name  of  the  repre-
sentative of  the  British  Gtovemment  in  its  topographical
department,  honourably  known  in  connexion  with  science,
geologic,  antiquarian,  etc.

But  our  present  purpose  is  with  the  theory  of  the  con-
struction and  meaning  of  that  truest  Wonder  of  the  World;
no  response  having  as  yet  appeared  to  the  interesting  and
very  suggestive^  letter  of  Colonel  Sir  Heniy  James  in  the
Athenaum  of  16th  November,  after  the  review  of  Pro-
fessor Piazzi  Smyth's  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,
And  here,  when  two  heads  of  scientific  departments  in  Her
Majesty's  service  differ,  who  shall  decide  1  In  our  per-
plexity let  us  be  only  too  happy,  as  the  saying  is,  if  we
can  admit  them  to  be  men  of  distinction — ^without  a  dif-
ference. The  absence  of  difference  does  helpfully  extend
through  several  material  elementary  theses,  whatever
divergence  there  may  be  on  further  important  points.

Let  us  note,  then,  seriously,  what  theses  towards  a  theory
of  the  Great  Pyramid  are  mutually  recoffnieed  by  both
parties  and  considered  settled:  even  when  regarded  from
such  opposite  points  of  view  as  by  the  Astronomer  and
savant  with  the  Scriptures  reverently  in  hand ;  and  by  the
gallant  Director  of  Military  Engineers,  surveying  en  masse
the  whole  of  the  country,  with  scientific  and  constructive

^  We  say  this  notwithstanding  his  light  rejection  of  what  we  hold  the
true  morphological  principles  of  the  Structure,  first  noticed  by  the  late
John  Taylor,  since  then  extended  by  C.  Piazzi  Smyth,  and  in  confirmation
of  which  we  propose  to  give  the  shorter  portions  of  the  evidence. — W.  P.


398  Appendix  1.  [afp.  L

skill  also  in  plans  and  profiles  of  fortification,  and  an  eje
for  practical  simplicity  therein ;  all  brought  to  bear  on  Hw
field  of  peaceful  antiquarian  researcL    Thus ;

A.  That  two  different  standard  units  of  measure  wen
used  in  the  Oreat  Pyramid ;  one  for  the  Base  and  con&eefted
parts^  another  for  most  of  the  ordinary  details  throughout
the  Structure.  This  latter  we  may  briefly  speak  of  as  the
Chamber-unit,  and  the  former  as  the  Base  unit :  tor  aroid
names  on  which  there  may  be  diversity  of  opinion.

B.  That  this  '  Chambei^unit'  was  207  British  inchei^
and  (always  excepting  the  Base-unit)  is  the  most  remaifcaUe
of  man's  units  of  measure,  being  the  oldest  by  fbarteea
centuries,  and,  there  is  reason  to  suspect^  vastly  older  tliin
that  And  further, — in  this  we  are  more  particularily  in-
debted to  Sir  Henry  James,  though  on  other  points  we  an
exhibiting  the  concurrent  testimony  of  the  author  of  Ufi
and  Work, — ^this  standard  was  preserved  with  extreme
accuracy  down  to  the  times  of  the  example  at  Klamaky  and
even  onward  to  our  own  era.  Indeed,  the  many  cubits  of
comparatively  recent,  that  is  historic,  times,  and  in  other
nations,— <^ubits  of  which  the  varieties  in  length  and  sub-
division have  perplexed  metrologists, — ^were  mere  derinh
tions  from  this  Chamber-unit ;  and  some,  from  the  yet  more
remarkable  Base-unit.  These  two, — ^however  contraiy  in
origin  and  character, — ^were  the  exact  and  pre-eminent
standards  of  unfathomable  antiquity.

Sir  Henry  James  has  sufficiently  proved  the  above-
noticed  process,  an  intrinsically  probable  one,  of  derivative
variations  of  metric  imits,  or  at  least  he  has  well  indicated
the  nature  of  it,  in  addition  to  the  changes  caused  by
accidents  and  bad  copjdng.

C.  That  the  'Base-unit'  was  equal  to  25  British  inches
and  a  fraction.     Less  than  25}.

D.  That  the  '  Base-unit'  was  essentially  and  notably  an
earthrfneaaure  in  one  sense  or  another,  probably  in  both,  be


APP*  1.]       Letter  No.l  hy  W.  Petrie.  899

it-rnggaitad*  The  jGftct  itadf  is  Here  noticed  because  on  one
jiaw  it  liM  a  jpedal  dgnificancy,  thoogh  not  within  the
■tope'of'ihiie  theiOB.

E.  That  the  v  angle  ia  true  in  faui ;  for,  it  will  be
allowed  to  follow  from  the  9rl0  diagonal  profile,  even  by
thiNW.who  decline  to  regard  the  converse  proposition,  thaA
tlie  former  was  the  primary  intention,  or  reason,  and  the
latter  a  mere  inevitable  corollary  from  it.

F.  That  the  Base  was  <»diginally  intended  to  represent
the  day$  of  the  fwr:  for,  notwithstanding  the  material
diiferenoe  between  360  and  365  or  366,  it  is  generally
allowed  that  the  artificial  360  divisions  of  the  circle  were
originally  intended  to  represent  the  days  of  the  year,  and
were  made  360  either  from  a  misconception  of  the  true
length  of  the  year,  or  from  a  desire  to  use,  in  the  practical
diviffion  of  material  circles,  the  divisible  number  nearest  to
it,  and  which,  therefore,  would  still  represent  the  year.

Preliminary  to  thesis  G.  We  notice  that — not  only  on
TayWs  and  Piam  Smyth's  theory,  but  even  on  that  of
Colonel  Sir  Henry  James,  the  features  of  which  we  are
more  especially  noticing, — ^the  inference  from  F  is,  not
only  that  the  year  is  strongly  indicated,  but,  hfcfiiiori^  self-
evidently,  the  more  general  idea  of  A  omcLE  was  essentially
intended  in  the  original  designing  of  the  Base,  though  put
in  a  square  form :  an  important  symbolic  reason  exists  for
this,  but  forms  no  part  of  our  present  subject.  We  fully
expect  to  be  met  with  the  query  whether  we  are  to  suppose
that  because  such  d^rees  were  originally  derived  from  the
year,  they  could  never  be  afterwards  applied  to  totally  other
purposes ;  even  to  the  losing  sight  of  their  origin,  as  is  the
case  with  the  meanings  of  words  \  We  by  no  means  deny
this ;  but,  when  a  line  not  circular  is  composed  of  such
units,  and  without  any  manifestation  of  other  sense  in  it,
such  composition  of  the  line  becomes  the  most  distinct
possible  token  that  it  has  something  to  do  (if  not  with  the


400  Appendix  1.  [aIpp.  1.

originating  and  concrete  idea  of  a  year,  yet  at  least)  widi
the  thence  derived  idea  of  etroiifari^y  which,  being  abstnct
and  general,  would  be  probably  permanent,  as  in  Cut  it
continues  to  this  day :  and  this  circularity,  combined  with
the  61°  51',  eta  angle  (no  matter  by  what  practical  mk
set  out — whether  by  Piam  Smyth's  or  by  Sir  H.  Jamei^sX
defines  a  vertical  radius  equal  to  and  co-cential  with  Ae
horizontal  radii  betokened  by  that  circularity.

Thus  we  have  a  radius  set  upright  on  its  parent  centra
and  its  own  exact  circle's  length  delineated  symmetrical^
around  it  on  the  ground,  and  subdivided  in  a  way  that
labels  it  a  circle.  Both  the  elements  of  the  w  constradieii
being  thus  set  forth,  each  by  an  independent  token,— evn
if  we  omit  all  confirmatory  £acts,  as  for  brevity^s  sake,  we
here  do, — ^the  conclusion  becomes  inevitable,  that  the  w  idea
was  perceived,  nay  intended,  as  such,  in  the  original  de-
signing of  the  work :  in  other  words,  as  follows.

6.  That  the  t  construction  is  true  in  theory  ;  i.e.  in  the
intention  of  the  original  design,  in  addition  to  the  pre-
viously mentioned  thesis  D  that  it  is  true  in  fact.

Whatever  may  be  the  result  of  an  examination  of  further
questions,  they  may  well  be  remitted  to  a  subsequent  paper.
By  maintaining,  with  the  Scottish  Astronomer  Royal,  so
many  positions,  from  an  opposite  point  of  view.  Sir  Heniy
James  has  oppositiously  manifested  their  indisputable
character,  and  has  thus  aided  pakeologic  truth.  In  the
world  of  opinion  he  has  advanced  our  lines  of  undisputed
possession  so  far,  into  the  unsettled  temtory  of  Pyramid-
ology,  by  setting  forth,  independently,  his  view  of  a  Derak
Base  and  diagonal  profile;  involving,  as  necessary  conse-
quences, the  above  theses.  William  Petrie.

Letter  No.  2  by  the  Same.

All  the  foregoing  foundation-theses  are  identical  with
those  of  J.  Taylor^s  and  P.  Smyth's  theory ;  and  seeing  that


APP.  1.]       Letter  No.  2hyW.  Petrie.  401

they  result  so  clearly,  though  in  some  cases  unintentionallyy
from  Sir  Heniy  James's  own  view  of  the  case,  it  seems  in-
consistent that  he  should  state  that  view  in  the  manner  he
does ;  as  if  it  superseded,  or  at  least  disproved,  the  more
complete  view,  by  Piam  Smyth,  of  the  ^mathematical
'  principles  on  which  the  Pyramid  was  constructed.'  This
seems  the  less  warrantable  while  Sir  Henry  James's  view
depends  so  much  on  a  single,  and  as  yet  unverified,  state-
ment (of  the  precise  value  and  status  of  the  Derah)  in  a
small  volume  in  a  rudimentary  series — ^for  which  we  own
sincere  respect,  to  the  extent  of  its  modest  profession —
without  reference  to  the  prior  authority  from  which  this
datum  may  have  found  its  way  into  that  work.  We  take
leave  to  add,  that  total  obscurity  and  uncertainty  rests  on
the  authority  and  degree  of  precision  of  that  datum  during
the  very  present  time  in  which  Sir  Henry  James  is  unhesi-
tatingly building  thereon  no  less  a  superstructure  than
an  original  and  would-be  opposition  theory  of  the  Great
Pyramid  as  against  what  he  terms  the  ^  elaborate'  work,
resulting  from  the  Professor's  lengthened  and  arduous  in-
vestigations, both  literary  and  physical,  on  the  subject.

But,  granting  all  that  Sir  H.  James  assimies  to  be
authenticated  concerning  the  derah^  how  then  do  the
grounds  of  preference  lie  ?  Let  us  compare  categorically
some  of  the  respective  claims  of  the  supposed  derah  with
those  of  the  cubit  of  25*025  British  inches,  as  the  original
base-unit;  so  far  as  their  respective  merits  are  susceptible  of
exposition  in  a  few  lines.  In  adjacent  opposite  columns  we
will  compare,  firsts  their  independent  existence  and  import-
ance, and  their  antiquity,  apart  from  any  supposed  relation
to  the  Pyramid  :  next,  we  will  compare  their  applicability
to  the  Pyramid  in  respect  of  accuracy  of  coincidence,  and
the  nature  of  the  ideas  expressed  by  the  resulting  number
of  units  in  the  base  and  its  belongings.

2C


402  Appendix  1.  [afp.  1.

Hypothesis  that  thb  Base  Unit  was

J^VAL  TO  26^488  BbIT.  ZNCHIS.         EqUAL  10  2&<ni  BtaCT.  XXCHB.

FIB8TLT —
The  €kum$  qfea^h  Standard  WrtgpeetMig  qfiU  rdal&im»  io  the

K. — TbiB  unit  ii  supposed  to  K. — Tim  unit  is  the  mostpro-
be  the  derah,  &  measure  said  to  baible  length  oi  the  piiiflelsr
be  at  pwesnt  known  in  ISgypt       enbit  referred  to  in  tiie  real  cooi*

innnioations  of  God  witii  his  obe-
dient people,  as  reooided  in  ths
Scriptores^  in  Tarioos  ages ;  efen
that  sacred  cabtt  which  was  need
by  Moses  and  the  Israelites  after
leaving  Egypt,  and  by  their  pa-
triarchal line  ages  eariier :  in  the
times  of  sfauctmes  and  erenis
mentioned  in  terms  of  the  cubit,
and  which  were  divinely  com-
manded and  recorded.  For  the
evidence  of  this,  see  obeervatiooi
on  '  Sir  Issac  Newton's  Disserts-
tions  on  Cubits,' etc.,  in  Zj/i  oad
Work,  voL  iL  pp.  341-366,  and
454-460,  and  Appendix,  pp.  2-A,
There  are,  besidei^  indicatiooi
that  this  sacred  cubit  was  the  ori-
ginal and  universal,  the  Divinely-
appointed  and  natural  unit  for
exact  and  permanent  measure-
ment. It  was  used  for  the  temple
of  the  true  God,  and  for  its  con-
tents, in  Solomon's  time.

There  are  also  existing  ex-
amples, in  widely  different  parts
of  the  world,  of  anciently  in-
herited standards  of  measure
identical  with  this, — as  nearly  ss
probable  errors  in  our  informa-
tion of  the  lengths,  and  in  their


APP.  !•]      Letter  No.  2byW.  Petrie.  403

BASM^nm,  2^488.  BAJu-uirrr,  26»(m.

tranfmisnon  dnriog  2000  or  4000
yean,  would  lead  ua  to  expect ;
and  eren  more  accurately.  Theae
date  back  probably  to  a  common
origin,  ai  atated.

Ifc— Iti  especial  uaeia  claimed,  L.— It  ia  tbe  natural  metric
by  thoee  who  assert  its  reality,  standard  for  the  whole  human
to  be  as  a  land-meoiure,  race ;  based  on  the  best-defined,

most  inyariable,  and  simplest
dimension  of  the  earth;  being
10-^  X  the  polar  radius ;  ie.,  its
precise  ten-millionth ;  free  from
the  objections  attaching  to  other
earth-standards  since  proposed
by  human  science.

It  is,  likewise,  most  remark-
ably, just  the  four-thousand-
millionth  part  of  the  earth's
mean  daily  march  in  its  orbit^
reckoning  the  true  rotation  or
sidereal  day,  not  the  apparent
day.

M.^From  its  existence  as  a  M. — ^From  its  exigence  as  a
eubit  of  seren  palms  (says  Sir  cubit  of  seven  pahns,  may  have
Henry  James),  may  have  been  been  derived  the  six-palm  cubit,
derived  the  six-palm  cubit  of  21*45  inches;  the  probable  origin
21*847  inches,  such  as  that  in  of  a  particular  class  of  cubit  ex-
Egypt  foundbyQreavessa21'888  amples,  such  as  those  in  Egypt,
inches.  found  by  Le  P^re,  Sir  G.  Wil-

kinson, and  Greaves,  21*29  and
21*4  and  21*88,  whether  they
were  in  course  of  time  differently
subdivided  or  not,  and  slightly
increased  or  decreased  in  repeated
copying  in  later  days  of  inferior
artistic  accuracy;  and  by  wear
and  accident,  and  by  attempted
corrections  for  such  changes.


404                       Appendix  1.  [afp.  1.

Sboohdlt —
Th€  dtunu  <ifea€h  Standard  6y  Us  rdaiUm  to  ike  FgramUL

K.— ItsabdiTidettlielMuw-«ide  K.— It    nbdiTidM  tiie  biM-

into  360.     Thii  wu  the  mode  of  nde  9t165*6  Brit,  indbet  (ns

diTision  for  the  circle,  etc,  in-  p.  408),  into  the  days  of  the  jetr,

Tented  at  Babylon,  about  1600  reckoning  the  true  or  iidegeil  n>*

yean  after  the  Great  Pyramid  tations  of  the  earth  m  the  comt

was  built ;  and  onr  beet  anthori*  of  its  orbit,  366'257.    Monom,

ties  consider  that  it  was  not  in  the  subdiTisian  of  this  cobit  into

nse  previously.      This  sabdivi-  25  parts  or  Pyramid  inches — for

sion,  therefore,  of  the  base,  needs  mUfeasut  IForib  this  is  ezplsmed

collateral  proof  that  this  system  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  pria-

of  subdivision  was  in  use  in  the  ciples  of  the  Pyramid  aitaags-

Pjrramid,  or  in  those  times :  such  meats, — shows  each  day  as  bciag

proof,  for  instance,  as  we  have  in  exactly  100  Pyramid  indies,  or  a

many  parts  of  the  Pyramid,  that  fourfold  cubit,  around  the  entiis

five  is  the  number  par  excellence  circuit  of  the  base,

characteristic  of  it  (see  Life  and  This  coincidence,  being  signi-

Work),  and  that  other  numbers  ficant,    oosmically,    is    on    thsl

were  espedaUy  used  in  certain  account  more  probable  than  any

places  in  it,  on  a  fixed  principle ;  other  suggested  division.     But

whereas  360  does  not  seem  to  this    probability  is    highly   in-

have  sufficient  probability  on  this  creased    by  the  fact  that  tins

ground.  same  division  or  unit  of  the  bass

The  best  that  can  be  said  of  (25*025)  establishes  seversl  othff

the  possible  connexion  of  such  dimensions  with  unequalled  sim*

existing  Egyptian  measures  with  plicity.

the  base  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  This  unit  makes  the  oo-effi-
is,  that  if  the  existing  Egyptian  cient  of  the  l^ramid's  height
gaiab  (for  this  will  suit  the  case  or  radius  to  be  expressed  with
better  than  its  fourth  part,  the  remarkable  neatness,  namely
derah),  be  descended  from  far  |X100.  The  digits  7  and  3
beyond  pre-historic  antiquity,  or  being  nuurked  in  the  construe*
even  probably  so,  and  its  ancient  tion  of  the  ascent  (or  height  pas-
length  were  (101*839)»'113  of  sage)  to  the  so-called  King's
an  inch,  or  about  y^^^  part  Chamber,  besides  being  remark-
shorter  than  our  present  informs-  ably  connected  (as  shown  in
tion  assigns  as  its  existing  length.  Life  and  Work,  Postscript^  voL
it  would  then  become  probable  iiL),  with  the  decimal  expression
that  this  measure  was  derived  of  the  r  ratio    on  which


APP,  !•]      Letter  No.  2hyW.  Petrie.  406

BAflB-UlOT,  26.48S.  BAflB-XJHIT,  26.0SS.

from  the  Pyramid  base,  divided  height  depends  AU  thii  is  sng-*
by  90 ;  became  9  and  10  in  com-  geative  of  an  intended  connexion
bination  are  nomben  connected  rather  than  a  mere  coincidence,
with  the  Pyramid  in  at  least  two  Thia  unit  makes  also  remark*
other  ways,  the  diagonal  profile  able  cosmical  expressions —
and  the  relation  of  its  radius  to  Earth's  mean  sidereal  or  cois
the  solar  distance,  and  therefore,  rect  dajr's  march,      4  x  10*

by  a  modercUe  probability,  these        Sun*s  mean  distance,      •(  x  lO**^
numbers  may  have  been  subee-        Earth's  polar  radius,  10'

quently  taken  to  divide  the  base    These  facts  are  of  precisely  the
for  a  new  unit ; — ^while  the  base    same  class,  nay  more,  of  the  same
would  have  been  formed,  never-    order,   and   even  of    the   same
theless,  on  the  25*025  unit,  for,     fanuly  group  with  the  days  in
on  that  unit  it  represents   the    the  year  already  noticed:  and
earth's  true  rotations  in  the  com-    we  do  not  reasonably  expect  to
jjete  orbit.      But,    it  may  be    find    such  a  connexion    among
aaked,   if  both  these  units   are    coincidences  of  a  purely  fortui-
probably  or  possibly  true,  why    tons  origin,
assume  the  25*025    unit  to  be
the  primary  intention,  and  the
101*839  or  its  quarter  (a  length
approximating,  though  not  ex-
actly, to  the  derah)  to  be  the
unit  subsequently  derived  from
the  base?   why  not  vice  verad,
as  Sir  H.  James's  theory  would
suggest?     The    reason  is,    Ist,

that  the  25*025  unit   is  more

certainly  a  palnologio  fact  than

the   101*839  unit;    it  is  soon

grounds  here  in  course  of  being

shown;      and,     2dly,     if    both

be  palnologically  real,  then  the

round   subdivision  of    the  base

(into  90  parts,  whether  by  the

author  of  the  design,  or  probably

by  others  without  authority)  to

obtain    a    convenient    unit    of

measure  for  a  particular  use,  as

land    measuring,    is    a    process

greatly  more  probable  to  have


406


Appendix  1.


[app.  1.


fromftrooBd  maltiple«f  it  (tte


bMe   feBglk),    •
tihsl  ihoald
al  ooe  operaiMm,
«f   two    DidcpeBdcBk
»— the  yew.


by


aadtha


Tliw  idea  of  the  gtmh,
miii  of  ■WMQTO  onipaslfl
the  pyramid  booe  after  Ha
pletioB,  is  merely  anggeated  to
one's  mind  aa  obriating  the  want
of  prol>ability  in  the  oonfcrae
idea  of  Sir  Henry  Jamea,  tbat
the  length  of  the  Pyramid  baae
was  itself  originated  by  thedcrah.
But  until  more  ia  known  of  the
antiquity  or  origin  of  the  gaaab
(or  of  its  quarter,  the  derah),  and
of  the  probable  limits  of  error  in
its  assumed  length,  its  deriTstion
from  the  Pyramid  base  must
remain  a  mere  suggestion,  though
somewhat  more  probable  than
that  of  the  derah,  and  gasab ;  or
than  either  of  these  having  origi-
nated the  base-length.

O.  The  relation  of  the  derah
to  the  other  parts  of  the  struc-
ture, is  niL


O.  The  relation  of  the  nered
cubit  to  other  parta  of  the  atrao-
ture  is  confirmatory  of  ita  having
been  the  true  standard  employed :
though  this  is  certainly  the  lesst
decisive  branch  of  the  evidence
in  our  present  veiy  imperfeet


APP.  !.]•     Letter  No.  2hyW.  Petrie.  407

BlflB-ITNlT,  2&488.  BaSB-UKIT,  SS-Otf.

■tate  of  knowledge  of  tilia  parti
not  yet  nnoovered,  and  of  parti
destroyed  becanie  prematurely
unobyered*

Some  of  tiie  four  baie-oomer
stones  (perhaps  all,  if  we  knew
all  tbeir  dimensions)  show  the
precise  doable  or  qnadmple  of
the  sacred  cubit  in  their  hidden
diagonal  dimensions,— their  dia-
gonals either  of  snilaoe  or  of
solidity.  We  might  add  that
the  probable  proportions  of  some
of  these  stones,  in  terms  of  the
sacred  cubit,  are  such  as  would  be
of  much  interest  were  our  infor-
mation less  liable  to  uncertainty.

Again,  there  is  strong  reason
to  believe  that  the  horiaontal
thickness  of  the  casing  was  on
the  mean  100  Pyramid  inches^  or
4  sacred  cubits.

Again,  in  the  interior  tiiere  is
apparently  a  use  of  the  sacred
cubit,  or  its  inches,  in  particular
dimensions  in  the  so-called  King's
and  Queen's  Chambers.

P.  The  imperfectness  of  the  P.  The  extreme  precision  of
coincidence  of  the  asserted  derah-  the  coincidence  of  the  25'025
multiplicate  with  the  Pyramid  inch  standard,  or  sacred  cubit,
base-length,  is  such  as  to  show  (with  the  division  of  the  base-
an  excess  of  10*2  inches  beyond  length  by  the  rotations  of  the
the  base-length,  according  to  the  earth  in  the  course  of  its  orbit)
most  judicious  mean  of  the  only  expresses  that  it  was  intentional
two  trustworthy  measurements  and  not  fortuitous,  as  strongly  as
which  we  possess :  those  of  the  coincidence  can  express  this  with
French  savants  and  of  Colonel  our  present  data :  for,  the  coin-
Howard  Vyse.  Or  even  if  we  cidence  is  far  more  dose,  indeed,
cook  the  result  by  selecting  the  than  the  small  extent  of  uncer-


408  Appendix  1.  [app.  1.

Basb-uvit,  26.48a.  BAflB-umx^  2&^u.

most    fayonrable   meMnrement^  tainty  in  the  tnie  meMi  between

the  want  of  coincidence  in  yet  the  only  two  reliable  measure-

7'7  inches.      Thia  is  very  on-  ments  of  the  original  base.    That

likely  to  be  due  to  errors  of  of  the  French,  9163*44  foitish

measorement,  for  they  mnst  be  inches, andof  Howard  Yyse,  9168,

in  the  contrary  direction,  con-  or  9167*50  after  m^fcwig  a  small

sidering  the  caoses  of  error  in  allowance  for  wear  since  the  fiisfc

the  termini  of  the  base,  and  in  nncovering  of  the  sockets,  and

the  process  of  measuring,  and  the  for  the  fact  that  Yyse  did  not

results  of  rader  measurements  of  notice,  and    lu^baUy   did   not

others  when  the  rubbish  inter-  sllow  for  the  existence    of  an

yened.  But  it  might  be  accounted  intenrening  film  of  cement,  as

for  by  the  probable  alteration  of  the  French  :  the  most  probabk

the  unit  of  measure  in  the  lapse  truth  will  be  (9163-44  +  9167'50)

of  4000  years.     But  whfle  we  -s-2a9165-47.  Now  the  number

thus  hold  that  the  want  of  coin-  of  the  25*025  inch  base-units  in

eidence  in  Sir  H.  Jameses  derah-  this,  agrees  with  the  rotations  of

base  is  readily  accountable,  it  is  the  earth  in  the  course  of  its

sufficient  to  prohibit  the  term  orbit    exactly    to    a    hundred

prtciUj  which  Sir  Henry  James  thousandth  of  the  whole  quan-

applies  to  this  moderate  coinci-  tity :  indeed  much  more  exaet-

dence,  since  he  applies  the  term  ly  than  our  uncertainty  of  the

approximate  only  to  the  much  length  of  the  base,

more  close  coincidence  of  the  v  What  a  contrast  to  Sir  Henry

construction  advocated  by  others.  James's  coincidence  of  the  derah-

multiplicate  which  he  calls  exact,
although  it  shows  about  100
times  the  error !

Such  are  the  comparative  merits  of  the  derah  (25*488)
advocated  by  Colonel  Sir  Henry  James,  as  a  base-unit^  as
compared  with  the  sacred  cubit  (25*025)  advocated  by
Professor  Piazzi  Smyth.  The  comparison  is  not  in  &your
of  the  derah,  in  any  aspect  of  the  case  :  and  yet— excepting
the  sacred  cubit — the  derah  is  really  the  best  out  of  the
multitude  of  units  of  measure  that  have  been  tried,  by
persevering  industry,  with  the  purpose  of  finding  some
unit  that  shall  show  an  intelligible  quotient  on  dividing
the  base,  and  at  the  same  time  shall  have  at  least  some


APR  1.]      Letter  No.  ZhyW.  Petrie.  409

shadow  of  evidence  of  having  had  an  independent  existence
as  a  standard  of  measurement  among  men  in  those  days.
How  strikingly,  then,  does  the  above-shown  superabundant
fulfihnent  of  these  conditions,  by  the  sacred  cubit,  contrast
with  the  fedlure  of  all  other  proposed  standards  I

William  Petrie.

Letter  No.  3,  by  the  Same.

Beview  of  the  tuhjecty  and  general  caruideratums, —
Colonel  Sir  Henry  James  states  that  the  principles  on
which  the  Great  P3rramid  was  constructed,  were  simple,
and  have  been  strangely  overlooked  by  ancient  and  modem
authors,  and  that  this  is  his  conclusion,  arrived  at  by  an
examination  consequent  on  the  publication  of '  the  elaborate
work'  of  Professor  Smyth.

But  it  is  important  to  notice,  1st,  that  the  Kamak
cubit,  which  he  brings  prominently  into  the  question,  per-
fectly confirms  much  that  Piazzi  Smyth  has  written,  while
it  gives  no  additional  information,  and  opposes  nothing
in  that  author's  work,  although  the  tone  of  Sir  Henry
James's  letter  would  imply  the  contrary.  And,  2dly,  that
the  'principles'  of  construction  put  forth  by  Sir  Henry
James  do  not  militate  against  the  facts  on  which  Professor
Smyth  has  rested  his  exposition  of  the  meaning,  intention,
and  authorship  of  that  structure — the  great  ends  for  which
the  facts  are  really  valuable  to  human  intellect;  though
this,  being  theory,  may  be  slighted  as  such,  by  many.
Indeed  the  facts  are  common  to  both;  and  the  whole
remaining  body  of  the  facts  and  inferences,  concerning  the
interior  of  the  structure,  are  not  included  at  all  in  Sir
Heniy  James's  principles  of  construction  :  these  are  meagre
enough  as  principles,  relating  solely  to  ^  mathematical  rules
— irrespectively  of  their  reasons  or  their  meaning — ^by
which  the  exterior  form  only  of  the  Great  Pyramid  was
constructed.     On  this  point,  the  opposite  rules  enunciated


410  Appendix  1.  [app.  1.

hj  etch  ptrty,  agree  with  wliit  Aiej  aflnme  to  be  the  &cti^
for  the  pret^it^  and  until  the  liiicts  of  dhnemdon  snd  ao^
than  be,  if  erer,  more  accuntely — andpeffectlf  laqMBtiaDj
— aicertAiiied ;  chiefly  from  the  casiiig  and  oomer  itonM
at  present  bnilt  into  certain  paUic  works  at  CSairo.

Meanwhile,  there  is  another  test  by  which  to  decide  the
matter;  let  us  aak, — ^is  the  one  set  of  snppoeed  mathe-
matical rules  of  constmctiony  a  constitaent  part  of  a  haimo-
nioofl  and  well-united  system  of  distinct  signs  and  tokou^
embracing  a  much  larger  mass  of  &ct8  (or  eoinddenoei^  n
some  may  be  pleased  to  name  them)  in  that  stractoie ; —
and  is  the  other  suggested  set  of  mathematical  mksi
isolated  from  the  fctcts  observed  in  other  features  of  the
structure  t  or,  at  least,  not  indicated  by  a  similar  connexion
with  them.  Judged  by  this  test,  the  evidence  is  wholly  in
favour  of  Professor  Smyth's  view,  as  is  shown  in  detail  in
the  third  volume  of  his  last  work.  To  the  writer's  mind
this  is  greatly  confirmed  by  a  further  tracing  out  of  the
same  clue ;  but  this  being  as  yet  unpublished,  he  can  only
assert  such  additional  testimony  as  being  his  own  impies-
sion.

On  the  other  hand.  Sir  Heniy  James  appeals  to  the
superior  nmplicity  of  his  rules  of  construction  :  but  this
superiority  is  not  found  in  their  physical,  nor  even  mathe-
matical, simplicity — ^it  is  only  arithmetical  Thus,  a  certain
radius  for  height,  and  its  circumference  for  base  length,  is
quite  as  simple  or  plain  a  rule,  regarded  mathematically  or
physically,  as  Sir  Henry  James's  alternative  of  a  triangU
with  two  of  its  sides  forming  a  right  angle^  and  of  untqwd
length  in  a  certain  ratio,  though  that  ratio  be  not  arithmeti-
cally complex,  and  with  some  additional  process  for  defining
the  base  length.  If  the  angle  of  the  diagonal  profile  had
been  a  plain  half  right  angle,  45® :  or  1  vertical  in  1  hori-
zontal, there  would  have  been  a  tolerably  good  balance
of  probability  between  that  and  any  alternative  angle  as


APP.  1.]      Letter  No.  ZbyW.  Petrie.  411

simply  defined,  and  as  coincident  as  the  existing  v  an^e  of
John  Taylor  and  Piazzi  SmytL  But  the  diagonal  profile
is  not  simply  45%  it.  is  41^  59'  50'  etc,  or  approximately
9  :  10  ;*  and  as  the  v  theory  and  this  are  mathematically
inseparable^  or  each  one  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the
other,  why  should  the  one  which  is  the  less  simple,  less
eosmical,  and  less  extrinsically  supported  by  unity  of  design,
eta,  be  assumed  to  have  been  the  original  intention  f  Again,
the  division  of  the  year  into  its  days, — ^whether  solar,  «'.&
apparent,  or  sidereal,  i.e,  real — ^is,  mathematically  and  phy-
sically, as  plain  a  fiact  as  the  purely  artificial  division  of  a
circle  into  360  parts.

In  each  of  these  cases  (the  profile  and  the  base-length)
we  have  to  choose  between  a  most  plain  fact,  abundantly
illustrated  and  deeply  rooted  in  cosmical  nature,  and  an
artificial  idea,  recommended  chiefly,  if  not  solely,  by  the
brevity  of  its  mere  arithmetic,  in  man's  mode  of  mentally
grasping  ratios.  Hence,  in  the  argument  of  the  probability
that  simple,  natural,  and  universal  illustrations  formed  the
basis  of  the  design  of  the  Oreat  Pyramid,  we  cannot  recog-
nise any  preponderance  in  favour  of  Sir  Henry  James's
view ;  while  on  the  previously  noticed  ground  of  unity  of
design  and  meaning,  the  evidence  is  wholly  on  the  side  of
Taylor's  and  Smyth's  view,  as  already  stated.  Although
the  9:10  profile  may  have  been  given  to  the  workmen  as
a  guide,  in  laying  the  rough  interior  blocks,  yet  the  ques-
tion is,  not  this  but — ^the  principle  or  trUentum  of  the
design.

The  only  way  of  making  the  probabilities  to  be  against  the
IT  theory,  as  compared  with  the  9:10  profile  theory,  is  by
a  series  of  untenable  suppositions^ — as,  that  the  originator
of  its  design  was  of  low  mathematical  and  constructive
attainments,  so  that  he  did  not  even  perceive  the  remarkable

^  We  say  '  approximately,*  because  Sir  H.  James  applies  this  term  to
the  «-  angle,  and  their  claims  to  accuracy  are  eqtiaL — W.  P.


•  L


▼  -fu£  !•  >:irs  JiT-r  :.rta  Tit  iniitrL  31  ta-ic  ir:Ti3i:ix;iI  ccQw-
'ux  c  *r  ^ir^.oa  iaes  it  ■r'-jieai:*-  Xr^.  !••  3  r^smoxSacd
'^TiiT.  '  ^  Ls*-i«=is  «.  TJii'icLat  in.  in.  LTyrTiCnzc  >iisi> :  Aizazc*

suiTi*    iicll    i^iii  izii^Fie^ii"  zi  "iii*   •»*^j*t*r.  Az.»i  liec,  on

-f  -i^f^-wZi.  ^*1ii-=Trr  ilr^-.-TT  aia  -s^a  abiop-«ed,  let  it  be
f/Uif.Ir  pTof-iMrii  4c.i  irilrrivid  to  uiTOG^oat  the  IfWf
*^v «:''*.,  :r-  {•j-  iLTJzr.'jZ.  &sir>>noniT  and  exterior,  its  sTmboIk
afi^i  f/fZjr.rifXir(z  branch^  :  ihe  thconr  trill  then  show  its
worth-

Arrii'i  an  apparently  gratuitous  divergence  of  opinion,  it
if)  'iTiU'T'r^.Uup^^  to  notice,  as  in  Letter  No.  l^how  some  of  the
r/ioj<j  ft'.t:\t\y  w;lf-^;vident,  but  vitally  important  theses,  on
wU'irU  l'roft:HHi>r  Smyth's  \-iew8  rest,  are  confirmed  by  Sir
II.  •l.'irn^H'H  choH<;n  data.  The  relations  of  the  latter  to  the
fof  ffif^r  an?  Miinply,  that  Colonel  Sir  Henry  James  has  the
rrnilit  of  culling  attention  to  a  reported  existing  £^j|)tian


X


f


APP.  1.]      Letter  No.  3hy  W.  Petrie.


413


measarey  which  is  so  similar  to  the  remarkable  ancient  and
still  existing^  unit  of  Taylor^s  and  Smyth's  theoiy,  as  to  be
confirmatory,  and  suggestive  of  an  original  identity ;  and
to  establish  the  same  intention  of  circularity,  etc.,  in  the
base, — as  in  theses  A  to  G.  Sir  Henry  James  has  also  the
credit  of  making  (not  altogether  an  original,  but  certainly)
an  independent  discoyeiy,  and  of  being  the  first  to  publish
— ^that  a  Pyramid  with  a  9 : 1 0  diagonal  profile  is  approxi-
mately the  same  mathematical  form  as  the  ir  relation  of
base  and  height; — an  in^resting  contribution  to  the  ir
theory.  William  Petrie.

1  See,  for  instance,  the  guz  (25*025  Brit,  inches,  within  probable  errors
of  measnrement),  the  measure  of  the  Arabs,— that  branch  of  the  family
of  Abraham  (that  great  chosen  Patriarch  of  the  national  custodians  of
the  Scriptures  of  the  liying  God  and  their  sacred  cubit),  that  branch  whose
traditions,  measures,  language,  customs,  etc.,  have  been  less  disturbed
by  conquest,  and  by  voluntary  changes  of  national  habits,  or  caprices  of
fashion,  through  the  lapse  of  ages,  than  those  of  any  other  nation.— W.  P.


4:^  lpptikiis±  [app.2.


APPENDIX  2.


DISCvUESES  AT  E-DYAL  50CIEIT  OF  EDDT-
BUEGH  OX  GBEAI  PYEAMID  SUBJECTS;


ly  I«S:T3I3£2  ISC,  A2PD  JASOTAET  AXD  APRIL  IMB^

DULELT  n


WITH  BEFLSCnONS  THEBEON.


ITk^iViJ  cf  Bcyal  Society  of  Edinbur^  on  December  li,
1S67.  at  npyrted  in  the  EDiHBrmGH  Etehihg  Coukaht  fir
Dirmi^r  23,  1S67.

•  AXTIQUnr  OF  CTTELLBCrUAL  MAN.

*  On  Monday  night  (December  16)  the  second  orduuuy
meeting  of  the  Eoval  Society  was  held  in  the  Boyal  Insti-
tution. Professor  Ljon  Plajfair,  C.B.,  vice-president^  in
the  chair.

*  Professor  C.  PiAZZi  Smyth  delivered  an  address  on  "  The
Antiquity  of  Intellectual  Man,  from  a  Practical  and  Astro-
nomical Point  of  View."  In  his  address,  which  was  iUos-
trated  by  numerous  diagrams,  the  Professor  described  the
leading  features  of  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  and  noticed  the
remains  of  proto-Chaldsean  buildings,  and  the  earliest  re-
mains of  buildings  found  in  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates^
which  indicated  the  existence  there  of  several  large  cities,
which  must  have  flourished  long  before  Babylon  was  ever
heard  of.     After  referring  to  the  remains  of  Babylon,  he


AFP.  2.]   Royal  Society,  Sd. ;  Dec.  16, 1867.   416

proceeded  to  point  out  that  all  these  arddtectnral  lemams,
as  well  as  those  of  the  Modes,  Persians^  PhoBniciaDBy  Greeks,
and  Bomans,  were  all  of  less  antiquity  than  the  Great  Pyra*
mid  of  Elgypt,  which  he  dated  at  2000  years  before  Christ.
He  referred  to  a  statement^  made  by  Sir  James  Simpson  in
his  recant  work  on  ^  Ancient  British  ScolptoringSy"  as  to
there  being  ^  mde  bnt  magnificent  pyramids"  in  Ireland  and
Brittany,  maintaining  that  these  Irish  remains  were  exactly
opposite  to  the  Egyptian  Pyramids  in  shape ;  and  that  they
had  no  place  among  Pyramids,  whether  tested  by  geometiy
or  astronomy,  while  their  mechanical  construction  was  some-
thing so  wretched,  barbarous,  and  savage-like,  that  their
present  tumble-down  condition  would  seem  to  be  explain-
able by  the  passage  over  them  of  not  a  third  of  the  number
of  years  during  which  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt  had
witnessed  the  rise  and  fall  of  nations.  The  Professor  next
disputed  the  accuracy  of  a  statement  in  the  same  work  of
Sir  James  Simpson's,  to  the  effect  that^  from  the  very  earli-
est periods,  circles,  single  or  double,  and  spirals,  had  formed
perhaps  the  most  common  fundamental  type  of  lapidary
decoration ;  and  adduced  the  testimony  of  a  gentleman  in
England,  to  the  effect  that  the  circles  referred  to  were  the
last  efforts  of  nations  before  lapsing  into  barbarism.  He
also  noticed  a  statement  made  in  a  paper  read  before  the
last  meeting  of  the  British  Association,  to  the  effect  that
there  were  writers  known  to  have  written  in  Egypt  so  far
back  as  9800  B.C. ;  and  contended  that  the  authority  on
which  that  statement  was  made  was  utterly  unreliable,
while  the  statement  itself  was  opposed  to  well-known  fetcts
as  to  the  deposits  foimd  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  Pro-
fessor Smyth  proceeded  to  refer  to  the  latest  theories  which
had  been  propounded  as  to  the  principles  on  which  the
Great  Pyramid  was  constructed,  and  endeavoured  to  show,
from  various  measurements  of  the  Pyramid,  that  its  de-
signer must  have  been  acquainted  with  many  of  the  dis-


416  Appendix  2.  [app.2.

coveries  of  modem  astronomy,  such  as  the  distanee  of  the
earth  from  the  son,  and  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.
He  maintained  that  the  Great  Pyramid  showed,  hy  a  series
of  scientific  proofs,  that  miraculous  aid  must,  in  some  manner
or  other,  have  been  given  to  its  designer,  to  have  enabled
him  to  accomplish  so  wonderful  a  work  at  such  a  period  of
the  history  of  the  eartL

*  Sir  James  Simpson,  on  being  called  upon  by  the  Presi*
dent,  said  he  regretted  that  his  friend  Professor  Smyth  had
not  given  him  the  slightest  notice  of  his  intended  attack.^
But  in  reply  to  Professor  Smyth's  criticisms  on  his  woik,
he  argued  at  some  length  that  the  Professor  was  greatly
mistaken  in  his  ideas  of  the  ages  of  different  schools  of
architecture.  For  example,  he  had  spoken  of  Greek  archi-
tectural remains  dating  back  only  to  the  seventh  centniy
B.G.^  But  every  one  in  the  slightest  degree  acquainted
with  Greek  archaeology,  knew  that  there  were  far  older
architectural  remains  in  Greece,  as  in  the  Cyclopean  walls
and  Lion's  Gate  at  Mycense,  which  still  stand  wonderfully
entire.  The  curious  building  known  as  the  treasuiy  or
tomb  of  Atreus,  at  Mycenae,  was  reckoned  by  all  the  best
Hellenic  archaeologists  as  being  several  centuries  at  least
older  than  what  Professor  Smyth  gives  as  the  oldest  speci-
mens of  Greek  architecture.  But  this  tomb  of  Atreus  was
more  interesting  in  another  point,  alluded  to  by  Professor
Smyth.     Professor  Smyth  challenged — ^what  all  ardiitectB

1  There  was  no  '  attack'  made  or  intended  ;  nor  waa  Sir  J.  T.  Simpaon
mentioned  by  name.  Two  passages  in  a  published  work  by  him,  ezpiMi*
ing  opposite  opinions  to  those  of  the  author,  were  reviewed  ;  as  were  many
other  persons'  opinions  upon  both  that  one  section,  and  the  numerous
other  sections  of  which  the  address  consisted.  And  its  author  would  not
have  been  held  excusable  in  scientific  society,  had  he  omitted  to  notioi
published  opinions  of  great  men  unfavourable  to  his  views. — C.  P.  8.

*  In  this  sentence,  and  that  which  follows.  Sir  J.  T.  Simpaon  does  not
notice  that  it  was  only  the  Hellenic  Greek  architecture  whose  rise  waa  placed
by  the  author  in  700  b.o.  ;  while  in  another  column  of  his  Chart  (see  the
Frontispiece)  the  author  had  given  the  Pelasgic  architecture  of  Greece  an
antiquity  of  1800  B.O.,  agreeably  with  Mr.  Ferguason's  teaching.~C  P.  8.


APP.  2.]  Ratfcd Society,  Ed.;  Dec.  16,1867.  417

oeitainly  allowed — ^that  circles  and  spirals  are  among  the
earliest  and  fundamental  forms  of  stone  decoration ;  and  he
held  that  circles'  and  spirals  marked  the  period  of  degrada-
tion, not  the  period  of  commencement  in  lapidary  orna-
mentation. But  the  pilaster  at  the  door  of  Atreus'  tomb —
probably  eleven  or  twelve  centuries  B.O., — ^was  elaborately
ornamented  with  circles  and  spirals,  and  yet  it  is  among
the  oldest  (not  the  youngest)  and  degraded  specimens  of
Greek  art  The  temples  of  Thebes,  Assyria,  showed  abun-
dance of  decorations  originating  in  spirals  and  circles,  and
in  pieces  of  them — ^are  all  geometric.  Any  of  the  most
common  books  on  ancient  -architecture  would  convince
Professor  Smyth  of  this.  He  had  no  doubt  whatever  that
the  Pyramids  of  Egypt,  as  of  Ireland  and  Brittany,  were
all  tombs.  Professor  Smyth  tried  to  speak  disparagiogly
of  those  of  Ireland  and  Brittany,  because  they  were  less
i^  size;^  but  a  planet  was  still  a  planet,  whether  enor-
mously large  or  veiy  small  The  sight  of  the  old  Irish
mausolea,  scattered  for  miles  along  the  banks  of  the  Bojme,
was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  archaeological  sights  in
the  United  Kingdom — tall  and  large  as  little  hills,  like
those  of  Newgrange,  and  showing  in  their  interior  large
cydopic  chambers,  the  huge  component  stones  of  which
were  sometimes  highly  decorated.  If  Professor  Smyth
would  visit  and  measure  them,  he  would  perhaps  find  them
as  interesting  and  astonishing  as  others  he  had  visited,  or
more  so.  Those  of  Brittany — ^many  of  them  decorated  in-
teriorly— ^were  perhaps  older  than  those  of  Egjrpt,  for  they
contained  implements  and  weapons  only  of  stone — not  of
bronze  or  iron.  They  were  reared  in  the  stone  age — the
Egyptian  tombs  were  reared  after  metallic  tools  were  in-

^  This  statement  is  erroneous.  Professor  Smyth  disputed  the  right  of
the  Irish  tumuli  to  be  called  '  pyramids/  solely  on  the  question  of  shape ;
and  he  not  only  exhibited  a  model  of  a  good  pyramid,  so  smaU  as  12  inches
high,— but  also  gave  the  geometrical  definition  as  applicable  to  any  size,
large  or  smalL— C.  P.  S.

2  D


418  Appendix  2.  [afp.  2.

Tented.  But  if  not  content  with  the  age  of  tfaeee  eno^
moos  western  tombs  or  pyramidfl^  we  hjul,  besides  cromlechi
and  megalithic  circles,  other  remains  of  intellectnal  man  in
Europe  undoubtedly  older  than  the  oldest  E^grptian  Pyra-
mid. He  then  alluded  to  the  carving  npon  a  piece  of  ivoiy
of  a  figure  of  the  mammoth — ^moving  or  running — found
by  M.  Lartet  and  Dr.  Falconer  in  one  of  the  old  inhabited
caves  of  France.  That  accurate  piece  of  drawing  or  acul^
ture  must  undoubtedly  have  been  executed  fay  a  man  that
saw  the  mammoth  with  his  own  eyes.  Yet  surely  Pro&Mor
Smyth  would  admit  that  the  date  at  which  this  ^  intellec-
tual" man  lived  in  France  was  £eur,  far  older  than  the  age  of
the  oldest  pyramid.  In  the  most  ancient  grave  of  man  yel
discovered,  at  Aurignac,  a  piece  of  sculpture  was  found,  con*
sisting  of  a  mammal  tooth,  shaped  into  the  form  of  a  bird's
head.  Yet  we  know  that  those  buried  in  this  grave  wers
contemporaneous  in  France  with  the  mammoth,  rhinoceroti
Irish  elk,  etc.  In  reference  to  the  question  of  the  astro-
nomical questions  connected  with  the  old  EJgyptian  Pyra-
mids he  was  no  judge.  But  he  understood,  though  all  the
measurements  were  near,  none  were  exactly  what  the  theoiy
wanted.  But  things  mathematical,  to  be  mathematical,
should  be  correct  entirely,  and  not  merely  nearly  sa  He
concluded  by  remarking  that  though  Professor  Smyth's
papers  were  extremely  clever,  he  did  not  believe  one  word
about  the  Pjrramids  having  been  built  on  astronomical  prin-
ciples. He  had  no  faith  whatever  in  what  was  called  the
astronomical  size  and  measurement  of  the  Pyramids :  they
might  as  well  tell  him  that  the  Eegister  Office  and  the
College  were  arranged  on  a  similar  principle.  It  was  a
spurious  archaeology  and  astronomy  that  fed  on  such  fifuicies
and  romances.

*  The  company  then  adjourned  to  the  next  room,  and  par-
took of  tea  before  separating.'


APP.  2.]  Royal  Society,  Ed. ;  Jan.  6,  1868.    419

The  lad  Speech  of  (he  above  Meeting^  a»  given  ihe  next  mom'
ing,  or  on  December  17, 1867^  in  the  Sootsman.

^Sir  James  Simpson,  in  reply  to  Professor  Smyth's  criti-
cisms on  his  work,  signed  at  some  length  that  the  Plro-
fessor  was  greatly  mistaken  in  his  estimate  of  the  antiqniCy
of  the  architectoral  remains  of  Greeee,  and  gave  it  as  his
opinion  that  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt  were  nothing  bnt
tombs^  and  that  there  were  tombs  in  Europe  older  than
the  Ilgyptian  Pyramids — a  fietct  which  he  maintained  to  be
proved  by  the  discovery  that«they  were  the  tombs  of  per-
sons who  lived  before  metal  weapons  were  known  in  Europe,
while  the  Egyptian  Pyramids  were  built  after  metal  wea-
pons began  to  be  known.  He  asserted  that  the  statements
in  his  work  which  had  been  called  in  question  by  Professor
Smyth  were  accurate ;  and,  in  proof  of  the  fact  that  there
were  remains  in  Europe  more  ancient  than  the  £|gyptian
Pyramids,  he  referred  to  pieces  of  sculpture  which  had
been  found  in  graves,  which  showed  that  the  sculptor  must
have  seen  the  mammoth.  Sir  James  concluded  by  remark-
ing that  though  Professor  Smyth's  papers  were  extremely
clever,  he  did  not  believe  one  word  about  the  Pyramids
having  been  built  on  astronomical  principles.  He  had  no
&ith  whatever  in  what  was  called  the  orientation  of  the
Pyramids ;  they  might  as  well  tell  him  that  the  Register
Office  and  the  College  were  arranged  on  a  similar  principle.
The  company  then  adjourned  to  the  next  room,  and  par-
took of  tea  before  separating.'


Meeting  of  January  6, 1868,  as  reported  in  the  Scotsman  of

January  7.

*  Royal  Society. — ^The  third  ordinary  meeting  of  the
Royal  Society  was  held  last  night  in  the  Royal  Institution.


420  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

Dr.  Christison,  vice-president^  occupied  the  chair.  The
Chairman  deliyeied  the  Keith  medal  to  ProfesBor  Piaizi
Smyth  for  his  communications  during  the  last  biennial
period,  entitled  ^  Notices  of  Becent  Measarements  at  the
Great  Pyramid."  The  Committee,  in  the  minnte  recoBi-
mending  the  CouncO  to  make  the  award,  recorded  their
opinion  ^that  the  energy,  self-sacrifice,  and  skill  displaysd
by  Professor  Smyth  in  this  vast  series  of  measurements
fully  entitle  him  to  the  hi^est  testimony  which  the
Council  has  in  its  power  to  offer."  The  Council,  Professor
Christison  remarked,  offered  no  opinion  of  the  theoiy
propounded  by  Professor  Smyth,  but  they  were  fully  oon-
yinced  that  this  was  a  most  yaluable  series  of  measnrementi^
on  which  all  future  theories  must  be  based.  Professor
Piazzi  Smyth,  in  returning  thanks  for  the  honour  conferred
on  him,  expressed  regret  that  the  stones  of  the  ancient
tombs  of  the  Egyptians,  and  even  of  the  Great  Pyramid
itself,  were  being  carried  away  for  the  construction  of
public  and  private  buildings,  so  that  there  was  reason  to
fear  that,  after  being  so  remarkably  preserved  for  forty
centuries,  they  would  yet  pass  away  from  the  earth ;  and,
under  these  circumstances,  he  hoped  that  the  notice  which
the  Royal  Society  had  taken  of  his  labours,  would  direct
the  attention  of  other  investigators  to  this  subject  Dr.  A.
Crum  Brown  and  Dr.  J.  R  Fraser  read  communications
'*  On  the  Modifications  produced  by  Direct  Chemical  Addi-
tion upon  the  Action  of  Certain  Poisons."  Professor
Kelland  submitted  a  paper  by  Mr.  John  Scott,  ^  On  the
Burning  Mirrors  of  Archimedes,  and  on  the  Concentration
of  Light  produced  by  Reflectors."  The  object  of  the  paper
was  to  show  how  certain  defects  in  the  experiments  by
Bufibn  might  be  remedied,  so  as  to  form  a  strong  presump-
tion that  the  accounts  of  the  Archimedian  mirrors  were
authentic.  Professor  Kelland  also  read  a  commanication
by  A.   D.  Wackerbarth,  of  Upsala,  on  Professor


APP.  2.]    Rot/cU  Society,  Ed.;  Jan.  6,  1868.    421

Smyth's  former  account  of  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh.
The  writer  was  of  opinion  that  the  great  Pyramids  might
have  1>een  the  standard  of  the  ancient  Elgyptian  weight
and  measure,  but  he  did  not  believe  that  it  was  designed
in  accordance  with  the  theories  that  had  been  propounded
by  Professor  Smyth.  After  reading  the  paper.  Professor
Kelland  made  some  observations  as  to  the  value  of  the
measurements  which  had  been  made  by  Professor  Smyth,
and  showed  how  they  demonstrated  the  truth  of  Pliny's
statement  of  the  dimensions  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  Sir
James  Y.  Simpson  replied  to  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth's  criti-
cism of  his  work  on  **  Ancient  Sculpturings"  at  last  meeting
of  the  Society.  He  did  so  with  the  utmost  friendship  for
Professor  Smyth,  whose  measurements  were  most  exact,
but  whose  logic  was  most  wretched.  In  speaking  of  the
circles  and  spirals  found  on  the  stone  monuments  in  this
countiy  and  elsewhere,  he  (Sir  James)  suggested  that  they
were  sepulchral  and  ornamental  He  had  since  last  meeting
shown  the  passage  referred  to  to  Mr.  Biyce  and  Mr.  Kin-
near,  and  they  quite  agreed  with  him  in  the  opinion  he
expressed  on  the  subject  (Sir  James  said  that)  Professor
Smyth  admitted  that  they  might  have  been  so  used,but  (that)
he  (Prof.  Smyth)  said  that  he  (Sir  James)  had  made  a  slip
in  saying  that  these  circles  and  spirals  had  been  used  from
the  earliest  periods.  Sir  James  quoted  from  various  authors,
amongst  others  Professor  Smyth  himself,  to  show  that  circles
were  used  on  these  monuments  for  purposes  of  adornment
from  the  very  earliest  times.^  After  transacting  some  pri-
vate business  the  members  and  their  friends  had  tea  served
in  the  anteroom.'

^  No  reply  was  made  to  this  discouree  :  which  was  irregular,  had  not
been  allowed  by  the  Council,  nor  announced  in  the  billet,  did  not  refer
to  the  advertised  business  of  the  evening,  and  occupied  so  long  as  to  pre-
vent the  last  of  the  papers  on  the  programme  being  read.— C.  P.  S.


422  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

Meeting  of  January  20,  1868,  ow  reported  in  (he  Duly

KxTDBw  of  January  22.

<BOYAL   SOCIETY    OF   EDIKBUBOH.

*  SIR  J.  Y.  SIMPSON  AND  PROFESSOR  PIAZZI  SMYTH  ON

PYRAMIDAL  STRUCTURES.

*  On  Monday  night,  an  address  (which  we  briefly  noticed
yesterday)  was  delivered  to  the  Royal  Society,  by  Professor
Sir  James  Y.  Simpson,  on  **  Pyramidal  Stroctores  in  Egypt
and  Elsewhere,  and  the  Objects  of  their  Creation."  There
was  an  unusually  large  attendance  of  members.

*  Sir  James  Y.  Simpson  commenced  by  stating  that  the
probable  derivation  of  the  word  pyramid^  as  suggested  by
the  distinguished  Egyptologist,  Mr.  Birch,  was  firom  two
Coptic  words  signifying  the  "  king's  sepulchre,"  and  he  then
pointed  out,  that  in  various  parts  of  the  world,  very  large
sepulchral  conical  hills  existed,  made  sometimes  of  earth
and  sometimes  of  stone,  containing  within  them  relatively
small   chambers   for   the   dead,  constructed  of  enormous
stones,  and  galleries  often  concealed,  leading  into  these
chambers.     He  cited  various  authors  using  the  word  "  pyra-
mid" in  this  sense,  and  particularly  Sir  William  Wilde,
who,  in  his  travels  in  the  East,  when  visiting  some  of  the
Egyptian  Pyramids,  tells  how  their  dome-shaped  interior
chambers  reminded  him  of  the  Pyramids  in  Ireland  at
Newgrange,  Louth,  etc.,  and  again,   in  his  work  on  the
Boyne,  the  same  distinguished  archaeologist  discusses,  at
greater  length,  the  analogy  between  the  Pyramids  of  Egypt
and  the  Pyramidal  mounds  in  the  west  of  Europe.     All
authors,  from  the  father  of  history  downwards,  have  gene-
rally agreed  in  describing  the  Pyramids  as  magnificent  royal
sepulchres ;  and  the  sarcophagi  of  dead  princes  have  been
found  in  many — if  not  indeed  in  all — of  them,  when  first
opened.     The  Pyramidal  sepulchral  mounds  on  the  banks
of  the  Boyne  were  opened  and  rifled  in  the  ninth  centuiy ;


APP.  2.]   Royal  Society,  Ed. ;  Jan.  20, 1868.  423

and  those  of  the  F^rramids  of  Gizeh  were  broken  into  and
harried  in  the  same  eentorj  by  the  inquiring  Arabian
Caliph  El  Mamoon.  Bj  some^  the  largest  of  the  Pyramids
at  Gizeh  has  bera  maintained^  and  particularly  of  late  by
€hkbb,  Jomard,  Taylor,  and  Prdessor  Smyth,  to  be  a
marvellous  metrological  mcmmnent^  built  some  forty  centu-
ries ago,  and  containing  within  it^  and  in  its  structure,
standards  for  men  and  nations,  for  all  times,  of  measure  of
length,  capacity,  weight,  etc  Messrs.  Taylor  and  Smyth
further  hold  that  this  Great  Pyramid^  as  it  is  termed,  was
so  built  for  this  purpose  of  mensuration  under  Divine
inspiration ;  the  standards  being,  under  superhuman  origi-
nation  and  guidance^  made  and  preserved  in  it  to  the  present
day.  It  was  the  largest  of  the  many  Pyramids  of  £g3rpt,
but  apparently  not  the  first,  imd  had  been  calculated  by
Mr.  Furlong  as  a  structure  which  in  the  East  would  cost
about  £1,000,000.'  Over  India,  and  the  East  generally,
enormous  sums  had  often  been  expended  on  royal  sepulchres
for  the  dead ;  and  the  Taj  Mahal  of  Agra,  built  by  the
Shah  Jehan  for  his  favourite  Queen,  cost  perhaps  triple  the
money.  Mr.  Taylor  ascribes  to  Noah  the  original  idea  of
the  metrological  structure  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  ^We
are  told,"  says  he,  ^  that  Noah  was  a  '  preacher  of  righteous-
ness,' but  nothing  could  more  illustrate  this  character  of  a
^  preacher  of  righteousness '  after  the  flood,  than  that  he
should  be  the  first  to  establish  a  system  of  weights  and
measures  for  the  use  of  all  mankind,  based  upon  the  mea-
sure of  the  earth."  Professor  Smyth,  computing  by  another
chronology,  rejects  the  presence  of  Noah,  and  makes  a
shepherd — ^Philition — the  presiding  genius,  holding  him  to
be  a  Gushite  skilled  in  building,  in  the  same  way  as  Mr.
Keane,  in  the  last-published  book  on  Irish  archsdology,
strangely  holds  the  iDund  towers,  etc.,  of  that  country  to
be  all  also  Cushite  in  their  origin  and  masonry.  A  granite
coffer,  stone  box,  or  sarcophagus  standing  in  one  of  the


424  Appadix  3.  [app.  2.

BSemr  f^jt  of  lae  Przaand  oQed  Ae  Eag  s  ClHadKr,  ii
Ui  bj  M«flBi.  Ta jiar  snd  SKjdi  to  knrv  been  kewn  oaft

OB  Ae  aBebaDd^aod  cor
Jkn^j-^ajLoa  en  toe  cdho;  vcxe  all  denTsd  from  tlie  nn-
of  thia  gTMnce  rrfl  TW  lectBicr  read  Tinoai
cztnctt  from  the  vorki  of  thcae  aBllioi%  ihoviiig  diai  in
their  fae&f  the  grat  ohjcet^cod,  aod  aim  for  vUchthe
wiiole  Pyramid  was  created,  waa  the  ptamalion  of  thie
coffer  ae  a  icandard  of  meaonea.  He  read  tlie  puUiahed
accuunta,  arerni^  that  it  repneented  without  aod  within  a
rectangolar  figure  of  mathematical  fonn,peifiBCtfy  leTel,  and
hig^y  polished.  But  though  thna  imaginwi  to  be  a  great
ftandard  of  measure,  Ptofeaeor  Smyth  had  dted  tlie  mea-
snremenu  of  it,  made  and  pablished  by  twenty-five  different
obeervers^  several  of  whom  had  gone  aboat  the  matter  with
great  mathematical  aocoracy ;  bat  all  these  twenty-five^  as
he  owned,  varied  from  each  other  in  their  aoooonta  of  this
standard  in  every  element  of  length,  breadth,  and  depth,
both  inside  and  outside.  Profeasor  Smyth  had  measured
it  himself  as  a  twenty-sixth  measurer,  and  again  his  mea-
sure varied  frt>m  every  other.  Yet  surely  a  measure  of
capacity  should  be  measureable,  but  this  seemed  immeasure-
able — at  leasts  to  twenty-six  different  measurers.  "  StiD,**
says  Professor  Smyth,  *^  this  affair  of  the  coffer's  precise  siie
is  the  question  of  questions."  He  holds  that  theoretically
its  capacity  ought  to  be  71,250  cubic  inches,  yet  be  himself
found  it  some  90  cubic  inches  less  than  this ;  while  Pro-
fessor Greaves,  one  of  the  most  accurate  measurers  of  all,
found  it  210  cubic  inches  below,  and  the  French  acade-
micians who  accompanied ,  the  Napoleonic  expedition  to
Egypt,  found  it  about  6000  cubic  inches  above,  the  theo-
retical size  requisite  to  make  it  a  measure  for  a  chomer  or
chalder — ^namely  71,250  cubic  inches.  Thirty  years  ago
it  was  pointed  out^  and  indeed  delineated  by   Colonel


APP.  2.]  RoycU  Society,  Ed.;  Jan.  20,  1868.   425

Howard  Vyse,  as  not  well  polishedy  imd  much  broken  at  the
edges.    Professor  Smyth,  in  his  late  travels  to  E|gypt,  states
that  he  found  every  possible  line  and  edge  of  it  chipped
away  with  large  chips,  and  one  comer  broken  off  to  nearly  a
third  of  the  whole.    But  worse  fsusts  than  these  are  revealed
of  it  by  Professor  Smyth  as  a  measure  of  capacity.     His
published  measurements  show  that  it  is  not  a  vessel,  as
alleged,  of  pure  mathematical  form ;  for  externally  it  is  in
length  an  inch  greater  on  one  side  than  another ;  in  breadth
half-an-inch  broader  at  one  point  than  at  some  other  points ;
in  thickness  of  sides  it  varies  in  some  points  about  a
quarter  of  an  inch ;  and  its  bottom  at  one  point  is  nearly
a  whole  inch  thicker  than  it  is  at  some  other  parts.     In-
ternally there  is  a  convergence  at  the  bottom  towards  the
centre ;  in  length  and  breadth  it  differs  about  half-an-inch
at  one  point  from  other  points,  and  thus  its  interior  seems
really  of  a  form  immeasureable  in  a  correct  way  by  mere
lineal  measurement — ^the  only  measure  yet  attempted.     If
it  were  an  object  of  the  slightest  moment^  perhaps  liquid
measurements  would  be  more  successfid.     Worse  details
still  remain  in  relation  to  the  coffer  as  a  great  standard
measure  of  capacity.     Its  western  side  is  lower  down  in  its
whole  extent  to  nearly  an  inch  and  three-quarters;  and
ledges  are  cut  round  the  interior  of  the  other  sides  at  the
same  height.     Should  we  measure  on  this   western   side
from  this  ledge,  or  from  the  imaginary  brimi     Besides,
there  are  three  holes  cut  on  the  top  of  its  lower  western
side,  as  in  all  the  other  Egyptian  sarcophagi,  and  used  with
the  ledge  to  admit  and  lock  the  lid  of  such  stone  chests.
In  other  words,  it  is  the  ledge  and  apparatus  pertaining  to
the  Egyptian  sarcophagi.     When  about  a  thousand  years
ago  the  Caliph  Al  Mamoon  tunnelled  into  the  interior  of  the
Pyramid,  he  discovered  by  the  accidental  falling  of  a  granite
portcullis,  the  passage  to  the  King's  Chamber,  shut  up  from
the  building  of  the  Pyramid,  to  that  time.     The  Arabian


426  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

hiBtorian  Ibn  Alhokm  states  that  on  tibia  oecanon  thej
found  in  the  Pyramid^  '^  towaida  the  top  of  a  chamber  (now
the  so-called  King^s  Chamber)  within  a  hollow  stone  (or
coffer)  in  which  there  was  a  statue  like  a  man,  and  within
it  a  man  upon  whom  was  a  Iveastplate  of  gold  set  with
jewels ;  upon  this  breastplate  was  a  sword  of  inestimable
price,  and  at  his  head  a  carbuncle  of  the  bigness  of  an  ^g^
shining  like  the  light  of  the  day,  and  upon  him  wen
characters  writ  with  a  pen,  which  no  man  understood," —
a  description  stating  down  to  the  so-called  ^'statae,"  or
painted  wrapper,  or  caitonage,  and  the  hieroglyphics  upon
the  sere  cloth,  the  arrangements  now  well  known  to  belong
to  the  higher  class  of  the.  Egyptian  mummies.  In  shorty
the  marvellous  metrological  coffer,  mathematically  formed
under  alleged  Divine  inspiration  as  a  measure  of  capacity
(and,  according  to  M.  Jomard,  of  length  also),  for  all  men
and  all  nations,  for  all  time,  and  particularly  for  these  latter
profane  times,  is  in  truth,  proceeded  Sir  James,  nothing
more  than  an  old  dilapidated  stone  coffin.  The  standard  in
the  Great  Pyramid,  according  to  Professor  Smyth,  fw
lineal  measurements,  is  the  length  of  the  base-line  or  lines
of  the  Pyramid.  It  is  pretended  that  in  this  base-line
there  has  been  found  a  new  mythical  inch — one-thousandth
of  an  inch  larger  than  the  British  standard  inch ;  and  Pro-
fessor Smyth  has  attempted  to  show  that  the  status  of  the
nations  of  Europe  in  the  general  and  moral  world,  may  he
measured  in  accordance  with  their  deviation  or  conformity
to  this  m3rthical  Pyramidal  standard.  The  engineers  and
mathematicians  of  different  countries  have  repeatedly  mea-
sured a  meridian  arc  of  a  league  of  sixty  miles,  in  order  to
employ  it  as  a  standard  for  lineal  divisions.  As  part  of
their  standard,  they  measure  off  sixty  miles  of  the  surface
of  a  kingdom  with  almost  perfect  mathematical  exactitude.
Professor  Sm3rth,  continued  Sir  James,  holds  that  one  side
of  the  Pyramid  has  been  laid  down  by  Divine  authority,


APR  2.]  Rot/al  Society,  Ed.;  Jan.  20, 1868.   427

as  sach  a  gaiding  standard  measure.  The  sides  of  the
Pyramid  have  been  measured  by  many  measurers.  But^as  in
the  case  of  the  cubic  capacity  of  the  coffer,  none  of  these  two
measures  agree  with  each  other,  but  vary  from  some  8050
inches  to  9050  and  upwards.  At  the  time  Professor  Smyth
was  living  at  the  Pyramid,  Mr.  Ingiis  of  Glasgow  visited
it^  and  laid  bare  for  the  first  time,  the  four  comer  sockets.
But  Mr.  Inglis's  measurements  not  only  differed  immedi-
ately from  all  the  others  made  before  him,  but  he  made  the
four  sides  differ  from  each  other ;  one  of  them  being  longer
than  the  other  three.  Strangely,  Professor  Smyth,  though
in  Egypt  for  the  purpose  of  measuring  the  Pyramid,  and
holding  that  its  base-line  ought  to  be  our  standard  of  mea-
sure, and  that  the  base-line  could  only  be  accurately  ascer-
tained by  measuring  from  socket  to  socket,  never  made  that
measurement  himself;  but  he  lays  down  as  the  measurement
of  one  side  the  figure  9142  inches  (which  no  one  ever
found  it  to  be),  because  that  figure  will  be  the  result  of
multiplying  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  year,  by  what
he  calls  the  Pyramidal  cubit,  made  up  of  twenty-five
mythical  Pyramidal  inches,  and  which  Pyramidal  cubit  he
further  holds  to  be  the  same  as  the  ^  sacred  cubit "  of  the
Jews,  being  given  by  Divine  inspiration.  In  proof  of  the
length  of  the  "sacred  cubit,"  Professor  Smyth  cites  the
essay  on  the  subject  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  who  long  ago
showed,  from  Professor  Greaves'  measurements,  that  the
working  cubit  of  the  masons  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  as
evidenced  in  the  interior  of  the  building,  was  the  old
Memphis  cubit.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  twice  lays  it  down
that  the  sacred  cubit  is  in  length  24*82.  But  for  Pyra-
midal purposes,  Professor  Smyth  thinks  it  should  be
25*07.  In  obtaining  this  end,  Professor  Smyth  makes
a  wrong  summation  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  figures,  calcu-
lating nine  means,  which  he  gathers  out  of  Sir  Isaac's
essay,  as   amounting  on  a  mean  to   25*07,  when   they


428  Appendix  2.  [app,  2.

actually  amount  to  25*29,  while  he  tenna  thia  leaiilt  of
25*07  as  a  ^really  glorious  consummation.''  "For,"  says
he,  ^  a  length  of  25*025  British  inches,  or  practically  the
sacred  Hebrew  cubit^  is  exactly  one  ten-millionth  of  the
earth's  semi-axis  of  rotation."  We  grant  that  it  is  neaify
so  under  Professor  Smyth's  erroneous  summation ;  and  if
we  allow  the  polar  axis  of  the  earth  to  be,  as  Professor
Smyth  wishes  it  to  be  considered,  500,500,000  British
inches.  But  in  Captain  Clarke's  latest  and  very  canfiil
observations  on  the  subject,  the  polar  axis  is  not  thia  mea-
surement Mr.  Taylor  considered  the  pyramidal  inch  and
cubit  to  be  an  exact  segment  not  of  the  axis  of  the  earthat
the  pole,  but  of  its  axis  at  30  deg.  lat,  where  the  Pyramid
stands,  and  where  the  earth's  diameter  is,  of  course,  much
greater.  Yet  Mr.  Taylor  and  Professor  Smyth  made  both
axes,  though  very  different  in  length,  fit  exactly  to  their
numbers.  Mr.  Taylor  made  out  further  the  "  sacred  cubit"
to  be  24*90,  whilst  he  found  the  pyramidal  cubit  25  inches,
each  different,  but  both  supposed  to  be  revealed  from  on
high.  To  account  for  this,  Mr.  Taylor  states,  and  despite
all  geological  or  other  authority,  that  ^  the  smaller  (24*90)
is  the  sacred  cubit"  which  measured  the  diameter  of  the
earth  before  the  flood ;  the  one  by  which  Noah  measured
the  ark,  as  tradition  says,  and  the  one  in  accordance  with
which  all  the  interior  works  of  the  Great  Pyramid  were
constructed.  The  larger  (25)  is  "  the  sacred  cubit "  of  the
present  earth,  according  to  the  standard  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid when  it  was  completed.  Such  contradictions  and  in-
consistencies, said  Sir  James,  entirely  upset  the  whole  wild
and  extraordinary  theory  of  the  base  of  the  Pjrramid  being
a  standard  of  lineal  measurement,  or  a  segment  of  any
particular  axis  of  the  earth.  Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Smyth
seem  to  think  that  if,  by  multiplying  any  object  in  length,
they  can  run  out  the  calculations  with  a  long  tail  of  O's,
it  proves  something  exact  and  certain.     The  lecturer  stated


APP,  2.]   Royal  Society^  Ed.;  Jan.  20,  1868.   429

and  showed  that  if  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  standard  of  the
^  sacred  cabit"  be  tme,  and  if  the  polar  axis  of  the  earth
be,  as  fondly  and  theoretically  imagined  by  Professor
Smyth,  500,000,000  pyramidal  inches,  then  the  brim  of  the
lectorer^s  hat  being  exactly  one-half  of  Sir  Isaac's  *  sacred
cubit,'  that  brim  was  in  measurement  one  20,000,000th  of
the  earth's  polar  axis.  The  lecturer  pointed  out  other
common  objects  by  which  such  lines  of  O's  could  be  similarly
obtained,  if  that  availed  aught.  Sir  James  next  discussed
some  others  amongst  the  many  matters  which  Professor
Smyth  fancifully  aveired  to  be  typified  in  the  Great
Pyramid.  The  so-called  Queen's  Chamber,  has  a  roof
composed  of  two  large  blocks  of  stone  leaning  against
each  other,  making  a  kind  of  double  roof  This  double
roof,  and  the  four  walls  of  the  chamber,  according  to  Pro-
fessor Smyth,  count  six,  meaning  the  six  days  of  the  week,
whilst  the  floor  counts,  as  it  were,  a  seventh  side  to  the
room,  ^  nobler  and  more  glorious  than  the  rest,"  and  typi-
fying something  of  a  ^  nobler  and  more  glorious  order" —
namely,  the  Sabbath.  It  is  surely  difficult  to  fSuicy  any-
thing more  unfounded  than  this  strange  imagination.  Yet
Professor  Smyth  holds  that  he  is  thus  able  to  point  out  that
the  Sabbath  had  been  heard  of  before  Moses,  and  that,  in
the  above  typical  way,  he  finds  unexpected  and  confirmatory
light  of  this — a  fact,  which  he  holds,  is  of  *^  extraordinary
importance,  and  possesses  a  ramifying  influence  through
many  departments  of  religious  life  and  progress."  He
holds  also  that  the  comer-stone,  so  frequently  alluded  to
by  the  Psalmist  and  the  Apostles,  is  a  symbol  of  the
Messiah — ^is  the  head  or  comer-stone  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  which,  though  long  ago  removed,  may  yet  pos-
sibly, he  thinks,  be  discovered  in  the  Cave  of  Machpelah,
though  why  or  wherefore  it  should  have  found  its  way  to
that  distant  and  special  locality  is  not  suggested.  Pro-
fessor Smyth,  continued  Sir  James,  holds  the  Great  Pyra-


430  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

mid  to  be  in  its  emUems  and  intentions  and  wovk  *sape^
human,**  and  '^Ixiilt  under  the  direction  of  chosen  men
divinely  inspired  from  on  hi§^  for  this  pmposeL"  If
divine,  the  work  should  be  absolutely  perfect;  bnt^  as
owned  by  Professor  Smyth,  it  is  not  entirely  ooireci  in  its
orientation,  in  its  squareness^  etc — all  of  them  nistteri
proving  that  it  is  human  and  not  divina  It  was^  Professor
Smyth  further  allies,  intended  to  be  a  standard  of  mea-
sures for  all  times  down  to  these  latter  days^ '  to  herald  in
some  of  those  accompaniments  of  the  promised  milkmnisl
peace  and  goodwill  to  all  men."  If  the  Pyramid,  eon-
tinued  the  lecturer,  is  a  divine  mirade  of  this  kind,  then
the  Arabian  Caliph  £1  Mamoon  upset  the  supposed  minds
a  thousand  years  ago  when  he  broke  into  the  Kinffs
Chamber  and  unveiled  its  contents ;  for  the  builders  in-
tended to  conceal  its  secrets  for  the  benefits  of  these  latter
times,  and  for  this  purpose  had  left  a  mathematical  sign
of  a  cross-joint  on  the  galleiy,  by  which  some  man  in  the
distant  fiiture,  visiting  the  interior,  should,  according  to
Professor  Smyth,  detect  the  entrance  to  the  chambers,  and
which  secret  sign  Professor  Smyth  himself  was,  as  he  be-
lieves, the  first  to  discover.  In  relation  to  the  Great
Pyramid,  as  to  other  things,  we  may  be  sure  that  Crod
does  not  teach  by  the  medium  of  miracle  anything  that  the
unaided  intellect  of  man  can  find  out  The  lecturer  con-
cluded by  a  series  of  remarks,  in  which  he  pointed  out  that
at  the  time  at  which  the  Great  Pyramid  was  built^  probably
4000  years  ago,  mining,  architecture,  astronomy,  eta,  were
so  advanced  in  various  parts  of  the  East  as  to  present  no
obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  erection  of  such  a  noble  Royal
Mausoleum  as  the  Great  Pyramid  undoubtedly  is.

*  The  Chairman  (Professor  Relland)  said  he  was  afraid
that  the  meeting  could  not  enter  into  a  discussion  that  even-
ing on  the  paper  just  read.  Professor  Piam  Smyth  was
undoubtedly  entitled  to  a  reply,  and  others  might  have


AFP.  2.]  Royal  Society,  Ed.;  Jan.  20,  1868.   431

something  to  say  oa  the  subject  He  would,  therefore,  sug-
gest that.thej  should  hear  any  remarks  which  the  Professor
might  wish  to  make  at  present,  and  that  the  discussion
should  be  resumed  at  another  meeting.

^Professor  PiAZZi  Smyth,  in  reply,  said — ^The  essay
which  we  have  heard  this  evening  is  both  on  a  very  im-
portant subject^  and  by  one  of  the  most  celebrated  and
versatile  men  of  the  present  day.  If  the  result  of  this
essay  should  be  the  elucidation  of  more  truth  than  has
hitherto  been  known  in  the  world,  no  one  will  be  better
pleased  than  myself.  But,  if  that  result  should  not  follow,
and  if  the  essay  should  be  found  unable  to  withstand  the
necessary  test  of  subsequent  careful  examination,  the  re-
sponsibility of  having  uttered  its  errors  will  attach  to  the
author  alone ;  and  there  it  may  be  lefL  So  far  then.  Sir,
touching  the  advertised  subject  of  the  paper,  according  to
its  title  as  duly  printed  in  the  biUet  for  the  business  of
this  evening,  and  to  which  I  would  gladly  confine  myselfl
Yet  I  cannot  pretend  to  be  altogether  unaware  that — such
printed  title  of  the  paper  notwithstanding — ^my  humble
name  has  occupied,  unfortunately,  a  large  share  of  the
lecturer's  attention.  The  primal  reason  for  this  would
seem  to  be,  that  in  the  course  of  a  special  investigation  a
short  time  ago,  I  ventured  to  discuss  the  merits  of  two
little  paragraphs  in  a  certain  book  which  was  printed  and
published  to  all  the  world,  in  the  beginning  of  last  year.
Those  two  paragraphs  crossed  the  path  of  my  investigation
in  so  positive  a  manner  that  it  became  absolutely  necessary
for  me  either  to  disprove  them  or  yield  to  their  domination.
In  all  this  there  was  nothing  unusual,  for  the  same  sort  of
thing  takes  place,  more  or  less,  in  every  scientific  inquiry ;
and,  in  fact,  in  that  same  investigation  of  mine  there  was
a  host  of  other  books  submitted  to  a  precisely  similar  line
of  criticism.  Yet  what  was  said,  in  one  short  section,
touching  only  the  two  paragraphs  already  mentioned,  has


432  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

excited  an  amount  of  comment  (£rom  their  anthor)  which  ib
perfectly  extraordinary.  The  first  of  thoae  remarkaUe
paragraphs  of  his,  contained  the  assertion  that  there  an
**  pyramids,"  yea,  even  **  magnificent^  though  mde"  pyramids
in  Ireland;  and  the  second  stated  that,  "fixim  the  Teiy
^  earliest  historic  periods  in  the  architecture  of  I|gypt^
^  Assyria,  Greece,  etc.,  down  to  our  own  dayB^  ciidei,
^  single  or  double,  and  spirals,  have  formed,  under  vaiioos
^  modifications,  perhaps  the  most  common  fundamental
**  types  of  lapidary  decoration."  Now,  my  aigument  with
regard  to  the  first  paragraph  was,  that  whereas  the  shape
of  a  pyramid  is  defined  truly  and  mathematically  to  he  a
solid,  whose  base  is  a  regular  rectilinear  figure,  and  wfaote
sides  are  plain  triangles,  with  their  several  verdces  meeting
together  in  a  point,  that  name  of  pyramid  could  by  no
means  be  even  approximately  applied  to  Newgrange,  the
chief  of  the  so-called  Irish  pyramids,  because,  when  restored
from  its  present  to  its  original  condition,  it  is  shown  to
have  had  a  circular  base,  and  a  top,  not  pointed,  but  veiy
broad  and  fiat.  And  my  argument  touching  the  second
paragraph  was  that,  in  so  far  as  referred  to  the  Great
Pyramid  of  Jeezeh — the  example,  par  excdlemce^  of  the
very  earliest  historic  period  in  the  architecture  of  E^^ypt —
(with  the  other  and  later  countries  I  had  nothing  to  do)—
in  so  far,  I  say,  as  referred  to  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Jeeseh,
circles,  single  or  double,  and  spirals,  did  not  by  any  means
form  the  most  common  fundamental  types  of  its  lapidaiy
decoration.  There  has,  indeed,  been  a  suggestion  thrown
out  that  I  was  altogether  mistaken;  and  because— as
gathered  out  of  my  own  book,  Life  and  Work  at  the  Oreat
Pyramid, — on  a  certain  absurdly  small  feature  of  the  whole
building,  usually  known  as  the  ''  granite  leaf,"  there  is,  on
one  part  of  it,  a  peculiar,  little,  something  or  other ;  a  some-
thing, whether  for  ornament,  or  mechanical  use,  or  sym-
bolical  purport,  and  when  put  on  no  one  can  telL     In


APP.  2.]  Royal  Society,  Ed.;  Jan.  20, 1868.  433

order  that  the  presently  known  facts  of  this  most  minute
and  peculiar  little  something  or  other  may  he  easily  ap-
prehended, I  have  placed  on  the  tahle  a  model  of  the  whole
^  granite  leaf"  one-fifth  of  the  natural  size ;  and  I  shall  he
much  obliged  to  any  gentleman  who  will  show  how  there
can  be  got  out  of  the  small,  smooth,  slightly-raised,  semi-
ovoid  patch  you  see  thereon,  enough  engraved  figures  of
^'circles,  single  or  double,  and  spirals,  to  form  perhaps  the
^  most  common  fundamental  types  of  the  lapidary  decora-
"  tion"  of  all  the  twenty-one  acres  of  the  Great  Pyramid's
well-dressed  stone  surface.  Further  than  this,  I  cannot
say  that  anything  of  importance  has  been  brought  forward
trenching  on  the  real  grounds  of  my  views  concerning  the
unparalleled  and  veiy  exalted  character  of  the  design  of
the  Great  P3rramid.  Much  attempt  has  no  doubt  been
made  to  break  down  .distinctions,  and  confound  it  with
other  pyramids,  and  even  with  remotely  pyramidal  struc-
tures; and  nyich  attempt  also  to  undervalue  it  itself,
merely  because  some  of  its  (the  Great  Pyramid's)  describers
have  erred,  or  had  imperfect  data  of  observation  and  mea-
surement to  go  upon.  But  this  is  an  old,  old  story.  It  is
what  the  Pagan  Eg3rptians  began ;  what  the  Greeks  went
on  with;  then  the  Komans;  then  the  Mohammedans;
and  lastly,  even  some  modem  Europeans — some  few  men,
who  are  in  a  sad  state  of  darkness  as  to  modem  science ;
the  final  and  highest  principle  of  which  is,  not  to  presume
to  give  out  perfect  and  infallible  dicta,  but  rather  to
know  well  about  the  limits  of  error  attending  every  nume-
rical datum.  But  the  Great  Pyramid  has  outlived  all  these
unwise  attacks ;  and  it  still  stands,  amongst  many  other  of
its  features,  the  highest  of  all  buildings,  and  with  a  most
important  meaning  in  that  particular  height.  Several
cathedral  spires  of  Europe  have  been  intended  by  their
architects  to  be  higher;  but,  from  foundations  failing,  or
other  reasons,  they  have  invariably  stopped  far  short  of

2  £


434  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

their  aim ;  leaving,  therefore,  the  earliest  of  existing  build-
ings, the  Great  Pyramid,  still  in  all  its  noUe  sapeiiimty
as  well  as  scientific  significance ;  and  making  it  more  than
ever  a  wonder  and  admiration  to  all  the  intelligent  of
mankind  in  eveiy  land.  After  standing,  indeed,  thus  for
4000  years,  the  Great  Pyramid  is  now  shining  forth  with
a  brighter  character  and  purer  fame  than  ever  it  did  before.
And  only  think.  Sir,  what  that  implies.  To  withstand  tbe
trials  of  4000  years  of  persecution,  and  oppression,  and
criticism,  and  judgment,  and  yet  to  come  out  fairer  and
more  precious  after  all !  I  can  only  hope  that  the  same
may  be  said,  after  the  lapse  of  even  a  tenth  part  of  that
interval  of  time,  for  the  characters  of  some  who,  in  persis-
tently endeavouring  to  undervalue  that  primeval  stractore,
know  not  what  they  do.     (Applause.)

*  Owing  to  the  time  occupied  by  the  above  subject^  the
reading  of  the  other  papers  on  the  programme  was  post-
poned till  next  meeting  of  the  Society.'       %


MEETING  OF  APRIL  20,  1868.

As  reported  in  the  Scotsman  of  April  21.

*  Last  night,  at  the  tenth  and  last  ordinary  meeting  of
the  Royal  Society  for  the  season — ^Professor  Playfair  in  the
chair — a  paper  was  read  by  Professor  C.  Piazzi  Smyth
commenting  on  two  papers  on  the  Great  Pyramid  lately
printed  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,"  one  of
which  was  the  production  of  a  native  of  Sweden,  and  the
other  was  written  by  Sir  James  Simpson.  Both  of  these
papers  were  alleged  by  Professor  Smyth  to  be  based  upon
needlessly  imperfect  data.  The  first  was  written  in  entire
ignorance  of  the  progress  of  pyramidal  research  during  the
last  three  years ;  and  he  had  placed  himself  in  correspond-


APP.  2.]  Royal  Society^  Ed. ;  April  20, 1868,  435

ence  with  the  author,  who  had  confessed  his  ignorance  of
all  recent  Pyramid  exploration  so  honestly  that  he  could
do  nothing  else  than  present  him  with  a  copy  of  his  recent
work.  The  other  essay  (Sir  James  Simpson's)  extended
to  no  less  than  twenty-six  pages,  of  which  twenty-four  pages
were  filled  with  hardly  anything  else  than  the  severest  ani-
madversions on  the  Great  Pyramid  and  himself — (laughter)
— ^his  name  being  printed  no  less  than  eighty-five  times —
(laughter) — and  there  being  no  fewer  than  seventy  cases  of
extracts  in  inverted  commas  from  his  writings,  besides  many
quotations  similarly  derived,  but  without  commas.  After
maintaining  that  an  opposite  meaning  was  ingeniously
given  in  the  essay  to  the  majority  of  the  extracts  from
his  writings,  than  that  which  he  intended  them  to  convey.
Professor  Smyth  proceeded  to  contend  that  Professor  Simp-
son was  mistaken  in  his  ideas  regarding  the  construction  of
the  Pyramid,  and  said  that  he  saw  no  prospect  of  that
gentleman  ever  coming  to  understand  the  true  construc-
tion of  that  noblest  work  of  the  world  4000  years  ago,
and  how  vastly  it  differed  from  all  those  tumuli  which  he
insisted  on  comparing  it  to  and  confounding  it  with,  unless
he  would  himseli'  ascend  and  descend  the  ancient  P3rramid,
climb  up  the  steep  steps  of  its  colossal  masonry,  and  mea-
sure each  step  carefully  from  top  to  bottom.  He  went  on
to  defend  the  accuracy  of  all  his  measurements,  and  to
insist  that  the  authority  upon  which  Sir  James  Simpson
relied  for  the  statement  that  an  embalmed  human  corpse
had  been  found  in  the  coffer  was  not  reliable.

*  Sir  James  Simpson,  in  reply,  said  that  Professor  Smyth
was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  he  attacked  the  P3rramid
when  he  objected  to  his  reasonings  upon  the  measurements
of  the  Pyramid.  It  reminded  him  of  Bishop  Warburt^n
always  maintaining  that  those  who  attacked  his  reasonings
in  his  work  on  "  The  Legation  of  Moses"  were  not  con-
demning him  but  Moses.     He  was  at  perfect  liberty  to


436  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

express  his  opudon  on  the  Pyramid  qnestioii,  and  he  had
not  knowingly  mis-stated  the  meaning  df  any  qnotaiion
which  he  had  made.  Sir  James  then  noticed  a  few  <rf  the
measurements  of  Professor  Smyth,  maintaining  tiiat  the
calculations  which  he  had  founded  upon  them  were  inaoca-
rate,  and  that  it  was  an  erroneous  method  of  procedure  to
take  the  mean  of  different  measurements.  Such  a  method
of  procedure,  he  alleged,  was  childish  ;  it  was  a  species  of
mathematical  aberration,  and  it  ran  through  the  whole  of
Professor  Smjrth's  book.  Professor  Smyth,  he  belieyed,
was  one  of  those  men  who  would  compute  miUions,  but
could  not  calculate  the  smaller  figures. — (Laughter.)— He
had  not  heard  a  single  sound  man  say  otherwise  than  thai
the  whole  of  Professor  Smjrth's  theory  about  the  Pyramid
was  a  series  of  the  strangest  hallucinations,  which  many
weak  women  believed,  and  a  few  womanly  men,  but  no
more.  He  had  talked  about  it  to  a  great  many  arith-
meticians, and  he  had  found  that  they  scoffed  at  it  and
despised  it.

'  Professor  Smyth,  in  reply,  said  that,  with  regard  to  the
two  papers  in  the  "  Proceedings"  of  the  Society  to  which
he  had  confined  himself,  he  was  already  in  correspondence
with  the  author  of  one  of  them,  and  hoped  to  arrive  at
some  approximation  of  opinion  with  him  ;  but  with  regard
to  the  author  of  the  other  paper,  he  thought  that  it  was
proper  that  he  should  not  attempt  to  hold  any  discussion
with  him,  until  the  Council  should  have  had  abundance  of
time  to  inquire  into  the  matters  that  he  had  laid  before
the  Society,  and  had  arrived  at  some  conclusion  or  report
upon  them.'


APP.  2.]  Remarks  an  the  Lecture  of  Jan.  20.  437


REMAKKS  ON  THE  LECTURE  OP  JANUARY  20,

As  it  was  reported  in  the  Daily  Reyhew  of  January  22  ;  in
a  Private  Letter  fromVf.  P.,  of  dale  January  23,  1868  :
not  written  for  publication,

'  Had  it  been  my  port  to  reply  to  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's
discourse, — I  should  have  felt  it  necessary  to  commence  by
expressing  a  difficulty  in  knowing  how  far  I  was  expected
to  take  his  observations  as  mere  pleasantry,  jocular  play,
not  intended  to  be  answered.  For,  of  this  character,  much
of  it  certainly  seemed.

*  His  mode  of  representing  the  coffer's  condition ; — ^his
complaint  of  the  errors  of  modem  measurers  as  a  charge
against  the  Great  Pyramid ; — his  complaint  of  (what  is  just
the  token  of  design  in)  the  coffer,  as  intended  for  a  capacity-
standard,  that  it  is  unamenable  to  linear  measurement;
and  his  complaint  that  if  linear  measurement  were  in-
tended, the  intended  standard  would  be  repeated  many
times,  all  over  the  coffer  and  Pyramid  j  whereas  it  is  con-
sidered by  scientific  men  to  be  important,  not  to  repeat  a
standard  more  often  than  is  necessary, — in  order  to  avoid
either  excessive  labour  in  making  copies  identical,  or  else
confusion  from  their  casual  differences.  Though  the  force
of  this  reasoning  could  hardly  be  admitted  by  one  who
gives  out,  that  no  errors  of  workmanship  or  measurement
ought  ever  to  be  made,  even  by  ordinary  mortals,  if  they
wish  to  be  considered  as  doing  a  thing  at  all  respectably.

*  Again,  his  taking  the  mere  admitted  limits  of  error  in
modern  imperfect  measures  under  adverse  circumstances  of
dilapidation,  hurry,  insufficient  means,  etc., — and  declaring
that  all  persons  are  agreed  that  these  errors  are  not  that,
but  original  variations  in  the  structure  itself; — surely  all
this  is  mere  joking,  and  strange  waste  of  time  for  the  Royal
Society  of  Edinburgh.


ISS  Appmdix  2.  [afp.  2.

*  1^  aaoe  ^cnxkBua^s  odier  mode  of  mtUck  loo;  the
Torkiztr  oci  like  ■■'■fnlri  'viieiker  aiitluiieiic^  or  indnctiTey
cc  of  «o£B2z£c  diSLL  wirfflm  nude  here  and  there  fay  tfaoee
vi>:«  b&Tv-  ^aJanxxued  The  whole  theoij;  hot  only  here  ind
tbtire  uxod  nuLTT  sszikiag  ihii^  viiere  there  is  no  mi»-
iikie :  m  izi3ssak«£  viikh.  in  some  ems.  when  rectified
££>CT  the  shTY^Tah-^eMisiMl  idea  in  a  still  slronger  li^t
He  calk  x^  sadi  Hiifaa^fi  as  if  the  Irading  outlines  of
Uie  xhev'CT  l&ai  ik>  ocher  «i|i|wits !  As  if  sodi  ^■"■*^^«'
pcvx&  viere  zks  ^oi^sZ/y  onminittwl,  by  most  adTOcates
cf  a  T«T-  xKw  theioffT  in  an  nnnsnal  sal^ect^  amid  all  the
zsce^  cc  ioa^  scciKi  eTide&oeB  of  it !

*  If  so  c^uroed.  /  cmld  fed  no  eonfosion  or  difficoUy ;
h  is  I^^n^2T  viia:  has  Keen  ahondantlT  seen  in  all  scientific
T«r:(£:rf^s&  Spc^risI  cases  of  mistaken  aignments  or  daUi
riisei  i::  irCr-'.>f  ci  c«r  c>>!isxracting  scMoe  theories^ — whidi
i>rTenbrI^tSfr  do  zic-^  peftsh  viih  the  faOure  of  these  wesk
prxrV^  ^c:  ■:•::  the  coEiraiT  snrnre  and  are  finnly  held,  on
c::::e  xbrr  a:>i  iadew-ndent  groand&  Thon^  I  i^oald
n:2:-er  like  nr  s;Lij>d  c*n  the  simplest  dL  all  platforms,  and
ask.  "*  WVrre  is  ihe  man  who  never  made  a  mistake  t"

*  The  Irvtzirer  s  argument  abont  KhaHph  Al  Mamoon,
and  :hi:  his  power  to  injure  the  Great  Pyramid  is  proof
:ha:  tha:  bcildis^  was  not  of  Divine  origin, — is  entirely
fal^^  :  be:  it  is  a  Willacy  which  has  wide  implication.  If
vjJid,  i:  would  pn>ve  that  the  Mosaic  ark  also  was  not  built
by  Divine  command  tsapematnraUy  given  in  real  human
words  pnx^eding  frcon  no  month  of  bom  man,  and  saper-
na:unl]y  shown  to  Moses'  eye  in  the  Moont), — ^becanse
that  ark  was  captui^  by  the  Philistines.

^  Also  that  the  Temple  of  Solomon  (with  all  its  contained
vessels^,  was  not  built  by  supernatural  Divine  conmiand, —
because  it  and  thev  were  all  either  destroved  or  carried
away  to  Babylon,  and  used  there  to  drink  out  ol^  in  honour
of  idols !     But  that  libation  was  an  expensive  one  to  the


APP.  2.]  Remarks  on  the  Lecture  of  Jan,  20.   439

Ehaliph  who  performed  it.  That  act  brought  the  hand-
writing on  the  wall,  and  cost  Belshazzar  his  kingdom  and
his  life,  with  the  thenceforth  wasting  away  of  the  city.

'Or  again,  that  Christ  could  not  be  Divine,  because
nailed  to  the  cross.  There  were  those  who  asserted  that
as  a  reason  at  the  time,  to  wit,  the  Chief  Priests.  God
answered  the  taunt  not  then,  but  afterward  by  resurrection
and  ascension.

'  Or  indeed  the  same  principle,  similarly  applied,  proves
the  non-existence  of  (xod ;  for  he  allows  man  to  deny  his
existence,  and  to  say  and  do  what  they  please  against  Him
(but  mind!  only  during  the  day  of  grace) — ^without  any
hindrance.  The  argument  indeed  proves  nothing ;  and  it
is  90  manifedly  fauUy  (like  most  of  the  lecture)  that  it  is
really  not  worth  these  few  pages  of  hasty  writing.

*The  hat-measuring  performed  by  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson
before  the  assembled  Society,  is  beneath  contempt  Any
one  after  he  knows  from  others,  what  the  10~^  part  of  the
earth's  radius  is, — can  find  just  as  many  ridiculous  or
ignoble  portions  of  matter  in  art  or  nature  as  he  pleases,
and  which  shall  be,  as  nearly  as  he  may  rather  coarsely
wish,  a  round  fraction  of  that  same  cubit

*  If  he  wishes  to  illustrate  his  argument  by  a  really  par-
allel case,  let  him  take  any  other  structure  as  large  and
equally  simple  in  its  parts  as  the  Great  Pyramid,  and  then
let  him  show  the  existence  of  as  many  and  as  close  coinci-
dences to  cosmical  data.  But  even  ihen^  he  would  not  have
done  half  the  work ;  for,  there  must  be  also  a  coincidence
of  a  system  of  symbols  already  recognised  as  existing  among
men  in  the  part  of  the  world  where  the  structure  existed.

*  My  own  views  of  the  Great  Pyramid's  Divine  origin
(views  very  gradually  formed,  and  cautiously,  during  the
last  two  years),  are  such  that  I  could  afford  to  make  a  pre-
sent to  the  opposite  party  of  the  whole  of  the  metrical
facts !  and  rest  the  case  entirely  on  the  Scripturally-fixed


440  Appendix  2.  [app.  2.

and  recognised  sense  of  the  symbols  of  fonn,  etc,  which
compose  the  structure ;— combining  that  species  of  OTidenoe-
with  the  evidence  of  the  direct  allusions  to  it  in  SCTiptnrey
and  showing  that  these  two  distinct  classes  of  evidence
exactly  coalesce  ;  without  the  (certainly  powerful)  additional
evidence  of  maamre^  equally  coalescing  with  the  other  two !
'  I  so  much  feel  the  importance  of  this  subject^  that  if
I  were  to  be  laid  aside  by  illness  or  by  the  approach  of
death,  I  should  (in  a  natural  sense)  deeply  regret  that  these-
papers  were  not  completed ; — ^not  for  any  ingenuity  in
them,  nor  that  I  in  the  least  expect  that  the  subject  itself
will  bring  earthly  honour  to  any  one  handling  it — ^t
appeals  to  too  small  a  minority,  and  always  must  do  so ;
— not  one  in  a  hundred  is  likely  to  receive  its  truths,
or  even  to  understand  them  properly); — but  because  I
think  I  can  just  point,  to  a  deal  of  truth  which  some  true
Christians  may  then  study  and  appreciate ;  but  which  at
present  they  seem  not  to  notice,  and  chiefly  for  want  of  a
pointing  finger.  I  had  no  idea  that  the  subject  would
expand  so  much,  under  such  study  of  it  as  I  have  been  able
to  give.  W.  P.*


REFLECTIONS   ON  THEORIZING;

AND  ON  THE  SUPERNATURAL  ;
IN  A  PRIVATE  LETTER  FROM  W.  PEIRIE,  Ebq.

The  most  plausible  of  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's  objections,  on
January  20,  is,  that  the  theory  he  condemns  is  not  held
without  variations,  by  each  individual  who  advocates  it,
and  that  even  the  same  advocate  has  occasionally  modified
his  theory.  What  an  accusation !  that  an  important  theory,
having  many  parts  and  ramifications,  and  while  its  data
remain  very  incomplete,  is  not  seen  quite  correctly  in  all


APP.  2.]       Reflections  on  Theorizing.  44 i

its  parts  as  soon  as  its  leading  principles  can  be  grasped.
What  a  suggestion  I  that  the  necessity  of  modifying  the
details  of  a  newly  developed  theory  makes  its  principles
stand  self-condemned.  Where  would  modem  science  be
if  its  advocates  had  acted  on  these  principles  1  The  great
engine  of  modem  science,  induction^  itself  pre-supposes  and
necessitates  the  building  up  of  a  true  theory,  out  of  a  mass
of  what  are,  at  best,  mere  probabilities  in  its  favour,  continu-
ally confirmed  by  other  equally  slight  probabilities,  or  set
aside  thereby.  This  process  impUes,  as  the  almost  neces-
sary history  of  a  theory  ultimately  adopted  as  beyond
doubt,  that  it  shall  have  been  constructed  out  of  what  were
originally  mere  probabilities  (and  very  slight  ones,  nay,
often  only  the  best  alternative  among  actual  improbabilities),
and  that  many  of  these  may  have  been  dismissed  as  errone-
ous in  the  process  of  maturing  the  theory.

What  if  the  sacred  cubit,  in  the  course  of  such  a  process
of  theorizing,  has  been  reckoned,  by  successively  stronger
probabilities,  to  be  at  first  a  few  tenths  of  an  inch,  and  then
a  few  hundredths,  different  from  the  amount  which  further
investigation  makes  to  be  the  more  probable  truth?  In
any  purely  mundane  investigation,  no  reasonable  savant
would  think  of  taking  such  a  circumstance  as  evidence  of
the  fallaciousness  of  the  general  course  of  the  development
of  the  theory.  Indeed  none  more  fully  recognise  the  just-
ness of  this,  and  habitually  take  extreme  advantage  of  the
liberty  of  frequently  modifying  a  theory,  than  that  school  or
party  (the  rationalistic)  which  is  most  forward  to  consider
the  exercise  of  this  liberty  to  be  a  proof  of  the  untenable-
ness  of  the  whole  theory,  in  such  a  case  as  that  of  the  Great
Pyramid, — where  the  theory  happens  to  be  adverse  to  those
of  the  school  referred  to.

The  alternative  theories  which  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  and
other  opponents  offer,  leave  far  more  unreconciled  features
in  the  structure  and  in  its  known  history, — more  that  is


442  Appendix  2.  [afp.  2.

unaoocmnted  for,  and  improbable^  than  doea  the  theory  he
oppoaea

That  theory  generally,  is  addressed  and  offered  to  those
only  who  already  admit  that  a  Diyine  command  saper-
naturally  given,  is  a  vera  ecaua  ;  as  science  terms  a  caose
recognised  already  to  have  existed  in  the  case  of  other
known  phenomena,  and,  therefore,  in  a  certain  sense  at
hand  or  available  for  the  present  hypothesis.  Those  who
openly  deny  this,  are  quite  consistent  in  pronouncing  this
whole  Pyramid  theory  to  be  fandfuL  To  such  thia  theory
is  not  offered :  a  previous  question  must  be  settled  with
them,  namely,  the  existence  of  supernatural  words  and  acts
from  the  Creator  to  His  intelligent  creatures  :  or, — accord-
ing to  a  symbol  chosen  by  Him  as  the  most  applicaUe—
the  existence  of  the  Presiding  Potter  and  the  fact  of  the
touch  of  His  finger,  as  a  vera  causa  in  the  history  of  the
Cosmos,  over  and  above  the  mere  relation  of  the  wheel  (of
nature)  on  which  His  work  is  being  performed  as  on  a  con-
tinuous and  uninterrupted  basis.

It  is  no  discredit  to  the  Cosmos  nor  to  its  Creator,^  that
He  designed  and  intended  it  to  produce  results  by  con-
nexion with, — and  not  as  isolated  from, — His  direct  action.
It  is  no  discredit  to  the  potter^s  rotary  apparatus,  that  it
should  be  intended  for  his  own  direct  use ;  not  to  work  as
a  clock  in  his  absence,  but  to  produce  its  results  by  the
combination  of  the  intelligent  and  varied  touch  of  his  hand
with  the  monotonous  rotation  of  the  apparatus  itself;
while,  moreover,  that  too,  is  continuously  sustained  by  his
foot — see  Postscript.  This  idea  is  skilfully  embodied  in  the
characteristic  structural  features  which  pervade  the  Oreat
Pjrramid.

I  would  rather  err  by  sometimes  ascribing  too  much  to
the  finger  of  the  potter,  than  by  refusing  to  admit  his

^  Though  this  has  been  asserted  as  if  self-evident,— JS«say«aiul  RevUwi,
and  similar  works.


APP.  2.]         Reflectiofis  on  Theorizing.  443

action,  except  by  the  foot,  at  the  treddle ;  or  by  altogether

ignoring  his  presence  at  the  wheel

William  Petrie.

P.8, — ^A  Hastt  Note,  ob  Outline  of  that  on  which  a  Paper  is

IN  Pboobess.

Botation — Bcriptnrally  symbolizeB  Nature, — rpox^t  rijs  y€pia€<as,
Natural  law,  the  fixed  order  of  creation,  or  oosmoB  itself ;  there-
fore, in  contrast  to

Badiation  b  Supernatural  power, — dva^yaafxa  r^f  Sd^-nt  (Heb.  i),
the  effulgence  of  the  Shekinah, — ^Almighty  power  that  origi-
nated nature  itself,  and  which  keeps  it  going ; — and  which
does  not  desert  it,  but  continues  pervading  it, — using  Nature
in  combincUion  with  this  direct  supernatural  power,  this  '  finger
of  God,' — the  ray  of  his  own  outstretched  arm  and  hand, — as
when  the  Spirit  brooded  on  the  waters  of  the  cosmos  to  pro-
duce organic  life.  The  principle  is  symbolized  in  nature  itself
by  solar  radiation  working  in  concert  or  unison  with  terres-
trial rototion.

This  all-important  principle,  that  the  supernatural  and  the
natural,  in  combination,  produce  a  result,  and  that  the  result  is
not  produced  by  either  separately,  is  very  plainly  illustrated  in
Scripture,  by  the  symbol,  several  times  employed, — ^the  Potter's
Wheel,  His  wheels  with  rotary  action  (natural  law,  Eccles.
i  3  to  13),  works  in  unison  with  the  action  of  his  finger  or
hand  (the  supernatural,  termed  in  Scripture  *the  finger  of
God),'  which  is  at  right  angles,  any  way,  to  the  rotary  motion,
— an  expressive  symbol  of  their  absolute  non -correlation  ;  these,
combined,  produce  the  vase.  The  presiding  potter,  mean-
while, himself  sustains  the  motion  of  his  wheel,  on  which  also
he  does  his  work  of  production.  '  Thou  art  the  potter,  we  are
the  clay,*  nature,  cosmos,  is  the  wheel,  and  thus  the  potter's
hand  represents  supernatural  power  working  in  the  midst  of
natural  law  : — as  in  composing  the  first  organic  germs  of  the
various  vegetable  and  animal  generations,  and  the  first  human
couple,  and  as  also  seen  subsequently,  in  angelic  ministrations,
and  the  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Divine  inspiration,  etc.

The  rationalists  wish  to  say  that  the  vessels  are  produced
by  the  potter's  wheel  witliout  the  potter,  and  that  the  idea  that
his  wheel  cannot  do  that  without  the  hand,  is  a  libel  on  it,
and  is  as  much  as  to  say  that  it  does  not  fulfil  its  purpose !


444  Appendijc  2.  [app.  2.

They  call  the  applicatioD  of  the  pottei's  hand  durmg  the

ithe  laws  of  satue.
the  wheeL

W.  P.


Letter  No.  3.

FROM  THE  DAILY  REVIEW  EDINBURGH  NEWSPAPER,

Far  May  18,  1868,

OPINIONS    OF    A    CIVIL    ENGINEER.

^  Sir, — In  the  report  of  the  last  meeting  of  the  Boyal
Society  of  Edinburgh,  which  appeared  in  your  impression
of  the  21st  ult.,  I  find  that  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  is  represented
to  have  said,  regarding  the  work  in  three  volumes  lately
published  by  Professor  C.  Piazzi  Smyth  on  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, '*  that  throughout  the  whole  of  it  there  ran  a  series  of
the  strangest  hallucinations,  which  only  a  few  weak  women,
and  perhaps  a  few  womanly  men,  would  belioTe  ;  and  that
he  had  spoken  to  a  great  many  engineers,  mathematicians,
and  others,  and  he  found  them  scoffing  at  and  despis-
ing it."

'  Now,  Sir,  excepting  by  reputation,  I  have  not  the  plea-
sure of  knowing  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson ;  and  I  certainly  cannot
boast  of  the  wide  experience  which  may  have  fallen  to  his
lot  in  respect  to  acquaintance  with  ''  weak  women "  and
"  womanly  men,"  whatever  that  expression  may  mean ;  nor
could  I  possibly  predicate  what  such  persons  might  or
might  not  be  generally  inclined  to  believe ;  but  i^  guided
by  their  instincts  for  what  is  true,  they  have  attained  to
faith  in  Professor  Smyth's  general  deductions,  I  say  it  is
so  much  the  better  for  them,  and  that  it  is  certainly  no
argument  against  the  correctness  of  his  conclusions  that
they  may  have  done  so.     The  insinuation  intended  to  be


APP.  2.]      Opinions  of  a  Civil  Engineer.         445

conyeyed  by  the  sneer  is  unworthy  either  of  the  reputation
or  social  position  of  the  utterer  of  it,  and  must  be  received
as  a  proof  that  he  finds  himself  much  in  the  position  of  the
celebrated  defendant  who,  having  no  case,  endeavoured  to
make  up  for  that  awkward  deficiency  by  abusing  the  plain-
tiff's attorney.

'  But  further,  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  appears  to  have  had  the
misfortune  to  fall  into  the  company  of  a  number  of
engineers,  mathematicians,  and  oth^  whom  he  describes
as  much  given  to  "  scoffing "  and  "  despising,"  and  I  fear,
further,  that  in  his  eagerness  to  reciprocate  their  opinions
he  has  had  the  additional  misfortune  also  to  have  acquired
their  peculiar  method  of  communicating  them.  Now,  Sir,
I  must  say  that  it  strikes  me  that  the  description  he  gives
of  the  singular  mode  in  which  these  friends  of  his  have
conveyed  their  opinions  to  him  respecting  Professor  Smyth's
book  is  such  as  to  lead  me  very  much  to  doubt  the  value
of  their  conclusions.  "  Scoffers  "  and  "  despisers  "  are  not,
as  a  rule,  people  of  sound  judgment ;  but  what  can  possibly
be  said  in  defence  of  the  judgment  of  any  one  so  ill  judged
as  to  quote  their  judgments  in  aid  of  any  views  of  his  own !

^  I  happen,  Sir,  to  be  a  member  of  the  institution  of  civil
engineers.  I  am  also  a  member  of  the  institution  of
mechanical  engineers,  and  I  have  had,  as  such,  considerable
experience  as  a  producer  in  connexion  with  one  of  our
staple  manufactures,  and  amongst  gentlemen  who,  with  no
ordinary  combination  of  enterprise,  practical  ability,  and
scientific  attainment,  conduct  some  of  the  great  industrial
concerns  of  the  nation,  and  I  have  the  pleasure  to  inform
Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  that,  whenever  I  have  had  the  oppor-
tunity amongst  my  feUow-engineers,  mechanicians,  or  manu-
fEicturers,  of  explaining  the  views  enunciated  by  Professor
Smyth  I  have  always  found  respectful  attention  paid  to
them,  and  in  many  cases  a  singularly  appreciative  adhesion
to  them,  and  especially  to  the  system  of  weights  and  mea-


446


Appendix  2.


[app.  2.


sures  proposed  b j  Professor  Smyth,  and  founded  on  the
metrical  standard  and  system  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  And
even  those  who  are  not  at  present  prepared  absolutely  to
adopt  the  Pyramid  standard,  greatly  appreciate  the  extreme
beauty  and  simplicity  of  the  Pyramid  system  of  mensura-
tion which  the  Professor  has  so  ably  elucidated.

^  For  myself^  I  can  only  say  that,  haying  given  the  opera-
tive conclusions  of  Professor  Smyth  my  most  careful  consi-
deration, I  believe  them  to  be  correct :  and  I  hope  to  live
to  see  the  day  when  both  the  standard  and  system  of  mea-
suration  he  has  deduced  from  the  Oreat  Pyramid  will  take
the  place  of  our  present  unworthy  standard  and  cumbroos
system ;  and  as  far  as  in  me  lies,  I  for  one  will  do  all  in  my
power  to  promote  what  I  should  consider  such  a  happy
practical  consummation  of  the  labours  he  has  bestowed
upon  this  great  subject, — I  am,  etc.,

^  Henry  J.  Marten.

<  Wolverhampton,  May  14,  1868.'


APP.  3.]   M.  Wackerharth  on  Great  Pyramid.  447


APPENDIX   3.


M.  WACKEEBAETH,  OF  UPSALA,  ON  THE

GEE  AT   PYEAMID;

AND

THOUGHTS  THEREON  BY  MR.  W.  PETRIE.

The  farmer  extracted  from  the  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society

of  Edinburgh^  Session  1867-68.


*  On  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Gizeh,  and  Professor  C.  P.
Smyth's  Views  concerning  it.  By  A  D.  Wacker-
BARTH,  AM.,  of  Upsala,  Communicated  by  Professor
Kelland.

^  The  author  gives  a  detailed  statement  of  the  theories  of
Professor  Smyth,  as  given  in  the  Transactions  of  this  Society,
voL  xxiii.  part  3.  He  then,  after  heartily  commending  the
zeal  and  diligence  of  the  Professor,  brings  forward  objec-
tions to  some  of  his  views.  1.  As  to  the  metron  or  unit
of  linear  measure.  Mr.  Wackerbarth  objects  that  this
measure  was  utterly  unknown  to  the  ancient  Egyptians —
appearing  in  no  Egyptian  document  or  monument  what-
ever, nor  in  any  ancient  writer  who  describes  the  condition
of  the  Egyptians.^     Mr.   Wackerbarth   collects  from   the

'  Both  M.  Wackerbarth  and  the  writer  of  the  abstract  seem  here  to
state,  as  a  new  discovery  of  the  former  gentleman's,  with  regard  to  one  of
the  scientifically  deduced  standards  of  the  Great  P>'ramid,  a  quality  or
feature  which  is  the  already  recognised  and  pervading  characteristic  of
the  whole  of  those  standards  ;  and  forms  an  important  step  in  the  chain  of
evidence  leading  towards  a  recognition  of  the  august  authorship  of  the
original  design  of  their  containing  and  component  Monument.  See
chapters  22  to  32  of  this  book.— C.  P.  S.


448


Appendix  3.


[app.  3.


materiale  most  accessible  the  following  table  of  wsi^ts  and
measures  in  ase  amongst  the  andent  Egyptians  (corrected
for  the  recent  measure  of  the  enbit  of  Ki^itink,  made  1^
Sir  Henry  James).


Loss  HsASuas.


TKfi.  (DtgitM),

I.   KMvX«.

gon  (pdm


Kabdeh,  .

U  1 1-  Fitr

1»  [lft|].epTtl3(I-j.^j),  .
SJ  I  2A   a.-i  1 1.  JULi£,I  cnbitl,


O-TSBSS
l-(785
3-967
369625

6-9U
813175


ITISEKART    ftlEABUBK.


I,   £jOOTrrt  (SriS.«.),

JO  1 1.  no£,  npojcy  (ix«-«,),

50   2i  h.  A-OTp   .


606 -SrS  ft  Eng.,  or  823  ft.  Bweaii*,
J  6  9  English  miles,  or  1  NorTegiui
(       niilc  =  ,"1,  degree  of  equator.
j  n-2  Engliih  mile*,  or2^  Norw^
t      miles  =  i  degree.


Llnd  Ueasure.


[bits  =  0-633  Eaglish  un*


=  nbont  ^  pint  English,  or  about  ^  Swedish


..  ejUt-n*.  (Mina}  =  8304  Rrains  =1-1
SkDlpund.


APP.  3.]  M.  Wackerbarth  an  GrecU  Pyramid.  449

*  2.  The  anihor  theiiy  finding  no  such  meaBore  as  the
metron,  goes  on  to  saj  : —

* "  It  is  really  yery  unpleasant  to  reject  a  beaatifiil  and
ingeniously  carried  out  theory  which  one  wishes  to  belieye,
but  I  cannot,  howeyer,  arriye  at  any  other  conclusion  than
that  Professor  Smyth's  yery  interesting  account  of  an
ancient  Egyptian  standard  of  length,  exactly  equal  to  a
ten-millionth  of  the  earth's  axis  of  rotation,  and  the  entire
system  of  weights  and  measures  that  he  has  deduced  from
this  imaginary  unit,  requiring  accurate  knowledge  of  the
earth's  dimensions,  figure,  and  density,  seyeral  centuries
before  the  age  of  Abraham,  and  the  supposed  connexion  of
the  English  measures  with  these,  are  things  purely  mythical.
On  the  other  hand,  that  the  Pyramid  and  its  contents  were
reaUy  the  standards  of  the  ancient  Egyptian  kingdom,  is
or  seems  to  me  an  opinion  not  destitute  of  probability ;
but  I  cannot  think  that  those  standards  were  constructed
with  any  reference  to  the  dimensions  of  the  earth,  but  that
they  were  arbitrarily  chosen  quantities,  intended  to  repre-
sent on  a  tolerably  large  scale  the  size  of  those  portions  of
the  human  body  which  their  names  indicate  :  e.g.  iULA^I
(cubihu),  the  arm  fit)m  the  elbow  to  the  point  of  the  middle
finger ;  g)On  {palmus\  the  breadth  of  the  hand,  etc.  etc.

*"In  fine.  Professor  Smyth's  method,  namely,  that  of
multiplying  or  dividing  by  quantities,  for  the  introduction
of  which  it  would  be  hard  to  giye  any  satisfactory  reason,
— as,  for  example,  the  numb^  366,  with  which  the  base
was  divided,  and  which  is  neither  the  exact  number  of
days  in  a  sidereal  year,  nor  anything  else,  and  again,  the
very  uncertain  number,  5*672  (the  earth's  density), — appears
to  me  in  the  highest  degree  dangerous.  How  deceitful
results  thus  obtained  can  be,  I  shall  now,  in  conclusion  of
this  discussion,  attempt  to  illustrate  by  a  few  examples ;
and  before  doing  this,  I  beg  to  state  that,  entertaining  the
highest  respect  for  Professor  Smyth,  I  have  not  the  least

2  F


ApptmiixX,


{AST.  3.


ansBBcasL'ic


JBT  firvsaccL  of  anj  of  cbe  caitJk  s  £bm9bod%  Imt  bf  ill
proporaoQ  lo  the  laigth  of  tke  secowk'  paidulnm  at  51^°
Ushoiie,  azipi  of  this  Tud  the  Fi^g^^A  |bo(  ■  the  third  paii
Xov,  ft  degree  of  the  eq[oator  k  jost  365^60-534  fed
Dnide  a  thoosamdth  put  of  that  umber  bj  the  lo^gth  of
the  sdercal  Tear  in  solar  daja,  365-^56358,  and  we  haf«
1-0000114  ;  that  is  to  aaj,  if  we  take  a  thouaaadth  of  a
degree  of  the  cqnatix*,  and  dmde  it  bj  the  number  of  dayi
in  a  sidereal  Tear,  we  have  an  FjigHuh  foot  aa  nearlj  as  a
powerfnl  microscope  can  determine  it.  Amd  fttHu  eerlak
that  tkis  is  petrel y  aeademiaL

^''Ex,  2.  K I  take  10,000  times  <;  the  base  of  the  hjper
bolic  logarithms,  and  mnltiplj  it  into  the  qfaantitr,  which  in
the  lunar  theory  is  called  g, — that  is,  the  ratio  of  the  differoice
between  the  moon*s  and  its  ascending  node's  mean  motionfi
to  the  moon's  mean  motion, — and  divide  the  earth's  pcdar
radius  by  the  product,  the  result  is  the  length  <^  the  Pyra-
mid's side.  But  are  we  to  suppose  that  the  ^jptiaoB
forty  centuries  ago  were  acquainted  with  the  lunar  theory,
the  earth's  compression,  and  the  use  of  logarithms,  and,
moreover,  took  this  clumsy  method  dT  perpetuating  their
knowledge  1    Is  it  not  tsr  more  probable  that  the  architect


.APP.  S.]  M.  Wackerharth  on  OrecU  Pyramid.  451

simply  determined  that  the  length  of  the  side  should  be
444  cubits^  and  accordingly  measured  out  that  distance !

*'*£x.  3.  Again,  if  instead  of  taking  Colonel  Yyieie's  measure
of  the  base,  we  accept  for  that  quantity  the  mean  of  half
a  dozen  of  the  most  trustworthy  travellers'  statements, —
for  instance,  Yyse's,  the  French  Academicians',  Cavi^^'s,
Wilkinson's,  Lane's,  and  Davison's — ^we  have  for  the
length  of  the  side  in  English  feet  a  number  which  expresses
in  millimetres  the  mean  height  of  the  barometer  at  Upsala.
But  will  any  one  maintain  that  the  dimensions  of  the
I^rramid  were  intended  by  its  builders  to  have  any  refer-
ence whatever  to  that  interesting  constant  1

^  ^  £x.  4.  If  we  multiply  together  one-tenth  of  the  side  of
the  Pyramid's  base,  the  length  of  the  line  joining  the  middle
of  the  side  and  the  apex  (that  is^  the  height  of  each  one  of
the  four  isosceles  triangles  that  compose  the  Pyramid),  and
the  modulus  for  the  common  logarithms,  the  result  is  3420,
the  constant  of  lunar  parallax,  for  which,  in  Bulges  tables,
the  value  3420'''96  is  given.

'  **  Ex.  5.  Lastly,  if  the  side  of  the  base  (763*81)  be  divided
by  the  hyperbolic  logarithm  of  v  (the  circumference  to
diameter),  and  that  quotient  again  by  the  ratio  of  the  force
of  gravity  at  London  to  the  force  of  gravity  at  the  Pyra-
mid (lat=30°),  (1  00188),  the  result  is  666 !'"


ON  PEOBABILITIES  OF  COINCIDENCB ;

OBy

THOUGHTS  SUGGESTED  BY  M.  A.  D.  WACKERBABTH'S

STRICTURES  ON  THE  RECENT  METRIC  THEORY

OF  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID :

By  WILLIAM  PETRIE,  Esq.

Zlst  March  1868.

Mr.  Wackerbarth's  table  of  ancient  Egyptian  measures
Ib  in  perfect  accord  with  all  that  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth


452  Thoughts  on  Prdbahilities       [app.  3.

says.  The  agreement  of  both  parties  on  the  moat  ancient
Gentile  cabit  (20*7  British  inches)  Ib  certainly  striking^  seeing
the  yery  different  sources  and  dates  from  which  each  de-
rived the  fact :  Wackerbarth  from  a  wooden  measure  dis-
covered at  Kamak,  Professor  Piaszi  Smyth  chiefly  from  the
interior  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  inaccessible  to  the  makers
of  the  Kamak  measure,  and  separated  from  it  by  700  years.
Tet  the  agreement  is  to  the  twenty-thousandth  part  of  the
whole  quantity :  this  is  a  difference  of  only  a  small  fraction
of  the  probable  error  of  each  part/s  source  of  information.
So  fiir,  then,  there  is  a  striking  confirmation  of  Pro-
fessor Smyth's  views  instead  of  any  stricture  on  them;
the  divergence  relates  purely  to  the  ctiner  standard  of
measure,  the  metron  of  50*05  British  inches;  or,  what  is
really  the  same  in  point  of  theory,  a  standard  of  25*025
British  inches,  the  precise  half  of  that  length :  and  this  is
the  form  in  which  it  ought  more  justly  to  be  discussed,  as
it  pervades  both  of  Piazzi  Smjrth's  publications,  while  the
metron  or  two-fold  form  of  the  standard  is  only  partially
assumed  in  the  earlier  and  smaller  book,  Our  InkeriUmce^
and  is  not  rested  on  at  all  in  the  larger  and  more  recent
publication,  entitled  Life  and  Work  ai  the  Great  Pyramid^
the  half  length  appearing,  on  further  investigation,  to  have
been  more  probably  the  original — or  at  least  one  of  the
original  forms  of  it.  Mr.  Wackerbarth's  objection^  to  the
theory  on  which  this  is  deduced,  is,  that  it  rests  on  coin-
cidences which  may,  too  possibly,  be  merely  casual  or
fortuitous.  To  illustrate  this,  he  cites  examples  of  curious
numerical  coincidences  that  are  indisputably  nothing  more
than  what  are  commonly  called  casual  The  mention  of
these  as  a  caution  merely,  would  be  laudable  and  useful ;

1  ThiB  objection  haying  been  before  the  minds  of  many,  it  ia  desirable  to
examine  carefuUy  whatever  seems  the  most  ably  argued  form  in  which  it
has  been  put  On  this  principle  of  selection,  Mr.  Wackerbarth's  paper
takes  precedence  of  one  by  Sir  J.  T.  Simpson,  contributed  to  the  sam«
learned  Society  (R.S.E.),  as  this  last-named  paper  abounds  in  mere  inTeo-
tive,  and  in  erroneous  assertion,  rather  than  in  solid  argument— W.  P.


APP.  3.]  by  William  Petrie.  453

but  let  OS  consider  how  far  the  application  of  such  examples
of  coincidence  to  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth's  theory  of  a
25*025  inch  standard  is  deserved  or  sound.

His  first  example  is,  that  a  360,000th  of  earth's  equatorial
circumference  is  365*2605  British  feet,  being  the  number
of  solar  days  in  a  year,  with  an  arithmetic  difference  of
only  one  100,000th  part,  which  is  within  the  probable
error  of  our  knowledge  of  the  datum  involyed.  This  is
certainly  a  rare  coincidence :  if  a  computer  were  to  devote
the  working  hours  of  each  working  day  to  search  physical
science  as  quickly  as  he  could  for  such  really  unconnected
coincidence,  the  average  rate  at  which  he  would  discover
them  would  be  just  about  one  in  each  year  so  spent.  We
therefore  feel  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Wackerbarth  for  it,
though  it  be  nothing  but  a  curiosity.  But,  it  confessedly
means  nothing:  hence  its  weakness  as  bearing  adversely
on  the  Pyramid  theory.  Had  it  been  a  precise  decimal
fraction  instead  of  having  36  as  the  submultiple  of  earth's
equator,  there  would  have  been  more  approach  to  meaning
in  it ;  and  had  it  been  a  circle  of  earth's  orbit  around  the
sun,  it  would  have  had  a  distinct  meaning,  and  besides,
would  give  a  round  number  of  feet  in  each  day's  march  of
the  earth ;  but  to  take  the  attributes  of  one  natural  circle
and  to  attach  them  to  a  different  natural  circle,  is  a  process
adverse  to  any  theory  that  could  assume  the  coincidence  to
have  been  intentional.  The  coincidences  of  the  Pyramid
theory  differ  in  these  respects  from  such  mere  coincidence
as  the  above  :  for  particulars  see  the  reply  to  Sir  H.  James.

Mr.  Wackerbarth's  observations  (see  Proceedings  of  the
RS.Ed.  1867-8,  and  our  page  450),  on  the  arbitrary  and
modem  length  of  the  British  yard,  prove  nothing  as  to  <^
tnch^  which  is  spoken  of  as  an  ancient  measure  in  Professor
Smyth's  work ;  nor  even  as  to  the  foot  of  1 2  such  inches,
of  which  our  non-venerable  yard  (as  he  truly  describes  it)
is  made,  for  convenience,  to  contain  an  integral  number.


454  Thoughts  on  PrdbdbiUUes       [afp.  3.

Mr.  Wackerbarth's  other  examples  of  lemaikably  dose
coincidences  between  unconnected  numerical  data  have  the
same  defect,  of  being  dismmilar  from  the  leading  Pyramid
coincidences, — ^both  in  the  manner  already  explained,  and
in  being  artifidaUy  complex,  and  of  heterogeneoos  composi-
tion ;  hence  they  have  no  real  force  as  against  the  Pyramid
theory  in  question.  Only  one  part  of  that  theory  (that
involving  the  mean  density  of  the  earth),  is  somewhat
behind  the  rest  in  extreme  simplicity,  and  insnch  ostensible
meaning  and  reasons — seen  for  instance  in  the  tokens  of
earth's  radios  and  son's  mean  distance, — as  to  be  in  some
small  degree  open  to  an  impotation  of  improbability  ct
intention,  as  in  the  case  of  the  above-named  mere  coin-
cidences ;  and,  to  this  extent^  that  part  of  the  theory  does
stand  less  firmly  than  the  rest  Its  aothor  and  advocates
quite  recognise  this.  They  have  never  said,  nor  do  they
mean,  that  every  point  of  the  theory  is  eqoally  secore  from
mistake,  and  that  it  admits  of  no  improvement  or  modifi-
cation :  only  that  there  is  a  strong  probability  (equal  to
what  is  in  practical  life  termed  a  certainty)  that  the  leading
ideas  of  it  are,  to  some  important  extent,  real ; — ^worthy  of
careful  improvement^  rather  than,  as  Sir  James  Simpson
seems  to  think,  worthy  of  hostile  efforts ;  as  thoogh  similar
coincidences,  when  ondesigned,  were  found  a  hundred  times
more  commonly  than  they  are,  and  as  though  the  sugges-
tion of  a  commonication  of  superhuman  knowledge  were  so
Bibliolatrous  as  to  deserve  no  quarter.  Yet  that  key  is  the
really  existent  key  in  human  history ; — a  vera  causa  (accord-
ing to  Baconian  phrase),  and  being  so,  it  is  as  much  entitled
to  be  fairly  tried  as  any  other  key — ^in  this  and  in  any
physical  problem, — and  much  more  so  entitled,  than  some
keys  which  savants  are  fond  of  trying,  unabashed  (millions
of  ages,  for  instance),  which  are  not  veroi  causoe  of  effects
similar  to  those  (organic,  geologic,  or  otherwise)  that  they
wish  to  explain  thereby.


APP.  3.]  by  William  Petrie.  455

Bat  farther, — why  do  simple  and  intelligible  coincidences
constitate  stronger  proofs  than  such  as  those  cited  by  Mr.
Wackerbarth,  viz.,  complex  ones,  and  such  as  do  not  carry
with  them  a  manifest  connexion  of  ideas  1  Chiefly  because
the  number  of  facts,  amongst  which  a  single  close  coincidence
is  to  be  searched  for,  is  vastly  greater  in  the  latter  case  than
the  former.  For  example,  Mr.  Wackerbarth's  cases  of  for-
toitous  coincidences  with  Pyramid  quantities  are  so  vaguely
and  capriciously  connected  with  the  subject^  and  are  so
complex,  that  they  can  be  manufisu^tured  by  myriads,  and
the  abstract  probability  of  the  intention  of  coincidence
(shown  by  the  closeness  of  agreement^  to  say  about  -si^tJx
part>  as  in  the  instances  given),  must  be  divided  by  about
a  myriad.  This  makes  f  X  3,000-5-10,000  to  1,*  or  },  being
less  than  even  chance,  if  we  would  express  the  true  value
of  the  coincidence  as  representing  a  probability  of  design
or  intention  in  the  matter.  Try  our  Pyramid  theory  by
this  test  We  have  a  coincidence  say  to  j^nnrth  part  But
before  proceeding,  let  it  be  distinctly  understood  that  this
does  not  mean  that  much  of  certain  error  or  want  of  coin-
cidence, as  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  seems  to  misconceive  it^  but
that  the  difference  is  not  proved  to  exist  at  all,  except  firom
necessary  imp^ections  of  work  ^  made  by  hands,"  and  of
its  measurement  by  limited  powers  of  sight,  and  of  the
needed  accuracy  of  knowledge  of  the  physical  data  required.
These  fractional  deficiencies  of  perfect  coincidence  being
then  thus  understood,  we  have,  in  the  Pyramid  theory,  a
coincidence  say  to  sinnr^h  part  on  an  average  of  the  cases
in  question.  This  coincidence  is  from  a  class  of  facts
limited  by  connexion  with  the  subject  and  with  fellow-
coincidences  ;  so  much  so,  that  the  choice  does  not  lie  among
fifty  such  £eu^;  nay,  not  among  a  dozen  such — ^perhaps

^  The  mathematical  reason  for  inserting  the  constant  ^  would  lead  to
a  digression  which  the  reader  will  not  practically  need,  as  it  affects  both
sides  equally.— W.  P.


456  Thoughts  on  Probabilities       [app.  3.

half  a  dozen,  when  we  take  mto  account  their  agreement
with  traditions,  etymologies,  and  STmbols  in  the  stroctore ;
as  was  more  fully  explained  in  a  paper  read  hy  ProfesBor
Piazzi  Smjrth  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  on  16th
March.  We  have  therefore  to  divide  f  x  3000  by  about
6,  making  about  571  to  1,  call  it  600  to  1  (because  the
data  of  the  calculation  can  only  be  very  vaguely  assumed),
as  representing  the  probability  (so  far  as  the  degree  of  coin-
cidence shows  it)  that  the  cause  of  this  coincidence  was
design  or  intention,  as  distinguished  firom  a  purely  fortui-
tous fact  Moreover,  if  there  be  two  or  three  such  coinci-
dences arising  out  of  the  iame  theory,  their  probabiUtieB
must  be  separately  estimated  on  the  above  principle,  and
then  multiplied  together;  two  such  of  1000  to  1  each  mak-
ing a  combined  probability  of  a  million  (1,000,000)  to  1.

The  above  is  a  rough  illustration  of  the  mode  of  mathe-
matically or  quantitatively  expressing  the  correct  mental
impression  of  probability,  as  to  intention  and  causation
having  originated  any  such  remarkable  coincidences  as  those
above  referred  to,  in  dimensions,  time,  qualities,  etc.  Such
an  impression  is  inherent  in  the  common  sense  of  mankind,
when  it  is  matured  by  experience  of  the  practical  facts  of
the  cosmos,  and  is  not  warped  by  prejudice  or  interest
The  impression  referred  to  (of  the  immense  power  of  evi-
dence in  two  or  three  close  coincidences  when  they  occur
in  the  circumstances  above  stated),  has  so  good  a  founda-
tion in  truth,  that  such  strictures  as  we  are  examining,
suggested  by  apparently  similar  examples,  without  design
or  causation,  useful  as  they  are  in  their  right  places,  are  yet
out  of  place  when  allowed  to  apply  to  coincidences  such  as
those  of  the  Pyramid  theory,  the  conditions  of  which  are
shown  to  be  highly  different  in  degree,  though  similar  to  a
superficial  view.

Some  may  ask  if  the  divisor  in  our  above-named  frac-
tion representing  the  probability,  should  not  be  reduced  to


APP.  3.]  hy  WiUiam  Peine.  457

the  number  of  instances  individually  tested  for  a  coinci-
dence hy  the  seeker  of  the  coincidenoesy  instead  of  being,  as
we  may  seem  to  have  taken  it^  the  number  of  instances
which  the  seeker  might  test  if  he  had  unlimited  time  1  To
this  we  reply  that  we  have  taken  a  number  between  the
two,  as  being  the  truest ;  because  the  mind  does,  in  reality,
test  a  much  wider  range  of  the  worse  or  more  obviously
non-coincident  class  of  instances  (by  a  rapid  intuition  or
practised  ezpertness  unconsciously  exercised  in  rejecting
them),  than  those  instances  merely  which  it  is  conscious  of
testing,  and  which  are  chiefly  the  small  percentage  of  better
sort  of  coincidences.  This  fact  is  well  illustrated  by  the
action  of  the  eye,  which,  in  a  second  of  time,  can  uncon-
sciously notice  literally  ten  thousand  objects  before  it;
such  as  seeds  of  many  colours,  shades,  shapes,  and  sizes,
evenly  shaken  out  upon  the  sufficiently  small  meshes  of  a
sieve,  and  can  single  out  from  amongst  them  the  one,  or
the  few,  that  seem  likely  to  reward  further  examination
by  yielding  some  desired  coincidence  of  size  or  position  on
the  meshes,  etc.  But,  in  justification  of  the  general  truth
of  the  preceding  comparisons  of  Mr.  Wackerbarth's  coinci-
dences with  those  of  our  Pyramid  theory,  let  it  be  remem-
bered by  those  who  think  the  assumed  denominators  to  be
unduly  large,  that  this  error,  if  it  exist,  is  very  much  com-
pensated by  its  afifecting  both  sides ;  and  thus  the  com-
parison would  not  be  essentially  altered  by  limiting  the
field  of  instances  searched  in  both  cases  to  those  which
were  somewhat  consciously  noticed  by  the  mind,  in  its
search  for  coincidences.

But  the  calculations,  to  find  out  the  probability  for  or
against  the  existence  of  any  causative  connexion,  should
be  completed  by  the  introduction  of  another  element  as  a
co-efficient;  namely,  the  intrinsic  improbability  of  mck  a
catisative  connexion  existing^  irrespectively  of  the  question  of
more  or  less  coincidence  of  any  sort,  and  reckoned  thus


458  Thoughts  on  Probabilities       [app.  3.

purely  from  general  cannderatwfu  of  ike  nature  of  the  hypo-
thetical cause,  or  rather  of  all  the  altematiyes  available  as
hypothetical  causes,  whose  respective  probabilities  are  in-
tended to  be  noticed.  This  element  caonot  well  be  re-
duced to  a  numerical  expression,  for  it  depends  on  a  wide
range  of  the  relations  of  things.  Still  the  estimate  must
be  made.  No  error  in  the  estimate  of  this  element  can
be  so  great  as  that  which  would  be  caused  by  the  entiie
omission  of  the  element  firom  the  calculaticm,  on  the  plea
that  it  is  difficult  to  form  an  estimate  of  it^  and  that  any
estimate  will  be  undesirably  vague.  The  conmion  sense  of
most  men  unconsciously  makes  the  estimate,  even  irhSi»
they  refuse  to  do  it  intellectually  or  numerically,  saying  it
cannot  be  done.

Let  us  now  take  one  of  the  examples  of  coincidence  given
by  Mr.  Wackerbarth,  as  inviting  a  comparison  of  probability
(or  rather  of  improbability)  with  that  of  our  Pyramid  theoiy,
as  regards  the  possible  existence  of  a  causative  or  intentional
connexion  between  the  coinciding  facts.  We  have  here  to
balance  such  an  improbability  as  the  particular  event  of
the  present  modem  mean  atmospheric  pressure,  estimated
in  a  particular  measure,  and  by  the  height  of  a  partiaUar
liquid — ^mercury — at  one  out  of  thousands  of  somewhat
celebrated  «pote  on  the  earth,  ancient  and  modem — Upsala
— ^and  other  things,  as  being  known  to  and  connected  with
the  builders  of  the  Pyramid,  and  selected  by  them  for
commemoration  by  the  Great  Pyramid.  We  have,  I  repeat^
to  balance  such  an  improbability  as  that^  against  another
improbability :  let  us  review,  then,  its  leading  features
also.  That  the  design  of  the  Great  Pyramid — ^involving
the  leading  geodetic  and  solar  phenomena ;  expressive  not
only  of  what  has  taxed  the  best  powers  of  modem  science
to  ascertain,  these  most  noble  physical  data  themselves,
but  by  their  aid  as  well  as  by  a  device  of  structural  angle,
expressing  with  redoubled  emphasis  the  idea  of  rotation  in


APP.  3.]  hy  William  Petrie.  459

union  with  radiation  ;^  and  the  stractore  being  the  greatest
and  earliest  of  remaining  monmnents^  and  in  its  features
and  history  showing  strong  opposition  and  contrast  to  its
surrounding  idolatry — ^had  the  same  origin  as  our  Sacred
Scriptures  and  the  stone  cairns  and  various  other  struc-
tures therein  recorded  with  precise  measurements.  Seeing
that  these  Sacred  Scriptures  and  these  structures  therein
mentioned  are  cdmilarly  opposed  to  surrounding  idolatiy ;
are  of  similar  date ;  and  declare  cdmilarly,  the  sun  to  be
set  for  (symbolic)  ^  signs,  and  for  seasons,  and  for  days  and
years/  and  ^the  breadth  of  the  earth'  to  be  a  noteworthy
object  by  the  Designer  and  Declarer  of  the  words  of  those
Scriptures.  Some  persons  would  say  that  there  is  primd
fade  much  probability  rather  than  improbability  in  the
last-named  connexion ;  but  we  do  not  ask  our  opponents
to  go  so  far;  we  only  ask  that  it  be  granted  that  the  con-
nexion is  incomparably  less  improbable  than  any  causational
connexion  with  the  Upsala  fact  above  named.^  We  would
suggest  that  the  probability  is  about  1,000,000,000  to  1
against  the  latter,  and  (not  to  favour  our  own  theory  too
much),  10  to  1  against  the  former.  Then  the  probability
ratios  (^  to  1,  and  600  to  1)  already  above  obtained  in
each  case  respectively,  and  derived  from  the  testimony  of
coincidence  alone,  should  be  reduced  by  dividing  by  these
figures  respectively.  The  ultimate  probability  thus  obtained,
after  duly  including  hoih  the  nature  of  the  coincidences
and  the  abstract  improbabilities  of  their  being  causatively
connected,  stands  as  follows : —

1  1  1

3  ^  1,000,000,000  ^  ^>  ^r  say  300,000,000  ^  ^

^  A  consideration  of  this  and  other  great  scriptoral  symbols  in  the
stmcture  is  in  preparation  for  publication. — W.  P.

*  It  will  be  seen  that  the  superhuman  origin  of  the  Scriptures  is  here
taken  for  granted  ;  so  far  at  least,  as  concerns  the  scriptural  facts  above
named.  We  assume  this  because  we  only  address  ourselves,  on  this  occa-
sion, to  those  who  admit  it  For  others,  the  scriptural  question  must  be
previously  settled,  as  an  entirely  separate  subject— W.  P.


460  Thoughts  by  W.  Petrie.         [afp.  3.

against  sach  a  coincidence  as  Mr.  Wackerbarih  mentions,
being  causatiye  or  intentional,

and  600  X  -7q  to  1  or  60  to  1

in  fiftyoar  of  even  one  isolated  case  of  coincidence,  sach  as
our  Pyramid  theory  presents,  being  causative  or  inten-
tional in  the  original  design  of  the  structure.

There  are  some  other  elements, — such  as,  the  small  frac-
tion expressing  the  mean  or  probable  error  of  workmanship
originally  unavoidable ;  and,  more  discrimination  between
the  one  least  improbable  kind  of  connexion,  in  the  case
under  consideration,  that  of  design  and  work  of  a  living
intelligence,  and  any  other  kinds  of  causative  connexion
between  coincident  quantities,  much  more  improbable,  as
the  alternative  to  its  being  supposed  a  purely  fortuitous
coincidence.  Such  additional  elements  are  properly  neces-
sary to  the  theoretic  completion  of  any  such  computation  of
probabilities  as  the  preceding,  but  these  are  not  noticed  above,
because  in  the  existing  state  of  our  dimensional  knowledge
of  the  Great  Pyramid  they  would  not  materially  affect  even
the  separate  probabilities  of  intention  in  the  two  classes  of
coincidence  here  reviewed ;  certainly  not  the  comparative
result  here  established.

We  shall  be  reminded  that  Mr.  Wackerbarth  distinctiy
professed  not  to  give  cases  similar  in  degree  to  that  of  our
theory,  but  professedly  extreme  cases,  by  way  of  reducUo
ad  absurdum.  We  have  not  overlooked  this,  and  our  object
has  been  to  show  that  the  same  sound  principles  which
show  the  absurdity  of  those  cases,  show  the  contrary  of
ours  :  and  that  where  there  is  a  question  of  probability  (as
facts  of  human  knowledge  ever  must  be,  however  certain
they  may  be  practically  called)  the  demand  to  consider  them
in  the  same  light  as  less  probable  cases,  constitutes  a
species  of  reductio  in  which  the  abntrdum  consists  solely  in
the  process  of  reductio,  W.  Petrdl


AFP.  4.]        Maeshowe  in  Orkney.  461


APPENDIX  4.


EXTRACTS

FROM  AN

ACCOUNT  OP  MAESHOWE  IN  ORKNEY,

Bt  JOHN  STUAKT,  Sia  Soc.  Aivr.  Soot.

CONTAINED  IN  VOL.  V.  PABT  2,  OF  PROCEEDINGS  OF  SOCIETT
OF  ANHQUARIES  OF  SCOTLAND  (1864).

'  It  was  thus  plain  that  Maeshowe  was  a  great  cham-
bered barrow,  and  that  it  had  been  constructed  by  first
building  on  the  surface  of  the  ground  the  chambers  and
gallery,  then  covering  the  structure  with  a  layer  of  small
stones,  and  finally  heaping  oyer  this  a  layer  of  earth  from
the  adjacent  surface,  and  from  the  (circular)  trench  by
which  the  barrow  is  surrounded.' — P.  251.

*  Chambered  tombs  have  been  found  in  many  countries,
or  a  series  of  chambers,  in  the  centre  of  mounds  of  earth
or  of  cairns  of  stones,  approached  by  long  passages.  In
Denmark,  structures  of  this  sort  are  called  giants'  graves ;
they  are  found  throughout  the  north  of  Europe ;  they
occur  frequently  in  Brittany ;  and  very  remarkable  ex-
amples have  been  found  in  some  of  the  Channel  Islands.
But  all  the  chambers  now  referred  to,  are  formed  by  the
imposition  of  covering  flags  on  walls  also  formed  of  flags,
as  in  the  simple  cromlechs,  without  any  appearance  of  the


462  Extract  from  an  Account       [app.  4.

^  horisatUal  arch  which  is  a  distingaishing  feature  of  the
^  central  chamber  at  Maeshowe.

'  The  horizontal  arch  formed  by  the  projection  of  one
'  stone  beyond   the   other,  till  the  conveying  walls  are

*  spanned  by  a  single  flag  at  the  top,  is  found  in  the  under-
^  ground  chambers  in  eveiy  part  of  the  north  of  Scotland,
^  as  well  as  in  the  chambered  cairns  and  ^  brocha.**     It  is

*  also  the  distinguishing  feature  of  early  Irish  remains  of  a

*  similar  character,  the  cloghauns,  the  undeiground  cham-

*  bers  in  raths  and  other  places,  and  in  the  chambered

*  cairns  at  Newgrange  and  Dowth  on  the  banks  of  the

*  Boyne.'— P.  261.

Maeshowe  in  Orkney  and  Newgrange  in  Ireland  compared.

'  I  paid  a  visit  to  Newgrange  shortly  after  my  eyes  had
'  been  familarized  with  the  arrangement  of  Maeshowe,  and
^  the  likeness  between  the  two  structures  was  so  remark-
^  able,  as  to  leave  no  room  for  doubting  that  the  same  idea

*  had  suggested  both.

*  In  each  there  was  a  long  narrow  gallery,  issuing  in  a
^  central  domed  chamber,  from  which  three  lateral  crypts
'  branched  off,  although  the  structure  of  Newgrange  is
^  much  ruder  and  less  developed  than  the  other.  This,
^  however,  may  be  partly  accounted  for  by  the  differences
^  of  material  at  Maeshowe ;  the  builder^  got  abundance  of
'  slabs  in  the  neighbourhood,  split  up  in  such  regular  forms,
'  that  the  work  has  the  appearance  of  ashlar,  without  being
'  touched  by  a  tool ;  while  at  Newgrange  the  builders  had

*  principally  to  deal  with  large  shapeless  pillars  and  small

*  boulders.  Here  the  gallery  leading  from  the  outside  to
'  the   central    chamber,  and   which   measures  63  feet  in

*  length,  is  formed  of  large  upright  stones,  covered  with
'  flags  of  immense  size.  The  central  chamber  is  formed  by
'  a  series  of  upright  pillars  partially  sunk  into  the  ground.


APP.  4.]      of  Maeskowe  in  Orkney.  463

*  on  which  the  conyerging  walls  of  the  dome  are  supported,

*  and  the  whole  covered  with  enormous  quantities  of  small

*  boulders  exactly  on  the  principle  of  the  chambers  in  Picts'
'  houses.  The  top  of  the  dome  is  19  feet  6  inches  from  the
'  floor.  From  the  entrance  to  the  inside  wall  of  the  chamber
'  opposite,  measures  18  feet^  and  between  the  extremities
'  of  the  ciypts  on  the  right  and  left^  the  distance  is  22  feet
'  The  chamber  itself  is  of  an  irregular  shape,  not  aboye
'  8  feet  in  diameter  in  any  direction.' — (See  Archasologia,
yoL  iL  p.  254.)

^  The  chamber  at  Maeshowe  was  about  15  feet  square  at
bottom,  and  the  top  of  the  dome,  when  complete,  was
probably  about  20  feet  from  the  floor.  If  we  include  the
cells,  the  structure  measured  about  28  feet  across,  and
nearly  20  feet  in  the  opposite  direction.  In  each  of  the
recesses  at  Newgrange  is  an  oyal  stcme,  slightly  hollowed,
which  may  haye  been  used  for  the  same  purpose  as  the
raised  slabs  on  the  floors  of  the  cells  at  Maeshowe.  It
seems  probable  that  in  both  cases  the  remains  of  the  dead
in  some  urn  or  cist  were  placed  here.

^  The  cairn  at  Newgrange  was  protected  by  a  circle  of
great  standing  stones,  which  surrounds  it  at  some  distance
from  its  external  limits,  as  the  ditch  does  at  Maeshowe ;
and  if  the  cairn  of  stones  were  removed,  it  would  leave  a
structure,  consisting  of  a  narrow  alley  of  standing  stones,
leading  to  an  irregular  circle,  with  three  offishoots  of
cdmilar  pillars,  which  may  suggest  some  points  of  analogy
between  it  and  groups  of  pillars  not  under  cairns,  such  as
Gallemish.'

Late  and  Early  Visitations,

*  When  Newgrange  was  examined  in  the  seventeenth
^  century,  it  was  found  to  be  much  in  the  same  state  as  it

*  now  is.     We  are  told  that  underfoot  there  was  nothing


464  Ejtraclsfrcm  an  Acetmnt      [afp.  4.

but  loose  ttoiiet  of  ereij  aae  in  namfhmm,  and  among
them  a  great  man j  bones  of  beasts  and  aome  pieees  of
deei^s  h<»n8 ;  and  with  the  exeeption  of  a  quantitj  of
bones  and  teeth  of  the  hone,  and  a  snail  fragment  of
a  human  skoll  of  unosaal  thirimeaSj  which  were  foond
in  the  tUbris  in  the  chambers^  no  idics  were  fisond  at
Maeahowe.  There  is  reason  to  beliere^  however,  that
in  both  cases  there  had  been  eazfy  YisitoiB  of  these
moonds^  who  had  left  the  chamben  in  confiiaioPy  after
having  nfled  them  of  eveEything  of  value  which  thef
contained.

*  The  rifling  of  Unnbs  was  carried  on  to  a  great  extent  in
the  middle  ages ;  and  the  temptation  to  it  was  great^  from
the  practice  which  long  prerailed  of  burying,  with  the
departed,  jewels  and  ornaments  of  great  Yalne.

'  That  the  Danes  ransacked  Newgrange  and  the  other
tombs  of  the  Kings  of  Tara  in  the  year  (861  AJ>.),  we  are
assured  on  the  aathority  of  the  Irish  annalists  (AjmaU  of
Four  MoMUn,  by  O'Donovan,  pp.  497-498),  and  we  shall
see  that  Maeshowe  suffered  a  like  visitation  (between  800
and  1100  A.D.).  Whether  a  gold  coin  of  Valentinian
(370  A.D.),  and  another  of  Theodosios  (390  AJ>.),  foond
on  the  outside  of  Newgrange,  or  the  two  ancient  gold
torques,  a  golden  chain,  and  two  rings,  foond  in  digging
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  entrance,  ever  formed  part  of
the  treasure  which  it  contained,  we  cannot  say ;  any  more
than  whether  the  silver  ornaments  found  near  the  bay
of  Skaill,  and  now  in  our  Museum,  formed  part  of  that
great  treasure  said  to  have  been  carried  off  from  Maes«
howe,'  (and  containing  coins,  Saxon  and  Cufic,  of  dates
from  887  A.D.  to  945  A.D.).


APP.  4.]         of  Maeshowe  in  Orkney.  465


PicUshf  PelasgiCj  and  other  comparison*,

*  The  idea  which  suggested  the  arrangement  of  the
chambered  tomb  was  only  a  modification  of  that  which
governed  the  builders  of  the  '^  Picts'  houses."  One  laige
central  chamber,  surrounded  hj  a  group  of  smaller  ones,
and  approached  by  a  long  narrow  passage,  is  the  descrip-
tion applicable  to  this  latter  class  of  buildings,  exemplified
by  those  at  Quentemess  and  Papa  Westray  in  Orkney,
and  Kettlebum  in  Caithness.

'  In  all  these  the  passage  to  the  internal  chambers  is  so
confined  as  to  imply  a  crawling  posture  in  one  requiring
access,  and  the  communication  between  the  chambers  is
equally  confined.  We  find  the  same  narrowness  of  pas-
sages in  subterranean  chambers  in  Ireland.  .  .  .  They  are
the  characteristics  also  of  the  African  wigwam  of  the
present  day.  .  .  .

'  The  idea  of  the  sepulchral  chambered  cairn  was  much
the  same,  only  that  the  internal  cells  seem  to  have  been
fewer  in  number,  while  not  unfrequently  there  was  only
one  large  domed  apartment  in  the  centre,  approached  by
a  narrow  passage ;  as  in  the  striking  group  of  cairns  at
Clava  on  Naimside,  described  in  our  **  Proceedings  "  (voL
iii.  p.  47) ;  and  as  in  the  chambered  cairns  at  Yarrows  in
Caithness,  opened  by  Mr.  Rhind,  and  described  by  him
in  the  Ulster  Journal  of  Archaeology^  vol.  ii  p.  100.

*  In  this  partial  similarity  of  arrangement  between  the
sepulchral  and  the  living  chambered  cairns,  we  recognise
a  feature  in  which  they  agree  with  one  class  of  the  early
Etruscan  tombs,  which  have  their  internal  arrangements
constructed  in  imitation  of  a  dwelling  chamber,  with  fur-
niture, like  the  apartment  itself,  cut  out  of  the  rock
(Fergusson's  Handbook  of  Architecture,  p.  259).  Many  of
these  Etruscan  tombs  consist  of  five  or  more  chambers,

2G


466


Bxtracts  from  an  Account      [app.  4


vaulted  on  the  horizontal  principle,  in  the  centre  of
mounds  of  earth,  which  are  surrounded  by  a  circle  of
standing  stones.

^  The  curious  specimen  of  early  Pelasgic  art^  called  the
Treasury  or  Tomb  of  Atreus,  one  of  the  kings  of  MycensB,
bears  a  strong  resemblance  to  the  plan  of  some  of  our  cham-
bered cairns.  In  it  is  a  great  circular  chamber,  in  a  mound
of  earth,  nearly  50  feet  in  diameter,  vaulted  on  the  prin-
ciple of  horizontal  layers  of  stones  projecting  the  one  beyond
and  above  the  other,  till  one  small  stone  closed  the  whole,
and  made  the  vault  complete.  This  chamber,  approached
by  a  long  gallery,  has  on  one  side  of  it  a  small  oypt  cut  in
the  rock,  which  appears  to  be  the  true  sepulchre.  .  .  .  The
central  chamber  at  Maeshowe  was  unpaved,  and  althou^
Mr.  Farrer,  at  my  suggestion,  made  some  digging  into  the
soil,  no  deposit  was  found,  nor  was  there  any  appearance
of  the  soil  having  been  disturbed.  So  that  here  also,  the
lateral  crypts  may  have  been  the  real  sepulchre.

'  From  what  has  been  said,  it  seems  likely  that  Maeshowe
must  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  a  race  who  long  pre-
ceded the  coming  in  of  the  Norse  population.  .  .  .

*  To  how  much  earlier  a  period  than  the  ninth  centmy  A.D.
we  are  to  assign  the  erection  of  Maeshowe,  it  would  be
difficult  to  say.  We  may  leam,  however,  from  Adamnan,
in  his  Life  of  Columba,  what  was  the  practice  of  burying  a
Pict  of  some  importance  soon  after  the  middle  of  the  sixth
century  A.D.  (viz.,  in  the  place  where  he  died  he  was  buried
by  his  companions,  they  raising  a  cairn  of  stones  upon
him).

'  This  was  no  doubt  an  extemporized  funeral,  but  we
know  that  the  cairn  was  one  of  the  recognised  monuments
of  great  men,  both  in  regal  cemeteries  and  on  battle-fields,
in  Pagan  times,  in  Celtic  Ireland,  till  the  establishment  of
the  Christian  religion,  when  all  such  modes  of  burial  were
abolished  (450  A.D.)


APP.  4.]  of  Maeshowe  in  Orkney.


467


'  Among  the  Celtic  people  of  Ireland  certain  spots  were
set  apart  as  regal  cemeteries.  Of  these  one  is  on  the
banks  of  the  HoyuBy  and  contains  the  cairn  of  New-
grange,  and  many  other  monuments  of  the  kings  of
Tara.  It  would  seem  that  Stennis  (in  sight  of  Maeshowe)
had  been  a  spot  of  similar  consecration  at  some  remote
time  for  the  people  of  Orkney,  or,  more  generally,  of  the
north  of  Scotland,  although  it  is  not  easy  to  suggest  a
reason  for  its  selection/


468


Appendix  5.


£afp.  5.


APPENDIX   5.


WEIGHTS  OF  THE  GEEAT  PYRAMID  AND

OF  THE  EAETH;

APPBOXIMATELT.


Fob  thb  Wsight  of  thb  Great  Ptbaiod.


Vertical  height  of  Great  Pyramid,       ...»  232-52

Inclined  height  of  Pyramid  face,         .        .        .         ae  296*72

Side  of  Bqoare-base, «  365*24

TranaverBe  thickneaa  of  general  caaing-stone  film,         =:         4'


Cubical  results  approxqeatelt.

Cubic  Pyramid  cubits  in  whole  Pyramk^  >»

Hollow  apace  of  Grand  Gallery,     .         ^     2,625
Hollow  spaces  of  regular  character  ^

elsewhere,   as  in  chambers  and  >      b     2,625

passages,  ...  )


10,339,850


Subtract,


5,250


Subtract  x  for  irregular  occasional  •  hollows,  and
add  same  for  extra  specific  gravity
King's  Chamber,


il- hollows,  and   ^
ity  of  lining  of    >


Subtract  cubic  contents  of  casing-stone  film  of  a    )


specific  gravity  peculiar  to  itself,


Remaining  cubic  contents  in  Great  Pyramid,  all  of
one    supposed  nummulitic  limestone  density,
(though  X  portion  of  it  is  Mokattam  stone)


dlof   \
isity,    S


10,334,600
0

10,334,600
861,952

9,472,648


APP.  5 .]     Weights  of  G.  Pyramid  and  Earth.  469

Specific  gravity  of  casing-stone,  or  Mokattam  stone,  »     0*367

(See  Life  and  Work^  voL  iiL  p.  177.)
Specific  gravity  of  nammulitic  limestone,  .        ,         ae     0*412

(See  this  book,  p.  234.)

PfTomidtonM.
861,952  cubic  cnbits  of  0-367  specific  gravity,       .         «     395,420

(See  Lift  and  Work,  voL  iiL  p.  175.)
and  9,472,648  cubic  cubits  of  0*412  specific  gravity,      -i  4,878,414


Sum,  or  concluded  whole  weight  of  Great  Pjrramid,  ,


approximately.


I     -  5,273,1


Weight  of  Earth  approximately.


Polar  Diameter,  .         ,        .         »     20,000,000  Pyr.  cubits.

Equal  Diameter,  ...»     20,070,000         „

Arithmeticalmean  of  the  two  radii,        «>     20,035,000  „

Cubic  Pyramid  cubits  in  Earth's  \

bulk  viewed  as  a  sphere  of  >  b4,210,791,200,000,000,000,000

above  mean  radius,         .  )

Pyramid  tons  in  the  same,  or  ^  ^

more,  beinff  necessarily  of  the  f

E.rti'.mLden«tyorme«(  -«.263.489.000.000.000.000.000

specific  gravity,     ^        •  )

Weight  of  the  Earth  more  accurately;  in  a  private

letter  from  w.  p.  to  c.  p.  s.


EquatorW  nuiii.  .         .        .  { ^^[.JJJ

Arithmetical    mean,    and    practically  ) ^

Av    4.-«  J  251,077,950

the  true  mean,         ...  )

Polar  radius,       ....  250,250,000


200  British  inches.
700


»f


»»


(Ratio,  say  300 :  301  accurate  within
limits  of  error.)

You  have  worked  with  what,  I  presume,  are  the  above
data  (as  given  in  Life  and  Work^  as  the  best  ultimate
determination  of  modem  science),  only  expressed  in  sacred
cubits.


470


Appendix  3.


[]app.  &.


250^827,120
250^000,000


Polar  ndiua,  ....

That  is  to  ay,

McM  Eqnjiorial  dkameLer^  in  acred  cufttti^  20,060,170

PoUr  ^ioMcler,  in  acred  oi&ifi^       ....         20,000,000

In  nsiiig  these  data  yoa  have  (doabtleas  for  breyity,
and  as  j^pearing  likelj  to  be  practically  exact  enon^  for
your  pmpoee)  taken  Uie  miart  arUkmetioal  mean  of  the  two
diameter  lengths,  apd  reck<Mied  that  a  perfect  sphere  (by
the  regolar  formula  i'D*)  with  this  diameter  would  be
saflficiently  equal,  practically,  to  an  oblate  spberoid  of
those  different  equatorial  and  polar  diameterSb  But  in
truth  this  does  a  gratuitous  injustice  to  your  latest  Gkeat
Pyramidologic  thesis  A  massXlO^^'=0mass  (or  weight).

The  precise  mode  of  reckoning  in  this  case  would  be
(as  you  are  well  aware,  but  I  repeat  it  for  the  sake  of
distinctness,  and  to  save  you  the  trouble  of  turning  to  the
formula,  and  to  enable  you  to  check  m«  if  I  make  an  over-
sight therein), — ^to  take,  for  the  true  mean  dianuter  for  ike
purpose  of  giving  the  mass,  not  D+i<^;  as  you  took,  but
exactly  D+§<i>  'D  being  the  polar  diameter,  and  a  the  exceis
of  the  general  equatorial  diameter  beyond  that  of  the  Polar.

We  get  it,  as  I  note  below.


A  sphere  is,

And,  if  the  sphere  be,  as
the  earth  is,  increased  by
a  small  amount  eqaatori-
ally,  or  in  two  of  its  three
axes,  ¥rith  a  tme  ellipse
for  any  trans-polar  section
(an  ellipse  being  a  figure
with  every  one  of  its  ordi-
nates  the  same  multiple  of
that  ordinate  to  its  in-
scribed circle),  then  the
effect  increased  weight  of
the  earth's  oblateness  will


liTtlMndhHB.


|»-R»or|»RRR


liytb*


D.


iD'or  »-D-D-D


APP.  5*]     Weight  of  G.  Pyramid  and  Earth.    471


be  exactly  in  proportion

BxprMMd  1^  the  xadlns  B.

KxiuMMd  by  th«  diAmetar  D«

to  its.  circumscnbed  cube

similarly  made  oblate, that

ia,  increased  in  its  two

equatorial  axes.

That   is  to  say  (with  the

notation  used  on  my  pre-

vious page),     ....

d=the    difference   of

a  =  the  difference  of

Neglecting  the  a'  fractions
because  tiiey  are  smaller

the  radii

the  diameters.

than   can  be   practically

estimated,— just    as    we

neglect  the  second  differ-

ential of  a  quantity,— we

have  thus—

As  a  sphere  is,  ...    .

firRxRxR

JxDxDxD

Then  a  spheroid  is,      .    .

|»-Rx(R+d)x(R+a)

jxDx(D+o)x(D+o)

or,    .    .

|irX(R+|d)«

;x(D+ia)«

In  other  words,  the  mean

)

w

radiMSffor  thejnirpose  of

V  is  R+|d

D+fa.

calculating  ou^  6tMA;,  .

/

•

Applying  this  correction  to  your  own  calculation  of  earth
bulk,  it  makes  it  to  be


5,270,976,000  000,000
5,2631489,000  000,000


000,000  )  Pyramid  tons,  instead  of  what  yon
000,000  )      give  without  the  correction.


But  as  your  diameter  used  was  not  the  exact  arithmetical
mean,  there  is  still  a  difference  to  be  corrected.

No  longer  referring  then  to  your  working, — I  give
here,  under  the  results  of  my  own  perfectly  independent
calculation,  made  many  months  ago,  for  the  purpose  of
trying  vert/  accurately  whether  the  space  included  in  the
whole  King's  Chamber,  or  in  its  lower  course,  or  in  one  of
the  upper  ones,  had  any  relation  to  the  bulk  or  weight  of
the  whole  earth;  I  did  not  carry  on  the  examination
very  completely  (I  regarded  bulk  rather  than  weight  of
water  and  of  mean  earth), — and  I  found  nothing  worth
noticing  to  you.


[


Ld.


..T


X   mrmu  'tvl  X  uL  ilff
■Bk  St  ICE  111  '.and.  rjnxuL  ~i«

It    "UlS  "r-TUliL    m    II

Ttih-  'winuL  3n?7*axir^  x  z  TiiSi.  mix  %  sbal  or

=  i"f   viSiff  sxii  laas   nf  jaemL  ic  al  «^  ms  $~7
«i£  aj  ff  XrrtTT=TT4TT>  ^  wf  =-W»HP»


APP.  5.]     Weight  of  G.  Pyramid  and  Earth.    473


longitude, — that  is,  passing  through  each  of  its  poles.  But
as  this  feature  of  earth's  form  is  not  well  proved,  it  must
be  estimated  at  a  tmall  amount,  to  show  the  truth  accord-
ing to  present  probabilities.  I  suggest  to  add,  therefore,
only  YT  o^  ^^®  equatorial  protuberance,  or  ^^nr  ^^  ^^^
earth's  whole  bulk  on  this  account;  that  is  7^^,  or
-000133  of  earth's  weight

Then,  adding  these  corrections,     *000028

+  000133

« -000161,  or  say  '00016  of  the
whole  a  843,000 1 000,000  1 000,000  Pyramid  tons.  Then,  adding
this  to  the  exact  sea-level  spheroid  at  specific  gravity  5'7f  which


IS


«,271.


037,500
843,000


000,000
000,000


000,000
000,000


There  results,  as  the  final  deter-  \

mination  of  the  mass  practi-  (  5,271    880,50(f  000,000   000,000
cally  existing,  as  onr  earth,  )

Expressed  in  Pyramid  tons.

Or  say,  omitting  fractions  which  are  certainly  beyond  probable
error,  5,271 1 900,000 1 000, 000  [000,000  Pyramid  tons.


On  thb  Relation  of  the  total  Masses  of  Great  Ptbamid
AND  Eakth.     1:10*^  •.     By  W.  P.

This  is  one  of  those  remarkable  facts  of  which  we  have
seen  several  examples  in  the  constitution  of  the  Great
Pyramid  ;  remarkable,  inasmuch  as  that  structure  is  found
to  represent  cosmical  quantities  with  much  less  differ-
ences than  the  supposed  or  probable  errors  in  our  data,
by  which  we  are  enabled  to  try  the  question  :  while,  never-
theless, this  apparent  precision  has  not  been  brought  about
by  coaxing  or  intentional  manipulating  of  the  margins
of  uncertainty  in  the  data  used, — a  process  which  others
would  naturally  suspect  to  have  been  the  cause  of  such
undue  precision  in  the  results.  But,  be  the  inference  what
it  may, — whether  a  large  error  be,  in  future  days,  dis-
covered to  vitiate  the  whole  or  not, — we  are  not  respon-


474  Appendix  5.  [app.  6.

dble  for  consequenceSy  but  only  for  a  faithfdl  public  state-
ment of  data,  and  of  the  facts  in  the  constitation  of  the
Great  Pyramid,  which  the  data  reveal  to  us.

But  the  practical  experience  of  a  scientific  mind  will
prevent  so  much  aurprifle,  or  mistrust  of  physical  infer-
ences,  theories,  or  laws,  merely  because  of  their  coinci-
dences being  closer  than  the  probable  errors  in  the  data
used.  The  best  and  only  true  security  against  being  mia-
led  by  what  is  called  mere  coincidence,  is  to  be  found  in
noticing  what  degree  of  close  or  necessary  connexion  such
result  may  have  with  a  consistent  and  intelligible  sjrstem
indicated  by  other  results :  and  this  kind  of  proof  exists
firmly,  in  many  instances,  in  our  present  unique  and  pro-
lific  theory  of  the  Great  Pyramid.  Bemarkable  accuracy
from  uncertain  €ata  combined  is  known  to  occur,  as  a
practical  fact,  much  more  frequently  than  would  seem  pro-
bable to  abstract  reason  or  popular  expectation.  I  say
this  from  individual  experience,  and  setting  aside  the  cases
where  the  result  depends  on  sagacity,  or  rather  the  natural
instinct  of  a  mind  made  for  and  devoted  to  physical  inves-
tigation ;  an  instinct  as  unaccountable  to  reason  perhaps,
as  that  by  which  a  bird's  bill,  used  with  apparently  no
effort,  nor  even  attention,  weaves  a  nest  much  better  than
can  be  done  by  human  reason  with  ten  fingers  and  tools  at
command.  This,  in  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  case  (as  a  signal
example)  is  now  known  to  have  enabled  him  to  propound
quantitative  facts,  in  several  departments  of  science,  to  a
degree  of  precision  to  which  mere  formal  inductive  reason-
ing would  seem  quite  incapable  of  leading,  on  such  rude
data  as  were  then  available.

But  to  return  to  the  Great  Pyramid  as  a  measure  of
earth's  mass, — the  working  out  of  the  results  as  they  were
hastily  and  provisionally  made  out  and  posted  to  me  by
Professor  Piazzi  Smyth,  on  his  discovering  the  matter,
carries  its  own  evidence  of  impartiality,  for,  the  coind-


APP.  5.]     Weight  of  0.  Pyramid  and  Earth.     475

dence  (within  j^o),  though  quite  as  near  as  could  be  ex-
pected from  our  data,  even  on  the  supposition,  which
probably  ought  to  be  granted, — that  it  was  intended  in
the  design  of  the  Pyramid, — is  yet  not  nearly  so  close
an  agreement  as  it  would  have  been,  had  Professor  Smyth
honoured  his  thesis  with  a  less  rough  process  of  calculating
its  application.  His  off-hand  mode  of  calculating  gave
the  following  results  : —

Earth's  mass,  =  5,263,000,000 1 000,000 1 000,000  )  in  Pyramid

Pyramid's  mass,  « 5,273,000       )        ton»-

Ck>mcidence,  to  10,000,  being  within  ^i  v  of  the  whole  quan-

tity.

But  myself  having,  some  months  ago,  required  as  a
datum,  the  earth's  mass  according  to  the  data  acknow-
ledged to  be  the  latest  and  best,  and  the  same  as  Professor
Smyth  had  here  used,  but  more  deliberately  worked  out,
with  all  minutiae  of  correction, — I  had  by  me  the  result^
immediately  available  for  the  most  impartial  comparison.
It  is  as  follows  : —

Earth's  mass,  =::  5,27 1,900,000 1 000,000 1 000,000  )  in  Pyramid
Pyramid's  mass,    =5,272,600         )        tons.

Coincidence,  exact  to  700,  being  within  y^stf  of  the  whole  quan-

tity.

Details  on  all  the  above  calculations  accompany  this
sheet  on  a  separate  paper.

The  Pyramid  mass  here  adopted  is  taken  as  given  by
Professor  Smyth's  calculation  of  it,  but  corrected  as  seems
needful  for  impartial  probability's  sake,  by  deducting  1200
tons  (only  ttVtt  o^  ^^^  whole)  for  an  undiscovered  chamber,
passage,  and  other  vacuities.  The  reasons  for  the  exist-
ence, position,  character,  and  amount  of  which  inferred
spaces  undiscovered,  are  given  in  a  separate  paper.


iH    f%e  0.  Pyrcmid  Scient^c  Theory^    [app.  6.


APPENDIX    6.


ON  THE  GEEAT  PYEAMID  SCIENTIFIC
THEOEY,  AND    ITS  CEITICa

BT  J.  O.

Extracted  from  the  EDnrBimaB  EmnNG  Covramt,  Saturdtoff
May  9,  1868,  and  revised  ly  ite  Author.


*  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth's  Work  on  the  Great
Pyrabod*  and  its  Critics.

{CommunicaJted,)

^  The  first  volume  of  Professor  Smyth's  able  work  is  in
itself  a  valuable  possession  to  a  student.  It  contains  the
details  of  the  everyday  life  of  Professor  and  Mrs.  Smyth
(for  his  wife  accompanied  him  to  Egypt,  as  she  had
previously  done  to  Teneriife),  from  the  time  of  their
arrival  in  Cairo  till  their  work  in  Egypt  was  finished ;  and
it  is  written  with  an  unflagging  power  of  humorous,  lively,
and  picturesque  description.  But,  moreover,  it  is  full  of
matter  such  as  only  an  accomplished  artist,  a  true  scholar,
and  a  pure  and  thoroughly  practised  man  of  science  could
have  thrown  into  it.  There  is  much  of  beauty  in  Dean
Stanle/s  description  of  Egypt ;  but  the  pen  of  Professor
Smyth  presents  such  a  picture  as  only  a  man  fuU  of  science,
and  possessing  the  educated  power  of  a  painter,  could  draw.

^  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid  ;  During  the  Montbs  of  Janvarj,
February,  March,  and  April ;  in  8  vols.  Edinbnigh*  1867.


APP.  6.]  and  its  Critics.  477

The  river  and  its  wealth,  the  fields,  villages,  and  inhabit-
ants, the  monuments,  grotesque  or  sublime,  the  heavens  at
mom  or  eventide,  by  noon  of  day,  or  noon  of  night,  are  all
pictured  to  ""the  mind's  eye"  with  a  rare  power,  carrying
with  itself  the  feeling  of  truthfulness.  The  second  volume,
however,  as  it  contains  the  data,  in  the  form  of  measure-
ments and  their  results  in  length,  angle,  and  temperature,
on  which  the  theory  set  forth  in  the  work  rests,  is  in
reality  the  most  important  part  of  the  book,  though  to
^  the  general  reader"  perhaps  the  least  interesting.  It  is  a
remarkable  product  of  a  combination  of  patient  research
and  unwearied  assiduity  in  original  observation.  And  let
it  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  observations  and  measure-
ments are  as  little  the  work  of  a  mere  dilettante  as  are  the
calculations  those  of  a  mere  scholar  or  antiquarian.
They  are  the  work  of  a  man  trained  from  his  youth  to  the
finest  observations  of  this  kind,  and  heretofore  approved
by  his  fellow-men  of  science,  as  an  expert  in  such  profes-
sional manipulations.  He  has  been  already  tried  by  the
only  true  and  adequate  jury  as  to  his  fitness  for  such  work.
A  sentence  pronounced  again  by  that  jury  in  a  deliberate
manner  can  alone  be  valid  in  shaking  the  credit  of  what
Professor  Smyth  has  set  his  name  to  as  trustworthy.  And
we  would  boldly  say  that  those  who  are  training  for  work
in  the  fields  of  scholarship,  or  history,  or  theology,  would
do  well  to  learn  from  this  volume  how  a  true  scholar,
historian,  and  (in  the  real  sense,  like  Newton)  a  catholic
theologian,  equips  and  girds  himself  for  the  work  of  found-
ing his  theory.  The  third  volume  contains  the  evolution
and  proof  of  this  theory  from  the  data  set  forth  in  the  pre-
ceding volume.  The  theory  is  a  consistent  and  beautiful
wlwle^  developing  itself  step  by  step  from  these  dcUa,  It
enables  one  to  read  in  the  proportions  of  the  Pyramid,  the
scientific  truth  ascertained,  or  promising  to  be  ere  long
ascertained,  respecting  the  size  and  weight  of  the  earthy


478    The  G.  Pyramid  Scientific  Theory^  [app.  6.

Tespocting  the  time  of  the  earth's  reyolution  round  the  sail,
and  (as  lately  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Petrie)  respecting  its
distance  from  the  sun.     It  unfolds  a  stable  and  satis&cto?y
system  of  metrology,  based  on  the  measureable  length  of
the  earth's  polar  axis,  the  mean  density  of  the  material  sab-
stance  of  the  earth,  and  the  mean  temperature  of  its  sarfieioe ;
thus  guaranteeing  the  superiority,  in  respect  of  appropriate
earth-commensurability  and    trustworthiness^    of    certain
traditional  points  in  the  long  descended  British  system  of
metrology,  and  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  one,  oyer  the  French
metrical    system   of  .the  reyolutionary  era.      Moreovery
besides  indicating  the  period  of  the   earth's  reyolntioa
round  the  sun,  and  affording  grounds  for  belief  that  there
is  indicated  also  symbolically  the  sacred  diyision  of  time
into  sabbatical  weeks,  the  P3rramid  is  seen  to  indicate  on
the  sublime  dial-plate  of  the  ^  starry  heayens  "  the  precise
date  of  its  own  construction ;  while  here  again  its  silent
but  demonstrative  testimony  is  corroborated  by  the  yener-
able  voice  of  sacred  history  and  of  earth-wide  tradition.

*  No  longer,  indeed,  does  this  noble  geometric  monument
stand  in  all  its  primeval  grandeur  and  perfection ;  but  a
deep  meaning  may  be  traced  even  in  its  gradual  dilapida-
tion. For  thus  alone  could  the  alphabet  of  its  language
be  learned,  and  the  meaning  stored  up  in  it^  spelled  out
step  by  step ;  thus  alone  could  the  real  nature  of  its  socket
foundation  be  discovered,  or  the  relation  of  its  componoit
layers  of  structural  masonry  to  its  symbology  be  asoer-
tained  ;  thus  alone  could  the  meaning  of  these  things,  and
the  kindred  meaning  of  the  august  whole,  be  read  into  by
the  minds  proved  competent  for  the  work.

*  Of  course,  this  theory  has  met  with  veiy  various  treat-
ment. Some,  acknowledging  its  power,  have  candidly  con-
fessed themselves  placed  in  a  dilemma  by  it ;  for,  if  true,
it  lands  its  recipient  in  the  necessity  of  either  admitting
that  the  builders  of  the  Pjrramid  possessed  naturally  a


APP.  6.]  and  its  GHtics.  479

higher  knowledge  of  physical  science  than  is  reached  at
thifit  day,  or  that  they  worked  on  the  strength  of  super-
natural instruction  and  guidance.  Others,  again,  without
allusion  to  this  dilemma^  have  generously  acknowledged  the
value  and  beauty  both  of  the  measurements  and  of  the
theory.  But  still  others,  while  laughing  to  scorn  the  bare
idea  of  Divine  inspiration  and  guidance  in  such  a  matter,
have  either  argued  against  the  facts  on  which  the  theory
is  based,  in  a  very  disallowable  manner,  or  have  made
statements  that  are  not  warranted  by  the  facts  of  the  ques-
tion. With  a  brief  consideration  of  some  of  these  things,
and  a  short  statement  of  our  reasons  for  believing  that  the
idea  of  a  Divine  interposition  in  this  matter  is  neither  irra-
tional nor  unwarranted,  but  rather  highly  credible,  on  the
ground  of  analogy  and  an  important  final  cause,  would  we
close  our  remarks.

'  An  objection,  according  to  a  report  that  appeared  in
the  CourarU  a  short  time  since,  has  lately  been  brought
against  the  system  by  which  Professor  Smyth  reaches
the  ultimate  result  in  his  measurements,  which,  if  valid,
would  utterly  sh^ke  the  theory  by  rendering  its  basis  un-
trustworthy. This  objection  is  directed  against  the  system
of  taking  the  mean  of  several  observations  in  order  to
reach  the  data  on  which  the  theory  rests.  This  system  is
declared  to  be,  in  fact,  worse  than  childish;  to  be  a
mathematical  aberration,  erroneous,  equivocal,  and  delusive.
Now,  what  we  say  is,  that  if  such  be  the  character  of  this
system.  Professor  Smyth  in  employing  it  only  errs  in  com-
pany with  the  great  body  of  physicists,  and  that  there  is
an  end  not  only  of  his  theory  of  the  Pyramid,  but  to  all
the  reliance  heretofore  placed  on  innumerable  scientific
results  ;  nay,  more,  for  in  this  case  the  very  tables  in  the
truth  of  which  annuitants  have  been  fain  to  trust  are
equivocal  and  delusive,  and  the  fiars  prices  of  every  Scot-
tish county  are  taken  on  a  foolish  and  even  dishonest  prin-


480    ITie  0.  PyranUd  Scientyic  ITieofy,    [app.  6.


As  for  another  statemflat^  eontamed  in  the  aune
report^  that  certain  calmlatinna  of  ProfeMor  Smyth  wen
inaocmatey  we  have  seen  thoee  qpecial  calcnlationa  gone
oyer  again  and  again  caiefonj  bj  another  paitj,  and  foond
correct  to  their  last  figure ;  and  we  are  informed  that  Pro-
fessor Smyth  has  left  the  yery  sheet  that  was  ipedally
objected  to  liMiging  in  the  Boyal  Socie^  Booms^  to  be
sifted  and  proyed  wrong  by  wh<Hnsoeyer  may.  Not  nn-
natarally,  the  Professor  aski^  ''Can  ^  J.  T.  Simpson
^  mean  by  such  nnsopported  asterticms  to  tiy  to  Mamp  <mi
**  the  troth  t**  But^  to  dose  this  part  of  the  subject^  we  may
state  that  we  haye  beside  us  a  list  of  the  errata  in  his  Ghest
Pyramid  work,  printed  by  the  Astronomei^Boyal  for  Scot-
land, and  this  shows  that^  after  all  the  criticisms  directed
against  it^  **  the  misprinting  noted  on  pp.  2  and  3  of  the
list  of  errata  merely  of  certain  intermediate  steps,  for  the
sacred  cubit,  is  the  only  error  known  to  the  author  as
discoyered  by  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson  and  his  friends.**  Again,
a  remark  may  be  made  on  one  or  two  out  of  many  mis-
statements yentured  on  in  two  articles  on  Life  and  Work
at  the  Great  Pyramid^  that  appeared  last  summer  in  the
Saturday  Review.  Thus  the  reyiewer  asked,  **  In  the  ruin-
**  ous  state  of  almost  eyery  portion  of  the  Pyramid,  eyeiy
^  one  must  know  how  yague  and  indeterminate  the  best
**  obseryations  must  unayoidably  be,  as  the  huge  discre-
**  pancies  between  the  published  lists  suffice  to  indicate.
^  What  are  we  then  to  think  of  measurements  professing
**  accuracy  to  tenths  of  seconds,  or  two  places  of  decimals  1"
*  Now  we  haye  here  Professor  Smyth's  own  answer  to
this  in  the  following  words : — *^  There  are  no  obseryations
^  to  tenths  of  seconds,  and  much  less  to  hundredths  of  the
^  same,  throughout  all  three  yolumes  of  Life  and  Work,  And
**  further,  I  was  at  extraordinary  pains  in  seeking  out  the
**  ancient  unbroken  surfaces  of  the  Pyramid  masonry  to
^  obserye  upon  in  all  important  cases."     The  Saturday


APP.  6.]  and  its  Critics.  481

Beviewer  has  about  half  a  dozen  similar  instances  of  posi-
tive untruth,  one  of  them  being,  that  the  great  French
national  book  on  Eg3rpt  does  show  2k  lid  U)  the  co£fer  of  the
Great  Pyramid.  Now,  a  proper  inspection  of  the  book  and
plate  referred  to,  shows  that  the  lid  meant  by  the  reviewer
belongs,  according  to  the  letterpress  of  the  plate,  not  to  the
co£fer  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  but  to  a  sarcophagus  in  a
neighbouring  tomb.  Moreover,  the  plate  representing  the
co£fer  of  the  Great  Pyramid  shows  it,  though  under  the
name  of  sarcophagus,  yet  in  fact  and  shape  in  the  most
unmistakable  manner  as  a  lidless  box  with  all  its  angles
sharply  cut,  and  with  not  the  faintest  trace  of  any  ledge  or
groove  such  as  the  reviewer  would  hint  at.  Such,  then,  is
a  sample  of  the  inaccuracies  occurring  in  a  couple  of  brief
articles,  which  would  yet  afifect  to  explode  and  laugh  out
of  existence  a  work  which,  we  make  bold  to  say,  the
reviewer  himself  could  never  have  produced  under  the  most
favourable  circumstances.  He  would  need  a  different
genius,  as  well  as  a  different  heart  (and  the  two  are  closely
connected),  to  produce  such  a  work.  And  being  thus  led
up  to  it,  we  would  now  venture  a  remark  of  our  own  on  the
bearing  of  the  question — "Is  the  stone  box  of  the  Great  Pyra-
"  mid  a  mere  coffer  or  measure  of  capacity,  as  the  great
"  French  book  unquestionably  represents  it]"  Because, — on
Professor  Smyth's  actual  inspection  of  the  coffer,  it  turned
out  to  have  a  kind  of  ledge  on  which  a  lid  might  rest,  but
could  not  be  immovably  fixed, — therefore  a  conclusion  has
been  come  to  by  others  and  triumphed  in,  that  the  coffer
is  onli/  a  sarcophagus  or  coffin,  and  nothing  more.  Our
remark  is,  that  even  if  the  proof  of  the  box  being,  or
having  ever  been,  used  for  a  sarcophagus  were  conclusively
established  (which  is  far  from  being  the  case,  several  things
making  it  doubtfiil),  still  that  would  not  invalidate  in  the
very  least  Professor  Smyth's  metrological  theory,  based  as
that  is  on  many  well  ascertained  and  measured  numerical

2  H


482   The  0.  Pyramid  Scientific  Theory,  [app.  6.

facts,  with  traces  of  consilient  arrangements  and  commen-
surabilities.  To  onr  mind,  it  would  rather  give  to  that
theory  a  deeper  moral  significance,  and  invest  the  entire
subject  with  a  deeper  religious  meaning.  It  would  just
add  this  to  the  theory,  that  the  royal  builder  of  the  Pyra-
mid, though  deemed  an  atheist  by  the  idolaters  who  toiled
in  his  service,  was  enabled  under  the  guidance  of  the  great
Opifex  Mundi  to  rear  for  himself  the  grandest  tomb  that
ever  human  being  who  hoped  to  Uve  again  was  buried  in.
For,  buried  in  that  tomb  and  coffer,  he  lay  among  the
symbols  of  creative  and  providential  power,  wisdom,  justice,
and  bounty,  continuing  to  preach  of  these  attributes  by  his
work  so  long  as  its  symbolical  meaning  was  remembered ;
even  as  he  preaches  by  it  again,  in  these  latter  days,  after
the  knowledge  of  the  symbols  has  been  restored.  But  this
we  put  merely  as  an  alternative.

'  In  our  opinion  the  idea  of  a  Divine  interposition  in  the
planning  and  construction  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  when
closely  contemplated  as  springing  from  all  the  &cts  and
relations  of  the  case,  is  perfectly  rational  and  credible  in
the  estimation  of  a  rightly-instructed  mind.  Rightly-in-
structed mind,  we  say,  for  a  man  may  be  mighty  in
''  midden "  philosophy,  and  ignorant  as  a  child  in  that
great  mother  science  of  catholic  and  revealed  theology,
based  on  the  grand  design  argument  uttered  by  the  Cosmos;
on  the  wide  testimony  of  universal  history  and  tradition ;
and  on  that  testimony  of  human  nature  to  religion  which
is  so  inextinguishable,  that  it  drives  the  very  atheist  Posi-
tivists  into  that  ineffably  sad  idolatry  of  Humanity  itself.
It  is  on  this  grand  testimony  that  the  Astronomer-Royal
for  Scotland  builds  ;  and  we  rejoice  to  be  of  one  mind  with
him.  And  well  may  Professor  Smyth  answer  the  scomers
in  the  words  of  Newton  to  the  scoffing  Halley — "  Mr.
^  Halley,  I  have  studied  the  subject,  and  know  the  truth
**  of  religion."     And  this  not  because  we  think  the  truth


APP.  6.]  arid  its  Critics.  483

of  religion,  as  the  grandest  historical  element,  is  dependent
on  the  truth  of  the  theory  as  to  the  Great  Pyramid,  but
because  the  principles  involved  in  the  full  argumentation
of  this  theoiy  are  among  the  principles  of  catholic  theology
according  to  our  description  of  it ;  and,  accordingly,
whether  the  case  of  the  Great  Pyramid  be  one  to  which
these  principles  are  rightly  applied  or  not,  the  principles
themselves  dare  not  be  pooh-poohed.  The  self-called
^advanced  thinkers"  of  the  archaeological  schools  may
scout  them;  but  we  hold,  on  the  universal  testimony
of  sacred  and  profane  histoiy,  that  man's  stoiy  does  not
take  its  rise  in  a  dunghilL  Our  creed  in  this  matter  is  the
same  as  Professor  Smyth's — that  blessed  belief  handed
down  in  Scripture,  and  chanted  by  the  grand  choir  of
historians  and  poets.  His  theory,  too,  falls  in  completely
with  the  grand  strain.  It  points,  on  the  ground  of  remark-
able &ct8  and  coincidence, — to  the  Great  Pyramid  as  an
instance  of  those  Divine  interpositions  which  are  known  on
the  testimony  of  Scripture,  corroborated  by  tradition,  to
have  been  made,  as  occasion  called  for  them,  during  the
infant  ages  of  the  world.  Nay,  more,  for  it  points  amongst
others  to  one  passage  of  Scripture  (not,  as  the  Saturday
Reviewer  says,  because  held  to  describe  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, but),  because,  since  the  passage  evidently  describes
the  earth  symbolically,  no  other  sjrmbol  except  the  Pyramid
can  be  pointed  to.  The  passage  is — **  Where  wast  thou
"  when  I  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth  1  declare  if  thou
''  knowest  understanding.  Who  hath  laid  the  measures
"  thereof,  if  thou  knowest  1  or  who  hath  stretched  the  line
"  upon  it  1  Whereupon  are  the  sockets  thereof  made  to
"  sink,  or  who  laid  the  comer-stone  thereof,  when  the
*'  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God
"  shouted  for  joy  1"  But,  moreover,  the  Great  Pyramid,
viewed  in  the  light  of  the  theory  commenced  by  the  late
John  Taylor,  and  further  developed  by  Professor  Smyth,


484    The  0.  Pyramid  Scientific  Theory^  [app.  6.

is  seen  to  be  a  peculiar  one  among  other  elements  of
prophecy,  cast  by  Divine  Providence  as  seed  on  the  waters
among  the  nations,  to  ripen  in  due  time,  and  serve  most
beneficent  ends  in  the  appointed  seasons.  This  is  a  theme
treated  germinally  in  such  works  as  Bishop  Horsley's
^  Preliminary  Dissertation  to  his  Sermons  on  the  Resorreo-
tion  of  our  Lord,"  and  in  the  opening  of  De  Quincey^s
^  Essays  on  the  CsBsars;"  but  it  remains  to  be  systemati-
cally and  adequately  handled.  Some  of  its  leading  moments
only  can  be  here  indicated.  There  existed,  then,  in  the
religious  books  of  the  ancient  Persians,  undoubted  prophetic
and  apocalyptic  elements,  which  certainly  contributed  along
with  other  elements  in  the  Magian  system  to  form  that
character  which  fitted  Cyrus  and  his  Persians  to  punish
the  grossly  idolatrous  Babylonians,  and  free  God's  ancient
people.  Again,  if  ever  there  was  a  clear  case  of  a  Divine
interposition  of  the  more  ordinary  kind  employed  for  great
moral  and  religious  ends,  it  may  be  seen  in  the  moral  and
religious  revival,  such  as  it  was,  that  took  its  rise  in  Pagan
Greece  in  the  person  of  the  *'daimon-possessed''  Socrates,
and  all  that  sprang  from  the  influence,  example,  and  teaching,
cast  into  society  by  that  noble  martyr.  Still  again,  de-
scending to  Eome,  it  is  matter  of  notoriety  that  the  Romans
treasured  in  the  Capitol  certain  Sibylline  books;  that
these,  by  very  cogent  arguments,  can  be  shown  not  to  have
been  favourable  to  polytheism,  still  less  to  pantheism;
and  that  they  not  only  fell  in  remarkably,  in  certain
prophetical  statements,  with  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  but
influenced  the  conduct  of  leading  Romans  themselves,  being
supposed  to  apply  to  Julius  Caesar  himself.  All  these
things  we  devoutly  believe  to  have  been  arranged  and
provided  by  God,  even  as  we  know  from  history  that  they
formed  powerful  elements  in  forces  that  moved  the  cardinal
events  in  human  story.  And  is  any  one  so  blind  as  not  to
see  that  we  live  in  times  as  momentous  as  any  since  those


APP.  6.]  and  its  Critics.  486

of  the  flood,  excepting  those  years  when  the  Lord  of  Glory
himself  dwelt  on  earth)  For  how  many  are  ready  to
shout,  lo  Psean !  in  the  vain  hope  that  at  last  the  '*  vile
superstition,"  as  they  call  it,  taught  in  Holy  Scripture,  and
so  marvellously  supported,  is  doomed  to  a  speedy  extinction.
Others  are  busily  helping  on  this  sure  consummation,  as
they  believe  it,  by  advancing  and  fostering  a  strange
philosophy,  which  (whatever  lip-worship  some  of  its  sects
may  pay  to  revelation,  yet  in  reality)  takes  man  up  at  first
as  an  ape-descended  animal,  reared  in  barbarism,  and  des-
tined in  the  end  (so  far  as  this  philosophy  can  show)
only  to  make  manure  for  the  soil  he  sprang  from.  When
forced  to  hearken  to  such  degrading  opinions,  is  it  not  a
boon  to  be  thankful  for,  when  there  is  presented  to  our
contemplation  a  most  noble  builded  work,  which  proves
how  far  removed  from  savageism  its  architects  were,  at  a
period  when  history  and  tradition  alike  testify,  that  man
and  the  world  had  just  emerged  from  an  awful  catastrophe)
For  in  saying  this  we  stand  well  supported,  and  defy  any
one  to  disprove,  on  the  only  valid  and  allowable  ground —
that  of  universal  history  and  catholic  theology — the  reason-
ableness and  credibility  of  God's  interfering  to  instruct
and  guide  an  architect,  who  knew  and  worshipped  Him,  in
the  rearing  of  a  grand  symbolical  building ;  suited,  accord-
ing to  Divine  foreknowledge,  at  least  to  stagger,  and  suggest
wiser  views  to  certain  of  the  "  advanced-thinkers"  and  rather
too  positive  d  priori  philosophers  of  these  latter  days.


486


Appendix  7.


[app.  7.


APPENDIX    7.


HEBREW   SCBIPTUEE   CRITICISM,

m  CONNEXIOK  WITH  THE  GBEAT  FTSAIOD.

Bt  W.  A.  P.


Article  I.

(See  page  537,  toL  iiL  of  Life  amd  WoriJ)

Job  iiL  13,  14. — ^Tor  now  should  I  have  lain  still  and

*  been  quiet,  I  should  have  slept :  then  had  I  been  at  rest^
'  with  kings  and  counsellors  of  the  earth,  which  built  dry^

*  unfrequenUd  places   for   themselves.'     njTri  (*  ghor-bih' ;)
(fern.)     Literal  Hebrew,  precisely  expressed.

Eng.  Ver.  has  desolate  places.  The  Hebrew  root^  yy^
(ghorah),  he  was  dry,  signifies  dry,  generally  in  the  sense
of  mere  absence  of  visible  water;  e.g,y  *the  waters  were
dried  up  /  *  the  Eed  Sea  was  dried  up  /  *  better  is  a  dry
morsel  with  contentment,'  etc.  But  sometimes  it  signifies
more  strongly,  a  thing  deprived  of  its  invisible  moisture,
desiccated,  parched ;  e.g,,  *  I  was  like  an  owl  of  the  desert*
(fem.) ;  *  in  the  day  the  drought  consumed  me'  (mas.);  *  my
bones  are  burnt  with  heat*  (mas.),  Job  xxx.  30 ;  *  a.  shadow
from  the  heat*  (mas.)

Hence — from  the  absence  of  water  implying  cessation  of
vegetable  growth,  and  therefore  of  animal  dwelling — the
the  word  is,  even  more  frequently,  used  figuratively  for
desolation  as  regards  vegetation  or  human  dwellings  than
it  is  literally.     Sometimes  it  is  used  even  for  killing  (Jer.


APP.  7.]  Hebrew  Scripture  Criticism,  Art.  2.  487

L  27) ;  '  slay  all  her  bullocks ;'  f.e.,  take  away  their  (liquid)
blood  which  is  their  life.

The  word  (*ghor-bah')  in  Job  iiL  14,  is  probably  meant
in  both  senses :  a  place  where  the  mummified  body  is  left
to  retain  its  dry  and  shrivelled  state,  and  a  place  at  the
same  time  apart  from  human  dwellings.

It  is  quite  a  canon,  in  Scripture  criticism,  that  its  author,
the  Holy  Spirit,  intends  us  to  take  the  whole  of  the  custom-
ary or  conventional  scriptural  sense  of  a  word,  except  so
far  as  the  context  or  other  Scripture  may  limit  that  ex-
tended sense.

The  description  last  above  would  apply  equally  to  rock
tombs  or  to  a  pyramid,  and  not  to  other  burial  places ;  but
the  term  builty  instead  of  heton  or  digged,  points  strongly  to
the  idea  of  a  pyramid  rather  than  to  the  only  alternative,
a  rock  tomb  which  was  generally  digged  as  a  catacomb,
with  a  well-like  entrance,  or  at  most,  only  hewn  out  of  the
side  of  a  rock ;  not  essentially  buiU  above  it  also,  as  is  here
stated.

Further,  a  pyramid  is — ^by  absence  of  light,  and  by  length
and  narrowness  \)f  passages — less  fitted  for  human  dwell-
ings than  the  rock-tombs  such  as  surround  them,  and  are
continually  used  by  the  living;  and  therefore  the  idea
*  desolate^  applies  also,  rather  more  forcibly  to  a  pyramid
than  to  a  mere  tomb.

Article  2.

(See  page  637,  voL  iiL  of  Life  and  Work.)

Lamentations  iii.  16. — ^*  He  hath  set  me  in  dark  placet
as  they  that  be  dead  of  old/  IfTO  (magh-shahch)  mas.
The  root  "sil^n  (*  ghah-shach'),  he  was  dark,  signifies  pri-
marily to  restrain^  hold  in,  and  chiejlt/  with  reference  to  light^
because  its  being  restrained  restrains  all  human  doings  and
organic  life.


488  Appendix  7.  [app.  7.

The  ame  root  is  naed  in  Tamfntjtiops  liL  2,  'He
brought  me  into  darkmeuf  ir.  8,  'Their  Tinge  t»  hUtdoer
than  a  coal ;'  t.  17,  '  For  these  things  our  eyes  are  dim^
And  Psafan  cxIiiL  3 :  '  The  enem j  hath  persecoted  my  sool,
he  hath  smitten  down  my  Kfe  to  the  ground;  he  hath
made  me  to  dwell  in  darkmea  as  those  that  have  been  kmg
dead.  Therefore  is  my  ^nrit  overwhdmed  within  me,  my
heait  wiihin  me  is  desolate,'

As  in  Job  iiL  14,  so  here,  the  only  two  places  that  can
be  meant,  agreeaUy  to  Eastern  costom,  are  a  pyramid  or  a
rock  tomb ;  and,  <^  the  two,  the  sense  of  the  word,  either
radical,  to  restrain  %x  shnt  in,  ^  denyatire,  to  daiken,  shut
B^t  oat, — is  more  complete^  a{^dicaUe  to  a  pyrunid  than
to  a  rock  tomb.

Bat  there  are  also  other  expressions  in  the  context  that
indicate  a  prnmid  rather  than  a  tomb.  Blayney's  trans-
lation is  quoted  in  some  places  here.  It  has  the  merit  of
being  quite  impartial  tesdmony,  for  he  does  not  perceire
the  alluaon  to  a  pyramid.  Parts  of  verses  4  and  5  refer
to  a  mummified  state  equally  in  eUker  place  of  bunaL
*  Mr  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  he  made  old  ;  he  hath  encom-
passed  my  head  so  that  it  is  weary*  (Blayney,  p.  394).  But
verse  5,  *  He  hath  builded  upon  me'  (Blayney)— against
me  (Eng.  Yer.)

7.  *  He  hath  hedged  me  round  about  that  I  cannot  get
out ;  he  hath  made  my  chain  heavy.'

8.  *  Yea,  when  I  cry  aloud  he  hath  obstructed  my  prayer'
(Blayney).

9.  *  He  hath  blocked  up  my  way  with  hewn  stone,  my  paths
hath  he  distorted'  (Blayney),  or  made  crooked  (Eng.  Yer.)

This  building  over  him,— obstructing  the  cry  of  his
voice,— blocking  up  the  way  with  hewn  stone  like  the
masonry-blocking  in  the  Pyramid  passage, — and  the  pass-
ages so  blocked  being  angular  or  crooked, — seems  very
significant  of  a  pyramid.


APP.  7.]  Hebrew  Scripture  Criticism^  Art  3.  489

It  may  further  be  noticed,  that  the  nearness  of  Jere-
miah, and  more  especially  of  Job,  both  in  respect  of  date
and  place,  to  the  building  of  the  Pyramids,  and  the  P3rra-
mid's  unparalleled  greatness  and  notoriety — then,  even
much  more  than  now — lends  much  force  to  any  reasons
above  shown,  in  favour  of  this  construction  of  their  words.

Note  on  Articles  1  and  2.

In  replying  to,  or  anticipating,  critical  objections  (which  are  sure
to  be  made),  we  must  remember  that  the  high  probability  thai  the
Pyramids  are  intended  in  these  texts,  does  not  rest  on  the  same
word  or  root  being  used  in  each  case  ;  for  the  words  are  quite  dif-
ferent. Neither  does  it  rest  on  the  roots  of  the  words  signifying
anything  characteristic  of  the  Pyramid's  form  ;  such  as  pointedness,
five-corneredness,  convergency,  etc.  But  that  the  other  considera-
tions above  set  forth  strongly  indicate  Pyramids ;  and  that  any
alternative  idea  is  not  so  well  supported ;  and  that  therefore  any
charge  of  fancifulness  applies  really  to  those  who  reject  these  in
favour  of  any  alternative  ideas  less  supported.

Article  3.

(See  page  641,  vol.  iii.  of  L\fe  and  Work.)

Zechariah  iv  7. — 'Who  art  thou,  O  great  mountain?  before
'  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  nSte^ns  (mee-8h5hr,  mas.)  straight-lined,
'  evenly  fitted,  adjusted,  and  smoothed  :  and  he  shall  bring  forth  the
'  head-stone  thereof  with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace,  unto
•it  I'

If  we  take  the  obvious  connexion  of  the  sentences, —
rightly  enough  suggested  by  the  word  thereof — in  the
English  version,  and  so  understand  *  the  head-stone  thereof
to  mean  the  completing  head-stone  of  the  great  mountain ;
the  assertion  that  it  shall  become  a  plain  (as  in  Eng.  Ver.)  is
contradictory  to  the  next  assertion,  that  it  shall  be  joyfully
completed  with  a  head-stone.  The  only  alternative  exegesis
is,  that  the  great  mountain  means  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of


490  Appendix  7.  (afp.  7.


the  eompletioii  <^  mne  desired  edifice  to  widdi  the  heid-
rtone  refen :  but  tlus  Knae  <^  mountaiii  is  not  sof^wited
ty  the  use  <rf  the  wofd  in  other  fJsces  <rf  Saipture  ;^  and
if  it  were,  it  woold  still  mske  the  construction  of  the  pieaent
sentence  rery  nnnatnral,  bj  omitting  the  essential  object
which  the  hesd-stone  is  to  crown,  and  facing  instead,  the
moontain  to  be  aboHdied.

These  alternatives  being  thns  untenaUey  we  torn  to  the
original  Hebrew,  and  we  find  that  Uie  root  i^  (yih-shar),
he  was  strai^t  or  rig^ — from  whidi  the  word  (mee-sh^ir)
in  the  above  text  comes,— does  not  signify  that  which  is
korucmial ;  if  it  did,  we  shoold,  con&ssedlj,  be  Umited  to
the  inconsistent  idea  given  in  the  Kng.  Ver.  Bot  the  word
signifies  that  which  is  ^om,  in  the  sense  of  not  crooked,  nor
curved,  serrated,  nor  having  projections,  as  a  pavement  or
stone  facing  with  some  of  its  tiles  or  stones  sank,  and
others  above  their  proper  level,  or  with  their  edges  cropping
ont.  The  word  imports  jast  the  idea  that  the  Latin  recftu
does,  in  constituting  the  origin  of  our  words  direct^  corrtct^
rectified,  and  right  morally  (for,  the  Hebrew  word  is  as  freely
used  in  a  moral  or  figurative  sense  as  is  this,  its  equivalent
in  Latin  and  English),  and  right  physically,  as  we  say  a
right  line,  meaning,  in  the  words  of  our  geometrical  defini-
tions, *a  line  that  lies  evady  between  two  points,'  and,
figuratively,  right  conduct.

1  If  we  wonid  avoid  profitless  and  miHleading  speculation, — too  common
among  commentators,— we  must  fuithfully  adhere  to  the  following  sound
canon  of  interpretation.  Admitting  the  Scriptures  to  have  one  Author,  we
must  take  its  words  in  the  sense  taught  in  other  places  of  the  same  Author's
writings ;  and  we  must  reject  any  symbolical  meaning  of  merely  man's
devising,  however  plausible,  for  a  word  in  one  place  of  Scripture,  in  any
case  in  which  that  word  symbolizes  differently  in  other  places  in  Scripture;
moreover,  each  material  thing  has  generally  but  one  symbolic  sense,  rarely
more  than  two,  throughout  Scripture.  For  example,  the  word  mountain,
in  Scripture,  has  a  very  distinct  symbolic  sense— Governmental  authority,
and— not  the  sense  of  great  sins  nor  great  difficulties,  in  Scripture,  though
these  be  continually  so  expressed  by  modem  divines,  to  the  detriment  of
true  and  sound  exegesis.    (See  Part  4  of  thut  article.)


APP.  7.]  Hebrew  Scripture  Criticism,  Art.  3.  491

Pabt  2. — Examples.

The  preceding  page  has  noted,  that  even  when  this
Hebrew  word  in  Scripture  is  used  (as  it  frequently  is)  for
a  plain,  it  is  not  at  all  as  a  necessarily  harizofUal  line  or
surface ;  but,  as  a  rectilineal — and  comparatively  smooth  and
even — ^line  or  surface.

The  following  scriptural  uses  of  this  same  form  of  the
word  (the  masculine  noun)  illustrate  this : —

Psalm  zlv.  6. — *  The  sceptre  of  thy  kiogdom  is  a  straight  (right)
sceptre.*
Isaiah  zL  4,  and  xlii.  16. — '  The  crooked  shall  be  made  straighL^
Psalm  xxyi.  12. — *  My  foot  standeth  in  an  even  place.*
So  here,  Zech.  iv.  7. — It  reads  literally, — 'Before  the  face  of
'  Zerubbabel   (that     is,   under  his    superintendence),   thou,   great
*  mountain,  shalt  become  adjusted^  straight,  and  even.'

The  meaning  is  further  iUustrated  in  other  forms  of  the
same  root  in  Scripture.^  The  following  examples  have
important  reference  to  the  meaning  intended  in  Zech.  iv.  7.
The  texts  are  placed  here,  in  such  order  as  seems  to  illus-
trate and  classify  the  senses  in  which  the  word  is  used.

Psahn  xviL  2. — *  Thine  eyes  behold  the  things  that  are  equal,*  or

right  and  just,

1  Samuel  vi  12. — 'The  kine  took  the  straight  way.*

Jeremiah  xxxi.  9. — '  I  will  cause  thee  to  walk  by  the  rivers  of

waters,  in  a  straight  way  wherein  they  shall  not  stumble.*

An  uneven  or  rugged  way  is  the  chief  if  not  the  only
cause  of  stumbling  here  referred  to ;  so  that  the  sense  of
the  verse  shows  that  the  word  means  smooth  and  regular  in
this  text.

Judges  xiv.  3. — '  Samson  said  unto  his  father.  Get  her  for  me,  for
she  pleaseth  me  weU,* — literally, — she  is  right  in  mine  eyes.


^  In  all  such  inTestigations  as  these,  the  scriptural  nsage,— the  sense  in
which  the  word  is  u^ed  by  the  same  Divine  Author,  it*  the  point  of  special
importance ;  far  more  than  the  usage  of  other  authors,  the  secidar  and
classical  usage,  even  if  it  were  different.


492  Appendix  7,  [app.  7.

The  word  is  in  many  other  places  translated  pleating^
righteous^  and  upright  : —

Jeremiah  xviiL  4. — '  He  nuide  it  again  another  veasel,  aa  memed
'  good  to  the  potter  to  make  it.'

Proyerbs  iii  5,  6. — '  Tmat  in  the  Lord  with  all  thine  heart ;  and
'  lean  not  unto  thine  own  understanding.  In  all  thy  ways  acknow-
'  ledge  Him,  and  He  shaU  direct  thy  paths.'

Proverbs  iv.  25. — *■  Let  thine  eyelids  look  stmight  before  thee.*

2  Kings  z.  3. — '  Look  even  out  the  best  and  meetest  [or  fittest]  <^
'  your  master's  sons,'  and  set  him  '  on  his  father's  throne.'

Jeremiah  zL  5. — '  The  captain  of  the  guard  took  Jeremiah,  and
'  said  unto  him  .  .  .  whither  it  seemeth  good  and  eonvement  for
'  thee  to  go,  thither  go  ...  go  back  also  to  (xedaliah  .  .  .  and  dwell
'  with  him  among  the  people,  or  go  whereaoerer  it  seemeth  ofrnvaU*

*  ent  unto  thee  to  ga'

But  especially  notice  the  following : —

Micah  vii  4.—  *  The  best  of  them  is  a  brier,  the  moH  upright  is
'  sharper  than  a  thorn  hedge.'

Ezekiel  i.  23. — *  Under  the  firmament,  the  wings  of  the  living
'  creatures  were  straight,  the  one  toward  the  other  ;  every  one  had
'  two  which  covered  on  this  side,  and  every  one  had  two  which
'  covered  on  that  side,  their  bodies.'

1  Kings  vi.  35. — *  He  carved  cherubim,  and  palm-trees,  and  open
'  flowers,  and  covered  them  with  gold  fitted  upon  the  carved

*  work.'

This  last  is  the  participial  form  of  the  word,  pualy  and
therefore  signifies  intensity  of  the  action  ;  either, — as
Gesenius  suggests,  the  intensity  of  flattening  the  gold,  by
blows  of  a  hammer  to  reduce  it  to  a  sheet, — or,  it  should
rather  be  understood,  the  intensity  or  nicety  of  the  JUting
process  mentioned,  that  is,  to  render  its  surface  true  and
even  with  the  curves  and  turns  of  the  woodwork,  so  as  to
preserve  correctly  the  form  of  the  carved  work  thus  encased.
This  is  much  more  agreeable  to  the  context  than  is
Gesenius's  notion ;  for,  the  fiUing  refers  to  the  placing  it  on
the  carved  work,  rather  than  to  the  previous  preparation
of  the  gold  in  leaves.    Besides,  the  carved  work  (cherubim,


APP.  7.]  Hebrew  Scripture  Criticism^  Art  3.  493

palm-trees,  and  open  flowers)  were  curved  and  complex
surfaces,  not  straight  or  flat  ones.

This  last  instance  of  the  use  of  the  word  (mee-shQhr)
brings  out  very  clearly,  and  in  close  connexion  with  our
subject,  the  sense  of  accuracy  oifitUng  and  adjuatmenl  (irre-
spective of  the  primary  sense,  straightness)  as  a  derived
sense  from  the  primary  idea  of  straightness ;  this  has  led
to  its  use  for  evenness^  and  thence  correctness  in  general.
But  in  the  work  of  casing  and  finishing  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, the  term  is  peculiarly  appropriate  both  in  its  direct
and  derived  sense.

From  all  the  foregoing,  the  root  is  seen  to  express
straight,  pleasing^  correctedy  or  made  upright,  'EYVXf-fitted  (mean-
ing closely  and  evenly),  and  flush  with  a  given  surface,  as
the  technical  English  phrase  goes.  In  view  of  this,  the  text
in  question  would  be  *  under  the  direction  and  superintend-
ence of  Zerubbabel,  thou,  great  mountain,  shall  become
stfxiight-lined,  evenly  fitted,  adjusted,  and  smoothed^  and  this
word  refers  well  to  the  completion  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  by
covering  over  its  step-formed  sides  of  roughly  hewn  blocks
of  the  grey  nummulitic  limestone,  with  a  smooth  inclined
surface  of  the  compact  and  white  Mokattam  casing-stones
with  extraordinarily  exact  and  close  joints;  and  the  word
refers  well  to  the  polishing  down  of  all  inequalities,  so  as
to  produce  its  truly  even  or  plane  surfaces  and  straight
arris-lines,  giving  to  the  mass  its  final  and  correct  dimen-
sions and  angle.

Pabt  3. — Impartial  corroborative  evidence  200  years  b.c.
Being  the  consistent  opinion  of  the  LXX.  on  the  meaning
of  this  Hebrew  word  in  all  places  in  the  Scriptures,

In  corroboration  of  the  above,  we  notice  that  the
original  word  (mee-shohr),  was  in  this  verse  understood
in  a  similar  sense, — and  not  as  a  horizontal  plain, — by  the


494  Appendix  7.  [app.  7.

neveaty  chosen  tnaahtofB  d  the  Greek  Tenkm  at  Alex-
nndiUL,  200  yean  before  Christ

KaropOwrai  IB  thm  ezpiessioiL  *  Thorn  akali  he  Aonm^jf
earreded  or  adjuded '  is  the  exact  and  literal  sense  of  this
Oteek  word,  bj  which  the  Septnagint  here  render  the
Hebrew  (mee-shohr).  Karvl  in  composition  denotes  here
the  intensity  or  thoroo^mess  of  die  acticm.

But  more  than  this.  From  their  mode  of  translating
the  same  Hebrew  word  in  other  places^  we  learn  that  their
view  of  its  primary  sense  was  noiharuonialne$i,  bat  drau^
nea  and  evenness^  no  matter  whether  vertical  or  inclined  or
horizontaL  It  is  reassuring  thus  to  peroeive  that  those
pre-dhristian  translators  exactly  concurred  with  the  resohs
of  our  independent  critical  examination  of  the  usage  of
the  word  in  our  own  codex  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.

This  is  seen  by  noticing  that  the  LXX.  had  an  appropriate
Greek  word,  ircSctvi^,  which  they  habitually  used  in  Scrip-
ture, in  its  accurate  sense,  to  express  a  plain  (straightness
and  evenness  when  combined  vnth  harizonialnem)^  and
accordingly,  where  they  met  with  the  Hebrew  root,  mee-
shohr,  and  its  context  decidedly  cuid*  to  it  the  sense  of
horizontalness,  they  do,  generally,  render  it  by  ireSccvT— «.^.
Jer.  xxi.  1 3,  but  not  always,  even  in  such  cases ;  so  little
do  they  recognise  the  idea  horizontalness  as  necesiorily  be-
longing to  mee-sh5hr — e.g.^  1  Kings  xx.  23  and  25,  roXc-
firja'(iifi€v  Kar*  €v6v;  and  Joshua  xiiL  9,  16,  17,  21,  ras
9r<$Acis  rod  Mi(r(u/o.

To  the  example  in  Jeremiah  xxL  13,  we  might  have
added  Deut.  iv.  43,  cv  t^  y^  t^  ircSii^,  and  2  Chron.
xxvi.  10,  etc.,  but  Jeremiah  is  more  to  the  point,  for  it
was  translated  by  the  same  commission  as  Zechariah,  and
therefore  would  illustrate  their  usage  better  than  examples
from  the  Pentateuch,  which  was  translated  into  Greek  by
a  different  conmiission,  about  100  years  previously.


APP.  7.]  Hebrew  Scripture  Criticism,  Art  3.  495

Part  i.—The  Context.

The  text,  the  translation  of  which  is  above  criticised,  Zech.
iv.  7,  has  not  only  much  mam/egt  allusion  to  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, but  much  other  connexion  therewith,  not  so  obvious  at
first  sight.  Without  here  digressing  to  discuss  the  evidences
of  this,  we  pass  on  to  notice  a  point  too  closely  connected
with  the  above  criticism  to  be  wholly  remitted  to  a  future
paper.  With  such  reference  to  the  Great  Pyramid,  then,
the  S3rmbolic  word  mountain  (see  foot-note,  page  490)  has  a
peculiar  import  in  the  text  above  criticised,  as  connected
with  other  texts,  «.^.,  the  stone  which  'became  a  great
mountain;'  Daniel  iL  35.  That  Pyramid — ^the  only  one
both  original  and  purely  non-idolatrous  and  non-subservient
to  this  or  that  mortal's  earthly  glory  like  the  rest  of  the
P3rramid8, — that  Pyramid,  as  far  removed  from  polytheism
as  from  atheism,  from  the  afficting  atheism  whose  mis-
guided votaries  are  still  more  egotistical  and  bent  on  visibly
and  ostentatiously  magnifying  themselves  during  their  little
earthly  careers,  than  any  other  class  of  mankind, — ^that  great
P3rramid,  the  greatest  of  the  stone  cairns  built  by  Divine
command  at  various  times,  as  tokens  of  God's  past  or  future
acts  among  men, — ^is  set  as  a  standing  83rmbolic  protest  (of
which  *the  decree*  in  Psalm  ii.  is  a  brief  verbal  translation)
reserving  the  GOVERNMENTAL  rights  of  *  The  King's  Son,' —
'Avvafiet9  fiiWovros  aiwfos,* — during  the  times  in  which
the  nations  are  left  to  walk  de  facto  in  their  own  ways,
owning  another  lord, — *  rov  (tkotovs  tov  aicavos  rovrov.'

This  part  of  the  matter  cannot  be  entirely  passed  over,
though  it  must  be  only  thus  hinted  at  here,  as  it  is  a
subject  of  kindred  extent  and  importance  with  that  to
which  this  present  volume  is  more  expressly  devoted.


496


Appendix  8.


[app.  8.


APPENDIX   8.


EREATA


IN  'LIFE  AND  WORK  AT  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID'

(so  VAB  AS  DISCOVERED  UP  TO  APRIL  1868).


Poffe
159

173


VOL.    L

Line
6  from  top,  for  no  read  not*

13  from  top,  for  hard  read  broad.


VOL.    IL


Page
66

126


158
192
195
458


458


Lifu


last  bat  1,  for  continuation  read  culmination.
N.B. — The    distances    entered  for  the  '  trenches*

from  the  base-sides  of  the  6.  Pyramid,  refer  to

that  building's  present  sides,  which  are  roughly

above  100  inches  within  the  ancient  casing-stone

sides.
12  ab  tmo,  for  334^  read  334°.
last  but  1,  for  6'  0'  read  &  0".
5  from  top,  for  18-inch  rod  read  18-foot  rod.
Erase  the  third  paragraph,  and  read  the  article  on

Sir  Isaac  Newton's  value  of  the  Sacred  Cubit,

following  these  pages  of  Errata.
2d  line  of  par.  4,  for  Sir  Isaac  Newton  read  Sir

Isaac  Newton's  numbers  re-examined.


APP.  8.]      Errata  in  *Life  and  Work!  497


VOL.    HI.

135       18  from  top,  far  realised ; — rtad  realized  as  a  linear
standard; —

135      last  but  2,  dele  ntntf.

135      last  but  1,  /or  25*07  rtad  more  than  25.

174      15  ab  imo,  far  0*85  read  2*85.

344      6  from  top,  far  expressed  read  printed.

Correct  also  the  mistake  of  Mr.  William  Osbnm
hayiDg  been  thought  to  be  dead.  He  is  happily
still  living,  and  the  author  has  receired  some
very  instructive  letters  from  him,  during  the
last  six  months.

505      2,  of  par.  3,  far  xL  16  read  xvL  11.


Sm  ISAAC  NEWTON'S  NUMBERS  FOR  THE  LENGTH  OF
THE  SACRED  CUBIT  OF  THE  HEBREWS.

At  p.  458,  voL  iL  of  Life  and  Work  at  the  Chreat  Pyramid, — ^there
is  an  unfortunate  misprinting  of  the  calculated  numbers  representing
in  British  inches,  the  quantities  from  which  the  mean  '  25*07,  ±  *10
British  inches,*  for  a  new  statement  of  the  length  of  the  above  cubit,
was  derived.  This  fnal  mean,  is  correctly  given,  as  intended ;  so
likewise  are  the  original  terms,  expressed  chiefly  in  Roman  Uncisd,
in  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  Dissertation  on  Cubits,  reprinted  at  pp.  354-
366.  No  important  mischief  therefore  is  likely  to  have  accrued,
from  this  error  in  printing  one  of  the  intermediate  steps.  But  as
the  error  is  an  undoubted  blemish,  which  I  much  regret,  have  can-
celled in  the  list  of  errata,  and  sincerely  thank  those  who  have
called  my  attention  to  it, — I  hasten  to  give  the  following  discussion
de  novo.

At  p.  365,  of  Sir  Isaac's  treatise  above  mentioned,  he  assumes  25}
Homan  unci®,  to  represent  the  length  of  the  sacred  cubit  of  the
Hebrews, — a  cubit  which  he  had  elsewhere  shown,  there  were


498  Appendix  8.  [af^.  8.

groondi  for  beUermg  that  that  people  ponened  before  they  weot
down  into  Egypt*  and  had  had  ipeeially  brought  to  their  attentioti
again,  for  religions  matten,  after  leaving  Elgypt  under  Moses.

But  Sir  Isaac  Kewton  was  not  oonfident  of  having  obtained  tfaia
eubit*s  precise  length,  to  the  last  figure  pnt  down  in  his  arithmetical
expression.    And  he  particularly  and  almost  prophetically  says,—

'This  is  what  I  thought  proper  to  lay  down  otjpresoU  with  rq^ard
'  to  the  magnitude  of  this  Cubit.  Hereafter,  periiaps  those  who
'  shall  view  the  sacred  mount*  and  the  monuments  of  the  CkaldeBang^
'  by  taking  accurately  the  various  dimensions  of  the  stones,  bricks,
'  foundations,  and  walls^  and  comparing  them  together,  will  discover
•  something  mare  certain  and  exact*

Now  what  Sir  Isaac  laid  down  at  that  then  present  time,  was
abundantly  sufficient  for  his  then  purpose ;  or  to  prove,  that  there
existed  a  most  sensible  and  positive  difference  in  the  length  of
that  sacred  (or  25f  uncisB)  cubit  of  the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  pro-
fane cubit  of  the  Egyptians ; — whose  length,  expressed  in  the  same
Roman  uncia,  was  hardly  more  than  21*3.  And  in  this  last  con-
clusion, he  is  so  eminentiy  borne  out  by  all  subsequent  investiga-
tors, that  that  subject, — or  the  length  of  the  pro/anef  or  Egjrptian
national,  cubit, — ^need  not  be  stirred  again.

But  within  the  last  few  years,  another,  and  a  more  refined,  or  a
residual  question  has  arisen,  which  apparentiy  never  crossed  Sir
Isaac  Newton's  mind ;  viz.  was  the  sacred  cubit  of  the  Hebrews,
taken  by  itself,  accurately  the  ten-millionth  part  of  the  length  of
the  Polar  semi-axis  of  the  Earth?  And  as  tins  quantity  in  Nature,
according  to  modem  science,  is  something  very  close  to  25*8  Roman
uncisB, — Sir  Isaac's  determination  of  25  and  },  ie.  25*6  of  the  same
uncie  for  the  sacred  cubit,  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  so  near  eapeci-
aUy  for  a  confessed  imperfect  approximation,  from  a  portion  only
of  the  materials  collected, — ^that  it  becomes  intensely  important  to
submit  aU  the  data  to  a  more  rigid  scrutiny  than  before ;  with  the
caution  moreover  in  view,  of  assigning  some  limits,  within  which
we  may  feel  tolerably  certain  of  the  result.

The  several  quantities  therefore,  extracted  from  my  reprint  of
Sir  Isaac  Newton's  paper  (but  to  which,  in  the  original,  I  cordially
refer  all  readers), — and  reduced  to  British  inches, — at  the  approxi-
mately assumed  rate  of  12*15  for  1  Attic  foot ;  and  0*97  for  1  Roman
tmcia,— are  as  foUows : —


APP.  8.]     Errata  in  ^Life  arid  Vfork!  499


Saof
Approxi'

Mkthod  of  RxrsBXircs.

▲ttia

Bomaa

Vnd«u

Biitldi
InehM.

Brltkh

IjMhM.

1.

From  Talmudists  and  Jose-
phns,  by  Greek  cubit  (p.
856,  vol.  ii) ;  between    .

2f

and

2

•  ••

•  •  •

•  ••
••t

81-24
24*80

127*77

2.

From  Talmndlflts,  by  proportions
of  human  body  (p.  865),  between

•  •  •

•  ••

281
24-

27-94
28*28

}26*61

3.

Josephmi  by  pillars  of  Temple  (p.
856),  between     ....

21
2

28-0
24-0

27*16
28*28

}  26*22

4.

By  Talmudists'  and  "all  Jews'"
ideas  of  a  Sabbath-day's  journey
(p.  858),  between

2i
2

280
240

2716
28*28

126-22

5.

By  Talmudists  and  Josephns,  on  steps
to  Inner  Court  (p.  858),  between

270
240

26*19
28-28

}  24-74

6.

By  many  Chaldaic  and  Hebrew  propor-
tions to  Cubit  of  Memphis  (p.  8^),      .

26-6

24*83

24-88

7.

From  a  statement  by  Mersennns,  as  to
the  leuffth  of  a  supposed  copy  of  the
Sacred  Cubit  of  the  Hebrews,  preserved
secretly  (p.  8fi8,  vol.  ii  Lije  and  Work),

26-68

24-91

24*91

The  simple  mean  of  the  last  column  s  26*47  British  inches.  But
that  is  not  a  proper  method  there ;  because,  not  only  has  Sir  Isaac
Newton  evidently  shown  that  he  had  most  confidence  in  his  two
last  determinations ;  but  his  first,  by  its  very  wide  limits,  shows
that  it  is  by  far  the  least  trustworthy  of  alL

Some  decrease  of  weight,  therefore,  for  No.  1,  and  increase  for  Nos.
6  and  7,  require  to  be  made.  How  much  precisely,  it  is  impossible
to  say :  but  perhaps  ^  for  the  former,  and  3  for  each  of  the  two
latter,  the  intermediate  quantities  being  reckoned  at  1  each, — may
be  considered  fair  and  probable.  In  which  case  the  mean  comes
out,  25*05  British  inches.  While,  simply, — and  in  fact  as  I  did
on  the  first  occasion,  using  then  a  slightly  different  value  of  the
Roman  oncia, — throwing  away  the  on  most  objectionable  observa-
tion, and  taking  a  mean  of  the  rest,  unweighted,  gives  25*09  of  the
same  British  inches.


600  Appendix  8.  [app.  8.

Bat  neither  25*09,  nor  25*05  are  folly  safe,  either  in  the  second,
or  perhaps  the  first,  place  of  decimals; — for — ^besides  the  mieer-
tainty  connected  with  the  proper  weighting  of  each  of  the  resolts,
according  to  the  different  kind  of  docnmentary  evidence  obtained
by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  on  each  occasion, — ^there  is  considerable  onoer-
tainty  in  the  value  of  a  Boman  nnda,  expressed  in  British  inches.
We  have  assumed  as  above,  that  the  former  »  0*97  of  the  latter :
but  modem  scientific  and  architectural  authorities  are  found  any-
where, between  Zach  at  0*9681  and  Penrose  at  0*97286;  and  mi^^t
require  us  to  reduce  our  final  quantities  by—  *05^  or  increase  them,
by  +  *06  of  an  inch ;  or  by  any  intermediate  figure.

Wherefore,  the  statement  already  printed  at  p.  458  of  yoL  ii.  of
Lye  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid,— ue.  25'07±  10  British  inches,
for  the  best  result  dedudble  from  all  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  approved
approximations  for  the  length  of  the  Sacred  Cubit  of  the  Hebrews, —
is,  if  not  as  good  a  statement  as  can  be  made, — at  least  a  great  deal
better  than  the  24*82  inches,  absolute,  which  has  been  hitherto
current  in  most  English  works ;  and  beyond  comparison  better  than
the  20*7  inches,  nearly,  of  the  Ordnance  Survey  Map  of  Jerusalem,

This  Ordnance  qusntity  of  20 '7  inches  is  evidently  not  the  aaered
cubit  at  all,  but  the  profane  cubit ;  and  in  the  explanation  of  the
scale  at  the  foot  of  the  above  map,  the  revered  names  of  '  Sacred '
and  '  Cubit  of  the  Tabernacle '  are  given  to  precisely  what  Moses
was  so  anxious  to  keep  them  from  being  confounded  with,  viz.,
the  cubits  of  idolatrous  Egypt  and  other  Qentile  nations ;  tbe  in-
scription at  one  end  of  one  of  the  Ordnance-Map  scale-lines  being
'  Egyptian,  Hd/rew^  Babylonian,*  and  at  the  other  end  '  Royal  or
'  Sabred  cubits,  also  named  cuhUs  qf  the  Tabernacle,*  If  this  map  is
one  of  those  prepared,  as  believed  by  some,  at  the  expense^  and  to
the  orders  of,  the  Palestine  Exploration  Association, — such  a  radical
error  with  regard  to  the  sacred  cubit  of  the  Hebrews  may  well  excite
surprise.  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  map  is  purely  the  work  of
the  several  Ordnance  officers  whose  names  are  conspicuously  en-
graved upon  it, — the  nation  must  regret  that  they  should  have  so
entirely  ignored  the  researches  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  the  greatest
philosopher  their  country  ever  produced,  and  in  one  of  the  most
important  of  all  questions  that  have  ever  been  brought  forward  in
either  the  science  or  history  of  metrical  standards.


APP.  9.]  FurOi^  Ea^lorcOion  of  Q.  PyrmMd.  601


APPENDIX  9.


NOTE

IN8KRTBD  BY  SPECIAL  RBQUSST  OF  A  CONTRIBUTOR  TO  THIS

APPENDIX,

ON  THE  QUESTION  OF  FURTHER  EXPLORA-
TION  OF  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID.


A  FEW  of  the  deeper  readers  of  the  foregoing  work  and
Appendix,  and  of  Life  and  Wark^  etc.,  will  be  impressed
with  the  extreme  importance  of  a  further  exploration  of
this  unique  structure,  the  Great  Pyramid ;  an  exploration
to  be  conducted  with  an  accuracy  and  completeness  worthy
of  the  great  interests  now  for  the  first  time  found  to  be
involved, — palseologic,  chronologic,  metrologic,  geodetic,
geologic,  astronomic,  but  above  all,  symbolic,  that  is  to  say,
relating  to  the  higher  ideas  intentionally  embodied  therein
by  its  Originator,  and  for  the  sake  of  which  the  structure
itself  and  its  scientific  facts  were  really  designed ;  according
to  the  conviction  of  some  of  us,  after  a  carefully  impartial
study  of  the  subject  with  the  present  incomplete  data.

In  presence  of  the  existing  and  increasing  sense  of  the
importance  of  the  preservation,  and  of  a  further  explora-
tion of  this  pre-eminent  'sign  and  wonder,'  a  word  of


602  Appendix  9.  [app.  &.

caution  and  goidanoe  is  here  earnestly  added.  Most  hap-
pily, the  diplomatic  as  well  as  the  pecuniary  difficulties  are
great ;  and  for  this,  our  gratitude  is  due  to  the  rtders  of
Egypt ;  for,  if  it  had  heen  otherwise,  the  structure  would
have  heen  already  so  much  injured  hy  zealous  hut  im-
proper exploration,  that  the  obtaining  of  the  much-needed
exact  data  would  have  heen  rendered  hopeless.  We  can
only  wish  that  the  governing  powers  had  been  equally  firm
in  adopting  the  most  stringent  arrangements  to  arrest  the
destruction  ilow  continually  in  progress  by  the  wantonness
and  perversity  of  crowds  of  tourists.  The  pecuniaiy  and
operative  part  of  the  work  has  likewise  been  a  wholesome
restraint  on  improper  exploration.  As  bearing  on  this,
we  may  state,  that  not  far  short  of  ten  thousand  pounds
would  be  needed  for  such  refined  scientific  work  and  en-
gineering labours  as  would  be  properly  required,  including
the  due  replacing,  and  re-enveloping  of  the  parts  to  be
exposed  during  the  examination  and  measurement

We  say  that  these  diplomatic  and  other  restraints  do,
most  happily,  exist ;  for  it  would  be  worse  than  useless —
a  positive  calamity — ^if  such  exploration  were  attempted  at
all — ^by  persons  not  fully  competent — scientifically,  practi-
cally, instrumentally,  and  pecuniarily — ^and  duly  impressed
with  the  serious  moral  responsibility  of  the  work,  and  with
the  grave  importance  of  devoting  all  skill  and  scientific
means  of  extreme  precision,  to  that  part  of  the  business
which  remains  to  be  done,  if  it  is  attempted  at  all :  seeing
that  the  attempt  will  (as  in  Howard  Vyse's  case)  necessarily
expose  fiducial  parts,  of  inestimable  value,  to  risks  of  irre-
coverable obliteration  by  swarming  tourists,  and  even  by
accidents  and  carelessness  during  the  investigation.

Begging  the  esteemed  author  to  insert  this  word  of
caution  and  suggestion,  addressed  to  the  worthy  zeal  for
adequate  completion  of  proofs  or  disproofis  and  data, — a


APP.  9.]  Further  Exploration  ofO.  Pyra/mid.  603

zeal  which  his  publications  on  the  Great  Pyramid   are

arousing,  whether  he  wish  it  or  not,  in  individuals,  few

and  far  between,  yet  collectively  numerous, — I  subscribe

myself,  his  obedient  servant^

William  Fetrie.

4  Thx  Avenue,  Blaokhxath,
LoiTDON,  S.EL,  June  2, 1868.


INDEX.


Abou  Hajalah,  quotation  firom,  971.
Aboa  Rouh,  pyramid  of,  19.
Advanced-thinlcen,  theories  of  the,  M9-884.
Age  of  the  Pyramid  of  Sakkara,  1&
Al-Hokm,  the  Arabian  writer,  206-878.
Al-Mamoon,  the  Khallph,  286-277.
Alyattea,  tomulaa  of,  96.
American  architectore,  qneation  of  the  origin

of,  108.
American  built  remains,  107, 108.
American  mounds,  Mr.  St  John  V.  Day  on,

108.
Ancient  bufldings,  4.
Angle-unit  of  Great  Pyramid,  816,  816u
Animals,  extermination  of,  116.
Antiquity  of  intellectual  man— contemporary

method  of  inquiiy  into  the,  1-8.
Antiquity  of  intellectual  man  from  a  practical

and  astronomical  point  of  view,  414-416.
Antiquity  of  man,  final  results  of  all  our

researches  into  the,  887-390.
Api>earance,  present,  of  the  coffer,  278-280.
Appendix  2.  Discourses  at  Royal  Society  of

Edinburgh  on   Great  Pyramid  suljects,

414-446.
Appendix  8.  Errata  in  '  life  and  Work  at

the  Great  Pyramid,'  496-600.
Appendix  4.  Extracts  fit>m  an  account  of

Maeshowe,  461-467.
Appendix  9.    Further  Exploration  of  the

Great  Pyramid,  601-608.
Appendix  1.  Letter  of  Sir  H.  James,  and

three  lettera  by  Mr.  Petrie,  898-418.
Appendix  3.    Mr.   Wackerbarth   on    Great

Pyramid,  and  Mr.  Petrie's  remarks,  447-460.
Appendix  6.  On  the  Great  Pyramid's  sdentiflo

theories,  and  its  critics,  476-486.
Appendix  7.  Scripture  Exegesis  in  connec-
tion with  the  Great  Pyramid,  486-40S.


Appendix  6.  Weight  of  the  Gfeat  Pyramid

and  the  Earth,  468-476.
Arab  writen  untrustworthy,  i7S-S77.
ArehsBological  data,  118-178.
Archsological  results,  174-181
Architectural  data,  10-112.
Architectural  results,  10^112.
Architecture,  earliest  known,  10-12.

first  residual  known,  97-106.

history  of,  by  J.  Fergusson,  &.

hut  days  of  NUe,  48,  44.

of  the  Proto-Chald«an  templea,  49-66.

of  Tarious  countries,  the  dates  of  tfae»

106.

second  residual  known,  106-108.

the  Egyptian  and  Euphratean,  81

third  Tariety  of,  86-87.

Ark  of  the  Corenant,  246,  264.

Assyria,  69-64.

Astronomical  emplacement,  66-68.

of  Birs-i-Nimroud,  71-75.

of  Ethiopian  Pyramids,  89-42.

of  Lower  Egyptian  Pyramids,  16-

19.
Astronomical  intention  and  no  Astronomi-
cal intenUon,  109-111.

test,  88-86.

Astronomy,  Babylonian,  69-76.

Astronomy,  distinguishing  features  of  tiM

Great  Pyramid,  886,  S86i
Astronomy  the  first  problem    in  ancient

bufldings,  8.

of  Babylon,  837-842.  *

« Athennum,'  Mr.  Petrie's  letter  to  th^  896-

400.
Sir  Heniy  James's  letter  to  the,  898-

896.
Atreus,  tomb  of,  90, 98.
Augustus,  Canini's  restoniioB  of  the  toml^

of,  102, 108.


606


Index.


B

Basil  rantins,  46-48L

Tower  of,  4&,

Babykm,  68, 78.

of  Kobaehadnenar,  47,  8S7.

Babsionian  ABtronomy,  dO-75.
generalities,  76-7&

Bal^kmiana,  flue  art  degenerated  amongst

the,  78-78.

tbe  Semitixed,  77.

Baligionisli  example,  contrast  with  Gnat

Pyramid,  835-348.

■eragesimiil  degrees,  815, 841.

Bampton  lecturer's  eologj  on  Nebnohad-

neiar,888.
Baahan,  Giant  Cities  of;  105.
Belns,  Temple  of,  00-88.

Bible  date  of  Deloge  singolarlj  ftilfllled,  880-


Biblieal  Deloge,  880-384.

Btrs-i-Nimrond  Tower,  68,  09.

astronomical  emplacement  of  the,  71-76.

Borsippa,  orientation  of  the  temple  of  Nebo
St,  338,  330.

temple  of  Nebo  at,  69.

BojnejiynmW*,  127, 131,  333-336.

questioned  for  age,  143-146.

tested  by  Geometry,  131-138.

tried  by  Astronomy,  138, 189.

firahe's,  Tycho,  Observatory's  astronomical
emplacement,  17.

Brandis,  Dr.  J.,  on  sexagesimal  subdivi-
sions. 341,  342.

Buddhist  architecture,  104, 105.

Buildings  almost  the  sole  contemporary
monuments,  4-8.

and  art  of  the  Persian  Monarchs,  81-83.

Babylonish  contrasted  with  those  of

Jeeseh,  46-48.

»  costly,  224,  225.

,  Proto-Chaldean,  61-55.


Callr's,  M.,  Logarithms,  241.
Cambodia,  architecture  of,  106, 107.
Capacity  of  the  coffer,  291-294.
CazTuthers,  W.,  on  characteristic  difference

between  zoologists  and  geologists,  118.
Cassini  on  earth  measuxe,  241.
Ceylonese  architecture,  date  of,  106.
Chamber^  O.  p..  'DescripUve  Astronomy,'

table  of  weights  of  planets,  261.
Check  on  prodigality  of  *  Time,'  867-871.
Chinese  architecture,  107.


Chipped  flints,  120-120.
ChxtmologiDal  limits  of  the  aaeient

woxld,49.
Chronology,  817.

1  considerations  in,  804-890.

Circles  and  Spirals,  150-150,  417,  411,  4St.

488.

Circle-drcaBferenioe  of  Great  Pyramid,  m^

810.
Circular  buildings,  no  attentloB    p^ld   to

orientation  in,  110.

buOders,  84-OOl

temples  of  Rome,  102, 101

Civil  Engineer,  opinions  of  a,  444-440.
Clarke,  Captain  A.  B.,  on  eomparisoat  of

standards,  842.

I>r.,ontlieheapinffnpofNIto-Biid,lia

Coflbr  in  King's  ChaniMr,  iinnsnt  mppmr-

•noe  of  the,  878-880.

on  its  owneapMtty,  894-801.

Coffer's  materisl,  877-8801
Coffer,  why  of  that  capacity  ?  808-307.
Coincidence,  on  probabilities  «f,  455400L
Comparisons  of  standards*  by  Captain  A.  B.

Clarke,  848.
Considerations  in  chronology,  304-890.
Contemporary  method  of  inquixy,  1^

monumental  examination  prindi^e,  40.

Contrast  of  Great  Pyramid  wltb  Bal^yloniih

example,  385-348.
Crawnird,  Mr.  Jl,  on  the  antiqaity  of  w»«^

166-168.
Critics,  Great  Pyramid  seientiflo  theory,  and

its,  476-485.
Criticism,  Hebrew  Scripture,  480-495.


DAT«multipUer,  SIgyptian,  168-106.

Dates  given  by  Hgyptian  and  Aasyrlan  t^

glons,  124.

of  Egyptisn  Pyramid  buOding,  84-89.

Day,  Mr.  St.  John  V.,  discovery  Inr,  80»

310.

on  American  mounds,  108.

on  New  Grsnge,  150.

Deluge,  date  of  the,  884-890.

generally,  879-384.

sii^gulariy  AilflBed,  Bible  dato  of;  388^

887.

-^ —  the  Great  Pyramid  a  monnmetit  of  tha.
881.  .  ^^      ^

Denunciations  by  Sir  J.  T.  Simpson,  S59.
Derah,  oompariseii  of  the  Sacred  enblt  with
the,  408-409.


Index.


507


DevlationB  in  avtronomictl  emplacement  of

Pynmida,  19,  20.
in  the  mathematicel  figure  of  the  colTer,

292.
Discoreiy,  the  Utent^  in  the  coffer,  307-310.
Division  into  5,  the  importance  of,  305.
Draconis,  a,  333-827,  885.
Dynasty,  Egyptian  chronology  ahowing  the

date  of  each,  29.

E

Early  Egyptians  mailced  no  knowledge  of  v,
329.

Earth  and  Great  Pyramid  weight,  408-476.

,  mean  density  of  the,  308-310.

,  onward  movement  of  the,  258,  259.

— — ,  reference,  a  higher,  258-261.

,  specific  gravity  of  the,  802,  80S.

Eastern  world,  chronological  limits  of  an-
cient, 49.

Echatane,  a  city  of  Media,  79.

Edinburgh  Daily  Papers  quoted  from,  856,
357,  414-436.

'  Edinburgh  Evening  Courant'  quoted  from,
476.

'  Edinburgh  Review*  on  Pyramidal  piles,  8, 9.

Egypt,  latest  excavations  in,  170-173.

Bgyptian  and  Assyrian  religions,  dates  given
by,  124.

Egyptian  chronology  according  to  various
authorities,  29.

,  attached  to  one  star  alone,  319.

,  showing  the  date  of  the  beginning  of

each,  29.

date  multiplier,  162-165.

potsherds,  157-161.

Pyramid-building  dates,  24-29.

written  history,  166-170.

Egyptological  date  authorities,  26-29.

Egyptologists  of  the  French  and  German
schools,  823.

Elevating  ideas  from  the  intellectuality  of
the  Great  Pyramid.  213-219.

BpiiMlhean,  a  tumulus  is,  87.

Errata  in  'Ufe  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyra-
mid/ 496-500.

Ethiopia,  Pyramids  of,  37-43.

Etruscan  and  Pelasgic  remains,  90-92.

Etruscan  tumulus,  the  essence  of  the  old,
103,  104.

Etruscans,  what  they  were  to  the  Romans,
101-104.

Euphrates,  valley  of  the,  45-83.

Europe,  pyramids  of,  127-156w


Examined,  probabilifiea  Of  coincidenee,  455-

460.
Examples  of  Scripture  criticism,  401-408.
Exegesis  of  Scripture  in  connexion  witii  Hue

Great  Pyramid,  486-495.
Explorers,  Proto-Chald»an,  50,  51.
Extracts  from  an  aoooont  of  Maeahowe,  461-

467.

F

FLims^  chipped,  120-126.

of  the  drift,  113-126.

Fergusson,  James,  architectural  philosophy,

80,  81.
description  of  Nebo*s  temple,  firom  the

restoration  by,  339, 840.

on  contemporary  buildings,  5-7.

on  the  age  of  the  Pyramids,  10,  84, 174,

176.
on  the  orientation  of  Bgyptian  buildingi

of  the  Second  Empire,  S3.

restorations  of  Assyrian  iMdaees,  62.

ruins  of  Wady-El-Coatib,  48,  44.

SemiUo  races,  no  builders,  97.

supposed  temple  of  Belus,  67,  68.

Figure  of  the  Pyramids,  12-16.
First  habitat  of  inteUectual  man,  46.
First  residual  architecture,  97-106.
Fleming,  Dr.,  on  animal  extermination,  117,

118.
Formation  of  units  and  standards,  240-246.
French  Academicians*  measure  of  the  oofl^,

288.
and  German  schoohi  of  Egyptologist!,

823.

metrical  heat  system,  S12-31S.

metrical  system,  256-258.

work  on  Egypt,  engraving  of  the  coffer

in  the,  282.

G

Gbografhical  tracings  of  circular  buildings,
88,89.

Gibbon,  on  Al-Mamoon,  273,  274.

Glottology,  science  of,  376.

Grand  Gallery  of  Great  Pyramid,  327.

Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  circular  buildings
of,  92-96.

Great  Pyramid  beginning  of  human  architec-
ture, 375.

,  circle-circumference  of  the,  815,  816.

1  deduced  standard  of  heat,  811-814.

,  dislike  to  the  primeval  testimony  of

the,  247-2681


608


Index,


'•opteiM«ffkt,17lu
csplon^ioa  offkt,  Wl-Mt.
oftto

—  Hi  MMbets  a  eorolkiy  to  riMpt,  IM-IM.

—  lliihi4M,lf»-18i.

—  lli«dtbt»fSS-»6.

-»  Bitvtod  Xhrnarf,  tn-SISu


—  BOBBBMDt  artbe  Ddofe,  atL

MiiBtiflBthMi7aaditoerittet,47M8i.

^->  Sir  Hmr  JftiDM's  thaoty  of  the»  M^

SM.
Mtomntj  aloiM,  846-847.

—  tiM  oldMt  monoment  of  Egypt,  10, 19.

—  throws  pecnliar  light  on  the  epoch  of
the  Deluge,  884.

^»  tnily  oriented,  18, 17.

OiMTea,  Prof.,  meuore  of  the  coffer,  S88.

—  on  Anb  Aothoritiee,  287,  S78,  S76.
OfMk  Archttectare,  100, 101.

U

Haubustoit,  R.   8.,  on  the  year  of  the

PltUdee,  838.
HmmIh,  a  Mohammedan  martyr,  88.
Ilat-tdok  of  8ir  J.  Y.  Himpeon,  S61-2&4,  440.
Heat,  Great  Pyramid,  iU,  2S8SS8.
Ileat-etandard  of  Great  Pyramid,  811-814.
Uehrew  arehiUtcture,  07-09.

Barred-cul)it,  497-600.

Boripture  criticiem,  488-406.

^—  word  (mee-ahOhr),  opinion  of  the  lxx.

on  the,  494,  495.
Iltifhta  of  lonie  of  the  highest  bnlldings,  283.
Ilersflhel,  Hlr  John,  on  a  Drsoonis,  822,  323.
.^—  on  the  entrance  passage  of  the  Great

Pyramid,  317,  318.
nightr  eartli-rt^farenne,  268-281.
Blstofy  of  Architecture  by  J.  Fergusson,  8.
— ^,  dlsturb^n  t>f,  28.
Homer,  Leonard,  on  Egyptian  potsherds,

167-181.
Human  insnffleiency,  confession  of,  890.
lluiley,  Mr,   on  anti-Biblical  periods  of

elvlUsaUon,  101.
Hypothesis  for  the  metrical  system,  285-29L


tto  Qnot  Pymdd  ei;  S74«r&


Jadu  is  bidk,  data  of  Ha
James^  Sb*  HeBiy.aDd
foond


101


mid,90g-SUL
—  OB  a


OB  the  V  hypothesis  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, 188-101.

's  principles  of  eonstnietkNi  do  not  mili-
tate against  the  fkets   on   whidi
Smyth  has  rested,  409-113.

theoretical  Pyramid  proiDe,

covered  by  Mr.  Petrie,  189.

's  theory  of  Great  Pyramid,  S8S-8M.

Jerusalem.   Ordnance    map   of^
sacred  and  profkne  cubits,  600.

Jopllng's,  Mr.,  coffer  theory,  S97.


KsAUPH  Al-Mamoon,  Al  Hokm*s

288-278.
Kingdom  of  Thebes,  80-Si.
Kings  of  Assyria,  88, 64.


aeeonntof.


Lahouaos,  878-878.

Latitude  of  Great  Pyramid,  SS6,  tn.

Leider's,  Dr.,  Pyramid,  43.

Lepsius  on  the  sges  of  difliarent  Pyramida,

170-175.
Lesueur,  M.,  on  Kgyptian  dynastiea,  ICT-lTQi
Le  Verrier,  M.,  satronomy  of  predakMi,  8S8,

839.
Lewla,  Sir  G.  C,  Egyptian  Hiatoiy  hj,  I«B,

109.
on  Egyptian  Chionology,  S8.


Index.


509


*  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pynmid,'  errata

in,  490-600.
Linear  meaaore,  2S9-S46.
Lithic  method  of  investigation,  by  J.  Feigna-

aon,  0.
strocture,  Great  Pyramid  signal  aa  a,

179,  180.
Loftos,  Mr.,  Utitndea  of  Tarioas  Eastern

cities,  60,  67.
Lubbock,  Sir  John,  on  pre-Ustorlc  times,  118,

180, 148, 149.
Luxor,  orientation  of  the  Palace  of,  88.
Lyell,  Sir  Charles,  on  the  antiquity  of  man,

120,  126.
Sir  C,  on  Theban  inscriptions,  162-166.


MAnBOWE,  account  of,  by  John  Stuart,  461-
467.

tumulus  of,  93-96.

Man,  final  result  of  our  research  into  the  an-
tiquity of,  S87-S90.

— ,  growing  desire  to  push  beyond  Bible
dates  the  origin  of,  366-371.

Map  of  Jerusalem,  Ordnance  surrey,  600.

Marten's,  H.  J.,  Letter  to  the  'DaUy  Re-
view,' 444-446.

Masoudi,  quotation  from,  271,  272.

Material,  the  coffer's,  277-280.

*  Mazzaroth,'  by  Miss  Rolleston,  886.

Mean  density,  earth's,  803-310.

Measures  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  246,
264.

—  on  the  various  coffer,  286-291.

Mechanical  structure  of  New  Grange,  139-
143.

Media  and  Persia,  79-83.

'  Medical  Times,'  Sir  J.  T.  Simpson  on  the
Pyramids,  ft-om  the,  366,  366,  368.

Menes,  the  ear-rings  of  the  wife  of,  172, 173.

Metrical  hypothesis,  286-291.

theory,  321-323.

Metrology,  Babylonian,  841,  342.

Mexican-built  remains,  107, 108.

Mis-statements  of  the  'Saturday  Review,'
480,  48L

Mixraim,  sons  of,  left  off  Pyramid  building,
23.

Moodie,  Lieut  D.,  R.N.,  on  animalian  fkcts,
117.

Morphological  principles  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid structure,  397.

MulUpUer,  £^yptian  date,  162-166.


NsBO,  temple  of,  69.

Newcombe,  Professor  8.,  reoompntaiiODa  on

earth's  distance  from  sun,  218.
New  Grange  and  Maeahowe  compared,  46f,

463,  466,  467.

Governor  POwnall  on,  182-184, 180, 140.

in  Ireland,  92,  96.

in  its  mechanical  style  of  strocture,  180-

143.

Mr.  St  John  Y.  Day  on,  166.

ornamental  aenlptoring  of,  142, 148, 140,

147.
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  numbers  for  the  length  of

the  sacred  cubit,  497,  600.

on  the  sacred  cubit  of  the  Hebrews,  S40.

Nfle  architecture,  last  days  of,  43,  44.

mud,  the  heaping  up  of,  160.

Nimrond,  orientation  of  the  buildings  at,  00-

02.
Nineveh'fell,'science  lost  nothing  when,  08, 04.
Northern  Hindoo,  date  of  architecture  o^  100.


Objbctioms  to  Mr.  Ll  Homer's  Sgyptlan

Potsherds,  168-100.
Onward  movement  of  the  Earth,  258,  260.
Opinion  of  the  lxx.  on  the  Hebrew  wotd.

(mee-ah6hr),  480-497.
Opinions  of  a  CivU  Engineer,  444-440.
Oppert,  M.,  on  the  supposed  temple  of  Beloa,

67.
Ordnance  Survey  confounds  the  sacred  and

profane  cubit,  600.
Orientation  of  Egyptian  building  of  the  id

Empire,  83,  34.

of  the  buUding  at  Nimroud,  60-02.

of  the  Great  Pyramid,  16,  17,  227-281,

338.
of  Tycho  Brahe's  Observatoiy  at  Urani-

bourg,  17.
Origin  of  man  pushed  beyond  Bible  reputed

datea,  866-871.
Ornaments  on  some  of  the  stones  at  New

Grange.  142, 143,  146,  147.
Osbum,  W.,  Monumental  Histoiy  of  Egypt,

828.
on  circle  and  spiral  ornamentation,  160,

161.

on  the  sge  of  the  Sphinx,  172.

on  the  Turin  Payrus,  168, 169.

the  religions  of  the  world,  886.

Other  competitors  with  the  Great  Pyramid,

842.


510


Index.


Palacb  of  AMyrit,  01-M.

Pi1irrt*nt  ezplontkm  oonftNindi  tha  nered

and  pnifkna  cobito,  600.
Ptlaiglo  and  Etniscan  renudiM,  90-02.
— —  and  other  compariaons  with  llaeahowe,

Mft407.
Psrifal,  Mr.  Heniy,  on  the  dimenalona  of  the

eoffff  in  the  Great  Pyramid,  S96-390.
Period  of  dnration  of  Greek  architecture,  101.
Pttwpolia,  statoea  of  the  lion  and  the  boll

Pttr8la,80-8&

Patrie,  W.,  compariaon  of  haae-nnlta,  401-400.

letter  to  the  '  Athennnm,'  896-400.

on  mean  ^*ft*T*^  of  earth  from  aon,

115-119.
— —  on  nnmbers  connected  with  the  Great

Pyramid,  800,  SOL

—  on  probabilitlea  of  colncldeneea,  451-460.
on  the  onward  movement  of  the  earth,

158-261.

—  on  the  sixe  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  805.
•——  on  the  trenches  as  applied  to  Sir  H.

James's  theory,  191-19S.
— —  on  the  weight  of  the  Great  Pyramid  and

earth,  468  475.
— —  remarks  on  Sir  H.  Jamea's  letter,  896-

413.
Philology,  376-

Planet  temple  ot  Nebo  at  Borsippa,  835-341.
Pleiades,  885-327-385.
Poaition  of  Groat  Pyramid,  226-231.
Potaherda,  Egyptian,  157-161.
Pownall's,  Governor,  account  of  New  Grange,

182-184,  139,  140.
Prichard,  Dr.,  on  the  earlier  chapters   of

Genesis,  125.
Probabilities  of  coincidences,  451-460.
Procmstean  method  of  datea,  26.
Prodigality  of  Time,  check  on,  367-371.
Profkne  cubit  hypothesis,  304-307.
Promethean,  a  pyramid  is,  87.
Proto-Chaldeean,  50,  51.
^^  eitiea,  what  used  for,  57,  58.
——Pyramidal  temples  and  burled  cities

48-58.
Pnrpoaes  of  the  Proto-Chaldsan  temples,  51,

53.
Pyramidal  buildings,  *  Edinburgh  Review'

on,  8,  9.
pyramid  building,  dates  of,  in  Vgypt,  24-29.
~—  building,  variations  with  time  in,  21-23.


PyiniMeaUt,145,M6.

deltaiitkm  of  a,  18L

'— —  system  of  numben  ftiDy  prwerwd  tai

tfae,8ia
— —  temperature  anitahle  for  obaerrlnc  In,

814.

theaea,  898-400.

Pyxamida,  aatroaomieal  emplaoement  of;  in

general,  17-19.
— -  flgnre  of,  11-15.

Lower  Vgypt,  10-11

of  Ethiopia,  87-48.

of  Europe,  187-11&

questioned  for  age,  148-156.

— —  —  proved  by  mechanics,  180-148.

teated  by  geometry,  181-188.

tried  by  astronomy,  188, 189.

of  Lower  Egypt  all  square-baaed  and

triangular  aided,  11.

approximately,  table  of  the,  10.

Pytheaa  of  M  arseOlea  on  the  Pole-atar,  ISt.


Qunmoif  of  future  exploration  of  the  Great
Pyramid,  501,  501.

B

lUnoirALnic,  864-867,  882-884.

Bawlinson,  Bev.  George,  on  the  Babykmians,
69-71.  77,  78.

on  the  Proto-Chaldman  Kingdom,

49-51.

Sir  Henry,  excavations  at  Borsippa,  71-

75.

on  Persian  buildings  and  art,  81-88.

translation  of  cuneiform  inaciip>

tions,  837.

Reflections  on  theoridng  and  on  the  taper-
natural,  440-444.

Belation  of  the  total  maasea  of  Great  Pyra-
mid and  Earth,  473-475.

Religions  uses  of  the  Proto-Chaldsan  temples^
51-53.

Remarks  on  Sir  J.  Y.  Simpson's  paper,  437,
441.

Rolleston,  Miss, '  Mazzaroth,  or  the  Conttel-
Utiona,'  886.

Roman  architecture,  101-104.

Romana,  what  the  Etmscana  were  to  the^
101-104.

Rotation  and  radiation  scriptaraHy  need  at
symbols,  443,  444.

Round  towers  of  Ireland,  96.


Index.


611


Royal  Society  of  Edlnlniii^,  dfaNMranw  at

the,  414-486.
Rukin'e  'Seven  Lampa  of  Aroliitectare/

864.

8

Saorxd  onbit,  845,  240.

— ,  compariaon  of  the  derah  with  the,

408-400.

,  of  the  Hebrews,  407-600.

Sakkaia,  pyramida  of,  18, 10.

Sarcophagi,  how  lowered  into  pyramida  and

tomba,  810.

measurement  of  yariona,  281-888.

'  Saturday  Review,'  mla-statementa  of  the,

480,  481.
Science-interdicted  hypotheaia    tried,  871-

877.
Scientific  symbolixations  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, 328S31.
theory  of  the  Great  Pyramid  and  ita

critics,  476-485.
Scripture  criticism,  examples  of,  401-403.

on  Job  iiL  13, 14,  486,  487.

on  Lamentations  iiL  16,  487-480.

— — on  Zechariah  iv.  7,  480-401.

Second  residual  architecture,  106-118.
Semitic  nations  never  builders,  07.
Sexagesimal  degrees,  Babylonish,  816.
Shape  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  183-188w

of  the  Proto-Chaldsan  temples,  68-56.

Simpson,  Sir  J.  T.,  '  Archaic  Sculpturings,'

127,  120, 142,  150.
attacks  the  Great  Pyramid  weifi^t  and

capacity  measures,  264-266.
—  called  on  to  prove  his  assertion,  358.

hat-trick,  251-254,  440.

inveighs  against  the  astronomy  of  the

Great  Pyramid,  228-230.

on  circles  and  spirals,  150-156.

on  the  granite  leaf  of  the  Great  Pyra-
mid, 152-154,
on  the  stone,  bronze,  and  iron  ages,  128,

120,  144-146.
on  his  weak  women  and  womanly

men,  357,  861,  445.
proposes   liquid   measurement  in

the  broken  coflTer,  202.
remarks  by  W.  P.,  on  a  paper  by»

441-444.

young  lady's  advice  to,  362,  363b

flise  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  202-225.

Smyth,  Piazzi,  table  of  depth  measures  inside

the  coffer,  280.


Smyth,  PlaisI,  important  theaea,  oonflnned

by  Mr  H.  Jamea'a  ehoaen  data,  418, 418.
Sothia  the  Egyptian  atar  of  obaervattoB,  880.
Southern  Hindoo,  date  of  the  aichttaeturt

or,106L
Speoiflc  gravity  of  the  earth,  808,  808.
Sphinx,  age  of  the  Great,  178.
Spiral  or  acroU  omameutation,  where  found,

01.
Spirals  and  eirolee,  160-166^  417-481, 488, 48S.
Sprenger,  Dr.  on  the  chronologioal  aznnge-

ment  of  Arab  writers,  867.
Standards,  on  oomiMuiaon  of,  848.
Stone  age  of  the  world,  olaima  for  the,  188,

144-146.
Stonehenge,  08, 06.

Stuart,  John,  account  of  Maeshowe,  461-467.
Subsidiary  numbers,  800,  801.
Summation  for  a  few  readers,  8a7-8S8.
Symbols,  rotation  and  radiation  acriptorally

uaedaa,  443,444.
Synopaia  of  Britiah  Museum,  on  the  Pynk

mids  of  the  4th  dynasty,  10.


TiLBKiXACUi  in  the  wilderness,  864.

Table  of  deviationa  in  aatronomioal  emplaoe-

ment  of  Pyramida,  80.

of  Egyptian  chronology,  80.

of  wcdghta  of  planeta,  referred  to,  861.

Talbot,  Mr.  Fox,  Aasyrian  inacription  trans-
lated by,  68,  63.
Taylor,  John,  on  the  coffer  measure,  310.
on  the  shape  of  the  Pyramid,  188-

103.
Temperature  of  Great  Pyramid,  236-238,  811-

814.
Temple  of  Nebo  at  Borsippa  dedicated  to  the

seven  Planets,  330,  340.
Temples  of  Rome,  102,  103.
Temples,  purposes  of  the  Assyrian,  60.

— ,  of  the  Proto-Chaldsan,  6L

— ,  shape  of  Proto-ChaldMan,  52-56.

,  table  of  numerical  results  for  their

Bstronomical  directions,  34.
Test,  astronomical,  33-36.
Theban  kingdom,  30-32.
—  temples,  30-32.
Theories  depreciatory  of  the  Great  Pyramid,

205-808.
Theory  of  Great  Pyramid,  by  Sir  Henry

James,  803-806.
of  the  stone,  bronze,  end  iron  ages,  146,

146.


512


Index.


TW««hti  <m  the  ProtabiUtlM  of  A.  D.  W.'k

SMoterMt  451-4M.
TtaM,  dMck  OB  prodigiaity  of;  S«7-4n.
Tbh^nh,  King  of  SthiopUi,  a  boflder  of

pjnuBldt,S7,  S9.
l^Mble  kypotlMalt,  SfO,  911.

tiM,  S80-184.

ToaborAlTmttas.88.

I^var  of  Babel,  4&.

TtaMbcp.  tenimoiiy  of  the,  in-l«l

Ttanhn,  dUtereBee  beCweea  a  pynaiSd  and

oTAlyattca^ML

TtoHiiaM  race,  eiicalar  boOdm  vffe  a,  8^

Tteta  papyraa,  IfS,  IM.
Ttoho  Btthe*e  ObaerratoiT  at  rnaibous,
IT.


Cim»  and  Staadanli  of  GT«at  Pttsb^


rTHuK«:|L   l^ilfttsal  «srocta:«    of   T^cho
at^lT-


Yyw,  OoL  HowBid,  oa  Aiab  aatlmitla^  SIT-

OB  meaaBree  of  the  ooAr,  tSS.

VaxiatkMia  with  tine  In  Pynunid  bnlldi^,
Sl,tt.


VAUKRtw  liW^  4a  lite  <a
>  -  X«a.  :^^


[,  A.  D.,  OB  the  Greet  FyimiBld,
4S0,  4«,  447'4ftL
Week  wooMB  end  womanlj  bmb  of  Btr  J.  T.

afaBpeoB,  U7,  an,  44s.

Weight  end  eepaeity  meeemee,  t6S-9M.

of  the  Ofeet  PTrenId,  tSS-S86.

end  the  lezth,  468-475.

Whewell*a    Phfloeophy    of   the    Indncttre

ScieBteeey  8M.
Whttwocth*e.  Kr.,  saogee  deeeifbed,  S54-SS6.
WihK8irW..«Beentiee  of  the  BoTne,' ISS,

US^  U7. 19f  ,  14S,  U«w
WmdMOB,  Sir  O.,  on  opoBiag  of  the  Pyra-

mlda,  fr4-f7«.
WQliam   Fetrie,  oitieiraia  on  M.  Wacker-

barth'k  paper  by,  451-460.
Woolhooeee,  Weighte  and  M eeeozee  of  all

NatSone,  111,  ni,  SM.
WrittcB  history,  Kgyptian,  16e-17a


Tbab  of  the  Pleiadee,  8SS-M7.


KDIXaCBCB  :  T.  OMCSTABLB,

ruxTKB  TO  Tsa  <Qmai,  ascb  10


LIFE  AND  WORK


AT


THE  GREAT  PYRAMID

During  the  Months  of  Jannaiy,  Febroaiy,  Haroh,
and  April,  a.d.  1865 ;

WITH  A  DISCUSSION  OF  THE  FACTS  ASCERTAINED :
By  C.  PIAZZI  SMYTH,  F.RS.S.  L.  &  K,F.RA.S.,F.R.S.S.A.,

HON.  M.,  I.E.,  SCOT.,  P. 8.  ED.,  AMD  R.A.A.S.  MUNICH  AVD  PALKBMO,

PROFESSOR  OF  PRACnOAL  ASTRONOMY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  EDINBURGH,

AND  ASTRONOMER-ROYAL  FOR  SCOTLAND.

In  Three  Vols.  Demy  Svo,  pp.  1653,  Price  568.
ILLU8TBATBD  WITH  88  PLATES  AND  SBVEaAL  W00D0UT8.


OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS.

"Professor  Piazzi  Smyth  deserves  no  common  credit  for  his
remarkable  inyestigations  ;  and  we  think  he  has  fully  made  out  a
case  for  further  inquiry.  This,  however,  ought  no  longer  to  be  left
to  private  means,  but  developed  by  the  resources  of  a  powerful
State;  especially  if  that  State  be  one  which  is  about  to  change,
without  adequate  consideration,  its  ancestral  standards  (which  may
prove  to  be  older  than  any  existing  records)  for  an  extremely  arti-
ficial system  of,  at  best,  doubtful  utility.  Modem  mechanical
devices  are  capable  of  easily  lifting  and  replacing  without  injury,
the  hugest  stones  in  the  Pyramid ;  and  until  that  is  done  in  the
interior,  and  until  the  original  sides  are  measured  with  Ordnance-
Survey  precision,  there  will  always  be  a  strong  feeling  that  import-
ant attainable  knowledge  is  being  allowed  to  disappear  gradually
from  the  earth  for  want  of  a  little  liberality  and  decision.'* — North
British  Review,  No.  xciii.,  September  1867.

'*  The  Egyptians,  upwards  of  4000  or  5000  years  ago,  must  have
possessed  a  complete  metrologic  system,  more  perfect,  we  say  it,
than  the  metrical  system  of  which  we  (the  French)  are  so  proud.


md  they  have  engraved  the  indelible  remembranoe  6i  it  aa  this
mountain  of  stone.'* — Betme  de$  Deux  MomdeM^  Parii,  16th  October
1867.

'*  Photography  and  mathematical  instruments  have  made  Pyra-
midology  quite  a  fireside  stndy." — Newctutle  Daily  Jamrmai^  4ik
May  1868.

"Profeeeor  Smyth  is  highly  qualified  for  the  task  of  messnre-
ment;  and  he  has  measured  with  great  diligence.  .  .  .  We  see
also  many  samples  of  power,  and  of  great  earnestness  combined
with  careful  industry."— 7%6  Athenaum,  20th  JtUy  1867.

"The  conscientious  care  and  accuracy  of  Professor  Smyth's
observations,  the  abundance  of  facts  and  figures  embodied  in  these
volumes,  fairly  challenge  consideration  and  inquiry."— TA«  Scott-
man,  *!th  November  1867.

"  Shortly  after  the  publication  of  this  pioneer  volume  {Our
Inheritance  in  the  Oreat  Pyramid,  1864),  the  eminently  qualified
writer,  following  the  chivalrous  example  of  Greaves,  went  to  £gypt
to  make  his  own  observations  on  the  Pyramid.  The  results  are
now  given  to  the  world  in  volumes  which  will  certainly  form  an
era  in  the  history  of  Pyramid  discovery." — T?te  Guardian,  &th
November  1867.

"  As  a  record  of  pious  devotion  to  science,  and  of  labours  under-
taken from  the  loftiest  motive  by  which  man  can  be  inspired, — a
love  of  truth  for  the  sake  of  it,  and  a  determination  to  get  at  it,
— these  magnificent  volumes  will  ever  have  a  moral  charm.  .  .  .
His  conclusions  it  is  difficult  to  accept.  It  is  difficult  also  to  reject
them."— Daily  Revieu;,  2d  December  1867.

"  Few  narratives  of  Egyptian  travel  are  more  entertaining ;  and
we  cannot  fail  to  sympathize  heartily  with  the  author's  zealous
desire  to  pluck  out  the  heart  of  this  huge  mystery  of  forty  centuries
ago,  or  to  admire  the  spirit  of  enterprise,  the  courage,  industry,  and
practical  ingenuity  which  he  displayed  in  so  toilsome  a  task,
entirely  carried  on  at  his  own  private  expense  for  the  advancement
of  scientific  and  antiquarian  truth."—  The  lUustrcUed  London  News,
Sth  June  1867.

"  These  volumes  are  in  their  way  unique,  and  well  worthy  the
attention  of  those  who  devote  themselves  to  the  useful  as  well  as
the  pleasant  in  science." — The  Standard,  I2th  June  1857.


3


**  The  work,  as  a  wholes  is  a  marvel  of  careful  accomulation  of
fact,  and  it  is  replete  with  the  meet  succinct  argument.  **»-7*Ae
Globe,  lOth  June  1867.

**  In  spite  of  the  formidable  appearance  of  three  arge  volumes,
no  one  will  ever  look  upon  the  time  devoted  to  it  as  anything  but
well  epenV—The  Church  Standard,  ISth  May  1867.

*<  The  deep  scientific  and  historical  researches  of  these  volumes  is
indeed  refreshing,  amid  the  increasing  audacity  of  modem  scepti-
cism.'' — The  Voice  upon  the  Mountains,  May  1867.

**  The  author  of  these  volumes  is  one  of  those  thoroughly  ener-
getic men,  whom  difficulties  do  not  deter  from,  research.  .  .  .  The
results  of  that  examination  (of  the  Great  Pyramid),  we  have  no
hesitation  in  saying,  are  invaluable.'' — BeWa  Weekly  Messenger,  27th
April  1867.

"  Life  and  Work  at  the  Great  Pyramid  is  a  monument  of  labour,
of  erudition,  and  of  research,  which  may  well  challenge  the  admira-
tion and  gratitude  of  all  who  are  interested  in  solving  the  mystery
of  that  stupendous  structure,  which  is  rightly  designated  the  greatest
wonder  of  the  world."—  The  Morning  Star,  Ibth  April  1867.

"  We  heartily  recommend  this  book  to  the  notice  of  all,  espe-
cially scientific  men." — The  Manchester  Courier,  April  IQth,  1867.


ALSO,
By  the  Same  Author,

ON  THE  LENOTH  OF  THE  SAOBED  OUBIT
OF  THE  HEBBEWS;

WITH  A  LIST  OF  ERRATA  IN

*  LIFE  AND  WORK  AT  THE  GREAT  PYRAMID,'

So  far  as  Discovered  up  to  April  1868.
Stitched,  Price  Id.

EDMONSTON  AND  DOUGLAS,  88  PRINCES  STREET,
EDINBURGH :  AND  ALL  BOOKSELLERa


