THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE
By Frank S. Smythe — London: Victor Gollancz, 1930
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): This text reproduces the 1930 first edition as scanned by the Internet Archive (identifier dli.pahar.2435). The 1930 publication is in the public domain. The work is complete, including the 'footprints of a Snow Man' passage.

========================================================================

THE 


KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


by 
F. S. SMYTHE 


LONDON 

VICTOR GOLLANCZ LTD 

14 Henrietta Street Covent Garden 
1930 





ICE FRETWORK ON THE LHONAK GLACIER: IN THE BACKGROUND 
IS THE DODANG PEAK 


OD 

co 
) 

mati 


Printed in Great Britain by 
The Camelot Press Ltd., London and Southampton 


CONTENTS 


Preface page 9 


Chapter I Ambitions and Dreams 


II Kangchenjunga : Its Nature and History 


III Plans and Preparations 
IV A First Glimpse of the Himalayas 
V Superstitions and Storms 
VI Off at Last 
VII Through Tropical Sikkim 
VIIT The Kang La 
IX In Unknown Nepal 
X The Base Camp 
XI The First Attempt : THE GREAT ICE WALL 
XII The Avalanche 
XIII The Second Attempt : THE NorTH-wesT RIDGE 
XIV The Ramthang Peak on Ski and Foot 
XV The Jonsong La 
XVI The Conquest of Jonsong Peak : 


THE FIRST ASCENT 


XVII The Conquest of Jonsong Peak: 


THE SECOND ASCENT 
XVIII The Return to Darjeeling 
XIX Lessons of the Expedition 
Appendix I 
Appendix IT 
Index 


13 
18 
53 
972 
82 
89 
105 
138 
163 
195 
214 
250 
258 
288 
311 


339 


369 
403 
421 
443 
450 
455 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Ice Fretwork on the Lhonak Glacier : in the background 


is the Dodang Peak Frontispiece 


Kangchenjunga at dawn from Darjeeling facing page 


At the Base Camp: from left to right, Dr. Richter ; 
Wood Johnson ; Professor Dyhrenfurth ; Duvanel ; 
Frau Dyhrenfurth ; Wieland; Hannah; Hoerlin ; 
Kurz; Schneider. Note the Expedition Boots 


A typical Sherpa 
Kabru and Kangchenjunga from Rinchenpung 


The Head Lama of Pemayangtse Monastery chats with 
Wood Johnson 


The Band of the Pemayangtse Monastery 
Devil Dancers of Pemayangtse Monastery 
The First Camp : at Tingling 

The Rangit Valley 

Between Tingling and Yoksam 

An Old Gentleman from Thibet 

Some of our ‘‘ Tigers ” 

An Unexplored Valley : the Yamatari Valley 
Khunza 


Nepali Dwarfs at Kangbachen : the evil effects of inter- 
marriage—note the baby on the woman’s back 


Kangchenjunga from the Base Camp 
The Wedge Peak from the Base Camp 


Kangchenjunga, showing proposed route, from the Base 
Camp 


The Rescue of Ondi 
The Ramthang and Wedge Peaks from above Camp Two 
The Great Ice Wall 


The Route up the Great Ice Wall 
7 


22 


58 


94 
116 


118 
122 
124 
128 
132 
136 
144 
160 
172 
178 


188 
192 
198 


202 
226 
230 
242 
252 


8 LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Chettan facing page 
The Ice Avalanche that fell towards Camp One 

The North-west Ridge of Kangchenjunga 

Unknown Peak seen from North-west Ridge 

The Summit of Point 20,800 feet 


Grim work on the North-west Ridge: Schneider and 
Wieland on the Great Pinnacle 


The Route to the Ramthang Peak 

The Great Ice Avalanche seen from the Ramthang Peak 
The Summit Ridge of the Ramthang Peak 

On the way to the Jonsong La 

The Jonsong Peak from Camp One, Jonsong Glacier 
Camp Two, Jonsong La 

Pinnacles of Solid Ice—on the way to the Jonsong La 
Kangchenjunga from the Jonsong La 


The North Face of the Jonsong Peak—7,000 feet high— 
and Camp One 


Descending the Jonsong Peak below Camp Two: the 
Peak in the background is a minor buttress of the 
North-west Ridge 


Nearing Camp Three on the Jonsong Peak 
Kellas Peak 

The Lhonak Peak from the Lhonak Glacier 
The Ice Slope on the Jonsong Peak 

Wind ! Porters descending the Jonsong Peak 


Unexplored Country to North-west of Jonsong Peak : 
a view from the summit 


The Last Porter Returns to Camp on the Jonsong Peak 
Yaks at the Jonsong Base Camp 
A Home-made Bridge over the Lhonak River 


256 
260 
266 
268 
276 


282 
290 


304 
316 
320 
328 
334 
336 


344 


348 
352 
356 
372 
378 
382 


396 
400 
406 


412 


PREFACE 


‘This book is a personal account of the attempt made in 
1930 to climb Kangchenjunga, 28,156 feet, and the success- 
ful ascent of the Jonsong Peak, 24,344 feet, and other great 
peaks of the Eastern Himalayas, by a party of mountaineers 
from four nations, Germany, Austria, Switzerland and 
Great Britain, under the leadership of Professor G. Dyhren- 
furth. I have endeavoured to record my own personal 
impressions of what was primarily an adventure. It is now 
no longer necessary to disguise adventure shamefacedly 
under the cloak of science. The scientific side of the expe- 
dition was well attended to, and interesting and important 
data has been gained. We went, however, to Kangchen- 
junga in response not to the dictates of science, but in 
obedience to that indefinable urge men call adventure, 
an urge which, in spite of easy living and ‘‘ Safety First,” 
still has its roots deep in the human race. 

I should like to take this opportunity of expressing my 
appreciation of the interest, sympathy and help so freely 
offered by The Times, and especially Mr. R. Deakin, the 
Foreign News Editor, and Mr. U. V. Bogaerde, the Art 
Editor ; also to Mr. Alfred Watson, the Editor of the States- 
man, Calcutta, who was responsible for the transmission 
of dispatches and who helped the expedition in many 
ways. I should like also on behalf of the expedition to 
tender grateful thanks to the Indian Government for 
allowing the expedition’s goods into India free of Customs 
duty. Among the many kind friends in England and abroad 

9 


IO PREFACE 


who helped, thanks are due to Brigadier-General the Hon. 
C. G. Bruce, M.V.O., Lieutenant-Colonel E. L. Strutt, 
C.B.E., D.S.O., Mr. Sydney Spencer, Mr. T. H. Somervell 
and Mr. G. Seligman for valuable advice and help, and to 
Colonel Bonn, the proprietor of the Suvrettahaus Hotel, St. 
Moritz, for his kind hospitality to the expedition. In India, 
thanks are due to Field-Marshal Sir William Birdwood, Bart., 
Commander in Chief in India, for the loan of a Gurkha 
N.C.O., to Mr. Howell, the Foreign Secretary at Delhi, and 
to Colonel Dawkes, C.I.E., the British Envoy at Khatman- 
du, Nepal, for their advice regarding the entry of the 
expedition into Nepal; to Mr. W. J. Kydd of Dar- 
jeeling, for his efficient work with the expedition’s 
mails ; to His Highness the Maharajah of Nepal, for his 
kindness in allowing the expedition to enter Nepal, and 
for his great hospitality and help when it was in 
Nepalese territory, and to His Highness the Maharajah 
of Sikkim. 

Without the help of the Himalayan Club it 1s safe to say 
that the expedition would never have reached the Base 
Camp, and it is, therefore, not out of place to express ap- 
preciation and gratitude of the invaluable work rendered to 
the expedition by Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. Tobin, D.S.O., 
O.B.E., Mr. G. W. Wood Johnson and Mr. J. S. Hannah, 
who accompanied the expedition, and of those who did 
not accompany it, to Mr. G. Mackworth Young, the Hon. 
Secretary, and Mr. G. B. Gourlay, the Hon. Local Secre- 
tary in Calcutta. 

The expedition is extremely grateful to the Meteoro- 
logical and Broadcasting Departments of Calcutta for com- 
bining to send out daily weather reports. The fact that the 


PREFACE TI 


receiving apparatus was smashed beyond repair makes no 
difference to our gratitude. 

I am extremely grateful to Mr. H. Ruttledge for per- 
mission to use a photograph of Chettan. 

Many firms assisted the expedition, and I take this 
opportunity of expressing grateful thanks to the Imperial 
Tobacco Company at Calcutta, for the gift of over 100,000 
cigarettes, and a large quantity of tobacco ; to the Hurri- 
cane Smock Company, Liverpool ; Messrs. Jaeger, Ltd., 
and Mr. W. Bill, of London, for woollies, and to Messrs. 
Sands, Hunter, Ltd., and Agfa, Ltd., for photographic 
apparatus and materials ; and last, but not least, the thanks 
of the expedition are due to the proprietor of the Mount 
Everest Hotel, Darjeeling, and the Lloyd Triestino Navi- 
gation Company, for a substantial reduction of charges 
and steamship fares. 


CHAPTER I 
AMBITIONS AND DREAMS 


In the geography class at school we knew, on paper, 
three kinds of mountain ranges. There was the mountain 
range represented by a long line supported on either side 
by little legs which straggled pathetically across the page 
of our freehand geography drawing books, like some 
starved Medieval dragon. This method of mountain de- 
lineation is technically known as hachuring, but our 
Geography Master generally referred to mountain ranges 
drawn thus contemptuously as “‘ centipedes ”’ and awarded 
but a low mark to home-made maps drawn in, as he 
rightly considered, such a slovenly fashion. ‘Then there was 
the shading method. The idea of this was in imagining the 
sun to be shining on one side only of the range, the other 
side being in funereal shadow. Well done it 1s quite effective, 
and as there are few schoolboys who can resist rubbing a 
pencil lead up and down a piece of paper, it was univer- 
sally popular. Yet, if giving some vague impression of 
form and relief, the mountain ranges we drew were grim 
sad affairs as desolate and unattractive as the airless vistas 
of the moon. And lastly, there was the contour method. 
This was popular among few owing to the time and labour 
involved, for unless approximate accuracy was achieved, 
a map drawn thus was sure to incur the wrath of the 
Geography Master. 


Personally, I found much satisfaction in laboriously 
13 


14 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


drawing out and colouring any mountain range portion 
of the map, sometimes to the exclusion of all else on the map 
and other items of homework. Geography, was, indeed, one 
of the few subjects in which I took any interest whatever 
at school, and had it been the only subject necessary to 
qualify for promotion I might have reached the “Sixth.” As 
it was, I was relegated for the remainder of my natural 
school life to the ‘* Fifth Modern,” a polite term for 
““ Remove,” the pupils of which were taught handicrafts 
on the apparent assumption that their mental equipment 
was such as to render it impossible for them to make their 
living otherwise than with their hands. 

The green lowlands of the map had little fascination 
for me. Mentally, I was ever seeking escape from the 
plains of commerce into those regions which by virtue of 
their height, their inaccessibility and their distance from 
the centres of civilisation were marked, ‘‘ Barren Regions 
Incapable of Commercial Development.” My gods were 
Scott, Shackleton, and Edward Whymper. 

There was one portion of the Earth’s surface at which I 
would gaze more often than at any other, the indeter- 
minate masses of reds and browns in the map which 
sprawl over Central Asia. For hours I would pore over 
the names of ranges, deserts and cities until they were at 
my finger-tips. By comparison with distances I knew— 
the distance to the seaside, or to London—I tried to gain 
some idea of a mountain range the length of which is 
measured in thousands of miles, the Himalayas. 

In imagination I would start from the green plains, and 
follow the straggling line of a river up through the light 
browns of the map to the dark browns, to halt finally on 


AMBITIONS AND DREAMS 15 


one of the white bits that represented the snowy summits 
of the highest peaks. There I would stop and dream, trying 
to picture great mountain ranges lifting far above the 
world : the dull walls of the schoolroom would recede, and 
vanish, great peaks of dazzling white surrounded me, the 
airs of heaven caressed me, the blizzards lashed me. And 
so I would dream until the harsh voice of the Geography 
Master broke in with its threats and promises of punish- 
ment for slackness and gross inattention. If he had known, 
perhaps he would have left me there on my dream sum- 
mits, for he was an understanding soul. 

If I had learnt as much about other branches of geo- 
graphy as I knew about mountains I should, indeed, have 
been a paragon. As it was, the knowledge gained from every 
book on the subject on which I could lay my hands had 
its drawbacks, and I have a distinct recollection of being 
sent to the bottom of the form for daring to argue that the 
Dom, and not Mont Blanc was the highest mountain en- 
tirely in Switzerland.* 

Three Himalayan names stood out before everything 
else, Mount Everest, Mount Godwin Austin (now called 
K 2) and Kangchenjunga. Once the knowledge that 
Everest was 29,002 feet high, instead of a mere 29,000 feet, 
resulted in my promotion to the top of the form, where for 
a short time I remained, basking in the sun of the Geo- 
graphy Master’s approval (for he was a discriminating man) 
before sinking steadily to my own level, which was seldom 
far from the bottom. 

For years my ambitions were centred about the hills and 


1 The peak of Mont Blanc is equally portioned between France and Italy. Only 
the extreme eastern end of the Mont Blanc range being in Switzerland. 


16 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


crags of Britain ; the Alps followed naturally. They were 
satisfying, if not supremely satisfying, for they enabled 
me to erect a more solid castle of imagination upon the 
foundations of my early dreams. On their peaks I learnt 
the art and craft of mountaineering, and the brotherhood 
of the hillside. To some the British hills are an end in them- 
selves, and to others the Alps, but the “Journey’s End” 
of the mountaineer is the summit of Mount Everest. 

Is mountaineering worth while? ask many. Not to 
them, but to others. Adventure has its roots deep in the 
heart of man. Had man not been imbued with it from the 
beginning of his existence, he could not have survived, 
for he could never have subdued his environment, and were 
that spirit ever to die out, the human race would retrogress. 
By ‘‘ adventure ” I do not necessarily mean the taking of 
physical risks. Every new thought, or new invention of the 
mind is adventure. But the highest form of adventure is 
the blending of the mental with the physical. It may be a 
mental adventure to sit in a chair, and think out some new 
invention, but the perfect adventure is that in which the 
measure of achievement is so great that life itself must be 
risked. A life so risked is not risked uselessly, and sacrifice 
is not to be measured in terms of lucre. 

Mental alertness is dependent on physical virility, and 
an inscrutable Nature decrees that man shall ever war 
against the elemental powers of her Universe. If man were 
to acknowledge defeat, he would descend in the scale of 
life and sink once more to the animal. But there has been 
given to him that “something” which is called the 
“Spirit of Adventure.” It was this spirit that sustained 
Captain Scott and his companions, and Mallory and 


AMBITIONS AND DREAMS 17 


Irvine. Even in their last harsh moments, the crew of the 
R.1o1 knew that they did not perish uselessly. Mr. G. 
Winthrop Young wrote, ‘‘ Will the impulse to adventure— 
which has coincided so happily for a time with that 
‘feeling’ for mountains—die with its opportunity ? Or 
will new outlets be found during yet another stage in our 
conquest of the elements?” I think they will, when man 
has conquered the Earth, he will turn his eyes to the stars. 


CHAPTER II 


KANGCHENJUNGA: ITS NATURE 
AND HISTORY 


Roughly speaking, there are two types of mountains. 
There is the mountain which forms a point projecting 
from a range, ridge, or glacier system, and there is the 
mountain which stands apart from other ridges or ranges, 
and possesses its own glacier system. A good example of the 
former type is afforded by the peaks of the Bernese Ober- 
land. Magnificent though they are individually, especially 
when seen from Mirren or the Wengern Alp, they are in 
reality but elevated points above an interlinking system of 
snowy plateaux and glaciers. Another good example is the 
great Himalayan peak, K 2. Though in many respects one 
of the most wonderful peaks in the world, it is, properly 
speaking, but a solitary spire of rock and ice rising above 
the glaciers and snow-fields of the Karakoram Range. 

Of independent mountains, there is no finer example 
than Kangchenjunga. It is a mountain great enough to 
possess its own glaciers radiating from its several summits, 
and though surrounded by many vassal peaks, which add 
their quota to the ice rivers radiating from the main massif, 
the glaciers which flow far down to the fringe of the 
tropical forests cloaking the lower valleys are the undis- 
puted possession of the Monarch. Of the world’s first half 
dozen peaks, Kangchenjunga is the only one that displays 


its glories to the world at large. Only those who can afford 
18 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 19 


the time and expense necessary to penetrate the remote 
fastnesses from which they spring can view the glories of 
Everest or the Karakorams, but Kangchenjunga is to be 
seen by anyone who cares to visit the hill town of Dar- 
jeeling, or climb one of the lower foot-hills. Thus man is 
able to turn his tired eyes towards the snows, and reflect 
that there are still worlds unconquered towards which he 
can gaze for inspiration and hope. 

Whether or not Kangchenjunga is the second or the 
third highest mountain in the world is not yet certain, 
for its height is approximately equal to that of K 2, and it 
is still a matter of argument as to which should take pride 
of place. As determined by the Survey of India K 2 is 
28,250 feet high, 194 feet higher than Kangchenjunga. 
These heights have been estimated by the most accurate 
trigonometrical processes possible. So many slight errors 
are, however, liable to creep into the most elaborate 
calculations that they can be regarded as approximate 
only. Sir Thomas Holditch, one of the greatest of survey 
authorities, held that there are bound to be errors owing to 
refraction. For instance, the rays of the sun passing through 
rarified air over snow-covered areas are liable to cause an 
error of refraction. Another difficulty is the attractive forces 
exercised by sucha great mountain range as the Himalayas. 
It is well known that in the vicinity of the range there is a 
slight dip in the surface of water. It can hardly be doubted, 
therefore, that instrumental levels are affected. 

With these factors taken into account, the heights of the 
three highest peaks in the world were worked out by 
Colonel S. G. Burrard, Superintendent of the Trigono- 
metrical Survey of India, who arrived at the following : 


20 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Mount Everest, 29,141 feet ; Kangchenjunga, 28,225 feet ; 
K 2, 28,191 feet. Thus Kangchenjunga is made 34 feet 
higher than K 2. This slight difference is scarcely worthy of 
note and taking into account fluctuations of height due to 
seasonal snowfall on the summits, it may be assumed that 
there is a dead heat for second place. 

Kangchenjunga is situated to the north-east of Nepal, an 


eran as ve “abhor 


ee 
pst Ae 
ty “ [IB E TESS 
Cte eee ee, t “te 7 en, 
IIMA LAY IN > 


. ae 
3 7; Ay 
= ya 3 a efi ie 
a et rene Wiens 6 eg EN HIMA LA 


s ee ne sai ‘Lone 
: pret 


“slachen 
eh PAANCHENIUNGA 





By courtesy of The Times 


independent state, and to the north-west of Sikkim, a 
state under British mandate. Its main ridges which run 
from N.N.E. to S.S.W. form a natural boundary between 
these two states, as well as a watershed to several impor- 
tant rivers. Twelve miles north of Kangchenjunga is the 
Thibetan frontier. This runs along what is strictly speaking 
the main watershed of the Himalayas, which separates 
the arid plateaux of Thibet on the north from the more 
fertile and rain washed country on the south. On this 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 21 


watershed, however, there are no elevations to rival Kang- 
chenjunga, so that the mountain and its satellite peaks 
form a huge mountain massif pushed southwards from the 
main Himalayan Range. 

Generally speaking, the more isolated a mountain or 
mountain group, the greater are its fluctuations of climate. 
Kangchenjunga is large enough not only to make its own 
weather, but to catch the full force of ready-made weather 
in addition. Only low foot-hills separate it from the Plain 
of Bengal, and these are not high enough to afford it pro- 
tection from the south-west monsoon. The result of this is 
an annual precipitation of snow that is probably greater 
than that of any other peak in the Himalayas. Because of 
this Kangchenjunga boasts some of the most magnificent 
snow and ice scenery in the world. 

Kangchenjunga not only breaks the force of the mon- 
soon, but protects the main watershed to the north from its 
onslaught to a great extent. The result of this is an extra- 
ordinary variation of scenery and climate within a small 
area. Ihe dry, almost dusty hills at the head of the Lhonak 
Valley, the Dodang Nyima range, and the plateaux of 
Thibet beyond are in striking contrast to the valleys 
radiating southwards from Kangchenjunga, for here is a 
dry reddish brown country with a snow level appreciably 
higher and glaciers considerably smaller than those of 
Kangchenjunga, and its immediate neighbours. 

The huge annual precipitation of snow on Kangchen- 
junga is, from the mountaineer’s point of view, a disad- 
vantage, for it plasters itself on the mountain, and fills every 
hollow with clinging masses of ice. Owing to this quantity 
of snow, that is ever building up, plus the tug of gravity, 


22 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


these icy masses move downwards to join the main glaciers 
which they feed. Frequently, they are perched high up on 
the mountainside, and are unable to flow down the steep, 
rock precipices beneath, so they break off in chunks 
hundreds of feet thick, which fall thousands of feet to the 
glaciers beneath in terrible ice avalanches. These ice 
avalanches are Kangchenjunga’s deadliest weapon. 

There is probably no other mountain where the moun- 
taineer is exposed to greater dangers than he is on Kang- 
chenjunga, for not only has he ice avalanches to contend 
with, but uncertain weather as well, weather incalculable 
both in cause and effect. 

With such a mountain before their eyes, it is perhaps 
small wonder that the peoples inhabiting the valleys round 
Kangchenjunga have become impregnated with the 
grandeur and mystery of the great mountain. To them 
its five summits are the ‘‘ Five Treasures of the Snow,” 
and on them rests the throne of an all powerful god. 
Their prosperity, and even their lives, depend on the 
good humour of this god, for he is able to blast their crops 
with his storms, or destroy their villages with his floods and 
avalanches. There are even dark tales of human sacrifices to 
this powerful deity handed down from the remote past. 

Roughly speaking, there are four main lines of approach 
to Kangchenjunga, up the valley of the Tamar River in 
Nepal, passing Khunza and Kangbachen, up the Yalung 
Valley in Nepal, up the valley of the Teesta River in 
Sikkim, and up the Talung Valley also in Sikkim. Between 
the Yalung and Talung Valleys there is also the Rangit 
River, which has its sources in the glaciers of Kabru, 
24,002 feet, one of Kangchenjunga’s outpost peaks to the 





KANGCHENJUNGA AT DAWN FROM DARJEELING 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 23 


south. But compared to the first two, this is but a subsid- 
iary valley, and does not form a main line of approach. 

The first European to undertake serious exploration in 
the neighbourhood of Kangchenjunga was the famous 
botanist and explorer, Sir Joseph Hooker. Eighty years 
ago the valleys round Kangchenjunga were unknown and 
unexplored. Dense, trackless jungle covered them, through 
which trails had to be cut, whilst transportation was very 
difficult. In 1848, Hooker traversed the Tamar Valley, 
and visited the Walung and Yangma Passes which lead 
from North-eastern Nepal into Thibet, north of Mount 
Nango. He then passed through Kangbachen and back 
to Darjeeling, via the Yalung Valley and the Singalila 
Ridge. In January, 1849, he reached Dzongri via the 
Rathong Valley, but was unable to go farther owing to 
snow. In April he ascended the Teesta Valley to Lachen, 
and made several attempts to climb Lamgebo Peak, 
19,250 feet. Thence, he ascended the Poki River, and 
after bridging it near its junction with the Tumrachen 
River, tried to reach the Zemu Glacier. Failing to do this, 
he explored the Lachen and Lachung Valleys, and made 
attempts on Kangchenjau and the Pauhunri, 22,700 feet 
and 23,180 feet respectively. 

Unsuccessful though these attempts were, they deserve 
something more than passing notice. At this date moun- 
taineering had scarcely begun even in the Alps, and it was 
not until sixteen years later that the Matterhorn was 
climbed, yet here was an explorer attempting peaks 8,000 
feet higher than the Zermatt giant. As it was, Hooker 

'Mr. Douglas Freshfield in his book, Round Kangchenjunga, included an interesting 


chapter on the early history of Kangchenjunga. The subject was also dealt with 
more recently in Vol. II of the Himalayan Journal by Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. Tobin. 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 23 


south. But compared to the first two, this is but a subsid- 
iary valley, and does not form a main line of approach. 

The first European to undertake serious exploration in 
the neighbourhood of Kangchenjunga was the famous 
botanist and explorer, Sir Joseph Hooker. Eighty years 
ago the valleys round Kangchenjunga were unknown and 
unexplored. Dense, trackless jungle covered them, through 
which trails had to be cut, whilst transportation was very 
difficult. In 1848, Hooker traversed the Tamar Valley, 
and visited the Walung and Yangma Passes which lead 
from North-eastern Nepal into Thibet, north of Mount 
Nango. He then passed through Kangbachen and back 
to Darjeeling, via the Yalung Valley and the Singalila 
Ridge. In January, 1849, he reached Dzongri via the 
Rathong Valley, but was unable to go farther owing to 
snow. In April he ascended the Teesta Valley to Lachen, 
and made several attempts to climb Lamgebo Peak, 
19,250 feet. ‘Thence, he ascended the Poki River, and 
after bridging it near its junction with the Tumrachen 
River, tried to reach the Zemu Glacier. Failing to do this, 
he explored the Lachen and Lachung Valleys, and made 
attempts on Kangchenjau and the Pauhunri, 22,700 feet 
and 23,180 feet respectively. 

Unsuccessful though these attempts were, they deserve 
something more than passing notice. At this date moun- 
taineering had scarcely begun even in the Alps, and it was 
not until sixteen years later that the Matterhorn was 
climbed, yet here was an explorer attempting peaks 8,000 
feet higher than the Zermatt giant. As it was, Hooker 

‘Mr. Douglas Freshfield in his book, Round Kangchenjunga, included an interesting 


chapter on the early history of Kangchenjunga. The subject was also dealt with 
more recently in Vol. II of the Himalayan Journal by Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. Tobin. 


24 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


ascended to the Cholamo Lake at the head of the Lachen 
Valley, whence he ascended a small peak, and crossed the 
Dongkya La, 18,130 feet, into the head of the Lachung 
Valley. 

Hooker, and Dr. Campbell, Superintendent of Dar- 
jeeling, who accompanied him, were seized and impri- 
soned at Tumlong on their way back to Darjeeling, at the 
orders of Namgay, Prime Minister of Sikkim, and it was 
some time before they were released. As retribution for this 
outrage, a portion of Sikkim, south of the Great Rangit 
Valley, was annexed by the British Government. This dis- 
trict had once belonged to Nepal, but after the Gurkha 
war of 1817, it was restored to the Sikkim Government, who 
in the same year ceded to us Darjeeling. It is now covered 
in valuable tea plantations. 

Hooker made a small scale map of Sikkim to illustrate 
his wanderings, but this remained untouched until 1861, 
when Lieutenant Carter made a reconnaissance survey 
between Darjeeling and Tumlong during the march of 
Colonel Gawler’s force. It was not until 1878 that the 
survey of Sikkim was resumed by Captain H. J. Harman, 
R.E., of the Survey of India. Harman made several 
journeys, which included an attempt to reach the Monas- 
tery of Tulung, but he was forced to return owing to the 
hostility of the inhabitants. He tried to reach the foot of 
Kangchenjunga, but his health suffered in the tropical 
valleys, and he was forced to return. Colonel H. C. V. 
Tanner undertook the continuance of the survey. It is 
thought that he was responsible for the survey training of 
the three Indian surveyors, “ Pandits,” signing themselves 
S.C. D., U. G., and R. N., who performed such valuable 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 25 


work in this district. The actual triangulation was under- 
taken by Tanner and his assistant, Robert, whilst the 
“ Pandits ” added topographical details. 

In 1879, S. C. D. (Babu Sarat Chandra Das), the best 
known of the “Pandits,”’ crossed the Kang La, 16,373 
feet, from Sikkim into Nepal, passed up the valley of 
Kangbachen, traversed the Jonsong La, 20,200 feet, and 
the Choten Nyima La to Tashi Lhunpo in Thibet. This is 
certainly one of the boldest journeys on record in that part 
of the world, and the crossing of the Jonsong La, a high 
glacier pass, was a great feat. Two years later, in 1881, he 
crossed the Nango La, north of Kangbachen, and con- 
tinued to Lhasa. In 1883, another bold journey was under- 
taken by a native, Lama Ugyen Gyatso of Pemayangtse 
Monastery, who travelled to Lhasa by the Teesta and 
Lachung Valleys, and over the Dongkya La, making 
valuable sketches en route. 

In October to December of the same year, the survey of 
the more accessible parts of Sikkim was completed by 
Robert and his assistant, Rinzin Namgyal (Rinsing of 
Mr. Freshfield’s Round Kangchenjunga) who explored the 
Talung Valley to the Tulung Monastery. In October, 
1884, he crossed the Kang La into Nepal, explored the 
Yalung Glacier, and followed Sarat Chandra Das’s route 
over the Jonsong La. But instead of crossing the Choten 
Nyima La, he descended the Lhonak Valley to its junc- 
tion with the Lachen Valley, returning to Darjeeling on 
January 31, 1885. 

J mentioned these preliminary explorations in the 
neighbourhood of Kangchenjunga if only to show how 
little was known but a short time ago of the approaches to 


26 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the mountain. Had this preliminary exploration work not 
been carried out, and the way cleared for future mountain- 
eers, one of the most beautiful and interesting climbing 
districts in the world might still be accessible only with 
great difficulty. It would be as well, therefore, for future 
parties, who may attempt Kangchenjunga, to remember 
that no route on the mountain can be considered as a 
preserve for any one party. 

What may be called the first purely mountaineering 
party made its appearance in 1883, in which year Mr. 
W. W. Graham began his ascents in Sikkim. He first 
visited Dzongri at the beginning of April, and climbed a 
peak of about 18,000 feet on the Singalila Ridge. After a 
week he was forced to return to Darjeeling on April 12. 
Later in October, he ascended Jubonu, 19,350 feet, a peak 
in the Kabru Range that he gave as about 20,000 feet, and 
a peak west of the Kang La, which he gave as 19,000 feet. 
Finally came his climb of Kabru, 24,002 feet, the summit 
of which he claimed to have reached. This ascent has been 
the subject of much controversy, and whether or not he 
actually climbed Kabru is still doubtful. Possibly, he may 
have mistaken it for the Forked Peak. 

Graham made one interesting remark: he said that May 
was the avalanche month. Furthermore, it should be noted 
that nearly all the big climbs in Sikkim have been done 
during or after the monsoon. 

The most valuable mountain exploration ever carried 
out in the Sikkim Himalayas was that of Mr. Freshfield’s 
party in 1899. Leaving Darjeeling on September 5, 
the party ascended the Teesta Valley and Zemu Glacier, 
crossed into the head of the Lhonak Valley, and traversed 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 27 


the Jonsong La. Owing to a heavy snow-fall, they were 
greatly hampered in their plans, and descended to Kang- 
bachen without having attempted Kangchenjunga or one 
of its neighbours as had been their original intention. 
But though unable to do any climbing, Mr. Freshfield 
made many valuable speculations and observations as to 
the possibility of peaks, whilst Signor Vittoria Sella, who 
accompanied him, took many beautiful and instructive 
photographs. 

Mr. Freshfield was the first mountaineer ever to examine 
the great western face of Kangchenjunga, rising from the 
Kangchenjunga Glacier. Speaking of this glacier he 
writes : ‘It has its origin in a snow-plateau, or rather 
terrace, lying under the highest peak at an elevation of 
about 27,000 feet, that is only some 1,200 feet below the 
top, the final rock-ridges leading to which look very 
accessible. Below this terrace, however, stretches a most 
formidable horseshoe of precipices, or what at least the 
ordinary traveller would describe as precipices. Since, 
however, this glacier affords what is in my opinion the only 
direct route to Kangchenjunga, which is not impracticable, 
I must qualify the word.” He goes on to say, ‘‘ But—and it 
is a ‘ but’ I desire to emphasise—the routes I can discern 
by careful study of my companions’ photographs are more 
or less exposed to the worst, because the least avoidable by 
human skill, of all mountain risks. Steep places will have 
to be surmounted by a series of slopes, in which the 
crevasses and séracs have been filled or beaten down by 
avalanches from hanging ice-cliffs above, and when the 
peril of this staircase has been run, a way must be found 
along a shelf similarly exposed.” 


28 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


After passing through Khunza, Mr. Freshfield crossed 
the Mirgin La and the Kang La to Dzongri and Dar- 
jeeling. He describes his experiences in his classic book 
Round Kangchenjunga, a book which is unfortunately out 
of print. During this expedition, one of Mr. Freshfield’s 
companions, Professor E. Garwood, constructed a map of 
Kangchenjunga and its environs, which still remains of 
great value. It is, indeed, an extraordinarily accurate work, 
considering the difficult conditions under which it was 
made. 

Between the years 1889 and 1902, the late Mr. Claude 
White, Political Officer in Sikkim, made various explora- 
tions, of which he has unfortunately left but few details. 
He was the first to investigate the gorges between the 
Pandim and Simvu Mountains, and in 1890 crossed the 
Guicha La, and ascended the Talung and Teesta Valleys. 
He ascended the Zemu Glacier to about 17,500 feet, and 
crossed the Tangchang La and the The La into the 
Lhonak Valley. 

Of all mountaineering pioneers in the Kangchenjunga 
district, and for that matter in the Himalayas, Dr. A. M. 
Kellas’s name will stand pre-eminent. He was perhaps the 
first mountaineer to regard the Himalayas in the same way 
that the modern mountaineer regards the Alps—as a 
playground. Topographical and scientific considerations, 
while being important to him, were nevertheless of 
secondary importance as compared to mountaineering, 
yet, in the course of a number of purely climbing expedi- 
tions into North-eastern and North-western Sikkim, he 


‘Round Kangchenjunga was published in 1903 by Edward Arnold, but owing to 4 
disastrous fire, all copies in stock were subsequently burnt. 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 29 


could not fail to acquire much valuable topographical 
knowledge which will be of much value to mountaineers 
in the future when Sikkim has been opened up, as it is 
bound to be one day, as the “‘ Playground” of the 
Himalayas. 

Kellas’s climbs are too many to mention in detail, but 
among the many peaks and passes of 20,000 to 23,000 feet 
that he ascended or attempted in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of Kangchenjunga, must be mentioned the Nepal 
Gap, 21,000 feet, separating the Zemu and Kangchenjunga 
glaciers, which he attempted four times from the former 
glacier, nearly reaching the crest of the pass; Simvu, 
22,360 feet, which he attempted three times with European 
guides in 1907, but failed, owing to bad weather and snow 
conditions, to reach the summit; the Simvu Saddle, 
17,700 feet, and the Zemu Gap, 19,300 feet, which he 
ascended from the Zemu Glacier in May, 1910 ; the Langpo 
Peak, 22,800 feet, ascended in September, 1909; the 
Sentinel Peak, 21,240 (or 21,700 feet), east of the Choten 
Nyima La, ascended in May, 1910, and the Jonsong Peak, 
24,344 feet, on which he was beaten by bad weather after 
ascending in December, 1909, to 21,000 feet on the North- 
west Ridge. 

Kellas’s last expedition prior to his death on the first 
Everest Expedition was made in 1921, when he conquered 
Narsingh, 19,130 feet. His mountaineering has had far- 
reaching effects. He was the first systematically to employ 
and train Sherpa and Bhutia porters. On one occasion 
only, in 1907, was he accompanied by Europeans, at other 
times natives climbed with him. That he was able from 


such raw material as untrained natives to train men who 


30 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


subsequently worked and climbed so splendidly on Everest 
and Kangchenjunga expeditions shows how great a moun- 
taineer he was. As one who has humbly followed in his 
footsteps on the Jonsong Peak, I can safely say that from 
the technical point of view of route-finding and mountain- 
eering Dr. Kellas will stand out as the greatest pioneer 
of Himalayan mountaineering. Apart from climbing, he 
contributed to various scientific journals valuable papers 
on the physiological and physical aspects of high mountain- 
eering. If in place of his occasional scanty notes and 
articles, he had written a detailed account of his climbs, 
posterity and the literature of mountaineering would have 
been the richer. 

One more ascent must be mentioned before turning to 
the attempts on Kangchenjunga itself, and that was the 
attempt made in October, 1907, by two Norwegians, 
Messrs. C. W. Rubenson and Monrad Aas on Kabru, 
24,002 feet. They tackled the mountain via the Kabru 
Glacier, which is broken into a great ice-fall, and had to 
cut their way for five days through a complicated maze of 
ice pinnacles and crevasses. These difficulties came to an 
end at about 21,500 feet, and they camped on the plateau 
above the ice-fall between the two peaks, which is so 
plainly visible from Darjeeling. From there they attempted 
to reach the eastern summit. Their first attempt was beaten 
by lack of time due to a late start. They advanced their 
camp to 22,000 feet on October 20, and tried again. 
Owing to intense cold they were not able to start until 
8.30 a.m. At 6 p.m. they were only about 200 feet below 
the summit, although separated from it by a considerable 
distance horizontally. Here they were exposed to the full 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 31 


force of the terrible west wind, against which advance was 
almost impossible. At sundown the cold became so intense, 
that to save themselves from frostbite they were forced to 
retreat. 

The descent was marred by a bad slip on the part of 
Rubenson, who was last man down. Monrad Aas held him 
on the rope, but the shock was so great that four of its 
five strands actually parted. When at last they reached 
camp, Monrad Aas’s feet were frostbitten. 

Thus ended a most plucky attempt, especially plucky in 
view of the fact that Rubenson had never been on a 
mountain prior to the expedition. The party, though 
failing to reach the top, made the valuable discovery that 
it was possible for men to spend a considerable time (in 
this case twelve days) at an altitude above 20,000 feet, and 
there to eat well and sleep well and generally keep fit and 
acclimatise without noticeable physical deterioration. 


The Previous Attempts on Kangchenjunga 


With the exploration of the lower valleys and peaks 
round Kangchenjunga it was only a matter of time before 
an attempt was made on the mountain. The first attempt 
was made in August, 1905, by a party consisting of three 
Swiss, Dr. Jacot-Guillarmod, M. Reymond, and Lieutenant 
Pache, who put themselves under the leadership of an 
Englishman, Mr. Aleister Crowley, who had been one of 
the companions of Dr. Jacot-Guillarmod during an 
expedition to the Karakorams in 1892. To help with 
commissariat arrangements, an Italian hotel-keeper from 
Darjeeling named De Righi was added to the expedition. 


32 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Leaving Darjeeling, the expedition proceeded by the 
Singalila Ridge and the Chumbab La Pass to the Yalung 
Valley, and having ascended the Yalung Glacier, attacked 
the south-western face of Kangchenjunga. This face is 
exceedingly steep, and consists for the most part of granite 
precipices. At one point, however, there is a snowy shelf, 
conspicuous from Darjeeling, which leads up to the ridge, 
falling in a westerly direction from the third highest sum.- 
mit of Kangchenjunga. This appears to be the only 
breach in the great curtain of precipices hemming in the 
head of the Yalung Glacier. Even supposing this face to 
be climbed, it would still be necessary for the mountaineer 
to traverse a long distance from the third highest summit 
to the highest summit, a distance which, in the opinion of 
all who have seen the intervening ridge and noted its 
exposure to the west wind, is too great. The snowy shelf 
looks, and probably is, desperately dangerous owing to 
falling stones and avalanches, and its dangers must be 
considerably increased by its southern and consequently 
warm aspect. 

The party established a camp at 20,343 feet, and some 
of them appeared to have climbed 1,000 feet higher. 
Disaster overtook them on September 1. On that day the 
party was assembled at mid-day at the highest camp. 
In the afternoon Dr. Guillarmod, Lieutenant Pache, and 
De Righi with three porters decided to descend to a lower 
camp, leaving Crowley and Reymond at the higher. The 
danger of descending steep snow slopes in the heat of the 
day should have been obvious, and Crowley states that he 
warned them of the danger that they were incurring by 
doing so. While traversing a snow slope, two of the porters 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 33 


who were in the middle, slipped, dragging with them Pache 
and the third porter who were behind, and Guillarmod 
and De Righi who were in front. This slip in itself might 
not have proved fatal, had it not started a large avalanche 
of snow. Guillarmod and De Righi escaped with a severe 
shaking, but their four companions, Pache and the three 
porters, were buried and suffocated by the avalanche. 

The cries of the survivors soon summoned Reymond, 
who, apparently, found no difficulty in descending alone 
from the upper camp. Crowley remained in his tent, 
and on the same evening wrote a letter printed in The 
Pioneer on September 11, 1905, from which the following 
is an extract : “‘ As it was I could do nothing more than 
send out Reymond on the forlorn hope. Not that I was 
over anxious in the circumstances to render help. A moun- 
tain ‘ accident’ of this sort is one of the things for which 
I have no sympathy whatever. . .. To-morrow I hope to go 
down and find out how things stand.” In another letter, 
written three days later, and published on September 15, 
he explains that it would have taken him ten minutes to 
dress, and that he had told Reymond to call him if more 
help was wanted, which he did not do. 

The first search for the bodies was in vain, and they were 
not found until three days later (after Crowley had left 
the party) buried under ten feet of snow. Thus ended a 
truly lamentable affair. 

From such an expedition it is not easy to draw 
conclusions as to the dangers and difficulties of an ascent 
of Kangchenjunga from the Yalung Glacier. Yet, these 
dangers, even so far as they are revealed by telescope at 
wanjeciing, are great, and though the Yalung Glacier is 

K 


34 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


well worth investigating both from the point of view of the 
magnificent scenery at its head and other routes up the 
great peaks bounding it, there would seem little justifica- 
tion for a further attempt on Kangchenjunga from it. 

Kangchenjunga remained untouched until eleven years 
after the war. British mountaineers had devoted their 
energies to overcoming Everest, and it was left to other 
nations to attempt Kangchenjunga. The Everest expedi- 
tions produced far-reaching effects. They showed that men 
could stand, without extraneous aid in the form of oxygen, 
an altitude as great as 28,000 feet. The lessons learned in 
transport organisation and climbing equipment were in- 
valuable, and perhaps what is most important of all, they 
proved that high Himalayan climbing depends on having 
the right mentality as well as the right physique. 

The second attempt on Kangchenjunga was made, like 
the first, from the Yalung Glacier, and like the first, it 
ended in tragedy. Early in May, 1929, an American, 
Mr. E. F. Farmer, of New York, left Darjeeling. He was 
accompanied by native porters, his sirdar being Lobsang, 
whose work was to be so invaluable to our expedition. 
Farmer’s climbing experience was limited to the Rockies, 
and he had never before visited the Himalayas. He told 
no one of his plans, and having obtained a pass to enable 
him to go into Sikkim, and signing an undertaking that 
he would enter neither Thibet nor Nepal, he left on May 6, 
with reliable Sherpa and Bhutia porters. He did not return. 
The porters’ story, which has been carefully probed and 
tested in every particular, is as follows : 

He first of all visited the Guicha La ; then crossed the 
Kang La into Nepal. In order not to arouse suspicion, he 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 35 


avoided the little village of Tseram in the Yalung Valley 
by traversing the rhododendron-clad slopes on the eastern 
side of the valley. He camped on the same site as the late 
Mr. Harold Raeburn and Mr. C. G. Crawford, who 
prospected this district in 1920.1 Farmer’s party found 
graves which must have been those of the victims of the 
first attempt on Kangchenjunga. 

On May 26, Farmer and three ex-Everest porters started 
up towards the Talung Saddle. Farmer was warmly clad 
and wearing crampons, but the porters were poorly shod, 
and had no crampons. In view of this Lobsang advised 
turning back, and it was agreed to do this at noon. Climb- 
ing became difficult, and the porters found it impossible 
to proceed in their poor quality boots. Accordingly, 
Farmer ordered them to halt, while he continued a little 
higher for photographic purposes. The porters did their 
best to dissuade him, but, apparently, oblivious of all risk, 
he climbed up and up, through drifting mists. Now and 
again when the mists cleared he appeared, and the porters 
waved to him to descend. At 5 p.m. he was still seen to be 
climbing, then the mist came down and he was seen no 
more. The porters remained where they had halted until 
dusk, then they descended to the camp, and waited in 
vain for his return. They signalled at intervals during the 
night with an electric torch and Meta fuel, but to no 


‘Mr. Raeburn made two visits to the southern walls of Kangchenjunga. The first, 
on which he was accompanied by Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. Tobin, was made in 
order to investigate the south-east outlying peaks of Kangchenjunga and possible 
routes up the south-east face of Kangchenjunga itself, and to explore the Talung 
Glacier. Later Raeburn and Crawford ascended the Yalung Glacier and examined 
the Talung Saddle, which lies on the ridge between Kabru and Kangchenjunga, 
separating the Yalung and Talung Glaciers. According to Raeburn, it looked “ vicious 
in the extreme, defended everywhere by overhanging masses of ice.’’ Failing in this 
object, they descended to Upper Tseram, were able to cross the ridge just south of 
Little Kabru, and thus descended the Rathong Valley. 


36 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


purpose. The next morning they climbed up to a point 
from which his route was visible, and caught a glimpse of 
him soon after dawn far up ona steep snowslope. He seemed 
to be moving jerkily, with arms outstretched. Of course, this 
may have been imagination on the part of the porters, but 
if true, it may well have been due to snow blindness. 
They kept up their vigil throughout the day, and it was not 
until the morning of May 28 that hunger forced them down 
to Tseram. 

In order that any suspicion as to foul play should be 
eliminated from the score of possible contingencies, the 
narrative of each porter was taken down and checked. 
Investigation and minute cross-examination convinced 
those that enquired into this sad disaster that the whole 
truth was told, and that no blame whatever attached to 
the porters, whose conduct had been of an unimpeachable 
character throughout. 

Kangchenjunga had scored heavily. Two attempts had 
been repulsed with merciless severity, but it must be con- 
fessed that the attempts were of so weak a nature that the 
great mountain had no need to call in its real weapons of 
defence, storm and altitude. Serene and untroubled, it had 
not even attempted to kill its attackers ; it had let them 
kill themselves. But its complacency was to be rudely 
shaken in the autumn of the same year, 1929, in which 
Farmer met his death. 

In view of the fact that no published account has ap- 
peared in this country of this attempt which was made by 
Munich mountaineers, I make no apology for giving a 
detailed description of one of the most brilliantly resourceful 
and courageous attempts in mountaineering history, an 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 37 


attempt which has been described by the Editor of the 
Alpine Fournal as ‘‘ a feat without parallel, perhaps, in all 
the annals of mountaineering.” 

As all mountaineers know, Munich is the home of one of 
the most enterprising schools of young mountaineers there 
is. The men who attempted Kangchenjunga were the 
pick of this school. The leader was Dr. Paul Bauer and his 
companions were Herren E. Allwein, one of the con- 
querors of Mount Kaufmann in the Pamirs, Peter Aufsch- 
naiter, E. Beigel, Julius Brenner, W. Fendt, Karl von 
Kraus, Joachim Leupold, and Alexander Thoenes. The 
expedition on arriving at Darjeeling were helped in their 
transport arrangements by Colonel Tobin, the Darjeeling 
Secretary of the Himalayan Club, and Mr. E. O. Sheb- 
beare, Transport Officer of the 1924 Everest Expedition. 
So well planned were their transport arrangements, that 
three days after their arrival, the first half of the expedi- 
tion was able to leave Darjeeling. The second half followed 
two days later, together with Colonel Tobin. Eighty-six 
porters were employed. Eight days later they reached 
Lachen, and ten days later, August 18, established their 
Base Camp (Camp Three') on Green Lake Plain at a 
height of 14,126 feet. 

Exploration of the north-east side of Kangchenjunga 
was immediately begun. One party ascended to the Simvu 
Saddle, whence an attempt, beaten by bad weather, was 
made on the Simvu Peak, 22,760 feet. The other party 
explored the possibilities of reaching the East Ridge of 
Kangchenjunga. As the terrific precipices leading upwards 


‘ Permanent camps were established from Yaktang at the end of the Zemu 
Valley and numbered from that point. 


38 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


to the lowest point in the North Ridge between Kang- 
chenjunga and the Twins were quite hopeless, they de- 
cided to attack a spur, or ridge which leads up to the North 
Ridge, and joins it at the point where a conspicuous snowy 
terrace runs across the north-west face of Kangchenjunga 
about 1,500 feet below the summit. This ridge is heavily 
armoured in ice and its knife-like crest is broken up into 
towers and spires of pure ice. Great masses hang pre- 
cariously from it and huge precipices fall on either side to 
the glacier, down which thunder great avalanches. No 
such formidable route had ever been tackled by any other 
party on any other peak in the world. 

Owing to the weather, the snowfall, the great variations 
of temperature, and the quality of the ice, these ice 
ridges of Kangchenjunga are completely different from 
those encountered in the Alps. Mr. Freshfield had seen this 
ridge too, and there is an excellent photograph in Round 
Kangchenjunga, but he did not mention it as a possible route 
to the summit of Kangchenjunga, and small wonder. All 
one can say is that though the technique of icemanship 
may not have advanced far since pre-war days, the will of 
man to conquer the greater summits of the Himalayas has 
developed beyond all expectation. The Munich attempt 
on Kangchenjunga proves this. 

Actually, the ice ridge has one advantage over the main 
ridges, and in particular the North Ridge of Kangchen- 
junga: it is sheltered from the prevailing western winds 
which blow with such paralysing force. If the upper part 
of this ice ridge could be gained, the party thought that 
they would have a chance of reaching the summit. 
But to do so, many and terrible difficulties had to be 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 39 


overcome. Yet, as Dr. Bauer wrote, ‘‘ With mountaineers, 
it is the one remaining possibility of access to Kang- 
chenjunga.” 

On August 24 and 25 the party had assembled at the 
Base Camp, and were ready to make the attempt. The 
porters had proved themselves worthy of the confidence 
that was to be reposed in them, and the party had become 
well acclimatised to altitude. The only drawback was the 
weather, which was stormy. But considering that the 
monsoon season had not yet finished, that was only to be 
expected. 

The first difficulty was a 700 feet high ice-fall which had 
to be surmounted in order to reach the base of the ice 
ridge. From Camp Six, 18,606 feet, the party endeavoured 
to storm the 2,800 feet wall leading to the crest of the ice 
ridge. The way proved very dangerous ; falling boulders 
a cubic yard in size swept the route, compelling a sharp 
look-out. They had nearly attained the crest of the ridge 
when bad weather necessitated return. The following day 
a stronger party, four Germans and three porters equipped 
with bivouac necessities and food, returned to the attack 
in better weather. The slopes leading to the ridge were 
ribbed with ice flutings common to the Himalayas, be- 
tween which rose sharp, serrated, and cornice crowned 
edges of rock. The party was spread-eagled one above the 
other on the smooth ice slopes without security, and the fall 
of one would have meant disaster to all. Also, there was a 
grave danger of stone falls. Once more they were forced 
to retreat. 

On the following day, Allwein and Thoenes reached the 
ridge by climbing a steep ice gully. This gully was so 


40 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


difficult, however, that it was a question whether porters 
could be got up it. Indeed, so great were the difficulties 
proving, that it was nearly decided then and there to 
abandon the attack in favour of the East Ridge from the 
Zemu Gap, but this ridge is so long, and the obstacles so 
many, that there seems little chance of reaching the summit 
of Kangchenjunga by it. Incidentally, it does not even 
lead directly to the highest summit, but to the second 
highest summit, 27,820 feet, between which and the 
highest summit stretches a formidable ridge. But before 
abandoning the ice ridge, one more attempt was decided 
upon. Camp was pitched goo feet higher up the wall. 
The following day dawned sulkily, and the weather was 
none too good, yet it was decided to make one last 
effort to hew a breach in the snow bosses, and force a 
way to the crest of the ice ridge. 

The difficulties were immense. They slowly hacked 
away at the ice curtain ; everything that could be utilised 
as a help to the sorely-tried party was employed and even 
icicles as thick as a man’s arm were used to hitch a rope 
round. Height was gained ; hope replaced despair ; the 
party turned back rejoicing at the thought that they had 
discovered the necessary ice-technique for making 4 
formidable slope possible for laden porters. 

But Kangchenjunga prepared to resist the onslaught. 
A snowfall compelled a retreat to Camp Six. Another 
attempt to reach the ridge was made, but another snowfall 
occurred, and avalanches drove the party down again. 
Camp Seven was rendered unsafe by these avalanches, and 
all the equipment had to be carried down through deep 
new snow to Camp Six. 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 41 


On September 13, the weather cleared, and the assault 
was renewed. Two days of strenuous step-cutting brought 
the party to the crest of the ridge. A scene of incomparable 
splendour opened out before their eyes. “ Nearly ver- 
tically below lay the Twins Glacier, while slopes of 60 
degrees led downwards, on the farther side, to the Zemu 
Glacier. Icy and shining pinnacles led upwards for 6,500 
feet. In a wide cirque above us towered the ice slopes of 
the Tent Peak, the Twins, Kangchenjunga, Simvu, above 
the two mighty glacier basins. Avalanches thundered in 
continuous icy cascades down these faces. Behind us swept 
endless glacier shapes into the dim and cloudy distance.’”* 

Three great towers interposed, barring their advance. 
For two days they toiled and struggled in conquering them. 
Beyond these towers the ice ridge rose in a precipitous step. 
They had hoped to reach a snowy ledge on the step, and 
establish Camp Eight, but they were overtaken by night 
before they had reached this level. “‘ Bivouac material and 
provisions were dumped where we stood. The porters 
belayed to a well-buried axe watched us with astonishment 
scooping out a place for the camp in a cornice on the dizzy 
ridge. Then Aufschnaiter and Kraus descended with 
them to Camp Seven, while Beigel and Dr. Bauer settled 
down in our tiny tent. The spot was not altogether trust- 
worthy since in one place, where the axe had been deeply 
driven, we could look down through a hole on to the 
Twins Glacier. We slept well, but at dawn great care 
was necessary in distributing our stiffened limbs properly 
while wriggling gingerly out of the insecurely pitched tent. 


"From Dr. Paul Bauer’s account in the Alpine Journal, translated into English 
by Lieutenant-Colonel E. L. Strutt, the Editor. 


42 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Hardly had the sun begun to thaw us than we started on 
the first gendarme hacking out layer after layer of ice from 
its flanks, till we could force a way past it on the left and 
attain a névé slope at an angle of fully 70 degrees. Two 
hours later this also lay below and we had cut a good deep 
zigzag track through it connecting each icy boss with the 
next. A hundred feet below us lay the little tent, above us 
rose more ice pinnacles. A little ice crevice, enlarged by us 
into a chimney, brought us some twenty feet higher up the 
steepest part of the névé, much hampered here by many 
cornices. By the early afternoon we stood at length at the 
base of the last pinnacle separating us from the first plat- 
form in the spur. We saw the ‘ shock troops,’ Nos. 2 and 3 
parties, approaching from below with their porters ; 
quickly we levelled out a space on the terrace for our 
friends’ camp, and then turned downwards as the spur now 
lay in shadow. Soon it grew so cold that danger of irost- 
bite became threatening. We met the other contingent, 
Allwein and Thoenes, with the porters Chettan and Lewa, 
just as they attained the terrace.” 

Above Camp Eight there were more pinnacles, or 
perhaps it would be more correct to say perpendicular 
steps or pitches in the ridge. These had to be stormed by 
the crest. The first was not so difficult. An overhanging 
crack filled with powdery snow led diagonally upwards to 
the left. The second pinnacle was harder. A short, nearly 
vertical ice runnel had to be negotiated, followed by 4 
traverse to the left of it. A steep ascent to the right brought 
them to the crest. The next pinnacle hung over the ridge 
like an enormous mushroom some 120 feet high. ‘‘ On the 
Twins side rose a wall formed of wind-blown powdery snow 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 43 


above the overhanging bulge. It was dreadful work crawl- 
ing up on the treacherous powdery mass poised above the 
nearly perpendicular Twins Glacier slope.” 

The pinnacle above this gave them the longest work of 
all. Allwein’s report reads as follows : “‘ On reaching the 
fourth tower on September 23, we were at first completely 
at a loss, the crest appeared vertical or even overhanging, 
so was the slope falling towards the Twins Glacier, and so 
indeed was the left flank as well. Yet on this latter flank 
depended our only hopes, for a tiny ledge led upwards in 
the face crowned with a huge cornice furnished with a deep 
recess hollowed out of the ice in its centre. Higher up the 
ledge soon ended under impossible ice overhangs, leaving 
no other alternative but from the said recess to burrow a 
shaft perpendicularly upwards through the wide, stretching 
cornice. We worked away the whole day at this tunnel, but on 
returning to camp at 4 p.m. the work lay still unfinished.” 

On the following days they were able to improve this 
route, until finally this originally difficult and dangerous 
pinnacle became the easiest of all. 

Such hard work as this has never before been accom- 
plished at such an altitude. Its technique opens out an 
entirely new method of overcoming these terrific Hima- 
layan ice ridges, though only time will show whether 
routes of this difficulty will ever lead to victory on the 
greater peaks of the Himalayas. 

On September 25, they traversed along the edge of a 
dizzy snow rib corniced on both sides to the bottom of a 
Jong-dreaded 200 feet gap. So soft was the snow and so 
narrow the rib, which was not more than two feet wide, 
that no proper route could be made, and they could only 


44 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


beg the porters to follow exactly in their footsteps. Beyond 
the gap rose another great tower. The lower part of this 
was comparatively easy, but necessitated very hard work. 
Above rose a steep snow runnel, on which it was a severe 
struggle clearing away the soft snow and cutting steps in 
the underlying firm ice. The party forgathered on a little 
shoulder half way up. A hundred feet of more difficult work 
led to the foot of a wall of fearful steepness, crowned by 
a huge cornice. The base of this was masked by masses of 
rock and snow, and it was difficult to fashion reliable foot- 
holds from which the cornice could be flogged down, but 
at last a way was forced through the eaves of over-hanging 
snow, and the party stood on the crest of the ridge. 

The great tower had been conquered ; slowly, but 
surely, the gallant party were winning their way up this 
terrific ice ridge. The fight was a fair one until Kang- 
chenjunga called in its ally, the weather. Snow began to 
fall nearly every day, and on the following morning after 
the conquest of the tower, lay fully a foot deep. The most 
difficult part of the route had been done, but it had cost 
two valuable weeks. Fresh obstacles were always cropping 
up; disappointments had been many, and until the 
conquest of the gap and the great tower was accomplished, 
it had seemed problematical whether progress was possible 
at all. Now, however, the party were sufficiently far ad- 
vanced to push hard for the summit. 

In lieu of tents, ice caves were carved in the solid ice 
at Camps Eight and Nine, large enough to hold six to eight 
persons. The entrance to these was as small as possible, and 
the temperature inside rarely sank below 26° to 28°F., 
whilst outside it was usually about 14°F. by day and 10° to 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 45 


25° below zero Fahrenheit by night. Future Everest 
expeditions would do well to investigate the technique of 
ice cave making. Ice caves properly constructed below 
and on the North Col of Everest would most likely prove 
more efficient than tents. Above the North Col only tents 
could be used, for the climbing lies entirely over rocks. 

Above Camp Nine, 21,646 feet, the difficulties dwindled. 
Two easier ice towers were soon stormed. Snow slab 
avalanches broke away under the leader, but it was always 
possible to secure him so that he could not slip far. One 
snow slope entailed caution, but once firm steps had been 
made it became safe. Camp Ten, 22,288 feet, was pitched 
on easy and open snow. Here, as below, an ice cave 
was scooped out. Preparations were made for the final 
assault, communication was established between all 
camps, and food and equipment sent up with the utmost 
speed. 

Theoretically, October should bring settled weather, 
practically, the weather was doubtful, it was not exactly 
stormy, but aggravated by continual snow flurries. On 
October 3, Allwein and Kraus set out to reconnoitre and 
track out the route above Camp Ten for the next stage on 
the following day. The snow was not good, and they often 
sank in knee-deep, but they were able in an hour to ascend 
about 350 feet, which was very fair going. They turned back 
at about 24,272 feet. As a result of their exploration, they 
considered that no more difficulties were to be expected, 
but that owing to the soft, powdery snow, two more camps 
would have to be pitched. Was this optimism justified in 
the light of previous Himalayan experience ? I think not. 

This was the highest point reached. That night hopes 


46 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


ran high in the ice cave. What they had hardly dared to 
expect, the summit, seemed to lie within their grasp. 

October 14 dawned evilly. The sky was cloud covered ; 
a cold wind was blowing and light snow falling. The snow 
thickened ; by 8 a.m. it was coming down hard. Plans had 
to be altered, and preparations for a siege made. Kraus 
and Thoenes with two porters, Lewa and Chettan, left, and 
descended in order to save food, and help with the trans- 
port. The snow continued ; by the evening of October 15 
things looked black. ‘‘ We began to realise with heavy 
hearts that the ascent of Kangchenjunga was now hardly 
possible. Only a deliberate abandonment of our hitherto 
‘ safety-first > tactics for a desperate assault might result in 
success. This would entail a complete break-up of our lines 
of communication and result in ‘ every man for himself. 
The ‘summit’ party could no longer, as hitherto, be 
supported by a reserve party ready to ‘ leap-frog ’ in case 
of necessity. Even with instant improvement of the weather 
it would take days for a relief party to fight its way through 
from below to our support.” 

As the weather appeared too bad for an attempt on the 
summit, they decided at least to make an attempt to reach 
the North Ridge and gaze down the unknown north-west 
side of the mountain. Even this proved impossible. After 
two hours’ hard work they had risen not more than 250 
feet. The wind-blown, crusted slopes of snow continually 
collapsed beneath them, letting them sink in thigh-deep. 
Abandoning their loads, they struggled upwards for an 
hour and a half. They reached a height of about 24,000 
feet and then decided to retreat. 

As they sat again by their ice cave, they were startled 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 47 


by the extraordinary appearance of the sky to the south. 
A huge cloud bank over 30,000 feet high was forming, 
whilst above it the sky was of an extraordinary sea-green 
colour, “a most threatening and terrible sight.’” 

The following day they awoke to find the cave entrance 
completely blocked with snow. The snowfall continued, 
and many times during the day they had to sweep the 
entrance clear. By nightfall no less than seven feet of snow 
had fallen, and it was still snowing. “A cataclysm of 
nature seemed to foreshadow our doom.” There was now 
no thought of advance. Communications had been cut off, 
they did not know what was happening below, and those 
below did not know what was the fate of those above. It 
was a terrible position to be in. To stay meant starvation. 
“The Storm God was still piling snow on us, yet, on the 
following morning, trusting to our powers and experience, 
we determined to ‘Wrestle one more fall.’ The descent 
appeared humanly impossible, but an attempt had to be 
made.” 

So deep was the snow that they fought their way down 
leaving behind a furrow a man’s height in depth. A slightly 
ascending bit not 150 feet high took them over two hours. 
The porters behaved magnificently, though laden with 
some eighty pounds each. They had frequently to be 
jerked from the holes into which they sank, but they 
continued to struggle gallantly on. 

Steeper slopes peeled off in avalanches as the leader, 

1In Round Kangchenjunga, p. 114, Mr. Freshfield describes a similar strange atmo- 
spheric appearance, which heralded the great storm of September, 1899, during which 
no less than 27 inches of rain fell in 28 hours in Darjeeling, occasioning considerable 
loss of life and damage to property. See also my own description in my book Climbs 


and Ski Runs, p. 70, of the green ray sunrise which preceded a terrible storm on the 
Schreckhorn. 


48 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


tightly held on a rope, stepped on them. The most danger- 
ous slope had fortunately already avalanched. They 
descended in the actual groove made by the avalanche, 
thus saving a good two hours. Disaster nearly overtook them 
when another slope with Allwein and two porters on it 
avalanched, and only a desperate effort on the part of 
Dr. Bauer saved them. So great an effort was it for all 
concerned, that for ten minutes or more they lay motionless 
and exhausted before they could resume the fight. 

On their arrival at Camp Nine they had to clear the ice 
cave entrance from beneath seven feet of snow. They lay 
there all night, recovering their strength for the tussle with 
the most difficult portion of the descent. 

The next day things went wrong. The porters, not 
unnaturally, were nervous. To face such difficulties with 
heavy loads was impossible. They were brought back to 
the cave, and the Europeans without packs set out to 
clear footsteps in the newly fallen snow, and thus make 
possible the traverse of the great ice towers. 

The following day, a good half of the loads were jet- 
tisoned, and thrown down the 5,000 feet precipice to the 
Twins Glacier. Thus relieved, the party could renew the 
struggle. 

For once wayward Fortune smiled on them—the 
weather became fine. They gazed down, but could see no 
sign of any living beings either on the ice ridge or on the 
Zemu Glacier. It was not until two days later that they 
learned that all the ice ridge party were still alive. 

Each of the two communication parties had had a great 
struggle in retreating. The exhausted porters continually 
fell, and avalanches poured down. Beigel and Aufschnaiter 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 49 


had suffered the worst. Between Camps Nine and Eight 
they were swept off their feet by small avalanches. Once 
the leader slipped when traversing slightly below the crest 
of a ridge; in another instant all must have been pulled 
off, and hurled down the precipices, but the party were 
saved by the presence of mind of the second man, who had 
time to leap into space on the reverse side of the ridge, 
and thus held his companions on the rope. This mishap 
resulted in the loss of both rucksacks, provisions and 
bivouac material, and a miserable night had to be spent 
on the ridge under a cornice without shelter of any kind. 
As a result Beigel was severely frostbitten in the feet. 

At last with joy the upper party reached Camp Six. 
Communications had been severed from below. It took 
four days to plough down through snow many feet deep 
to the Base Camp. Everyone carried as great a load as 
possible. ‘The sahibs broke the trail, sinking in below their 
knees. The porters followed, while last of the exhausted 
procession came Beigel, carried on a rough stretcher made 
from two tent poles, ‘“‘silent and uttering no complaint.” 
Even at the snout of the Zemu Glacier another weather 
catastrophe overtook the worn-out party. For three days 
it snowed and rained, and the snow covered bamboos and 
rhododendrons proved almost impassable. Poor Beigel, 
who had been carried, had perforce to walk. The moun- 
tainsides were alive with landslides ; mud-shoots did 
their best to annihilate the party. ‘‘ Dishevelled, dead-beat, 
our nerves worn out with the wild struggle against nature, 
with unkempt beards and covered with mud, we trod with 


heavy feet into the brilliantly lit dining room of the Lachen 


bungalow.” 
Dr 


50 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Thus ended one of the most gallant mountaineering 
enterprises ever carried out. 

In one respect only is criticism justified. When they 
reached their highest camp at an altitude of 24,000 feet, 
they considered that they had overcome the worst diff- 
culties. Such, however, is far from the case. These diffi- 
culties had scarcely begun. Altitude and its effects only 
begin to be serious over 24,000 feet, and being on the 
sheltered side of the mountain they had not yet begun to 
experience the terrible west wind which sweeps the upper 
part of the North Ridge with such merciless severity, and 
last, but not least, is the final pyramid, of which the 
climbing difficulties are certainly greater than those of the 
final pyramid of Everest. Colonel E. F. Norton, in an 
interesting letter in the Himalayan Journal analysing the 
respective difficulties of Kangchenjunga and Everest, lays 
stress on the time factor. He writes :— 

“ Exclusive of false starts it took the party just under a 
month from the foot of the ridge (17,060 feet) to Camp Ten 
at 23,290 feet. This includes the establishment of Camp Ten 
for six sahibs and four porters equipped ‘ for the fight for 
the eight thousanders.’ (The meaning of this expression 13 
not quite clear to me. 8,000 metres equals 26,600 odd feet, 
equals 1,500 feet below the summit, so I am not certain if 
they were equipped for the whole distance to the top.) 
This represented a climb of 6,230 feet. 

‘Compare Mount Everest ; in 1924 we estimated to es- 
tablish a similar party (equipped to lay out one more 
camp and reach the top) at Camp Five (25,000 feet) in 15 


days from the Base Camp (16,500 feet). This represented 
a climb of 8,500 feet. 


HISTORY OF KANGCHENJUNGA 5! 


“We failed ; but that this was not an unreasonable 
estimate is proved by the fact that we established Camp 
Five in 1922 (including a four-day reconnaissance of the 
East Rongbuk Glacier—up and back again) with four 
sahibs in 19 days from first leaving the base camp, largely 
over an unknown route. 

“Camp Five on Mount Everest was 4,000 feet from the 
top—an easy rock climb. 

° Camp Ten on Kangchenjunga was 5,000 feet from the 
top, and judging from what Mr. Bauer says, the condition 
of the snow even at this height necessitated ‘stamping a 
track.’ 

‘“‘Now the difficulties imposed by altitude only begin 
to be really serious from about 24,000 or 25,000 feet 
onwards, both as regards condition of the snow and 
rarity of the air. 

““Next consider the time available on Kangchenjunga. 

**Mr. Bauer’s party started presumably in the tail of the 
monsoon (August 26), and got badly caught high up on 
the mountain by the first winter snowfall on October 3 
—after five and a half weeks. A party trying it in the 
spring can hardly kick off from the foot of the mountain 
until April 15 on account of the spring cold; the 
monsoon is due to arrive by May 21 (I am writing from 
memory)—again five and a half weeks. 

‘‘On Everest we reckoned on a season of from four to six 
weeks, i.e. from May 1 to the arrival of the monsoon on 
the north face of the mountain—any time between 
June 1 and 15. The penalty for being caught high on 
Everest in soft new snow is the danger of avalanches on 
only about 1,500 feet of descent from the North Col. 


52 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


On Kangchenjunga there must be thousands of feet of 
such dangers—as Mr. Bauer found. 

‘‘Events may well prove me wrong: but on the face of 
it, Kangchenjunga appears to me a more formidable and 
more dangerous proposition than Mount Everest.” 

One cannot but concur with this admirable analysis. 
Time will always be the most important factor in any 
attempt on Kangchenjunga. Five and a half weeks is the 
maximum period during which weather and conditions 
suitable for climbing can be expected. It is significant also 
to notice that at their highest camp the Bavarians had 
begun to experience the west wind. 

I mention these facts in no carping spirit, but merely to 
point out the difficulties to be expected. Given sufficient 
time, and weather of the right type, there is a remote 
probability that Kangchenjunga can be climbed by 
present day methods. But does a sufficiently long enough 
spell of good weather ever occur on the mountain? Can 
men acclimatise sufficiently to climb even moderately 
difficult rocks, and the upper rocks may be more than 
moderately difficult, between 27,000 and 28,000 feet ? 

There is no need to analyse further possible routes on 
Kangchenjunga. Every side has now been explored, 
photographed and mapped, and further reconnaissance is 
unnecessary. The mountain may require methods to over- 
come it which are at present not known to mountaineers, 
but even supposing medical science discovers means 
artificially to acclimatise the body so that as much work 
can be put out at 28,000 feet as at a much lower altitude, 


Kangchenjunga will still remain something more than 4 
formidable antagonist. 


CHAPTER III 
PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 


Only by comparison is it possible to obtain any idea of 
the scale of the world’s greatest mountain range. Yet, even 
this method is unsatisfactory, for whether the mountaineer 
is toiling up Mont Blanc or Mount Everest, his feelings, 
apart from those imposed by altitude and the desire to 
achieve, are very similar; he is but a microcosm on the 
vast mountainside. Suffice to say that Mont Blanc is little 
more than half the height of Mount Everest, 29,002 feet ; 
Kilimanjaro, 19,700 feet and Mount McKinley, 20,454 
feet. The highest peaks of Africa and North America, 
would rank as minor peaks in the Sikkim Himalayas; and 
even Aconcagua, 23,000 feet, the monarch of the Andes, is 
no higher than the historic North Col on Everest. 

Each group of the greater peaks has its own type of 
scenery, but none is finer than the magnificent massif that 
culminates at 28,156 feet above sea level in the summit of 
Kangchenjunga. The visitor to Darjeeling who climbs to 
the top of Observatory Hill sees it fifty miles away over 
range upon range of lower ridges, split with deep, gorge- 
like valleys, incredibly remote and icily aloof, lifting its 
glaciers like silver shields to the sky. There is no scale by 
which the observer can appreciate the size of what he sees. 
The apparently insignificant ridges over which his gaze 
passes are themselves as high as, or higher than, the Alps. 
The slit-like valleys and gorges are disclosed only by the 


53 


54 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


mists, born of their steamy, tropical heat, that form to- 
wards noon and writhe slowly upwards in columns of 
massive cumuli. There is no standard of comparison, and 
experience alone can teach that the heights, depths, and 
distances are twice or three times as great as those in the 
Alps. 

The eye can pass at a glance over these leagues of ridges 
and valleys between Darjeeling and Kangchenjunga, but 
the foot of man cannot take them at a stride. The problems 
of reaching the base of the greater peaks and of carrying 
sufficient food and equipment are second only to the 
problems of scaling the peaks themselves. It is largely due 
to these initial difficulties, and to the expense of organising 
and maintaining a large bandobast' of native porters that 
so few expeditions are undertaken in the high Himalayas. 
Yet, in an age when mountaineering in the Alps is said to 
have reached technical perfection, it is indeed remarkable 
that not one of the greater Himalayan peaks has been 
climbed. 

Yet, if the summits of Everest and other giants over 
25,000 feet remain untrodden, man has not been idle ; 
he has climbed thousands of minor peaks and several 
expeditions that have been carried out in the High Hima- 
layas have taught valuable lessons as regards the right 
personnel, the best kinds of food and equipment, and the 
easiest and most efficient methods of porterage. The three 
Everest expeditions and the 1929 Kangchenjunga expedi- 
tion taught invaluable lessons. It is over the graves of 
former mistakes, and not on the wings of new ideas that 


* Bandobast—a common Indian term meaning organisation, arrangement, party, 
etc. 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 55 


the climber will at length tread the highest summits in 
the world. 

Though it may sound “ a glimpse of the obvious ”’ there 
is only one way of learning Himalayan mountaineering, 
and that is to climb among the Himalayas. Useful asset 
though it is, a brilliant Alpine mountaineering record is 
no Open Sesame to a brilliant Himalayan record, the 
conditions are so different. In the selection of the personnel 
and equipment it was unfortunate that not one of the party 
that left Europe had experience of Himalayan expeditions. 
Schneider certainly had climbed in the Pamirs, but the 
conditions prevailing there are not the same as those of 
the Eastern Himalayas. Had it been possible, it would 
have been the wisest move to have invited at least one or 
two British or German mountaineers at the outset with 
past Himalayan experience. Apart from this vital omis- 
sion, the party selected by Professor Dyhrenfurth was an 
exceptionally strong one. It possessed one important ad- 
vantage over most other British parties that have visited 
the Himalayas—all its members had experience in winter 
mountaineering and ski-running, as well as summer moun- 
taineering in the Alps. This was important because snow 
conditions approximating to Alpine winter conditions are 
frequently encountered in the Himalayas. 

Climbing is mental as well as physical work. Mr. G. 
Winthrop Young devotes a whole chapter to the mental 
aspects of Alpine mountaineering in Mountain Craft. All 
that he wrote applies with even greater force to Himalayan 
mountaineering. The climbing party must be something 
more than a collection of expert mountaineers, it must be 
a team, and like a team of Test cricketers, one that pulls 


56 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


together in every department of the game ; and if it is 
a good team, it should also be a happy family. In no other 
pursuit is the best or the worst in a man brought out as it 
is in mountaineering. An old friend of civilisation may be 
a useless companion on a mountain. The 1929 Munich 
expedition had one great advantage over our own, they 
were all friends before they started from Europe. We were 
not, and the fact that everything went so smoothly must 
be set down to luck. There have, in fact, been other Hima- 
layan expeditions the members of which were acquaint- 
ances, if not friends, which did not go so smoothly as our 
expedition. 

In Professor Dyhrenfurth, the expedition possessed a 
leader of wide mountaineering experience, as well as an 
accomplished geologist. He has ascended more than seven 
hundred peaks in the Alps and Hohe Tatra. He is forty- 
four years of age, and comes of a hardy mountaineering 
stock, for his father, Dr. Oskar Dyhrenfurth climbed the 
Jungfrau at the age of sixty-nine,' and at the age of seventy- 
four, made a solitary climb on the Dachstein, in which he 
fell badly, but recovered. Professor Dyhrenfurth made his 
first climb at the age of nine, and at the age of thirteen, 
ascended the Rosengartenspitze, the well known peak in 
the western Dolomites. He was severely injured in 1921, 
when he fell twenty-one feet owing to a rope breaking 
when ascending the Drusenfluh. During the War he com- 
manded a corps of mountain guides on the Italian frontier, 
and spent summer and winter at heights of over 10,000 

1This is by no means an unusual age for mountaineers to make ascents. Many 
members of the Alpine Club have made greater ascents at considerably greater ages. 


The late Captain J. P. Farrar at the age of seventy-one climbed many first class 


peaks in the last year of his life. Mountaineering begets longevity and longevity 
mountaineering. 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 57 


feet in redoubts among the Ortler mountains, and in dug- 
outs cut in the solid ice of glaciers. ‘These experiences were 
of more use to him from a Himalayan point of view than 
any ordinary Alpine mountaineering. 

Frau Dyhrenfurth is perhaps best known as an inter- 
national lawn tennis player. She is one of the best players 
in mixed doubles in Switzerland. She has accompanied 
her husband on many expeditions, but few women have 
taken part in great climbs in the Himalayas, and by ac- 
companying the expedition, she joined that select little 
band of Himalayan lady mountaineers, including Mrs. 
Bullock Workman, Mrs. Ruttledge and Frau Visser. 

The second in command of the expedition was Monsieur 
Marcel Kurz, who besides being a climbing member, was 
our cartographer. He is the greatest living Continental 
authority on winter mountaineering, and his record of first 
winter ascents and difficult climbs is unique. His climbs 
included the first winter ascents of the Ober Gabelhorn 
and Taschhorn in the Zermatt district, the last two peaks 
in the Alps of Valais to be unclimbed in winter. He is an 
expert on snowcraft and avalanches, particularly from the 
point of view of ski-running. When climbing with Mr. H. 
E. L. Porter in the Southern Alps of New Zealand in 1927, 
he made a new route up Mount Tasman by the East Ridge, 
and also ascended Mount Cook, 12,349 feet, the highest 
peak in the New Zealand Alps, by a long and difficult 
route. He revised and brought up to date the famous Kurz 
guide-books on Mont Blanc and the Pennine Alps written 
by his father, and has also written Alpinisme Hivernal and 
a guide to the Alps of Valais. He has mapped Mount 
Olympus for the Greek Government, and published a 


58 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


monograph on the mountain from both historical and 
topographical aspects. 

Herren Hoerlin and Schneider joined the expedition 
with as brilliant a record of great climbs as any young 
mountaineers in Europe. The number of great ascents 
made by them rivals that of the famous Swiss pair, Dr. W. 
Amstutz and Herr Schumacher. In 1929, they carried out 
a series of climbs on the range of Mont Blanc which in- 
cluded the first winter ascents of the Aiguille Noire de 
Pétéret and the Aiguille Blanche de Pétéret, as well as 
a ski traverse of Mont Blanc. They are an extraordinarily 
fast pair ; their time for their winter ascent of the Aiguille 
Blanche de Pétéret, one of the most dangerous climbs in 
the Alps, was actually faster than that for the summer 
ascent of the peak by Mr. Eustace Thomas and Josef 
Knubel, Mr. Winthrop‘Young’s famous guide. They also 
ascended the Aiguille Verte and Les Droites in winter. 
Herr Schneider comes from Hall, in Tyrol, and is a geo- 
logist. In 1929 he took part in the Alai Pamir expedition 
led by Herr Rickmer Rickmers, in the course of which he 
climbed some fifteen peaks in the neighbourhood of 17,000 
feet, eight 20,000 feet peaks and Mount Kaufmann (renamed 
Pic Lenin by the Soviet) the highest peak ascended in Cen- 
tral Asia. Herr Wieland, though not so experienced as his 
compatriots, is nevertheless one of the keenest of the 
younger German mountaineers. 

Herr Hoerlin is a student of medicine. Though he only 
started to climb in 1922, he is recognised as one of the 
leading young German mountaineers, and is the president of 
the Akademischer Alpen Club, Berlin, the most exclusive 
mountaineering club in Northern Germany. 


sj00q woryIpedxe oy} 910N 
MHCIANHOS {Zan {NITUHOH !HVNNVH ‘GNVISIM ‘HIMNANAMHAC NVas 
‘4anNvANa { HLUMANAYHAG UOSsasOdd ‘ NOSNHOL GOOM ‘ AAHOLIA “Ad ‘FYSL OF Fe] WoIy 


dWVO aSvad AHL LV 





PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 59 


Dr. Richter was to act not only as surgeon, but as 
reporter to the German newspapers. He is a German army 
doctor, and though his experience of climbing was 
limited, he had had considerable experience of ski-ing, 
and was an excellent runner. He is a keen physiologist and 
hoped to obtain valuable data in connection with the 
effects of high altitudes on the bodily functions. 

In order to ensure bringing back a first-rate film record 
of the expedition, Professor Dyhrenfurth engaged Monsieur 
C. Duvanel, who had previously made a number of aerial 
films for the Swiss Government, as well as instructional 
films of Alpine climbing and ski-ing. He is, like Kurz, a 
French-speaking Swiss, and comes from Lausanne. 

The importance of having expert transport officers with 
a Himalayan expedition can hardly be over-estimated. It 
is one thing to climb a mountain but it is quite another 
thing to get to the foct of the mountain and having got 
there maintain an efficient line of communication. The 
expedition were fortunate in obtaining as chief transport 
officer Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. Tobin, D.S.O., O.B.E., 
the Darjeeling secretary of the Himalayan Club whose 
experience not only of Himalayan mountaineering gener- 
ally but of local Darjeeling conditions made him an 
invaluable asset to the expedition. Upon him devolved 
responsibility for the enlistment of porters and the arrange- 
ment of the multifarious expedition details at Darjeeling, 
many of which though seemingly trivial in themselves are 
vital to the efficient working of a transport organisation. 

In order to strengthen not only the transport organisa- 
tion but the climbing party as well, Mr. G. W. Wood 
Johnson was invited to join the expedition. Like Colonel 


60 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Tobin he is well acquainted with local conditions. His 
enthusiasm for mountaineering may be gauged by the 
fact that he had come to India not only to learn tea- 
planting but to learn how to handle natives and speak 
Nepali in order to fit himself for a future Everest expedi- 
tion. In these things he had prospered exceedingly under 
the able tuition of Mr. McKean his manager. Though he 
had then no previous Alpine experience he was a member 
of the Fell and Rock Climbing Club of the English Lake 
District and an expert rock climber. Alpine experience 
counts for little in the Himalayas without knowledge of 
travelling conditions, and an expedition undertaken by 
him in 1929 to peaks around Dzongri was to prove of more 
value to our expedition than any amount of Alpine experi- 
ence. 

Having chosen the personnel of a Himalayan expedition, 
the next thing to do is to equip it. Himalayan mountain- 
eering falls naturally into two categories. There is the 
expedition that has for its object the conquest of peaks up 
to 23,000 feet high, and for this ordinary Alpine clothing 
and foot-gear are sufficient. Then there is the expedition 
that sets out to attempt the greater peaks of the Himalayas. 
This requires more specialised equipment, for owing to the 
effects of altitude and subsequent lowering of the vitality and 
bodily wastage, the winds that mercilessly sweep the uppet 
ridges, and intense cold, it is essential to prevent frostbite. 

There is only one way of efficiently clothing an expedi- 
tion, and that is to study the lessons of the past, and to 
take heed of the lessons learnt, often at considerable cost, 
on expeditions such as Sir Martin Conway’s in the Kara- 
korams and the three Mount Everest expeditions. These 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 61 


lessons and the recommendations derived from them are 
all laid down and should be studied with the utmost care. 
Nor should the late Sir Ernest Shackleton and the clothing 
which he provided for his expeditions into the Antarctic 
be neglected, for he was one of the first to make a scientific 
study of light wind-and-cold-resisting clothing. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth was fortunate in having the advice 
of Brigadier-General the Hon. C. G. Bruce, C.B., M.V.O., 
Lieutenant-Colonel E. L. Strutt, C.B.E., D.S.O., who 
accompanied the 1922 Everest expedition, and others. 
In the light of their experiences on Everest they were un- 
hesitating in their recommendation that light clothing and 
light boots should be worn of a type similar to that ad- 
vocated by Shackleton. On Everest, the best clothing was 
found to consist of woollen underclothes, Shetland wool 
sweaters, and outside a light jacket of wind-proof material. 
Boots were similar to those used in ordinary Alpine work, 
only lightly nailed and sufficiently roomy to take two or 
three pairs of stockings and socks. It is interesting to note 
that the porters who went highest, about 27,000 feet, did 
soin Army ammunition boots brought out from England and 
costing 15/6a pair. Thus, in a properly equipped expedi- 
tion, frostbite is usually due to the carelessness of the 
climber. 

Bearing these things in mind, it was unfortunate that 
Professor Dyhrenfurth did not follow advice founded on 
many years experience, of equipping his expedition with 
light clothing and boots. He chose rather to adopt the 
diametrically opposed theory that one layer of heavy 
material is warmer than two or more layers of lighter 
material, 


62 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The following is a list of clothing that was supplied. 
A tricot coat weighing six pounds; breeches, three 
pounds, six ounces; sweater, two pounds, ten ounces; 
outer wind-jacket, three pounds. I can only describe the 
boots as portmanteaux. They weighed six and a half 
pounds a pair, and each was nailed with sixty clinker 
and tricouni nails. The soles were built up of layers of 
felt, rubber and leather, and the uppers, which came half- 
way to the knee, were felt-lined. Crampons supplied with 
these boots were proportionately heavy and weighed four 
pounds a pair. Allowing an additional two pounds for an 
ice-axe, and five pounds for underclothing, head-gear, 
socks, stockings and puttees, but not including gear and 
equipment such as is normally carried in a rucksack or 
rope, we were, therefore, expected to carry a total of 
thirty-two and a half pounds to the summit of Kangchen- 
junga. This, together with other equipment, etc., would 
in my case be nearly a quarter of my own normal weight. 
It goes without saying that this equipment proved totally 
unsatisfactory. The only occasion on which I wore the 
expedition boots was on the Ramthang Peak, and I shall 
not easily forget the effort of lifting them at an altitude of 
23,000 feet. What would they and the clothing be like to 
the climber dependent on his last dregs of energy between 
27,000 and 28,000 feet near the summit of Kangchenjunga? 

It was with some inkling as to what was likely to be 
provided that caused me to purchase some equipment in 
England in addition to that with which Professor Dyhren- 
furth was providing me. This consisted principally of 
Shetland woollies and Jaeger underclothing. Of the 
former, I had four sweaters weighing four ounces each 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 63 


purchased from W. Bill of Great Portland Street, London. 
I never found it necessary to wear more than three of 
these, and these three worn in conjunction with Jaeger 
combinations and a wind-proof jacket were definitely 
warmer than the tricot jacket, and the two pounds ten 
ounces single sweater. Unfortunately, the boots came as a 
complete surprise, and, like some of the other members of 
the expedition, I was forced to wear a pair of boots which 
I used to tramp from Darjeeling to the Base Camp, boots 
which would only take two pairs of stockings, and that at 
a squeeze, but which nevertheless proved perfectly satis- 
factory with a dozen or more tricouni nails knocked into 
each. 

I know that in making such challenging statements I 
may arouse the wrath of my continental friends, who 
believe that weight and thickness alone spell warmth, but 
apart from my own former experiences in the Alps, during 
which I have made a close study of clothing and equip- 
ment, and apart from the experiences of former Himalayan 
and Polar expeditions, it cannot be doubted that several 
layers of light clothing are preferable to one layer of thick, 
heavy clothing, and that clothing one third of the weight 
of that which I have mentioned would be heavy enough, 
and warm enough for a man to reach without fear of frost- 
bite the highest peaks in the world. 

There is another thing that must be considered besides 
mere warmth—the ventilation of the body. Though the 
air temperature may be many degrees below freezing, the 
sun temperature is enormous at high altitudes. If the body 
is not sufficiently ventilated, perspiration cannot evaporate, 
and a sudden lowering of body temperature by wind, or 


64 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the withdrawal of the sun may result in a severe chill. A 
single layer of thick material, while being wind-proof, is 
also ventilation proof. It is possible to have clothing which 
will both ventilate the body and protect it from the wind, 
and in this respect there is nothing better than several 
layers of Shetland wool. 

The head and ears must be well protected, and here 
again one cannot do better than to wear two or three 
Shetland wool Balaclava helmets, while in the event of a 
severe wind, a leather flying helmet can be worn outside, 
although this again tends to retard ventilation. 

Snow blindness must be guarded against. At high alti- 
tudes the ultra-violet rays of the sun are so intense that 
even on rocks it is possible to suffer snow blindness. No 
special protection, other than the ordinary bottle-green 
or dark yellow snow-glasses that can be purchased in 
Switzerland at one franc a pair, is necessary. Personally, 
I found Crookes’ glass more restful, as it does not distort 
colour, and eliminates all glare by cutting out the ultra- 
violet rays. The sun also shines with such power that it 
strips the skin off the face like paper, a process which, 
incidentally, is assisted by the wind only too effectually. 
The best kind of protective face cream is that which both 
lubricates the skin and absorbs the ultra-violet rays, which 
are principally responsible for the painful stripping process. 

Excellent gloves were provided. They were of the leather 
fingerless variety fleece-lined. Puttees have many Oppo- 
nents among mountaineers, but the Kashmiri puttees as 
recommended by General Bruce do not impede the 
circulation in the least degree and are wonderfully warm. 
Not only do they prevent the snow getting in, but they 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 65 


afford excellent protection against the inroads of leeches. 
Incidentally, while on this last subject, it is a useful tip 
to put tobacco leaves in the stockings. Although leeches 
enjoy one’s blood, they object to having to chew tobacco 
first in order to get it. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth did a wise thing when he decided 
to have separate tents for each European member of the 
expedition. Later on, I shall have occasion to remark on 
the psychological importance of this. Suffice to say that 
these tents made by Schuster of Munich were excellent, 
and stood up well to wind and rain. The only criticism 
that might be made is that there was not sufficient over- 
lap in the flaps. 

The best thing of all among the camping equipment was 
the synthetic rubber ground sheets. These were about one- 
third of an inch thick. Not only do they keep one dry, but 
they insulate one from the cold ground or snow, and are 
soft enough to eliminate the “ inevitable stone.” 

Wise is the mountaineer who fusses over his sleeping bag 
as a cricketer fusses over his particular brand of bat. In- 
dividual taste should be satisfied, for the Himalayan 
mountaincer spends an appreciable portion of his life 
lying in his sleeping bag. Here again the lessons of the past 
are not to be ignored. It has been said of Everest sleeping 
bags that they were too narrow, and that at great altitudes, 
the climber had to wriggle, strain and pant in order to 
insinuate himself into his bag, an effort so great at 25,000 
feet or more that he would lie for minutes exhausted by the 
effort. The warmest sleeping bag is not a tightly fitting 
one, but one in which there is plenty of room to change 


the position. Warmth also depends upon having sufficient 
EK 


66 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


air space round the body. Several years experimenting in 
Alpine conditions have convinced me that quilted eider- 
down is superior to all other forms of material for a sleep- 
ing bag. Also that an outer covering of jaconet is advan- 
tageous. A plain sleeping bag, open only at one end is 
better than one slit down the side, for however well the 
side may be laced up, and the finicky business of lacing is, 
incidentally a labour, the slit is sure to coincide with the 
middle of the back during the night, and chilliness will 
result. 

Unwilling to be standardised on this matter, I had a 
sleeping bag made by Mr. R. Burns, of 5 Lever Street, 
Manchester, to my own design. It was seven feet long, 
thirty-two inches wide at the head end, tapering to seven- 
teen inches at the feet end, and weighing eight pounds, 
fourteen ounces. It consisted of two quilted eiderdown 
bags, one inside the other. The inner one was lined with 
Jaeger fleece, and the two bags were enclosed in an outer 
covering of jaconet. Both bags and the outer covering were 
fitted at the head end with a string-bag arrangement. The 
length was so ample that I was able to snuggle up right 
inside it with only my nose and mouth projecting through 
the drawn up opening. 

The advantage of having two bags was a great one. It 
meant that in the lower tropical forests I could utilise the 
outer of the two eiderdown bags only, and sleep comfort- 
ably without being too hot. Higher up, the second bag 
could be utilised with its fleece lining, and on the snows 
both bags together with or without the outer covering. 
Thus, it was easily possible to regulate through a wide 
range of temperature the degree of warmth required. 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 67 


It is interesting to note that when only one bag and the 
jaconet cover are utilised, the latter tends to condense the 
vapours of the body and wet the eiderdown, but with two 
bags this does not occur, owing to the air space between 
the bags. I slept for six weeks using both bags and the 
cover without the bag becoming damp. I slept well too ; 
in fact, during the whole expedition I do not remember 
shivering once during the night, and that fact, coupled 
with the excellent sleep I was able to enjoy, was of no small 
importance, and was undoubtedly responsible for my 
keeping fit during the expedition. I can unhesitatingly re- 
commend these bags to other expeditions, and particularly 
those whose route takes them through a variety of climates. 

The expedition bag was about the same weight, and was 
enclosed in a heavy canvas cover weighing five or six times 
more than the jaconet cover. It was narrow and slit down 
the side. The slit was done up with little wooden cross- 
pieces which had to be fitted through string loops, an 
awkward and irritating business, whilst the bag was so 
narrow, that more than once I heard my companions 
groaning as they strove to get into it. 

The expedition took with it one large ‘‘ Debrie ”’ cine- 
camera with its manifold gadgets, including various tele- 
photo lenses, three ‘‘ Kinamo ”’ cine-cameras, which take 
one hundred feet of film and can be loaded in a daylight 
charger, and no less than 60,000 feet of standard size film. 
In addition, practically everyone had his own camera, the 
majority of which were fitted for film packs. Of the latter 
we took an enormous quantity made by Messrs. Agfa, Ltd., 
each in an air-tight tin, and I am happy to add that they 
gave every possible satisfaction, and admirably stood the 


68 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


manifold changes of humidity and temperature they had 
to undergo between exposure and development. My own 
pet cameras were two thin pocket “ Etui’’ cameras, one 
6 x g centimetres, and the other 9 x 12 centimetres. Of the 
work done by them, I need only say that it was of the 
finest possible quality, and photographs taken by these 
little cameras appeared in newspapers all over the world. 
Both cameras were very light, and either could be slipped 
into the pocket. They were supplied by Sands, Hunter, 
Ltd. The disadvantage of cinematographic and photo- 
graphic work on a large scale is the number of additional 
porters this entailed. I do not think that less than fifty 
porters were utilised in carrying our cinematographic 
and photographic apparatus and materials. 

A large quantity of continental and English rope was 
taken, and regarding this all members of the expedition 
were agreed that the Alpine Club rope manufactured by 
Beale’s was far the superior both in strength and general 
handiness. 

There is no space here to mention the manifold items 
of equipment necessary for an expedition of this nature. 
I think a good deal of what we took might have come 
under the heading of luxuries rather than necessities, and 
had our subsequent transport difficulties been realised at 
the outset, it is safe to say that there would have been 
a drastic cutting down of individual and general equip- 
ment, and this without imperilling the party in any way. 
The seeker after information regarding Himalayan equip- 
ment should refer to the Alpine Club equipment report. 

Turning to food, the importance of correct feeding can 
hardly be over-estimated. The mountaineer climbing at 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 69 


high altitudes should look after his stomach with as much 
care as most American millionaires are forced to look after 
theirs. Up to the Base Camp, normal eating and foods can 
be indulged in. Above that the health, and therefore the 
success of a Himalayan expedition, depends upon eating 
the right kind of food. Sugar is to the mountaineer climbing 
over 20,000 feet as petrol is to an internal combustion en- 
gine. Thanks to the generosity of many firms the expedi- 
tion was able to leave Europe with enough food and 
chocolate to start a grocery store and confectioner’s shop. 
Unfortunately, however, much of this food came under the 
heading of luxuries, and included such substances as 
caviare, paté de foie gras, tinned gherkins, Christmas 
puddings, tinned mushrooms and so forth. If in place of 
these, sugary foods had been taken, the subsequent ill 
health and upset stomachs which afflicted the expedition 
members at various times might have been avoided. As 
a substitute for bread, which is not to be obtained in 
most parts of the Himalayas, we took Swedish biscuits. 
These proved excellent, not only as a food, but as an 
aid to the digestion. The effect of high altitude is to make 
the stomach very acid, and food tends to ferment rather 
than be absorbed by the normal processes of digestion. 
Bismuth tablets are a spendid neutraliser of this uncom- 
fortable condition. Owing to low pressure at high alti- 
tudes water boils at lower temperatures than at sea level. 
In order to facilitate boiling we took with us a patent 
high-pressure boiler. Though there was often some doubt 
as to whether or not it would blow up it was on the whole 
a great success. 


No physiological subject during recent years has provided 


70 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


a greater controversy than whether oxygen is useful or 
not at great altitudes. In spite of the fact that Colonel 
E. F. Norton and Mr. T. H. Somervell reached 28,000 
feet on Everest without oxygen, there are those who still 
declare that oxygen is of value despite the weight of the 
cylinders containing it, and the apparatus to distribute it. 
Personally, I think a compromise will be reached so that 
the future climbers of Everest will carry one or two 
small oxygen cylinders as a reserve to boost their strength 
up for that last terrible few hundred feet. We com- 
promised, but in a different way, and took with us oxygen 
cylinders, not for inhalation on the actual climb, but 
for use in tents, as it was thought that this “ English 
air,” as the natives called it, would serve as an excellent 
‘“'bracer ”’ to the day’s work at a high altitude, and might 
be of use in resuscitating an exhausted man. It was cer- 
tainly found to be useful in both these departments, but 
whether the expense of porterage and the apparatus 
was worth it is doubtful. I think, however, that for 
Everest or Kangchenjunga oxygen should be taken as a 
medicine, for its effect on an exhausted man is superior to 
that of alcohol. 

Apart from oxygen, Dr. Richter took with him a special 
physiological apparatus in addition to the usual imple- 
ments of his profession. 

The foregoing is necessarily little more than an allusion 
to a few among many of the details that must be consid- 
ered before an expedition can so much as set sail from 
Europe. It is intended only to give the reader some idea 
of the manifold things the leader of an expedition has to 
consider. No one could have worked harder than Professor 


PLANS AND PREPARATIONS 71 


and Frau Dyhrenfurth, and their work was inspired by the 
fact that in going to Kangchenjunga they were fulfilling a 
lifetime’s ambition. 

As regards the Press, it was arranged that I should act 
as Special Correspondent and Photographer to The Times. 
Messages were to be sent back by runners from the 
expedition and thence telegraphed to Europe through the 
Statesman newspaper in Calcutta, the Editor of which, 
Mr. Alfred Watson, was of great service to the expedition. 
So at last, on February 24, 1930, the first party consisting 
of Professor and Frau Dyhrenfurth, Dr. Richter, Duvanel 
and myself left Europe on the S.S. Gange of the Lloyd 
Triestino Navigation Company. 

On our arrival at Bombay, we sent off six and a half tons 
of goods to Darjeeling. Our first task was to apply to His 
Highness the Maharajah of Nepal for permission to pass 
through his country. That that permission was granted was 
due partly to the kind offices of Mr. Howell, Foreign 
Secretary, and Colonel Dawkes, the British Envoy at 
Khatmandu, the capital of Nepal. It was considered also 
that an English speaking Gurkha N.C.O. would be most 
useful to us, and thanks to the kindness of Field-Marshal 
Sir William Birdwood, Bart., we were able to obtain the 
services of Naik Tikeram Thapa of the 2/8th Gurkha 
Rifles, who was specially selected by his Commanding 
Officer, Lieutenant-Colonel C. D. Noe. 

These things being accomplished, we toured through 
India, visiting such show places as Delhi, Agra, and 
Benares. But the plains were hot and dusty, and we longed, 
all of us, to sense the keen air from the snows of Kangchen- 
junga and the High Himalayas. 


CHAPTER IV 
A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 


In order to meet Wood Johnson and make some of the 
preliminary arrangements for the expedition, I left the 
first party at Agra, and travelled on alone to Siliguri. 
The “ Darjeeling Mail” from Calcutta arrived there 
soon after dawn. The night in the train had been a 
stifling one, and intense heat had not improved a slight 
attack of dysentery contracted at Agra. Yet, it was 
impossible not to experience a thrill, for Siliguri lies at 
the foot of the Himalayas, and I craned my head out of 
the window to try and catch a glimpse of the great 
mountain range we had come so far to see. But nothing 
was visible save a few miles of the monotonous heat- 
soaked Plain of Bengal. 

Alighting on the platform, I found my hand clasped by 
Wood Johnson. He said, ‘‘ I knew it was you, because you 
are obviously a climber.” I replied that at the moment 
I certainly did not feel like one, as my stomach appeared to 
be full of gnawing rats. “Oh! That’s nothing,” was the 
comforting reply, “‘ everyone gets these little ‘ tummy’ 
troubles out here.” 

It was during breakfast that I learned that I was expected 
to accompany Wood Johnson on the pillion of his motor- 
cycle to his tea plantation at Rangli Rangliot, 5,000 feet 
up, thirty miles from Siliguri and twenty from Dar- 


jeeling. Three years previously I had risen from a muddy 
72 


A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 73 


ditch by the side of a remote road in Wales whither I had 
been hurled at a speed of forty-five miles per hour vowing 
that I would never again ride a motor-cycle. Now, this 
vow must perforce be broken. 

I will not mention the make of the motor-cycle, as this 
might be considered derogatory by the makers. We had 
not proceeded a mile from Siliguri when a portion of the 
horn fell off. Many bullock carts were on the road, and 
vigorous blasting on the horn was required to move them. 
After a search, we retrieved the lost portion, and proceeded 
on our way. 

The road from Siliguri is flat and straight, as straight as 
a Roman road, and with a fair metalled surface. On either 
hand is dense jungle ; tangled, knotted masses of trees 
and undergrowth, interspersed with tall, coarse elephant 
grass. Here are to be found elephant, leopard and tiger. 
Indeed, Wood Johnson told me that a man eater of the 
last species had recently caused considerable alarm in the 
district. The road we were on is a unique highway. It is 
the connecting link between India and Thibet, the great 
trade-way along which Thibetans pass to sell their goods 
in India, and the route followed by three Everest expedi- 
tions. After the sullen-eyed Bengalis of Calcutta and the 
plains, it was a relief to see the yellow-skinned, almond- 
eyed, alert little men from Thibet and Nepal, with their 
wide, cheery grins. 

As we chugged and exploded through the silent forest, 
dim, unsubstantial shapes far overhead began to loom 
through the haze, the Himalayas. In no other moun- 
tain range that I have seen is the transition from 


plain to mountain so abrupt. One minute we were 


74 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


on the Plain of Bengal, as flat as a golfing green, the 
next the wooded jaws of the great Teesta Valley had 
enclosed us. 

The Teesta Valley is one of the most superb valleys in 
the world. Though no snow peaks are visible from its 
lower portion, the traveller realises that he has entered the 
Himalayas. Above him the valley sides rise for thousands 
of feet at such a steep angle, it seems almost impossible 
that the dense tropical vegetation can cling to them; 
below, in a rocky bed of giant boulders carried down by 
the turbulence of the monsoon rains, thunder the melted 
snow waters of Kangchenjunga, and the glaciers of 
Northern Sikkim. 

Where it debouches on to the Plain of Bengal, the valley 
floor is but a few feet above sea level. Luxuriously beau- 
tiful though the forests are at this low altitude, they serve 
but to breed one of the most malignant malarial mosquitos 
known to exist. It is said of Teesta Valley malaria that 
once it is fairly in the blood, the victim will never entirely 
rid himself of it. That this is a truism is shown by the poor 
physique of the Sikkim Lepchas, who inhabit the valley. 
This race of gentle mild-eyed people is being gradually, 
but ruthlessly exterminated by disease and malaria. Their 
plight is not helped by a strict conservatism regarding 
marriage, which decrees that they shall not marry 
Thibetans, their hereditary enemies. Thus the evils of 
inter-marriage are added to those of disease, evils that 
increase as the population decreases. It is only fresh 
and healthy blood that can save the Lepchas from 
extinction. 


Soon after entering the valley, the road began to climb 


A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 75 


in a series of hairpin bends. These Wood Johnson nego- 
tiated at a high speed, while relating to me how the pre- 
vious year he had run off the road, fallen a considerable 
distance with the motor-cycle on top of him, and had to 
spend three months in hospital. Fortunately, it was on a 
straight section that the tyre elected to go suddenly flat. 
The valve was at fault, although had the tyre been punc- 
tured, it would have made little difference, as Wood 
Johnson possessed no repair outfit. 

We were five miles from the nearest village where help 
could be obtained. First of all, we attempted to continue as 
before, but even at a slow speed the motor-cycle slewed 
unpleasantly about the road, and after I had received a 
bruise on the shin, I suggested to Wood Johnson that he 
should go on alone, repair the valve, and return. With no 
weight on the pillion this was possible, and a few minutes 
later he was out of sight. 

To one who had but recently escaped from the cold, 
damp vapours of a London February, the heat seemed 
terrific. From all sides came a shrill symposium of in- 
numerable insects, and the harsh clatter of frogs. It was my 
first experience of a tropical forest, and as I wished to see 
more of the Teesta Valley, I decided to continue walking 
along the road. 

For the most part the hillside rises steeply and directly 
from the road, but at one part there was a comparatively 
level intervening stretch of forest. It was while passing 
this that I was suddenly startled by an unpleasantly 
malevolent snarl. Looking to the left I could clearly dis- 
tinguish between the matted undergrowth the form of a 
large tiger, not more than five yards away. Apart from 


76 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Zoos and circuses, it was the first time that I had ever seen 
a tiger, and I must confess that Wood Johnson’s story of 
the man eater recurred unpleasantly in my mind. My only 
weapon, a pocket knife, seemed a poor defence. It was a 
situation requiring tact. If I ran, the tiger might regard this 
as an indication of timidity, and follow me. If I stood still, 
he might assume me to be an attacker, and himself attack. 
The best compromise was to continue quietly walking 
down the road. Once I heard a rustle as though the brute 
was following me through the jungle, but after two hundred 
yards the flat jungle gave place to a buttress of crags 
abutting against the road. I could breathe more freely, 
for the tiger was scarcely likely to follow me along the open 
road. It was, of course, much to be regretted that I had 
not a rifle, for to have shot one’s first tiger in such circum- 
stances would have been unusual. The fact that farther 
along the road several natives passed me showed that 
in this district, at least, nothing is to be feared from 
tigers. 

A mile or so farther on was a native hamlet, consisting of 
thatched, wooden houses resting on log piles. Here the 
road divided, one branch climbing the hill towards Dar- 
jeeling, the other continuing along the valley, after crossing 
a tributary of the main Teesta River by a well-made 
suspension bridge. By the bridge, I sat down to wait for 
Wood Johnson. At length, he arrived, and we continued 
once more on our journey. 

I told him of my encounter with the tiger, and gathered 
that I should consider myself lucky seeing one so soon 
after arriving in India. Other men had been out for years, 
and had not seen a tiger. He, Wood Johnson, would have 


A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 77 


given a month’s pay to have seen that tiger at the business 
end of a rifle. The tiger had already killed deer, and other 
animals. There was, of course, no question of it attacking 
human beings unless itself attacked. All this I gathered as 
I bumped painfully up and down on the pillion of Wood 
Johnson’s motor-cycle. 

Presently, we left the road in favour of a narrow lane 
that winds up the hillside to Rangli Rangliot, 4,500 feet 
above the Teesta Valley. In England, this lane would be 
much in demand by motor-cycling clubs as a test hill. 
People would line its one in three gradient and hairpin 
bends to cheer the intrepidity of the riders, but in this 
part of the world it is only one among many other hills of 
a similar character habitually traversed by the Austin 
Seven cars and motor-cycles of the tea planters. Wood 
Johnson said his record was twenty minutes for this par- 
ticular ascent, but that out of consideration for my stomach 
he would not try to break it. Anyway, Fate willed other- 
wise. We had climbed but two or three hundred feet above 
the main road when the engine, after a few splutters and 
a sharp cough, stopped dead. 

This time it was a twist-grip throttle control that had 
broken. A caravan of laden ponies under the charge of 
some natives was coming up the path. They wished to 
pass us, but this Wood Johnson would not allow. He said 
they would interfere with our future progress. First of all, 
we endeavoured by an ingenious arrangement of string to 
manipulate the throttle from the handle-bars, then Wood 
Johnson in the saddle, and myself and two natives shoving, 
the motor-cycle was pushed up the hill. After several 
attempts the engine suddenly elected to start witha gallant 


78 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


roar. I sprang on behind, Wood Johnson let in the clutch, 
and once more we shot up the hill. But we had not gone 
more than a few yards when the engine again spluttered 
and coughed to a standstill. The same laborious process 
was then repeated, after which we sat down exhausted 
amid a circle of interested natives. 

The noon-day heat was appalling. Divesting ourselves of 
the majority of our clothes, and giving them to one of the 
natives with instructions to bring them up, we once more 
attacked the problem of our recalcitrant mount. First of 
all I thought of something ingenious, and then Wood 
Johnson thought of something even more ingenious. The 
result was always the same, a vulgar splutter and a sar- 
castic cough. An hour or two later we hurled the contrap- 
tion to the side of the road, and sat down to consider the 
situation. We were very hot, Wood Johnson’s hand was 
bleeding from contact with one of the sharp edges common 
to all motor-cycles, my stomach had not been improved. 
The motor-cycle tilted over by the side of the road at an 
inelegant angle, with its horn tied together by string and 
lurching drunkenly over one handle-bar, seemed to leer at 
us. There was nothing for it but to walk uphill. Luck was 
with us. We had not got half-way when we met some 
unladen ponies coming in the opposite direction, two of 
which we at once commandeered. 

It was now possible for the first time since leaving 
Siliguri to appreciate the surroundings. As we climbed, the 
tropical heat of the Teesta Valley was gradually super- 
seded by a temperature comparable to that of a warm 
English summer day. The jungle thinned, and abruptly we 
emerged from it on to open slopes covered in tea. A fresh 


A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 79 


evening breeze greeted us, seeming to whisper of high 
places and the snows. Thousands of feet below now was the 
Teesta Valley with its argent river thread. Northwards, 
rolling hills stretched like grass-grown slag-heaps towards 
the factories of the snows. These grass and forest-clad hills 
are but the foot-hills of the Himalayan wall, yet they are as 
great in scale as the main range of the Alps. In the Alps 
one may gaze down into a valley and see trim, neatly laid- 
out little villages and fields, roads, railways, and electric- 
power lines, but these give to the mountains an artificial 
taint, and even on the summit of Mont Blanc or the Matter- 
horn the mountaineer cannot escape entirely from civilisa- 
tion. But amid these lower foot-hills of the Himalayas there 
are few signs of commercialism. True, man has hacked a way 
here, and scraped a clearing there, but generally speaking 
the country is the same as it always has been. Up there, in 
the evening stillness of the tea-gardens I experienced for the 
first time in my life that subtle feeling of joy and sorrow 
intermixed which comes to all who are born with the love 
for mountains. Joy for the vision and hope of the un- 
known, and sorrow in realising how many adventures 
there are to seek, and how pitifully short is the life in 
which to seek them. 

Gielle Tea Estate, where Wood Johnson works, is one 
of the most beautifully situated among the Darjeeling 
district tea-gardens, and commands a view up the 
Teesta Valley towards the snows. A pleasant evening was 
spent there as the guest of Mr. McKean, Wood Johnson’s 
manager, who had kindly given permission for the latter 
to accompany the expedition, although it meant single- 
handed work on the plantation for the next three months. 


80 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


McKean had lived twenty years at Gielle, and it was 
largely due to his expert tuition in the handling of native 
labour that made Wood Johnson so invaluable to the 
expedition. 

He presented me with a kukri as a memento of the 
occasion. The cutting powers of this heavy, curved knife 
in the hands of an expert Gurkha is amazing. It is said 
that with one blow a bullock’s head can be severed from 
its body, whilst during the War it was a favourite amuse- 
ment among men of Gurkha regiments to crawl across 
** No Man’s Land ”’ at night, lie “‘ doggo ” on the parapet 
of the enemy trench, and lop off the head of the unfor- 
tunate sentry or anyone else who happened to pass. But 
apart from its unique cutting powers, the kukri is useful in 
many other ways, and during the expedition I saw it 
employed in cutting up firewood, opening packing-cases, 
sharpening pencils, hewing down vegetation and other 
varied, if menial tasks. 

That evening a number of tea-garden coolies came in 
with baskets of freshly plucked tea. Most of them were 
women, sturdy little Nepalis with gay coloured head- 
dresses, necklaces and earrings. In spite of a heavy day's 
work, for which they are paid but a few annas, they have 
always a smile at the end of it, and they stood outside the 
factory laughing and chattering like school children 
starting out for a treat. The gaiety of these hill people is 
indeed infectious, and one cannot but compare these lively 
little women of the hills to the morose Hindu women of the 
plains. 

It was late when Wood Johnson and I left McKean’s 
hospitable roof. Innumerable fireflies flitted round us as we 


A FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE HIMALAYAS 81 


passed through the silent plantation. Somewhere in the 
direction of the Himalayas lightning flickered restlessly. 
The profound quietude of the hills was broken only by the 
distant throbbing of a native band. 


CHAPTER V 
SUPERSTITIONS AND STORMS 


Great mountain peaks usually excite superstitious awe 
in the minds of the simple peasantry who dwell in the val- 
leys beneath them. Their height, their isolation from the 
everyday affairs of life and their grandeur impress men 
with a sense of their insignificance, persuading them against 
all judgment and reason that there are forces abroad be- 
yond human ken. 

During the Middle Ages the Alps were popularly reputed 
to be the abode of monstrous dragons ; the uneasy ghost of 
Pontius Pilate was believed to haunt the slopes of Mount 
Pilatus above Lucerne, and as late as the latter half of the 
last century, Edward Whymper wrote of the Matterhorn : 
‘“‘ There seemed to be a cordon drawn around it, up to 
which one might go, but no farther. Within that invisible 
line gins and effreets were supposed to exist—the Wander- 
ing Jew and the spirits of the damned. The superstitious 
natives in the surrounding valleys (many of whom firmly 
believed it to be not only the highest mountain in the Alps, 
but in the world) spoke of a ruined city on its summit 
wherein spirits dwelt ; and if you laughed, they gravely 
shook their heads ; told you to look yourself to see the 
castles and the walls, and warned one against a rash ap- 
proach, lest the infuriate demons from their impregnable 
heights might hurl down vengeance for one’s derision.” 


With the advance of civilisation, however, most Alpine 
82 


SUPERSTITIONS AND STORMS 83 


superstitions became legendary. Sturdy guides haul tourists 
to the summit of the Matterhorn, the ghost of Pontius Pilate 
is enjoying a well-earned repose, and the dragons have 
fled before the hosts of Mr. Thomas Cook and the Poly- 


technic Institute. 
Yet even in such an accessible mountain range as the 


Alps superstitions die hard, and the traveller who forsakes 
the tourist highways will still find ancient beliefs that have 
been handed down through countless generations. How 
much more, therefore, must superstitions be rife among 
the stupendous ranges of the Himalayas? The fact that 
their greatest peaks have defied the best efforts of skilled 
mountaineers, and that, of the sixty odd peaks over 25,000 
feet, not one has been scaled, is in itself a justification of the 
belief that a cordon is drawn round the summits beyond 
which man may not enter, where dwell the gods in icy 
detachment from the world. 

The most rationally minded of men cannot gaze from 
Darjeeling upon Kangchenjunga without experiencing 
something of the same emotions of the simpler-minded 
Sherpas and Lepchas who dwell in the valleys below. He 
will find himself wondering half in shame whether there is 
anything in the tales told him of the powerful god whose 
sacred throne rests upon its summits, the ‘‘ Five Treasures 
of the Snow,” and whether the snow-fields and glaciers 
suspended in mid-air above a misty ocean are indeed the 
abiding places of the Mi-go, the Abominable Snow Men. 
He will gaze on Siniolchum and reflect that if there is a 
God of Inaccessibility, his unapproachable halls and 
palaces must be fashioned beneath the icy flutings and 
sweeping scimitar-like ridges of that amazing peak. 


84. THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


It is easy to understand the superstitions of the natives 
who live round Kangchenjunga. Their fears and fancies are 
merely an outward expression of a primitive instinct that 
recognises in Kangchenjunga something beyond human 
understanding ; a world apart, akin both to Heaven and to 
Hell ; something to be revered, feared and worshipped. 

At first sight it seems strange that men should flock so 
willingly to the banners of expeditions such as have at- 
tempted Everest and Kangchenjunga. The reason is not 
far to seek ; there is prestige and honour to be gained in 
daring the inaccessible and braving the wrath of the gods. 
The Sherpas may be the prey to superstitious fears, but 
they are men enough to be able to conquer them. 

Mountain superstitions are much the same the world 
over ; it is, therefore, curious to find such a unique super- 
stition as the Abominable Snow Men so firmly implanted 
in the native mind. Our porters, even the most educated 
among them, swore that they had seen them, and described 
them as being white-skinned and naked, but covered with 
thick hair. Whence did this belief originate ? Was there 
once a wild tribe that roamed the Himalayas—a tribe, per- 
haps, of white nomads from Southern Siberia, half ape and 
half man, to give to this superstition a foundation of fact? 
During the last Everest expedition wild rumours were 
afloat that the expedition actually encountered these 
beings. Actually, however, no European has set eyes on 4 
Snow Man. The nearest approach to fact was the experi- 
ence of Mr. E. O. Shebbeare, who accompanied the 1929 
Bavarian expedition to Kangchenjunga. He relates that 
when ascending to the Base Camp his porters begged him 
to come with them to see the footprints of a Snow Man in 


SUPERSTITIONS AND STORMS 85 


the snow. When, however, he arrived at the spot a fresh 
fall of snow had covered the ground. 

Thunderstorms are common among the Himalayas. 
Most fine mornings see the cloudy galleons sweeping up 
from the steamy Plain of Bengal. Slowly they sail over the 
green foothills or float in lazy stateliness on the blue hazes 
of the deep valleys, their keels in shadow, their sails of 
massive cumuli bellying thousands of feet aloft in the sun- 
light. As they advance, they are augmented by the warm, 
moist air currents from the valleys. Magically they grow 
larger ; their girth and height increases every moment ; 
they are sifted by the upward breezes, broken and distorted 
into all manner of queer forms by vagrant winds ; momen- 
tarily dissipated by unexpected blasts. They become a 
mighty fleet and pass in splendid line ahead towards the 
huge wall of the Himalayas, where they assault in misty 
surges the snowy bastions of Kangchenjunga. 

Towards mid-day the first thunder echoes in deep 
growls along the valleys. A smooth slaty pall of nimbus, 
underhung with coppery billows of cumuli, slides up the 
zenith. The thunder becomes louder ; its solemn booms 
are resolved into an angrier crackle. Spiteful lightning 
spears the whale-backed crests of the foothills and leaps 
among the clouds. A veil of rain is borne along by the 
thundercloud trailing hill and valley, blotting out the 
sunny hillsides, sweeping over the ridges. 

Local thunderstorms occur almost every day among the 
foothills of the Himalayas ; they seldom attack the great 
peaks, and usually expend their wrath before the evening, 
their apparently indissoluble clouds melting into the night. 
But, occasionally, there are storms which are neither local 


86 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


nor confined to the foothills. I saw such a storm at 
Darjeeling. 

The afternoon had been thunderous, and storm after 
storm had stalked over the hills, their hailstones bringing 
dismay to the tea planters whose leaves were ready for 
plucking. The sunset was wild as I climbed Observatory 
Hill. Long, tendrous clouds, bridging a gap between the 
dense curtains of cumuli, had been twisted by the wind 
until they appeared like bloodstained claws groping in the 
sky. The sky between was that ominous cat’s eye green, a 
colour that mountaineers and seamen instinctively distrust. 
One doresque shaft of ruddy light striking through the tur- 
moil of mists fell upon the Singalila ridge. Day was dying 
as I gained the summit of Observatory Hill, and sullen 
draperies had been drawn across the sunset. In the south 
lightning flicked a restless whip over Tiger Hill ; in the 
east, towers of cloud were occasionally revealed by foun- 
tains of lightning. Once again came thunder, long heavy 
vibrations shaking the earth ; lightning blue and vivid 
slashed the peaks of the Singalila ridge and Nepal. 

On the summit of Observatory Hill there is a Thibetan 
temple, not a building, but a forest of prayer flags ringing a 
small space in which is set a primitive altar. Here, as 
though to propitiate the gods, and perhaps, in particular, 
the great God of Kangchenjunga, the lamas began to pray, 
a low mutter breaking forth into a wail of religious fervour, 
accompanied by the monotonous ringing of a hand-bell. 
I felt that indefinable sensation that every visitor to the 
East feels sooner or later—that time and space are limitless, 
that man is but the puppet of fate, a mere plaything of 
elemental forces beyond his comprehension or control. 


SUPERSTITIONS AND STORMS 87 


Thibetan music is the epitome of that strange mountain 
land of the Himalayas. Its weird dirge-like monotone, its 
occasional passionate crescendo, suggests infinity, the 
presence of great mountains and limitless spaces, the fears 
and hardships of those foredoomed to dwell on bitter wind- 
swept plateaux and gaze for ever on the barren slopes and 
inhospitable solitudes of Central Asia. 

The praying ceased ; between two rolls of thunder no 
sound disturbed the hilltop save the sigh of an awakened 
wind among the prayer flags and the distant clamour of 
Darjeeling. 

The storm came up apace with glares of bluish lightning 
and staccato thunder that flung in waves of sound across the 
valleys or rolled and grumbled like immense engines on 
the ridges. Rain and hail swept the hill ; the lightning leapt 
in furious confused brilliance. Thunder, crashing and 
majestic, came hard on its heels. In a few minutes the storm 
was gone, its turbulence swallowed in the night. A small 
star gleamed tentatively, was extinguished by a cloud 
scud, and gleamed again more confidently. The subsiding 
groan of the wind among the prayer flags broke a heavy 
silence. 

Other and more distant storms took up the tale. In the 
direction of Everest sudden floods of white light soundlessly 
illuminated the cloudy pavements of the sky, picking out 
in faultless detail the towers, minarets and cupolas of a 
cathedral of mist towering above the world. As though 
jealous of his supreme neighbour, the God of Kangchen- 
jJunga struck out with fierce blue swords and vicious darts 
of forked lightning. Somewhere over Bhutan and Thibet 
another cloud winked with bibulous persistence like some 


88 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


lesser mountain god delighting in this fiery combat of 
Himalayan giants. 

No thunder was to be heard. From the depths of the 
Rangit Valley beneath, mist wraiths swayed upwards like 
jinns from the confines of a monstrous bottle. The moon 
was rising as I turned to go ; her calm radiance seemed to 
quell the stormy disputes between earth and sky. Beneath 
her contemptuous gaze the distant lightning became de- 
sultory and wan. The clouds were withdrawn from Kang- 
chenjunga. Far up in the awakened stars something white 
gleamed steadfastly—the summit. 


CHAPTER VI 
OFF AT LAST 


By the end of March all members of the expedition were 
assembled in Darjeeling. While in Delhi we had written 
letters to the Maharajah of Nepal, and to Colonel Dawkes, 
C.I.E., British Envoy at Khatmandu, requesting permis- 
sion to attack Kangchenjunga from the Nepalese side. Ow- 
ing, however, to political friction existing then between 
Nepal and Thibet, it seemed advisable not to worry the 
Nepalese authorities until matters had quieted down. The 
letter was left, therefore, with Mr. Howell, the Foreign 
Secretary, who had kindly undertaken to forward it at an 
appropriate date. The previous year, the Munich expedi- 
tion had also applied for permission to enter Nepal, but 
though this permission had been eventually given, it had 
arrived far too late for them to avail themselves of it. Bear- 
ing these things in mind, we had no option but to plan an 
attempt on Kangchenjunga via Sikkim, and the eastern 
face of the mountain. 

Apart from Colonel Tobin, who as previously men- 
tioned, was appointed Transport Officer, Mr. J. S. Hannah, 
of the Bengal and Nagpur Railway, was invited to join the 
expedition. Hannah had had considerable experience of 
Indian travel, and had also climbed in the Alps. Most im- 
portant of all he spoke Hindustani, and this, combined 


with the efficient way in which he handled transport and 
89 


go THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


porters, was to make him an invaluable member of the 
expedition. 

By whichever route we went, we hoped to leave Dar- 
jeeling early in April. The time during which an attempt can 
be made either before or after the monsoon is so short, that 
it was essential to be at the foot of the mountain, if pos- 
sible, by the middle of April. This would allow some six 
weeks. But as General Bruce pointed out, the monsoon might 
come by the middle of May, and that this was possible was 
borne out by the experience of the tea planters and others 
living in the Darjeeling district. Assuming that the difficulties 
would be comparable to those encountered by the Munich 
expedition, four weeks was definitely too short a time in 
which to make the attempt. On the other hand, so far as 
could be seen from Darjeeling, the Kang La, the 16,373 
feet pass we must traverse into Nepal was still so deeply 
snow-covered at the beginning of April that to have started 
earlier would have been impossible. 

Attempting any great Himalayan peak must always 
mean a gamble with the weather. Had we decided in the 
beginning to tackle the eastern face of the mountain by 
the same route as the Munich expedition, we could have 
established our Base Camp early in April, and commenced 
to have attacked the mountain without delay. But Pro- 
fessor Dyhrenfurth had other objects in view besides at- 
tempting Kangchenjunga. North-east Nepal was prac- 
tically unknown. No European had passed along the val- 
leys to the west and south-west of Kangchenjunga since 
1899, when Mr. Douglas Freshfield passed round Kang- 
chenjunga. The upper branches of the Kangchenjunga 
Glacier were still unexplored. No one had seen the head of 


OFF AT LAST gl 


the Ramthang Glacier which falls from the western face of 
Kangchenjunga. There were valleys unknown, and peaks 
untrodden, and the district might confidently be expected 
to provide topographical and geological data of consider- 
able interest. 

Directly on arrival at Bombay we had dispatched the 
expedition’s goods, weighing some 6} tons, in a special 
truck by passenger train to Darjeeling. Though this cost 
£135, and should have taken no longer than four or five 
days in transit, over two weeks had elapsed, and still there 
was no sign of the truck. Imploring telegrams were sent to 
high officials, eliciting non-committal replies. The truck 
had been seen here, and seen there, but not one of the rail- 
ways could tell us exactly where it was at the moment. 
Finally, as we were in despair, the goods arrived, but the 
expedition had been delayed two or three days, and every 
day was of vital importance. 

A store-room was hired, and the 180 crates containing 
food and equipment unpacked under the supervision of Frau 
Dyhrenfurth. She was in her element, as clad in a neat 
apron, and armed with a pencil and notebook, she super- 
intended operations, amid stacks of various foodstuffs, tins, 
rucksacks, boots, films, patent hot-water bottles, dangerous- 
looking magnesium flares, and a multitude of other things 
all heaped up amid a labyrinth of packing-cases and 
crates. There was one tragedy, a German firm had pre- 
sented the expedition with a large quantity of honey. This 
had been packed in cardboard containers. Travel and heat 
had done their worst, and it had arrived a glutinous mass. 
It was not, however, entirely wasted, for it was much appre- 
ciated by the porters and countless children who gathered 


92 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


around the crate and licked the honey as it oozed through 
the cracks. 

General Bruce had been emphatic on one thing in par- 
ticular. “Don’t forget to worm your porters,” he had 
whispered into my ear at Victoria Station. Worms are a 
curse among the natives in India, and the strongest Hima- 
layan porter may become anemic and weak from them. 
Actually, Dr. Richter discovered but few porters who were 
suffering from this particular ailment. Possibly the Medical 
Officers of previous Everest expeditions taught them how to 
cure themselves with santonin and castor-oil. More pre- 
valent among the porters was a species of scurvy, due most 
likely to under nourishment, that showed itself in the form 
of skin breakings, and boils. A number of porters were so 
badly affected by this that it was impossible to take them. 

Owing to recent cases of smallpox locally, it was deemed 
advisable to vaccinate all porters. We anticipated some 
trouble here, and Frau Dyhrenfurth heroically offered 
herself as the first victim and example. But her public 
spirited offer was unnecessary. The porters took to vac- 
cination with alacrity, and they roared with laughter at 
the lengthening of the faces of those being vaccinated as 
their arms were scratched. 

Not warning Darjeeling of our coming had been a 
serious error, and meant much additional work for Colonel 
Tobin in enlisting every available porter. It was an exceed- 
ingly busy time for most members of the expedition and 
especially so for Colonel Tobin, who laboured with all his 
might to get the manifold preparations completed in time. 
About 400 porters were necessary if we were to attack 
Kangchenjunga from Nepal, and 400 good porters are not 


OFF AT LAST 93 


obtainable normally in Darjeeling. As had been proved 
previously on Everest and Kangchenjunga, the best types 
of Himalayan porters are Sherpas, Bhutias, and Thibetans. 
There is little to choose between these hardy races for car- 
rying powers and endurance, but the Sherpa is the best 
mountaineer. Like the Bhutia, they dwell in the remote 
valleys of Northern Nepal, and have both Nepalese and 
Thibetan blood in them. They are used to withstanding 
cold and hardships on some of the most inhospitable portions 
of the world’s surface, and are natural mountaineers. The 
men who did so well on Everest and Kangchenjunga were 
known as “ Tigers,” for their work in carrying loads at 
immense altitudes was tigerish in its strength and courage. 
It may appear extraordinary that these men should so 
readily leave their homes and rickshaws in Darjeeling, 
where many of them make a comfortable living during the 
tourist season. Perhaps it is because of a born instinct for 
adventure, perhaps because of the prestige that is to be 
gained by being chosen to accompany an expedition to 
the greatest peaks of the world, and perhaps because they 
love the mountains with a primitive unreasoning devotion 
which finds expression in the belief that they are the abid- 
ing places of the gods. Whatever it is, and it would be in- 
teresting to get behind their minds in the matter, it is not 
entirely the prospect of monetary reward that impels these 
men to risk life and limb on Everest and Kangchenjunga. 
There are many good men in Darjeeling, “rickshaw 
wallahs,” most of them, but there are also many good men 
living in far-away hill villages, who, had they known, 
would have been only too willing to come too. As it was, 
during the fortnight we were at Darjeeling, a number of 


04 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


men came in from the hills anxious to join the expedition, 
including two from Nepal, who said that they had tra- 
versed the Kang La. So long as these men remain un- 
spoilt in a world where commercial gain is becoming the 
only thing that matters, future expeditions, with moun- 
taineering as their aim, will have no difficulty in finding 
the right men to help them on their enterprise. 

Thus it was, that though the expedition was able to en- 
list a nucleus of keen, reliable men, it was forced also to 
enlist others who had no interest in its objects, “ bazar 
wallahs” who were merely out to serve their own ends, 
and who had no intention of working or serving the 
expedition faithfully. 

Four sirdars were engaged, Naspati, Gyaljen, Narsang 
and Lobsang. Of these, Lobsang was incomparably the best. 
Though only an ordinary “ rickshaw wallah ” of humble 
origin, and affecting none of the European clothes and 
manners of the other sirdars, and of little experience, hav- 
ing only recently been promoted from coolie to sirdar, 
he was a born commander of men. A Bhutia by birth, he 
was yet liked and respected by the Sherpas and Thibetans. 
His pock-marked, rugged countenance was the hardest I 
have ever seen in a native, and indicated a masterful 
personality. Perhaps it was this very personality that was 
responsible for adverse criticisms from some quarters, for 
Lobsang was of that rare native type which prefers being 
left to itself, to act largely on its own initiative. He was a 
genuine “tough” in the best sense of that word, and as 
Wood Johnson remarked, his work was equal to that of a 
sahib. Unfortunately, he was now too old to climb to the 
highest camps, but as commander of the general coolie 





A TYPICAL SHERPA 


OFF AT LAST 95 


organisation at the base, in the lower camps and on the 
march he would be invaluable. 

Of the other sirdars, Naspati and Gyaljen were excellent 
men, especially in keeping pay-rolls, management of stores, 
and “‘ office jobs,’ but for sheer drive and personality they 
were not to be compared to Lobsang. 

Minor worries are to be avoided at all costs on a Hima- 
layan expedition, and a good personal servant can do much 
to alleviate the trials and discomforts of life. General 
Bruce had given me a letter to his own personal servant, 
Lhakpa Chede, who accompanied him on the Everest 
Expedition. In this letter General Bruce flatteringly if 
inaccurately referred to me as his grandson. It is needless 
here to enlarge upon the admiration, affection and respect 
with which the Leader of two Mount Everest expeditions is 
regarded in Darjeeling. On many occasions natives stopped 
me in the streets of Darjeeling to ask whether the General 
Burra-sahib was leading the expedition. This charming 
fiction was of inestimable advantage to me personally, and 
I was soon known among our porters as the Nati-sahib 
(Grandson), 

Lhakpa Chede had taken a post as a waiter, and was 
unable to come. Mr. Kydd, of St. Paul’s School, suggested 
his own “rickshaw wallah,’” Nemu. It was a happy sugges- 
tion. Nemu had been ‘“ Sandy” Irvine’s servant on 
Everest, and had ascended as high as Camp Five, a height 
of 25,000 fect. But that was six years ago, and Nemu was 
now thirty-six. For Europeans this should be the prime of 
life, but it must be remembered that these men are fre- 
quently old at thirty, whilst the majority of them die in the 
neighbourhood of fifty. Was Nemu therefore too old, was 


96 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


his strength, and power of resistance to cold, still equal to 
the task, did he really want to leave a comfortable and easy 
job in favour of the hardships and rigours of high moun- 
taineering ? Nemu’s keenness to come was in itself an 
answer to these questions. 

I took an instant liking to the man. Clad as he was ina 
ragged and patched old coat, a dirty pair of aged corduroy 
breeches, frayed puttees, probably relics of the last Everest 
expedition, and a pair of apparently cast off boots, he 
looked at first glance a thorough old vagabond, but his 
face was broad and good-humoured, and his eyes were 
those of a hillman, possessing that subtle, far-away look 
of those accustomed to gaze great distances. Hazel brown, 
and set far apart, they were eyes indicative of honesty and 
trustworthiness. So I engaged Nemu, and had no cause 
ever to regret it. 

There were many other seasoned veterans of Everest and 
Kangchenjunga who were anxious to come. “ Satan” 
Chettan was secured by Schneider as his servant. Of all 
Himalayan porters he was the most experienced in moun- 
taineering, for he had accompanied all three Everest expe- 
ditions, climbed with Dr. T. G. Longstaff and Mr. H. 
Ruttledge in Garhwal, and as the servant of Dr. Paul 
Bauer, the leader of the Bavarian expedition, performed 
miracles of endurance on Kangchenjunga the previous 
year. There was also Lewa, who put up a magnificent 
performance on the Bavarian expedition. Perhaps most im- 
portant of all were the cooks, for on their efficiency much 
depended. The Bavarians had sung the praises of Ten 
cheddar, so we engaged him. He spoke a little English, 
and among his favourite expressions which we soon learnt 


OFF AT LAST 97 


by heart was ‘“‘ sometime coming.” To him everything 
was always “‘ sometime coming ”’—even death itself. There 
is a whole philosophy in “ sometime coming.” 

Many of these porters produced tattered and dirty letters 
of recommendation from General Bruce and other members 
of the Everest expeditions, testifying to their courage and 
loyalty. One of the first questions was often whether the 
General Burra-sahib was coming. Happy indeed the man 
who can win the respect and affection of such men. 

As nothing had been heard from Nepal, it was necessary 
to plan a provisional scheme to attempt Kangchenjunga 
via Sikkim and the Zemu Glacier. It was arranged that 
Wood Johnson and myself should leave Darjeeling about 
April 1, and proceed via Gangtok, the capital town of 
Sikkim, and Lachen, and blaze a trail up to the Zemu 
Glacier. It is possible to take ponies as far as Lachen, but 
above that, dense jungle would probably necessitate 
arduous trail making. It would also be the task of this 
advance party to find three camping sites between Lachen 
and the Base Camp, which we proposed to establish on 
Green Lake Plain on the north bank of the Zemu Glacier. 
With the way thus prepared, the main body of 150 porters 
and about 60 pack ponies would start from Darjeeling 
under the charge of Hannah, where they would be joined 
at Gangtok by the climbing party, who would travel in 
motor-cars from Darjeeling. 

From Gangtok the main body would proceed on foot 
or ponies to Lachen, where a provision dump under the 
supervision of Colonel Tobin would be made. 

The three temporary camps between Lachen and the 


Base Camp would be a day’s march between, and would 
GK 


98 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


be used as stagesin the relaying of loads from Lachen to the 
Base Camp. By this means we estimated to reach the Base 
Camp with 67 porters. Of these 25 would be sent back, 
leaving 42 porters to do the work of establishing the Base 
Camp, and the first two high camps on Kangchenjunga. 
By this method it would be the work of only eight or ten 
days to bring all the expedition’s food and equipment from 
Lachen to the Base Camp. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth was naturally loth to attack 
Kangchenjunga by the same route as that of the Bavarians 
the previous year so long as there was a possibility of 
climbing the mountain by any other route, but it was 
obvious that the ice ridge leading to the North Ridge was 
the only line that offered any possibility on the Sikkim 
side of the mountain. 

It was at this stage, when all preparations had been 
completed, that the following charming letter was received 
from the Maharajah of Nepal :— 


‘** Khatmandu, 
‘© Nepal. 
‘ goth March, 1930. 
*'To Proressor Dr. G. O. DYHRENFURTH, 
** Darjeeling. 

“ DEAR Sir,—I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your 
letter of the 16th March, 1930, giving information of the 
formation of an International Expedition to attempt an 
ascent of and make scientific observations on Kangchen- 
junga, and requesting permission for the expedition to 
enter Nepalese territory and approach the said moun 
tain via Kang La, Chumbab La, Tseram, Mirgin La, 


OFF AT LAST 99 


Khunza and Kangbachen, using the same route on 
return with the possibility of one party going over to 
Sikkim by way of Jonsong La. 

“His Highness appreciates your remarks about the 
international character of the expedition which has for 
its object the cementation of international friendship and 
good-will among the countries concerned, coupled with 
the augmentation of human esthetical and scientific 
knowledge, and desires me to inform you that he gladly 
accedes to your request. The Nepalese local authorities 
concerned are being ordered to permit the party the use 
of the routes mentioned in Nepalese territory. 

“His Highness hopes that the expedition will be a 
great success in every way, and sends to you as the worthy 
leader of the expeditionary party the best wishes for that. 

* T remain, 
‘** Your obedient servant, 
(Signed) Maricut Man SINGH, 
*“* Bada Kaji, 
“Private Secretary to his Highness the Maharajah, 
Nepal.” 


Although a complete change of plans was necessary, no 
time was lost in rearranging matters. Had, however, we 
realised the difficulties confronting us, I do not think we 
should so willingly have abandoned the original scheme. 
The route to the Zemu Glacier is a relatively easy one com- 
pared to that to the Kangchenjunga Glacier and good 
paths along low valleys lead four-fifths of the way from 
Darjeeling. The road to the Kangchenjunga Glacier via 
the Kang La and Mirgin La passes is much more difficult. 


10o THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Most important point of all—the winter was a late one, and 
snow lay low on the Kang La. 

Mules could be employed only as far as Yoksam, five 
marches from Darjeeling. Thenceforward, we must rely 
entirely on porters, and as previously stated, 400 of these 
were necessary. We estimated that it would take us three 
weeks to reach the foot of the mountain, and once the base 
camp was established, communications had to be main- 
tained, and fresh supplies for the porters obtained. 
Obviously, we must rely to a large extent on local help in 
Nepal. A telegram was sent to the Maharajah asking 
whether we could buy porters’ food at Tseram or Khunza, 
two Nepalese villages we must pass through. We received 
a very courteous answer, informing us that everything 
possible would be done to help us, and that we could 
employ local porters and obtain local supplies. Thus was 
solved the greatest difficulty of all, for without local help, 
this route would have been absolutely impossible. 

In order to avoid overcrowding at the camping sites, 
Colonel Tobin considered it necessary to split the expedi- 
tion up into three parties. Wood Johnson and Hannah 
were to be transport officers of the first and second parties 
respectively, whilst Colonel Tobin was to bring up the rear 
with eighty mule-loads of provisions and equipment, which 
he would transport to Yoksam, where he would be met by 
150 porters sent back from the first and second parties to 
carry his loads over the Kang La. This arrangement was 
made assuming that local help in the shape of porters and 

1 This arrangement was known only to Professor Dyhrenfurth and Colonel Tobin 
and the fact that neither the transport officers, Wood Johnson and Hannah, of the 


first and second parties respectively, knew anything about it was largely responsible 
for subsequent transport difficulties. 


OFF AT LAST IO! 


food was to be obtained by the first and second parties on 
the Nepalese side of the Kang La. 

It was an excellent scheme, but it was perhaps not suffi- 
ciently elastic in its allowance for failures. How were we to 
be certain that porters and supplies would be immediately 
forthcoming in Nepal. The Maharajah’s commands would 
take some time to infiltrate from Khatmandu into a remote 
corner of North-east Nepal. Little time would be avail- 
able for the Subadar appointed by him to look after our 
needs, and to collect porters’ food and porters from the 
sparsely populated valleys. The weather was another im- 
portant factor. Anything might happen on a pass as high 
as the Kang La. Even now, the beginning of April, almost 
daily storms were depositing snow at levels far below the 
summit of the pass, and boots were available for but a few 
of our porters, principally the ‘‘ Tigers intended for the 
work of establishing the high camps on Kangchenjunga. 
Was it wise to split up the party into three separate groups 
over such a difficult route ? The discomforts of overcrowd- 
ing in camping sites would have been well worth cohesion 
and unity. If I have dealt at length with this problem of 
transport, it is because it is a very real problem, and one 
on the solving of which the success of any Himalayan 
expedition depends. 

The three Everest expeditions had a far easier task, for 
in spite of the length of their route from Darjeeling to 
Everest, they were able to take ponies and mules the whole 
distance. This meant employment of less than 100 porters, 
and these were all picked men. We had 400 porters, some 
very good, others very bad. In addition to attempting 
Kangchenjunga from the Kangchenjunga Glacier, it was 


102 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


proposed first of all to explore the southern face of the 
mountain above the Yalung Glacier, the face attempted 
by the ill-fated Crowley party, but like Mark Twain, our 
exploration got no farther than an examination through 
the powerful telescope at the Planters’ Club at Darjeeling, 

To appreciate the beauty and dignity of Kangchenjunga, 
the apparently smooth, sickle-like sweep of its ridges, the 
pale red of its granite precipices gleaming like a sun-caressed 
Devonian sea cliff through a blue Atlantic haze, it should 
be viewed with the naked eye. Seeing it thus it is impossible 
to grasp the scale of the mountain, and the mountaineer’s 
analytical mind is peacefully submerged in a quiet ocean 
of meditation. 

But seen through a telescope Kangchenjunga ceases to 
be an object of restful meditation. It is revealed in all its 
cruelty. The pale red precipices are resolved into fear- 
ful slices of unrelenting granite ; the apparently smooth 
ridges resemble the blade of a knife seen through a micro- 
scope ; broken and jagged, torn and hewn by wind and 
weather into edges, gaps and towers of fantastic and terrible 
beauty ; what appear to the naked eye as straggling thin 
white threads are terrific ice-armoured couloirs, down which 
crash stones, and ice avalanches from disintegrating cliffs of 
rock and ice. Even looking through a telescope it was im- 
possible not to gain some idea of Nature’s forces that are 
ever at work slowly destroying the greatest peaks of the 
world. 

But a minute’s examination was needed to assure us that 
it was futile to seek a way from the Yalung Glacier. Though 
only the upper part of the route was visible, the long sloping 
icy shelf the mountaineer would have to ascend is exposed 


OFF AT LAST 103 


to avalanches of snow, ice and stones, while the ice-fall up 
which the party would have to go to reach the shelf, looked 
unassailable. The telescope effectively dispelled any 
nebulous schemes we may have cherished of attempting 
this side of the mountain. 

At last the preparations were completed. On the night 
of April 5, the last load was packed and weighed by Frau 
Dyhrenfurth, assisted by many willing helpers. We had 
planned to reach the dak-bungalow at Chakung in one 
day by motoring to Singla Bazar, and from there riding 
to Chakung 4,000 feet higher. This was, however, a long 
march for the porters, so it was decided to send them off a 
day beforehand. 

It is interesting to remember that there are days during 
every month when it is considered by the natives extremely 
unlucky to start on a journey. However, should a native 
find it absolutely essential to leave on one of these unlucky 
days, it is usual for him to send on his hat on a lucky day 
beforehand by a servant or friend. In this way the gods are 
deluded into thinking that he has actually started on a 
lucky day, and he may escape the consequences of his rash 
act. 

It was important to have someone in Darjeeling who 
would look after our mails, and arrange for the sending of 
dispatches to Mr. Alfred Watson, Editor of the Statesman, 
of Calcutta, whence they would be forwarded to The Times 
in London. We were extremely fortunate in obtaining the 
services of Mr. W. J. Kydd, of St. Paul’s School, Dar- 
jeeling. Mr. Kydd had been in the Secret Service during 
the War, and we felt we could not leave the work in more 
competent hands. 


104 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


It was arranged that Herr Eberl, the German Vice- 
Consul at Calcutta, should accompany the expedition part 
of the way. Before leaving Calcutta he was able to arrange 
to have weather reports broadcasted for us by the courtesy 
of the Meteorological and Broadcasting Departments, and 
he brought with him a suitable receiving set complete with 
masts. He also loaned us some useful porters’ tents, and 
presented to the expedition a number of gramophone 
records. 

April 6 was a day of bustle and activity at Darjeeling. 
Each porter and his load was checked by Colonel Tobin. 
This was facilitated by the issue to each porter of a metal 
disc stamped with a number. The native population of 
Darjeeling was agog with excitement. Crowds lined the 
roads ; porters’ wives were there to see their husbands off, 
some to give them a final cup of tea, others to wag an ad- 
monitory finger. The porters themselves swelled with 
conscious pride. 

Kangchenjunga sympathised but little with these pre- 
parations for its discomfiture. It sulked behind sullen 
clouds, dispatching now and again sudden rainstorms, 
destined apparently for the express purpose of drenching 
and damping the ardour of the expedition. 

That night before turning in Wood Johnson and I took 
a final stroll along the terrace of the Mount Everest Hotel. 
The weather boded ill. Lightning glared every few seconds 
through a rain-charged murk. Ghostlike swathes of mist 
eddied evilly from the valleys. From the direction of the 
Himalayas came long low growls of thunder. 


CHAPTER VII 
THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 


April 7 dawned mistily, but as the sun got up, the 
dense blanket of white, wet fog enwrapping Darjeeling 
quickly dissolved. Rifts were torn in the curtain disclosing 
Kangchenjunga, silvered, blue-shadowed, and remote. 
It was a morning full of a calm promise. 

There were many friends and strangers to see us off, 
including an American lady, who seemed particularly 
anxious for our welfare, and asked us whether we did not 
expect to find it “ turrible slippery ’? on Kangchenjunga. 

Four Austin Seven motor cars had been engaged for the 
first stage of our journey to Singla. There we were to be 
met by ponies and continue on them to Chakung. From 
Darjeeling to Singla a rough track descends tortuously 
6,000 feet, in a distance as the crow flies of about five 
miles. Frequently the gradient is as much as I : 3 or 1: 4, 
and hairpin bends are such as to necessitate reversing, 
with the wheels but a few inches from the unprotected 
edge of precipitous drops. 

“Baby ” cars have done much to improve the social 
amenities of the Darjeeling district. A few years ago the 
tea planters, whose estates are scattered about the hill- 
sides, were forced to use ponies or mules for transport. As 
a result, their existence was frequently a lonely one, for 
many of the plantations are twenty or thirty miles from 
Darjeeling. Recently, however, one of the planters bought 


105 


106 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


“baby” car as an experiment. He found to his sur- 
prise and delight that it was capable of negotiating the 
narrow zig-zagging tracks, and terrific hills of the district. 
Now practically every tea planter owns one, and the social 
life of the district has been vastly improved thereby. 

The climate of Darjeeling is temperate, and comparable 


rey . Sy Meigs Se vote 
oy" fet 
ZN Ney wick G6 ioracien 7 
“ie "Ww; 
NG - OS AE ONE ey 


x ZN 
UR DRANCHENSUNGR- 


y 
: 2% 


_ % 


Te" OF 


ns 
Tt 1 We 


PN\)op 
at 





By courtesy of The Times 


to that of England, the temperature seldom rising above 
70°. That of Singla in the Rangit Valley is definitely 
tropical. At first we passed through woods and glades 
of oaks, firs, and beeches reminiscent of the hillsides of 
Shropshire. Then came more open slopes covered in dark 
green terraces of tea, and clumps of tall bamboos. 

Kurz, Wood Johnson, and myself were in the first car of 
the little procession. We had not gone more than a mile or 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 107 


so from Darjeeling when we overtook a number of our 
porters scattered along the road, who had obviously only 
left Darjeeling that morning instead of the previous day. 
In reply to our query as to why they had not started, 
several of them said they were not feeling well. The cause 
of this was not far to seek. The advance pay intended for 
the upkeep of their wives and children in their absence 
had been spent in one last “ beano ” the previous night at 
Darjeeling. It was essential to get these men to Chakung the 
same day, and to Wood Johnson, as transport officer of our 
party, fell the unwelcome task of staying behind to see 
that they did get there. 

As we descended, we were vouchsafed occasional 
glimpses of the snows. Below was the floor of the Rangit 
Valley, 2,000 feet above sea level, whilst forty-five miles 
away remote in heaven rose the summit of Kangchen- 
junga, 28,156 feet, a vertical height difference of over 
26,000 feet ! 

Once we were stopped by a tea planter who cheerily 
wished us good luck, and insisted on taking a photograph. 
It became hotter and hotter. Several of us were wearing 
Terai hats, double wide-awakes with broad brims. These 
are worn mostly by tea planters, and afford excellent 
protection from the sun. The pith solar fopz soon goes to 
Pieces in the rains, but the Terai stands up to any amount 
of hard wear. 

A peculiarity of tea is that given the right soil, and the 
requisite amount of rainfall, it seems to grow satisfac- 
torily in any climate, varying from the temperate to the 
tropical. The highest Darjeeling tea garden is over 6,000 
feet above sea level, and the lowest descends to the bottom 


108 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


of the Rangit Valley. We passed garden after garden, 
all picturesque and forming charming deep green fore- 
grounds to the distant procession of woolly white clouds 
masking the distant wall of the Himalayas. 

At Singla we were hospitably greeted by the planters of 
one of these lower plantations, and spent a pleasant hour 
sipping cool drinks in a shady bungalow. 

Apparently on the principle that walking was good for 
us, only four ponies had been ordered, and we had to take 
turns in riding them. No doubt, the intention was a good 
one, but in the enervating heat of the Rangit Valley, such 
mortification of the flesh seemed both unpleasant and 
unnecessary. 

At Singla Bazar a dismal tale awaited us. According to 
Narsang, one of our sirdars, a large number of coolies had 
not yet arrived, and they could not possibly get to Chakung 
that day. We would have to wait a day for them to catch 
up. There was much that was unintelligible, and little 
that was useful in his declarations, poured out as they were 
in weird and wonderful English learnt during service with 
a Gurkha regiment in France. And what had happened 
to the cook ? Why was he not there waiting for us with 
lunch prepared ? “ The cook ? He is gone on somewhere,” 
and Narsang waved a hand with characteristic native 
vagueness. 

In my rucksack was a large lump of dry gingerbread. 
This was broken up and handed round. Suddenly, Wood 
Johnson arrived. “‘ Not get to Chakung?” Nonsense ! 
Of course, the porters would, all of them. Within five 
minutes the peaceful serenity of Singla Bazar was re- 
placed by a feverish activity. The lazier of the porters who 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 109 


had settled down for the day and the night at the village, 
found themselves, much to their surprise, on the road to 
Chakung. Our sheet anchor, Lobsang, was behind, bring- 
ing on the stragglers. The majority of the good porters, 
the Sherpas and Bhutias, had left the previous day, and 
were well en route to Chakung, it was only the Nepali 
“bazar wallahs’”? who were exhibiting such early 
slackness. 

Singla Bazar is a picturesque little place. Its primitive 
thatched houses and shops rest in the shadow of spreading 
trees, but, like most native villages, the spaces between the 
houses were plentifully bestrewn with garbage. Therefore, 
there were smells, and there were flies. We were glad to 
leave it and jog leisurely along the valley. 

Presently we came to a suspension bridge across the 
Ramman River, a tributary of the Rangit River. The 
former forms the frontier of Bengal and Sikkim, and there 
was a native frontier post at one end of the suspension 
bridge, with a corporal in charge. To him we showed the 
passes that had been given us in Darjeeling. Unfortunately, 
Dr. Richter and Eberl had left their passes in their ruck- 
sacks, which had been sent on ahead, whilst Wood John- 
son, whom we had left at Singla Bazar, had forgotten his 
altogether. The former two had to wait until their ruck- 
sacks were returned, but Wood Johnson, we knew, would 
get across without a pass whether he was given permission 
or not. It transpired later that when the pass had been 
demanded of him, he had looked the corporal up and 
down until that unfortunate man had apologised for 
daring to insult the sahib by asking for the pass, and had 
humbly escorted Wood Johnson across the frontier. 


110 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The suspension bridge had tied to it numbers of little 
prayer flags, or perhaps more literally, prayer rags. All 
bridges in this part of the world are decorated thus in order 
to propitiate the river gods. It is usual, also, to throw a coin 
or two into the river when crossing a bridge to help, 
presumably, towards the upkeep of the river gods. 

From the suspension bridge the path wound steeply 
uphill through dense jungle. The afternoon was close and 
boilingly hot, and a heavy slumberous silence was broken 
only by the whirring of insects. We turned a corner; 
a small spring of pure water was bubbling from a bank. 
By the side of the path in an orange garden a meal 
had been laid out on the grass, presided over by the grin- 
ning face of Tencheddar. Famished, we greeted it with 
a peon of praise and thanksgiving, forgetting in the 
ecstasy of the moment to revile Tencheddar for his idiocy 
in having come this absurd distance before stopping to 
prepare a meal. 

The orange garden is the property of the Maharajah of 
Sikkim. There are many such scattered about this fertile 
countryside, for orange-growing is the most important 
industry in Sikkim, and the revenue brought in from these 
scattered estates is surprisingly large. 

With appeased appetites we lay back at last contentedly. 
Already we felt ourselves to be far from civilisation. 
Dotted about the hillside below were primitive little 
houses, above rude terraces of rice, irrigated by roughly 
cut channels along which flowed water from the mountain 
streams and springs. The day was drawing to a close, and 
between the blue cloud shadows moving across the broad 
bosomed hills, the forests were daffodil gold in the declining 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM II! 


sun. Somehow I was reminded of an evening I once spent 
on Bowfell, in the English Lake District, one of those 
perfect evenings, still and peaceful, with soft colourful 
distances. Seated on a grey boulder I had watched just 
such a peaceful sunset and seen the hills imperceptibly 
annexed by the Kingdom of Night. But here everything 
was greater. In the Lake District, you may run down a hill 
into a valley and up another hill in an hour or so. In the 
foot-hills of the Himalayas, it is a day’s hard work. The 
country over which we were looking was vaster than any 
of us had imagined. It produced in us almost a feeling of 
impotence. We were not ants, or flies, but mere microcosms 
toiling over the age-worn wrinkles of the earth. 

Night was falling rapidly as we continued on our way. Now 
and again we passed porters. In the heat, they were making 
heavy weather of it, but a few days’ marching would soon 
sweat out the fatty accumulations of soft living, and knit 
together muscles and sinew in preparation for the hard 
work ahead. 

Presently the path rounded a shoulder and passed 
into the Ratho Valley, contouring along its southern side. 
The others were ahead, and I found myself alone. Night 
trod hard on the heels of day. Soon it was dark. Fireflies 
flitted out from the forest on either hand, like minute lamps 
in the hands of hurrying elves. Rain began to fall, each 
heavy drop drumming on the still leaves of the silent 
forest. The path divided, but my pony unhesitatingly took 
the left branch. A few minutes later I arrived at the dak- 
bungalow, just in time to escape a tropical deluge. 

The dak-bungalows of Sikkim are theoretically run by 
the Government of that State, but actually it is the British 


I12 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Government that is primarily responsible for their upkeep. 
Each bungalow is in charge of a native caretaker. All those 
at which we stayed were clean and comfortable. Their 
situation is admirable, and the sites of many of them 
were obviously chosen by someone with an eye for scenic 
beauty. The bungalow at Chakung stands on a wooded 
ridge separating the Ramman and Ratho Valleys close 
to the ruins of an ancient shrine, which was most likely 
formerly employed for the worship of some local 
deity. 

The supper that evening was a merry one. Wood 
Johnson arrived in the middle of it, and later Eberl and 
Dr. Richter. Just as we were thinking of turning in, the 
corporal of the police put in a belated appearance. 
Recovering from his surprise at the suspension bridge, he 
had followed Wood Johnson with a tenacity worthy of the 
“* Flying Squad.” As he had no wish to get the man into 
trouble, Wood Johnson gave him a note to take to the 
Commissioner at Darjeeling. With this in his pocket, plus 
substantial baksheesh, the corporal returned to his post a 
happy man. 

Heavy rain fell all night, and was succeeded by a dull 
grey morning and low sluggish mists. Already some of the 
Nepali porters had come to the conclusion that loafing in 
Darjeeling was preferable to work, and it was only with 
difficulty that we were able to get some of the more miser- 
able specimens to start at all. 

Our next stage was to Rinchenpung. From Chakung the 
route descended into the Ratho Valley, and crossing 4 
stream climbed over a low ridge bounding the northern 
side of the valley. The path was bog-like in places, and the 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 113 


morning was as depressingly dismal and damp as an 
August day in the Highlands. 

We had not gone far before we saw our first leech. Soon 
the path was swarming with them. Apparently they had 
their own telegraph system, and leeches all along the route 
had been warned of our coming. These pests are the most 
unpleasant feature of journeying through the tropical 
valleys of Sikkim. Ungorged they are about the thickness of 
a match, and a little shorter. Gorged, they attain the dimen- 
sions of a large slug. They are blind, and attack by scent 
alone, but their nasal acuteness more than compensates for 
their blindness. Stop for but a few moments, and they 
approach from all directions. 

Their method of progress is peculiar and comical. 
Raising their heads in the air, they bend forward and 
attach themselves, apparently by the mouth, to the ground 
in front. The tail is then brought up against the head with 
the body arched between and the head makes another 
forward lunge. Had it not been annoying, it would have 
been amusing to see these eager little blood-suckers standing 
with their heads upright, like tiny serpents, waiting to affix 
themselves to their prey. 

The powers of insinuation and penetration of a leech are 
great. They can insinuate themselves into an eyehole of a 
boot with the greatest of ease, whilst their drill-lke head is 
capable of boring through at least one layer of a puttee. 
Personally, I found that the Kashmiri puttees given to me 
by General Bruce afforded excellent protection, and I was 
not once bitten on either foot. But the persevering little 
devils are not easily baulked of their prey. I was just 


beginning to congratulate myself on my immunity, when 
Hx 


114 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


I discovered two large ones firmly attached to my scalp! 
It is a mistake to pick a leech off once it has become 
attached to the skin, as its head will be left in the wound, 
and this may lead to blood poisoning, or at least a nasty 
festering sore. The usual way of forcing them to release 
their hold is by dipping a bag of salt in water, and letting 
the brine drip on to the leech, which soon drops off. 
Another excellent method is to apply a burning cigarette. 

If, by virtue of boots and puttees, we were comparatively 
immune, it was a different matter for the porters and 
ponies. The majority of the porters preferred walking in 
their bare feet, and the leeches made the most of them. 
The ponies’ legs streamed with blood, and it was necessary 
to keep a sharp look-out to see that the leeches did not 
crawl into their nostrils and ears. In the absence of human 
beings and beasts, how do leeches manage to exist ? 

From the ridge north of the Ratho Valley, we descended 
into the Rishi Valley. Both these valleys are side valleys of 
the main Rangit Valley, and are comparatively small and 
glen-like. A primitive little bridge of logs spans the Rishi 
River, and large boulders near by afforded a luncheon site 
free from leeches, for a leech hates a dry surface, and only 
lives in swampy ground, or comes out after rain. 

It was a delightful spot, almost like a valley in South 
Devon. The water of the torrent was sweet and clear, and 
despite a formal protest on the part of Dr. Richter, we did 
not hesitate to drink it. It is only from these smaller 
streams that pass through villages that there is danger of 
typhoid or dysentery. 

If there had been any doubts as to how Frau Dyhren- 
furth would stand the strain of these marches through 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM I15 


Sikkim, they were soon set at rest, for the ‘‘ Memsahib,” 
as she was soon respectfully and affectionately known by 
all the members of the expedition, not only insisted on 
taking a man’s share of the work, but was usually among 
the first to finish the day’s march. 

From the Rishi Valley, the path rose steeply to the ridge 
on which stands the Rinchenpung dak-bungalow. This is 
one of the prettiest bungalows in Sikkim, and from its well 
kept lawn and creeper-clad veranda, there is an enchanting 
view up the Rangit Valley towards the snows. Once again, 
the day ended in rainstorms of monsoonish intensity. 

There were two other visitors at the bungalow. They 
told us that they were on a world tour, and had been 
“ taking the Himalayas ”’ as part of their Indian itinerary. 
The weather, they said, had been continuously bad, and 
they were now returning to Darjeeling without having had 
one satisfactory view of Kangchenjunga. 

Wood Johnson and I preferred the fresh air of the 
veranda to the crowded little rooms of the bungalow. I 
woke at dawn next morning. The rain had ceased. From 
the still woodlands came the song of the coppersmith bird, 
a musical, yet monotonous note, like someone beating a 
sheet of copper with a metal hammer. As I raised myself 
in my sleeping bag, I saw between a gap in the nearer 
mists the crest of a great cloud high up in the sky aglow 
with the first pale light of day. But was it a cloud ? It was 
too steadfast, too immovable. I rubbed the dimming 
sleepiness from my eyes. It was no cloud, but a snowy 
mountain. Even as I watched, the dawn came up fiercely, 
ruddily, a titanic conflagration sweeping the upper regions 
of the sky. The nearer mists dissolved ; other peaks became 


116 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


visible, their summits glowing like the white tents of a 
besieging army reflecting the glare from some burning 
city. 

I roused our tourist friends. Now, at last, they had seen 
the snows. I wonder whether they still remember that 
glimpse of them ? 

The morning was one of sparkle and freshness as we set 
out for Pemayangtse. Improving weather raised the 
spirits of the porters, and for once in their lives even the 
Nepalis seemed cheerful and willing. 

T left well in advance of the party to try to take some 
photographs before the usual morning clouds concealed 
the peaks. I did not go unrewarded. For a little distance 
the path descended through woods, but in one place a 
landslip had swept out a clearance. Framed between the 
trees, and thirty miles away, I saw Kabru and Kangchen- 
junga. It was a view so overwhelming in its magnificence 
as would cause the most ardent photographer to despair 
of reproducing one tithe of its grandeur. The morning 
clouds gathering about the crests of intervening hills, or, 
rising from the valleys, served but to increase the visual 
impression of height and depth. How is a photographer to 
transfer such an impression to a film ? Only by comparison 
can he hope to convey to the unsophisticated any sugges- 
tion of the real scale, and what method of comparison 18 
there ? The forests covering the lower hills are but a dark 
green cloak, over which the eye passes at a casual glance. 
The river in the valley beneath was a mere thread. The 
greatest works of man, his towns, his cathedrals, and his 
factories, would be lost in such a landscape. Place St. 
Paul’s on the crest of one of the intervening hills ; to the 





KABRU AND KANGCHENJUNGA FROM RINCHENPUNG 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 117 


eye it would appear as a mere dot ; on a photographic 
film it would be invisible. Only physically can one learn to 
appreciate the scale of the Himalayan foot-hills, and that 
by toiling over them. 

Mentally, a man is lost in this country. Like an astrono- 
mer he can estimate distance only in figures. His brain is 
too small, too tied to the little houses, towns, villages, and 
hedgerows among which he is accustomed to live, to grasp 
the real magnitude of these immense landscapes. 

As I came out of the forest on to the open hillside, the 
snows had all but vanished behind growing masses of 
cumuli. Only the summit of the nearest snow peak, 
Narsingh, was visible, and I had barely time to take a 
photograph before it, too, vanished. 

The path passed along a ridge, decorated by a row of 
chortens (prayer shrines), at which it is customary to pray 
and give thanks to the gods, and then plunged in steep 
zig-zags down a precipitous hillside. 

At the junction of the Kalet and Rangit Valleys we 
found ourselves once more in tropical heat. The Rangit 
Valley here becomes gorge-like, yet so fertile is the soil, 
trees and other vegetation somehow manage to eke out a 
precarious existence on ledges and crannies of precipitous 
cliffs and crags. 

Some women from a neighbouring hamlet were washing 
clothes in the river. Their method was to dip the clothes 
in the water, then, holding them up, beat them violently 
with a piece of flat wood. This must be the method em- 
ployed by my local laundry when washing my dress shirts. 

Thanks to the efficiency of Mr. Kydd, we were overtaken 
here by a runner, and spent a pleasant half-hour in the 


118 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


shade reading letters from home, and the latest murder 
sensations and French railway accidents in newspapers. 

Some members of the party had seen a large snake, the 
markings of which they described to Wood Johnson. He 
said it was probably a king cobra. If so, they were lucky 
not to be attacked, for the king cobra is one of the few 
snakes that attack human beings without provocation. 
It is said that it can overtake a running man. 

We lunched near a small hamlet, at which Duvanel 
and his ciné camera created considerable excitement, and 
afterwards trudged up to Pemayangtse. It was scorchingly 
hot, but the gradually increasing coolness as we gained 
height was well worth the effort. 

The dak-bungalow at Pemayangtse is admirably situ- 
ated on a grassy sparsely wooded ridge, and commands 
superb views to the north and south. We had barely arrived 
when we were greeted by an imposing little procession of 
Lamas from the neighbouring monastery. They were bare- 
footed, and clad in long gowns ofa dingy red colour, on top of 
which was the “ patched robe,” the emblem of poverty. 
From the girdle encircling their waist were suspended 
various sacred instruments and relics, such as pencil 
holders, knives, and purses. Their heads were close cropped 
like black flue brushes, but the tropical sun seemed to 
have little effect on them. Most of them were young, with 
somewhat vacuous faces, dull, unintelligent eyes, and loose 
lipped smiles. There was, however, one old monk of 
dignified carriage, who was most likely the Proctor of the 
monastery, for his face bore the stamp of character and 
intelligence. Standing before the bungalow, they com- 
menced a low, monotonous intoning, possibly praying for 





THE HEAD LAMA OF PEMAYANGTSE MONASTERY CHATS WITH 
WOOD JOHNSON 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 119g 


our souls, while the old man came forward and burst 
forth into a torrent of Nepali and Thibetan. After con- 
siderable difficulty, we were at last able to get his meaning. 
Yes, they were glad to greet us, but we had only come in the 
nick of time. Had we a Doctor Sahib? Then would he 
cure them of this terrible thing that was afflicting the 
monastery ? ‘‘ What was the terrible thing?” we en- 
quired. His answer was simple and expressive, “‘ Worms ! ”’ 
And as for himself, for his sins, he was possessed of a terrible 
ear-ache. 

A little later, a number of Holy Men might have been 
seen imbibing large quantities of castor oil and santonin 
with every appearance of gusto and enjoyment, whilst the 
old monk lay on the ground in order to have oil poured 
into his bad ear. Gratitude in the form of eggs and skinny 
chickens arrived later, and it was arranged that they should 
give us a devil dance the following morning. 

Devil dances are a religious observation. They are 
usually given in honour or propitiation of some deity. In 
this particular instance, the deity was the God of Kang- 
chenjunga. 

That evening we made merry with the gramophone. 
This was always a never ending source of amusement to 
the porters. Scarcely had the first record been put on, when 
the doorway of the dining room was filled with dirty faces 
grinning appreciatively. The classical masters were little 
appreciated, but Messrs. Layton and Johnstone, and the 
bass voiced vocalist in ‘“‘ Give Yourself a Pat on the Back,” 
never failed to produce roars of merriment. 

Before turning in, we sat on the veranda, arguing as to 
whether something white far up among the stars, lit by 


120 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the rising moon, was a mountain top or a cloud. Most 
argued cloud, but when hours later I woke in the middle 
of the night, and looked out, the ‘‘ cloud ”’ was still there, 
watched over by trembling stars. 

We rose early next morning, and passed up the roughly 
paved road leading to the monastery. The approach to 
the monastery was lined with high poles decorated with 
prayer flags, consisting of long, multi-coloured strips, 
inscribed with prayers, nailed longitudinally to the poles. 
These prayer flags are common all over Thibet, Sikkim, 
and Nepal, and are supposed to have been originated by 
Asoka, the Constantine of Buddhism, who ordered pillars 
to be erected, inscribed with prayers and extracts from 
Buddhistic laws. Planted in the ground more than twenty 
centuries ago (B.c. 253-251) there are six set up by him in 
India still standing. Sometimes prayer flags display the 
dragon-headed horse, one of the great mythical animals 
of China. 

The Pemayangtse Monastery stands on a wooded ridge 
about 7,000 feet above sea level. So fierce are the storms 
that sweep across the Himalayas, that its wooden roof 
was once carried away. It is now secured by iron wires 
to the ground. It is a tall building of stone and wood, 
gaudily painted in red and yellow, the two holy colours 
of Thibet. 

The Lamas were waiting to receive us grouped round 
the Head Lama, a charming old gentleman who greeted 
us with a warm smile of welcome. While not engaged in 
conversing with Wood Johnson, our transport officer, 
who spoke Nepali, he was ceaselessly engaged in telling 
his rosary of yellow beads, keeping up a low, monotonous 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM I2!I 


mumble at the same time, which is appropriately called 
‘‘ purring like a cat.” 

General Bruce relates that on one occasion when 
visiting the Pemayangtse Monastery he was for some 
reason put under a spell by the Head Lama. The spell 
took the form of a severe stomach-ache which General 
Bruce was told would last until mid-day. It did, in spite 
of efforts made to cure it, but punctually at mid-day it 
disappeared as “‘ miraculously ” as it came. 

Telling beads is one convenient method of praying, but 
perhaps the best of all methods, as it gets through the 
greatest number of prayers in the shortest possible time, is 
the prayer wheel. This consists of a copper or brass cylinder, 
which is made to revolve on a wooden handle. Inside the 
cylinder is a roll of paper or parchment on which are 
written as many prayers as can be squeezed in. As every 
revolution is equivalent to reciting all the prayers inside, 
it is possible, by assiduously revolving this apparatus, to 
get through some millions of prayers a day. 

The Head Lama told us that he would be pleased to 
offer up a prayer to the God of Kangchenjunga for the 
safety of the expedition, and also volunteered the informa- 
tion that the weather would remain fine. This was an 
excellent idea, as we knew it would put great heart into 
our porters. If he possessed such powers over General 
Bruce’s internal economy, the ordering of meteorological 
conditions should present little difficulty. 

Before the monastery was a large grass-covered quad- 
rangle, enclosed by pavilions and outhouses on three sides, 
whilst a flight of steps leading up to the imposing and 
fantastically painted portico of the monastery, overhung 


122 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


with tapestries, formed the fourth. Arranged in a line 
before the monastery was the band. The instruments 
consisted of two long metal-chased and ornamented horns, 
from twelve to fifteen feet in length, smaller horns, flutes, 
drums, and cymbals. Some of the bandsmen wore cowls, 
which gave to them a curiously Ku Klux Klannish ap- 
pearance, and others a curved, cockatoo-like crest to 
their hats. 

Shortly after our arrival, the band crashed forth into 
what was presumably a welcome. My first impression was 
of a hideous medley of sound, which, judged by European 
standards, was completely tuneless and unintelligible. Yet, 
as my ears became accustomed to the din, I became aware 
of a perceptible rhythm. The music began to take shape 
and form in my mind. Gradually, I felt myself borne 
away, as it were, mentally, from the Twentieth Century, 
conveyed on the wings of this strange music into the very 
heart of this mystic mountain land, where time and space 
are limitless, and man is re-incarnated through eternity. 
The bass note of the great horns, surely the deepest note 
of any known musical instrument, seemed to boom of the 
might of the gods, the thunder of their avalanches, the 
roar of their torrents, the solemn roll of the thunderstorms 
that beat about the buttresses of their mid-aerial thrones. 

The music dropped into a dirge-like monotone, then 
rose suddenly into a passionate crescendo. Two hideously 
masked figures appeared in the portico of the monastery. 
Leaping down the steps they dashed into the quadrangle, 
spinning round and round with wide-spread arms and 
swirling silken robes. 


The band had previously taken up a position in the 


AAALSVNOW ASLONVAVWNGd FHL JO AGNVd AHL 








=e 





Ashe 





THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 123 


pavilion. Seated in front was the Head Lama amid a 
horde of acolytes. In one hand he held a bell which he 
occasionally rang vigorously as a signal for changes of 
music, or to call in more devil dancers. 

The duty of these first two devils was apparently only 
to announce the more important devil participants in the 
dance. Suddenly the band, which had stopped for a rest, 
blared forth again, and four figures slowly descended the 
steps, and commenced to dance. 

They wore long silken robes, beautifully embroidered, 
and on their heads the most fantastic masks we had ever 
seen. Intended primarily to represent animals, fowls, yaks, 
eagles, goats, horses, and sheep, they were yet ghastly 
mockeries of nature—the phantasmagoria of a madman’s 
imagination. At first the music was dirge-like, and the 
dancers’ movements correspondingly slow. It quickened 
gradually. Other dancers joined in. Lines, circles, and 
squares were formed as in folk dancing. Movements became 
more rapid, arms were flung wide with gestures of abandon, 
legs kicked high in time with the banging of the drums, 
and the boom of the great horns. They pirouetted round 
and round with incredible speed, their heavy garments 
flying upwards and outwards like human catherine wheels. 
The music mounted to a terrific pitch of frenzy. Suddenly, 
above the din, came the sharp ringing of the Head Lama’s 
bell. The music dropped, the dancers retired after a final 
twirl and obeisance, and sprang quickly up the steps into 
the monastery. 

Duvanel was naturally anxious to secure “ shots ”’ of the 
dancing, but at first it was plain that his machinations were 
regarded as savouring of black magic. However, directly he 


124 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


commenced to turn the handle of his camera the Lamas 
appeared considerably relieved. Obviously this compli- 
cated machine was nothing but a new and improved form 
of prayer wheel. 

Lastly, there appeared several monsters of ferocious 
aspect, accompanied by two small boys dressed to represent 
demons. Possibly, they were intended to represent the 
devils which worry beasts in the form of insect pests and 
leeches, for armed with long yak-hair whisks, they pro- 
ceeded to goad the monsters into fury until they reared, 
stamped, and charged about the quadrangle, whilst once 
again the band obliged with a crashing crescendo of sound. 

As though in answer to this demonstration in its honour, 
the cloudy draperies of morning were drawn aside, dis- 
closing Kangchenjunga. One silver banner of cloud 
trailed from its crest. The attendant fairies of the great God 
were “ baking their bread.” 

From Pemayangtse to Tingling was an easy march, but 
a hot one. Once again, we descended into and across the 
upper Rangit Valley. On the descent we passed a well- 
built, modern looking temple. It was here that the Dalai 
Lama stayed during a tour of Sikkim. As, in view of his 
extreme holiness, it was thought necessary to erect a 
temple at every place at which he spent a night such a tour 
must be something of a drain on the purses of the local 
taxpayers. Several members stopped to bathe in the 
Rangit River. The current of these mountain torrents 1s 
dangerously strong, and Dr. Richter was nearly carried 
away. Had he been so, he would certainly have been 
drowned. 

We forgathered for lunch in a cool, shady spot by 4 





DEVIL-DANCERS OF PEMAYANGTSE MONASTERY 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 125 


small brook, afterwards dozing and resting during the heat 
of the day. But cool, shady spots in Sikkim are only too 
liable to harbour leeches, and it was not long before 
Schneider had a large one affixed to his bare arm. 

At Tingling we camped for the first time. It was a 
charming site for a camp. Close at hand was the little 
village of Tingling, which stands on one of the few flat 
bits in Sikkim, and we pitched our tents at the edge of a 
wheatfield. 

Prior to the expedition, Professor Dyhrenfurth had had 
tents made for each member. Actually, they were two- 
men tents, so that there was plenty of room for one man. 
The dweller in civilisation may argue that for each man 
to have his own tent is unnecessary and unsociable. 
Travellers and explorers, however, know the psychological 
value of privacy. During the months of monotony and 
hardship of a Polar expedition—and the same thing applies 
in a lesser degree to Himalayan expeditions—the best 
friends may become sick of the sight of each other, and 
little habits of speech and manner that count for nothing 
in civilisation may jar intolerably. Only by being able to 
escape for a while is a man able to tolerate things which 
normally he would not give a care to. 

Nemu, my servant, was an expert in the art of camping. 
He was usually among the first to arrive at the end of a 
day’s march, and had an unerring eye as to the best place 
to pitch a tent. This, combined with a never failing ca- 
pacity for looking after his master’s interests, made him an 
invaluable servant. He was an old soldier, and had the 
North-west Frontier Medal, and like most old soldiers, he 
was an adept in the gentle art of scrounging. Not that I 


126 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


ever missed so much as a cigarette, but in the event of my 
breaking or losing anything, it was sure to be replaced in 
some mysterious way. Both on the march and on the 
mountains Nemu proved a tower of strength, and I can see 
now his broad good-natured face, with its philosophical 
eyes, and occasional broad grin, that flashed out always 
when least expected. 

At Tingling an unpleasant incident occurred. One of the 
coolies ran amok with a kukri, and before anyone could 
stop him, had run another porter—one of our best men— 
through the chest. The wound was a serious one below 
the heart, and had it not been for the skilful treatment of 
Dr. Richter, the injured man would probably have lost 
his life. | 

His assailant was brought along to the Mess Tent, 
under the charge of Tikeram Thapa, to be interrogated by 
Wood Johnson. While doing so, he managed to pick up a 
large stone, and made as though to try and brain me as I 
was standing back to him outside the Mess Tent, but was 
fortunately promptly collared by Tikeram. The man was 
obviously demented, and we were forced to tie him up, 
hand him over to the Head Man of Tingling, and send a 
runner to the police at Gangtok. 

Apart from this unpleasant incident, Tingling will 
always remain in my mind as one of our most charming 
camping sites. There is no view of the snows from it, but 
perhaps that is as well, for the gentle verdure-clad hills 
around are reminiscent of Glen Affric, and any intrusion 
on such a scene by the more restless forms of nature would 
tend to detract from the peaceful beauty of the landscape. 

Late that evening, several of us went to the Head Man’s 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 127 


house to see after our injured porter who had been lodged 
there. Climbing a rickety, wooden ladder, we entered a low- 
roofed room, like the upper story of a Swiss cowherd’s 
chalet. In the middle was an open stone fireplace, in 
which crackled a log fire, the flames of which lit the 
wrinkled face of the Head Man and his friends, as they 
squatted round. The atmosphere was close and heavy, 
even the pungent smoke not altogether successfully 
combating the odour of bodies unwashed since birth. The 
injured man had been wrapped in rugs, and placed on a 
bed of straw. He appeared comfortable. We ordered hot 
milk to be given to him at intervals throughout the night. 
Such is the toughness of these people, that despite the 
severe injury, and the obvious risk of subsequent infection 
and blood poisoning, we heard later that he was on his feet 
again in less than a fortnight. 

It was good to be in a tent again beneath the stars, 
and I lay long in my sleeping bag that night looking 
between the flaps at the sentinel trees on a neighbouring 
ridge dimly outlined against the sky. 

From Tingling to Yoksam was a longer march than that 
of the previous day, although the horizontal distance was 
no greater. A sharp ascent brought us to the crest of a 
wooded ridge north of Tingling. As we breasted the last 
rise, we were surprised to be met by a sudden blare from a 
band. The monks of the neighbouring Kachéperi Monas- 
tery had come to greet us, and had erected two little 
shelters of gay chintz-like material, for all the world like 
little beach bathing tents, in which fruit and tea were 
pressed upon us. The latter appeared to be made from 
aromatic herbs, and was rich, thick, and buttery. The day 


128 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


was very hot, and we were thirsty; I, for one, drank 
several cups of the sickly stuff, and for the remainder of the 
day wished I had not. The monastery band, complete with 
long poles to which were fastened various prayer flags and 
pennants, lined along the path outside the tent and did 
honour to us in a crashing crescendo of sound. 

From the ridge we glimpsed the summits of Kangchen- 
junga and Kabru. A silver lock of cloud was trailing from 
Kangchenjunga. Standing there in the still morning, 
perspiring gently under a fierce sun, it was difficult to 
realise that had we been up there we might have been 
fighting for our lives in death dealing cold and a tourmente 
of wind-flung snow. 

From the ridge we had to descend once more into the 
Rangit Valley. The valley here begins to narrow, and bold 
crags jut out through a tangle of vegetation on its steepen- 
ing sides. 

The trudge up to Yoksam was a hot one but we were 
fanned by a fresh southerly breeze. As we progressed, we 
were puzzled to hear a series of pistol-like reports, and an 
intermittent crackling, like rifle fire. Turning a corner, we 
saw that the jungle was ablaze. Dull red flames were 
leaping high into the air, amid a pall of black smoke. 
Hastened by the breeze, the fire was sweeping with great 
velocity along the hillside. One moment some majestic tree 
would stand defiantly in its path, the next it would dis- 
appear in a smother of flame and smoke, reappearing as a 
gaunt, blackened corpse. Owing to the clearings made by 
the natives of Yoksam, the scope of the fire was limited, but 
its fierceness and the speed with which it swept the hillside 
reminded me of boyhood tales of prairies and pampas. 


ONITONIL LV : dNVO LSdld AHL 





THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 129 


Like Tingling, Yoksam is situated on a shelf clothed in 
pasture land, rice and wheat-fields. We pitched our camp 
on the terraces of a rice-field. Soon after we arrived we 
received word that the second party, under the charge of 
Hannah and Wieland, was two marches behind and that 
the convoy of mules under Colonel Tobin had left Dar- 
jeeling. 

Yoksam is the last village. Thenceforward our way must 
lie through wilder country, and along rougher tracks 
towards Dzongri and the Kang La. Soon we would be at 
grips with things. Already the veneer of civilisation had lost 
its polish, despite the restraining and elevating influence 
of the ‘‘ Memsahib.”” Table manners were already at a 
discount. Beards were growing steadily, and it was a matter 
of speculation as to who would win the race for length and 
bushiness. At present the honours were fairly evenly distri- 
buted between Professor Dyhrenfurth, Dr. Richter, and 
Duvanel. My own particular effort promised to develop 
into what I believe is technically known as a “ King 
Beaver,” or a beard bright red in colour. 

The following morning, April 12, saw us strolling across 
the open pastures of Yoksam, or between fields of ripening 
grain. Then the path degenerated into a narrow, rough 
track and the forest enclosed us once again. 

The paths in this part of the world are a fair indication 
of the character of those who make them. The native, of 
course, lives only in the present ; the future holds no 
interest for him. Therefore, he goes about everything in the 
easiest possible way, the thought that by a little extra 
trouble he might save himself work in the future never 


occurring to him. It would not have been difficult to have 
Ix 


1go THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


made the path north of Yoksam contour the eastern side of 
the Rangit Valley. It would never have occurred to a 
Swiss Verschénerungs Verein to have done otherwise. 
But generations of native yak-herds and travellers over the 
Kang La have thought fit always to follow the line of least 
resistance, irrespective of time and future convenience. 
Thus, the path was continually climbing up, or dropping 
down to avoid the direct traverse of a steep piece of hillside. 
It was an extremely irritating path to the ordered and 
practical mind of a European. 

But passing through this magnificent primeval forest 
cloaking the Upper Rangit Valley one can forgive the path 
its vagaries. None of us had ever seen an Amazonian 
forest, but it can scarcely be finer than the forests that line 
the trench-like valleys of the Himalayas. Yet, to one who 
finds pleasure in tramping the windy moors, fells, and bens 
of the North Country, there is something indescribably 
depressing about such a forest. The dense walls of vegeta- 
tion on either side of the narrow straggling track and the 
interlacing canopy of vegetation far above the head shut 
out the health-giving sunlight and breezes. An awed silence 
seems somehow to hold in its arms a breathless suspense. 
There exists undefined menace, suggested perhaps by the 
dank odours of rotting vegetation. I experienced a feeling 
of being imprisoned in a vault, and longed to escape into 
more open places, to breathe air untainted by the miasmal 
odours of decay. Even the creepers that writhe about the 
trunks of the trees, or hang snakelike from the branches, 
appear ready to grip the traveller, and drag him to some 
horrible death in the gloomy recesses of the forest. There 
is little of good, and much of evil about such a place, and 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM I3I 


as Wood Johnson said, its impenetrable depths might hide 
anything, even the dreaded Snow Men. 

To the botanist, however, there is much of interest and 
beauty in the flora of these forests. Quoting from Sir Joseph 
Hooker : ‘‘ The vegetation consisted of oak, maple, birch, 
laurel, rhododendron, white Daphne, Jessamine, Arum, 
Begonias, Cyrtandacez, pepper, fig, Menispermum, wild 
cinnamon, Scitaminee, several epiphytic orchids, vines, 
and ferns in great abundance.” 

As the path progressed it became worse. Here and there 
it was built up of bamboos and logs against the sides of 
precipitous crags. Mr. Freshfield found it “‘ a great trial of 
temper.” So, too, did we, or perhaps I should say, the 
porters. For loads such as ski and tent poles are a consider- 
able nuisance in such a place. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth was anxious to make a double 
march, and reach Dzongri in two days instead of three 
from Yoksam. But these three stages had not been arranged 
without reason, and Wood Johnson, who had traversed this 
same route the previous year, pointed out the inadvisa- 
bility of a double march under such difficult conditions for 
transport. We accordingly camped in the usual camping 
place at the end of the first day’s march, where there is a 
flat shelf and the forest is not too dense to allow of tents 
being pitched. This camping place harboured an un- 
pleasant form of tick, a crablike insect about the size of a 
little finger nail, the bite of which was both painful and 
poisonous. 

The scene at night was a curious one. Every flat place 
on the hillside above the camp was occupied by the 
porters. Their fires twinkled through the gloom like the 


132 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


fires of goblins. Like us, they were depressed by the forests, 
but their depression found adequate expression in the 
simple belief that devils and other unpleasant characters 
dwelt therein. That is, perhaps, the chief difference between 
the workings of the native mind and the European mind. 
Scenery may depress or exhilarate the European mind in 
exactly the same way as it does the native mind, but the 
European mind is educated sufficiently to be able to 
analyse consciously, or subconsciously, the reason for its 
reactions. The European tells himself that his feeling of 
depression is due to the gloom, the smell, or the appear- 
ance of what he sees, but the native mind is too clogged 
with superstition to be able to reason out its reactions. It 
must look for a simpler and more direct explanation, and 
such an explanation usually takes the form of belief in 
devils, gods, or other figments of the imagination. These he 
is able to propitiate and thus set his fears at rest. Thus, 
where the European is able to conquer his feelings by the 
exercise of will power, and so remain mentally superior to 
his environment, the native is able to arrive at exactly the 
same result by completely different means. Thus, that 
evening it was thought necessary to propitiate the devils 
of the jungle, but this having been accomplished, our 
porters settled down for the night perfectly happily, with 
no fears that anything untowards was likely to occur. 
Mists hung low in the great ravine up which we were 
passing as we set off the following morning. The path 
became gradually worse and worse. In some places it was 
blocked by fallen tree trunks. Sometimes it was necessary 
to jump from one boulder to another across turbulent 
torrents. For a considerable distance the path vanished 





THE RANGIT VALLEY 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 133 


altogether beneath the débris of a landslip of considerable 
size. Here shattered tree trunks were piled in an inextric- 
able confusion, and dense undergrowth that had sprung up 
between made progress fatiguing and difficult. 

The way had to be cleared with kukris, and it was 
interesting to watch how quickly and neatly these were 
wielded by expert hands. Many who are reading this will 
have seen the batting of Frank Woolley, the great Kent 
cricketer. Seemingly little force is put into the stroke, yet 
the ball is at the boundary before the spectators have 
realised what has happened. The secret is hitting the ball 
exactly in the driving centre of the bat, combined with 
perfect timing of the stroke. The same methods apply to 
cutting with a kukri, and it was interesting to watch the 
dexterity with which heavy branches were lopped cleanly 
off, and a way cleared through the undergrowth. 

It was during this march that I began to feel ill. The 
forest had repaid my dislike for it by presenting me with a 
severe chill. Of course, it was my own fault—a chill always 
is the fault of its victim in the tropics. I did not have to 
cast back far in my mind to remember how the previous 
evening I had neglected to change damp clothes until I 
had been actually shivering. The tropics allow no latitude 
for foolishness, and to look after one’s physical well-being 
with scrupulous care is the first essential of Himalayan 
travelling. 

We crossed the eastern branch of the Rangit River, 
where it divides south of Dzongri. It was a wild spot. 
Mountain and cloud seemed to roof us in; the air was 
damp and chill. Far above we could just discern streaks of 
snow projecting like white fangs through the lowering 


134 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


mists. The glacier-born river roared sullenly over its rocky 
bed ; cold spray beat upwards from its grey waters. Even 
more than in the forest did we feel enclosed and shut in. 
As Eber! said, it might have been the end of the world. 

Into the forest again, and up the hillside, where the feet 
sank into leaves rotting into leaf mould, or crushed into 
blackened débris, and decayed branches. A storm was 
threatening as we camped on a slope under dismal trees. 
No doubt my recollections are prejudiced, for my voice 
had completely disappeared, and I crawled into my sleep- 
ing bag ill and feverish, but this camping site remains in 
my memory as the most depressing one at which it had been 
my ill fortune to spend a night. Fortunately, Dr. Richter 
gave me some excellent medicine and throat spray which 
considerably relieved me, but sleep was impossible. The 
weather broke that night in a thunderstorm accompanied 
by torrential rain. Though lying ill in a sleeping bag, with 
the rain from a leaky patch in the tent oozing through, 
there was an element of magnificence in listening to this 
warring of the elements on the very edge of the Himalayas. 
The blue glares of lightning were answered by majestic 
crashes of thunder that seemed to be precipitated from 
hill to hill and peak to peak in volleys and waves of sound 
like music in the nave of some immense cathedral. The 
very echoes were indicative of vastness. In a flat country 
the thunder seems to dominate, but in the Himalayas, it 
is but the mouth-organ of the giants. 

The storm died of its own fury, and morning dawned 
clear and cold. The forests above were dusted with new- 
fallen snow which extended down to as low as 8,000 feet. 
Such weather boded ill for the crossing of the Kang La. 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 135 


My lungs had been touched by the chill, and breathing 
was painful and difficult when walking uphill. Had it not 
been for the encouragement of Wood Johnson, who stayed 
with me during this trying time, I do not think I could 
have struggled up the 5,000 feet to Dzongri. 

As we ascended, oaks and chestnuts gradually gave place 
to firs. The dense tropical tree roof under which we had 
been marching for the past two days thinned. Shafts of 
sunlight illuminated a ground covered no longer in the 
rotting débris of tropical vegetation, but in fir cones and 
needles. The fresher and purer air from the snows brought 
with it a fragrance of sun-warmed resin. Beneath the firs 
were clumps of giant rhododendrons already budding, 
and as we got higher, these thickened, and the path twisted 
tortuously between their snaky, mangrove-like stems. The 
sun melted the snow on the fir branches above, sending it 
down in little showers of water drops, that filled the forest 
with patterings and murmurings. 

Wood Johnson and I rested in a hillside glade, but before 
we had sat down for more than a minute we saw dozens of 
malignant leeches making for us with a stern resolution. 
At this height, above 8,000 feet, we had expected to be rid 
of the pests, but they seemed to thrive in spite of the cold. 
Actually, they were the last we saw until returning to 
Darjeeling. 

The snow-drifts became more frequent. At length the 
path was completely snow covered, in places to a depth 
of two or three feet. Only a small portion of this snow had 
fallen in the night, and what we were encountering was 
obviously the lees of winter snow. To find such deep snow 
below 10,000 feet was disquieting, and doubts as to getting 


136 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


barefooted porters over the Kang La returned with re- 
doubled force. 

The rhododendron belt seemed interminable, but at 
length we emerged from it on to an open hillside clad only 
in dwarf rhododendrons, which are but two or three feet 
high, as compared to giant rhododendrons which attain 
a height of fifteen to twenty feet. The scene was more 
Alpine than Himalayan in character. The gentle snowy 
summits of the Singalila Ridge to the west put me in mind 
of the summits around Kitzbuhel in Tyrol. Normally, at 
this time of the year these slopes should have been mostly 
grass covered, but now, so large was the amount of snow 
on them, they suggested ski-ing rather than walking. 

The trudge, or perhaps it would be more correct to say 
stagger in my case, up to Dzongri remains in my mind as 
the most severe physical effort I have ever been called upon 
to do. As we breasted the last slope, on the summit of 
which flutter a few forlorn prayer flags, we were met by a 
biting wind from the north, bringing with it a hurrying 
swarm of snow-flakes. 

The sky was greying as we walked over the bleak upland 
pastures on which stand the huts of Dzongri. The few 
remaining blue pools of sky were engulfed in the advanc- 
ing tide of a blizzard. Wood Johnson went on ahead to 
look after the porters. On arriving at the camp he at 
once ordered a Thermos flask full of hot tea to be sent 
back. Narsang also carried my rucksack. Thus, I was able 
to reach Dzongri without having to be carried. 

The two primitive stone huts of Dzongri which afford 
shelter to the yak-herds later in the summer, stand on a 
rolling upland, the crest of which separates the Praig Chu 





AND YOKSAM 


BETWEEN TINGLING 


THROUGH TROPICAL SIKKIM 137 


and Rathong Valleys. Though Dzongri would appear to be 
a prey to every wind that blows, it is the obvious climbing 
centre for this part of the Kangchenjunga Range, and its 
comparative easiness of access from Darjeeling demands 
that a proper shelter hut, run on the same lines as a Swiss 
Alpine Club hut, should be built. There are a number of 
fine peaks, for the ascent of which Dzongri would make an 
excellent starting point : Kabru, 24,002 feet, Little Kabru, 
22,000 feet, Simvu, 22,360 feet, Pandim, 22,010 feet, and 
the rugged range to the south of it. All these peaks would 
appear to be possible to a strong mountaineering party. 
Dzongri itself stands at 13,200 feet, and immediately 
to the north of it is 15,480 feet Kabur, the culminating 
point of the Dzongri Ridge. The great gneissic boulders 
that are strewn about the slopes hereabouts form an 
interesting geological problem. How came they to be 
there ? Sir Joseph Hooker’s theory that ice once covered 
the whole spur, and in moving downwards transported 
these boulders from the upper crags to other parts of the 
spur is most likely the correct explanation. At all events, it 
is curious to find these grassy, rolling downs littered with 
boulders lying in the midst of savage snow and rock peaks. 
That evening the threatened blizzard broke. Once again 
I lay sleepless listening to the fury of the elements. Two 
days before we had slept in the moist, enervating heat of 
a tropical forest, now the snow slashed our tents, and the 
mercury of the thermometer shrank into its bulb, 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE KANG LA 


A calm morning succeeded an angry night. Winter had 
ousted spring and snow lay over six inches deep. The sky 
was a clear washed blue, and far to the south blue hazes 
indicated the heat stricken Plain of Bengal. The crests of 
Pandim, and the peaks to the south of it were fringed with 
a faint iridescence as the rising sun shone through their 
delicate eaves, cornices and flutings of snow and ice. We 
had little time or inclination to admire the beauties of 
the scene, for the blizzard had done something more than 
transform the hillsides, it had turned the hearts of the 
Nepali porters into water. They refused to go on. Wrapping 
their blankets round them they cowered in the snow, weak, 
miserable specimens of humanity.' 

Cajolery and argument were useless. It was necessary 
to separate the good men from the bad. Even though it 
meant delay in bringing some of the loads over the Kang 
La, it was better that we should get rid of these poor 
creatures now, rather than find ourselves at their mercy in 
a less favourable position. Wood Johnson, accordingly, 
ordered those men who wished to go back to stand to one 
side. They were indeed a sorry looking crew. The Sherpas 
and Bhutias eyed them contemptuously. The deserters 
numbered fifty, and the abandonment of their loads was a 

1 Considering that they were clad only in cotton clothing and were unequipped 
with boots they are scarcely to be blamed for refusing to traverse the snow covered 


Kang La. 
138 


THE KANG LA 139 


serious matter. It meant that they would have to be 
brought over the Kang La by relays of porters. Such a 
modus operandum had little to recommend in it in view of the 
uncertain weather, late winter and low snow-line. Having 
sent back the shirkers, and issued snow goggles to our 
faithful porters, we were at length able to start, not for- 
getting to leave a reliable man in charge of the dumped 
loads. 

For some distance the path contoured along the south- 
west slopes of Kabru, then dropped in a series of steep 
zig-zags into the Rathong Valley. In places it was deeply 
snowed under, and trail making was tiring work for those 
in front. It was here that we began to appreciate the sure- 
footedness of the Sherpas and Bhutias. Though many of 
them wore rope soled Thibetan boots without any nails, 
whilst others had no boots at all, they descended with that 
easy gait characteristic of hill men. 

Somehow the Rathong Valley reminded me of the upper 
reaches of Glen Nevis. There was the same luxuriant 
vegetation, sky line of crags and firs, and clear torrents 
hurrying down the hillsides, or hanging in thin, gauzelike 
water veils from beetling cliffs. 

Much to our relief we saw that the lower part of the 
valley leading up towards the Kang La contained but 
little snow. The Kang La itself, and the peaks north and 
south of it were buried in clouds suggestive of another 
blizzard. Snowflakes were falling as we mounted rhododen- 
dron-clad slopes into the Kang La valley, but presently 
the bleak sky was tempered by a fugitive sun, and the 
clouds rolled back. 

We pitched camp on a bed of dwarf rhododendrons. 


140 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Apart from these, the valley was distinctly Alpine in 
character, and the stern rock walls on either hand dark 
stained by oozing water, turf-crowned slopes above and 
below, interspersed with occasional slopes of scree and 
drifts of snow provided scenery of a type typical to the 
Alpine gneissic ranges. 


it TIiLBSE Webigect 
ee Bea 


met) : 

a A ere eh Li Bye 
wae a 3 weedy > s 

ARE eb “@ : 


m Ns Z Bysgi, mi “ah 6 oil Se “OD 
COIN pa, Le en > 


a ; CABREL Sy fi sen 
ang, C ny ¥ hs I), Cc 
iste te : a 
en 
ktoh AS Sy 22 
Res tt Re 


. Wramsen.t eS. 24.002" Ponting 


a eg 


0 G i . 
ty be . 

“NN { 
gh Ze 1, J af(lN 
CANES ANS 





By courtesy of The Times 


Thanks to Dr. Richter’s treatment, plus a tough con- 
stitution, my chill was already better, and I was able to 
take my place at mess that evening. Seated on packing 
cases, we ate our supper in the open, warmed by the sun’s 
last gleams. Up to date Tencheddar’s cooking had met 
with approval, although not always unqualified approval. 
We were getting used to the varieties of food and cooking 
he expected us to stomach. It is indeed strange what men 


THE KANG LA I41 


can get accustomed to in the wilds. Even the assistant 
cook’s confirmed habit of pulling his shirt out of his trousers, 
and wiping the plates with it met with no more than a 
conventional grunt of disapproval. Our servants waited 
upon us, and it was a point of honour with each one of 
them to see that his own particular sahib got more than 
anyone else. As time went on, we would endeavour to vary 
the monotony. At this Schneider displayed most aptitude, 
and his favourite concoction consisting of toasted cheese, 
salad dressing, Worcester sauce and gherkins remains an 
unholy memory. 

One unfortunate result of splitting up the expedition 
into three parties was the absence of alcohol in our own 
party, and it was not until we had crossed the Kang La 
that we discovered that Tencheddar had accidentally 
packed some bottles of rum in mistake for Worcester sauce. 
It was the only mistake he ever made that ended happily. 

As soon as the sun disappeared it became very cold, and 
a bitter wind got up, hustling down the valley from the 
snows. It was necessary to let the world know something 
of our doings, and I sat up late that night hammering on a 
portable typewriter, until numb fingers no longer func- 
tioned and an overwhelming desire for sleep, after two bad 
nights, submerged journalistic considerations. 

The porters had now been marching for ten days without 
a rest, and an off day was certainly theirs by right, but the 
unsettled weather, and the possibility of another snow- 
storm decided Professor Dyhrenfurth to push on over the 
Kang La without delay, and not only this, but to try to 
cross it in one day from our present camp. In view of the 
quantity of snow on the pass, one day certainly meant 


142 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


a very long and tiring march, for our camp was not more 
than 13,000 feet, and the Kang La is 16,373 feet. In 
addition, none of the sahibs or porters were acclimatised 
yet to altitude, and 16,000 feet to an unacclimatised body 
is more of a strain than 20,000 feet to an acclimatised body. 
Porters, also, were carrying a load of sixty to eighty pounds 
each. Taking all these considerations into account, it was 
doubtful whether such a long march was advisable. 

To our delight and relief, the following morning dawned 
brilliantly. The wind had dropped, and a benevolent sun 
warmed the chill air of the upland valley. Our porters were 
if anything more susceptible bodily and mentally to 
weather conditions than we, and on this occasion they 
started off in great heart. 

For a short distance above the camping site the valley 
floor is almost level, and covered in loose stones. We 
mounted over an ancient and steep terminal moraine. 
Thenceforward, the way lay entirely over snow. 

The direct heat of the sun, and the reflected glare of it 
from the snow were terrific. Unfortunately, protective 
glacier face cream was not available, and all we had were 
some tubes of ordinary cold cream. These proved almost 
completely useless and despite liberal applications, we 
could feel our skin becoming dried up, scorched and burnt. 
As we gained height, there were backward and enchanting 
views. The great foot-hills that had enclosed us during 
our march through the tropical forests to the snows seemed 
now mere rucks and folds in the earth’s surface. The deep 
valleys along which we had laboured had sunk out of 
sight ; belts and bands of translucent blue haze, from which 
white cumuli clouds born of steamy earthen heat were 


THE KANG LA 143 


beginning to nose their way upwards like white whales, 
alone told of them. It was as though we were gazing out 
upon some ocean from a viewpoint of few miles inland, the 
nearer peaks forming the broken edges of the coastal cliffs 
overlooking the long rollers of the foot-hills. 

Hoerlin and Schneider with their usual indefatigable 
energy left early with the intention of climbing the Kang 
Peak, 18,280 feet. This rises south of the Kang La, and if 
Mr. Graham’s description is correct would appear to have 
been climbed by him. Their ascent would act as an ex- 
cellent spur to the porters. 

On the Sikkim side of the Kang La there is a small 
uncrevassed glacier which is joined by another glacier from 
the north. This northern glacier, which boasts a con- 
siderable ice fall, leads up to the foot of a symmetrical snow 
peak, the delicately pointed summit and sharp ridges of 
which invite exploration and conquest. Southwards, were 
a number of rock peaks and ridges, one of which bears a 
striking similarity to the well-known Dent du Géant and 
Rochefort Ridge, on the range of Mont Blanc. 

As we plodded through the soft snow we experienced 
for the first time that Himalayan malady known as glacier 
lassitude. In our case, this lassitude, the mental and 
physical weariness induced by climbing the long snow 
slopes, was due probably to the fact that in six days we 
had ascended no less than 13,000 feet. But glacier lassitude 
is due to something more than mere lack of acclimatisa- 
tion ; sun and glare have much to do with it, as does also 
a curious lifelessness in the air. In the snowy trough we 
were ascending the air seemed dead and incapable of 
vitalising lungs and body. It lacked oxygen, and was as 


144 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


depressing to breathe as flat soda-water is to drink. In 
Himalayan glacier hollows evaporation in the tropical sun 
is so rapid that maybe the air is deprived by absorption 
of some of its oxygen. Only in snow and glacier hollows 
does lassitude attack the mountaineer, and by climbing 
a ridge he may rid himself of its baneful effects in a few 
minutes. It is also interesting to note that lassitude only 
makes itself felt on windless days, and that wind always 
restores energy to the apparently fatigued body. 

We halted for lunch on a level place some 500 feet below 
the crest of the pass. Directly above rose the steep slopes of 
the Kang Peak, and on them were the minute figures of 
Hoerlin and Schneider. How slowly they seemed to move. 
In the soft snow they were finding the going very laborious. 
They were making for one of the ribs falling from the 
summit ridge, and by the time we had finished lunch they 
had gained it. Thenceforward, the way looked less exacting 
physically, though more difficult from a climbing stand- 
point. The porters watched interestedly, forgetting their 
own tiredness. 

The last slopes of the Kang La remain in my memory as 
entailing something more than a weary trudge. I was, of 
course, still weak from fever, and every upward step meant 
an expenditure of will power as well as physical energy. At 
long last the slope eased off, and stepping on to an outcrop 
of rocks, I gazed down into Nepal. Little was to be seen 
save battalions of fleecy clouds struggling up the snow- 
filled and desolate valley leading to Tseram. 

From a scenic standpoint the Kang La is not an attrac- 
tive pass. Like some of the passes across the Alps, such as the 
Brenner, the Simplon and St. Gotthard, it is fatiguing 





ae ee dey 








a 


Uieataainc 


holt 


AN OLD GENTLEMAN FROM THIBET 


THE KANG LA 145 


without being particularly interesting. Perhaps its greatest 
charm is the sense of isolation and remoteness from the 
world of men inspired by it. It is suggestive of some Arctic 
landscape, frigid and hostile to flesh and blood. Looking 
down the way we had come, I could see the men strung 
out in a long line of slowly moving dots. It was difficult to 
realise that these dots on the vast counterpane of snow 
were indeed men, and each man, in addition to the load 
he was carrying, carried another load of care and trouble, 
joy and sorrow. 

Did I really soliloquise thus? I doubt it. It is only now, 
seated in a comfortable chair, and breathing the air of 
Primrose Hill approximately 200 feet above sea level that 
I can think of what I ought to have thought of on the 
Kang La, and forgetting for a moment the grumble of 
traffic, and a distant yet audible inferno of pneumatic 
drills, conjure up in my mind’s eye that string of little 
men toiling up the weary snow-slopes. 

After a short steep slope on the Nepal side of the pass, 
the snow filled valley curved gently downwards. After the 
labour of the ascent it was an easy matter descending 
through soft deep snow. It was an interesting fact that 
however much altitude may effect a man climbing in the 
Himalayas, he can, given easy ground, descend almost at 
an Alpine pace. Some remarkable instances of this occurred 
on Everest where slopes that had taken hours to ascend 
were descended in a few minutes. 

The ‘“‘Memsahib” was as usual well to the front of the 
party, and we congratulated her on being the first Euro- 
pean woman to cross the Kang La. After a short distance, 


the valley floor dropped in a steep boulder strewn pitch. 
Kk 


146 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Below this was another level section, and there, among 
stones and patches of snow we pitched camp. 

Two or three of us arrived with jarring headaches. It 
was the first and last time on the whole expedition that I 
was affected thus, and it is tolerably certain that the head- 
aches, which seemed to strike through the head from the 
back of the neck to the eyes, were induced by intense sun 
glare plus an altitude to which our bodies were not yet 
acclimatised. We found aspirin tablets the best remedy and 
under their influence the headaches disappeared in a few 
minutes. 

The northern side of the valley on which we were camp- 
ing, had been almost denuded of snow by the sun, but the 
unbroken snow covering the valley floor on the opposite 
slopes seemed to offer possibilities of ski-running. Actually, 
ski would have made the traverse of the Kang La much 
easier, but it seemed hardly fair to use them in view of the 
laden coolies, and it was necessary, too, for the Europeans 
to stamp out a track through the soft snow. Descending, 
however, we had no such scruples, and Dr. Richter set an 
example by running down the upper slopes on ski, which 
in lieu of bindings, he had tied on with odd bits of string. 

Scraggy dwarf rhododendrons were growing on the 
slopes above the camp, and soon a dozen or more little 
fires were smoking on the ledges and crannies, as the 
coolies cooked their evening meal. The day had been a 
hard one, an exceptionally hard one, even for our toughest 
Bhutias and Sherpas. The Alpine porter seldom carries 
more than a load of forty of fifty pounds, and this as a rule 
only along paths up to huts; on mountain ascents he 
carries considerably less. Our men had carried sixty to 


THE KANG LA 147 


eighty pounds each over a pass higher than the summit of 
Mont Blanc. They had, of course, been used to carrying 
heavy loads from early childhood, but even so their work 
that day had been simply magnificent. 

An hour or two after we had arrived Schneider and 
Hoerlin rejoined us. Their attempt on the Kang Peak had 
been crowned with success, albeit the ascent had been 
scarcely enjoyable in view of the bad snow conditions. The 
view had been marred by mist, but once they caught a 
glimpse of Jannu, 25,294 feet, which had impressed them 
as being a magnificent mountain. 

We had camped at about 4p.m., but as the evening 
drew on stragglers were still coming in, some of them very 
tired. Of Wood Johnson, who was bringing up the rear, 
there was no sign. As it was likely that he was experiencing 
difficulty in getting the last of these stragglers over the 
pass, I set off alone from the camp to meet him. 

Night was falling swiftly as I plugged uphill. The evening 
was a Calm one, and there was not even the faintest whisper 
of wind. For some distance I could hear the murmur of the 
camp beneath, and smell faintly the odour of burning 
rhododendrons, but soon nothing was to be heard. The 
gaunt, craggy sides of the mountains enclosed me. The 
murmurous trickles released by the sun had been clenched 
by frost to their channels. The silence of the high mountains 
at eventide was unbroken. I felt very lonely. Had it not 
been for the track stretching before me, a mere thread 
drawn across the snowy waste, I might have felt myself the 
sole inhabitant of a frigid planet. There was indeed an 
element of unearthliness about the scene. In the High 
Alps a man may find himself temporarily removed from 


148 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


civilisation, but always at the back of his mind is the 
thought that he has but to turn downhill, and in a few 
hours at the most he will regain civilisation. But in the 
High Himalayas such sub-conscious knowledge does not 
exist, and the wanderer experiences the genuine meaning 
of solitude. Above me the sun glowed redly, cruelly, on 
the peaks, but round me the snows were livid, deathlike, 
and the black rocks jutted through like unburnt coals 
amid the white ashes of the world. 

So I trudged on, conscious only of the pounding of my 
heart, and the crunch of the crusted snow beneath my 
nailed boots. Far above, on the last slopes of the pass, some 
black figures appeared, moving slowly and jerkily, like 
marionettes operated by tired hands. They approached, a 
sorry little procession of exhausted men. Wood Johnson 
was with them to cheer them on. He, too, was very tired. 
He said it had been necessary to drive them over the pass. 
They were so tired, he said, that they had sat down and 
asked to be left there to die in the snow. He had himself 
been forced to carry loads up the last slope to the pass. 
Both physically and mentally he was worn out with the 
strain. If we others had known difficulties of this sort were 
likely to arise, we would, of course, have remained behind 
to help, but we had not known, although in view of the 
trying day it had been even for unladen Europeans we 
might have guessed. 

Three or four of the porters could hardly stagger, but 
we supported them as well as we could, cheering them on 
and telling them that they had but a short distance to go. 
Several loads had been abandoned on the pass, but there 
was one grey-haired old man, who looked the oldest of our 


THE KANG LA 149 


porters, who, although in bare feet and as exhausted as any, 
steadfastly refused to abandon his load. To him it was a 
point of honour to get it to camp at any cost. I wish I could 
remember his name. So we continued down the snow 
slopes towards the camp, a little army of exhausted men. 

All the peaks were livid now, and the reflected glare of 
the sunken sun illuminated the snow-fields in a weird 
opalesque afterglow. 

Leaving the others, I hurried on to the camp, and 
rousing it, returned with men carrying lanterns. It was 
quite dark by the time we had got back to the tired porters. 
Willing hands relieved them of their loads or supported 
their faltering steps. It was bitterly cold as we stumbled 
down the last ice-glazed rocks to the camp. 

The poor old man’s bare feet were frost-bitten, happily 
not seriously, and he and the remaining stragglers were 
completely exhausted. It was only due to Wood Johnson 
that the casualties were not more serious. Thus ended the 
march over the Kang La. 

The weather maintained its promise, and the next day 
dawned fine. Eberl decided he would take advantage of it, 
and return to Darjeeling and Calcutta. His leave of 
absence was not long enough to permit of him coming to 
the Base Camp, and he could not afford to take the risk of 
being held up by bad weather returning over the Kang La. 
We parted from him with regret. 

The sun glare of the previous day had done its work only 
too efficiently, and I awoke conscious that my face was a tem- 
porary ruin. Edward Whymper in ‘‘Scrambles among the 
Alps” gives a harrowing description of the effects ofsunburn. 

“They have been scorched on rocks and roasted on 


I50 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


glaciers. Their cheeks—first puffed, then cracked—have 
exuded a turpentine-like matter, which has coursed down 
their faces, and has dried in patches like the resin on the 
trunks of pines. They have removed it, and at the same time 
have pulled off large flakes of their skin. They have gone 
from bad to worse—their case has become hopeless— 
knives and scissors have been called into play ; tenderly 
and daintily, they have endeavoured to reduce their cheeks 
to one uniform hue. It is not to be done. But they have 
gone on, fascinated, and at last have brought their unhappy 
countenances to a state of helpless and complete ruin. 
Their lips are cracked ; their cheeks are swollen ; their 
eyes are blood-shot ; their noses are peeled and indescrib- 
able.” 

Wood Johnson had not unnaturally suffered most, for he 
had been far longer exposed to the sun, and in his anxiety 
for the porters had neglected to look after his face. The 
non-mountaineering reader may think I am making a lot 
of this affliction, but those who gently brown, either 
artificially or naturally on the sands of Margate or the 
Lido, have little conception of the truly dreadful state 
that the Himalayan sun reduces the countenance to. 
Anyone who has ever experienced the agony of eating and 
smiling, or the sleepless nights it may cause will have 
good cause to remember it. As a Doctor once remarked 
to me: “ Take a man straight from England, and sit him 
for a few hours without clothes on in the middle of a snow- 
field in the sun, and he would most probably die.” I 
believe he would. . 

The previous evening I had eyed the snow-fields around 
with that sort of longing that every ski-runner knows. Now 


THE KANG LA 151 


I determined to try my luck on ski. We had brought with 
us ski for every European member of the party. Made by 
Schuster of Munich, they were a compromise in length 
and weight between ultra short or summer ski as used in 
the High Alps, and standard length winter ski. The wood 
was hickory, and the bindings detachable clip-on ones, of a 
breed not familiar to me, a compromise between Huitfeldt 
and Alpina. 

Unfortunately, however, these bindings had already left 
in one of the porter loads by the time I was ready to start, 
and like Dr. Richter I had recourse to string, and odd 
lengths of yak-hide thongs. The porters watched my 
preparations with intense interest. I think they thought 
that the ski constituted part of some flying machine by the 
aid of which the sahibs would alight on the summit of 
Kangchenjunga. In the narrow forest paths, their porter- 
age had been an irritating and difficult business, but the 
porter carrying them had treated them with the utmost 
care and respect. Had he known that they were not part of 
a flying machine he might possibly have been tempted to 
throw them away. 

Dirty faces grinned expectantly as I fastened them on. 
Willing hands helped to tie the cat’s cradle-like bindings of 
odd bits of string. At length I was off, shooting down the 
slopes into the middle of the snow-filled valley. The snow 
was board hard, with a delightful loose crystalline surface 
into which ski could be edged. It was very similar to early 
morning spring snow in the Alps, but in the Alps a two or 
three inches deep surface of crystals is only experienced 
after a snowfall; normally, the surface is conducive to 
skidding, and the traverse of steep slopes is tiring. But on 


152 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


this Himalayan snow which gains its crystalline surface 
from the heat of the mid-day sun, any swing is possible, 
from the Telemark to the stem Christiania. 

The running was of its kind the most perfect that I have 
ever experienced. Would that it had been longer. As I 
glided down the valley I was scarcely conscious of move- 
ment ; only the procession of mountains on either hand, the 
gentle slush of the snow beneath my ski, and the breeze 
meeting my face suggested it. I felt Einsteinian. It was I 
who was stationary, and the world that was slipping away 
beneath me. 

The valley floor dropped in another pitch; it was 
necessary to make downhill swings. I became more con- 
scious of movement, and movement swift, fierce, exhilara- 
ting. Some porters were marching down the side of the 
snow. I swooped past them in tremendous style, leaving 
them gaping in wonder. My triumphant progress was short 
lived. Suddenly both ski came off together. The world 
ceased to slip, it revolved with great velocity and in revolv- 
ing dealt my nose a shrewd blow. I arose, my neck was full 
of snow, and my mouth full of hard words. From above 
was borne down faintly a roar of laughter ; the prestige of 
the flying machine had vanished for ever. 

We descended from winter into spring. A softer air lubri- 
cated our tortured countenances. There were patches of 
grass and dwarf rhododendrons, whereon we flung our- 
selves down for a few moments of delightful repose. We 
turned a corner. Below was the emerald green Alp above 
Tseram, where Mr. Freshfield pitched his camp thirty years 
previously. Behind were the snow-clad peaks of the Kang 
La. Over the ridge to the north we could see some glittering 


THE KANG LA 153 


summits in the neighbourhood of Jannu, forming the 
culminating points of acute ice ridges, defended beneath by 
ribbed curtains of blue ice. They looked, and probably are, 
unassailable. 

The vegetation became more luxuriant as we descended. 
Small flowers peeped shyly out between the boulders of an 
ancient moraine. Everything was green and glad in the 
sunlight. A rough path led us gently downwards to Fresh- 
field’s camping site. 

Since Yoksam our camping sites had been poor ones. It 
was pleasant, therefore, to find a level pasture of dry, 
springy turf on which to pitch our tents. Around were 
woods of firs and giant rhododendrons. The air was per- 
meated with sweet scents. Near at hand the voice of a 
crystal clear stream babbled a friendly welcome. Majestic 
snow-clad peaks stood watch and ward over this little Eden. 

At one end of the pasture a new hut, constructed of 
rough-hewn timbers, intended for yaks and their herds, 
had been built, but of the yaks and herdmen, or more im- 
portant, the Nepalese Subadar, whom we had hoped to 
find waiting for us with coolie food, there was no sign. 
Doubtless, our coming had not been observed, and it was 
possible that the Subadar might be waiting for us in the 
hamlet of Tseram, which was some twenty minutes’ walk 
farther on. But it was not so much the beauty of our sur- 
roundings to which we first turned our attention, as to the 
great wall of snow-covered peaks to the north of Tseram 
and the Yalung Valley, peaks very similar in steepness and 
general appearance to those hemming in the Gastern Val- 
ley, near Kandersteg in the Bernese Oberland. Did the way 
via the Mirgin La to Khunza lie over this wall ? We knew 


154 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


that we must cross the Mirgin La, but the map and Mr. 
Freshfield’s description had not led us to expect anything so 
formidable in appearance. Already, the Kang La had forced 
us to realise how great was the task that we had embarked 
upon in attacking the Nepalese side of Kangchenjunga. 

Coolie food was running short, and it was imperative to 
find the Subadar without delay. Accordingly, that after- 
noon, Wood Johnson and I set off for Tseram. 

A rough path oozing with snow-drifts led down the 
mountainside, through a tangle of giant rhododendrons 
into the Yalung Valley. Less than a year previously, the 
young American, Farmer, had passed this way with his 
porters en route to the Yalung Glacier, whence he made his 
attempt on Kangchenjunga which ended so tragically. 
We had received a telegram asking us to make every 
possible enquiry and search for him, and in particular to 
visit the Decherol Monastery, which, according to the 
map, was situated some distance up the Yalung Valley, 
below the terminal moraine of the Yalung Glacier. 

A quarter of an hour’s walk brought us down to a 
muddy torrent, flowing from the Yalung Glacier, which 
we crossed by a small bridge. During the flood season, 
Himalayan torrents must be immense. The width of the 
torrent bed, and the jumbled confusion of great boulders 
carried down by the flood waters bear witness to what the 
Yalung River is capable of, but now it was no bigger than 
an Alpine torrent from a glacier of moderate size.' 

As we ascended the north bank of the stream, a head rose 
cautiously over a large boulder. We shouted a greeting, 
but it abruptly disappeared, and its owner, a boy, bolted 


1 See Appendix : “ Glaciology : Snow Conditions and Avalanches.” 


THE KANG LA 155 


precipitately as though all the devils of the district were at 
his heels. There came a furious clamour of dogs, and a few 
instants later we approached a rude hut, long and wide- 
eaved, with the boards of its roof weighted down with 
stones. A wizen-faced old man wearing high Thibetan 
boots and a dirty black robe girdled at the waist came 
forth to greet us. Behind him was his wife, twisting her 
fingers in shyness and embarrassment, while eyeing us 
half fearfully with narrow, dark, restless eyes, under a 
tattered fringe of hair. Close at hand, two savage Thibetan 
sheep dogs strained at the cords with which they were 
fastened to stakes in the ground. 

The old man was the yakherd of this remote valley, and 
if being dirty constituted good yakherdmanship, he was 
certainly efficient at his job. There was no question of any 
high-water mark round his neck, for no tide had ever 
penetrated as far. Yaks were obviously his great enthusiasm 
in life. He smelt of them too. His wife was, if anything, 
dirtier and more odorous. 

From them we learned that the Nepali Subadar had 
been staying at Tseram waiting for our arrival for some 
time, but not hearing anything of us, he had gone down 
the valley the previous day. This was most unfortunate ; 
we must find him and obtain coolie food at all costs. The 
best man for the job was dur Gurkha, Tikeram Thapa, 
and we arranged with the old man for the loan of his son 
as a guide. Meanwhile, should our coolie food run out 
entirely, there were always the yaks. We were told that 
their owner, who lived in the lowlands, had kindly sent 
up a message to say that if necessary we could slaughter 
one. If possible, however, we wished to avoid feeding our 


156 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


coolies on meat, as they are vegetarians, and meat has a 
deleterious effect on them. 

We asked the yakherd for information regarding Farmer. 
He was not able to tell us much. Farmer and his porters 
had not passed through Tseram itself, being unwilling to 
attract attention owing to the fact that they had crossed 
the Nepalese frontier without permission. They had 
avoided Tseram by traversing the rhododendron-clad hill- 
side above that hamlet. As for the Decherol Monastery, 
that had been a ruin for thirty years or more. This was all 
he could tell us, but we decided if we had time, we would 
go some distance up the valley and attempt to discover 
traces of Farmer. 

The evening was chilly, and we adjourned into the 
yakherd’s hut. One end of it was reserved for yaks, the 
other end for the yakherd and his family. A mass of dirty 
straw, alive with fleas, was the family couch. At one 
corner were piled some sacks of grain, rough cooking 
utensils, and wooden drinking cups. The rough and 
uneven floor was paved with stones and dried mud. A 
fire of rhododendron wood was burning on a primitive stone 
hearth, but as there was no chimney the smoke had to 
find its way out through chinks in the roof, a process more 
efficient in theory than in practice. 

The old man and his wife, and two or three of our 
porters, who had come down from the camp, squatted 
round the fire, and a greasy looking concoction of some 
buttery substance was brewed, but fortunately, we were 
spared having to drink it. It was a scene simple and 
primitive, that will live in my memory. The last gleams of 
sunset filtered through the cracks ; there was a glimpse of 


THE KANG LA 157 


forest and mountain. Is happiness to be measured in terms 
of modern invention? Was not this old man in his old hut, 
through the chinks of which he could watch the sunset 
and the stars, with his simple philosophy and his yaks, 
happier than many dwellers in a city? 

In the last light we walked back to camp. A profound 
quietude enwrapped mountain and valleys. Below, the 
lazy smoke from the yakherd’s hut lifted gently upwards, 
mingling imperceptibly with the night. For the yakherd 
and his family it was just the end of another day, the passing 
of another spoke in the wheel of life. 

That evening after dinner we sent for Tikeram, and 
acquainted him with the urgency of the situation. He was 
keen and willing to start at once. “‘ I am here to help,”’ he 
said, and set off at once on his journey through the night, 
guided by the yakherd’s son with a lantern. 

Whether or not we were forced to remain at Tseram 
until food arrived, it was essential to rest the porters. It is 
not too much to say that we had arrived a dilapidated 
party in health and morale. Several of the porters had 
bruised or cut feet, and one or two, including the plucky old 
man who had refused to abandon his load, minor frost- 
bites. Worst of all, a number of them were suffering from 
snow blindness. There was no real excuse for this, for they 
had been issued with snow glasses, but the native is both 
careless and improvident. Snow blindness is, as I know 
from personal experience, extremely painful. Its first 
effect is by straining the optic nerve to put the vision out of 
focus. A profuse discharge follows, and the eyes ache 
abominably. It is impossible to open them in the light 
without severe pain, as the light seems to strike them 


158 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


almost like a blow. Fortunately, ordinary snow blindness is 
as brief in its effects as it is painful, and two or three days’ 
rest and treatment are usually sufficient to effect a com- 
plete recovery. Our porters, however, did not know this. 
They thought they were dying, or about to become com- 
pletely blind, and it was a pitiable sight to see them 
cowering beneath their blankets, pathetic bundles of 
humanity, outside Dr. Richter’s tent. 

News came that Hannah and Wieland were in difficulties. 
Their porters, not unnaturally, had refused to traverse the 
Kang La without boots. The next day, therefore, we called 
for volunteers to return over the Kang La to carry boots 
to their help. Thirty-seven of our best men immediately 
responded, and were sent off under the charge of Lobsang. 

The situation was certainly not promising. Every day 
was of vital importance, and here we were relegated to 
Tseram for an indefinite period. | 

That morning, Kurz left early to map the lower por- 
tion of the Yalung Glacier and Valley. He returned later, 
confirming the statement of the yakherd that the Decherol 
Monastery was indeed a complete ruin. 

Had it not been for our anxiety over the transport, and 
the painful state of our faces which made eating a misery, 
and sleeping difficult, we might have enjoyed our four 
days enforced rest at Tseram. To while away the time we 
rigged tape between two upright poles, made a quoit from 
rope, and played deck tennis. Even at such a moderate 
elevation as 10,000 feet, we found this somewhat strenu- 
ous, but exercise had the excellent effect of quickening 
acclimatisation. 

That evening Wieland arrived, and acquainted us with 


THE KANG LA 159 


the situation on the other side of the Kang La. It was not 
a good one, but we knew that we could rely upon Hannah 
and Lobsang to get their men across. For the rest, every- 
thing depended on the weather. Actually some of Hannah’s 
men had already arrived, carrying light loads, having 
marched direct from Dzongri. 

On April 20, Wood Johnson and I, with Nemu who had 
accompanied Farmer to show us the way, visited the Yalung 
Valley to search for traces of Farmer. From Tseram a rough 
track traverses the north side of the valley. It was evidently 
the former route to the monastery, for we passed a number 
of rude walls and shrines covered in inscriptions. 

Like most large Himalayan glaciers, the Yalung Glacier 
terminates in a great moraine some 1,000 feet high. Above 
this, the glacier is moraine covered for so great a distance 
that Lobsang, who was with Farmer, told us that they had 
had to march for three days before they trod ice. 

It was while resting after lunch on the slopes of the valley 
near the terminal moraine of the glacier, that two curious 
incidents occurred. The first was an earthquake shock, the 
same shock, I believe, that was experienced in Turkestan 
and which we afterwards saw mentioned in the newspapers. 

The second incident was an amusing one. As we sat 
smoking, we saw something moving in the valley beneath, 
half hidden by a huge boulder. Whatever it was, it seemed 
too large for any animal likely to be met with thereabouts. 
Nemu, however, had no doubts upon the matter, and fell 
on his belly with a frightened whisper of ‘‘ Bad Manshi, 
Sahib ! Bad Manshi !”’ (Bad Men, Sir ! Bad Men !) 

This was interesting ; were we at last to meet one of the 
redoubtable Snow Men in person? Lying flat and motionless 


160 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


behind the rocks we peered intently down into the 
valley. For perhaps ten minutes we gazed, and we were 
beginning to wonder whether what we had seen had been 
a mere figment of imagination, when suddenly with ma- 
jestic tread out walked—an enormous yak. Needless to say, 
we burst into a roar of laughter at poor Nemu, who had 
been trembling with terror, but his superstitions were not 
to be so easily over-ruled. He declared that like other of 
our porters he had on several occasions actually seen the 
‘Bad Manshi,” and described them as being huge men, 
white skinned and naked, but covered with thick hair. 
Native temperament is childlike in many respects. Given 
work to do, or some object in life to fulfil, our porters were 
happy, but after having been left to their own devices for 
two or three days, they were only too liable to get into 
mischief, or work up some imaginary grievance. Among 
our porters were one or two men who, had they lived in 
England, would make admirable paid labour agitators or 
“tub thumpers ” in Hyde Park. As it was they did their 
best to stir up strife among the rest of the porters, and to 
a small extent they succeeded in deluding the more 
credulous. | 
That evening, we were eating our supper in the Mess 
Tent, when there came an excited babble of voices. We 
took no notice of them until we had finished our meal, 
then Wood Johnson went outside. As usual, the trouble 
had originated with a few of our more unreliable porters. 
The Sherpas and Bhutias stood eyeing the scene passively, 
if curiously. A few minutes later, thanks to Wood Johnson, 
the agitators were slinking away amid the laughter and 
jeers of the remainder of the porters. The trouble had 


cc SUHDIL ,, UNO AO AWOS 





THE KANG LA 161 


arisen simply owing to Narsang forgetting to issue a ration 
of sugar. To get behind the native mind would indeed be 
to get behind the mind of a child. 

Late that evening, Tikeram Thapa arrived with the 
welcome news that he had found the Nepali Subadar, and 
that the latter was coming up to Tseram the next day, 
bringing a few local porters with loads of coolie food. 
Tikeram told us that he had marched over twenty miles 
down the valley in the night, guided by the yakherd’s son, 
although he had fallen and damaged a knee. It was a 
capital bit of work. 

The same evening we made the discovery of the bottle 
of rum which as previously mentioned had been accident- 
ally substituted by Tencheddar for a bottle of Worcester 
sauce. Despite the transport thorns besetting our way, we 
went to bed happy that night. 

The following day we decided to shift the camp to 
Tseram, and carry as many loads as possible up the moun- 
tainside above in preparation for the start to Khunza. 
Diplomatically, we had made friends with the yakherd 
by presenting him with a number of empty tins which 
he had obviously coveted, and as a result he was willing 
to guide us to Khunza by a route over the Mirgin La 
that was well known to him. In such a remote part of the 
world an empty condensed milk or bully beef tin obviously 
possesses a very definite value. 

The hillside above Tseram scarcely belies its apparent 
steepness. It is steep, but nowhere dangerously so. We 
returned to find the Subadar had arrived. He proved to 
be a thin-faced, sad, somewhat anemic-looking man, with 
a rong; straggling, and ill-nourished moustache. He was 

K 


162 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


clothed in baggy white breeches and a black jacket. The 
only indication of any rank was the Nepalese coat of arms 
in gold above his turban. He seemed a cultured and 
educated man. We told him of our labour agitators, and 
he proceeded to tell them exactly what he thought of 
them. Making a number of comments on their ancestry, 
their personal appearance, and their chances of future 
salvation which, if he was to be believed, were nil, he ended 
up by telling them that the Maharajah of Nepal, whose 
country they were now in, had given orders that every 
assistance should be given to the expedition, and that he, 
the Maharajah’s representative, was there to see it done. 
If, he concluded, it was not done, there was always the 
time-honoured custom of chopping off a few heads. There 
were no more labour troubles. 


CHAPTER IX 
IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 


We broke camp on April 22. After the enforced inaction 
of the past few days, it was a relief to be again on the march. 
It was a brilliant morning, and fragrant odours of sun- 
warmed firs and flowers permeated the still air as we 
trudged up the hillside. We emerged from the forest on to 
open slopes of grass and boulders. There we were greeted 
by Kabru, and for the first time found ourselves gazing 
at its eastern face. Thus early in the morning it was in 
deep blue shadow, but the reflected light from the snow-fields 
of the peaks opposite across the Yalung Valley revealed 
the clean-cut edges of its hanging glaciers, and lit with 
a greenish sheen its icy steeps and snowy mouldings. 

If Kabru turns a serene and benevolent countenance 
towards Darjeeling, it has, like a two-headed giant, an- 
other face, and this face which overlooks the Yalung 
Glacier is savage and cruel. Even as I watched there came 
a distant roar, the snowy lips of the giant writhed back, 
and an avalanche was spat out from between its teeth. A 
mere puff of white dust it seemed at that distance, and 
only the thunderous roll of its falling told of the tens of 
thousands of tons of grinding ice blocks crashing down 
thousands of feet to the Yalung Glacier. As though ashamed 
at the meaningless ferocity of its twin brother, a cloud was 
detached from the warm, sunny face of the mountain, and 


was wafted gently over the ridge. Dispassionately, it slid 
163 


164 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


along the precipices, growing larger as it did so, and finally 
wrapped the mountain in a soft, grey shroud. 

It was not long before we came to the snow. It was still 
frozen hard, and I determined to hurry on to try and 
obtain a glimpse, and if possible, a photograph of Everest. 
The mountainside which appears from Tseram a smooth, 


He uly IL B E iM neck 
LD LA '4 yp SO: 


ws 7 ia ae POLITE Kae 
i Lee) Nn Ye 19 \\ 
Se Jes ae 


aha! 
ay NE arn 


i ‘| au ae 
WENJUNGA 


i 
n 5 aioe rey 
sf oe) 





oe a wy 
we Be Or; ra Fst 
= : 4 2 WS A 
S Pr gh’ My Ck 
A JP iG ae te f ay 


Peers z Shs 24.002"? Upandin'<: 
. AN iw 2) 


eS 7 wayyy 
7 2 rn NY mlz, " J 


ah €" By il : 
+My 





By courtesy of The Times 


unbroken face topped by small, rocky summits, is in reality 
broken up into subsidiary ridges and valleys, and round- 
ing a shoulder, I found myself in one of these snow-filled 
valleys leading upwards to the first of a series of snowy 
cols we must cross." 

As I mounted the snow slopes, I saw over a low ridge to 


1 This first col is actually the highest point traversed between Tseram and Khunza 
and is 15,361 feet high. 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 165 


the left a solitary peak rising above a sea of woolly clouds. 
In shape its summit was a symmetrical sugar loaf like the 
Zermatt Weisshorn, and to the north and south its ridges 
swept down in graceful parabolas to perfectly proportioned 
shoulders. It was Makalu, Everest’s 27,790 feet high neigh- 
bour. When Everest has been climbed, Makalu may defy 
many generations of future mountaineers, for it is one of 
the most terrific peaks in the world. By the time I had 
reached the col, it had disappeared behind clouds welling 
up from the warm depths of the Arun Valley. Of Everest 
there was nothing to be seen. 

From the col I looked across a desolate snow-clad hill- 
side, broken into rounded shoulders and stony hollows. 
Here and there the snow had melted, disclosing grass and 
straggling patches of dwarf rhododendrons. On one of 
these I had my lunch. The day was sunny, and the grey 
rocks warm to the touch. I was alone. Some may not 
appreciate the charm of solitude, but the true mountaineer, 
even if temperamentally of a gregarious nature, realises 
the value of occasionally parting from his companions in 
order to contemplate mountains as they should be con- 
templated, alone. On an expedition escape from one’s 
fellows is seldom possible, not that one often desires it, 
but there are times when an inexplicable and fierce 
desire demands temporary release from the bonds of 
sociability. 

I sat down, ate my lunch, and afterwards inhaled a con- 
templative cigarette, lolling among the dwarf rhododen- 
drons, with my back fitting comfortably into a hollow of 
a rock. For a while I was merely a body clogged with an 
excellent lunch, gazing with peaceful digestion and bovine 


166 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


appreciation at the landscape. But presently and un- 
expectedly the dull pudding of my mind was stirred by 
the spoon of inspiration. I seemed to become a part of the 
hillside on which I was resting. I felt very old, and yet 
eternally young. The hills had been my companions 
through zons of time. I had seen them created, raised, and 
fashioned by the forces of the earth. I had seen vegeta- 
tion clothe them, and snow cloak them, ruin overtake 
their more fanciful and extravagant constructions. I felt 
that I had always lived with the hills, and on the hills, 
and that the hills had treated me kindly. How else could 
a man be born with the love for hills ? There is eternity 
both ways. 

Men came over the col, one after another, a string of 
them. The silence was broken by the clatter of voices. I 
did not resent their presence, for I had had my hour alone 
on the mountain. 

The snow was soft and fatiguing to march through. For 
some distance the path to the Mirgin La contours the 
mountainside. It was a long, hard day for the porters, 
especially for those who had had to carry loads all the 
way from camp. Once I came across Nemu. From some- 
where he had acquired a pair of truly remarkable breeches. 
As there were no fifty shilling outfitters at Tseram, I was at 
a loss to imagine how he had got them, and Nemu himself 
never enlightened me on the subject. I say that they were 
remarkable breeches, because they did not look as if they 
were intended to be breeches at all. They were made of 
some curious balloon-like cloth, that hung down in loose 
folds like a collapsed parachute, and as Nemu walked, 
the breeches gave forth an important sort of swishing noise. 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 167 


I think he experienced some mental strain in wearing them 
at first, for sahibs and coolies would gape at them, laugh, 
or make uncomplimentary remarks, but nevertheless he 
wore them in, as it were, until they became as much part 
of the expedition as Duvanel’s beard, or Wieland’s sun- 
skinned nose. 

But Nemu was by no means alone as regards eccentricity 
of costume. One porter boasted an officer’s khaki tunic, 
another a bandsman’s jacket, then there was a villainous 
looking fellow with what might have been once an old 
Etonian tie, and two or three who sported engineers’ over- 
alls. Everest equipment was still greatly prized, and one 
man possessed a pair of Everest puttees, ragged and worn, 
sacred relics of which he was very proud. Like ladies, they 
allowed their imagination to run riot in the matter of head- 
gear. My own impression as to the constructive principles 
underlying the latest shapes in ladies’ hats is that you take 
a perfectly ordinary hat, such as a Homburg, and then 
proceed to knock, kick, crush, and cut it in a fit of berserk 
fury. After such treatment, it is styled the latest mode or 
shape. This is precisely the treatment meted out by our 
porters to their own headgear. Any fashionable Paris hat 
designer, desirous of obtaining new ideas, can hardly do 
better than go on an expedition into the Himalayas, taking 
with him Sherpa and Bhutia porters. 

We reached the Mirgin La, 14,853 feet, under a greying 
sky. Hailstones were falling, and from the east came an 
occasional thunder growl. Below, the snow slopes fell away 
into a desolate valley, ribbed with ancient moraines, like 
the embankments of a railroad fallen into disrepair. A few 
tattered prayer flags fluttered on the summit of the pass. 


168 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Viewed thus under a leaden sky, with light and shadow 
merged into one universal monotone, black-jawed crags 
jutting from livid featureless snow slopes, and a chill wind 
sighing through the gap, it was a depressing scene. 

No depressing thoughts occurred to the porters as they 
breasted the pass, and they grinned broadly at the pros- 
pect of descent. Among them were several women, who 
had been with Wieland’s party. In weight-carrying powers 
they were the equal of a man, and their powers of en- 
durance were prodigious. These women did much to keep 
up the spirits of the porters, and relieved the tedium of 
the march with many verbal leg pulls and jokes which, 
according to Wood Johnson, it was fortunate the ‘‘ Mem- 
sahib’”’ did not understand. Now, one of these women, 
with a load on her back, sat herself down in the snow, and 
commenced a glissade down the steep snow slopes. For 
a few yards all went well, and she slid slowly and with 
dignity, then suddenly a hard icy patch of snow super- 
vened. She uttered a shrill scream as her speed suddenly 
increased. The next moment she spun round, something 
happened, and her skirt was blown up over her head. Her 
load went one way, and she another, both rolling over 
and over to the bottom of the slope. A roar of laughter 
followed her from the assembled porters. 

It was an easy matter descending these upper slopes, but 
tedious work lower down. There we encountered for the 
first time a type of soft snow that is fortunately seldom met 
with in the Alps, but which is, however, all too common 
in the Himalayas. It is not that it is simply soft, but the 
direct heat of the sun appears to have the effect of shrink- 
ing the snow beneath the surface, so that holes are formed 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 169 


into which the climber may sink up to the waist. For a 
few steps the surface crust may bear, and then, all at 
once, it collapses. 

Walking under these conditions is extremely tiring and 
irritating, especially for laden porters, who sink in at al- 
most every step. The Nepali Subadar, who was in front, 
was making very heavy weather of it. I came across him 
energetically digging in the snow with his hands to retrieve 
one of his shoes that had been left in a hole. Snow passes 
were evidently not to his liking, and the wan smile with 
which he greeted me was in sad contrast to his magnificent 
bearing on the previous day. I offered him a chocolate 
biscuit as solace for his woes, but he was unable to eat it 
owing to his religious principles, which forbade the eating 
of food handled by anyone outside his own particular caste. 
Nevertheless, he eyed it wistfully. It must have been about 
this time that he got severe frostbite, which resulted in 
his nearly losing a foot. 

Perhaps, it would be as well to explain here that there 
are three stages of frostbite. The first is merely a temporary 
numbness, a loss of circulation which may be restored by 
rubbing or warmth. In the second stage frostbite mani- 
fests itself in blisters and swellings charged with fluid. And 
lastly there is the worst stage of all, in which the whole 
area affected, usually the extremities, becomes gangrenous. 
In this case, amputation may be necessary. The Subadar 
most likely came from one of the warm valleys or plains in 
Southern Nepal, and was not able to resist the cold as were 
our porters, with their more active circulation and thicker 
blood. Perhaps he had not even realised that he was 
being frostbitten when one foot lost sensation. 


170 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


As we stood in the snow, Dr. Richter and Kurz shot by 
on ski. Their progress was to be envied. At the same time, 
someone had to make a track for the porters. To have to 
walk oneself at the expense of considerable effort, and to 
be passed by someone else travelling with but little effort 
rouses the worst passions. It is like trudging along one of 
those incredibly dull by-pass roads on the outskirts of 
London, and being passed by fat, opulent men in luxurious 
motor vehicles. Of course, if you are one of the fat, opulent 
ones, your viewpoint is different. 

Dense, black clouds were massing as we struggled down 
the valley. Spiteful stilettos of lightning stabbed the peaks, 
and thunder crackled like a giant shelling walnuts. Once 
I descended into a hole up to my chest between two 
boulders. One foot jammed, and I was unable to extricate 
it for a quarter of an hour. I mention this purely as a point 
worthy of note among solitary climbers. I have seen a man 
so trapped that it took half an hour or more of hard work, 
plus considerable ingenuity, to get his feet out from be- 
tween two boulders. Death by starvation thus would not 
be pleasant. 

We pitched camp on a miserable spot on the north side 
of the valley. Had it not been for the porters, we should 
have continued the descent, and camped below the tree 
line, but the day had been a heavy one for them, and it 
was necessary to camp at the first available place. 

From our camp we looked across the Kangbachen 
Valley, in which, out of sight, lay Khunza, to a range of 
peaks rising to 21,000 feet. They were for the most part 
massive mountains, with indeterminate ridges, between 
which flowed steep and broken glaciers. Owing to a lack 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 171 


of definite ridges, and the consequent difficulty of finding 
a continuous route to their summits, they looked decidedly 
awkward of access. 

The day ended wretchedly in a heavy snowstorm, whilst 
a miserable supper turned out by Tencheddar did little to 
alleviate the general gloom. 

The clouds snowed themselves out during the night, and 
morning dawned clear and cold. With memories of Signor 
Sella’s wonderful photograph of Jannu in Mr. Freshfield’s 
book in our minds, we set off up to the ridge running south- 
east from the Sinon La, the last pass we must cross to 
reach Khunza. We found, however, that the ridge above 
the camp was only a subsidiary ridge of the main ridge. 
Some decided to go on, but Schneider and I favoured 
descent to the “ flesh-pots ” of Khunza. 

A good path led up to the Sinon La, but we found that 
on the north side of the pass formed the head of a long 
and steep couloir filled with hard snow, which must be 
descended some distance. It was a place where a slip might 
well end fatally, and we stamped secure steps for the por- 
ters. A number of other snow-filled couloirs had to be tra- 
versed, after which we found ourselves in rhododendrons. 
Somehow, I was irresistibly reminded of the descent to 
Chamonix from the Grands Mulets. Not that there was 
much in common between the Chamonix and Kangbachen 
Valleys, except a certain trench-like monotony. The Kang- 
bachen Valley is far wilder than the Chamonix Valley, 
and on either side rise peaks to an altitude of 20,000 feet 
or more. 

We strolled down sunny slopes to the crest of an in- 
determinate ridge from which we looked down to Khunza, 


172 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


a little cluster of brown dolls’ houses thousands of feet 
beneath, and far up the valley we must go towards the 
Kangchenjunga Glacier. But this view, fine though it was, 
had not the dramatic quality of the view up the Yamatari 
Valley to the east. Curving round the corner were the 
moraines of the glacier, which has its sources in the 
southernmost recesses of Jannu, and above rose a range of 
rock and ice peaks of terrific aspect. 

One of the curses of being a mountaineer, is that an 
analytical mind, trained as it is in seeking routes and 
estimating their relative difficulty, tends to detract’ from 
esthetic enjoyment. In other words, the humble tourist, 
unversed in the art of mountaineering, is sometimes more 
able to appreciate the beauty and magnificence of a scene 
than is the mountaineer with his mind clogged with 
technicalities. But here was a scene so magnificent as to 
submerge the sharp, ugly rocks of analysis and technical 
considerations beneath the smooth rollers of pure con- 
templation. The thought of how these peaks might be 
climbed did not intrude. I did not see couloir or ridge, 
did not endeavour to win a theoretical way to a summit. 
Even Mark Twain would have put aside his telescope and 
been content to gaze with unfettered eyes up that sylvan 
valley with its background of stupendous ice peaks. 

As I lay on the flat summit of a moss-clad boulder, some- 
thing of my boyhood’s simple adoration of the hills re- 
turned to me, that half wild yearning for an unattainable 
“something.” It is a yearning that becomes dulled by time 
and experience. But such is the magical influence of the 
hills that sometimes they are able to recall it at unexpected 
moments, and this was one of them. However much a man 





AN UNEXPLORED VALLEY : THE YAMATARI VALLEY 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 173 


may delude himself into thinking the contrary, he becomes 
as expert in his mental appreciation for the hills as he does 
in his physical appreciation for them. The unsophisticated 
moments of youth are to be prized and cherished. 

We lunched and lounged in the sun, then plunged down 
through the rhododendrons by a steep zig-zagging path. 
Soon we were among the firs, strolling by the side of the 
torrent from the Yamatari Glacier. The path entered on 
to an open grassy glade, a smooth sward as flat as a cricket 
ground. What a cricket ground it would make too ! With 
the dark fir woods as a natural boundary, and snowy 
mountain tops as pavilions-—-surely more conducive to 
century-making than the dingy villas and gasometers of 
the Oval, or the sulphurous vapours of Bramall Lane. 

We had found our way to this delightful spot easily 
enough, for the path had ended there, but we could not 
find any way out and down to Khunza for some time. 
Yet who would wish to escape from such a fairy glade? 
However, presently we crossed a little bridge over a stream, 
and found ourselves on a good track. At a turn of the path 
we could gaze down to the village, a trim little place, with 
neatly laid-out fields. It was strange to think that no 
European had passed through here for thirty years. It 
might have been a village in Switzerland or Tyrol. 

Porters passed us. They were tired after two days hard 
marching, but they were cheerful at descending from the 
snows once more. 

As we ran down the last part of the path, we were 
puzzled to see various little water-wheels revolving in the 
streams. They seemed to have no practical use. Then it 
dawned upon us that they were prayer wheels. The 


174 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


inhabitants of Khunza are lazy but ingenious. Unwilling to 
expend time and energy in revolving prayer wheels by 
hand, they utilise the abundant water power of the 
vicinity, and had rigged up a number of water-wheels, on 
which are carved many prayers. Every time a wheel 
revolves, so many prayers are “said” for the village. 
Literally millions must go out every twenty-four hours, 
and if these prayers mean anything, the gods that dwell on 
the mountains round Khunza must look very favourably 
on its inhabitants. 

Our camp was pitched on a flat field at the southern 
end of the village. The inhabitants eyed us with curiosity; 
small children stood round, sucking their thumbs in round- 
eyed wonder at these strange reincarnations of something 
or other that had come down from the mountains. 

The Subadar had arrived early that morning ; he had 
not camped with us, but lower down in the woods. We 
did not then know that he was frostbitten, and it was not 
until later that a gangrenous sore developed. Narsang 
was there too, having preceded us to arrange about food. 
Actually, he had done nothing, and the reason was plain 
to see ; the hospitality of Khunza had proved too much for 
him. With magnificent optimism he declared that though 
no food had come up from lower down the valley, we could 
have as much food as we wanted, and unlimited coolies 
from Khunza. That no food had come up was a serious 
matter. We had hardly one day’s coolie food left, and 
whether enough would be forthcoming from Khunza with 
which to carry on to the Base Camp was doubtful. The fact 
that there was no food or coolies available, as kindly 
promised us by the Maharajah of Nepal, was partly due to 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 175 


the slackness of the Subadar who had been sent up to 
arrange for it. He was aware of our intended route, and all 
he had done was to collect some food in the lower valleys 
several marches away. It was exasperating to be confronted 
with such difficulties when within easy reach of our goal, 
and Wood Johnson told the Subadar that if coolies and 
food were not forthcoming, we should have no option but 
to report him to the Maharajah. This threat had an 
immediate effect on the Subadar, and he at once informed 
the Head Man of Khunza of our requirements. We had no 
wish to deplete the village of food, but the Subadar said 
there was plenty to spare, and that to take it would mean 
no hardship to the villagers. We were, of course, prepared 
to pay a good price for it. The Head Man was, therefore, 
given a day in which to collect the food. 

That evening several of us decided to call upon the Head 
Man, the principal reason being that Wood Johnson had 
promised us a drink of an intoxicating liquor known as 
marwa. The Head Man’s house was a large building 
constructed on the chalet principle. Built of sturdy timbers, 
with a wide-eaved roof weighted down with large stones, 
it looked fully capable of withstanding any storm. On 
entering, we found that half the inhabitants of the village 
were present. In the middle of the floor a large log fire 
was burning, and round this we squatted, cross-legged on 
rugs. Presently, a mixture of water and fermented hempseeds 
was brewed in a large cauldron, presided over by a withered 
old hag, whose wrinkled face and claw-like hands, illumi- 
nated by the ruddy glow of the fire, were positively witch- 
like. The atmosphere was heavy and close, and a strong reek 
of smoke from burning rhododendron branches fought a 


176 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


losing battle against a stronger reek of unwashed bodies. 

Presently, the concoction was brewed, and was ladled 
out into cylindrical wooden metal-bound pots. These had a 
lid, in the centre of which was a metal cone, with around 
hole through the top. Through this hole was thrust a bamboo 
stick, up which the liquor had to be sucked. I cannot 
pretend to describe the taste of this drink, it is enough to 
say that it is by no means unpleasant and, taken in 
sufficient quantities, is decidedly intoxicating. 

Heavy rain was roaring on the roof by the time we had 
finished, but we splashed back along the village ‘‘ High 
Street? to camp happily enough singing the latest music- 
hall airs. 

Theoretically, the following day, April 24, was a rest 
day, but not for Wood Johnson. His was the disagreeable 
task of getting blood out of a stone, or in other words, food 
out of the Head Man. That individual, lulled doubtless 
into a sense of security by the patronage of his house by 
the sahibs the previous evening, had done nothing. 
Probably, this was due not so much to wilful neglect, as to 
native inability to appreciate the value of time. What 
mattered a week, or two weeks, or even a month to the 
sahibs ? What was their hurry? Why were they so anxious 
to undergo hardships on the mountains when every day was 
bringing the summer nearer? Such was his philosophy— 
the same sort of philosophy in these regions that decrees 
that when you are invited to a wedding you find it usually 
more convenient to turn up two or three months after the 
ceremony. 

We repaired to the Head Man’s house to find him peace- 
fully tilling his garden. The Subadar was furious. He saw 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 177 


his reputation being destroyed, his authority set at nought, 
possibly even his head removed on his return to Khat- 
mandu. After a volley of invectives, he grasped the cower- 
ing Head Man, seized some rope lying handy, and pro- 
ceeded to lash him up to a post. “‘ Produce the food, or 
have your head cut off”—that appeared to be the gist of 
the conversation for the next few minutes. Of course we 
interceded. We had no wish for our way through Nepal to 
be littered with the heads of Head Men. Nevertheless, the 
situation was not without its humour. Imagine a portly 
and worshipful mayor of some British provincial town tied 
to a post in his own back garden, and told to supply a party 
of complete strangers with food, or have his head cut off in 
the event of not doing so. So the Head Man was released 
from his bonds. The thunder clouds disappeared from the 
brow of the Subadar, and Khunza slumbered peacefully in 
the sunlight once more. 

That afternoon we visited the Khunza Monastery. This 
is situated outside the village on the west bank of the 
Kangchen River. A rickety suspension bridge, the safety 
factor of which it would be scarcely wise to enquire into, 
spans the river. Entering a stone gateway, on which were 
carved the usual prayers, we passed through a forest of 
dilapidated prayer flags. 

Khunza Monastery is a branch of the famous Khampa 
Dzong Monastery in Thibet. Normally, the Buddhistic 
religion imposes celibacy upon the Lamas, but so lax 
have conditions become at Khunza that from the Head 
Lama downwards, they intermarry with the villagers. 
There were also chortens. These are stone monuments 


erected in honour of some former Lama saint. On the 
MK 


178 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


summit there is usually a crescent moon, sun, or lotus, 
whilst sacred relics, such as the ashes of Lamas, are placed 
in a niche. 

A Thibetan monastery is more in the nature of a village 
than a single group of buildings. For instance, about 8,000 
monks reside at the De-pung (Rice-heap) Monastery near 
Lhasa. Compared to the great Thibetan monasteries, 
Khunza Monastery is, of course, small. Its wooden build- 
ings are primitive, and display none of the grandeur of the 
great Thibetan monasteries. Passing along a narrow street, 
bounded by primitive two-storied houses, where circulated 
many varied and powerful odours, we were ushered through 
a doorway and up a flight of wooden steps, deeply furrowed 
with the passage of countless feet, into the monastery 
temple. As our eyes became accustomed to the gloom, we 
found ourselves to be in a barn-like room with uneven 
wooden floor. At one end gleamed little Aladdin-like oil 
lamps on altars, lighting the enigmatical face of a carved 
Buddha and effigies of former lamastic saints. ‘The decora- 
tions were of the usual garish mixture of red and yellow, 
the beams across the roof and the pillars supporting it red 
and the tapestries and friezes yellow. Dozens of little 
lockers filled with sacred books lined the walls. Presently, 
the stairs creaked beneath a heavy tread, and the Chief 
Lama, a very fat man with a dough-like face and crafty 
smile, entered the temple. 

On this occasion the hospitality consisted of some con- 
ventional devil dancing by a number of Lamas, but this 
was only the preliminary to a religious ceremony the 
purport of which was difficult to understand. Possibly 
it was intended as a blessing upon our expedition, but this 





KHUNZA 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 179 


was doubtful in view of our unpopular demands in the 
matter of food and coolies. 

The ceremony consisted of numerous incantations by 
the Head Lama, accompanied by the monastery band, 
and repeated by the Lamas, varied by an occasional 
vigorous ringing of a small bell by the Head Lama. Some- 
times the band would stop, and only the low mutter and 
wailing of the praying Lamas would be audible, like the 
rise and fall of wind in the rocks of a mountain top. Put 
such a scene on the stage of a London music hall and it 
would scarcely induce anything but boredom, but here, 
many marches from the nearest outpost of civilisation, it 
produced a strange impression upon us. The crowding 
cares of the Twentieth Century seemed to fade away. We 
were back in a medieval land caring nothing for progress, 
a land fiercely jealous of its ancient rights, its conservatism 
looking askance upon modernity and the outer world. 
Perhaps it is happier so. 

At the conclusion of the ceremony everyone was handed 
small quantities of rice and seeds which were cast into the 
middle of the floor. Among other things, the Head Lama 
showed us a knotted raw-hide whip, stained with blood, 
with which the Lamas are accustomed to keep order 
among the villagers, for they have the powers of life and 
death over the inhabitants of the district. 

Much of the power wielded by the Lamas over the 
destinies of Thibet, Nepal, and Sikkim is due to their prey- 
ing on the superstitious beliefs of the people. While on the 
expedition there was related to us a story concerning a 
certain high dignitary. The dignitary who owned a large 
and scattered estate decided to visit an outlying portion 


180 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


of it. There were, however, strong reasons why he should 
not do so. It appeared that a considerable portion of the 
revenue accruing from the estate had been pocketed by 
the Lamas of a neighbouring monastery. Therefore, he 
was told that there was a large and thoroughly malevolent 
devil who had taken possession of this portion of the estate, 
and that should its shadow fall upon him he would 
die an agonising and lingering death. Naturally the 
dignitary was loth to come to such an unpleasant end, 
and decided to postpone his visit. It was then that some 
ingenious person suggested that if he carried an umbrella 
the devil would be unable to cast its shadow over him. 
This idea was seized upon gladly, and the estate was visited 
under the devil-proof shelter of an enormous umbrella. It 
is to be hoped that the embezzling Lamas were brought 
to book. 

We had with us our portable gramophone, and suggested 
that the Head Lama might care to hear some white man’s 
tinned music. Thus it came about that for the first time 
in its history the religious gloom of the monastery was 
broken by Messrs. Layton and Johnstone and “ Sunny 
Side Up.” The Lamas gazed open mouthed for none of 
them had ever seen or heard a gramophone before, while 
the Head Lama forgetting his dignity squatted on the 
floor and gazed with great curiosity up the horn, seem- 
ingly under the impression that Messrs. Layton and 
Johnstone were the reincarnated voices of two holy English 
Lamas. 

Before we departed our host insisted on our drinking 
large quantities of marwa. It was a more intoxicating 
brand than the Head Man’s and the suspension bridge 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 181 


seemed to sway unpleasantly to more than one member 
of the expedition. 

It was necessary to establish a provision depot at Khunza, 
and we decided to leave Tikeram Thapa in charge, for he 
had displayed considerable aptitude in the making up and 
paying of accounts. Meanwhile, the Subadar would go 
down the valley, and arrange for food to be sent up on 
the backs of local coolies. Such was the procrastination of 
the Head Man that the porters’ food did not arrive until 
late that night. Fortunately, its quantity exceeded our 
expectations, and we finally turned in happy in the know- 
ledge that with eight maunds: we had sufficient food to 
feed our porters for at least a week, and could carry on 
without further delay to the Base Camp. 

The majority of the party were away early the next 
morning en route to Kangbachen. It was a perfect morn- 
ing ; a myriad water jewels gleamed on the pastures of 
Khunza ; the peaks rose serenely into a stainless blue sky, 
little puffs of mist eddying enquiringly from their shadowed 
hollows and meeting with annihilation from a brilliant 
sun. Wood Johnson remained behind to supervise the 
transport, and see that all the coolies were evacuated from 
the village. This last was important, because our men had 
not unnaturally made the most of their rest at Khunza. 
If the Sherpa or Bhutia has any vices, the only one I know 
is predilection to strong liquor at any and every oppor- 
tunity. But this is not so much a vice as another indica- 
tion of their childlike disposition, for, like a child, they 
will eat and drink more than is good for them, without 
a thought as to the consequences. Unfortunately, they are 


1 One maund=eighty Ibs. 


182 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


liable to become quarrelsome when intoxicated, and at 
such times, like an Irishman at a race meeting, they pick 
up the nearest weapon and proceed to run happily amok. 
Luckily, we had no serious damage done in this way, save 
for the porter stabbed at Tingling, and Dr. Richter was 
spared having to stay up all night, as did Mr. Somervell 
in the last Mount Everest expedition, sewing up scalp 
wounds. 

The march promised to be a long one, but Wood John- 
son had the brilliant idea that he and I would ride on yaks. 
Accordingly, the Head Man was summoned, and told to 
parade the local yaks. 

A yak was produced for Wood Johnson. Never have 
I seen a more inoffensive looking beast, and with its long 
hair and mild brown eyes, it might have been a child’s 
toy. Personally, I felt a little doubtful about it, and re- 
marked to Wood Johnson that yak-riding was not num- 
bered among my accomplishments. I also suggested that 
it would be unpleasant to be thrown over the edge of a 
mountain path. Wood Johnson’s reply was contemptuous. 
He said : ‘‘ Walk if you like, 7 am going to ride. No tea 
planter has ever been known to have been thrown by a 
yak.” Suiting his actions to his words, he vaulted with 
Wild West abandon on to the back of the yak. Watching 
him do it, I felt that there was nothing that he did not 
know about yaks, and that he had ridden them since 
infancy. 

For a few moments the yak stood peacefully. It turned 
its head and looked at Wood Johnson in a gentle, enquir- 
ing, pleading sort of way. Wood Johnson sat nonchalantly, 
but then with the idea of getting the yak to move, he hit 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 183 


it. The yak did move. From a gentle, doormat-like creature 
it became suddenly possessed of seven devils. It commenced 
to tear rapidly round and round in circles, and in the 
middle of one of these circles its back arched bow-like, 
and Wood Johnson sailed through the air, alighting heavily 
on his back. He got up. The yak had stopped, it was nib- 
bling a bit of grass, its mild brown eyes contemplating 
Wood Johnson with a sort of gentle, pitying, reproachful 
look. In the background stood the Head Man, his face 
a mask of Eastern passivity. 

A few minutes later I was walking along the path, having 
declined the yak that had been thrust upon me, leaving 
Wood Johnson swearing that he would ride a yak that 
day, or perish in the attempt. 

It was a delightful walk. The path lay through pine 
woods and glades yellow with primulas. Pine tops vignetted 
glimpses of cathedral-like peaks. It was a morning over- 
flowing with jollity and good humour. The little brooks 
hastening down the hillside towards the river gurgled and 
chuckled with merriment. Below in its rocky bed the river 
laughed more ponderously. The Pipes of Pan played softly 
in the treetops. 

The path was so good for the first few miles that I was 
always half expecting to come across a Beer Garden full 
of fat men in shorts noisily drinking beer. Certainly, in 
Switzerland such asylvan valley would have been so defiled 
every kilometre or so. There would have been red paint 
on the trees to guide the tourist from Beer Garden to Beer 
Garden. There would have been benches for them to rest 
upon ; the pine woods would have been cut down and 
laid bare in order that a view should be obtained from 


184 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


these seats, though this would have been unnecessary, for 
you could have bought picture postcards of the moun- 
tains, the coloured ones costing five centimes more than 
the plain. But here was a Switzerland unspoilt, Alpine 
beauty on a loftier, nobler scale, its paths traversed only 
by yaks and their herds. 

Presently the path descended into the torrent bed, which 
is here nearly a quarter of a mile wide. Great boulders, 
some of them as large as cottages, are piled in it, their 
rounded smoothness telling of terrific floods that have 
carried them down like pebbles, rolling them over and 
over. Once the path passed through a considerable stretch 
of forest that had been blasted by fire, indicating that long 
spells of dry weather sometimes occur in these parts. 

Some four miles from Khunza the stream was bridged. 
It would have shortened the day’s march to have crossed 
it, and continued up the western side of the river, but not 
unnaturally we followed the route marked in Professor 
Garwood’s map. Judging from the stony banks of the tor- 
rent, the floor of the valley was composed of an ancient 
moraine, in which the present stream is busily engaged in 
carving out a larger and larger channel. We were given an 
unpleasant example of the speed at which this old moraine 
is being eroded when crossing a steep slope of loose stones 
more than one hundred feet high above the river, for 
boulders, large and small, were constantly falling down 
this slope, while some blocks of rock, weighing many tons, 
seemed ready to come down at any moment. It was not a 
place to linger in. 

The path got worse and worse as we ascended, in places 
it was so overgrown with giant rhododendrons that it had 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 185 


to be cleared with kukris. Once we passed an enormous 
boulder fifty feet high at least, under which there was a 
cave with a fire blackened roof, and a small patch of cul- 
tivated ground outside which suggested that it was pos- 
sibly inhabited by a hermit, for there was no grazing 
ground handy for yaks. 

Finally, the path emerged from the forest, and we found 
ourselves confronted by the snout of the Jannu Glacier, 
which pushes a huge dyke of ice and moraine almost across 
the valley. Should this glacier advance and dam the 
streams from the Kangchenjunga Glacier and those of 
North-eastern Nepal, the consequences might be disas- 
trous for villages lower down the valley. 

The glacier snout is fully 1,000 feet high, and it was 
weary work clambering up its high moraine. Curiously 
enough, we were all feeling the effects of altitude, though 
the altitude was less than 15,000 feet. Mr. Freshfield re- 
marked the same feeling of tiredness and listlessness be- 
tween 14,000 and 17,000 feet. Is it because at this altitude 
the body undergoes a definite physical change? Acclima- 
tisation would appear not to be gradual, but taking 
place in stages, though these stages are not necessarily at 
the same heights for everyone. There should now be 
enough evidence for physicists to be able to draw some 
conclusions. Personally, I was in addition still suffering 
from the effects of my chill, and I could scarcely drag my 
unwilling body up the wearying slopes of loose stones. 

The afternoon mists had long since gathered, and cold, 
clammy vapours swirled over the drab stone covered hills 
of the glacier. It might have been difficult in the mist to 
have found the way over the moraine mounds, but for 


186 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Tencheddar who had gone on ahead and built cairns every 
few yards. At length we reached the other side. The mists 
lifted, and we gazed down to the flat valley floor where 
stood the huddled chalets of Kangbachen. Seen thus be- 
neath the mists, this barren and treeless valley, unrelieved 
by a single shaft of sunlight, appeared inexpressibly dreary. 
It was a scene that recalled to mind a similar evening in 
the Pass of Glencoe, when a low roof of mist divorced the 
world from its good wife the sun, and seemed to oppress me 
with a sense of gloom, foreboding, and death, so that I hur- 
ried through the grim defile, unwilling to linger on a spot 
rendered ghastly by its association with a fiendish crime. 

But as I slithered down the moraine, a light pierced the 
gloom. A tiny window of blue sky was disclosed, and in it 
was thrust a summit, red hot from the furnace of the set- 
ting sun. It was Jannu, 10,000 feet above me. Even as I 
watched, the glow faded from it. For a few seconds, before 
the mists closed in again, it gleamed down palely white, 
like some nun, disdainful of the world, yet peering curi- 
ously upon it from some high window of an unapproach- 
able convent. 

There came a sound of yak-bells, a sound, at once 
homely and calling up memories of Switzerland. Gloom 
was replaced by cheerfulness. A small boy was driving the 
yaks back to Kangbachen from the neighbouring pastures. 
He was crooning a song to himself as he did so, a mon- 
otonous little tune of infinite repetitions. At Kangbachen, 
one day is but a repetition of the last, and music is but an 
echo of life itself. When he saw me the tune froze on his lips. 
I did not blame him, for what he saw was a villainous look- 
ing fellow, with a stubbly red beard, an old slouch hat, and 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 187 


an aged pair of plus fours. He might have been forgiven for 
thinking me an apparition, a Mi-go, or some other un- 
pleasant and undesirable character. Having, however, 
after a critical scrutiny, assured himself that I was in 
reality, perfectly harmless, he jumped on to a yak, which 
splashed through the torrent leaving me wondering 
whether the latter would have suffered Wood Johnson. 

I followed, and arriving at the camping site found our 
servants had mostly got in before us, and my own tent 
already pitched. I was surprised to see Nemu washing 
something in the stream. On inspection, it proved to be a 
dishcloth with which he was wont to clean my plate, knife, 
and fork. As this dishcloth had already reached saturation 
point as regards grease and dirt, I wondered by what pro- 
cess of reasoning Nemu had decided to wash it at this 
particular hour and place, even though he had always a 
capacity for doing the unexpected. As one of the porters 
carrying some of my luggage had not arrived, and did not 
arrive until the next morning, it is possible that the washing 
of the dishcloth may have been simply to propitiate my prob- 
able wrath. The workings of the native mind are curious. 

A number of the porters did not get into camp that 
night. This was largely due to the carousals at Khunza, 
and their inevitable aftermath of headaches. However, 
they were quite happy bivouacking out in the woods 
around fires. Wood Johnson arrived proud and happy, 
having with characteristic bull-dog determination suc- 
ceeded in mastering the yak and actually ridden it for the 
first few miles. 

We awoke next morning, April 26, to see Jannu, and its 
attendant peaks, in all their magnificence. From this side 


188 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


there is no possibility of climbing Jannu, and nothing I have 
seen is more hopelessly unassailable than the terrific sweep 
of its northern precipices. The peaks to the south of the 
Jannu Glacier and to the west of Jannu, though consider- 
ably lower, look equally hopeless. They are but acute 
wedges of rock, the ribs and ridges of which are plastered 
in ice that has been fashioned by time and weather into 
mere blades and biscuits. These peaks possess no main ridges, 
they are upflung indeterminate wedges of extraordinary 
steepness and complexity, and their ribs and ridges usually 
end in complete cut-offs, consisting of rock precipices, or 
hanging glaciers. Looking at such peaks, one is forcibly 
reminded of the geological newness of the Himalayas as 
compared to the Alps and other mountain ranges. They 
have not weathered sufficiently to present the mount- 
aineer with feasible routes. They are still elemental and 
savage masses spat out by fire and eruption. Time has 
had little softening influence on them. Restless looking, 
inhospitable peaks they are, grand to look upon but evil 
to climb. 

Kangbachen is situated at the junction of the Kangchen- 
junga and Thangchen rivers. The last named flows down a 
valley, which was formerly traversed by traders between 
Thibet and Nepal, but owing to political friction between 
these two countries, it would appear to have fallen into 
disuse. During what must have been more profitable days, 
Kangbachen must have flourished, and its inhabitants 
were most likely of good physique, but with the closing of 
this trade route, it was cut off from the world. Among so 
small a population, the evils of intermarriage soon mani- 
fested themselves, and at the present time a number of its 





NEPALI DWARFS AT KANGBACHEN : THE EVIL EFFECTS OF INTER- 
MARRIAGE—NOTE THE BABY ON THE WOMAN’S BACK 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 189 


inhabitants are crétins, not quite the ghastly type as de- 
picted and described in Whymper’s Scrambles Among 
the Alps, but nevertheless stunted, dwarf-like and seem- 
ingly possessed of but little intelligence. Several of them 
collected round our camp, and eyed it with curiosity. Two, 
a man and his wife, were but three feet high, and the 
woman carried on her back a baby almost as large as her- 
self, which seems to show that physical development is 
arrested at an early age, judging from this couple, at the 
age of five or six. By no means all the inhabitants were 
thus stunted, and several of the children appeared quite 
normal and healthy. 

It was desirable, if possible, to replenish our larder. 
Wild sheep were known to be in the vicinity, and as local 
knowledge might be helpful, we engaged an old gentleman, 
who styled himself the village Shikari. 

Before breaking camp, I went a short way up the valley 
for some photographs. I had not walked more than two 
hundred yards from the village when, on turning a corner, 
I found myself face to face with a wild sheep. He was a fine 
specimen, with a splendid head, and had I taken with me 
a rifle, I could have shot him easily, as he stood staring at 
me without moving for more than a minute. But soon fear 
overcame his astonishment and curiosity. With a tremend- 
ous and agile leap he was away up the hillside, and in a 
few seconds was lost to sight among the grey boulders. 

It was impossible to leave Kangbachen early that 
morning, owing to many of the bivouacking porters not 
having arrived. The march from Khunza to Kangbachen 
had been a hard one for them, and it was necessary to 
give them an off-day, or at least a very short and easy 


190 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


march. At Wood Johnson’s suggestion, therefore, it was 
agreed that they should have no more than three hours 
marching. This does not sound much, but with full loads 
of sixty to eighty pounds carried at a height of 15,000 feet, 
it was enough for tired men. The porters, having been told 
of this through Lobsang, were perfectly willing to go on. 

Passing through the evil-smelling, refuse strewn main 
street of Kangbachen, we found ourselves on an excellent 
path running along the western side of the valley. As yet, 
we had had no glimpse of Kangchenjunga, but some of its 
snow-clad neighbours were now visible far ahead up the 
valley. The snow-fields of one peak in particular aroused 
our ski-ing enthusiasm. The path, in keeping with the 
usual evil habit of paths in this part of the world, presently 
petered out into a stony waste formed by the terminal 
moraine of the Kangchenjunga Glacier. In order to save 
time we had engaged several locals from Kangbachen who 
knew every inch of the way to the upper pastures by the 
side of the glacier where they are accustomed to graze 
their yak herds. Among these was the local milkman, or 
Dhudwallah, of Kangbachen whom we had engaged to bring 
up fresh milk to the Base Camp at regular intervals. This old 
man, who was to prove distinctly useful to us later on, was 
a picturesque figure. With his lined, seamed and weather- 
beaten face, he might have been any age, but his bright 
eye, and the speed with which he walked up the hillside 
on broken ground betokened the born hillman. He was 
exceptionally dirty, and exuded a strong odour of yaks and 
other things, and more than one of us had qualms in 
entrusting the milk to his care. Also, he expectorated, a vice 
not common among natives, and expectorated with an 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL IgI 


accuracy of range which I have seldom seen surpassed. 
This accuracy we hoped would save the milk. 

As in the valley lower down, denudation had worn a 
deep rift in the old valley floor, but here the slopes of loose, 
insecure boulders were much larger—in places over a 
hundred feet high—and the danger of traversing beneath 
them was proportionately greater. Above these slopes, the 
mountainside at one place appeared dangerously unstable, 
owing to an outward dipping strata of rock. Rock falls 
were obviously not uncommon, and one of many tens of 
thousands of tons had only recently taken place. For more 
than a hundred yards we scrambled as quickly as possible 
over masses of scarred boulders. It was a relief to leave the 
vicinity, for though the risk of crossing such a place is 
small, it exists, nevertheless. In view of the communica- 
tions that must be maintained and constant passage of 
porters up and down between the Base Camp and Kang- 
bachen, it would perhaps have been better to have gone a 
longer if more fatiguing way round. 

Wood Johnson and I were last, and with such an easy 
march in prospect, we sat ourselves down on every con- 
venient grassy patch, and lounged in the sun. 

In its lower portion, the Kangchenjunga Glacier is so 
moraine covered that the inexperienced might be forgiven 
for thinking that there was no glacier there at all. This 
stony camouflage has, indeed, often led travellers, and 
even surveyors, into the mistake of thinking that Hima- 
layan Glaciers are much shorter than they actually are. 
These moraines tell a tale of destruction, and their size 
alone is eloquent of nature’s forces that are ever engaged 
in pulling down the proud peaks of the Himalayas. 


192 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


As we ascended the valley, the scenery became wilder 
and the ridges on either side rose in height. Farther up the 
valley we caught a glimpse of the Wedge Peak, with its 
amazing rock and ice precipices. Heavy clouds began to 
gather, the sun was obscured, the temperature dropped, 
and a bitter wind charged with snowflakes smote down 
from the snows. 

The porters, believing that the march was to be a short 
one, had taken things easily, and Wood Johnson and I 
hurried anxiously on. But there was no sign of the others 
having stopped to camp. The weather worsened, it began 
to snow heavily. Evening was drawing on apace as we 
reached a little group of huts marked in the map as Ram- 
thang, 15,431 feet. There camp had been made. The 
actual marching time for unladen Europeans had been 
about five hours. 

The day ended with a heavy blizzard. Less than half 
the porters arrived, the remainder spending the night in the 
blizzard, many of them without shelter. 

The snow lay over six inches deep next morning. Above 
the huts of Ramthang, the way lay over flat, stony pastures. 
With the new snow covering the ground, plus the hot sun 
piercing the dissolving mists, our faces were threatened 
once again with disaster. In a desperate attempt to save 
mine from further destruction, I donned a white cotton 
veil. I found little to recommend in it. It tended to 
produce a feeling of breathlessness, whilst it was apt to 
strain the eyes, thereby producing a headache. The latter 
disadvantage was, however, overcome by cutting holes for 
the goggles. 

Presently, the mountainside became so steep that it 





KANGCHENJUNGA FROM THE BASE CAMP 


IN UNKNOWN NEPAL 193 


forced us down to the Kangchenjunga Glacier. Himalayan 
glaciers have usually a convenient trough between the ice 
and the mountainside. Were it not for this trough, the 
ascent of most of them would be very tiring as they are 
usually very bumpy. To give some idea of the moraine 
covered portion of the Kangchenjunga Glacier, I can only 
say that it resembles a road-mender’s paradise, or a 
London thoroughfare that has been erupted by pneumatic 
drills. 

It was curious how badly we were going at this moderate 
altitude. Kurz and [I had our lunch together, and we both 
agreed that though we were only about equal in height to 
the summit of Mont Blanc, we were feeling the altitude 
more than we had ever done on that mountain. Possibly, 
it was because glacier lassitude is at its maximum in a 
glacier trough. Members of the Everest expeditions re- 
marked the same thing in the trough of the East Rongbuk 
Glacier. 

After lunch we toiled on again. The trough was lost in 
amaze of moraine mounds, and we toiled over miniature 
summits, and along stony valleys. Once more, with the 
coming of afternoon, the sky had clouded. It grew leaden, 
and a strong, biting wind hinted at another blizzard as we 
ground up a stony slope. Above was a flat shelf of coarse 
grass. Here we decided to make the Base Camp. 

Wind and snow harassed us as we pitched our tents on 
the leeward side of a little knoll. It was a dreary welcome. 
All the porters got in that evening but they exhibited little 
enthusiasm at so doing, they were too tired. We crept into 
our sleeping bags with a flurry of snow beating on the tents. 


As I lay in mine, I thought over the events of the past three 
Nk 


194 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


weeks. We had met and overcome certain transport 
difficulties, but these were by no means at an end. Dif. 
ficulties of the route, and lack of time, had meant working 
the porters very hard indeed. On the last Everest 
Expedition they had been given one rest day in every four 
or five working days, whenever possible or circumstances 
justified it. Our porters had been marched for the first 
eleven days without a rest day, including a double march 
over the Kang La, a march which must have stressed the 
physique of the fittest of them. The march from Khunza 
had also been a tiring one, whilst the march from Kang- 
bachen to Ramthang is better forgotten. Would even our 
best men, the “ Tigers,” on whom so much depended 
stand up to the strains and hardships of Kangchenjunga ? 


CHAPTER X 
THE BASE CAMP 


The temperature dropped to zero Fahrenheit in the 
night, and the morning of May 27 dawned cold and clear. 
As I pulled aside the frozen tent flaps discomfort was for- 
gotten. It was a morning of silver and blue, silver where 
the rising sun sparkled on the crystals of newly formed 
snow, blue in the shadows. Opposite the Base Camp, 
rising in one clean sweep of 8,000 feet above the Kang- 
chenjunga Glacier, was the Wedge Peak. It is appropri- 
ately named. Other mountains may be termed fanged, or 
sugar loafed, but the Wedge Peak seen from the north is 
nothing more or less than a gigantic elemental wedge. It 
is a brutal mountain, possessing neither the structural 
massiveness of Kangchenjunga, nor the fairy-like ethereal 
remoteness of Siniolchum. The last named mountain has 
been called the “ Embodiment of Inaccessibility,” yet 
who would think of Siniolchum in terms of accessibility 
or inaccessibility ? it is too beautiful to be defiled by man. 
The Wedge Peak is different, its very aggressiveness chal- 
lenges the mountaineer to pit himself against it, yet what 
mountaineer would accept that challenge? Even as I 
watched, it flung an icy gauntlet to the glacier, and the 
still morning air trembled to the dull boom ofan avalanche. 
Look at it through glasses, if you will, and seek a way up 
the sliced granite precipices, but when your gaze has 


passed up these, it will halt aghast upon the ice slopes 
195 


196 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


above. Even imagination will boggle at the thought of 
having to climb them, at cutting and cutting for hour after 
hour, and getting—nowhere. Even imagination slips and 
is cast headlong down the precipices. Turn to the skyline. 


SH4, 
y 1) 
(ests 


d 
SF; 


‘Miles 


Non 
: aks 
. 


fy 
o 


ie ay Wigs, ae 
he Tent Peak jv a 
see 090 a 


Ty 
UN 


whepiere 


\ : 
VAN Sy 


ae Tee 
ANC HENJU Nt ( 


_ UL 


208 NM 
wea Gee ee 
Sori Why ne eg 1 Syvip 
ee 
SE 


0 (9126) 


= 
: 
3s 
—2 


\ 


2 


Oe 
a 





By courtesy of The Times 


There ice, not ordinary ice, sharp-edged and unbroken, 
but ice hacked and tortured by the winds, clings to the 
ridges ; thin flakes of ice through which the sun gleams 
with a cold fire ; pinnacles of fairy-like delicacy, elegant 
busts, daring minarets, extravagant mushrooms, a strange 


THE BASE CAMP 197 


goblinesque procession, drunken and tottering, frozen in 
a downward march. 

I tore eye and mind away. Eastwards rose the Twins : 
peaks more staid and comfortable, not merely elemental 
and savage, but displaying that dignity and grandeur of 
the nobly proportioned and adequately buttressed. Framed 
in this magnificent gateway is Kangchenjunga. It is farther 
away, but distance enhances rather than detracts from its 
intrinsic grandeur, so great is its scale. It is built up of 
icy terraces one above the other. Rock cliffs separate 
each terrace. Glaciers rest on the terraces, their lower 
edges forming ice walls anything up to 1,000 feet in 
height—tiers of fortifications guarding the precipices from 
assault. 

If the difficulties of the Wedge Peak are blatantly ob- 
vious, those of Kangchenjunga are less obvious. At first 
sight, the difficulties of Kangchenjunga on this side fail 
to impress. Glancing at the apparent angle of the moun- 
tain, with its sloping snow-covered terraces, one tended 
to exclaim involuntarily “ It will go!” But, gradually, as 
first general impressions were superseded by a closer 
analysis, optimism was ruthlessly uprooted ; the easy be- 
came difficult, the difficult impossible, and the impossible 
appalling. 

The face of the mountain is nearly 10,000 feet in height. 
Compare this to some of the greatest Alpine mountain- 
sides. The southern side of Mont Blanc rises 11,000 feet 
from the Val Veni, yet compared to Kangchenjunga, this 
cannot strictly be called a genuine mountain face, for the 
lower part of it is grass and forest covered, whilst it is 
broken up into a series of ribs and ridges radiating from 


198 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the summit of Mont Blanc. The west face of Kangchen- 
junga is a mountain wall of almost equal height, rising 
not from a green valley, but from a glacier, and cloaked 
in snow and ice. To compare Kangchenjunga with the 
Alps is like comparing a pygmy with a giant. But it is the 
only possible form of comparison, and the only one which 
the reader unacquainted with Himalayan conditions will 
be able to appreciate. It is a better comparison than to 
state that it is equal to so many Snowdons piled one on 
top of another, a comparison which only vaguely suggests 
height. Height and scale can only be thought of in terms 
of a more direct comparison. 

The view we were looking at was similar to that seen 
by Mr. Freshfield. His camp, however, was a little farther 
up the glacier, on the corner he calls Pangperma, where 
the Jonsong Glacier unites with the Kangchenjunga 
Glacier. One thing was very clearly impressed upon us at 
the start, and that was that if such an expert mountaineer 
as Mr. Freshfield considered that Kangchenjunga offered 
the greatest chance of attack on this side, it must indeed 
be a formidable mountain. 

There is probably no great peak in the Himalayas on 
which so much snow is precipitated every year. Strictly 
speaking, it is not on the main watershed of the Himalayas 
which separates the arid plateaux of Thibet from the 
northern states of India, it juts out like a rugged peninsula 
from the main mountain coast. The Everest group is on 
the main coastal watershed, and by reason of the inter- 
vention between it and the plains of India of many inferior 
ridges, receives the south-west monsoon after much of its 
fury has been spent. Such hills as there are separating 





THE WEDGE PEAK FROM THE BASE CAMP 


THE BASE CAMP 199 


Kangchenjunga from the plains are not high enough to 
break the monsoon, and the mountain, and its satellite 
peaks, receives almost the full force of it. It would be 
interesting to know what the annual precipitation is on 
Kangchenjunga as compared to Mont Blanc. It is possible 
that the amount of snow that falls on the upper part of 
the mountain is two or three times greater than that of 
the Alpine giant. Only evaporation prevents the glaciers 
of Kangchenjunga from extending far down into the 
lower valleys.: 

Mr. Freshfield’s analysis of the possibilities of this side 
of Kangchenjunga was a shrewd one. He considered that 
the greatest difficulties would be experienced on the lower 
part of the mountain. Once the upper terrace immediately 
under the highest summit had been gained, he considered 
that the final climb would be practicable. ‘ The moun- 
taineer,” he writes, ‘“‘ should search to the left between 
the saddle which connects Kangchenjunga and the Twins.” 
Unfortunately, this saddle is hidden by the shoulder of 
the Twins, and he did not see it. Had he done so, his re- 
port could not have been anything but a pessimistic one, 
and we, in all probability, would not have planned an 
attack on this side of the mountain. As it was, we hoped 
to find a way on to the North Ridge which connects the 
highest summit to the Twins. 

Though Mr. Freshfield considered that the Kangchen- 
junga Glacier was the most likely line of attack, he was 
seriously under-estimating the difficulty of the mountain 
when he wrote that “‘ the peak is hardly likely to be gained 
with less than two nights spent on its actual face.” We 


1 See Appendix : ‘‘ Glaciology : Snow Conditions, and Avalanches.” 


200 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


estimated that a minimum of six camps would be required. 
It is necessary to add, however, that when Mr. Freshfield 
made his journey, little was known about the effects of 
great altitude upon climbers, or the difficulties of snow, 
ice, and weather above 23,000 feet. On Everest six camps 
were established above the Base Camp, and Everest is, 
technically speaking, an easy mountain. Kangchenjunga 
is in everything but actual height an infinitely more diffi- 
cult mountain than Everest. 

The Base Gamp was separated some five miles from the 
foot of the western face. At this distance it is difficult to 
form a just estimate of mountain difficulties and dangers. 
Also, we were not far enough away to escape the illusive 
effects of foreshortening, or near enough to be able to see 
whether or not a route might be found even up the glacier, 
that was not likely to be swept by avalanches from the 
huge hanging glaciers of Kangchenjunga and the Twins. 
Mr. Freshfield found himself in a similar predicament 
when examining Kangchenjunga, and although of the 
opinion that the most practicable route existed on this 
side, wisely committed himself to no definite statement. 
While admitting that “‘the whole face of the mountain 
might be imagined to have been constructed by the De- 
mon of Kangchenjunga for the express purpose of defence 
against human assault, so skilfully is each comparatively 
weak spot raked by ice and rock batteries,” he was yet 
not prepared to say Kangchenjunga was not possible. 
“Perseverance and good judgment may meet their 
reward.” 

Our plan, then, boiled down to this, we must reach 
the North Ridge, if possible, at the lowest point—the col 


THE BASE CAMP 201 


between Kangchenjunga and the Twins. We must climb 
this ridge, and make our last camp somewhere on the 
upper of three glacier-covered terraces, about 1,500 feet, 
beneath the summit under the final rock pyramid. 

There was one alternative, to gain the first or lowest 
terrace, and from it climb directly up the mountain face, 
past the second to the upper terrace. If the first terrace 
could be gained, the upper difficulties did not appear to 
be insuperable. It was by no means certain, however, what 
sort of climbing would be found on the rocks and ice be- 
tween the three terraces. Also, in the event of a heavy snow- 
fall, retreat would be impossible, owing to the danger of 
snow avalanches, for the obvious route between the ter- 
races formed a natural funnel down which they might be 
expected to sweep. But the chief difficulty would be in 
gaining the lower terrace. So far as we could see from the 
Base Camp, the ice wall forming the lower edge of this 
ran without a break across the mountainside. Only on the 
extreme right did there seem any possibility of getting up 
to it, but even if this was accomplished, the mountaineer 
would be exposed for over a mile to the risk of ice ava- 
lanches while traversing to the left towards the second 
terrace. 

Kurz had previously suggested this route, but one glance 
at the mountain was enough, it was hopelessly and des- 
perately dangerous. Owing to the interposing shoulder of 
the Twins, we could not tell whether or not the lower ice 
wall petered out to the left, but the general lie and form 
of the mountainside suggested that it swept right round 
to beneath the col between Kangchenjunga and the Twins. 
A prolonged examination revealed the disturbing truth 


202 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


that there was no chance of successfully attacking any 
portion of the mountainside visible from the Base Camp, 
and that any direct assault on the face from the head of 
the main Kangchenjunga Glacier was foredoomed to 
failure. The only hope was that held out by Mr. Fresh- 
field, that rocky shelves might lead easily upwards from 
the Eastern Tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier to 
the col between Kangchenjunga and the Twins. The fate 
of the expedition would be decided by what lay round 
the shoulder of the Twins. 

It was a fascinating, yet depressing view. It was fascina- 
ting to let eye and mind wander over that huge mountain 
wall, to pass up the granite precipices, and over the de- 
fending bastions of gleaming ice, resting finally on the 
summit where the streamers of wind-blown snow were 
being torn off by the westerly wind. But it was depressing 
to think that where the eye might wander so easily, the 
body could not follow. 

The weather had relapsed into a capricious vein. The 
morning was a beautiful one, and under the warm sun 
the snow vanished as one looked at it. But towards mid- 
day dank, snow-charged clouds began to gather. A cold 
and hostile wind was signalled, and came rushing up the 
valley ; snow began to whip across, frothing the ground. 

A base camp must be something more than a starting 
point, it must be the G.H.Q.., the hospital, and provision 
dump of an expedition, and not least, the peaceful haven 
at which tired and worn-out climbers can recuperate their 
strength. In fact, the psychological importance of a good 
base camp to a Himalayan climbing party is great both 
to Europeans and porters. 





ioe Aue ee hale a 


KANGCHENJUNGA, SHOWING PROPOSED ROUTE, FROM THE BASE CAMP 


THE BASE CAMP 203 


The thick, peaty turf lent itself admirably to the build- 
ing of huts for the porters. Duvanel, Wood Johnson, and 
myself were the leading surveyors, architects, and builders. 
A piece of ground was levelled, and the construction of 
a building that was to serve both as a cookhouse and 
porters’ quarters was commenced. 

The methods adopted by Wood Johnson and myself 
were primitive. Having prised out stones, we piled them 
on top of each other, filling up the intervening spaces with 
clods of earth. Duvanel, however, was not so easily pleased. 
He displayed a praiseworthy and unexpected aptitude for 
the work. With that meticulous accuracy and attention to 
detail that are such admirable qualities in the Swiss, he 
proceeded to build a wall that will stand through all 
time. Not for him clods of earth piled higgledy piggledy, 
but stones that fitted into one another; and corners 
that were corners, and not tottering masses of stones 
and turf. 

At length the task was completed. With a large sheet of 
canvas stretched from wall to wall as a roof, and with a 
low front, it presented such a curious pavilion-like appear- 
ance that it inspired me to nail to it a notice that read, 
“*M.C.C. Members Only.” Then we stood back with a 
sigh of satisfaction to admire the result of our labours. But 
the next moment a puff of wind came up the valley, and 
the whole front of the pavilion, which had been constructed 
by Wood Johnson and myself, collapsed, leaving Duvanel’s 
wall alone standing. Perhaps our type of architecture was 
too Gothic in its conception ; Duvanel’s was Norman, and 
so his wall stood. Generations hence, when the descendants 
of Sir Henry Lunn and Mr. George Lunn run fortnightly 


204 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


tours to the Pangperma Palace Hotel and Kangchenjunga, 
people on their way to the Helicopterdrome for the ascent 
of Kangchenjunga will pause and gaze in astonishment 
on Duvanel’s Wall. Honeymoon couples will sit under it 
in the moonlight, and hoarse-voiced local guides will bellow 
opinions and lies as to its origin and antiquity. 

A day or two after we had dug ourselves in, a large pole 
was carried up from below Kangbachen and _ various 
prayer flags were affixed to it, not only as a propitiation 
to the gods in the future, but in expiation for our crimes 
in the past. Most important of these latter was the releas- 
ing of sundry devils by the rash removal of stones during 
our building operations. It appeared that the sole func- 
tion of stones is to act as a shelter for devils, and by mov- 
ing stones we had evicted any number of them. As a result 
they were highly indignant with us, and unless propitiated 
might wreak dire vengeance upon us. 

A special medicinal tent was allotted to Dr. Richter, 
the atmosphere of which soon became impregnated with 
the unpleasant and insidious odours associated with the 
profession of medicine. During the march Richter had 
trained one of the porters in elementary first-aid. This 
man had been presented with a Red Cross armlet, the 
psychological effect of which, combined with Richter’s 
teaching, had produced such an excellent effect, that 
he had become quite expert in the art of applying iodine 
and bandaging. 

Soon after we arrived at the Base Camp we were sub- 
mitted to the usual tests of breath-holding, pulse rate, lung 
pressure and capacity, etc. Though the height was but 
16,500 feet, I found that I was still unacclimatised, and 


THE BASE CAMP 205 


could only hold my breath for twenty-five seconds. It is 
interesting to note that three weeks later, at a height of 
20,000 feet, I was able to manage thirty-five seconds. 

Acclimatisation is, of course, one of the most important 
factors in high Himalayan climbing. In the short season 
available for attempting peaks such as Kangchenjunga 
and Everest, it is very desirable that the climber should 
become acclimatised as quickly as possible. Whether a 
climber climbs better after he has become quickly accli- 
matised or slowly acclimatised is doubtful. Experience on 
Everest would seem to show that the likeliest man to reach 
the summit is not the man who acclimatises quickly early 
on in the expedition, but the man who acclimatises so 
slowly that he is at his best towards the end of the expedi- 
tion. The experience of Mr. Odell on the last Everest 
Expedition affords an interesting example of a man who 
acclimatised so slowly that he was not at his best until 
nearly the end of the expedition, at which stage he was 
fitter than those who acclimatised earlier. 

Against slow acclimatisation on Everest and Kangchen- 
junga must always be set the all important factor of time. 
We could not reasonably expect more than a month of 
good weather in which to attempt Kangchenjunga, and 
even this short period might well be curtailed by the early 
breaking of the monsoon. 

It was with this in mind that Dr. Richter had devised 
two methods which he hoped would aid the climbers in 
acclimatising quickly. The first was by withdrawing 200 
cubic centimetres of blood from each climber. The object 
of this was to lessen the blood pressure, in order to counter- 
act to some extent the low pressure of the atmosphere. 


206 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Mountain sickness (lack of acclimatisation) is due not only 
to lack of sufficient oxygen in the air, but to the low pres- 
sure of the atmosphere as compared to that to which 
the body is accustomed normally. This low pressure 
reacts unfavourably on the blood and nervous centres, 
producing headaches, general lassitude, and in some 
cases, nausea. 

These ill effects are automatically countered by the body, 
which increases the number of hemoglobins in the red 
corpuscles of the blood. So far as it is known, it is only by 
increasing the number of these hemoglobins that the body 
is able to adapt itself to the low pressure and lack of oxygen 
at high altitudes. It was difficult, therefore, to see what 
practical use withdrawal of blood could be. For one thing, 
taking such a large quantity of blood away must inevit- 
ably result in a temporary weakening of the body, and 
therefore the climber’s powers. Also, it is well known that 
the body quickly remakes and replaces any blood that has 
been lost. At all events, I refused to part with my blood, 
and so, too, did the rest of the party with the exception of 
Professor Dyhrenfurth and Duvanel. The first, no doubt, 
through a sense of duty towards the scientific objects of 
the expedition, and the latter because he seemed to like 
it. The remaining members withstood the doctor’s vam- 
pirish entreaties for their blood. 

There was more to be said for the second experiment. 
The state of an acclimatised body at a high altitude closely 
resembles the effect of anemia at a normal altitude. 
Anemia is a poverty of blood due to the lack of red cor- 
puscles and hemoglobins, but it has been found that 
ordinary liver eaten by the patient has the effect of 


THE BASE CAMP 207 


increasing these, and thereby the quantity of blood. The 
mountaineer at a high altitude suffers not so much from 
poverty of blood, but from a lack of the essential hemo- 
globins. It was hoped that eating a concentrated liver pre- 
paration would have the effect of increasing these hemo- 
globins, and hastening acclimatisation. High altitude 
also induces wastage of the body, so that anything which 
would strengthen the blood is advantageous. Therefore, 
each climber was presented with a bottle filled with tablets 
of concentrated liver, three of which had to be taken three 
times a day. I regret to say that being somewhat absent- 
minded by nature, I took mine for only two days, after 
which I usually forgot to take them at all. Sometimes, 
however, I would find the bottle in my pocket, or at the 
bottom of my rucksack, and I would then swallow a large 
number of tablets at once in an endeavour to make up for 
what I had forgotten. Such irregularities are to be de- 
plored, and it is to be feared that the liver tablets were 
not so beneficial as they might have been had I taken 
them more regularly. Schneider was, however, meticulous 
as to taking them, and I used to see him rolling his ration 
meditatively round his tongue, instead of swallowing them 
as per instructions, after meals. 

In the evening we would gather in the mess tent, where, 
muffled up to the ears in sweaters, we would eat our dinner 
and endeavour to preserve some semblance of cheerfulness 
while wind and snow beat without. In order to delude 
ourselves into thinking that we were really enjoying life a 
porter would be told off every evening to work the gramo- 
phone, which he would keep in full blast for the duration 
of the meal. Once or twice the temperature was so low 


208 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


that it froze up the vitals of the gramophone, which after 
slowing down into a dismal dirge, would finally stop 
altogether with a protesting groan. 

It was necessary to remain at the Base Camp some days 
in order to rest the porters, and prepare the plan of cam- 
paign. As yet, owing to the non-arrival of the second and 
third parties, we were still without much necessary equip- 
ment, and what news there was as to the state of the trans- 
port was not altogether satisfactory. In fact it seemed 
probable that the delay to Colonel Tobin’s bandobast on 
the Kang La, which had been caused by bad weather and 
lack of porters, owing to desertions from our party and 
our consequent inability to send back sufficient help, might 
result in a serious shortage of food. It was, therefore, de- 
cided to slaughter a yak which had been sent up from 
Kangbachen. I felt sorry for this yak, for it was a depressed 
looking beast, and its sad brown eyes seemed always to 
follow us about piteously, as though aware of its impending 
fate. Wood Johnson was its executioner, and the fell deed 
was done with Professor Dyhrenfurth’s rifle. Although 
Wood Johnson tried on several occasions to get near to 
wild sheep it must be confessed that this was the only useful 
rifle shooting accomplished, unless the assassination of a 
tame pigeon at Khunza is included. 

On April 29, we decided to explore two peaks, both of 
about 20,000 feet, to the north of the Base Camp. It was 
arranged that Wieland should tackle one, and Wood 
Johnson and myself the other. The weather was good 
when Wood Johnson and I set off up the stony moraine 
slopes above the Base Camp. From the crest we had an 
excellent view of our objective, a cone-like peak with 


THE BASE CAMP 2064 


a sharp summit of snow, which formed the culminating 
point of a long rock ridge set at a comparatively easy 
angle. 

We halted for some minutes in the sun to enjoy the 
glorious panorama of Kangchenjunga and its neighbour- 
ing peaks and glaciers. From the Tent Peak to the Wedge 
Peak nothing was hidden, save only the two upper tribu- 
taries of the Kangchenjunga Glacier, and in particular, 
the bay of the Eastern Tributary Glacier and the slopes 
to the North Ridge, on the feasibility of which so much 
depended. The upper ridges were smoking with blown 
snow, telling of a fierce westerly wind. One silvery banner 
from the crest of Kangchenjunga streamed far out against 
the blue sky. Since we had arrived at the Base Camp we 
had not seen the mountain unassailed by wind. Was it 
always so, we wondered. The chances of climbing the 
North Ridge in the face of such a relentless opponent 
would be nil. 

Himalayan peaks are cruel. The Alps are the “ Play- 
ground of Europe,” the Himalayas the Playground of the 
gods. The Alps provide physical and esthetical enjoy- 
ment, the Himalayas, the fiercer Joys of achievement. In 
the Alps, when you have climbed a mountain, you want 
to climb it by other routes, to explore every ridge, tramp 
every glacier, to make a friend of it. You get to know its 
moods, learn to appreciate its weather vagaries. There is 
nothing friendly about a Himalayan peak. You feel that 
it is coldly hostile, that it resents intrusion. It allows no 
latitude, it seizes upon the slightest mistake. It will kill 
you if it can. And so if you climb it, you climb it only to 


conquer it for the sake of achievement. To do so you may 
Ox 


210 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


have to mortify the flesh, steeling yourself to overcome 
bodily and mental weariness. When you have reached its 
summit, you have finished with it. There is no desire to 
renew acquaintances, or make a friend of Himalayan peaks, 
they resent familiarity. And always they will kill you—if 
they can. 

How is it that the mountaineer should gain such an 
impression ? Is it merely the height, the scale, the distance 
from civilisation, the weather, the clearness of the atmo- 
sphere, the unknown? Theoretically, I suppose, a combi- 
nation of all these things. Actually, you cannot help feel- 
ing that these peaks are imbued with a fanatical hatred 
towards the intruder. They are as conservative in their 
attitude towards modernity and progress as the humans 
who dwell in the valleys beneath them. 

We continued on our way, passing under the snout of 
a small glacier that descends from the north-west slopes 
of the Cone Peak, as we subsequently called it. This glacier 
is very broken, yet there were a few crevasses in it. The 
ice, which is curiously stratified, was hummocked and 
pinnacled, for its surface had been raised and broken by 
internal pressure. There were few actual crevasses, and 
many of the ice pinnacles were markedly bent. In the 
Alps such bending would be impossible without a fracture, 
and one is led to the conclusion that Himalayan ice is 
more plastic than Alpine ice. This plasticity is doubtless 
due to an enormous range of temperature.’ 

Toiling up a slope of scree, we found ourselves on the 
crest of an easy rounded ridge of loose stones, leading up- 
wards towards the summit. We began to experience wind, 


1See Appendix : “ Glaciology : Snow Conditions and Avalanches.” 


THE BASE CAMP 2II 


and worse still, the weather began to cloud up for the 
usual afternoon snowstorm. 

Wood Johnson and our two servants, Ondi and Nemu, 
whom we had taken with us, were going slowly, but my 
own progress was funereal. Though we were but 18,000 
feet or so above sea level, I was feeling the height severely. 
Every step was an effort, and every flat stone suggested 
a rest. 

Snowflakes began to whip across, stinging our cheeks 
with their icy particles. Grey mist rags writhed over the 
ridge. We donned our spare clothing and gloves, and with 
heads bowed to the blast, struggled on. 

The hog-backed ridge narrowed to a nearly horizontal 
ice ridge, abutting against the summit cone of rock and 
ice, which rose steeply for perhaps 200 feet. With crampons 
it would have been an easy matter to have walked along 
the crest, or on one side of this ice ridge, but without them 
we had to cut steps. The ridge was not possible on the side 
sheltered from the wind, and the crest bore the brunt of 
its fury. We were forced, therefore, to cut along the ex- 
posed side, which consisted of steep unbroken ice slopes 
falling to the glacier beneath. 

We tied on the rope, and leaving the porters in a sheltered 
place under some boulders, advanced to the attack. There 
was nothing to break the cruel force of the wind. But if it 
was cruel, it possessed one good attribute, it completely 
banished my lassitude. I felt fit for anything, fit enough 
to cut steps for hours in the ice. 

I cut steps as quickly as possible, until the whole length 
of rope between us was out. It was Wood Johnson’s first 
experience of ice-work, but he is an excellent rock climber 


212 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


and his sure-footedness precluded a slip. The wind was no 
longer blowing steadily, it was coming in gusts of increas- 
ing strength that threatened to blow us from our steps. 
Our clothes were becoming sheeted in ice, and our fingers 
were rapidly losing sensation. Retreat was inevitable. With 
axe picks driven well in at every step, we slowly descended 
the ice to the friendly rocks. According to an aneroid, we 
had reached a height of 20,000 feet, about 150 feet from 
the summit. 

Our servants were glad to see us back, for sheltered from 
the wind as they were, it had nevertheless been a chilly 
wait for them. After slow movement on the ice, it was a 
relief to feel the blood circulating again in tingling finger- 
tips. We rattled down the easy ridge. It had been an in- 
teresting experience. If this wind at 20,000 feet had been 
sufficiently strong and cold to turn us back, what would 
such a wind be like on the summit ridge of Kangchenjunga ? 

We arrived back in camp to find that Hannah and his 
porters had come up that day. Wieland had been more 
successful than us. His peak had proved a lower and easier 
one, and he had reached the top without difficulty, and 
descended before the storm broke. As this peak was to the 
west of ours, he had been able to look into the Eastern 
Tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier, but his report of 
what he had seen was not encouraging. There were no 
easy rock shelves leading to the North Ridge. A cirque of 
sheer cliffs and hanging glaciers walled in the head of the 
glacier, apparently barring approach to the North Ridge. 

With the arrival of Hannah and much of the vital equip- 
ment necessary for establishing the high camps, Professor 
Dyhrenfurth decided to start on the morrow, June 1. He 


THE BASE CAMP 213 


hoped to establish camps One and Two. The route to 
the North Ridge would have to wait until a closer inspec- 
tion would enable us to estimate its difficulties and dangers. 

The weather would have to improve a lot. At present, 
it was still wintry. Only with its aid would Kangchenjunga 
be climbed. 

That evening, Wood Johnson harangued the porters. 
He said, “‘ You have had a hard time, you will have a 
much harder time, and you will be faced with privations 
and dangers. Let any man who wants go back to Dar- 
jeeling.”” None did. They replied with burst after burst 
of cheers. 


CHAPTER XI 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT: THE 
GREAT ICE WALL 


We left the next morning, May 1, in good weather. The 
party consisted of Professor Dyhrenfurth, Kurz, Wieland, 
Duvanel, Wood Johnson, and myself. Hoerlin, Schneider 
and Dr. Richter were to follow in a few days ; the first two 
were not fit, and had been bothered by stomach trouble, 
whilst Richter was suffering from a strained heart. Hannah 
also was to follow in a day or so, and remain in charge of 
Camp One. 

Whether or not the rest at the Base Camp had been as 
beneficial to the health of the party as had been hoped was 
doubtful. It is a curious fact that during the whole expedi- 
tion we never felt really fit at the Base Camp. Probably, it 
was not so much the altitude as the damp and boggy 
ground on which it had been pitched, and the relentless 
winds and snowstorms that chilled us every afternoon. 
At all events, we were glad to leave it, and get to grips 
with our opponent. 

In order to get on to the middle of the glacier, we had 
to thread our way between and over moraine mounds ; 
the route had, however, been facilitated by the erection of 
cairns the previous day by Schneider and Kurz, who had 
visited the glacier for mapping purposes. 

For a considerable distance the gradient of the Kang- 


chenjunga Glacier is a gentle one, and in five miles it does 
al4 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 215 


not rise more than 1,500 feet. The day before, Wood 
Johnson and I had noted a snowy corridor running up the 
middle of the glacier, which seemed to offer an easy routes 
and this we gained after negotiating the maze of moraines. 

As we marched on up the glacier, the mountain wall, 
began gradually to shut us in on either hand. We were 
passing through the portals of an immense gateway into 
another world. Kangchenjunga gained in magnificence as 
we approached the foot of its northern face. From the 
Base Camp the edges of its hanging glaciers had looked but 
a few feet high, but now we began to appreciate their real 
scale—huge walls of ice hundreds of feet in height. Once 
there came the sound of an avalanche from the icy re- 
cesses of the great mountain ; its deep growl echoing 
menacingly from peak to peak seemed to threaten us for 
our invasion of these solitudes, 

The corridor, at first wide, became a narrow trough 
through ice hummocks. The sun poured down upon us a 
fierce heat in which the snow became more abominable 
every hour. Once again we experienced the energy sapping 
effects of glacier lassitude. 

Progress was slow, but there was no need for hurry, save 
at one place, where we were forced by the roughness of the 
glacier under the cliffs of the Twins. Here, the glacier was 
liable to be swept occasionally by ice avalanches dis- 
charged from a hanging glacier and we hurried across a 
level stretch which was strewn with fallen ice blocks. 

The way became rougher. Presently, there came into 
view an unknown mountain to the west, about 23,000 
feet high, situated between the Wedge Peak and the 
North-west Ridge of Kangchenjunga, on the watershed of 


216 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the western tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier and 
the Ramthang Glacier. Between it and the Wedge Peak a 
steep glacier flows downwards to join the main ice stream 
of the Kangchenjunga Glacier. It is a serene and stately 
mountain, with icy ridges converging to a summit of 


aS = oN Miles 
: ea = SQM iw Why § > #sS ays 


he TentPeak; an 


se. 
=~ 


tt 


Se 
; srt “i 
Be “ws, 


i$ SENT. 


<r va ie i 





By courtesy of The Times 


purest snow. So impressed were we by its beauty, that we 
named it the Madonna Peak. This name was, however, 
subsequently changed by Professor Dyhrenfurth to Ram- 
thang Peak. 

The Indian Survey authorities have wisely decided to 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 217 


adhere to native nomenclature in the Himalayas. They are 
justified in doing so by the fate that has overtaken the 
peaks of the American and Canadian Rockies, where 
anyone with any pretensions to fame, and sometimes none 
at all save to be the first to tread a summit, has dubbed his 
name (or it has been dubbed by admirers) to inoffensive 
mountain tops. Only in very exceptional cases is there any 
justification for this. Among these may be mentioned the 
case of a member of the Alpine Club, who, hearing that a 
peak had been named after him, considered it his duty to 
make the first ascent.* 

We were anxious to see round the corner of the Twins, 
and up the Eastern Tributary Glacier to the North Ridge, 
but soon we saw that the glacier dropped so steeply above 
its junction with the main ice stream of the Kangchenjunga 
Glacier that no view would be obtained until we had 
mounted some distance up it. 

The first object was to find a suitable place for Camp 
One. It was necessary to camp out of range of ice ava- 
lanches from the Twins and Kangchenjunga. The most 
level site for a camp was under the cliffs of the Twins, but 
as this was by no means safe, we were forced to pitch camp 
some way out on the glacier itself. Here the glacier was very 
rough, and there were several crevasses near the camp 
artfully concealed by snow. Professor Dyhrenfurth fell into 
one of them up to the waist. It was a deep one, and he was 
unroped. Had all the snow-bridge given way, the odds are 
he would have been killed. 

A few yards from the camp we discovered another deep 
crevasse running in the direction of the camp itself. 


1Mr. L. S. Amery. 


218 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Determined probing, however, failed to reveal any cre- 
vasse actually under the camp, so that there seemed 
reasonable hope that we and our tents would not dis- 
appear into the bowels of the glacier in the middle of the 
night. 

We were a happy party in camp that evening. Happier 
than we had ever been at the Base Camp. The feeling of 
lassitude so often experienced at the Base Camp had disap- 
peared ; we felt fitter and stronger. Most important of all, 
we were sheltered by the Ramthang and Wedge Peaks 
from the abominable afternoon winds. Only an occa- 
sional puff stirred along the snowy surface of the glacier. 
Higher it was different. Far above, the icy bastions of 
Kangchenjunga jutting defiantly out into space thousands 
of feet above our heads like the prows of some ghostly 
mid-aerial fleet, were being lashed by tortuous columns of 
snow spray. Thin shreds and sinuous tendrils of blown 
snow writhed from the crest of the North Ridge. Sometimes 
they would rise steadily, like smoke from a factory chimney 
on a calm day, the next moment they would be captured by 
the vortex of a local whirlwind, and drawn upwards 
convulsively, to vanish into the deepening purple of the 
evening sky. 

For once the weather was kind to us. The evening 
snowstorm was a mild, desultory affair, lacking its usual 
venom. The sun gleamed through the gently falling snow, 
illuminating its crystals, until they gleamed like showers of 
diamonds distributed by the prodigal hands of the moun- 
tain fairies. At sunset, the clouds rolled back, leaving only 
light grey skirts of mist that clung to the knees of the 
peaks. The peaks took to themselves the splendours of 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 219 


evening, and the snow around us gleamed opalescently 
with their reflected glories. We stood outside our tents 
entranced, and mindless of the cold. Blue deepened to 
purple, purple to ink-pot. Stars glittered frostily ; the low 
mists dissolved into the night. It was very silent, yet not 
quite silent. From somewhere came a sound, more felt than 
heard, like the distant surge of Atlantic breakers heard 
from far inland—the wind. 

There was no mess tent, and we ate our dinner lying in 
our sleeping bags. A candle placed on my tin-box served to 
illuminate my own abode. At regular intervals the honest 
face of Nemu, with its habitual slightly worried expression, 
thrust itself between the flaps, and two horny hands would 
press upon me such delicacies as the cook thought fit to 
inflict upon us. These included portions of the yak Wood 
Johnson had shot, but I found them only suitable to 
sharpen a knife on for the next course. 

I awoke next morning to see the sun stealing across the 
glacier, pushing before it the cold shadow of the Twins. 
With a short march in prospect, nothing was to be gained 
by starting until we were thoroughly warmed up. During 
the expedition, we did not once have occasion to leave a 
high camp before the sun had risen. To have done so on 
Many occasions would have been to have courted frost- 
bite, and it was doubtful whether the porters could have 
been induced to start until the life-giving rays of the sun had 
cheered them. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth had brought with him a small 
horn, of a pattern not unlike those used on foreign railways 
as a signal for the train to start. With this horn he was 
wont to arouse the camp in the morning. In theory, the 


220 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


three blasts which he used to blow on it were the signal for 
climbers and porters to tear themselves from their sleeping 
bags. In practice, Wood Johnson and I would, if it hap- 
pened to wake us, turn over with a sleepy curse and enjoy 
another forty winks. Finally, Wood Johnson managed to 
steal it, but shortly afterwards another one was produced. 
However admirable the intention, there is something 
abhorrent in being awoken thus on a mountainside in the 
morning. A more human method is for the leader himself 
to go round to the tents shouting into each one, “ Get 
up, you lazy louts,”’ or some such appropriate remark. 
Leaving Camp One, we set out up the glacier, and soon 
reached the foot of the Eastern Tributary Glacier, which 
rises steeply from the main Kangchenjunga Glacier for 
some distance. Under the cliffs of Kangchenjunga it is 
considerably broken, and pours over a low rock cliff, down 
which the unstable ice topples hourly with thunderous roars. 
Under the cliffs of the Twins it was less broken, and exten- 
sively moraine covered, and we mounted it without difficulty. 
Wieland and I were leading. Anxious to see the head of the 
glacier, and solve the problem that had been exercising our 
minds, we climbed as fast as possible. The going was simple, 
nothing worse than an occasional step to chop out. The 
slope eased off, and we stepped on to a level terrace of snow. 
Leaning on our ice-axes, we regained our breath, gazing 
upwards at the same time. What we saw was doubly disap- 
pointing. Before us, the glacier rose in unbroken snow 
slopes set at a moderate angle, yet steep enough to obscure 
all but the crest of the ridge connecting Kangchenjunga 
to the Twins—the ridge we must gain. But what was 
visible was very unpromising. Here were no easy rock 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 221 


shelves and snow slopes, but sheer ice-armoured precipices. 
Only the face directly beneath the highest summit of 
Kangchenjunga seemed to offer any hope. If the lower 
terrace could be reached, it might be possible to establish 
a camp there, traverse to the left, and climb a slope of 
1,500 to 2,000 feet to the crest of the North Ridge. The 
slopes leading upwards from the end of the terrace did 
not seem so excessively steep as those dropping directly 
from the North Ridge to the glacier. Yet, we were 
looking up and foreshortening had to be taken into 
account. At all events, one could say offhand, the climbing 
would be decidedly difficult. 

But how to reach the terrace ? Did the ice wall defend 
its whole length ? Ifso, what was the alternative ? We were 
in a horseshoe of mountains. From Kangchenjunga on the 
east to the Twins on the west, the precipices swept round 
without a break. The sole alternative to attacking the 
North Ridge via the terrace was to retreat. Discussions 
and opinions were unnecessary. Optimism’s flower was 
already withered as we trudged up the snow slopes. 

The glacier here forms a trough into which the sun was 
beating with piercing intensity. To have gone up its centre 
would have meant lassitude in its most disagreeable form. 
On those concave snow slopes we would be like flies in the 
middle of a burning glass. Accordingly, we traversed the 
northern slopes of the trough. Even on these the heat was 
bad enough, but it was relieved now and again by puffs of 
cold wind. We came to crevasses, only occasional ones, but 
cunningly concealed in places, with only a slight ripple or 
depression in the snow to indicate their presence, and once 
or twice, not even that. The snow was soft, and stamping 


222 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


a trail was hard work. We took turns at it ; a quarter of an 
hour at a time was enough. 

Already we were beginning to learn something of the 
secret that makes for good uphill walking at high altitudes; 
it is rhythm. Heart and lungs must keep in time with the 
movements of the legs. Each upward step must synchronise 
with the breathing. It does not matter how many breaths 
are taken to each step, as long as always the same number 
are taken. Once let this synchronisation fail, and it is 
necessary to stop and puff. The secret of maintaining it is a 
pace not varying by a fraction of a second in the interval 
of time elapsing between each step. To begin with, it 
is necessary to concentrate on the maintaining of this 
rhythm, but soon it becomes automatic. This is one reason 
why ground calling for a variety of pace is much more 
tiring to negotiate at a high altitude than ground on which 
the same pace can be kept up continuously. Above 20,000 
feet it is much easier to ascend a snow slope in good condi- 
tion than the easiest rocks, provided, of course, steps do not 
have to be kicked or cut. 

As we rose, we were able to gaze up the Western Tribu- 
tary Glacier. Like the Eastern Tributary Glacier, it falls in 
a steep ice-fall in its lower portion, but above the ice-fall 
unbroken snow-fields rise gently to a low col separating the 
Ramthang Peak from the Kangbachen summit of Kang- 
chenjunga. The Ramthang Peak itself rises gracefully, but 
seen from this direction the Wedge Peak loses something of 
its grandeur. 

Our pace was painfully slow, for quite apart from 
rhythm, or the lack of it, we were by no means acclima- 
tised. Like the lower slope, the one we were on eased off 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 223 


on to an almost level terrace. Above the terrace the 
glacier rose again, but this time it was broken into an ice- 
fall which appeared to extend its whole width. We decided 
to camp on the terrace, for there seemed little chance of 
getting through the ice-fall the same day, and the porters, 
like us, were making heavy weather of it in the soft snow 
under the broiling sun. 

Now at last we could see the whole of the face separating 
the North Ridge from the Eastern Tributary Glacier. Our 
hearts—I know that mine did—sank, as we gazed at it. 
There was no question of climbing it. The only possi- 
bility, if “‘ possibility ” it can be called, was directly over 
the ice wall, under the face of Kangchenjunga. This runs 
as a clean-cut barrier 600-800 feet high for some three 
miles across the face of the mountain, but under the North 
Ridge it is broken up into a series of ice waves and sub- 
sidiary walls. At one place a steep shelf sloped upwards 
from left to right, but above it towered a huge mass of 
unstable pinnacles that were liable to fall at any moment 
and sweep the shelf from end to end with their débris. 
Indeed débris lying on the shelf and below it showed that 
such falls were a frequent occurrence. Even had the shelf 
offered an easy climb, the steep ice of its lower and most 
dangerous portion would necessitate a staircase being 
was directly over 


cut. The sole remaining “‘ possibility ’ 
the ice wall, where it was most broken, but I must confess 
that until it was pointed out to me as such I had not given 
it a second thought. 

It was a pleasant spot for a camp. The sun lingered long 
upon us. The only drawback to it was the fact that there 
were one or two concealed crevasses in the vicinity, but we 


224 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


gave the porters strict orders not to go more than a yard 
or two from the tents. 

Afternoon merged into evening, and the sun fought its 
daily battle with grey snow clouds. The cook was pre- 
paring the evening meal, and tempting odours were being 
wafted across the snow as, anxious to obtain some photo- 
graphs, I strolled down the track for a short distance. Far 
beneath, the last halfdozen porters under the charge of 
Wood Johnson were toiling up the snow slopes. How small 
they looked, how painfully slow their progress. They 
halted ; I heard a faint shout. Doubtless they were glad to 
be within sight of camp. Now they were moving again. 
I heard another shout, and then another ; not so mucha 
shout, as a curious high-pitched cry. This immediately 
struck me as strange. Men going uphill at nearly 20,000 
feet do not waste their hard-won breath in shouting. 
There came a whole series of these cries. They seemed to 
come from a distance of a mile or so away, in the direction 
of the cliffs of the Twins. But between me and these cliffs 
the snow stretched unbroken, with no sign of any living 
thing on them. And still these strangely insistent, almost 
eerie, cries came. 

Wieland joined me, and we both listened. An eagle 
perhaps ? Wood Johnson approached, and calling down 
we asked him if he heard them too. ‘ Perhaps it is a 
Mi-go,” he said, half jokingly, and then asked if Ondi, his 
servant, had arrived. I went back to the camp. Yes, Ondi 
had arrived, said the others. But where was he now ? There 
was no sign of him. At that the truth began to dawn upon 
us and Wieland and I hurried across the snow in the 
direction of the cries. Soon we came across a single track, 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 225 


coming from the camp; there were no returning foot- 
marks. We followed it cautiously. After a few yards the 
track ended in a small hole, not more than two feet across. 
Approaching it, we gazed down between the jaws of a 
crevasse. From the depths came a moan and a faint 
despairing cry. 

We hastened back to camp. While Wieland returned 
with ropes and porters, I strapped on crampons in order 
to be ready to go down, if necessary. By the time I 
returned, a rope had been lowered. Fortunately, Ondi still 
retained sufficient presence of mind and strength to tie 
himself to it. With half a dozen sturdy porters hauling on 
the rope, he was soon dragged out. We quickly ascer- 
tained that he had no bones broken, but he had been 
badly bruised, his back and hands were skinned and 
bleeding, and he was half frozen and suffering severely 
from shock. He had fallen fully thirty feet before wedging 
between the walls of the crevasse, and had been down 
there for fully two hours. His extremities were white and 
numb, but we managed to prevent frostbite by massaging 
them. So severely was he suffering from shock, that, in the 
absence of Dr. Richter, I took upon myself the responsi- 
bility of giving him a double dose of belladonna. Whether 
or not this was the right treatment I do not know ; at all 
events, it sent him to sleep in a few minutes, and when he 
woke up next morning, he was much better and no longer 
suffering from the physical effects of shock. 

It must have been a terrible experience for him, and 
many men less tough would most likely have succumbed. 
The next day he was sent down to the Base Camp, but 


after two days there he insisted on returning. Such was the 
Pr 


226 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


spirit of the man. But the accident had a lasting effect on 
him. Prior to it he had been an excellent servant in every 
way, after it he became morose and sullen, dirty and careless 
in his work. It was only towards the end of the expedition 
that he began to recover something of his old spirit. I hope 
that by now he has completely recovered from his terrible 
experience. 

Night fell, accompanied by the usual snow flurry, but the 
weather next morning was perfect. Unfortunately, Kurz, 
who had been afflicted with earache and general altitude 
debility which had rendered him unable to sleep, decided 
to return to the Base Camp. This he did for a large part of 
the way on ski. Professor Dyhrenfurth, also, was not 
feeling well enough to continue. This left only Wieland, 
Wood Johnson, and myself. 

As Professor Dyhrenfurth was anxious to attack the ice 
wall, it was necessary to establish a camp at the head of the 
glacier. It was, therefore, arranged that a day should be 
spent in working out a route through the ice-fall to the 
upper plateau of the glacier. With this end in view we 
set off in two parties, Wood Johnson and myself on the 
leading rope, with Wieland and a porter carrying a ciné 
camera on the second. 

Traversing first of all towards the cliffs of Kangchen- 
junga, we turned up a snowy corridor. The difficulties and 
complexities of the ice-fall proved far greater than they had 
appeared from a distance. First came a short, steep wall of 
ice. This ice, like all ice we subsequently encountered on 
Kangchenjunga, was of a rubber-like toughness, and 
many blows of the ice-axe were needed to fashion a step. 
The work served to remind us once again that we were by 





THE RESCUE OF ONDI 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 227 


no means acclimatised to even this moderate altitude, 
19,500 feet, and I felt my icemanship lacking in vim as 
Wieland, with a wicked grin, proceeded to post himself on 
a snowy hump and film my efforts. 

Above this pitch we found ourselves on the lower lip of 
a huge crevasse, which appeared to traverse the whole 
width of the ice-fall. It was a formidable moat, several 
yards wide and not bridged by a single tongue of snow. 
Even supposing we got across it, it was by no means the 
only difficulty, for there were wider crevasses beyond 
equally formidable. As there was no possibility of crossing 
it on the left, I told Wood Johnson to anchor himself, 
whilst I explored as far as the rope would allow me to the 
right. The ice lip I was on writhed upwards sneeringly. 
There seemed little object in going on, but I gingerly 
ascended to its delicate crest. It was a happy move ; 
for but a short distance farther did the ice-fall continue 
towards Kangchenjunga, before becoming lost in smooth 
snow-slopes offering no difficulty whatever, which led 
easily up to the plateau above. 

We retraced our steps, and passing along the foot of the 
ice-fall, gained these snow slopes. There was certainly no 
difficulty in circumventing the ice-fall by this route, and a 
gentle walk took us quickly uphill. It was, however, not 
quite certain whether these slopes were entirely free from 
danger. Though we were separated by nearly half a mile 
of level snow-field from the foot of Kangchenjunga, the 
huge masses of hanging glaciers suspended on the great 
face of the mountain told of forces held in check which if 
released must result in avalanches of cataclysmic dimen- 
sions which might well sweep the whole breadth of the 


228 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


snow-field. Indeed, one solitary block of ice lying near at 
hand and projecting through the newly fallen snow seemed 
to make this unpleasant possibility very real. 

The reader may think that I am making much of the 
problematical, but one of the first lessons the Himalayan 
mountaineer learns is that exceptional forms of danger are 
more likely to encompass his disaster than ordinary forms 
of danger. In the Alps accidents usually occur through 
ordinary causes and neglect of ordinary rules. There is a 
certain mediocrity in Alpine dangers ; the mountaineer 
knows that in one place he may be in danger from falling 
ice or stones, and in another he is not. In a word, the 
Alps are a well regulated mountain range. They have 
passed through so many geological epochs that they have 
acquired a certain staidness of demeanour. The Himalayas 
are different, they are not entirely divorced from their 
catastrophic epoch. Their scale is so vast, their weather 
conditions so different that they are still capable of pro- 
ducing the exceptional. Thus, I think it may truly be said 
that until the mountaineer has learnt to appreciate the 
huge scale of things and the catastrophic size of ice 
avalanches his chances of annihilation are infinitely greater 
than on the most difficult Alpine climbs. 

Tacking up the snow slopes, we reached the little plateau 
above the ice-fall. Having satisfied ourselves that it was the 
obvious site for a camp we continued on up towards the 
ice wall. We had not gone far before we came across more 
artfully concealed crevasses. Wood Johnson went through 
into one, but I had him so tightly on a rope that I was 
able to jerk him outwards and backwards almost at the 
same instant. The snow was soft and fatiguing, and we 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 229 


decided that it would be best to return and save our 
strength for the morrow. 

We descended quickly, and in less than an hour were 
back in camp. We had done what we had set out to do— 
to discover a camping site as high up the glacier as pos- 
sible. We had also ascertained that there was no possible 
way to the North Ridge save over the ice wall and the 
lower terrace. 

That night I was awakened several times by the sound 
of great ice avalanches. Heard thus, through the darkness, 
there was something indescribably menacing in their 
deep growls. It was terrifying to be disturbed from sleep in 
this way ; one felt pitifully small and helpless amid these 
vast and wrathful mountains. The porters felt something of 
the same, but in a different way. In the avalanche they 
heard the voices of the gods, in the moan of the night wind 
the jeering of the Snow Men. Once I heard a mutter from 
their tent, a low intonation rising and falling—they were 
praying. 

The morning of May 4 was warm, sunny, and windless. 
Professor Dyhrenfurth was not well, he was suffering from 
severe high altitude throat, and could only speak in a 
whisper. These throats are induced by the dryness of the 
air, and the necessity for breathing through the mouth. The 
throat becomes painful and congested. At its best it is a 
nasty infliction, and reduces climbing efficiency consider- 
ably ; at its worst, it may be really serious. On Everest, 
Mr. Somervell’s throat became so congested that he could 
scarcely breathe, and had he not been able to cough away 
the obstructing matter he might have been suffocated. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth decided to return to the Base 


230 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Camp. Before leaving he gave us his instructions. As the 
route over the ice wall was the only way to the North 
Ridge offering any hope, we were to make every effort to 
overcome it. We were to establish a camp on the terrace, 
and attack the slopes above it leading to the North Ridge. 
Once on the latter, there were two routes worthy of con- 
sideration to the upper terrace immediately beneath the 
final rock pyramid. The first lay directly up the ridge. 
Immediately below the terrace, however, which at its 
junction with the ridge formed an extensive scree shelf, the 
ridge rose in an abrupt step which looked far from easy. 
The other route left the ridge below the step in favour of 
steep, crevasse riven slopes on the east face overlooking the 
Zemu Glacier. By crossing these, the upper and easy por- 
tion of the great rib attempted by the Munich party would 
be reached, and this followed to the terrace above the 
step. This route possessed the advantage of being on the 
leeward side of the mountain, and not exposed to the 
terrible west wind that constantly harries the North Ridge. 
On the other hand, the possibility of avalanches was not to 
be disregarded on this traverse, and the loose snow blowing 
over and off the North Ridge might well form wind slabs 
of the most dangerous nature. If this was so, it would be 
best to keep to the crest of the ridge, but the great step 
below the upper terrace suggested something more than 
ordinary rock climbing difficulties, and by ‘“‘ ordinary,” 
I mean the difficulties that a mountaineer may be ex- 
pected to tackle with some degree of confidence at a height 
of 26,000 feet. 

1The most treacherous form of avalanche : often found in the Alps during the 


winter months. The whole slope of wind-compacted snow comes away in a solid slab, 
which breaks up into a cataract of hard snow blocks. 





THE RAMTHANG AND WEDGE PEAKS FROM ABOVE CAMP TWO 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 231 


The reader must forgive me if the pictures I paint in his 
mind are done so with a brush steeped in the blues of 
pessimism, but the more we examined that huge mountain 
face, the more difficult and dangerous did it appear. 
Retreat in the face of such obvious difficulties and dangers 
would have been dishonourable neither to ourselves nor 
to mountaineering. After all, mountaineering is not to be 
classed with one of the modern crazes for sensationalism 
and record breaking at the possible cost of life and limb. 
It is an exact science, a perfect blending of the physical 
and the spiritual. It is not, and should not become, a des- 
perate enterprise. There is no sport worthy of the name 
that has not its own peculiar risks, but no one has any 
business to walk deliberately into danger, and if risks are 
to be taken, they should be taken only by those who are 
fully alive to them. 

Following our tracks of the previous day, we were soon 
up on the plateau. Leaving the majority of our porters 
to make camp there, and taking with us our personal 
servants only, we started off to the foot of the ice wall, 
accompanied by Duvanel with his little cohort of porters 
carrying various cinematographic apparatus and gadgets. 

The snow had not improved since the previous day, and 
we sank in almost knee deep as we ploughed up the slopes. 
We kept as far as possible to the left, for the danger of ice 
avalanches sweeping the slopes to the right was obvious, 
and the ice blocks of former avalanches were strewn about 
them. Higher up, we were forced by some crevasses to the 
right for a short distance, but were soon able to traverse 
back to the left again. 

As we approached the ice wall its magnificence 


232 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


increased. It towered over our heads, cold and green, in tier 
on tier of ice, laced and friezed with snow. Immediately 
beneath it was an almost level terrace of snow about a 
hundred yards in breadth intersected longitudinally by a 
large crevasse. As far as we could see there was only one 
bridge over the crevasse, and that did not appear par- 
ticularly solid. Driving two spare ice-axes into the snow, 
one on either side of the crevasse, we fixed a rope between 
them, which would serve as a safety hand-rail in the event 
of the bridge collapsing. 

Beneath the lowest point of the wall was a clean-cut mass 
of ice some fifty feet high, under the shelter of which we 
sat down for a few minutes. It seemed a safe place in the 
event of anything falling from above. This lower mass could 
hardly count as a part of the main wall, and we were able 
to circumvent it on the right, and mount to its crest up an 
easy snow slope. It was at this point that the real work 
began. 

Immediately above us rose an overhang of ice some 
eighty feet high. Above this was an icy shelf sloping up- 
wards to the left and outwards to the edge of the overhang 
at an angle of at least fifty degrees. Above this shelf rose 
another sheer wall of ice. The shelf was the only break ; we 
must gain it, and traverse it to the left to an easier slope 
that bore up to the foot of another ice pitch about one 
third of the distance up the ice wall. 

The slope to the right afforded convenient access to the 
shelf. At first sight it appeared to be a snow slope, but 
actually it consisted of an ice slope evilly overlaid with a 
foot or more of floury snow. This snow had to be shovelled 
away, and firm steps cut in the ice substratum. It was an 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 233 


easy enough place and a snow avalanche was not to be 
feared, but it took time. 

The ice was, as usual, tough and glue-like, and an 
altitude of 21,000 feet discountenanced severe exertion. 
Wieland and I took turns at the cutting, whilst Wood 
Johnson and the porters enlarged the steps to the dimen- 
sions of Wapping Old Stairs. We drove three pitons in, and 
fixed ropes thereto to assist the loaded porters in the future. 
These pitons were of a special type advocated by that great 
German mountaineer, Herr Welzenbach. They are barbed 
like an arrow, and we drove them into the ice with a 
broad-headed metal mallet. This type of piton has fas- 
tened to its head an iron ring. In addition to pitons, we 
carried a number of clip-on oval rings. These we could 
attach to the permanent ring on the piton, and afterwards 
fix a rope through them without the bother, and possibly 
the danger, of having to unrope. The procedure was for 
the leader to advance, drive the piton into the ice, clip 
on to its ring one of the detachable oval rings, and clip the 
rope through the oval ring. Thus, he could be securely 
held on the rope at every stage of the step cutting. The 
detachable oval rings were not, of course, used to thread 
the rope as a permanent hand-rail. In this case, the rope 
was threaded through the piton ring, and then tied. 

By the time we reached the shelf it was beginning to 
snow. The hours had passed like magic, and the afternoon 
was well advanced. Thus far, the work had been easy, it now 
became very different. First of all, it was necessary to cut 
out a secure “ jumping off” place in the ice at the end of 
the shelf from which the party could be securely held if 
need be. Duvanel took this task in hand, and soon fashioned 


234 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


a platform sufficiently broad on which to stand his ciné 
camera tripod. 

It was while commencing to cut steps along the shelf 
that Wood Johnson’s voice came up from below informing 
me that a hundred feet or so higher a large semi-detached 
flake of ice weighing a hundred tons or so was leaning 
unpleasantly over the route. I had already noticed this, 
and I am afraid, therefore, that I did not take Wood 
Johnson’s information in the spirit in which it was meant, 
and after growling something about keeping up the 
morale of the leader and sundry damaging remarks anent 
the ice flake, which might justifiably have retaliated by 
falling upon me, I addressed myself once more to the task 
of step-cutting. 

We were in a curious frame of mind. We knew that the 
place was dangerous. Had it been in the Alps, we should 
have gone back, but as the route was the only possible 
chink in the armour of Kangchenjunga the attack was 
persisted in, and the risks tacitly accepted. It was an 
understandable, yet false attitude of mind, but it is one 
that has warped the judgment of Himalayan parties in the 
past and will continue to exert its evil influence on other 
parties in the future. Suffice to say, that there will be many 
and terrible disasters before the greater Himalayan peaks 
are conquered, and before Himalayan mountaineering 
attains to any standard of sobriety. 

Step-cutting on the shelf was weary work. First of all, the 
snow had to be cleared away, and beneath that a sort of 
flaky coating of ice before a step could be cut into the 
honest ice beneath. As in walking up-hill at high altitudes, 
so with cutting—rhythm. As each upward step in walking 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 235 


must be attuned to the breathing, so must each swing of 
the ice-axe. It has often been said that Mallory had some 
trick of climbing at a high altitude. I wonder if this was a 
scientific cultivation of rhythm. Mallory was one of the 
most graceful climbers that ever lived, and grace is the child 
of rhythm. It may be that the rhythmical grace with which 
he was wont to climb on the most difficult rocks of Great 
Britain or the Alps proved of inestimable value to him on 
Mount Everest. 

A spell of twenty minutes’ cutting was sufficient. [I re- 
turned, and Wieland took my place. Twenty minutes’ 
cutting, a few hard-won steps; it was not much. It was 
now snowing hard, but fortunately there was no wind, and 
it was reasonably warm. 

Through the murk the great ice wall loomed coldly 
hostile. I have experienced fear many times on many 
mountains, but never quite the same dull, hopeless sort of 
fear inspired by this terrible wall of ice. I have often had 
occasion to remark how like men mountains are ; some are 
friendly and others unfriendly. Kangchenjunga is some- 
thing more than unfriendly, it is imbued with a blind 
unreasoning hatred towards the mountaineer. Sir Leslie 
Stephen once wrote: ‘‘But we should hardly estimate the 
greatness of men or mountains by the length of their 
butcher’s bill.” Kangchenjunga has every claim to 
majesty, and though the mere slaughter of those who 
attempt to reach its summit can scarcely add to it, the 
deaths that have occurred, and will occur, testify to the 
greatness of the mountain, and its supreme contempt for 
its wooers. The beautiful is often dangerous. Strip Kang- 
chenjunga of its icy robes, and it would become weak and 


236 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


defenceless, a mere rocky skeleton. In its dangers lie its 
beauties, and no right thinking mountaineer would have 
it otherwise. 

As we turned to descend, the mists thinned for a few 
moments. As though signalled by the rise of a curtain, a 
great ice avalanche blasted forth on to the snowy stage. 
Dimly, to the left, we could see clouds of wind-blown snow 
belch out from the mountainside, and the echoes boomed 
and crashed from precipice to precipice like the thun- 
derous applause of some huge audience. 

We returned to camp. Bad news awaited us. Owing to 
lack of local porters and our being unable to send back 
enough men to help him, Colonel Tobin was experiencing 
great difficulty in getting the transport to the Base Camp. 
We had sent back as many porters from Khunza as pos- 
sible, but these were unreliable men. Not only had they 
refused to help Colonel Tobin, but they had looted a 
dump of stores at Dzongri, and stolen many articles of 
value. Colonel Tobin wrote that as far as Yoksam every- 
thing had gone well. There he had engaged local porters 
to bring his loads on to Dzongri, but these had refused 
to traverse the Kang La. He had experienced bad 
weather, and his assistant sirdar, Phuri, had died of expo- 
sure on the Kang La, whilst his chief sirdar, Naspati, had 
proved physically unequal to the task, and had returned ill 
to Darjeeling. Lobsang, whom we had sent back from 
Tseram, was now working with relays of men to get the 
loads over the Kang La. Colonel Tobin had laboured 
heroically against great odds, and as a result was physically 
worn out, and had lain ill for some days at Tseram. Also 
he had fallen and hurt his arm. He did not feel equal to the 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 237 


task of coming on to the Base Camp and had decided to 
return to Darjeeling as soon as adequate arrangements had 
been made to send on the remainder of the expedition’s 
stores and equipment. 

No one could have worked more for the expedition than 
Colonel Tobin, but the task that had been set him was 
an impossible one, and he was in no way responsible for 
transport delays. With only a few porters at his disposal, he 
could not be expected to get his transport to the Base 
Camp. Worst of all, Wood Johnson and I were unaware of 
the arrangements that had been made between him and 
Professor Dyhrenfurth regarding the sending back of porters, 
otherwise such a situation could hardly have arisen as 
Wood Johnson would have arranged to send back local 
porters from Khunza. Thus, a serious situation had arisen. 

Something had to be done, and done quickly. Already 
sahibs’ food was running short ; there was only about a 
week’s supply left, and we were lacking many vital neces- 
sities, to say nothing of those little luxuries which help to 
alleviate the rigours of high altitude climbing. At sea- 
level yak meat should be an excellent diet for those gifted 
with a cast-iron digestion, but at a high altitude it is totally 
unsuitable and difficult to digest. At the Base Camp, even 
Schneider had expressed a dislike for it, and had turned 
with obvious relief to Welsh rarebit, salad dressing, and 
Worcester sauce. We were still without many items of 
equipment ; the wireless set had not arrived, and it was 
sad to think that every evening weather reports for our 
especial benefit were being broadcast from Calcutta. 

There was nothing for it but for Wood Johnson and 
Hannah to leave Kangchenjunga, collect local porters at 


238 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Khunza with the assistance of the Nepali Subadar, and 
return over the Mirgin La to the help of Colonel Tobin at 
Tseram. It was extremely hard luck for them to have to 
leave Kangchenjunga when at grips withit, but it was some 
consolation for them to know that the work they would be 
doing would be of the utmost value to the expedition. 
Hannah had already come up to Gamp One, and had moved 
it to a site a little farther up the glacier where it was less 
exposed to ice avalanches from the Twins. He had returned 
to the Base Camp directly he had received news of the 
transport difficulties. We had got back to camp too late 
from work on the ice wall for Wood Johnson to do likewise, 
nor could he be expected to do so after such a heavy day. 
Some time later, when he returned, after successfully 
helping to solve the transport problem, he told me that 
though it had seemed hard to have to abandon climbing 
he had somehow felt that what had transpired was all for 
the best. And perhaps that is so, for had he remained with 
the climbing party, he might have lost his life. 

We slept fitfully that night, awakened at frequent 
intervals by the thunder of ice avalanches. During the 
nineteen days that we were on Kangchenjunga ice ava- 
lanches seemed to fall more frequently at night than in the 
daytime. At first sight, this may appear strange. The coldest 
period of the twenty-four hours should serve to knit to- 
gether the unstable masses of ice. Actually, this tendency 
for avalanches to fall during the coldest hours is probably 
due to expansion owing to water freezing in cracks in the 
ice and forcing the masses asunder. Another avalanche 
period is in the early morning. In cases where freezing 
water has wedged the ice apart without forcing a fall, the 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 239 


frozen water tends to bind the ice together. Thus, a mass on 
the edge of a hanging glacier may not be forced to part 
from its parent glacier until it is well past the point of 
unstable equilibrium, owing to the ice mortar that is 
binding it to its parent glacier. It may be just a matter of 
a few pounds that prevents it from falling. When the sun 
penetrates the crack the restraining influence of the ice 
mortar may be removed, and the mass of ice, with nothing 
left to support it, topples to destruction. 

A striking illustration of this thesis occurred on Mont 
Blanc. We were ascending by the classic Brenva route, and 
halted on the Col du Trident to watch the red glow of the 
dawn sun creeping down Mont Blanc. We were debating 
as to the advisability of following a French party who were 
making a short cut to the crest of the Brenva Ridge, or of 
going the longer and safer way round via the Col Moore, 
when the rising sun touched a mass of hanging glacier 
above this route. Almost at the same instant that it did so 
a great avalanche was let loose, which swept the route 
between us and the French party. The slight warmth 
of the sun had been just sufficient to tear the unstable mass 
of ice from its parent glacier. After that we went the longer 
way round. 

The next day, May 5, dawned gloriously. It was with 
great regret that we parted from Wood Johnson. Only 
Wieland, Duvanel, and I were now left to continue with 
the work of making a route up the ice wall. Carrying with 
us several hundreds of feet of rope, and two or three dozen 
pitons, we returned to the attack. 

The previous day we had cut steps to a point about half 
way along the shelf. The work was useful in one respect for 


240 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


we were becoming acclimatised, and were climbing every 
day with increasing vigour. 

We went to work on the shelf with a will, the leader 
cutting fair sized steps, the second man enlarging them, 
and lastly the porters, who seemed positively to enjoy the 
work, hacking out platforms large enough for an elephant 
to stand on. An hour or two’s strenuous work and the 
traverse to the shelf was completed. From a snowy ridge at 
its end we could gaze back with satisfaction at the long line 
of steps, and a comforting hempen hand-rail of fixed rope. 
The most formidable ice slope loses much of its terrors 
when so decorated. 

The snowy ridge we were on led upwards for one 
hundred feet without difficulty. It was a gift from the gods 
of the ice wall, and we accepted it gratefully. Our grati- 
tude was a trifle ill-timed. We should have realised that the 
gods, like the morbid inventor of a cross-word puzzle, had 
only invented this easy bit for a joke. The joy departed 
from our hearts as we stood on an almost level ledge of 
snow. Above the ledge, the ice wall rose in what a moun- 
taineer, despairing of a suitable descriptive term, might 
call a “vertical overhang.” It was certainly vertical for 
twenty-five feet, and, about fifteen feet up, the ice bulged out 
forming a genuine overhang. To left and right the ledge 
thinned out into precipices of ice. Only from the point 
where we were standing was there the remotest possibility of 
climbing the wall. Twenty-five feet above our heads it “eased 
off” to an angle of about 70 degree. This “eased off” portion 
extended through a vertical height of about two hundred 
and fifty feet ; crowning this slope and leering down upon 
us, rose a final and vertical barrier of ice fifty feet high. 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 241 


As we stood, gazing silently, I tried to recall to my mind 
climbing of a similar nature in the Alps. I was unable to 
do so. In fact, it is probably safe to say that ice work of this 
nature had never been tackled in the Alps. Why should 
it be when it can always be avoided ? The most contin- 
uously exacting ice climbing on record is that done by 
the Munich expedition on Kangchenjunga, but some of 
our porters, who had been with that expedition, assured 
us that though the work had been much longer, there had 
been nothing to equal this ice wall for continuous difficulty. 

It is a well-known optical illusion that a slope looked at 
from below appears considerably less steep than looked at 
from above. The ice wall before us was a notable excep- 
tion ; it looked steep and it was steep. 

A few mouthfuls of food, a drink of hot tea from a 
Thermos flask, and we set to work. At one place, a shallow 
splayed out chimney ran up the ice wall. It was too shallow 
to be of any use for body-wedging purposes, but we pre- 
ferred it to the more exposed walls of ice on either side. 
Higher up, however, it became overhanging, and an upward 
and outward traverse to the right would be necessary. 
We debated whether crampons would be of any assist- 
ance, but decided that they would destroy the steps and 
would generally be more dangerous than useful, especially 
in view of the possibility of the leader falling off and spiking 
any unfortunates who happened to be beneath. 

It was on Mont Blanc that I had undergone the ex- 
quisite torment of having a man stand on my shoulders in 
crampons. Even tricouni nails are bad enough, and I can 
sympathise with Wieland, and his request for me to be as 
quick as possible, as I stood on his shoulders. Reaching 


QxK 


242 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


upwards, I hammered a piton into the ice, and clipped the 
rope into the oval ring. Supported by the rope running 
through the ring, I cut steps from the bottom of the wall. 
The easiest method of doing so was to place the feet in the 
steps already made, and leaning outwards and backwards 
on the rope, cut the next step above. Having reached 
the level of the piton, a fresh piton was driven in above, 
and the rope clipped into another oval ring. The lower 
piton could then be removed. 

It was hard work ; two or three steps at a time was as 
much as a man could manage. Leaning back on the rope 
did not improve matters, for it compressed the upper part 
of the body and made breathing difficult. The ice was 
white and flaky on the surface, but underneath of a blue- 
black transparency, like the cold depths of the ocean. It was 
difficult to swing the axe effectively, and we had to peck at 
the ice like an aged chicken seeking grubs in a farmyard. 
At the altitude, every stroke represented a definite piece of 
work, and every step a stage in a day’s hard labour. 

To the mountaineer who revels in the art and craft of 
icemanship, there is no music finer to his ears than the 
ringing thump with which an ice-axe meets the yielding 
ice, and the swish and tinkle of the dislodged chips beneath 
him. But esthetical and poetical sentiments were not for 
us. We wearied of the dull thud, thud, as the pick struck 
the ice. The musical ring of pitons driven well home found 
no answering ring in our hearts. We felt no excitement, no 
enthusiasm, no hope, no fear. We became mere dull 
automatons, as dull and as automatic as the driver of a 
racing car towards the end of an attempt on a non-stop 
distance record. Such is difficult ice work at 21,000 feet. 





THE GREAT ICE WALL 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 243 


The day was drawing to a dull close, and the usual snow- 
storm was pouring vials of snow powder on the world, as 
we stood together at the foot of the pitch, eyeing the scene 
of our labours. We had done eighteen feet, no more, but 
the steps were good ones. We would finish the lower wall 
on the morrow, and the day after that get up to the foot of 
the last wall. Yet one more day should see us up the final 
wall. Five days for five hundred feet of ascent ! Was it 
worth it ? Even with fixed ropes could laden porters ever 
be got up to the terrace above ? 

We returned to camp tired and dispirited, there to meet 
Schneider who had come up that day from the Base Camp, 
and a Schneider brimful of energy and enthusiasm. To me 
his presence was doubly welcome, for, as the most experienced 
member of the party, I had felt myself to be saddled with 
more responsibility than I cared for. The difficulties and 
dangers were too obvious to be ignored. The porters 
realised the former, but did they understand the latter ? 

The next morning, May 6, found us once more at the 
foot of the ice wall. Wieland and I were tired mentally 
and physically, and it was a relief to us to see the business- 
like way with which Schneider went to work. He is a 
splendid iceman, cutting steps with a methodical neatness 
and quickness equal to that of a first-class Alpine guide. 
He uses a short ice-axe with such a long and heavy pick 
that only a man with his strength of wrist and forearm 
could wield it effectively. 

Even with three men on the job, it was a day’s work to 
climb the last few feet of vertical or overhanging ice. 

From the top of the shallow chimney it was necessary to 
traverse across a slightly overhanging bulge to the right. 


244 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Here the ice was of a slightly more flaky nature than lower 
down, and it was not altogether pleasant leaning outwards, 
trusting that the piton would remain firm, and not pull 
away from the ice. Duvanel had come up with us, and took 


33 


a number of “ shots” of our struggles on the ice. Surely 
no film camera has ever been used in quite such a situa- 
tion. We might have got farther that day, but we were 
hampered by a heavy snowstorm that set in soon after 
mid-day. So thickly did the snow fall that within an hour 
or so it was six to eight inches deep. 

By the time we turned to descend, so much snow had 
fallen that our upward steps and fixed ropes had been 
obliterated completely. The steps along the shelf were 
difficult to find. Duvanel and his porters carrying the 
cinema apparatus were the first to descend. They were 
about half-way across when Duvanel slipped, and slid 
quickly downwards towards the eighty feet overhang 
beneath. Apparently, he had not reached the hand-rail 
when he slipped. It seemed that the three porters with him 
must be pulled off too, but the porter next to him, I think 
it was Sonam, an old Everest “‘ Tiger,” had such a tight 
rope that he was able to hold him and stop him before 
he had slid more than ten feet. It was a splendid bit of 
work—none of us could have done it better—and shows to 
what a state of mountaineering efficiency these porters 
have been brought by their experiences with former 
expeditions. But the slip had the effect of unnerving 
the remainder of the porters on the traverse, and one 
of them promptly followed Duvanel’s example. This 
man had no ice-axe, but fortunately he was held from 
the platform at the end of the traverse, and was drawn 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 245 


up on the rope wriggling like a fish by two lusty 
porters. 

Roping on to Nemu, I followed the first party. The new 
snow made the traverse treacherous. Unfortunately, the 
fixed rope did not extend the whole distance across, but 
only stretched across the steeper portion. For several yards 
the passage had to be made without its aid. The newly 
fallen snow made the going distinctly tricky; not in all 
cases did the steps made by the descending porters corre- 
spond with the ice steps below, and one of them collapsed 
beneath me. I was well supported by my ice-axe pick, and 
driving it in, was able to arrest the slip before it was properly 
started. But never shall I forget Nemu’s agonised ‘‘ Oh, 
sahib, sahib !’ It was a relief to get hold of the fixed rope, 
and walk across the remainder of the shelf. 

The snowstorm was an unusually heavy one, and looked 
as though it might continue all night. But as we ploughed 
down the snow slopes towards the camp, the snow stopped 
falling, and the clouds, relieved of their burden, began to 
dissolve. Below, grey mists swirled and eddied in the 
glacier valley ; and above, the peaks stood forth in the 
radiance of a perfect evening. It was one of those trans- 
formation scenes that mean so much to the mountaineer. 
For hours we had wrestled with the ice wall, wrestled in 
gloom and snowstorm, and now, like love in a world of 
hate, the sun shone through to cheer our downward march. 

The mists beneath became less turbulent and ceased 
their eddyings and swirlings, lying in the valley like 
November vapours over a sodden meadow. The last 
cloudy rags were being thrown into the purple dustbin of 
the evening sky as we reached camp. 


246 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


As I stood outside my tent after supper, watching the 
unity of earth and sky in the bonds of night, the harsh 
labours of the day were forgotten. Strange imaginings 
possessed me. In the profound quietude I heard the whisper 
of small voices ; the liquid notes of some strange harmony 
stole across the glacier, seeming to rise from the very snow 
I was standing on, then—a shattering, bellowing roar from 
Kangchenjunga ; snow whirling upwards and outwards ; 
a grinding thunder of echoes rolling and crashing from 
peak to peak, booming, murmuring, dying into an affrighted 
silence. But the voices and the music I heard no more. 

The party had been further strengthened by the arrival 
of Hoerlin, and Wieland and I felt that we could justi- 
fiably leave him and Schneider to continue with the attack 
on the ice wall. Since leaving the Base Camp, we had 
worked solidly for six days, and a rest was necessary if 
we were not to crock. Such ice work at high altitudes as 
we had been doing is not of a type that can be kept up 
indefinitely, and coming thus early in the expedition, 
we were both feeling the strain of it. 

Hoerlin and Schneider put forth a great effort, and 
climbed the slope to the foot of the final wall. During the 
day we watched them, mere specks crawling upwards 
with the slowness of an hour hand. While they were at 
work, a large avalanche broke away from the left-hand 
extremity of the wall, and swept the lower part of the 
sloping terrace which we had decided was too dangerous 
to be climbed. 

They returned with the news that there were two possi- 
bilities of getting over the final wall. One was directly up 
it, and the other by engineering a way up a crack, which 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 247 


separated the lower portion of the ice wall from the ice of 
the terrace. It would be necessary to keep as far to the 
right as possible, in order to avoid getting beneath some 
unstable-looking ice pinnacles on the terrace. On the other 
hand, they regarded with disfavour the crack, which 
seemed to suggest that the portion of the ice wall outlined 
by it to the right was breaking away from its parent 
glacier. They considered that the work would be com- 
pleted on the morrow, and the terrace reached, and pro- 
posed to take up all the porters with loads, to establish 
Camp Three on the terrace. If the upper wall turned out to 
be harder than was anticipated, the loads would be dumped 
as high as possible. They had roped up all the upper part of 
the route, but it remained to be seen whether the porters 
could go safely up and down. Even if they could, keeping 
up the communications would be a much harder task than 
on Everest, where porters were able to go up and down 
unaccompanied between camps. Here every convoy must 
be under the charge of a European. 

But would it be possible to maintain such communica- 
tions at all ? As we had seen two days previously, a slight 
fall of snow had altered the complexion of things com- 
pletely. A heavy fall would undoubtedly isolate Camp 
Three. And what of the other camps above that ? At least 
six were anticipated between the Base Camp and the 
summit, and this number might well be increased by the 
difficulties of the climbing and the altitude to eight. With 
the beanstalk severed just above the root, it would both 
cease to climb and die. 

Apart from snowstorms, something worse than an awk- 
ward situation might be created by the collapse of any 


248 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


part of the ice wall involving the route. Even supposing 
no immediate deaths resulted, it might be difficult, or even 
impossible, to descend. 

One primary fact had not been realised, and that was 
that Kangchenjunga is something more than an Alpine 
peak on a large scale. Not one of the party could deny that 
the route was liable to be swept by ice avalanches, but it 
was not realised exactly to what an extent risks were being 
taken. A party in the Alps sometimes deliberately incurs 
a risk of being overwhelmed by an ice avalanche when 
passing beneath a hanging glacier, or under an unstable 
ice pinnacle in an ice face, but such a risk is seldom 
incurred for longer than a few minutes. We had been 
exposed to these risks for four consecutive days, and were 
to be exposed to the same risk for yet another day. And 
this was not all ; the risk would last as long as we were on 
the mountain. Communications between camps must be 
maintained, and porters go to and fro. Thus, the ice wall 
and the slopes beneath would have to be traversed not 
once, but many times, and the probability of accident was 
greatly increased thereby. As I have pointed out, Hima- 
layan porters appreciate difficulty, but not danger. They 
place implicit confidence in their sahibs, whom they are 
prepared to follow anywhere. This confidence should not 
be abused. 

That day, and late into the night, I sat in my tent 
writing up a sadly overdue diary, and also a dispatch to 
The Times, which last was sent down the same day to the 
Base Camp. In the former I wrote : 

‘Our camp is pitched on the only safe place in the 
cirque, for the hanging glaciers that cling precariously to 


THE FIRST ATTEMPT 249 


the hollows of precipices frequently let loose enormous ice 
avalanches that sweep the snow slopes beneath with 
cataracts of ice blocks. Yet were one of these catastrophic 
ice avalanches—the collapse of a hanging glacier—such as 
are common among the Himalayas, to take place, we would 
be brushed like a speck of dust from the earth. Even as I 
write there comes at almost regular intervals, the boom and 
roar of ice avalanches from Kangchenjunga. It is almost as 
though the mountain was pulsating to the fierce beats of 
her restless heart. Unhurriedly masses of ice are riven by 
the downward motion of the ice-fields from the edges of the 
red rock cliffs. They totter forward, masses as great as the 
Houses of Parliament, breaking up into disintegrating ice 
masonry, which strikes the precipices beneath with an 
appalling crash, and pours down in an irresistible torrent of 
ice, concealed by billowing clouds of snow dust flung 
before it.” 

My dispatch to The Times concluded with these words : 
“As I write, avalanche after avalanche is roaring off 
Kangchenjunga, each one seeming to proclaim defiance 
and warning.” 


CHAPTER XII 
THE AVALANCHE 


I lay long in my tent that evening writing, and it was 
nearly midnight before I blew out the candle, and com- 
posed myself to sleep. But sleep would not come. I was 
quite comfortable, my digestive organs were in good order, 
and acclimatisation had reduced my pulse-rate to nearly 
normal. The night was curiously warm, in fact, the warmest 
night we had had since we arrived at the Base Camp. Now 
and again came the long-drawn-out thunder of avalanches. 

Perhaps it was the atmosphere, or maybe some trick of 
the imagination, but the sound of the avalanches seemed 
dull and muffled. It was as though Kangchenjunga was 
choking with suppressed wrath. My body was ready for 
sleep, but my mind was not. It was troubled and restless, 
groping in a catacomb of doubt and fear. I have known 
fear before on a mountain, but that was fear of a different 
nature, sharp and sudden in the face of an immediate 
danger, but I have never known what it was to lie awake 
before a climb, tortured by the devils of misgiving. 

Some people may call this a premonition, but I do not 
think it can be so defined. Premonition of danger is, after 
all, an anticipation of danger, where, theoretically, danger 
ought not to exist. That danger existed in this case cannot 
be denied. The mind had brooded over it consciously and 
subconsciously to the detriment of the nerves, and these 


had become temporarily unstrung. That is a more logical 
ago 


THE AVALANCHE 251 


explanation than the acceptance of the premonition theory, 
which is more dependent upon a belief in psychical 
phenomena. 

When, at last, I fell asleep, I was troubled with terrible 
dreams. These dreams were not dreams of personal danger, 
but of danger to the porters. They were always getting 
into an impossible position, and would turn to me appeal- 
ingly for help. But I was unable to help. Afterwards, Wood 
Johnson told me he used frequently to dream this too. 
Possibly it was due to an innate sense of responsibility. 
Others on Himalayan expeditions have probably experi- 
enced the same sort of dreams. It was a bad night. 

I crawled out of my tent the next morning, dull, heavy, 
and unrefreshed. I looked at the ice wall, and the weary 
track leading up through the snow to it, with loathing. 
Neither mentally nor physically did I feel fit to start. 

The morning was ominously warm and a steamy heat 
beat down through sluggish mists. ‘The sun was obscured, 
but for the first time on the mountain we were able to 
sit outside and keep reasonably warm without its rays on us. 

It was decided that the scheme arranged the previous 
day should be adhered to. All except the cook and myself 
were to leave and try to establish Camp Three on the 
terrace. 

Schneider with his usual boundless energy was the first 
to leave. He was accompanied by his servant, ‘‘ Satan ”’ 
Chettan, who was carrying a considerable load. 

There was no porter in the expedition of a finer physique 
than “ Satan,”? and I remember watching him swing on 
his load with effortless ease, and start off in the wake of 
his master, his legs propelling him uphill in shambling 


252 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


powerful strides, the gait of a born hillman and 
mountaineer. 

Duvanel and three porters carrying cinematograph 
apparatus came next, as the former wished to obtain 
“shots” of the last party, which consisted of Hoerlin, 
Wieland, and eight porters carrying heavy loads. For a 
while I sat on a packing case, watching them as they 
slowly plodded up the slopes of soft snow, then I adjourned 
to my tent in order to write some letters. 

Perhaps half an hour later I was startled by a tremendous 
roar. Two thoughts flashed through my mind. Firstly, that 
only an exceptionally large ice avalanche falling close at 
hand could make such a din, and secondly, with a sudden 
clutch of horror at my heart, that the noise came, not from 
the usual direction of Kangchenjunga’s face, but from the 
ice wal] ! 

I dashed outside. What I saw is indelibly engraved on 
my memory. 

An enormous portion of the ice wall had collapsed. 
Huge masses of ice as high as cathedrals, were still top- 
pling to destruction ; billowing clouds of snow spray were 
rushing upwards and outwards in the van of a huge ava- 
lanche. On the slope below was the party, mere black 
dots, strung out in a straggling line. They were not mov- 
ing. For an instant, during which I suppose my brain must 
have been stunned, the scene was stamped on my mind 
like a still photograph, or perhaps a more apt comparison 
would be a ciné film that has jammed for a fraction of 
a second. Then everything jerked on again. I remember 
feeling no surprise, it was almost like a fantastic solution 
to something that had been puzzling me. 


DIRECTION OF 
UPPER TERRA 













PROPOSED SITE OF 
ues Four 


ws 
. 


STEEP (CE SLOPE 


CHETAN KiKteD 


HERE 
‘ALAN Pe + 
Ong URRY “+ ~ « 
eager ah . * ~ . 
ELS 701 AREA «SWEPT ~*~ 
WHEN pyALaNncis sa 
OccunneD BY 


1C& AVALANCHE 


25 


AVALANCHE 


ak a ee 
~ 
~~ A 


cAMP Two 


Lf, 


THE ROUTE UP THE GREAT ICE WALL 


THE AVALANCHE 253 


Now the dots were moving, moving to the left ; they 
were running, but how slowly, how uselessly before the 
reeling clouds of death that had already far outflanked 
them. The next moment the avalanche had swept down 
upon them; they were engulfed and blotted out like 
insects beneath a tidal wave. 

In the tent I had been conscious of noise, but now I was 
no longer aware of it. The clouds of snow swept nearer. 
At first they had seemed to move slowly, but now they 
were shooting forwards with incredible velocity. Vicious 
tongues of ice licked out under them. Here and there 
solitary blocks broke free from the pall ; behind them I 
caught a glimpse of a confused jumble of ice blocks, grind- 
ing together like the boulders in a stream bed caught up 
by the flood waters of a cloudburst. 

The thought of personal danger had not occurred to 
me at first, but now, suddenly, came the realisation that 
the avalanche might sweep the camp away. I glanced 
round for the cook—he was standing outside the cooking 
tent—and yelled to him to run for it. 

I had stood and watched the avalanche like one rooted 
to the spot in a nightmare. Running was nightmarish too. 
The feet sank deeply into the snow ; at the height (20,000 
feet) every step was an effort. We floundered along for 
perhaps twenty yards, then heart and lungs gave out, and 
neither of us could continue. We looked round ; the ava- 
lanche was stopping two hundred yards away. Though I 
had not been conscious of any noise after the initial roar, 
I was paradoxically conscious of it ceasing. 

The avalanche stopped, only the clouds of snow, driven 
by the wind displaced by the falling masses, writhed far 


254 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


into the air. There was no sign of my companions. I turned 
to the cook : “‘ They are all killed, but we must do what 
we can.” We retraced our steps to the camp, seized ice- 
axes, and set out for the scene of the disaster. We tried to 
move quickly, but it was impossible at the altitude, it was 
better to go slowly and steadily, and how slow this was. 

The clouds of snow began to settle, the veil thinned. It 
was a terrible moment. I expected to see no sign of the 
party. Then, to my immense relief, I saw dimly a figure 
away to the left, and then some more figures. We toiled 
upwards, skirting the edge of the avalanche ; it was sharply 
defined, and the ice blocks were piled several feet high. 
Beyond it the snow was untouched, save where it had been 
scored by solitary blocks flung forwards from the main 
mass of ice. 

Two hundred yards from the camp the track vanished 
beneath the débris of the avalanche. We reached a little 
group of porters. They were standing stupidly, without 
moving or speaking, on the edge of the débris, all save one, 
who was probing energetically with an ice-axe between 
the ice blocks. It was Nemu. I asked him what he was 
doing, whether there was a man buried there, and he 
replied, ‘‘ Load, sahib, I look for load.” In order to run 
and escape from the avalanche he had dropped his load, 
and this was seriously worrying him. Who were alive and 
who were dead did not concern him, he had dropped his 
load, the load entrusted to him by the sahibs. 

I counted the party, two were missing. Hoerlin, Wieland, 
and Duvanel I could see above me. The missing ones were 
Schneider and Chettan. Two hundred feet higher I saw 
Wieland approaching something sticking out between the 


THE AVALANCHE 255 


ice blocks. It was Chettan’s hand. By the time I had 
climbed up he had been dug out. He was dead, having 
been carried down at least three hundred feet, and crushed 
in the torrent of ice blocks. His head was severely injured, 
but as a forlorn hope we administered artificial respiration 
for over an hour. In the middle of it Schneider reappeared. 
He had had a marvellous escape. He had actually been 
under the ice wall when it came down. He said: “I 
heard a crack ; then down it came, huge masses of ice 
from hundreds of feet above. I thought I was dead, but I 
ran to the left, and the avalanche missed me by five 
metres.” Chettan had been too far behind Schneider to 
save himself. 

The remainder of the party had amazing luck. They had 
been on the track where it ran farthest to the left. Had 
they been ten minutes earlier or later, nothing could have 
saved them. Even so, they had had to run for their lives, 
and the track was swept almost from end to end. Duvanel 
told me that when he saw it coming, the thought of being 
able to escape never even occurred to him. But, like the 
others, he had run to the left, as it seemed better to be 
killed doing something than waiting for apparently certain 
death. So narrow had been the escape of the main body of 
the porters that some of them had actually been bruised 
by blocks of ice on the edge of the avalanche. The 
escape of the party can only be called a miracle of the 
mountains. 

The portion of the wall that had fallen had been that 
outlined by the crack noted by Hoerlin and Schneider the 
previous day. In falling it swept the route on the ice wall 
diagonally, completely obliterating the lower part of the 


256 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


route that Wieland and I had made, destroying the 
snow bridge over the crevasse, and the ice hump under 
which we had sat. In fact, the topography of the route we 
had made at the expense of so much labour had been 
altered completely. The area of snow slopes covered by the 
débris must have been nearly a mile square, and the 
avalanche can scarcely have weighed less than a million 
tons. 

We returned to camp, two of the porters taking turns 
at carrying Chettan. According to those who had been 
highest, another crack had opened up above the ice wall, 
and there was a strong possibility of another avalanche, 
possibly greater even than the first, which might conceivably 
sweep away the camp. It was advisable to retire to Camp 
One with all speed. But before doing so we buried Chettan. 

It was a simple, yet impressive ceremony. A hole was 
dug in the snow, and the body, dressed as it was in climbing 
clothes, laid within with folded arms. A handful of rice was 
roasted by the porters, and this was scattered over the body 
to the accompaniment of muttered prayers. We stood round 
with bared heads. Then someone gave an order, and snow 
was quickly shovelled into the grave. As this was done the 
mists dispersed, and the sun shone through for a few 
instants. Almost one could see the brave soul winging its 
way over the mountains. We drove in an ice-axe to mark 
the spot, and silently turned away. We had lost not a porter, 
but a valued friend. We left him buried amid one of the 
grandest mountain cirques in the world. 

So died a genuine lover of the mountains, a real adven- 
turer at heart, and one whom members of several Hima- 
layan expeditions will mourn. 





By courtesy of H. Ruttledge 


CHETTAN 


THE AVALANCHE 257 


We descended to Camp One in a wet and soaking snow- 
storm, that later developed into a blizzard. Word was sent 
down to the Base Camp of the disaster, requesting that 
Professor Dyhrenfurth and Kurz should come up and 
discuss matters. 

Wind was howling, and snow lashing the tents, as we ate 
supper and crept miserably into our sleeping bags. 


Rr 


CHAPTER XIII 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT: THE 
NORTH-WEST RIDGE 


On May 10, the day after the accident, Professor 
Dyhrenfurth, Kurz and Dr. Richter arrived from the Base 
Camp, and a conference was held on the situation. 
“* Conference ” is perhaps a little misleading. It is a word 
conjuring up a picture of frock-coated gentlemen seated 
round a long mahogany table, the highly polished surface 
of which reflects waistcoats ornamented with gold watch- 
chains, and earnest countenances on which responsibility 
and a heavy lunch sit heavily. In the present instance I 
must ask the reader to imagine the sombre interior of the 
large porters’ tent, the thick canvas of which reduces the 
light within to a faint depressing green, whilst a pungent 
reek of smoke struggles with a faint, yet perceptible odour 
of unwashed bodies that have lain there during the 
previous night. In the middle a heterogeneous collection of 
packing cases do duty as a table. Seated on other packing 
cases are a number of unsavoury looking ragamuffins with 
unkempt hair, frowsy beards, cracked sun-scorched 
countenances, and eyes bleared by the snow glare. 

The first suggestion made by those who had remained 
at the Base Camp was that the attack on the ice wall should 
be renewed, but this was very properly rejected by all those 
who had shared in the attack. The sole remaining alterna- 


tive was to attempt the North-west Ridge which rises from 
258 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 259 


the western tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier. This 
ridge ends in a snow and ice terrace beneath the Kang- 
bachen summit, 25,782 feet, of Kangchenjunga. Even 
supposing the terrace to be reached, however, the most we 
could hope for was to ascend the Kangbachen summit, as 
there was no possibility of traversing to the highest summit, 
as both distance and difficulty were too great. Personally, 
I must confess to a longing to flee from the mountain 
altogether, and be able to lie in a sleeping bag at nights 
and sleep undisturbed by the fear of annihilation from ice 
avalanches. I suggested, therefore, that we should retire, 
cross the Jonsong La, and attempt the Jonsong Peak, 
24,344 feet high. This idea met with no support, and it was 
decided to attempt the North-west Ridge. Should we fail, 
as it seemed certain we must do, judging from appearances, 
at all events we could ascend the Western Tributary 
Glacier, explore its head, and possibly climb the Ramthang 
Peak. 

In order to do this, it was decided to move Camp One 
across the glacier to the foot of the rocky spur separating 
the Western Tributary Glacier from the glacier falling 
between the Wedge Peak and the Ramthang Peak. This 
new site would have the advantage of being considerably 
safer than the present one, for it was by no means certain 
that we were safe in the event of an exceptionally large 
ice avalanche falling from Kangchenjunga or the Twins. 
This uncertainty was emphasised the same afternoon in a 
startling fashion. 

We were aroused from an after-lunch siesta by the 
thunder clap of a great avalanche. We issued from our 
tents in alarm. Thousands of feet above us on the face of 


260 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Kangchenjunga masses of hanging glacier were collapsing. 
Sweeping the precipices with appalling violence, the 
avalanche crashed down to the glacier, and roared straight 
across at us. 

Huge clouds of snow were raised by the wind blast from 
the surface of the glacier, and came rushing down upon 
the camp. They concealed the falling ice, and it was hard 
to tell whether the camp was safe or not. My own inclina- 
tion was to run for it, and I was about to bolt precipitately 
when I saw Duvanel calmly turning the handle of his 
ciné camera with that sang-froid peculiar to his calling, 
the tradition of which demands that the handle of a 
ciné camera shall be turned in the face of charging 
elephants, and at shipwrecks, fires, explosions, earth- 
quakes and other catastrophes. Fired by his example, I 
pulled my own folding camera from my pocket, and took 
a hurried snap. As will be seen from the accompanying 
illustration the avalanche resembled the white clouds of 
some new and deadly form of gas attack. The God of 
Kangchenjunga is evidently well up in the technique of 
modern warfare. The roar of the avalanche subsided. We 
knew that we were safe from ice débris, but the clouds of 
snow continued to pour down the glacier towards the camp 
with extraordinary velocity. The next moment a wind 
blast struck the camp, and a blizzard of snow sent us 
scuttling into shelter. 

The blizzard lasted some minutes, and when it had 
cleared the upper part of the glacier was seen to be covered 
in nearly an inch of wind-blown snow. The actual ice débris 
of the avalanche had stopped well short of the camp, but it 
had swept quite half a mile down the glacier. This was not 


ANO dWVO SG4YVMOL TIadi LYVHL AHONVIVAY FOI AHL 





THE SECOND ATTEMPT 261 


the only avalanche; other lesser ones fell, but none of such 
terrifying dimensions. It was obvious, however, that it was 
a mere question of volume and momentum whether or not 
the camp was to be swept away by a future avalanche. If 
it was a rest day for tired bodies, it was scarcely so for 
nerve-racked minds. 

It was a simple matter moving camp the next day, and 
the new site on the other side of the glacier was safer than 
any we had yet discovered. We had not been able to bring 
down all our equipment from Camp Two, so some porters 
under the charge of Kurz went up to fetch it. Schneider 
and Duvanel, meanwhile, descended to the Base Camp, 
the former in order to make a new track up the glacier 
to our new Camp, the latter to develop some ciné film. 
I was left in charge of the evacuation of the old camp, 
and took the opportunity of donning a pair of ski, and 
making short runs on the glacier. The snow was excellent 
and similar to late Spring Alpine snow. 

The new Camp One was pitched in a fine situation. 
There was a delightful view northwards up the moraine- 
stacked Jonsong Glacier winding sinuously up towards the 
little notch of the Jonsong La. The background was domi- 
nated by the rocky mass of the Jonsong Peak. Farther to 
the east, rose a ridge of icy peaks running northwards from 
Kangchenjunga and the Twins, from which the Tent Peak, 
24,089 feet, rose head and shoulders above everything else. 
It is as aptly named as the Wedge Peak, for its horizontal 
summit ridge with its small points at either end resembles 
a tent, the ridge of which sags between its supporting 
poles. 


Some useful stores arrived from the Base Camp that day, 


262 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


among them being synthetic rubber ground sheets for the 
tents. Though light and spongy, and weighing but a pound 
or so each, the difference they made to our comfort was 
amazing, and we were able to sleep then and afterwards 
far more warmly and comfortably than we would have 
done otherwise, insulated as we were from the snow. There 
is no question that they are far superior to any ground 
sheet, and form an item of equipment that no future 
Himalayan expedition can afford to leave out, for they 
induce the sleep which is so essential if climbers are to keep 
fit, 

Relieved by the thought that we were tolerably safe from 
avalanches, we slept well that night. It would have been 
wise to have started early the next morning while the snow 
was still hard from the overnight frost, but we did not get 
away until the sun had thawed its crust sufficiently to let 
it break beneath our weight. The obvious route up the 
Western Tributary Glacier was a trough between the 
glacier and the rock ridge forming its northern containing 
wall. The trough was snow-filled for most of its distance, 
except for one section where a scree slope interposed. 
These troughs, which form such a convenient line of least 
resistance up the glaciers of this district are perhaps the 
only thing vouchsafed by Kangchenjunga which seems to 
have been intended for the benefit of the long suffering 
mountaineer. 

Wieland and I, with some porters, were the first to set 
off. Hoerlin, Kurz, and some more porters were to follow, 
but at the last moment Kurz, who was again not feeling 
well, decided to return to the Base Camp. 

The snow in the trough was in the worst possible 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 263 


condition. We floundered waist deep into holes between 
concealed snow covered boulders, and wallowed in hollows 
where the snow was soft and watery. An hour passed ; 
we had made but little progress. I suggested to Wieland that 
we should leave the trough in favour of the ice-fall of the 
glacier. In making this suggestion I was actuated by the 
fact that at one place the trough seemed likely to be swept 
by falling stones from the cliffs above. Hoerlin, however, 
was of a different mind ; he would stick to the trough. As 
things transpired, he was right ; the danger was more 
apparent than real. 

Ascending the ice-fall was fatiguing work on account of 
the soft snow. Snow-shoes eased the porters’ labours to 
some extent, but there were not enough pairs to go round. 
Considering how broken was the ice, it was remarkable 
how few crevasses there were, but these few were dangerous 
ones, subtly concealed. We toiled up and down over 
hummocks, or threaded our way between pinnacles. The 
devil of doubt began to gnaw at our hearts ; would we be 
able to get through the ice-fall ? The sun beat down upon 
us mercilessly, and glacier lassitude sapped the strength of 
sahib and porter alike. At last we saw a sort of corridor 
leading from the ice-fall into the upper part of the trough. 
We could see that the trough was perfectly safe, but had it 
been dangerous, we should still have preferred it to the 
sweltering gullies and hollows of the ice-fall, for glacier 
lassitude tends to undermine the judgment and warp the 
conscience of the mountaineer. 

A crevasse barred the way. We stepped gingerly on to a 
fragile snow bridge. Icicles were dislodged and went 
tinkling down into the green depths with a noise like the 


264 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


banging together of small chandeliers. The corridor 
stretched ahead ; its smooth, snow floor looked innocuous, 
but Wieland suddenly disappeared up to his waist in a 
concealed crevasse : it was merely one of Kangchenjunga’s 
little jokes. 

At the top of the trough, where it debouches on to the 
glacier, above the worst of the ice-fall, there is a short 
section liable to be swept by ice avalanches from a hanging 
glacier forming the edge of a snow plateau on the Ramthang 
Peak. While still within the danger area we were startled 
by a sudden crash, but all that came down were a few 
boulders and blocks of ice. 

The porters were by now very tired, and they begged us 
to camp as soon as possible. We promised to do so as soon 
as we were out of range of ice avalanches. The sun was 
declining, and evening mists gathering around us as we 
reached the smooth slopes above the ice-fall, where 
stretched Hoerlin’s straggling track, man’s first score on 
these snow-fields. Here we decided to camp, while Wieland 
went on with ski to bring down Hoerlin, who had camped 
some distance further up the glacier. 

The evening was strangely still save for an undercurrent 
of sound, as though the goblins and witches who haunt 
the cliffs of Kangchenjunga above were murmuring at 
our coming. As usual, it was the wind. An upward 
glance disclosed the snow eddying and swirling from the 
polished ice cliffs defending the snowy terraces. The sun 
set calmly. Barely had its last rays faded when they were 
replaced by silver moon sheen behind the North Ridge 
of Kangchenjunga. The snow blown off the ridge by the 
wind was illumined from behind, and Kangchenjunga 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 265 


took to itself a glowing aureole of light. Imperceptibly the 
upper snowslopes were resolved from the darkness ; ghost- 
like, unreal, they shimmered far above the world. Mindless 
of the cold, we stood outside our tents entranced by the 
glorious spectacle. At long last the laggardly moon peered 
over the ridge in a shy, self deprecating sort of way. It 
seemed to wither and shrivel as it mounted into the frosty 
sky and its radiance, at first soft and wan, became a hard, 
cold electric blue. Details stood forth as clearly as in 
daylight. Only the shadows were black, and in these lurked 
the darkness of a pit. 

The cold gripped us. We crawled into our tents, and with 
numbed fingers laced-to the flaps. As Sir Leslie Stephen 
wrote : “‘ Bodily fatigue and an appreciation of natural 
scenery are simply incompatible.”” He might have added 
cold and discomfort. 

The sun reached us early the next morning, and we were 
off betimes. Our first business was to move camp farther 
up the glacier to a site that would form a convenient upper 
base for operations against the North-west Ridge. As we 
marched up the glacier we were able to examine the 
latter. First impressions are not always accurate and it is 
never easy to assess the difficulties of a mountainside or 
ridge at their true worth. As that great mountaineer, 
Captain J. P. Farrar used to remark : ‘‘ You can never tell 
what rocks are like until you have rubbed your nose 
against them.” Yet, even bearing these things in mind, no 
ridge I have ever examined affected me with the same 
feeling of utter and complete hopelessness as that of the 
North-west Ridge of Kangchenjunga. Picture a ridge 
rising 4,000 feet. Thin, trim and whittle down its edges 


266 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


until they are as keen as a Gurkha’s kukri; then hack 
deep gaps into these edges and perch rocky towers 
hundreds of feet high on them. Armour every smooth 
bit with ice, and mask every ledge with snow, and you 
will perhaps obtain a faint glimmering of an idea of 
the North-west Ridge of Kangchenjunga. The ridge 
attempted by the Munich party is formidable, but it 
cannot compare to the North-west Ridge. Ice pinnacles 
alone had to be surmounted on the former ; spiky rock 
pinnacles bar the way on the latter, and between these 
are some of those extraordinary ice ridges peculiar to the 
Himalayas. In appearance and sensationalism they are 
comparable to those on the Wedge Peak. There are the 
same tottering masses, the same biscuit-like flakes through 
which the sun gleams, the same extravagant forms, hacked 
and torn by the wind, lurching and tottering at the behest 
of gravity, and the same ice flutings to emphasise by their 
graceful lines the appalling steepness of the slopes they 
decorate. If we had been forced to attack the ridge from its 
base, I think we would have relinquished any idea of 
attempting it at the outset, for the lowest rock towers are 
hopeless from a climbing point of view. It looked possible, 
however, to gain the crest of the ridge above these initial 
pinnacles, by a steep snow-filled couloir about 600 feet 
high, leading upwards from the glacier to one of the gaps 
in the crest of the ridge. 

Camp was pitched on the glacier, and leaving the porters 
to make it comfortable we set off to climb the couloir. 
The lower half was simple; then the angle steepened. It 
was not difficult, but care had to be taken that the footsteps 
kicked in the floury snow that masked rock slabs and ice did 





— DIRELTION OF*# ag 
p< <5 SAM? ONE cAMP TWO (20.290,412 "ond 


<a ao aber 


WE STERN TRIBUTARY 
OF KAN GCHENTUNGA GLACIER 


THE NORTH-WEST RIDGE OF KANGCHENJUNGA 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 267 


not collapse. The last hundred feet were very steep. The 
angle must have exceeded 60 degrees, but we were comforted 
by the thought that we could fix a rope to facilitate descent. 
A small cornice leaned over the summit. The leader, 
Hoerlin, hacked and flogged it down, and squirmed 
through and over to the gap, Wieland and I following 
one by one. The ascent had taken only forty-five minutes, 
indicating that we had become well acclimatised to 
altitude. 

My first impression was probably somewhat similar to 
that experienced by a house-breaker, not a burglar, but one 
of those phlegmatic gentlemen who stand on the dizzy 
edges of aged and tottering walls knocking bricks off into 
space with a pick-axe. But surely no house-breaker has 
ever stood on top of such an unstable wall as we found 
ourselves on. A modern £25 down and balance in rent 
villa could scarcely be more “‘ jerrybuilt ” than the place 
on which we stood. On either side of us the rocks were 
piled in loose masses needing but a touch to send them 
crashing down on either side of the ridge below us. On the 
opposite side of the ridge to that which we had ascended 
loose yellowish precipices dropped to the head of the 
Ramthang Glacier. From our gap it appeared possible to 
descend to the glacier down another steep gully, scarred 
with falling débris. Such a descent would, however, involve 
unavoidable dangers. And far above this scene of perpetual 
decay rose the great ice slopes and ice walls of Kangchen- 
junga. 

Is there any hope of ascending Kangchenjunga from 
the Ramthang Glacier ? The answer must be, no, unless 
the climber is prepared to take his life, and the lives of 


268 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


his porters, in his hand. Like the face above the Kang- 
chenjunga Glacier, that above the Ramthang Glacier is 
defended by enormous walls of ice running across the 
mountainside. At one point only is there any hope of 
climbing the lowest of these ice walls, and this point is 
also liable to be swept at any moment by ice avalanches 
from another and tottering ice wall above. Kangchenjunga 
was not built for the mountaineer. 

Leaving rucksacks and spare rope, we commenced to 
climb along the unstable ridge. Almost immediately, we 
were forced off the crest to avoid a decrepit rocky tower. 
A traverse had to be made on the southern side of the ridge 
over steep, loose rocks, here and there treacherously 
covered in snow. It was a place not so much difficult as 
dangerous. There was not a reliable rock round which a 
rope could be placed to secure the party, and had a slip 
occurred, it would in all probability have been attended 
by the worst results. 

From the traverse, an upward ascent brought us into the 
mouth of a loose gully, the head of which consisted of 
slippery slabs disagreeably covered by a few inches of 
unstable scree. 

It is curious how on any climb the mental equilibrium 
of the mountaineer is liable to be upset by bad rock. 
Difficulty is one thing, danger another. The nerve-stressed 
mountaineer needing a safety valve for his feelings fre- 
quently finds an outlet for them in forceful language. I 
make no excuses, therefore, for certain improper remarks 
when clambering up these rocks. I cannot remember what 
Hoerlin and Wieland said, I had not yet learned the 
English translation of the German epithets that they held 





UNKNOWN PEAK SEEN FROM NORTH-WEST RIDGE 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 269 


in reserve for such occasions, but once, Hoerlin turned and 
remarked to me in perfect English, ‘‘ These rocks are 
* * *!° sentiments which, happily, I was able to return 
with interest. 

The principal advantage of taking photographs on a 
mountain is that the mountaineer is thus enabled to stop at 
frequent intervals and recover his breath. That is why most 
elderly mountaineers carry cameras. Taking a photograph 
is a much more convincing excuse for a halt than a boot- 
lace or braces that need adjusting. All those liable to be 
touched in the wind should take a camera. With what the 
reader will no doubt consider admirable foresight, I had 
brought up my camera with me, and not left it at the gap. 
I was not blown, but the ridge beyond the top of the 
little gully appeared so uninviting that I decided to stop 
there and photograph Hoerlin and Wieland doing it. 

Seated in a sheltered place, with the sun glancing warmly 
down upon me, I was able to appreciate the situation to the 
full. For a short distance the ridge appeared possible, and 
although extremely loose, not excessively difficult. But 
beyond the next tower it was very different. It rose abruptly 
in a huge pinnacle, quite three hundred feet high, and 
above this pinnacle, connecting it to the next pinnacle, 
was the first of those appalling ice ridges. As I sat there I 
tried to think of an Alpine ridge comparable to it, but I 
could think of none. The Pétéret, the Brenva, the East 
Ridge of the Jungfrau, none would fit. 

How were porters to be got up? Even supposing ropes 
were to be fixed the whole way up the smooth slabs of the 
first great pinnacle, they would not be able to climb with 
anything but a light load ; also we had lost so much rope 


270 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


in the avalanche that we certainly had not enough to 
spare for even this first pinnacle. There was, however, 
no necessity for experiencing renewed pessimism. What 
we were now seeing simply confirmed the opinion that 
some of us had formed when gazing from the glacier 
below. 

Hoerlin and Wieland were moving slowly and carefully, 
but even so they could not avoid dislodging many rocks 
which thundered down the precipices of the Ramthang 
Glacier. They turned a corner, and disappeared from 
view, but presently I saw them on the top of another minor 
pinnacle. There they remained, and I conjectured that 
they could not advance farther. 

The usual mists gathered, but without threatening any- 
thing beyond desultory snow flurries. Occasionally, they 
rolled aside to disclose a beautiful snow mountain, unknown 
and unnamed in a south-westerly direction, apparently on 
the ridge separating the Yalung and Ramthang glaciers. 
This peak was in shape something like the Ober Gabelhorn, 
and possessed the same sweeping lines as the graceful 
Zermatt peak. Jannu should have been visible beyond, but 
mists obscured it. Almost immediately beneath us was the 
camp we had just established. We seemed to be looking 
almost vertically down upon it so steep were the precipices 
below. It seemed that a jump would have landed us on 
our tents. Above the camp, the Western Tributary Glacier 
swept up serenely to the col separating the Ramthang 
Peak from the first rock towers of the ridge we were on. 
The Ramthang Peak itself was playing hide-and-seek in a 
fitful mist but what was visible of it reminded me forcibly 
of the Ménch seen from the Jungfrau Glacier. There were 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 271 


the same graceful lines and flowing yet defiant massiveness. 

It was late when we returned to camp, where we found 
Professor Dyhrenfurth, Schneider and Duvanel, who had 
come up that day from Camp One. I fear none of us were 
particularly optimistic over the day’s work, and it was 
refreshing to find that Professor Dyhrenfurth did not agree 
with an opinion that the ridge was hopelessly inaccessible 
and considered that we should continue with the attack 
towards the terrace above. 

For once, the afternoon clouds, instead of thickening for 
a snowstorm, dissolved. The evening was a calm and 
beautiful one, sky and world were unsullied by a single 
speck of cloud, a profound silence brooded over the 
sanctuaries of the snows, and only an occasional streamer 
of wind-blown snow sallied into space from the upper 
reaches of Kangchenjunga. Slowly night’s floods filled the 
valleys, and the peaks became steeped in gaudy hues, like 
waxen deities covering their countenances with rouge and 
lipstick. Imperceptibly, the aerial pageantry died, but its 
riot of colourings was superseded by an afterglow which 
released the peaks from night’s bonds for a few instants 
revealing them as cold statues of purest alabaster against a 
sky of deepest indigo. It was of such a day’s end that Mr. 
G. Winthrop Young once wrote : 


When in the hour of mountain peace, 
The tumult and the passion cease, 

As the red sunfloods sink, 

And the pale lords of sovereign height, 
Watch the cold armies of the night 
Mustering their first assault. 


272 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Who would suspect evil to lurk in such a sunset? Yet, 
somehow, its superlative colourings put me in mind of a 
sunset I had once watched from a tiny ledge 12,000 feet 
up on the south face of Mont Maudit. That had been a 
sunset preceeding a heavy snowstorm in which retreat 
had been no easy matter. 

I awoke some hours later to hear the pattering of snow 
on my tent. In the quietude it sounded like the light tread 
of fairy feet. Presently, I became aware of a faint under- 
current of sound like the far off throb of a train down 
some pastoral valley. The train approached, its distant 
murmurings rising gradually to a booming crescendo of 
sound. A gust of wind struck the tent, hurling the snow- 
flakes against it with rude fierce spatterings. The gust 
passed, but soon came another and stronger gust. In a 
few minutes the blizzard burst, furiously sweeping upon 
our encampment. I snuggled more closely into my sleep- 
ing bag, for strong though the tent fabric was, it was not 
entirely proof against this bitter onslaught at a height of 
20,000 feet. We had thought to be sheltered by the North- 
west Ridge, but it afforded no protection, for the wind 
seemed to pour over it like a cataract, and descend 
almost vertically upon the camp. 

The gusts grew stronger, they wailed and shrilled, rising 
to a roaring sort of boom like an express train racing 
through a tunnel. I could feel the tent floor rise as though 
malicious wind devils were undermining it with the object 
of my abode flying upwards into space. The wind dug 
viciously at the sides, or strove with strong fingers to tear 
apart the flaps, and burst the tent asunder. I prayed that 
Nemu had driven the pegs firmly and deeply into the snow, 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 273 


and then I recollected that the guy.ropes were pitifully 
thin, no thicker than a sashline. There seemed every 
possibility of the tent carrying away ; if it did, there would 
be little fun in being overtaken by such a disaster clad only 
in underclothes, so I struggled out of my sleeping bag, 
pulled on my climbing clothes, and packed my rucksack 
with some necessaries. 

The storm had now reached a pitch of intensity I had 
never before experienced when camping, and the night 
was filled with thunderous volleyings. Sometimes the 
wind would sink to a mysterious calm, during which it was 
possible to hear the storm snarling and worrying on the 
North-west Ridge as a preliminary before gathering its 
forces for a fresh charge on the camp. It was during one 
of these temporary lulls that I heard a sort of wailing 
outside, a wailing more human than storm-like. Peering 
through the flaps, I could just perceive a figure crawling 
through the snow. It approached my tent. In the light of 
my electric torch I saw the white, frightened face of 
Nagpa, the cook.: ‘‘ Sahib! Sahib!” he cried, “‘ Tent 
go! Tent go!’’ Opening the flaps wider, I glanced out, 
the porters’ tent was intact ; the cook had merely lost his 
head. I was unwilling to have him for a bedfellow, and 
told him to go back. The cook, however, was completely 
demoralised, and shielding his face from the blast, he 
crawled down the line of tents with his constant wailing of 
“Sahib! Sahib! Tent go! Tent go!” Eventually, he 
found sanctuary with Wieland and Schneider, but as they 
explained later, they took him in not for love or charity, 
but simply as additional ballast for their own tent! It 


' Tencheddar had been left at the Base Camp. 
SK 


274 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


was the solitary untoward incident of the storm. Well 
and truly had our tents been pitched. 

An hour or two later the wind began to subside, and ere 
dawn it withdrew with some last mutters and snarls, 
leaving a clean sky picked out with stars against which the 
windy banners of Kangchenjunga softly lit by moonlight 
streamed in ghostly rivalry to the starry constellations. 

We awoke to a warm sun glancing benevolently over 
the Twins. The North-west Ridge was plastered with new 
snow, and our steps in the couloir had been obliterated. 
As there was a possibility of avalanches occurring, we 
decided not to renew the attempt that day, and devoted 
the morning to building a wall of snow blocks on the 
windward side of the camp. Hoerlin was not feeling well ; 
somehow he had contracted a severe chill. Duvanel 
was also by no means fit, and only his devotion to his 
cinematographic duties had torn him away from the Base 
Camp. 

At the head of the glacier on the ridge separating the 
Ramthang Peak from the North-west Ridge of Kang- 
chenjunga is a small point about 20,800 feet high. This 
Wieland climbed by himself, using ski most of the way, 
and returned reporting that he had had a splendid view 
of the Ramthang Glacier and the North-west Ridge. It 
was decided, therefore, that the whole party should ascend 
to this point the following day, and carefully examine 
the latter to see whether it was worth while persisting in 
the attempt to climb it. 

The following morning, May 15, dawned fine. Unfor- 
tunately, Hoerlin was so ill that there was no option but 
for him to return to the Base Camp. This was a serious loss 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 275 


to the climbing party ; at the same time, the prospect of 
getting any distance up the North-west Ridge was so 
utterly hopeless that it did not really matter. 

After the experiences of the past fortnight, it was with 
something more than relief that we set out to climb some- 
thing that could be climbed. It has been said that on 
Everest the climbing party were so heartily “fed up” with 
the mountain, its weather, and the effects of altitude that 
their sole wish was to get the job over and done with, no 
matter who did it. Our attitude towards Kangchenjunga 
was the same. I do not think there was one of us who was 
not sick to death of work on the mountain. At exactly what 
height mountaineering ceases to be pleasurable is not easily 
defined, the matter is rather one of individual tempera- 
ment, but I do not think there is one mountaineer who has 
climbed on Everest or Kangchenjunga who can honestly 
say that he enjoyed the work. Achievement may be good 
for the soul, but it is not necessarily enjoyable. It was a 
relief to turn away from our exacting opponent for a day 
and enjoy ourselves. 

The 20,800 feet point is easily reached along the 
ridge connecting it to the Ramthang Peak, but from sheer 
exuberance we chose to ascend by a little rock face rising 
from the glacier. We raced each other up by various 
routes, and subsided puffing and blowing on the summit. 
What a summit it is—one of the most extraordinary that I 
have ever stood upon. From the Western Tributary 
Glacier it appears a mere knob, an insignificant excres- 
cence, but had we stood on the Ramthang Glacier we 
should have seen an “impossible” peak. Seldom have 
I gazed down such abysmal precipices as those falling to 


276 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the Ramthang Glacier. They were as long as the south- 
eastern face of the Finsteraahorn, and as steep as the 
Dolomite wall of the Winklerthurm. The seamed and 
wrinkled surface of the Ramthang Glacier was spread out 
beneath us like a relief map, and we gazed down upon it 
like pilots from the nose of a bombing aeroplane. The upper 
portion of the Ramthang Glacier rises very steeply in an 
almost continous ice-fall. From the col we had reached in 
the North-west Ridge we had been separated by but a few 
hundred feet from it, but the drop from Point 20,800 must 
be at least 4,000 feet, and as this point is separated from 
the col by only about a mile, the inclination of the glacier 
is a steep one. 

At its extreme head the Ramthang Glacier forms a snowy 
plain beneath the west face of the Kangbachen summit of 
Kangchenjunga. This face resembles closely the north 
face above the Kangchenjunga Glacier. There are the same 
impregnable ice walls stretching across it from which ice 
avalanches fall at least as big as those that fall from the 
north face. At the southern end of the face, where it abuts 
against the main West Ridge of Kangchenjunga, which 
separates the head of the Ramthang Glacier from the 
Yalung Glacier, there appeared to be a remote possibility of 
ascending between the ice walls and gaining the West 
Ridge. But, like the route we had already tried to the 
North Ridge, the possibility of success was more than 
counterbalanced by the possibility of annihilation, for the 
whole of the route was liable to be swept at any moment 
by ice avalanches. Even if the West Ridge was gained, 
what then ? At the best it could only lead to the Kang- 
bachen summit. To traverse the ridge between the 





THE SUMMIT OF POINT, 20,800 FEET 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 277 


Kangbachen summit and the highest summit, over the 
third highest summit, would be beyond the powers of any 
party. Therefore, it can be said without hesitation that 
Kangchenjunga is definitely unassailable from the Ram- 
thang Glacier. 

But if this side of Kangchenjunga is disappointing as 
regards its climbing potentialities it is hardly so other- 
wise. Great tiers of ice, gleaming steeps, and terrific red 
granite precipices combine to form a mountain face of a 
magnificence and grandeur worthy of the high summits 
it defends. 

We had looked upon the last portion of Kangchenjunga 
to be properly seen by man, and what we had seen but 
confirmed out opinion that there are no group of mountain 
tops defended so impregnably as the ‘‘ Five Treasures of the 
Snows.” We tore our eyes away from those terrible ice 
walls and glanced for relief along the winding trench down 
which flows the Ramthang Glacier, and up over the sea of 
peaks to the west. Woolly clouds were rising from the 
valleys and draping themselves about the shoulders of the 
peaks. Once the cloudy waves rolled back ; in a distant 
trough a great peak rose in noble solitude above the world. 
Someone said, ‘‘ Everest.”? Then the mists closed in, and 
we saw it no more. 

We turned to the North-west Ridge. Our view of it was 
an end-on one, but if it was impossible to gauge its length, 
its height and difficulty were apparent. Below us on the 
glacier was the camp, a mere smudge on the immaculate 
expanse of snow. The terrace we must gain was 4,000 feet 
higher. The North-west Ridge was the connecting link. I 
have already described its knife-like edges of ice and its 


278 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


rocky towers. Seen thus, end on, they were jumbled one 
against the other, and one gained but little idea of the real 
length of the ridge. Perhaps it was this that deceived Pro- 
fessor Dyhrenfurth into deciding to continue with the 
attack. To those used only to Alpine scale, it is easy to be 
misled by the length of these Himalayan ridges. But if the 
length was not apparent, the difficulties were, and one could 
not but wonder how porters were to be got up, and camps 
established along that tremendous crest. There was no 
answer to this question. Even supposing the upper ice wall, 
against which the ridge abutted, to be climbed, and the 
terrace gained, what next? There was no possibility 
whatever of reaching any of Kangchenjunga’s summits. 
The terrace did not extend right across the mountain to the 
North Ridge, there was a cut-off of impassable precipices. 
At the best, we could only hope to reach the Kangbachen 
summit, and that was separated from the terrace by 1,500 
feet at least of formidable granite precipices. ‘The most we 
could do was to climb as high as possible, perhaps even as 
high as the Bavarians, but what was the practical use of 
that ? I fear my companions thought me a pessimist, but 
what else could one be taking everything into considera- 
tion ? Anyway, the decision was made. We were to go on. 
This settled, we sat and lazed two or three hours away 
in the warm sun, happy hours, but trammelled by the 
thought of the morrow. The evening mists saw us 
jogging down the glacier to the camp. 

The party that left the next morning consisted of 
Professor Dyhrenfurth, Schneider, Wieland and myself, 
with two porters, Lewa and Nima, the last named not to 
be confused with Nemu, my servant, both experienced 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 279 


Everest men. The couloir was in bad condition, and steps 
had to be kicked or cut through an upper layer of 
powdery snow a foot deep. The porters were not happy ; 
neither of them had experienced similar climbing before. 
Lewa stuck gamely to the task, but Nima was constantly 
slipping from his steps. I was next to him on the rope, and 
had several times to hold him. The ridge itself was also in a 
worse condition than it was during our reconnaissance. 

We climbed on two ropes, Schneider, Wieland, and Lewa 
on the first, and Professor Dyhrenfurth, Nima, and myself 
on the second. The duty of the second party was to drive 
in pitons and fix ropes to the rocks. Nima caused us some 
anxious moments. It made one shudder to see the way he 
climbed on the loose rocks, hauling himself up on his hands 
without testing loose holds. So poor a show did he put up 
that we decided to leave him on a broad and safe part of 
the ridge, a decision that relieved him as much as it did 
us. Lewa was, however, an excellent rock climber, and 
followed Schneider and Wieland without difficulty to the 
top of the pinnacle, which had been the farthest point 
reached during the reconnaissance. 

From the top of the pinnacle a vertical and holdless slice 
of granite drops to a gap. The climber must descend the 
granite slice on the rope, and alight on a sharp edge of 
snow. A piton was driven into a crack on the pinnacle, and 
a double rope fixed to it. Schneider and Wieland then 
descended hand over hand down the fixed rope, while being 
held at the same time from above on another rope by the 
remainder of the party. It was the sort of place fiction 
writers would make much of. Their descriptions would 
bristle with “unfathomable abysses,” ‘like a fly on a 


280 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


wall,” “ beetling precipices,” and so forth. The moun- 
taineering guide-book writer would, however, describe it 
simply as “a twenty feet absail”: and as a grudging com- 
pliment to the place add “sensational.” In this case, 
however, the fiction writer would convey a better picture 
to the mind of even the most sophisticated reader than the 
guide-book writer. To add to the sensationalism might be 
added the fact that the cracked and disintegrating pinnacle 
on which we stood exhibited a distinct tremor if rudely 
handled. I distinctly remember thinking, a trifle morosely, 
what a grand finale it would make to the expedition if 
the thing collapsed, and toppled into the “ unfathomable 
abyss ”’ with its human load. 

As Wieland swung over the edge, the dirty and bat- 
tered topi he was accustomed to affect looked strangely 
incongruous in these surroundings of rock, snow and ice, 
and, as he bumped and rasped down the rough granite, I 
half hoped that it would be knocked from his head and go 
spinning down the precipices, arriving at the camp below 
a pulped and shapeless mass. No such diversion occurred, 
and soon he had joined Schneider in the gap on the snow 
ridge. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth and I remained on the pinnacle 
for an hour or two. We were privileged in witnessing one of 
the finest feats of climbing we had ever seen. Immediately 
above the gap rose a semi-detached mass of rock ; beyond 
was another small gap, above which rose the great pinnacle 
in three hundred feet of slabs set at an angle not far re- 
moved from the vertical. Ice in the interstices of these slabs 
had forced them apart in many places and dangerously 


1 A German term for double roping. 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 281 


unstable flakes rested against the face. Every ledge was 
loaded with snow or ice. On an Alpine climb of excep- 
tional severity the ascent of this pinnacle would be a for- 
midable proposition ; at 21,000 feet it bordered on the 
impossible. 

Wieland ensconced himself on top of the semi-detached 
mass, and Schneider descended, without much difficulty, 
into the secondary gap, and began the ascent of the slabs. 
Methodically he worked his way upwards. The exertion of 
hard rock climbing at such an altitude was obviously 
severe, and after each upward heave he was forced to halt 
and rest. At length he reached a small stance, a tiny trian- 
gular recess, where Wicland joined him. Above this rose a 
slanting crack formed by the edge of a projecting flake the 
upper part of which bulged out unpleasantly. It was not a 
place to linger over, and Schneider did not linger. A foot 
scrape on the wall, a hand wedged in the crack, a quick 
upward caterpillar-like movement with nought but tiny 
hand holds to prevent a backward topple, and the hardest 
part had been accomplished. In the silence, unbroken save 
by an occasional whisper of wind, I could hear the sibilant 
sucking in of breath by sorely stressed lungs. A few feet 
more of difficult, but not such exacting climbing brought 
him to a sloping shelf. Wieland followed, and although 
burdened by both ice-axes and a rucksack, he came up 
without relying on the rope. 

So far, so good. For a few feet the work was easier ; then 
the slopes steepened once more. In places they were dan- 
gerously ice glazed, and their sloping icy shelves were 
masked by snow. Ice-axes were called into play to clear 
holds. Now and again loose flakes of rock were dislodged. 


282 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Hurtling madly down the cliffs towards the Ramthang 
Glacier, they loosed other rocks until a perfect torrent of 
crags set the echoes thundering from the cliffs of Kang- 
chenjunga. 

Two hours work, two hundred feet of ascent, such was the 
climbing on the great pinnacle. Professor Dyhrenfurth and 
I watched the struggle with intense interest. It was, pro- 
bably, the finest piece of rock climbing ever done at such 
an altitude. We forgot for the moment that the real problem 
was not the ascent of the ridge by the Europeans but the 
establishing of camps and the getting up of porters over 
this gaunt, inhospitable backbone of rock and ice. 

The weather restored pessimism, grey mists came flying 
up from the west, a chill wind sobbed over the ridge, driv- 
ing before it small moths of snow. Schneider and Wieland 
were out of sight now. Occasionally we could hear their 
voices, whilst an occasional stone crashed out news of their 
advance. We rose, stretched our cramped limbs, tied on 
Lewa, and started to descend. 

We had collected Nima but were still above the col when 
we were startled by an enormous roar. Millions of tons of 
ice had broken away from the ice wall and were thunder- 
ing down to the Ramthang Glacier. Instantly, the whole 
upper basin of the glacier was filled with a writhing hurri- 
cane of snow. Whirling up at us, it enveloped us in 4 
blizzard, that whitened and sheeted our clothes in snow. 
The sky was darkened ; the whole district seemed to be 
filled with the wind-blown snow dislodged by this 
monstrous avalanche. 

Such an avalanche, had it occurred in the Alps would 
command widespread attention, newspapers would refer 





GRIM WORK ON THE NORTH-WEST RIDGE: SCHNEIDER 
AND WIELAND ON THE GREAT PINNACLE 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 283 


> 


to it as a “‘ Cataclysm of Nature,”’ and questions would be 
asked in the Swiss Parliament about it. But on Kangchen- 
junga, such avalanches are not the exception, but the rule— 
almost an everyday occurrence in their season. 

Kangchenjunga is by no means the only Himalayan peak 
to discharge avalanches of such magnitude, but it is pro- 
bably safe to say that there is no other Himalayan peak 
that discharges them with such frequency. This is due, of 
course, to its great snowfall, the quick downward move- 
ment of its glaciers.: A good instance of the size of a 
Himalayan avalanche is that which occurred during 
the late A. F. Mummery’s attempt on Nanga Parbat. 
The party had bivouacked on a rock rib which pro- 
jected some five hundred feet from the mountainside, 
but when they returned to their bivouac site after an 
unsuccessful attempt on the mountain, they found that 
their gear had been swept away by an ice avalanche. The 
avalanche had fallen diagonally and taken the five hun- 
dred feet rib in its stride ! The size and destructive power 
of Himalayan avalanches is the first thing that should be 
studied when climbing in the Himalayas. A purely Alpine- 
trained mountaineer finds it difficult to appreciate the scale 
on which such avalanches occur. Mummery paid the pen- 
alty of not realising this when he made his final and 
disastrous attempt on Nanga Parbat. No trace of him and 
his two Gurkha followers was ever discovered. We nar- 
rowly missed paying the same penalty too, and had we 
been wiped out during our attempt to reach the North 
Ridge of Kangchenjunga, we should have received our 
just deserts. 


1 See Appendix : ‘‘ Glaciology : Snow Conditions and Avalanches.” 


284 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


It must be remembered that Himalayan ice avalanches 
habitually sweep the whole breadth of glaciers. To illustrate 
this I can but add that were the peaks in the vicinity of 
the well-known Concordia Hut in the Bernese Oberland 
enlarged to Himalayan scale, the mountaineer staying at 
the hut would not be safe from ice avalanches falling from 
the peaks on the opposite side of the Aletsch Glacier. 

It was a relief to leave the rotten rocks, and to stand 
once more in the col ; and it was pleasant to escape from 
the cutting wind, and seizing the fixed rope that hung 
down the steep upper part of the couloir step blithely 
down the capacious ladder of holds towards the camp. 

We glissaded down the lower part of the couloir, and 
for the first time that day Nima’s worried expression gave 
place to a broad grin of delight. The porters are children 
at heart, and they have all the enthusiasm for a glissade 
down snow that a child has for a toboggan. For the benefit 
of the uninitiated I should explain that there are two 
methods of glissading. One is to stand upright, and the 
other is to sit down. The former is best employed on hard 
snow, the latter on soft snow. A certain degree of expertness 
is necessary for the stand-up glissade. Many commence in 
elegant style. With ever increasing speed, they slide down 
the slope. Presently, as the speed becomes faster and faster, 
they become flustered. From stability, they are reduced to 
instability ; their elegance, their dignified deportment is 
lost, their balance is upset, they struggle wildly to regain it, 
then the snow comes up and hits them on the nose. They 
go head over heels, their ice-axes are snatched from their 
hands, their hats torn from their heads, their rucksacks 
wind themselves round their necks, endeavouring to 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 285 


strangle them, snow is forced down their collars, up their 
sleeves, and into their pockets and trousers. Over and over 
they go in a series of somersaults, to subside finally at the 
bottom where they rise to their feet vowing it was good fun. 
On this account, the inexpert and less venturesome prefer 
to glissade sitting. 

There is one other variety of glissade worthy of mention, 
and that is glissading on a rope. This is one degree worse 
than ski-ing on a rope. What usually happens is this : the 
leader, without troubling to enquire whether the second 
man is ready, shoots off with great velocity, despite the 
agonised cries of the latter. In a moment or two, the rope 
tightens on the second man who has barely had time to 
start, snatching him forward on to his head, and squeezing 
the breath out of him. The jerk arrests the leader, who hurls 
an uncomplimentary remark over his shoulder at the un- 
fortunate second man, who meanwhile slides, or somersaults 
pell mell past the leader. Then, before the leader has time 
to continue, he is in his turn dragged in the wake of the 
second man. And so it goes on, a vicious cycle, until 
they have reached the bottom, where they sit side by side 
in the snow roundly abusing one another. 

We reached camp in desultory snow squalls. Mists 
concealed the North-west Ridge, but now and again they 
blew aside and we scanned the rocks a little anxiously for 
signs of Schneider and Wieland. It was not until evening 
that we saw them descending, mere dots silhouetted 
against the jagged skyline. Dusk was falling when they 
returned. They reported immense difficulties, difficulties 
both of rocks and ice. Short of roping the great tower up 
from top to bottom, there was no possibility of getting the 


286 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


porters up it, and even with ropes, it would most likely 
prove impossible for laden men. The prospect of further 
advance beyond the tower was doubtful in the extreme. 
The whole crest of the first knife-like ice ridge would have 
to be hacked away before a passage could be won. At the 
end of this ridge, there was another tower, not so high as 
the first, but more difficult, in fact, probably impassable. 
Its summit was capped by a boss of ice which flowed down 
its sides like icing on a cake. There was no avoiding this 
tower, for the precipices on either side were sheer and offered 
no hope of a traverse. Above this tower, other ice ridges 
rose, a whole series of them, up to the terrace. Nowhere, 
said Schneider, was there a place on which a camp might 
be pitched. There were not even any ice pinnacles of a 
type suitable for bivouac caves. And the weather ? What 
would be the position of a party caught high up on this 
great ridge in bad weather or high winds ? The storm on 
the glacier three nights previously had been bad enough, 
but what would it have been like on the ridge? Retreat 
would be impossible. It would probably mean two weeks 
hard work to reach the terrace, even supposing camps could 
be established, and porters brought up, and by then the 
monsoon would most likely have broken. Each of these 
facts taken separately was sufficiently weighty to militate 
against any attempt; accumulatively, they were over- 
whelming. 

There was no alternative but to abandon the project, 
and the following day Wieland and I accomplished the 
dreary task of collecting and bringing down the fixed 
ropes. Kangchenjunga had beaten us, beaten us not by 
bad weather, so much as by sheer difficulty. We had 


THE SECOND ATTEMPT 287 


examined every portion of the faces above the Kang- 
chenjunga and Ramthang glaciers. Nowhere was there a 
chink in the armour of the giant ; nowhere was there a 
route at which the mountaineer might look and say, “‘ Well, 
it might go.’ Others sceptical as to the truth of these asser- 
tions may follow in our footsteps, but they too will return 
disappointed, and like us they will lie awake at nights 
and tremble, even as the ground trembles, at the roar of 
the great ice avalanches that seek their destruction, and 
like us, their hope and optimism will be ruthlessly crushed 
beneath the icy heel of Kangchenjunga. 


CHAPTER XIV 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI 
AND FOOT 


I have already had occasion to mention the beautiful 
snow and ice summit rising from the head of the Western 
Tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier. This peak, which 
is about 23,000 feet high, had inspired the appellation of 
Madonna Peak, for its sweeping robes of snow and ice 
suggest an unapproachable virginity, but Professor Dyhren- 
furth had, in the interests of topography, subsequently 
rechristened it Ramthang Peak in deference to the Ram- 
thang Glacier which is fed by its southern snow-slopes. 

On May 18, the day after our decisive and final defeat 
on the North-west ridge of Kangchenjunga, we decided to 
push camp as far as possible up the mountain and so bring 
the summit within reasonable reach. With this end in view, 
it was agreed that Schneider and I should start before the 
main body of the expedition, and explore the route, with a 
view to ascertaining whether it was possible to establish 
a camp on a snowy shoulder at the foot of the eastern ridge 
of the peak which we hoped to follow to the top. 

I was the first to leave, and soon after the sun had struck 
the camp strapped on ski and started alone up the glacier, 
which in its upper portion is practically devoid of crevasses 
and perfectly safe for a solitary ski runner. 

The morning was a lovely one ; scarcely a zephyr of 


wind disturbed the delicate ice crystals formed by a sharp 
288 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 289 


overnight’s frost on the surface of the glacier ; a host of 
hoary peaks lifted silvered heads into a sky of gentian blue. 
Slowly the sun flooded over the snow-fields, his slanting 
rays revealing the most delicate folds and unsuspected 
wrinkles and undulations on the time-worn countenances 
of the peaks. I almost felt myself to be the invader of some 
moonscape, fantastic, unreal and beautiful. 

A load of care had been lifted from my mind by the 
abandonment of the attempt on the North-west ridge. Now 
at last we were to attempt something that offered some pros- 
pect of success. Even my ski seemed to hiss joyfully beneath 
me, like a carefree ostler grooming a horse, and my ski- 
sticks drove into the crusted snow with a light triumphant 
plop at every forward lunge. 

Impelled by sheer exuberance I climbed quickly, too 
quickly, for soon my lungs began to labour reminding me 
that I was not on the slopes of Mirren but 20,000 feet up 
in the Himalayas. Gladness departed ; what was mere 
flesh and blood that it should stride about the mountains 
in this way ? 

I halted, and puffed myself into a more sedate frame of 
mind. Like walking uphill at great altitudes, so with ski- 
ing, rhythm. And, once cultivated, an easy rhythm. Despite 
the heavy hickory boards, I found myslf climbing more 
steadily, and making height more quickly, than if I had 
been on foot. Unconsciously, I began to keep my upward 
lunges in time with the slow beats of an old and sentimental 
music-hall ditty. I had not heard it, or sung it, for years, 
yet now, high up on the Ramthang Peak, it jogged through 
my brain in harmonious time with the forward movements 


of my ski. 
Tx 


290 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Leaving Point 20,800 feet on my left, I climbed up and 
round in a wide arc, and began to ascend to the snowy 
shoulder. The slope I was traversing gradually steepened, 
and presently, on glancing down, I saw that an ice cliff two 
or three hundred feet high was below me. For fifty yards, 
where the snow was resting but a few inches deep on hard 
ice, a ski jump down the ice cliff was the penalty of slipping, 
and I advanced cautiously, stamping my ski well in at 
every step. 

The slope eased off, and I found myself on the shoulder. 
From beneath it had looked almost flat and a good site for 
a camp ; actually, it was by no means flat and was, more- 
over, exposed to the full force of the wind. At all events, 
there was little object in advancing camp thus far, when 
only half an hour’s extra work would be entailed on the 
morrow if we pitched it as high as possible up the glacier. 

Above the shoulder rose an ice slope nearly 1,000 feet 
high, and forming a cut-off in the eastern ridge of the peak. 
The ice was too steep for crampons to be effectively used, 
whilst an evil glitter from its polished blue-black surface 
suggested a long and hard bout of step cutting. 

Schneider joined me. Together we lazed in the sun. The 
view was an extensive one. The whole of Kangchenjunga’s 
northern precipices were outspread before us. Our gaze 
swept along their granite facets, with their tiers of icy es- 
carpments that stretched across the face of the mountain 
like the galleries of some colossal stadium. Now and again 
avalanches boomed through the still morning air telling of 
an ever restless and malignant activity. 

South-westwards rose Jannu, 25,294 feet high. It would be 
difficult to conceive a more inaccessible looking mountain. 







o—- DikEction 
OF MOR THs SWEST. : 
PARGS 


F uppe 
CAM P “Tue 4a” 


LOWE 

na S% 
SAMS = 5 
Two 


rT 
eLD cAN 
ONE 


EASTERN TRIBUTARY “GLACIER 


THE ROUTE TO THE RAMTHANG PEAK 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 29QI 


Like many Himalayan peaks it is wedge-like in forma- 
tion, with two summits set at either end of an almost 
horizontal ridge. Once gain this ridge and the ascent of 
either summit should be feasible. But how to gain the ridge? 
On the side facing us the precipices lifted in one smooth, 
terrible fagade of granite ; on the other side, to judge by 
photographs, are equally fearsome cliffs. Can either sum- 
mit be reached directly ? The answer is, No. Both ends 
of the wedge end in hopeless precipices. Such is the prob- 
lem presented to the mountaineer by Jannu, a rival of the 
famous Mustagh Tower in the Karakorams, and one of 
the most appalling rock peaks in the world. 

Northwards, was the Jonsong Glacier, its irregular 
moraine strewn surface looking as though it had been 
riven by the picks and drills of a million mad nawvies. Far 
up it stretched the ugly moraines, and it was only at its 
head that the forces of ruin and decay relinquished their 
grip, and gentle snow slopes stretched upwards to the 
snowy notch of the Jonsong La. West of the Jonsong La, the 
Jonsong Peak, 24,344 feet, rises grandly, its massive sum- 
mit forming the culminating point of the ranges of North- 
eastern Nepal and North-western Sikkim. On this side, the 
south-eastern face, it throws down great cliffs friezed like 
Kangchenjunga with hanging glaciers. Dr. Kellas had, we 
knew, attempted it from the north-west. Given sufficient 
time before the arrival of the monsoon, that would be also 
our line of attack. 

Then the range of peaks directly to the north of the 
Base Camp attracted our attention : fine precipitous rock 
peaks standing out from torrential glaciers. One of them, 
with a horizontal roof-like ridge rising to an acute spire 


292 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


at one end, bore a curious resemblance to a church. 

At first we were observant and critical, but as we reclined 
in the snow, warmed by the sun, mind and muscles re- 
laxed, and the peace of the high places laid soothing hands 
upon us. Through half closed eyelids I gazed at a world 
unsubstantial and dreamlike. Once again I seemed to hear 
music, but this time music solemn and slow, a majestic 
symphony from the massed orchestras of the hills. Its slow 
pulsating waves bore me away into space—the music was 
drowned in a sudden roll of drums. I tried to escape from 
the insistant din. I could not. It closed in on me, sur- 
rounded me. There was a thundering crash. I awoke. My 
opened eyes were dazzled by the snow glare, but the 
thunder still smote on my ears—a great avalanche was 
roaring off Kangchenjunga. 

There is no peace to be found on these mountains. Soli- 
tude, yes, but peace, no. Every hour the mountaineer is 
reminded of the destructive forces that are ever at work 
ceaselessly endeavouring to reduce the grandeurs and beau- 
ties of the mountains to the uninspiring uniformity of the 
plains. To discover the peace that dwells upon hilltops 
you need go no farther than our Homeland hills. On them, 
among their rocks and heather, you will be given something 
that not even the lords of the Himalayas are able to 
give. 

We unclipped our sealskins, thrust them into our ruck- 
sacks, and strapping on ski set off down towards the little 
worm-like caravan of porters who were toiling up the 
glacier far beneath. 

I had barely started when Schneider was half way down 
to the glacier. He is a splendid ski runner, combining the 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 293 


dash of the first-class racer with the shrewd judgment of 
the mountaineer. To him, as with me, ski are something 
more than wooden boards, and ski-ing something more 
than a winter sport. 

We had reached a height of between 21,000 and 22,000 
feet, and I found ski-ing downhill at this height more tiring 
than ski-ing downhill at Alpine levels. One good point 
about mountaineering on foot at high altitudes is that it is 
no more fatiguing to descend moderately easy ground than 
itis in the Alps. The same does not apply to ski-ing. 
Balancing at low levels is automatic, but at 20,000 feet a 
conscious effort is required, whilst a swing is distinctly hard 
work. After a few swings the knees tend to become weak, 
and balancing more difficult. For a moderate class runner 
like myself, really to enjoy a long descent, it is best to stop 
and rest now and then. 

The snow was of a delightful quality, hard, but with a 
loose crystalline surface into which the ski edged well. On 
such a surface the jerked Christiania was a simple matter. 
So much for the technique and the drawbacks of ski-ing at 
high altitudes ; how can I describe the delights ? The swift 
tush with body tensed and crouched, the song of the wind, 
the slow procession of the mountains, the fierce exhilara- 
tion of pure speed, and far below a little line of laden por- 
ters ascending the glacier, halted in amazement at these 
strange pranks, rushing upwards towards me. As Mr. 
Arnold Lunn once remarked, “ Ski-ing is the finest form 
of locomotion known to man.” 

Camp was pitched on the gently sloping glacier under 
Point 20,800 feet. Unfortunately, Professor Dyhrenfurth, 
Wieland and Duvanel were not fit, and it looked as if 


294 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Schneider and I alone would be able to make the attempt 
on the morrow. Duvanel was worst ; he had worked very 
hard on the taking of his film, and had not spared himself. 
The unfitness of the party was due, partly, to the wrong 
kind of food, and partly to nerve strain. Owing to trans- 
port delays, we had been forced to exist for ten days on 
food scarcely suited to the peculiar requirements of high 
altitudes. Now, thanks to Colonel Tobin, Wood Johnson 
and Hannah, the transport had been reorganised and food 
cases were arriving every day at the Base Camp. But the 
harm had been done, stomachs had rebelled, and consti- 
tutions had been undermined. Yet, compared to nervous 
strain, food is of secondary importance. We had escaped 
annihilation on Kangchenjunga only by a miracle, and 
during the eighteen days we had been on the mountain 
we had never felt safe from ice avalanches. At the back of 
our minds there had been always the feeling that we were 
only there on sufferance, and did Kangchenjunga choose, 
it could kill us. However philosophical a man may be, 
and as regards danger he does become philosophical at 
high altitudes, such mental strain tells on the physique. 
The period spent on Kangchenjunga was the most nerve 
racking that I have ever experienced. Wieland and I had 
been up the whole time, and we were both tired, mentally 
as well as physically. We were sick of the unvarying glare 
of snow, and longed to feast and rest our eyes once more on 
green grass. Schneider alone was brimful of energy, for he 
is of a type impervious to “‘ nerves,”’ besides being a man 
of extraordinary physique. 

I spent the remainder of the afternoon seated on the 
snow ridge above the camp between Point 20,800 feet and 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 295 


the first rock towers of the North-west ridge. Among other 
dainties that had come up from the Base Camp, were some 
boxes of fruit jellies, and I lay contentedly in the snow 
eating them for hours, with the appreciative mechanical 
regularity of a small boy possessed of a generous, if mis- 
guided uncle. 

Mists gathered ere evening, their light luminescent fila- 
ments serving to enhance the beauty of the peaks. Once 
again I thought I saw Everest, like a blue jewel resting on 
cotton-wool clouds. 

Towards sundown a chill wind rose, and I was glad to 
retire to the camp. We had thought it to be protected from 
the wind, but that capricious element poured over the 
ridge above and descended on us in a bitterly cold douche. 
There were fifty degrees of frost as we vainly endeavoured 
to boil some hot tea over a Meta cooker, and so quickly 
did the heat radiate from the aluminium cooking pan, that 
it was impossible to get more than a lukewarm brew. 

Among other good things that had arrived were some 
tins of cranberries. These mixed with condensed milk 
formed a delicious dish, and Duvanel, who had under- 
taken the onerous task of cooking, distributed them to 
us. 

We were glad to get into our sleeping bags and warm 
numbed hands. The wind increased in force during the 
night, and once I awoke to hear the driven snow lashing 
my tent like raw-hide whips. 

At dawn the wind had not dropped, and the cold was 
still severe, but, nevertheless, Professor Dyhrenfurth gal- 
lantly blew the conventional three blasts on his horn. But 
for once he blew without effect ; there was no competition 


296 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


among my companions to “ show a leg.” A few minutes 
later I heard him passing down the line of tents endeavour- 
ing to rouse their occupants to a sense of duty. Eventually 
he stood before mine. “‘ Herr Smythe, it is time we started.” 
No answer. Louder : “‘ Herr Smythe, it is time we started.” 
I emitted a lusty snore. A few minutes later the camp was 
slumbering peacefully again. It was not until eight, by 
which time the wind had abated and the sun was warm, 
that we were tempted outside. 

By g a.m. Schneider and I were away. The wind had 
dropped completely, and the morning was as perfect as 
that of the previous day. Following our former tracks, we 
were soon on the shoulder. There we took off our ski, and 
made preparations for the final climb. 

More as an experiment than anything else I had brought 
with me the pair of expedition boots that had been sup- 
plied to me. These weighed no less than eight and a half 
pounds the pair, and each boot bristled with over sixty 
nails. So far during the expedition I had not been able to 
pluck up enough courage to put them on, except when 
camping, and I had worn ordinary light Swiss-made 
climbing boots, which had kept my feet perfectly warm. 
The expedition boots were designed to guard against frost- 
bite, and their uppers, which came half-way to the knees, 
were lined thickly with felt, whilst their soles were con- 
structed of layers of rubber, felt and leather. As regards 
weight, the same remarks might be applied to the climbing 
suits supplied to the expedition. These again were excel- 
lent for use in camp, but were too clumsy and heavy for 
difficult climbing on a mountain. My own favourite garb 
consisted of Jaeger combinations and shirts plus several 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 297 


light Shetland sweaters weighing about two or three ounces 
each, with a wind-proof jacket on top, a pair of strong tricot 
breeches, one pair of socks, and one pair of stockings, and 
as additional protection to the legs, a pair of light and 
warm Kashmiri puttees that I had got from General Bruce. 
Two or three light Balaclava helmets on the head afforded 
ample protection to the ears and neck, whilst in the event 
of a particularly strong, cold wind, a leather flying helmet 
could be added. Fleece-lined leather fingerless gloves, are 
superior to all others. 

In addition to the portmanteau-like expedition boots, it 
was necessary to wear crampons. These weighed about four 
pounds the pair. Thus, I was carrying a load of twelve and 
a half pounds on my feet, nearly an additional stone of 
weight, and I felt something like a cross between a leaden- 
footed diver, and one rooted to the spot in a nightmare 
after a heavy dinner. Thus attired, I began to lift my two 
foot portmanteaux up the snow slopes, with a slow, tread- 
mill-like action, trying to keep up with Schneider who was 
wearing ordinary light climbing boots. I felt fortunate in 
being with Schneider, for he exults in hard work on a 
mountain, and would, I hoped, make all the steps. If he 
did, it might be just possible for me to raise myself, plus 
boots and crampons, to the top of the mountain. 

The slope soon steepened, and step cutting became 
necessary. Schneider went at it with a will, swinging his 
heavy ice-axe with that graceful yet vigorous style of the 
born ice-man. The ice was blue-black, polished and hard. 
Step after step was hewn out. The slope seemed intermin- 
able, and it needed a glance backwards down the long 
ladder of steps to assure us that we had made progress. 


298 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Professor Dyhrenfurth, Wieland and Lewa arrived on the 
shoulder, and sunned themselves, while waiting for the 
work to be finished. Cutting went steadily on ; the thud, 
thud, thud of the ice-axe becoming gradually monotonous 
to the ears. I occupied myself with enlarging the holds. 

Suddenly came a mighty roar. We looked round. Huge 
masses were falling from the edge of the upper terrace of 
Kangchenjunga. Sweeping downwards with fearful force, 
a million tons or more of ice poured on to the Eastern 
Tributary Glacier. Sweeping forwards with lightning 
speed, the avalanche seemed to leap across the glacier, 
obliterating our former route between upper and lower 
Camp Two, and so far as we could see the site of lower Camp 
Two. The clouds of snow raised by the wind shot cannon- 
like across the mile-wide glacier and beat furiously against 
the precipices of the Twins. It was a tremendous avalanche, 
the largest we had ever seen. It confirmed, if confirmation 
was needed, the fact that nowhere within a mile or so 
of Kangchenjunga’s north face is the mountaineer safe. 

As quickly as possible I got my camera out of my pocket, 
and bracing myself firmly in my ice steps, took two hurried 
snaps. The illustration on the opposite page is one of them. 
It shows the head of the avalanche about to sweep the 
route between upper and lower Camp Two. The roar 
subsided, but it was long before the clouds of wind-blown 
snow began to settle. We turned again without a word to 
our task. 

About half-way up the slope we decided to try our luck 
by traversing to the left to where snow appeared to overlay 
the ice. Our speculation was justified, and to our delight 
we found ourselves on hard snow in which only a couple of 





THE GREAT ICE AVALANCHE SEEN FROM THE RAMTHANG PEAK 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 299 


good kicks were necessary to make a step. Without further 
difficulty, we gained a subsidiary ridge falling from the main 
east ridge of the mountain. The snow here was wind-blown, 
hard and icy, and without crampons another hour’s cut- 
ting at least would have been required. As it was, we 
walked, our faithful spikes biting well home. The angle, at 
first steep, gradually eased off. We found ourselves on the 
main ridge. It was almost horizontal at its junction with 
the subsidiary ridge, and we sat down for a welcome rest. 
My legs felt as if they had been afflicted with varicose veins 
since birth, and I anathematised the foolish spirit of experi- 
mental inquiry that had led me todon the expedition boots. 

If Schneider is included in a party, that party does not 
get much rest. Now, he was fairly bubbling with suppressed 
energy and enthusiasm, and unable to wait, untied the rope, 
and set off along the ridge, which appeared quite easy for 
a considerable distance. A minute or two later he dis- 
appeared over a snowy hump, and I was left to myself. I 
did not feel like going on, my calves ached abominably, 
but I supposed it had to be done, and so heaving myself 
to my feet, I set off on the wearying task of dragging the 
expedition boots up the final five hundred feet of ridge to 
the top. 

With a superhuman effort I gained the crest of the hump, 
wondering vaguely whether it would be practical to take 
my foot luggage off, and proceed in stockinged feet. 
Schneider was halted some distance along the ridge, and 
he called to me urgently. Beyond him the ridge was 
obviously much more difficult, narrowing to a mere blade 
of ice, of a type so characteristic of the Himalayas. I 
gathered that without me he did not like to go on alone. 


300 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


With an inward, if not outward groan, I galvanised the 
expedition boots into activity, and together we toiled along 
the ridge. 

There certainly appeared to be one or two distinctly for- 
midable pieces in the ridge. Immediately above Schneider 
it was split by a curious crevasse, and above the crevasse 
was a nasty, unstable looking ice flake. Roping on to 
Schneider, I paid him out while he carefully bestrode the 
crevasse, and cut steps up and along one side of the flake. 
After a short upward traverse, he cut up directly to the top of 
the flake, and commenced to hew its crest away witha cheer- 
ful abandon. The flake became thicker, and the work easier. 
Soon he reached a broader portion of the ridge, and there, 
comfortably seated in the snow, bade me cheerily to come 
on. I did so, cautiously propelling the expedition boots 
upwards from step to step. 

To the non-mountaineering public, there are only three 
kinds of mountaineering difficulties. There is the vertical, 
or overhanging precipice, the dizzy ledge, and the knife- 
like ridge. All these figure conspicuously in novels purport- 
ing to present the thrills of mountaineering. In actual 
practice, however, they are seldom met with. The Matter- 
horn, for instance, can be climbed, and not one of them will 
be encountered, and it is necessary to go to special districts 
such as the Aiguilles of Mont Blanc, or the Dolomites to 
find plumb vertical, or overhanging precipices, and genuine 
dizzy ledges. The knife-like ice ridge scarcely exists at all 
in the Alps, and the only examples I can recollect are the 
ice ridges on the Brenva face of Mont Blanc, and in 
particular the classic ice ridge of the Col de la Brenva, 
along which Mr. A. E. W. Mason’s heroes and villains 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 301 


crawled in Running Water. But even the Brenva ice 
ridges, airy though they are, cannot compare to the ice 
ridges adorning Himalayan peaks. It was with something 
of satisfaction, therefore, that I found myself on a ridge, 
the knife-like merits of which not even the most earnest 
seeker after the sensational could carp at. 

On my left the slopes dropped with tremendous steepness 
towards the Western Tributary Glacier ; on my right, I 
looked down the most extraordinary precipice I know of. 
Not extraordinary so much from the point of view of 
steepness—the Alps can produce a nearly vertical face of 
4,000 feet in height—but in its appearance. Great uncouth 
lumps of ice clung toit, bulging outwards like the primitive 
sculptures of Mr. Epstein on the “ Underground ”’ build- 
ing at St. James’ Park. Leering, gargoyle-like heads 
suspended from thick, goitrous-like necks of ice peered over 
into the abyss ; great boiler plates and sheets of black ice 
coated the smooth granite slabs ; icy stalks, marrows, and 
pumpkins, grew from every wrinkle, niche and cranny. 

How ice could cling to rocks at such an angle passes the 
comprehension. Such formations are not seen in the Alps. 
Only once before have I seen anything to approach this 
precipice, and this was strangely enough on Ben Nevis 
during an Easter climbing holiday. In that case, however, 
the ice was due to freezing moisture-charged winds from 
the Atlantic beating against the sunless northern cliffs of 
the Ben. In the present instance, it was more likely tem- 
perature fluctuation that enabled the ice to stick glue-like 
to the all but vertical precipice. 

Needless to say, I did not think of all these things at the 
time ; my attention was concentrated on getting over the 


302 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


narrow bit as quickly as possible to the broader and more 
comfortable ridge on which Schneider was sitting. The ice 
was obviously tough, but the crest tended to curl slightly, 
but unpleasantly outwards over the right-hand precipice. 
This tendency was perhaps slightly exaggerated in my 
mind by Schneider’s reference to “‘ gefahrlichkeiten ” and 
earnest exhortations to me to hurry. In a minute or two 
it was no longer essential to emulate the stealth of a cat- 
burglar, and treading more boldly, I rejoined Schneider. 

For a short distance the ridge was easier, then once 
more it narrowed. This time it was not so much a knife- 
edge as a leaf. The ice was curiously stratified, each stratum 
indicating a previous snowfall which had gone to help 
build up the leaf, but the latter was so thin and under- 
nourished that it needed but a blow to knock a hole 
through it several feet below its tapering crest. There was 
no going along that crest, the sole way of negotiating it was 
to traverse below it on the Kangchenjunga side. It was 
steep work ; hand-holds were as desirable as foot-holds. 
The expedition boots did not like it at all, and struggled 
clumsily to maintain a grip in the steps cut by Schneider. 
Given one good kick with them, the leaf would most likely 
have collapsed. 

The length of the leaf was quite short, not more than 
twenty-five feet. It thickened gradually, and presently 
Schneider was able to cut directly up. He put his head over 
the top like an evil disposed small boy peeping cautiously 
over the wall of an orchard. Satisfied that the leaf was thick 
enough to support him, he hauled himself on to its crest, 
and advanced a few steps until it widened out considerably, 
and there was no longer any doubt as to its stability. There 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 303 


he halted, and shouted back that it was the last difficulty. 
I followed. Half way along I found myself opposite an 
awesome hole, a yard in diameter, through which I was 
able to put my head and shoulders, and gaze down the 
other side of the ridge. My sensations were no doubt similar 
to those of one who gazes out for the first time from the 
attic window of a New York “‘skyscraper.”’ One glance was 
sufficient, and I popped my head back again. The down- 
ward view from my side of the ridge was sufficiently nerve 
harrowing. Presently, with a tremendous effort, I hauled the 
expedition boots on to the crest, and a few instants later 
flopped down thankfully beside Schneider. 

The difficulties had been conquered ; snow slopes alone 
separated us from the summit. We grinned at each other, 
but my own grin was a trifle wan. Three hundred feet of 
soft snow slopes to do in the expedition boots at nearly 
23,000 feet ! The ascent had taken longer than we had 
anticipated ; time was getting on, it was well after mid-day, 
and the afternoon mists were forming, and getting denser 
every instant. Leaving all our spare kit in our rucksacks, 
including, I regret to say, my camera, we set off on the 
last push to the top. 

Dense mist concealed the way, and in its enveloping 
folds the snow slopes seemed to stretch never-endingly 
upwards. Fortunately, it was remarkably warm and 
windless. 

On the way up the snow had been bad, but its vileness 
had been compensated for to some extent by the interest 
and excitement of the climbing. Now, with interest and 
excitement evaporated, and with nothing else to think 
about save getting to the top, we realised how vile it was, 


304 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


and what a purgatory we were undergoing. At every step 
Schneider sunk in well above the boots, but he persisted 
in leading, and his indomitable energy seemed in no 
whit abated. I plodded after him, cramp numbing my 
calves, my knees weak and trembling from the strain of 
raising the expedition boots. 

It was not all plain sailing. At one point a half choked 
crevasse rifted the slope, and its steep upper lip necessitated 
a few steps being cut. Above that the slope eased off. 

We trudged resolutely, if slowly, upwards. The mist 
thinned. The sun glared down upon our labours ; its 
suffocating heat scarcely served to lighten them, rather did 
it seem to sap all energy, so that despite well acclimatised 
bodies, every step became a gasping toil. We topped the 
slope, and found ourselves on an easy snow ridge sloping 
gently upwards. The summit became dimly visible. 
Schneider leapt forward ; soon he was fifty yards ahead, 
plugging with the tireless regularity of a machine through 
the soft snow. The fitful mists closed in upon us as we trod 
that last remote ridge-pole of the world. 

We stood together on the summit. The mists lifted for 
a few seconds ; once more sunlight and shadow chased 
about us. Below steamy clouds eddied and boiled from 
deep glacier cauldrons. A bitter breath of wind sallied out 
of the west, causing us to knock gloved hands together, and 
shuffle chilled feet. The world was not visible ; we felt 
ourselves to be far removed from it. A picture flashed 
through my mind of civilisation, its hateful clamour, its 
sweatful heat. Up here, all was peace. When we had 
gone, the wind would fill our footsteps with snow, and 
remodel once more the serene crest of the snow ridge we 





E RAMTHANG PEAK 


TH 


THE SUMMIT RIDGE OF 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 305 


had trampled under foot. All would be the same, and 
continue the same. When we die, may our spirits linger on 
the high places to which we have dedicated our youth. 

We turned, and strode downhill. An immense vitalising 
relief coursed through my tired body. I was no longer lifting 
the expedition boots, I was simply swinging them forwards, 
and allowing them to drop. How mercilessly long the 
ascent had seemed, how mercifully short and easy the 
descent. 

In a few minutes we were sitting in the snow by our 
rucksacks. For a while we lazed, but time was drawing on, 
and the descent had perforce to be continued. The flake 
and the knife-edge were soon traversed. Jumping the 
crevasse, we threw off the rope, and fairly raced along the 
ridge. At the end of it we found Professor Dyhrenfurth 
and Lewa. Though far from well, the Professor had pluckily 
climbed until he could go no farther. Wieland had as- 
cended to the shoulder, and then turned back. A welcome 
drink from the Professor’s flask, and we were off once more. 

Facing inwards, and with picks driven well home, we 
carefully descended the long line of steps. Half way down, 
where the snow gave place to ice, and the route traversed 
across the slope, we found a convenient streak of snow. 
Stamping our crampons well in, we pelted down to the 
shoulder. 

During the latter part, at least, our haste had been 
induced not so much by the desire to get down as by the 
knowledge that a large tin of fruit had been left on the 
shoulder. We had been the prey to grim forebodings that 
they might no longer be there, but these proved to be 


without foundation, and soon parched mouths and throats 
UK 


306 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


were being lubricated by delicious Californian peaches 
and their accompanying juice. 

We did not loiter, for the afternoon wind was increasing 
in strength every minute, and stinging particles of snow 
from a greying sky were whipping across the shoulder. 
With stiff fumbling fingers I pulled off crampons and 
expedition boots. The latter, with their armoury of nails, 
seemed to leer at me. | thrust them out of sight into my 
rucksack, registering at the same time a solemn vow never 
again to burden myself with them on a mountain. I 
strapped on ski, swung my heavy load on to my back, and 
turned downhill for home. 

Schneider had decided to descend direct to the Base 
Camp, and he suggested that I should leave my load at 
Camp Two for the porters to bring down the following day. 
This was a first rate idea, for like him, I hungered for the 
comfort and luxury of the Base Camp. With no boots to 
change, Schneider was off first. Taking everything straight, 
he shot skilfully down the snow slopes, and was soon a 
mere insect on the vast counterpane of the glacier. I fol- 
lowed. For a while, all went well, but then, instead of 
being sensible, and kick turning at the end of every tra- 
verse, I essayed a downhill Christiania swing. Instantly, the 
expedition boots retaliated ; the heavy rucksack swung me 
off my balance, and I pitched headfirst down the slope, 
where my nose, already raw and peeled, clove through the 
crusted snow like the prow of a ship. For a while I lay too 
winded even to curse, but then the humour of the situation 
suddenly dawned on me, and the breath I had regained 
was lost in an uncontrollable fit of laughter. 

Kick turn by kick turn, I descended to Camp Two. 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 307 


A circle of grinning faces greeted meas I entered the porters’ 
tent, and hurled the expedition boots to the ground. Some- 
where in the gloom a Primus stove was roaring ; a dirty 
hand pressed a large cup of steaming hot tea upon me. 
The porters were genuinely pleased that we had got to the 
top, as pleased as small boys would be at the success of 
their schoolmaster in an International rugger match. 
What splendid fellows they are ! Their devotion to duty, 
their uncomplaining fortitude, and unvarying cheerfulness 
on Kangchenjunga can never be forgotten. The ground is 
well prepared for the corps of native Himalayan guides that 
General Bruce and the Himalayan Club are anxious to form. 

The light was poor when Schneider and I started off 
for Camp One. The basin of the Western Tributary 
Glacier we were leaving seemed sombre and sad, the ice 
walls of Kangchenjunga shone greenly, malignantly in the 
fading light, and the jagged rock towers of the North-west 
ridge stabbed the livid mists like grim watchful sentinels. 
How long will it be before man again visits this lonely 
corner of the World ? 

We ski-ed in long smooth sweeps down the gentle breast 
of the glacier. Gradually, the angle steepened, the keen 
air tightened in nostrils, whooped past Balaclava-covered 
ears. Swish ! A swing one way, a long sideways skid on the 
hard frozen surface, snow crystals raised in a scintillating 
shower. Swish! A swing the other way. The ski whipped 
round like live things. Walking up through the soft snow we 
had been exposed for perhaps half an hour to the risk of ice 
avalanches from the ice cliffs below the shoulder of the 
Ramthang Peak. Ski-ing down, we swept across this 
dangerous area in a few seconds. 


g0o8 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Schneider soon disappeared ahead; he had as usual, 
taken everything straight. My ski-ing is, however, not of 
the type that allows me to take steep slopes straight without 
disaster, or at least frequent and unpleasant crashes, and 
I entered the corridor alone. In it I was forced to tack to 
either side of Schneider’s straight track several times. It 
was during one of these tacks that I went into a crevasse. 
In the dull light the slight concavity in the snow-crust 
concealing it was not visible. I was running moderately 
fast when the snow beneath me collapsed. There was no 
time in which to do anything, no fraction of a second in 
which to make a desperate spring forwards, my legs dropped 
into nothingness, my body, owing to its forward impetus 
was flung violently against the opposite lip of the crevasse. 
There I lay, half in and half out of the crevasse utterly 
and completely winded. My legs were numbed with the 
shock, and my back felt as though it were broken, as well 
as every other bone in my body. I certainly ought to have 
broken both ski and legs, yet, by some miracle, both were 
intact. It was a nasty moment that drop into space ; I 
remember vividly the noise of dislodged fragments of snow 
and ice as they fell with a sort of shush, shush, shush, into 
the bowels of the crevasse. Minutes later I was able to 
make an effort and haul my legs and ski out on to /erra 
firma, where for some time I lay, still partially winded and 
feeling not a little sick. As I lay I remembered the wise 
words of an American friend of mine who fell into a 
crevasse the first time he had been escorted on to a glacier. 
He said : ‘‘ Never again ! I guess it’s terra firma for me in 
future, less terror and more firmer.” 

Taking off my ski, I walked down the remainder of the 


THE RAMTHANG PEAK ON SKI AND FOOT 309 


corridor, following the porters’ tracks. Dr. Richter was at 
Camp One. He had some hot tea ready for me and, what 
was even better, rum. Both served to steady shaken nerves. 

The way between the Base Camp and Camp One had 
been well prepared by Schneider and Duvanel ; it was not 
only a good route for foot slogging, but first rate for ski- 
ing, and soon we had left Camp One far behind. 

The angle at which the main ice stream of the Kang- 
chenjunga Glacier rises is deceptive. From the Base 
Camp the glacier looks practically flat, but actually it 
slopes downwards at a much steeper angle than at first 
appears, and we skimmed gaily down it for quite three 
miles with scarcely a stop. 

Dusk was falling as we reached the maze of moraines 
separating the snowy middle of the glacier from the grassy 
terraces of Pangperma and the Base Camp. Seated on a 
boulder, we gazed back towards the scene of the labours, 
bitternesses, hopes and fears of the past nineteen days. 
The evening was a still one; the glacier rivulets were 
already hushed and awed in the grip of frost ; only the 
occasional slither and splash of a dislodged stone falling 
into a glacier pool broke a profound quietude. Through a 
window, where the mists were melting into the first stars, 
stood Kangchenjunga, its precipices aflame in the setting 
sun. Before us curved the great glacier down which we had 
come, like a ghostly road stretching to the foot of some 
Goblin fortress. All day long the avalanche juggernauts had 
roared down upon it ; now they rested cold and silentinthe 
garages of the hills, and ‘ Policeman Day” retired 
wearily from his long beat. 

We turned to go, leaving our ski and sticks on the stones. 


310 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Two figures came scrambling over the moraines to meet 
us, Nemu and Nima with a thermos of hot tea for each 
of us. It was a kindly thought, something to remember 
when other and more grandiose events have passed into 
oblivion. 

I had expected to feel very tired. On the Ramthang 
Peak it had seemed an impossibility to get down to the 
Base Camp that day, but seven thousand feet of descent 
had stimulated muscle and will jaded by altitude, and I 
found myself trudging over the moraine feeling little more 
tired than at the end of an Alpine day. 

Tropical night fell like the lowering of a curtain. As we 
stumbled over the last stones more figures emerged from 
the gloom and we clasped hands with our companions. 

Though defeat on Kangchenjunga had been our lot, it 
was a cheery crowd that gathered in the mess tent that 
evening. What a joy to be able to sit and eat dinner with 
one’s fellows once more, instead of “ pigging ” it cramped 
up in one’s own tiny tent. Even Tencheddar’s “ Soup 
sometime coming,” as we sat and waited hungrily for 
dinner, could not damp the general cheerfulness. 

Transport difficulties had been solved, and Wood 
Johnson and Hannah were back from their arduous tasks, 
which they had accomplished so successfully. Wieland and 
Duvanel had come down that day ; the latter was far from 
well. Only Professor Dyhrenfurth and Dr. Richter re- 
mained in the upper camps, and they with the remainder 
of the porters and equipment would be down next day. 

Kangchenjunga had beaten us, and claimed a brave 
soul in so doing. That the toll was not greater was not due 
to any skill on our part, it was a Divine Providence. 


CHAPTER XV 
THE JONSONG LA 


On May 20 the remaining camps on Kangchenjunga 
were evacuated, and all members of the expedition and 
porters assembled at the Base Camp. Rest and reorganisation 
were the first essentials. The general health and condition 
of the party was by no means what it should be ; several 
members were still suffering from the relaxing effects of 
altitude throats and Hoerlin was weak from his chill. 
Our greatest anxiety was Duvanel, who was seriously ill 
with a chill on the lungs and severe altitude throat. It was 
a question whether or not he should be sent down straight 
away to the lower valleys, if not Darjeeling, but he was 
determined to carry on, if possible. Frau Dyhrenfurth had 
stood her trying time at the Base Camp wonderfully well. 
She had organised the dispatch of stores and equipment to 
the other camps most efficiently and her untiring efforts, 
and especially her unvarying cheerfulness, had been real 
assets to the expedition. 

In order to attack the Jonsong Peak, 24,344 feet, which 
was now our main objective, we had to cross the Jonsong 
La, 20,200 feet. Though, technically speaking, an easy 
pass, the crossing of it was by no means an easy under- 
taking for two reasons, firstly, weather, and secondly, 
porterage. Every day was bringing the monsoon nearer, 
and on such a high pass heavy snowstorms and deep snow 


must be expected. Apart from the monsoon, purely local 
311 


312 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


storms might well prove embarrassing. The question of 
porterage was, however, the most serious one. We had 
dismissed the majority of our porters, retaining eighty of 
the best, and two hundred and fifty loads had to be trans- 


5 


agyagne pK, Ke “gASe CAMP iS 


Q' - ae : 
fe Mes ; ae s SONG LAS ta 
e ¢ “1 ts ie “© ae 09 po pk 


" AD h 28 ae 





By courtesy of The Times 


ported. A new Nepali Subadar had come up in place of 
the former one, whose feet had been severely frost bitten, 
and he promised to enlist for the expedition all the local 
porters available, but we knew that we could not rely upon 
obtaining more than twenty or thirty at the most. There 


THE JONSONG LA 313 


was another factor, dissatisfaction among the porters, and 
this, it must be admitted, was not entirely without reason. 
During the expedition the porters had been worked very 
hard, harder, it is probably safe to say, than they had ever 
been worked before on any other expedition. On Everest, 
it was customary to give them one rest day in every four 
or five working days. These rest days naturally depended 
on circumstances, but they had been set aside whenever 
possible. Our porters had marched without a rest from 
Darjeeling to Tseram, eleven days’ marching, with full 
loads of sixty to eighty pounds per man, which had 
included a total of something like 35,000 feet of uphill 
work, and marches in tropical heat. Since Tseram, owing 
to the breakdown of the transport arrangements and 
difficulty in obtaining sufficient local food, they had 
frequently been on short rations, or had to eat food to 
which they were not accustomed. 

Furthermore, a quantity of clothes had been lost or 
stolen en route, and a number of Sherpas actually had 
worked on Kangchenjunga for several days before their 
full complement of high climbing clothes had turned up. 
Another grievance, confined to the Bhutias, was that 
clothes had been issued only to the Sherpas on the moun- 
tain, and the Bhutias, who had been told off for the 
donkey work of bringing up loads to the Base Camp, had 
not had the extra clothes that had been promised them. 
Naturally, we had no option but to clothe the high 
climbing Sherpas in preference to the Bhutias, but the 
Jatter’s grievances were nevertheless easily understandable. 
An ugly situation that threatened to resolve itself into a 
strike and general desertion of the Bhutias was once more 


814 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


saved by the tactfulness of Wood Johnson, and the Bhutias 
agreed to cross the Jonsong La on the condition that the 
clothes promised them should be recompensed for by a 
cash equivalent on our return to Darjeeling. 

As regards transport, Wood Johnson told me that when 
he and Hannah had gone back, Hannah had arrived at 
Khunza first, and took what coolies he could find over the 
Mirgin La to Tseram. Subsequently, Wood Johnson, who 
had followed him to Khunza, went through that place 
with a fine comb, and got women, boys, and men from 
villages below, in fact every available coolie in the district, 
and sent them to Tseram. As a result of these efforts, 
ninety-eight loads were got from the Kang La and Tseram 
to the Base Camp; the remaining loads were mostly 
looted. Incidentally, sixty-eight Darjeeling men and 
twenty-three Khunza men were sent back from the Base 
Camp the day after we arrived there, but as they did not 
reach Colonel Tobin, they must all have deserted. Fortu- 
nately, while at Khunza, Wood Johnson made arrange- 
ments to send up coolie rations, meat, eggs, and vegetables 
to the Base Camp. The situation had been got well in hand 
by May 11, when Colonel Tobin left Tseram for Darjeeling, 
after having sent on all loads to Khunza. 

Wood Johnson now suggested that in view of the limited 
number of coolies available, only a small and light party 
should cross the Jonsong La and attempt the Jonsong 
Peak ; the remainder of the expedition should return to 
Darjeeling, turning aside to attempt Kabru, 24,002 feet. 
The snow would have melted from the Mirgin La and the 
Kang La, and even during the monsoon there should be no 
difficulty in crossing these passes, as they were not high 


THE JONSONG LA 315 


enough to be snowed under, while there would be little risk 
of the transport breaking down. The only other alternative 
was to get the loads over the Jonsong La by relays of 
porters. Such a scheme was all very well in theory, but 
there were grave objections to it in practice. In the event 
of a severe snowstorm, it was bound to break down, and 
we might find ourselves in the unpleasant position of having 
one half of the transport on one side of the pass and the 
other halfon the other, with all intervening communication 
cut off. Bad weather might well result in a wholesale 
desertion of the porters, or at least the underclad Bhutias. 
In spite of these objections it was decided that this scheme 
should be proceeded with. That it succeeded was due 
entirely to luck, the greatest piece of luck the expedition 
was blessed with. 

Owing to the expiration of his leave, Hannah had to 
return to Darjeeling, but before doing so he climbed with 
Wieland the 20,000 foot peak on which Wood Johnson 
and I had been beaten by bad weather. We parted from 
him with real regret. His work on behalf of the transport 
had been invaluable. In fact it is only fair to say that 
without him, Colonel Tobin, and Wood Johnson to do the 
spade work, the expedition would not have reached the 
Base Camp. 

Now that the main object of the expedition had been 
frustrated, Professor Dyhrenfurth wisely decided to make all 
use of the large party under his command, and by splitting 
it up, explore as much new country as possible. With this 
end in view Schneider and Wieland were told off to explore 
the 21,000 feet high col known as the Nepal Gap, which 
forms the lowest point on the ridge separating the head of 


316 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the Zemu Glacier from the Kangchenjunga Glacier. 
Dr. Kellas had attempted to reach it from the Zemu 
Glacier no less than four times. In 1907 he made two 
attempts ; on the first he reached 18,000 feet and was 
forced to retreat by a thick mist, and on the second 19,000 
feet, at which height impassable crevasses again enforced 
retreat. His third attempt in September, 1909, was defeated 
by a heavy snowstorm 1,000 feet below the col, whilst on 
his fourth and last attempt in May, 1910, he almost 
reached the col, but did not climb the small rock wall just 
beneath the summit. 

I should have liked to have accompanied Schneider and 
Wieland, but the claims of journalism and photography 
relegated me to the Base Camp. It was arranged that the 
Nepal Gap party should leave on May 23, and the main 
party for the Jonsong La the following day. Dr. Richterand 
Duvanel, who was now recovering from his chill, were to 
remain at the Base Camp until it had been cleared of all 
loads. Meanwhile, an urgent message had been sent to 
Tikeram Thapa at Khunza, telling him to collect and 
bring up as many local porters as possible. 

The few days rest at the Base Camp had been most 
welcome. It had been good to feel the soft turf beneath the 
feet again, and to rest eyes strained from the glare of glaciers 
and snow-fields. The weather was now very warm, an 
ominous warmth, which seemed to herald the monsoon. 
Unfortunately, the wireless set had arrived completely 
shattered, and we were unable to obtain news as to when 
the monsoon might be expected. It was small consolation 
to know that every evening messages were being broadcast 
for our especial benefit from Calcutta. Among the loads 





ON THE WAY TO THE JONSONG LA 


THE JONSONG LA 317 


that had arrived intact was the dark room photographic 
tent, a sinister looking affair, like the lair of a fortune- 
teller, in which we developed a number of negatives and 
cinematograph films. For the interest of photographers I 
need only remark that so brilliant was the light at 20,000 
feet that an exposure of 4 of a second at an aperture of 
f.22 was sufficient, save during the early morning or late 
afternoon. 

Given good weather, no one can fail to get over the 
Jonsong La. Whether the passage is to be a fatiguing one, 
or a relatively easy one depends largely on finding the best 
way through the labyrinth of moraines covering the 
Jonsong Glacier. Mr. Freshfield found it a troublous 
business descending on this, the Nepal side, and camped 
twice between the pass and Pangperma. He was, however, 
much hampered by snow covering the glacier. In former 
times the pass was frequently used by salt traders between 
Khunza and Lachen, and we were astonished to learn that 
the Dhudwallah, who had been engaged in bringing milk 
up to us regularly from Kangbachen, was fully conversant 
with the route. We engaged him, therefore, as our guide. 

In order to find a good camping place for our first camp, 
Hoerlin and Wood Johnson went up the Jonsong Glacier 
the day before the party left. They returned after having 
found a grassy shelf on the west bank where tents might 
be pitched. 

The morning of May 24 was a beautiful one, and Wood 
Johnson and I strolled up the grassy moraines feeling at 
peace with the world. On the way we passed Nemu, who 
was laden with a miscellaneous assortment of my luggage, 
including my aluminium washing basin which jerked up 


318 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


and down with a mournful clang at every step. For some 
distance we followed a well defined path which seemed to 
show that the Jonsong La was frequently crossed in the 
past, or that yaks were brought up to graze on the stony 
pastures of Pangperma. Possibly, it was the latter specula- 
tion that caused me to halt and sniff, and remark that 
there was a strong smell of yaks. Wood Johnson, however, 
seemed to take this as a personal reflection. 

Between the moraines and the mountainside were a 
number of old snow-drifts, composed probably of avalanche 
débris. These had been resolved by the hot sun and dry 
atmosphere into groups of beautiful little snow pinnacles a 
foot or two high. These are known in the Andes of South 
America as nieves penitentes, owing to their resemblance toa 
penitent congregation. The most common explanation as 
to how they are formed is that winter and spring snow- 
storms form snow-drifts, which are blown into ridges. As 
the snow of these ridges is not of the same consistency 
throughout, the less dense snow tends to melt and evaporate, 
leaving the denser masses, which are subsequently sculp- 
tured into pinnacles by sun and evaporation. As with ice 
pinnacles on Himalayan glaciers, the origin of meves 
penitentes is also influenced by temperature fluctuation. 
I have only once seen anything to approach them in the 
Alps, and that was in the exceptionally hot summer of 
1928, when the snow on the surface of the glaciers became so 
rough and spiky in the broiling sun, that one could only 
assume it to be in the first stage of being formed into 
nieves penitentes. 

In the corner of Pangperma where the Jonsong and 
Kangchenjunga glaciers unite, we sat down and rested 


THE JONSONG LA 319 


awhile. Are there grander or nobler peaks than those 
surrounding the head of the Kangchenjunga Glacier ? 
A snowstorm was raging on Kangchenjunga, and dark 
slate-coloured clouds sailing up from the south were 
adding their quota to the snow-fields and glaciers. A few 
clouds detached themselves from the main masses, and 
sailed inquisitively up the glacier, strewing snow-flakes in 
their wake, before being disrupted and annihilated by the 
dry Thibetan winds from the Jonsong La. Other and 
heavier clouds pouring over the ridges from the south 
advanced to the attack. The Wedge Peak received their 
first furious assault, and became impenetrably shrouded in 
the murk of a snowstorm. The storm clouds advanced in a 
solid phalanx, but the north wind counter-attacked 
vigorously. A writhing mélée took place above the glacier 
basins. The storm clouds were held, but now and again 
they sallied desperately forward, bombarding us with hasty 
flurries of snow. Impotent against the north wind, they 
retreated sullenly; the latter pressed its advantage 
irresistibly and, sweeping through their once proud ranks, 
forced them back in a confused and hopeless rout. A 
searchlight of sun pierced the gloom. Like the flood-lit 
summit of a lofty spire, the Wedge Peak stood forth from 
the blue veils of snow. Once through the shifting murk 
concealing Kangchenjunga came the deep growl of an ice 
avalanche. The great mountain was bidding us begone. 
We gazed up the glacier towards the Nepal Gap, 
arguing as to which was the most probable route taken by 
Schneider and Wieland. Was it a trick of the imagination, 
or did we see two minute dots descending the broken 
glacier from the ridge north-west of the Gap? Some 


320 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


porters were passing, and Wood Johnson directed their 
keen eyes to the place. Yes, they saw the dots too. Schneider 
and Wieland were evidently busy at their task of finding a 
way over the Gap. 

Continuing on our way, we passed the corner of Pang- 
perma and looked up the stony reaches of the Jonsong 
Glacier. There are many peaks hereabouts that would 
yield to determined assault, and some look decidedly easy. 
Dr. Kellas must have realised this when he crossed the 
Jonsong La from the Lhonak Valley to climb the Langpo 
Peak, 22,800 feet, at the head of the glacier. 

The passage of many porters had trodden out a good 
path along the moraine. Turning the corner at Pangperma 
seemed to bring us into a different country and a different 
climate. Everything pointed to a much drier climate, the 
very ground was more dusty than at the Base Camp, 
whilst the defeat of the storm clouds suggested that the 
strong, dry winds of Thibet protect the Jonsong Glacier 
to a large extent from many of the snowstorms that 
attack Kangchenjunga. Were a number of meteorological 
stations to be installed between Kangchenjunga and the 
Jonsong La, they would most likely exhibit striking differ- 
ences of precipitation and humidity. 

Camp had been pitched on a charming spot—a small 
grassy shelf above the moraine of the glacier. The shelf 
ended in a spur on which a number of flat stones, obviously 
arranged by the hand of man, suggested a former encamp- 
ment, possibly Mr. Freshfield’s. Ranged along the shelf 
was a drift of mieves penitentes. They occupied most of 
the width of the shelf, and there was but little room in 
which to pitch our tents. Had we known how this icy 





THE JONSONG PEAK FROM CAMP ONE, JONSONG GLACIER 


THE JONSONG LA 321 


congregation was to protect us, we should scarcely have 
resented their usurping so much space. Opposite the camp 
rose a fine snow peak of about 22,000 feet, which appeared 
climbable. On this side, it lets fall a steep glacier to 
the Jonsong Glacier. Were it in the Alps, this glacier 
would by reason of its steepness be much crevassed, yet 
here, so plastic is the ice, and so capable is it of accommo- 
dating itself to the irregularities and steepness of the 
ground down which it flows without breaking or cracking, 
that, though hummocked and lumpy, there was scarcely a 
crevasse to be seen in it. 

Half a mile farther on up the glacier, another steep high 
glacier flowed down to join the main ice stream of the 
Jonsong Glacier, the pinnacles of which made a fitting 
foreground to the great southerly walls of the Jonsong 
Peak. From our position the mountain appeared to full 
advantage. South-westwards from the summit, smooth 
unbroken snow-fields descend for some distance, but like 
Kangchenjunga, they come to an end above precipices 
thousands of feet high, and like Kangchenjunga these snow- 
fields, which are hundreds of feet thick, are constantly 
breaking away at their edges in huge ice avalanches, which 
set the echoes grumbling round the great cirque of peaks, 
whence the Jonsong Glacier draws its strength. 

That afternoon the sky was covered with gossamer-like 
clouds, floating above the mountain tops. Wood Johnson 
eyed them suspiciously, and gave it as his opinion that 
they preceded the monsoon. He added a grain of comfort, 
however, by declaring that we need have no immediate 
fears, and that we might confidently expect another week 


of fine weather. We could well believe in the imminence of 
Wk 


322 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the monsoon, for these clouds were strongly reminiscent of 
those which forecast a bout of féhn in the Alps. 

The majority of the porters were sent back the same 
day. Professor Dyhrenfurth’s scheme was that they should 
leave the Base Camp early the following morning bringing 
up more loads, and continue with us up the glacier. Lob- 
sang had been given instructions that this was to be done. 
The porters, however, not unnaturally, regarded such a 
procedure as being in the nature of a double march, and 
though they left the Base Camp early enough, they took 
good care not to arrive until it was too late to start another 
march up the glacier. This gave us no option but to post- 
pone our advance for another day. 

This attempt to double march the porters had an 
unfortunate effect on their morale. When at length they 
arrived, they gave it out as their intention to strike. 
Collecting in a sullen group, they declared they would not 
continue farther. Once more Wood Johnson was forced 
into the onerous position, in which he should never have 
been placed and over which he had no control, of having 
to placate our disgruntled labour. The porters were quite 
reasonable. They regarded the attempt to double march 
them as being the forerunner of other double marches and 
continual hard work without rests. Their experiences on 
the march out from Darjeeling, when they were marched 
for the first eleven days without rest, still rankled at the back 
of their minds. They were perfectly prepared to cross the 
Jonsong La, provided they were given one rest day in four 
working days. Naturally, this was agreed to, but it is 4 
pity that such a situation should have arisen. 

Late that afternoon Schneider and Wieland arrived. 


THE JONSONG LA 323 


Their reconnaissance of the Nepal Gap had been most 
successful. Not only had they been able to solve the problem 
of the Gap, but Schneider had made a lone ascent of the 
unnamed 23,470 feet peak to the north of it. Thus, if 
Graham’s claimed ascent of Kabru is not taken into 
account, it was the highest actual summit yet reached, 
for it was slightly higher than Mount Kaufmann in the 
Alai Pamirs, also climbed by Schneider in 1929, or Trisul, 
in the Garhwal Himalayas, climbed by Dr. Longstaff 
in 1907. 

The party had first of all ascended the tributary of the 
Kangchenjunga Glacier enclosed between the Twins and 
the 23,470 feet peak. They had made no attempt to reach 
the Gap directly from this glacier as the slopes are ex- 
tremely steep, and consist for the most part of rotten 
rocks, but they had ascended a subsidiary glacier falling 
from the ridge between the Nepal Gap and the 23,470 feet 
peak. On this they had camped, and thence proceeded 
with little difficulty to the ridge. On the far side of this, 
and well to the north-west of the actual Nepal Gap, they 
had discovered a short, steep snow slope leading down- 
wards towards the Zemu Glacier. They described it as 
being very similar to the south side of the Jungfraujoch 
in the Bernese Oberland. Thus, strictly speaking, the 
problem of the actual Gap remained unsolved, but a 
practicable way had been discovered over the main chain 
a little distance to the north-west of it, which is obviously 
much easier than the direct traverse of the Gap, even 
although the ridge traversed is a few hundred feet higher 
than the Gap. 


Having made this important discovery, they decided to 


324 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


attack the 23,470 feet peak. Wieland was unwell, but the 
indefatigable Schneider climbed it alone, a truly splendid 
effort. Low down, he had to dodge an ice-fall, that cut 
across the lower part of the ridge. Above this was a steep 
snow ridge. The snow was hard and icy, but with cram- 
pons scaling it was an easy matter, and he had to cut no 
steps. The summit was attained without further difficulty, 
whence he enjoyed a glorious view of distant Everest 
and Makalu. The name of the 23,470 feet peak suggests 
itself, and we christened it the Nepal Peak. 

That evening we made merry in the camp. By some 
sleight of hand on the part of Frau Dyhrenfurth a small 
crate of champagne materialised. My mouth organ 
emerged from the seclusion forced upon it by cracked and 
sunburnt lips, and the peace of the Jonsong La was broken 
by the strains of “‘ John Peel,” the rousing chorus of which 
was rendered by Wood Johnson. 

But the great peaks of the Himalayas take defeat hardly. 
That night I was sleeping peacefully, as a man should 
sleep after champagne, when I began to dream that I was 
involved in a railway accident. I could hear the coaches 
in front of mine telescoping, one after another, with a 
series of appalling crashes. My own was just about to smash 
when I awoke trembling with terror. The crashes continued, 
each one was nearer than the last. With an almost animal- 
like quickness my mind grasped the danger—boulders were 
rolling down the slopes on to the camp ! I struggled to get 
out of my sleeping bag and tent, but it was too late ; the 
former gripped me lovingly, the flaps of the latter had been 
securely laced up by Nemu. I could do nothing but lie 
where I was and hope for the best. Some sort of curious 


THE JONSONG LA 325 


sixth sense, a sense dependent entirely upon sound, told 
me that one boulder was coming straight for my tent. 
One side of the tent was occupied by my luggage, in- 
cluding a large tin box. Against this I rolled myself, hoping 
vaguely that it would break the force of the boulder. 
Actually, of course, it would have been crushed like an egg- 
shell beneath the falling lump of granite. For what seemed 
an eternity I could hear the onrush of the boulder. It was 
travelling in bounds. One moment, with a crash, it would 
strike another rock, the next, it would fall with a dull thud 
into the yielding turf. There came a great thud not more 
than a few yards away, the next bound would assuredly 
bring it on top of me. It was a tense moment. Then came a 
mighty thudding splash, and silence. The boulder had 
plunged into the drift of mieves penitentes not three yards 
from my tent ! 

It had been the last to fall. I scrambled out of the tent 
wondering whether any damage had been done by the 
other boulders. There were perhaps half a dozen in all. 
The camp was awake, all save Wood Johnson. Bawling 
into his tent elicited nothing more than a sleepy ‘‘ Whaser- 
marrer ?”’? Happy indeed the man who can sleep thus, 
even after champagne. 

The next morning I searched for and found my potential 
assassin. It was a rock about a foot and a half cube. A 
certain piquancy was added to the situation all unconsci- 
ously by Nemu. As he packed my kit, he glanced disparag- 
ingly at my tin box and remarked, “‘ Box, him come to 
pieces, Sahib, you get other box from cook.” He was right ; 
the tin box certainly was on its last legs and on the point of 
collapsing from the ill usage of the past few weeks. I took 


326 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


his advice and surreptitiously exchanged it for a stronger 
one owned by the cook. 

As this camp was to remain until everything had been 
transported over the Jonsong La, it should have been 
transferred to another and less dangerous spot. This would 
perforce have been on the glacier, which was here rough 
and moraine covered. That it was not, indicated the 
callous—one could scarcely call it philosophical—frame of 
mind into which we had dropped. The result of not moving 
the camp was evidenced a few days later when Frau 
Dyhrenfurth, who had been left by Professor Dyhrenfurth 
in charge, was nearly killed by another and larger fall of 
rocks. It was curious that these falls of rock should have 
occurred at precisely the same spot. The slope above the 
camp is by no means steep, and why two falls should have 
come down it when there were other and far more favour- 
able slopes for falling rocks is a mystery. It almost seemed 
as though they had been uprooted and aimed at the camp 
by some malignant hand. The porters put them down to 
the Snow Men, and for once I was not inclined to disagree 
with them. 

Explorers of the great Baltoro Glacier in the Karakorams 
relate that it takes no less than four days to march up 
the moraine-covered part of the glacier, before the ice 
is actually trodden. The Jonsong and Kangchenjunga 
glaciers combined cannot rival the Baltoro in size, yet 
in approaching the Jonsong La from Kangbachen the 
traveller marches a full three days on moraine before 
reaching open ice. 

Leaving the camp we climbed up and down over the 
stony moraine. There is little of beauty about the lower 


THE JONSONG LA 327 


portion of the Jonsong Glacier, but there is a certain 
impressiveness in the barren grimness of its stony reaches ; 
it is nothing more than a gigantic refuse bin for the great 
peaks about it. 

The Dhudwallah was a most useful acquisition to the 
expedition. Without him we should frequently have been at 
a loss as to the easiest route, and might have wasted much 
time in the stony labyrinth, but he picked out the way 
with the skill and aplomb of an Alpine guide, his leathery, 
wrinkled face with its deep-set hawk-like eyes frequently 
cracking into a broad grin of conscious importance. 

Some distance above the camp was a small glacier 
lake. High parapets of ice surrounded it from which a 
frieze of javelin-like icicles were suspended. Miniature 
icebergs floated on it, and its deep green depths, as placid 
as a Scottish loch on a calm September morning, re- 
flected the glories of the great peaks around. Presently, 
as we toiled over the wearying stones, a consider- 
able glacier opened out to the west. This was the one 
explored by Dr. Kellas, when prospecting the south 
face of the Jonsong Peak. Half a mile above its junction 
with the main ice stream of the Jonsong Glacier this 
glacier thrusts out pinnacles similar to those of the Rongbuk 
Glacier on Everest. These ice pinnacles are not found on 
the Kangchenjunga Glacier, and are common only to those 
parts of the Himalaya exposed to the dry airs of Thibet. 
There is something attractively fantastic in them ; their 
queer constructions, their cleanly chiselled walls, minarets 
and spires suggest a goblin city, the queer phantoms of a 
cubist’s dream, or maybe a halted regiment of the Moun- 
tain King. 


328 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


It was hard going for the porters. The glacier rose 
gently, but we must have climbed an additional two or 
three thousand feet up and down these moraine mounds. 
As we walked we searched for gem stones among the 
multi-coloured rocks, but all we found were gneissic stones 
inlaid with small garnets. 

At last the most turbulent part of the glacier was passed, 
and we pitched camp thankfully in a small hollow near 
the middle of the glacier. 

There are really two glaciers here flowing side by side, 
and sharing a common valley. That on the eastern side of 
the valley flows from the elevated snow-fields dominated 
by the Langpo Peak and the Pyramid. That on the western 
side has its source in the snows of the Jonsong La. Though 
coming together high up, the two glaciers maintain their 
individuality for two or three miles before becoming 
indistinguishable from one another. The Jonsong La 
branch resembles any ordinary Alpine glacier, but the 
Langpo branch exhibits a multitude of monstrous ice 
pinnacles of the same pattern as those to which I have 
alluded. So vast is the scale of the country hereabouts, 
that it is not until the mountaineer approaches close to 
these pinnacles that he is able to appreciate their size. 
Some of them, as the accompanying illustration shows, are 
nearly a hundred feet high. Our camp was near them, 
and Wood Johnson and I practised cutting steps up a minor 
one. We found the ice hard and tenacious, and it provided 
Wood Johnson with an excellent first lesson in icemanship. 

As the sun sank, the scene became beautiful in the 
extreme. The foreground was set with the ice pinnacles, 
the background with Kangchenjunga. During the day the 





CAMP TWO, JONSONG LA 


THE JONSONG LA 329 


latter had sulked behind the clouds, now the clouds were 
absorbed into the evening and it rose serenely into a deep 
mauve sky. But it was plain that the bad weather had not 
left it unscathed, for the upper part of the mountain was 
powdered in new snow. It was some consolation to think 
that even had we been able to hack our way up to the North 
Ridge, and established higher camps, we should most 
likely have been beaten by the weather on the final push 
towards the top. Day died amid almost unearthly splen- 
dours. The pale ghostly pinnacles were faintly lit by the 
reflection of Kangchenjunga’s sunset flare, and when 
night had at last cooled the red-hot castings of the peaks, 
bright-eyed stars glanced down on a world of awful 
desolation. 

We were off early the next morning. After the irritations 
of the previous day, it was delightful to stroll along the 
nearly level crest of a medial moraine, which formed the 
boundary between the two ice streams. 

The general condition of the party had greatly im- 
proved ; better food, and improved “ nerves,”’ had worked 
wonders on our health. Wood Johnson and I pelted uphill 
almost as though we were on the fells above Wastdale, and 
not 2,000 feet higher than the summit of Mont Blanc. 
Kurz, who had gone on a day in advance of the main party 
to do some surveying, had pitched his camp where Kellas 
had pitched his, at the junction of the Langpo and Jonsong 
glaciers. Passing him, we continued on up the latter 
glacier, accompanied by the Dhudwallah carrying my ski, 
building small cairns as we went for the benefit of the 
porters who were following. 


At last, after two and a half days’ marching, we trod 


330 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


snow and ice, where Hoerlin joined us, having come by 
some mysterious short cut of his own, through the ice-fall 
which here occupied the centre of the glacier. He and I put 
on ski, and continued up a snowy corridor contained 
between the ice-fall and the mountainside. Wood Johnson 
had not skied before, and he continued on foot with the 
Dhudwallah. Every few yards there were undulations in 
the snow, suspiciously like concealed crevasses, and the 
suggestion was made that those on foot had better rope up. 
The Dhudwallah, however, greeted this with contempt, 
and declared there were no “ holes.”’ He was right, the 
undulations were merely due to the melting effects of the 
sun, or rivulets beneath the snow. 

There is no doubt that with a little training the Dhud- 
wallah would make a first-rate guide. As it was, the way 
he led us up the pass was remarkable in its mountaineering 
instinct and judgment ; he seemed to know the Jonsong 
Glacier as well as a Zermatt guide knows the Matterhorn. 

Ski were much quicker than foot-slogging, and leaving 
Hoerlin to make some adjustment to his bindings, I went 
on ahead to find a suitable camping site. The corridor was 
the easy and obvious route, but at its upper end, where it 
debouched on to the unbroken glacier above the ice-fall, it 
was liable to be swept by ice avalanches from a hanging 
glacier on the mountainside above. It was only a small 
hanging glacier, the danger being limited to a few yards, 
and on ski one would have stood a sporting chance of 
dodging an avalanche. The dangerous area was traversed 
in a few seconds, and I was soon sliding over the gently 
sloping upper snow-field of the glacier. . 

Camp was pitched in a shallow snow hollow. Above tt 


THE JONSONG LA 331 


rose a steep slope of snow about 2,000 feet high. I saw 
Schneider fasten his eyes on this slope with that half 
fanatical, half predatory gleam peculiar to ski-runners. 
The next instant, unable to withstand temptation, he was off. 
For half an hour he climbed vigorously, then, pointing his 
ski straight downhill, he descended like a thunderbolt on 
the camp. 

The Jonsong La was close at hand, and I suggested to 
Wood Johnson that we might ascend to it on ski, and 
prospect the way for the morrow. 

The shadows were lengthening as we started up the 
glacier, and the glaring arc lights of day were being 
dimmed by the stealthy hand of night. In another hour or 
two they would be switched off altogether, and tropical 
darkness would fall almost with the suddenness of a blow. 

It was the first time that Wood Johnson had donned ski, 
but he made excellent progress ; surely no one has ever 
taken their first lesson in ski-ing at 20,000 feet. The glacier 
led us gently upwards to the foot of a steep little snow slope 
falling from the pass. Frost had already hardened the snow 
into a crust, and we found it easier to leave our ski, and 
climb the slope on foot. 

A bitter wind met us on the pass, but we scarcely 
heeded its onslaught. We were looking down into a new 
world, a world of yellow, brown and gold. The mountaineer 
experiences many dramatic views ; there is the view from 
the summit of the Wetterhorn, with its fascinating and 
terrible glimpse down to the emerald pastures and doll- 
like chalets of Grindelwald ; there is that backward glance 
down the Brenva face of Mont Blanc to the wrinkled 
surface of the Brenva Glacier curving over towards the 


332 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


heat-hazed meadows of Courmayeur ; there is enough 
drama in the outlook from the Dolomite Vajolet Towers to 
satiate the most earnest seeker after the sensational. Yet, 
none of these views impressed me so much as that from the 
Jonsong La. We had come from a world of ice and snow, 
we were passing into a world of earth and rock. Our eyes, 
tired with the unrelenting glare of snow-fields, rested 
gratefully on the brown terraces and colourful scree of the 
Lhonak Valley. We even tried to delude ourselves into 
thinking that it was a warm country we were descending 
into, but we knew that it was not ; these colourful slopes 
were on the edge of the bleak and inhospitable plateaux 
of Thibet. 

Our soliloquies were cut short by the wind. Fingers 
and toes were numbing. Furious banners of snow were 
streaming from the ridges on either hand. We turned. The 
shadows had stolen across the smooth carpet of the glacier 
beneath, and were marching up the opposite slopes. Kang- 
chenjunga was yellow and unearthly. Eastward, night's 
purple band was mounting the sky, sowing the first stars 
in its wake. 

Beating gloved hands together, we ran down the slope 
to our ski. I wish Wood Johnson could have enjoyed the 
run down as much as I. Perhaps he did, for ski-ing can be 
enjoyed equally well by the complete novice or the expert 
of experts, that is not the least of its charms. 

Wood Johnson responded readily to tuition, and some 
distance down executed a manceuvre which he triumph- 
antly described as a Stemming turn. When the camp was 
in view I regret to say I left him to his own devices. Perhaps 
it was selfish, but who could resist the long unbroken 


THE JONSONG LA 333 


slopes, so hard, and yet with their crystalline surface so 
perfect for ski-ing. I took them straight. The wind roared 
at me ; a fierce exultation gripped me. I felt as I did on my 
first solo flight when, with the engine shut off, and the wind 
crooning in the rigging wires, the old ’bus dived swiftly 
towards the little row of hangars that came rushing up to 
meet me. All was the same, only here, in place of hangars, 
the camp. An aerial dive, a perfect ski-run, there is a close 
affinity. And so with a long, almost lingering Christiania 
to a standstill. 

The weather was again good next morning. For photo- 
graphy’s sake I started before the others, and from the pass 
was able to snap the party as it crawled wormlike up the 
glacier beneath. It is only by views containing figures that 
one is able to give to others any idea of the vast scale of 
mountain country. My thumb at arm’s length before me 
sufficed to conceal the whole party from view. 

A strong cold wind was blowing across the pass, this time 
from the south. About fifty feet down on the Sikkim side an 
outcrop of rocks formed a sheltered place. ‘There I remained 
for nearly two hours basking in the sun, while awaiting the 
remainder of the party. Below this outcrop the slopes 
dropped steeply for five hundred feet, with rocks jagging 
from them here and there. Only in one place, immediately 
to the right of the outcrop, was there an unbroken run out. 
As the snow was hard and icy in places, and it was not 
certain whether a slip or slide might not be attended with 
unpleasant consequences, it seemed safest to fix a long rope 
down the steep upper portion for the porters. These seemed 
to think the descent a huge joke, and when they saw that 
there was no danger, many let themselves glissade before 


334 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


they had reached the end of the rope, and shot down, 
loads and all, to the glacier. 

The angle of the upper part of the slopes was at least 
fifty degrees, but apparently only the perpendicular can 
deter Schneider on ski. The only compliment he paid the 
slope was by not taking all of it straight, and he descended 
the first part in a series of miraculous swings before pointing 
his ski straight at the glacier. Other and less venturesome 
mortals preferred to put on their ski at the level where 
Schneider had disdained to make any more swings. It was 
a glorious run down the glacier, for the snow was of that 
delightful crystalline consistency commonly found in the 
Alps in spring. As we descended we slanted across to the 
left, taking care to give a wide berth to a hanging glacier 
on a subsidiary ridge of the Jonsong Peak, which is liable 
to discharge ice avalanches. 

The difference of snow level between this, the Sikkim 
side of the Jonsong La, and the Nepal side is striking. 
Even taking into account the steepness with which the 
glacier falls, the snow line is much higher than on the 
Nepal side and only a few minutes’ running was necessary 
to bring us from snow to a stony waste of moraines. 

As usual Nature, which obviously favours ski-runners 
in this part of the world, had provided a snow-filled 
corridor between the moraine and the mountainside to 
the west of the glacier. Down this we loitered, stopping 
every few minutes on the stones at the side for a siesta 
in the sun. 

Far away now, was the pass with the descending porters 
strung up on it like a row of pendent black beads. I was 
reminded strongly of the opening scene in Charlie Chaplin’s 





PINNACLES OF SOLID ICE—ON THE WAY TO THE JONSONG LA 


THE JONSONG LA 335 


film The Gold Rush, which shows the seekers after wealth 
toiling in single file up the Chilkoot Pass. 

Eastwards of the Jonsong La is a nameless peak of 
22,160 feet, and the Langpo Peak, 22,700 feet, which was 
climbed by Dr. Kellas. It was but one of many great 
ascents that he made in this district. Looking at it, and 
later at other peaks that he climbed, one could not but be 
impressed by his mountaineering judgment and route- 
finding abilities. Climbing with only native porters as 
companions, he had to rely solely on an instinct and 
judgment that seldom, if ever, failed him. When the 
history of the Golden Age of Himalayan exploration comes 
to be written, Dr. Kellas’s name will take a high place in 
the select little list of early mountaineers. 

The snowy corridor petered out into a stony waste. To 
the west was a subsidiary glacier, and we traversed across 
to it, floundering through bog-like patches of snow between 
the rocks. The snow of this glacier was abominable, whole 
masses of it frequently collapsing beneath our ski, letting 
them sink into water-undermined cavities. 

The glacier ended in an abrupt nose of ice. Beneath was 
a little lake, a blue-green gem in a sombre setting. It was 
an ideal spot for a camp, and Kurz and I returned with 
the welcome news to the porters who were finding it heavy 
going in the soft snow. 

Our camping place was Arctic in its solitude and beauty. 
Above us towered the ice nose festooned with giant icicles, 
and sculptured into all manner of forms. There was the 
wrinkled face of an old witch, peering sardonically down 
upon us, and, in bas-relief, three classical figures linked 
hand in hand. Beneath was a hermit’s cave, and above, a 


336 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


little balcony from which the fair-haired snow maidens 
could gaze rapturously, if not enviously, down upon us, 
as we munched our dinner of sardines and gherkins. All 
these things were reflected with faultless accuracy in the 
green blue depths of the little lake beneath. That evening, 
when frost stalked out with the shadows, freezing the 
surface of the lake into a smooth, white floor, the elves 
and fairies held a midnight ball, while we sophisticated 
mortals snored in our tents. 

We were short of fuel, and it was essential to secure 
some without delay. The porters had had a trying day 
traversing the Jonsong La, and were entitled to a rest. 
We called, therefore, for volunteers, who, for an extra day’s 
pay, would descend the Lhonak Valley and bring up 
rhododendron wood. Fortunately, sufficient were forth- 
coming. Also, we had none too much coolie food left, and 
runners were dispatched with notes to the Maharajah of 
Sikkim at Gangtok, and the Headman of Lachen, request- 
ing immediate assistance. 

Above the camp was a low ridge pushed into the Lhonak 
Valley by the Jonsong Massif. This rose to a little knob, 
which formed an ideal belvedere for viewing the head of the 
Lhonak Valley, its glaciers and surrounding peaks. Seated 
on the gaunt, granite slabs piled up like a ruined Stone 
henge on the summit, we drank in the glories of this new 
country. There was much to interest and impress us ; the 
brown upland valley ; the lateral terraces 1,000 feet above 
the floor of the Lhonak Valley telling of a former Ice Age 
when a great glacier extended many miles down towards 
the plains; the rugged limestone peaks of the Dodang 
Nyima Range, governed by the graceful summit of the 





KANGCHENJUNGA FROM THE JONSONG LA 


THE JONSONG LA 337 


Dodang Peak, 22,700 feet high ; asea of peaks to the north- 
west, above which projected two great combers, Chomiomo, 
22,430 feet, and Kangchenjau, 22,700 feet, ascended by 
Dr. Kellas, in 1910 and 1912 respectively. But it was not 
these distant peaks that delighted our eyes so much as a 
beautiful snow peak which stands watch and ward over the 
head of the Lhonak Valley. It is the Weisshorn of the 
district, possessing as it does all the gracefulness and 
elegance of the Zermatt peak. The superb sweep of its 
ridges culminates with mathematical preciseness in a 
slender spire of snow, and so well designed is it that it 
deceived us utterly as to its height, and we began to 
believe that it was actually higher than the Jonsong Peak. 
Only the upper part of the last named was visible. Its 
south-east ridge immediately below the summit appeared 
easy, but could it be reached? Kellas, we knew, had 
attacked it from the north-west, and we had already learnt 
enough about him to realise that his judgment was likely to 
be sound. This problem must wait until the morrow, when 
we hoped to set off on our attempt. 

Below us, two main tributaries of the Lhonak Glacier 
united to form a great ice stream which stretched far down 
the valley. This ice stream was, for a mile or two, broken 
up into similar pinnacles to those met with on the way to 
the Jonsong La. A weird procession they were, contrasting 
oddly with the browns and yellows of the scree slopes on 
either side of the valley. 

That denudation as well as glacier ice plays an important 
part in shaping these valleys was evidenced by a collection 
of earth pyramids on the northern side of the valley resem- 


bling in general characteristics the well-known ones above 
XK 


338 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Bozen (now called Bolzano) in South Tyrol. They are due 
to water forming deep runnels in the soft earth of the hill- 
side. As these runnels become deeper, so do the ridges 
between them become sharper. Some parts of these ridges 
are more knit together by stones and harder than others, 
The soft parts fall, or are worn away, the hard parts 
remain, forming eventually these quaint pinnacles of earth 
and stones. 

The Jonsong Peak was now within our grasp. But would 
the weather hold, could we snatch it from the teeth of the 
monsoon ? Westwards, battalions of cumuli cloud were 
flooding up from the Teesta Valley. Were they the advance 
guard of the monsoon ? Wood Johnson thought they were, 
and pointed out inky black clouds which floated detached 
from the main body of cumuli, saying that they were 
typical monsoon clouds. We had endured one great 
disappointment, were we to experience another? Time 
alone could tell. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THE CONQUEST OF JONSONG PEAK: 
THE FIRST ASCENT 


The day of our little reconnaissance of the summit of 
the rocky point above the camp had ended in snow squalls, 
but monsoonish threats came to naught and the following 
morning, May 30, was calm and sunny. The party 
that was to make the first attempt on the Jonsong Peak 
consisted of Schneider, Hoerlin, Wood Johnson and 
myself. It was decided that the Europeans should go on 
ahead of the porters and see if there was any possibility of 
reaching the South-east Ridge via the north face of the 
mountain. We knew that the ridge was possible if we could 
gain it, but the north face was cut off from view by a 
buttress, and it remained to be seen what was round the 
corner. 

Wood Johnson and I were the first away. Crossing the 
ridge above the camp, we descended the broad snow-field 
on the other side diagonally towards the Lhonak Glacier. 
The glacier is split in its upper portion into two streams, 
one fed by the Jonsong Peak, and the other by the Lhonak 
Peak and the Dodang Nyima range. A long lower ridge 
divides the two, bending down from the North-west Ridge 
of the Jonsong Peak. So far as we could ascertain from his 
description, Dr. Kellas when attempting the Jonsong 
Peak had camped low down at, or near the end of this 


ridge. His second camp had been on the col between the 
339 


340 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Jonsong Peak and an unnamed peak next to the Lhonak 
Peak. This unnamed peak does not appear to advantage 
when looking up the Lhonak Glacier, for it is farther away 
than its more impressive neighbour, the Lhonak Peak. 
Yet, as we learned later, it is a worthy mountain. 

There were no crevasses on the snow-field, and we 
walked down and across it unroped. The rocks of the 
buttress were easy but disagreeably loose, and we dislodged 
great masses that thundered down to the glacier amid 
clouds of sulphurous dust. 

All hope of reaching the South-east Ridge was erased 
from our hearts as we turned the buttress. One glance at 
the great precipices falling from the ridge armoured and 
defended with hanging glaciers was sufficient. Farther 
along, the rock precipices ended, and directly beneath the 
peak there appeared to be a chance of reaching the South- 
east Ridge up the 7,000 feet of snow and ice slopes forming 
the north face of the peak. But it was a very remote poss 
bility, for the steep average angle of the slopes, plus com 
fused masses of unstable ice pinnacles and hanging glaciers 
strewn indiscriminately over them suggested dangers at 
least as great as those of Kangchenjunga. 

The reader may wonder why we continued considering 
attacking the South-east Ridge when we knew that Dr. 
Kellas thought the mountain to be accessible by the 
North-west Ridge. The answer is that it is the moum 
taineer’s duty to consider every possibility however remote. 
Following blindly in the steps of his defeated predecess 
is not the right attitude of mind in which to attack a great 
peak in the Himalayas. That was one reason why we 
had attempted the Nepal face of Kangchenjunga um 


THE JONSONG PEAK 341 


preference to the better known Sikkim face. As regards 
the Jonsong Peak another reason must be admitted, and 
that was the appearance of the North-west Ridge ; it 
looked terribly long. From the col reached by Dr. Kellas, 
it swept up in ice edges over point after point before 
merging into the final rock and ice slopes of the peak. 
Earlier in the expedition we might have gone for it with 
cheerful insouciance, but Kangchenjunga had taught us 
wisdom. Length alone will forever militate against the 
ascent of the majority of the greater Himalayan ridges. 
Yet, Dr. Kellas had seen the peak from a better vantage 
point than we, for he had approached it directly up the 
Lhonak Valley and he was too good a mountaineer to 
waste his time attempting a hopelessly inaccessible route, 
or one beyond the powers of his expedition. We had already 
learned to respect his judgment, and the fact that he had 
tried the North-west Ridge of the Jonsong peak, though 
he had returned defeated from it, was practically a 
guarantee of its accessibility. 

Scrambling down the slopes of loose boulders, we 
gained the side moraine of the south branch of the Lhonak 
Glacier. There we sat down to await Schneider and 
Hoerlin. They and the porters were not long in coming. 
The latter were going well. There were only a dozen of 
them—all picked men—for we hoped to make a rapid 
push for the top. The porters left at the Base Camp were 
to relay the remaining loads over the Jonsong La. The 
men we had were all hard-bitten “‘ Tigers,” as tough, 
hardy and weather-beaten as the Old Guard of Napoleon. 
They were not merely porters, but genuine mountaineers 
and adventurers, who enjoyed a tussle with a great 


342 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


mountain as much as we did, and were as keen as we 
were to get to the top. 

The hanging glaciers on the north face of the Jonsong 
Peak were too obviously unstable to risk passing close 
beneath them. Fortunately, the broad upper part of the 
glacier was unbroken enough to enable us to keep in the 
middle out of range of their ice avalanches. For the most 
part we trod glacier ice, but here and there stretches of 
snow covered it. This snow seemed to have been laid down 
by some diabolical demon. If there were any watery 
hollows, they were concealed by innocent looking coverlets 
into which we floundered, sometimes up to the hips. The 
diabolical demon could seldom have laughed so heartily 
as he did that day. 

The surface of the ice was curiously fretted with little 
nieves penitentes. This could only have been the work of 
the sun. Many little pinnacles, no more than a few inches 
high, were capped by stones, forming minute glacier 
tables. The stones, of course, had protected the ice from 
the sun, so that when the surrounding ice had melted 
away, a little stalk had been left on which rested the stone. 

As we mounted the glacier, the snow and ice face 1mme- 
diately beneath the peak came into full view, and we saw 
what we had not seen lower down, that a possible route 
might be forced up it. But it was a route that would un 
doubtedly be exposed to unavoidable risks—risks of both 
snow and ice avalanches. Our last doubts were removed ; 
it only remained for us to follow in the footsteps of Dr. 
Kellas. First of all we must cross the glacier, thence climb 
to the crest of the low ridge, where we would make Camp 
One. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 343 


For the first time on the expedition we found ourselves 
among large crevasses. It is easy enough to get off the Mer 
de Glace on Mont Blanc to the Mauvais Pas if you know 
the right way, but if you do not, you are liable to get hung 
up by crevasses at the edge of the glacier. Such was our 
position now. We could see the side moraine only fifty 
yards away, and an easy slanting shelf leading up from it 
to the crest of the ridge, but that fifty yards was riven and 
torn into huge crevasses, with knife-like blades of ice be- 
tween. Europeans could, of course, have forced a way even 
though it involved some tricky ice work, but it was a differ- 
ent matter for the porters. An easy way must be found by 
which we could send them up and down between Camp 
One and the Base Camp unaccompanied by a European. 
A way was found at last along a little horizontal gully of 
ice which led out unexpectedly to the moraine. The shelf, 
as anticipated, offered no difficulty, and soon we had 
reached the crest of the ridge some five hundred feet above 
the glacier. There we camped. 

The actual crest of the ridge consisted of a hog-backed 
gently inclined snow-field, but we preferred asa camping 
site a rocky edge almost flush with the snow. 

The ridge was well sheltered from the wind by the main 
North-west Ridge of the Jonsong Peak, and the evening 
was warm and calm. Far down the valley the setting sun 
dwelt on the brown slopes of stones and earth, transforming 
them into sheets of yellow and gold, or lingered on the 
crests of the ice pinnacles of the Lhonak Glacier. There 
was one pinnacle conspicuous among the rest which 
formed a tapering neck, surmounted by a bird-like head 
with a cruel beak. As the sun set, and other and lower 


344 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


pinnacles had become cold and livid, one shaft of light, 
passing through a gap in some distant ridge, lit this pin- 
nacle with a ruddy glare. I almost imagined myself to be 
looking down at some strange and terrible prehistoric 
monster steeped in the blood of its victims. 

Day perished ; brown changed to violet, violet to purple. 
The huddle of ice pinnacles became cold and ghostly. 
Above the world, a vein-like network of cloud tendrils 
glowed fiercely as though suspended over the blaze of a 
city’s lights. Slowly, they faded, and were lost amid the 
stars. 

On Kangchenjunga we had known no peace of mind, 
we had awakened in alarm to the roar of ice avalanches, 
but now we could sleep peacefully. 

For the most part the night was a quiet one, with only 
the groaning and cracking of the glacier beneath to tell 
of its slow progress. Once came the bellow of an ice ava- 
lanche from the Jonsong Peak, like the startled growl of 
an aroused watch dog. 

Morning dawned mistily. Grey clouds roofed in the 
world ; but the rising sun thinned them, and tore them 
apart. In its powerful rays they dissolved swiftly into a 
sky of Italian blue. I was reminded of a Whitsun morning 
up Langdale; when the turf is silvered with dew, the lambs 
cry through the low mists, and Pike O’Stickle and Bowell 
take to themselves the dawn. 

A friendly sun smiled down upon us, as we trudged over 
the marble-like surface of the snow-field above the camp. 
We had hoped that the ridge would lead us straight to the 
col reached by Dr. Kellas, and it was something of a dis- 
appointment to find that ahead it looked difficult. The 





THE NORTH FACE OF THE JONSONG PEAK—7,000 FEET HIGH—-AND 
CAMP ONE 


THE JONSONG PEAK 345 


alternative was to descend to the north branch of the 
Lhonak Glacier. I volunteered to go on ahead and prospect 
the ridge. A short scramble up a slope of boulders brought 
me to a point whence, so far as I could see, the ridge 
stretched without difficulty for a considerable distance. 
Seen thus, there seemed every hope that we should be 
able to follow it all the way and that it would merge 
eventually into the snow slopes directly beneath the col. 
Rather prematurely, therefore, I waved on the others. 
This was a mistake. Only for a short distance was the ridge 
free from difficulties. Soon it became a conventional Hima- 
layan knife-edge of ice, and writhed downwards evilly into 
a deep gap. We retreated. Some hard things were said, 
but they were deserved. 

We descended a slope about 200 feet high to the glacier. 
Soon we were wallowing and floundering in soft snow, the 
most terrible snow we had ever experienced. The sun had 
softened a crust formed by an overnight’s frost. For a step 
or two it would bear us, then a whole cake of it would 
collapse, and we would go knee-deep or even waist-deep 
into a hole. 

But if it was trying or irritating work for the sahibs, it 
was much worse for heavily laden porters. Even though we 
stamped out the track, they, with their loads, frequently 
sank in to a much greater depth. Over the worst part of the 
glacier, I do not think we progressed more than 300 yards 
in an hour, and that along the level. 

We halted for lunch. The weather was not propitious ; 
a snowstorm was brewing, and grey clouds brought with 
them a tide of scurrying snowflakes. The sun reappeared 
again for a few moments, but its smile was but a 


346 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


transitory one, and soon faded and died behind leaden 
mists. 

Above our luncheon place the snow was less disagree- 
able, and we climbed thankfully out from the worst part 
of the glacial snow swamp to the foot of an ice-fall. We 
had come to regard Himalayan ice-falls with something of 
disdain. They were usually much easier than they looked, 
due to the absence of big crevasses. This one gave us no 
reason to revise our opinion. It was a tame affair, so tame 
that we did not need to rope until above the steepest por- 
tion, and that only for a solitary crevasse with overhang- 
ing eaves of snow necessitating an awkward step. 

The storm clouds had rolled back, and a benevolent sun 
illuminated the long snow-field before us, that lifted gently 
up towards Kellas Col, as we had already learnt to call it. 
Dominating this snow-field rose a little peak. Sunlight and 
shadow chased across it, a wilful mist concealed it for a few 
instants. Without it the world seemed dull and lifeless. 
Then it reappeared, supremely arrogant, and important. 
Actually, it was just an insignificant hump, on the great 
North-west ridge of the Jonsong Peak. 

We took off the rope, which we had put on for the one 
crevasse, and trudged manfully up the soft snow slopes. 
Ahead, was a sky-line, which we thought must be Kellas 
Col. We breasted it, only to find more slopes ahead. Time 
was getting on ; the day had been a hard one, for all con- 
cerned. Therefore, we were content to camp on a little 
platform beneath the humpy little peak. Only the tireless 
Schneider elected to go on, and prospect the way. For once 
his prospecting nearly led him into trouble. In the dull 
light, he was unable to see the slight depression formed 


THE JONSONG PEAK 347 


by a solitary crevasse, treacherously bridged. He went 
through up to the waist, and was lucky not to go farther. 
Although a narrow crevasse, it was a deep one. 

We awoke the next morning to hear the unpleasant 
sound of pattering snow on our tents. Enforced delay was 
something more than disappointing. We were short of food 
and fuel. In order to travel light, we had left as much as 
possible of the former at Camp One, and of the latter we 
had taken all the Meta solid fuel available at the Base 
Camp, the remainder had still to come over the Jonsong 
La. We estimated that if the snowstorm delayed us but one 
day, we would only have enough Meta to heat two cups of 
hot tea a day. How long would it last ? Monsoonish 
opinions alternated with hopes of aclearance, but the snow- 
fall continued without intermission. 

Had we known, stern events were afoot. Frau Dyhren- 
furth, who had been left in charge of transport organisa- 
tion, on the Nepal side of the Jonsong La, having carried 
out her task of sending relays of porters off with the re- 
mainder of the loads, had left for the Jonsong La. As luck 
would have it, the day that she traversed the pass co- 
incided with the snowstorm. Duvanel and Dr. Richter had 
come over before her, and she had no European com- 
panions. She was accompanied, however, by her servant, 
the Nepali Subadar, and a Subadar Major, who had re- 
cently come up from Khunza. In spite of the snowstorm, 
these last two escorted her to the actual frontier before 
turning back, another remarkable instance of the courtesy 
and help with which the Nepalese authorities had greeted 
us while we were in Nepal. 

To traverse a pass 20,200 feet high in a snowstorm 


348 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


during which we, mere men, were cowering in our tents, 
was a fine effort, and one which, as regards height alone, has 
probably only been surpassed by women on two or three 
previous occasions. Luck had held, and the crossing of the 
Jonsong La had been successfully accomplished. Unfor- 
tunately, it had been marred by one slight accident, anda 
glissading coolie had come to grief and broken an arm. 
Disaster had also overtaken some of the more fragile loads. 
Of the two typewriters on which I was wont to hammer out 
my dispatches one was no more. The box containing the 
gramophone records had broken loose from a porter’s back, 
and bounded down the glacier. Only a number of strong 
and thick records that had been supplied by Eberl had 
survived, and these were strictly classical. Our souls, and 
our porters’ souls, hungered not for Wagner or Beethoven, 
but for the bass-voiced gentleman who used to advise us 
every evening to give ourselves a pat on the back. Now he 
was lying shattered to fragments at the foot of the Jonsong 
La. 

It was still snowing the next morning, and our spirits 
sank to zero. We had little enough food and fuel left, and 
could not afford to play a waiting game. We had to decide 
definitely whether we would advance, or retreat. The 
former was scarcely practicable, and the latter seemed it- 
evitable. We were preparing to descend when the snow 
stopped. A bright light smote through the mist pall ; 4 
tiny patch of blue sky appeared. Miraculously it broadened 
and an eager sun burst through. The mists rolled back; 4 
wind from the north-west completed their discomfiture; 
they had to relinquish their hold on our ridge, and - 
treat to the Lhonak Valley, where they congregated 10 





a 


ec cme 





8, el 5 OE. F 


DESCENDING THE JONSONG PEAK BELOW CAMP TWO. THE PEAK IN THE 
BACKGROUND IS A MINOR BUTTRESS OF THE NORTH-WEST RIDGE 


THE JONSONG PEAK 349 


sullen battalions ready for a further assault on the heights. 

Nearly two feet of new snow had obliterated our tracks. 
It would be hard but not dangerous work going on, for so 
far as we could see there was no fear of the gentle slopes we 
must climb avalanching. 

It was certainly hard work, but not so strenuous as we 
had anticipated. The new snow was of a more or less uni- 
form depth, and was light and powdery. We climbed 
roped, for there were several concealed crevasses, two or 
three of which were only discovered by “ trial and error.” 

From the Lhonak Valley the North-west Ridge had ap- 
peared a definite edge all the way from Kellas’ Col. In 
point of fact, for some considerable distance there is no 
ridge, and what appears to be a ridge from below is merely 
the edge of a gently sloping snow-field. ‘This snow-field 
gradually narrows, until at a height of about 21,500 feet 
it does actually become ridge. 

One or two of the porters were feeling the effect of the 
altitude, and one of them, Nima, unroped himself from 
the rest. He was cautioned and tied up again. In the ab- 
sence of an accredited sirdar, Nemu was put in charge. It 
was interesting to watch the psychological effect of re- 
sponsibility. As Mr. Samuel Weller would have had it, he 
seemed to “ svell wisibly.”’ His countenance became even 
more earnest and worried, if such a thing were possible, 
and he fussed about like an old hen over a brood of 
chickens, but withal, he made a good sirdar, and one whom 
the men respected and obeyed. 

At the head of the snow-field was a platform, on which 
we enjoyed lunch and a welcome rest. Immediately below 
the platform and to the west precipices dropped to a great 


350 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


glacier, which has its source in the snows of the Jonsong 
Peak. This glacier at first runs in a north-westerly direction 
before curving round to the west. It is at least fifteen or 
twenty miles long, and its direction, and the ranges bound- 
ing it, are delineated inaccurately on the Government map. 
Whence do its waters flow? Do they enter the Khunza 
Valley at Kangbachen, or do they flow northwards into 
Thibet, and join the headwaters of the Arun River ? This 
was a question that we were unable definitely to solve, but 
it seems probable that the latter direction is the correct 
one. This glacier, like the Jonsong Glacier, only consists of 
bare ice for a few miles. Its lower portion is so moraine 
covered as to be invisible, but the ice continues for many 
miles under the stones. As Mr. Freshfield pointed out, 
many of the early travellers and surveyors utterly mis- 
judged the length of the glaciers in this district owing to 
their thinking that the glacier ended at the point where 
the ice was no longer to be seen. In its upper portion this 
glacier rises in a great ice-fall. Rocky spurs jut out into it, 
and over these ice avalanches fall periodically with thun- 
derous roars. 

Beyond the glacier, we looked over ridge upon ridge of 
peaks, some easy looking snow mountains, others mort 
difficult, and here and there carnivorous-like fangs of rock, 
forming summits which appeared hopelessly inaccessible. 
Our gaze passed far across these turbulent mountains, ' 
where seventy miles away two superb summits stood aloof 
from the world—Everest and Makalu. 

Everest has been described as a dull, if imposing moun" 
tain, when seen from the north and not to be compared 
with Makalu in grandeur or beauty. The latter is certainly 


THE JONSONG PEAK 351 


a superb peak. Its delicately shaped summit based on two 
wide shoulders is as perfectly proportioned as the Lhonak 
Peak. Yet, grand mountain though it is, it somehow lacks 
the sovereign dignity of the World’s highest summit. From 
our position we saw the North Ridge of Everest in profile, 
sweeping down in a graceful parabola to the North Col, 
to the right of which rose the little North Peak. But the 
most imposing face of the mountain is its southern, or 
Nepal face. No European has ever stood beneath it. Were 
he to do so, he would find himself looking up the grandest 
mountain wall there is. The north-west face of Nanga 
Parbat rises 22,000 feet from the Indus Valley. Itis possible 
that Everest’s southern face does not exceed this height, 
and it is probably less, but no other mountain can show 
a face to rival its unbroken general angle, combined with 
its length. We saw it in profile, and seventy miles away 
though we were from it, it seemed to drop and drop for 
thousands of feet, to disappear finally into the flocks of 
cumuli cloud that browsed about its base. 

We could have stopped long gazing upon that view, but 
our start had been a late one, and the sun was well past 
its zenith. So far the foot-slogging had been easy, if arduous, 
of a type Baedeker would class as, ‘‘ For adults only.” 
Immediately above us, the snow-field rose in steep waves, 
before narrowing into a sharp snow-ridge. Henceforward 
the climbing was, “‘ For experts only, with perfectly steady 
heads.” At the foot of the lowest wave was an incipient 
bergschrund. This was only visible on the right, on the 
left it was firmly bridged. The wind sweeping the slopes 
above it had compacted the snow into a hard icy cake. 
Luckily there was no ice, and a few slashes with the adze 


352 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


end of the axe sufficed to make a step. Above this lower 
wave, the slope eased off for a few yards ; then came a 
similar wave but a few feet high, and easily surmounted, 

We found ourselves on a level shelf, forming the lower 
lip of a long snowy trough. Above the trough rose the final 
wave. We looked at it with sinking hearts. Like the ice wall 
of Kangchenjunga, it was a brutal, elemental bulge of blue 
ice. Schneider thought there was a possibility of circum. 
venting it, and quickly traversed along to the left like an 
old hound nosing out the trail. A minute or two later he 
returned with the glad news that he had found a way, 
and the advance was resumed. 

At one point the lower lip of the trough we were tra 
versing was split at right-angles by an abysmal cleft. An 
insecure-looking tongue projected on our side, and from 
this we stepped gingerly across. At its westward end, the 
trough and the ice bulge petered out into an ice slope to 
gain which we had to cross another crevasse. Now came 
the first real climbing of the day. The ice slope fell away 
to the right, like the roof of a house, ending in a sheer drop 
to the glacier we had discovered. Steps, and good steps, 
had to be cut. A slip on the part of the porters was not 
to be thought of. Schneider cut the steps, which Hoerlin, 
Wood Johnson and myself enlarged to the dimensions of 
buckets for the porters. Nevertheless, we gave the lattet 
a tight rope. The slope was short, not more than 100 feet 
high ; and soon we stepped on to the crest of the North: 
west Ridge. There we experienced a disagreeable surprise 
For some way the ridge was level, then it rose to an !¢) 
point which formed a respectable peak in itself. So far the 
ridge was reasonably broad, and free from difficulty, bul 





NEARING CAMP THREE ON THE JONSONG PEAK 


THE JONSONG PEAK 353 


beyond the little peak it narrowed to a mere ice-blade of 
obvious and aggressive difficulty. Between this ridge and 
the Jonsong Peak was a gently inclined glacier, forming 
one of the heads of the glacier flowing north-west. Could 
we but gain this glacier all would be well, for from it’s 
head we could attack the final slopes of the Jonsong Peak. 

There were two possibilities of descending to this glacier. 
One, by following the North-west Ridge to a point where 
it sank to within reasonable reach of the glacier, and the 
other, by descending the ice slopes directly beneath us. 
Both were possible, but to get porters over either route 
meant an extra day’s work, and another camp, and for 
this we had neither sufficient food nor fuel. The only alter- 
native was to camp where we were on the ridge, and 
leaving the porters, making a bid for the summit the 
following day. It would be a very long and strenuous day, 
and a race against time. Any real difficulty such as steep 
rock climbing, or step cutting, would defeat us, and enforce 
retreat if we were to escape being benighted. It was by no 
means certain that there were no real difficulties on the 
final 2,000 fect of snow slopes and rocks separating the 
head of the glacier from the summit. It certainly looked 
easy enough, but as we knew from bitter experience, 
apparent easiness in the Himalayas is too often apt to 
prove a delusion and a snare. 

Another factor by no means to be neglected was altitude. 
We had been going slowly to-day in the soft snow, and 
that from 19,500 feet to 21,700 feet. We would go more 
slowly on the morrow. Such was the problem, and like that 
of the Jonsong La, it was one that luck alone could solve. 


The ridge was a poor place to camp upon, and we would 
YK 


354 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


have done better to have descended to the platform be. 
low, or to the trough. But every foot of height and minute 
of time was precious, and we decided, therefore, to stop 
where we were, even though forced to bear the brunt of 
the west wind. 

It would be difficult to imagine a more superb camping 
site, and we lounged about in the sun enjoying every 
minute of the remainder of the day. As we did so, we 
studied the route to be followed, and after a prolonged 
argument as to the respective merits of the ridge and the 
ice slope, the former was adopted as affording the most 
convenient route to the glacier. 

On the peak itself there were two possibilities. One up 
the crest of the North-west Ridge, which would mostly 
consist of rock climbing, and the other up snow slopes to 
the col between the highest point of the peak and a sub- 
sidiary summit to the west. The final decision, however, 
as to which was the better of these two routes would have 
to be left until we were actually at grips with the mountain, 
for it was difficult to tell by mere visual examination 
which was likely to prove the easiest. 

From a geological standpoint, the Jonsong Peak is very 
interesting. It forms the point at which the gneiss of 
Kangchenjunga, and the limestone of Thibet meet. The 
upper part of the mountain is composed of stratified lime 
stone, precisely similar to that of Everest, which we hoped 
would provide as easy climbing as it does on Everest. This 
limestone is based on gneiss. Where the two meet, there 
are alternate layers of gneiss and limestone, which run for 
a considerable distance across the mountainside. 

For warmth and companionship’s sake we placed ou! 


THE JONSONG PEAK 355 


tents end to end. Hoerlin and Schneider shared one, and 
Wood Johnson and I the other. The porters were housed 
in a tent of Polar design, which had been found to with- 
stand the fiercest winds. They had also a little Welzenbach 
tent, which in shape resembled a triangular slab of cheese, 
being head-high to a sitting man at one end, and sloping 
wedge-like to the feet-end. 

As the sun set, the west wind rose, and howled with 
bitter venom across the ridge, blowing fine powdery snow 
through every chink between the laced-up flaps. Our little 
camp was bathed in a ruddy glare. So beautiful was the 
scene that Wood Johnson and I, peering through the gauze- 
covered ventilation square at the back of our tent, could 
not forbear to go outside and photograph it. For perhaps 
a minute I stood in the snow, fumbling with numbed 
fingers at my camera. The sun was sinking northwards of 
Everest. One stiletto of cloud spanned the ranges, its hilt 
reached to Everest, its acute point, so acute that it was 
hard to tell where it ended, stretched far over Thibet. The 
hilt was dark, the point afire, as though it was steeped in 
blood. Although seventy miles away, Everest was as sharp 
and clear as though it rose from the range across the 
nearest valley. The North Col and the weary East Ridge 
up which expeditions had fought their way were clearly 
distinguishable. As I gazed at the final cone, beneath 
which high hopes were shattered, I thought of Mallory 
and Irvine. Their last resting place is surely one to be 
envied. When all the other peaks were cold and grey, one 
steadfast cloud banner streamed from it, whilst below, 
the great mountain drew to itself night’s purple folds, 
like the toga of some imperial Caesar. 


356 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The cold was intense. We had no thermometer, but there 
were at least fifty degrees of frost. I took two photographs, 
but my fingers became white and dead. I beat and 
rubbed them for fully a quarter of an hour inside the tent 
before the sluggish circulation returned. After cooking a 
cheerless and limited supper, we gulped down gratefully 
our one precious cup of hot tea, and wriggled into our 
sleeping bags. 

The night was a wild one. The wind roared across the 
ridge, its snow-charged gusts flinging themselves on the 
camp with an insane fury. Once again our little tents held 
out nobly. Nevertheless, it was not altogether a comfott- 
able feeling knowing that there were precipices on either 
hand. I thought of Captain G. I. Finch and Mr. Geoffrey 
Bruce’s windy night on Everest, but their experience was 
a far worse one than ours. 

Dawn broke ; the sky was unclouded, and the sun rose 
unhindered, but the wind continued with unabated vio- 
lence. We peered out of our tents. A tourmente of wind- 
blown snow was whirling past, and far up in the blue 
sky to the leeward of the ridge its crystals scintillated mn 
the sun like a myriad elfin spear points. At the Base Camp 
they would be thinking about breakfast, basking in the 
sun, maybe. Possibly some observant eye would note 4 
slight fuzziness about the ridges, but little would they 
realise what it really meant. To start was impossible, for 
to have faced the blast would have meant frostbite. The 
peak was within our grasp, yet we must retreat. With out 
limited supplies of food and fuel, we could not afford to 
wait another day. From Camp One we had sent back all 
the porters we could possibly spare. Instructions had been 





AS PEAK 


L 


KEL 


THE JONSONG PEAK 357 


sent to the Base Camp to send up food and fuel at the 
earliest possible moment, but this was scarcely likely to 
arrive in time. The hard work of the past few days had 
been wasted. We had resigned ourselves to endure yet an- 
other bitter disappointment when with dramatic sudden- 
ness, at about 8.30 a.m. the canvas of our tents ceased to 
roar and smack—the wind had dropped ! For some time 
we lay listening for its return, but save for a petulant gust 
or two, it did not return. We ate a hurried breakfast, while 
our servants thawed our frozen boots—I think Nemu took 
mine to bed with him—and packed our rucksacks with 
necessaries. 

At 9 a.m. we were off, in two parties, Schneider and 
Hoerlin on one rope ; Wood Johnson and myself on the 
other. We were all wearing crampons. Walking easily up 
the ridge we gained the summit of the ice peak which is 
about 150 feet above the camp, and nearly 22,000 feet 
high. This marked the beginning of the difficult section of 
the ridge. 

From the ice peak the ridge descended steeply for some 
distance, in a series of sweeps to a col above which it rose 
again to another little peak. The col was only about 200 
feet above the glacier, and once it was reached, the de- 
scent to the latter should be a comparatively easy matter. 
There was no possibility of keeping to the crest of the 
ridge, it was too sharp, whilst enormous cornices festooned 
with icicles overhanging the Lhonak side had to be avoided. 
We must traverse well below it on the south, or Jonsong 
Peak side. Had we not had crampons, the mountain would 
not have been climbed that day, for without them the 
steep icy slopes would have involved several hours of step 


358 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


cutting. As it was, steps were seldom necessary although 
it was tiring work flexing the feet in order to drive the 
crampon spikes well home. But if crampons made it pos- 
sible to succeed without step cutting, it was not altogether 
easy work. The slope was too steep to face outwards, we 
had to face sideways, and descend like crabs. Below, sharp 
shark’s teeth of rock, projecting viciously from the slope, 
and a bergschrund awaited a false step. 

Schneider and Hoerlin moved for the most part both 
together, and were soon far ahead. Wood Johnson and | 
moved for the most part one at a time and were therefore 
very slow. This slowness was dictated partly by the fact that 
Wood Johnson had had little previous experience of snow 
and ice, and was actually wearing crampons for the first 
time. There was, however, another reason of which | 
was not aware at the time, he was not feeling fit. It is only 
fair and just to remark that considering his unfamiliarity 
with such work he put up a remarkably fine perform 
ance. The technique of crampons is not to be learned in 
a day. 

Below the col, the ice was harder and steeper than above, 
and Schneider found step cutting essential. This enabled us 
to catch up to some extent, but even so by the time the first 
party had reached the glacier, we were still a long way 
behind. Schneider had cut a cunning zig-zag staircase, 
which led to the one place where the bergschrund could 
be crossed without much difficulty. After flexing the ankles 
on the slopes above the col, it was a relief to tread in good 
honest steps. The upper lip of the bergschrund was steép, 
but this Schneider had facilitated by hacking out large 
buckets of steps. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 359 


Seated on the glacier, we ate a snack of chocolate. The 
weather was now perfect, and the sun burned down with a 
fierce intensity, untempered by a breath of wind. Before us, 
the glacier sloped gently upwards with scarcely a ripple to 
mar its smooth surface. Trudging up it, mere dots now, 
were Hoerlin and Schneider. They were at least an hour 
ahead of us. We started after them. Almost at once, I 
noticed that Wood Johnson was going very badly. We had 
not gone far before he said he was too tired to go on. He 
said he would sit down in the snow, and wait until I re- 
turned. Naturally, I thought that altitude alone was 
responsible. He was feeling what I felt on the Ramthang 
Peak, when wearing the expedition boots, only worse. 
Under the circumstances ; a safe glacier, a windless day, 
and a broiling sun, I felt no scruples in agreeing to his 
suggestion that I should go on to the summit. Had I known, 
however, that he was suffering, not from altitude, but 
from a definite physical malady, there would have been 
no question of my going on. I should have returned 
with him then and there to the camp. 

Would it be possible to overtake Schneider and Hoerlin ? 
They were going very fast. Could I go faster ? I thought I 
could, for I was feeling very fit. I said good-bye to Wood 
Johnson with deep regret. It was something more than hard 
luck for him, and no one was keener than he to do the 
Jonsong Peak. Yet, he could console himself with the 
thought that should it be climbed, his share in its conquest 
would be as great as anyone’s, for it was only his able 
management of the porters, which was every bit as impor- 
tant towards the success of the undertaking as the actual 
climbing, that had rendered the ascent possible. 


360 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Every man possesses his own natural pace on a moun- 
tain, and by natural pace I mean the pace at which he js 
able to conserve the greatest amount of energy. This pace 
is, of course, apart from the difficulty of the ground, de. 
pendent on general bodily and mental condition, com- 
bined with the limitations imposed by altitude. At 22,000 
feet pace and rhythm are synonymous. Increasing the 
pace, and breaking the rhythm, results in an output of 
energy far out of proportion to the time saved. This I dis- 
covered to my cost. At low altitudes, this loss of energy is 
negligible, and there is always a larger store of energy held 
in reserve than at high altitudes. The men who reach the 
summit of Everest will be drawing on their last dregs of 
reserve energy. My attempt to catch up Schneider and 
Hoerlin failed because by going faster than my natural 
pace I unfortunately exhausted myself by utilising my 
reserve energy. 

Putting every ounce of energy into it I toiled up the 
glacier at a speed which would not have been out of place 
on Mont Blanc. I got within 100 yards of them, as they sat 
resting prior to leaving the glacier in favour of a steep 
little couloir leading up into the rocks of the peak. Here 
I sat down in a state of tired inertness, from which I never 
fully recovered for the remainder of the day. It was fully 
half an hour before I could move, and during that time I 
had the mortification of seeing Schneider and Hoerlin com 
tinue on their way. Quite rightly, they could not afford to 
wait for me. The peak was, after all, the first thing. 

I started again to follow them. The spurt had done mé 
little good, for I was now almost as far behind as I had been 
when I left Wood Johnson, and now I had tired myself 


THE JONSONG PEAK 361 


to such an extent that I could not go as fast as Schneider 
and Hoerlin. 

If I have described at length the evil effects of hurrying 
at high altitudes, I have done so to save others who may be 
tempted to hurry. Rhythm will one day get men to the 
top of Everest, but hurry, such as a race against time or 
weather, will defeat them utterly, and perhaps even render 
them so exhausted as to bring about disaster. It is possible 
that Mallory and Irvine perished thus, for if Mr. Odell was 
not mistaken in thinking he saw them, they were so late in 
starting that their attempt must have been a race against 
time. 

From the head of the glacier, there was no question as 
to which route should be followed. The apparently easy 
snow slopes leading up to the col between the two summits 
of the Jonsong Peak were composed not of snow, but of 
ice, and ice set at a steeper angle than had appeared 
from the camp. The rocky North-west Ridge was by far the 
easiest route. 

I plugged up the couloir. At first wide and fan-like, it 
gradually narrowed. Its western bank was formed by the 
ice slopes of the glacier falling from the ridge connecting 
the two summits. The other bank consisted of rocky 
shelves. On one of these shelves Schneider and Hoerlin had 
left every article of equipment they could spare. Obviously, 
they considered that time was of the utmost importance, 
and that if they were to reach the summit without being 
benighted on the descent, they must climb to it as lightly 
laden as possible. 

At the ledge, they had left the couloir in favour of the 
rocky shelves. I preferred to continue up the former, for 


362 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the rocky shelves were ice glazed here and there. It was not 
altogether a wise choice, for it was fatiguing work kicking 
and cutting steps in the hard snow of the couloir, and after 
climbing it a short distance I left it in preference for the 
rocks. 

A falling stone passed with the vicious buzz of a racing 
car. I looked up. Schneider and Hoerlin were fully 500 
feet higher. They were now on the crest of the ridge and 
silhouetted on the sky-line. They seemed to be moving 
quickly. I scrambled to the left out of range of anything 
they might send down. The mountain was patently rotten— 
a ruined mass of broken, shattered limestone. I looked at 
my watch, 3 p.m. My height was about 23,000 feet, ap- 
proximately 1,500 feet from the top. It would take another 
three hours, at least, perhaps four hours. To go on meant 
being benighted. Great mountains have little sympathy 
for the solitary climber, and the Himalayas none at all. 
The foolhardiness entailed in going on would be fair 
neither to my companions, nor to myself. So I sat dows, 
and prepared to enjoy a quiet half-hour. 

From my position I could see Wood Johnson seated on 
the glacier. He had followed me slowly for a short distance, 
and then returned and stopped near the foot of the ice- 
slope. Now that there was no question of going on, I felt 
contented and happy. The day had been something more 
than a disappointing one, but altitude has the beneficial 
effect of dulling disappointment in the same way as it dull 
ambition, and ambition had sunk beneath the oily surface 
of lassitude. From my perch I gazed upon a view combining 
both interest and beauty. All the nearer peaks were below, 
and I could gaze over the Lhonak and Dodang summits. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 363 


Northwards, over the Dodang Nyima range was the brown 
plateau of Thibet, contrasting oddly with the nearer snowy 
summits. Little cloud nautile sailed gently over its vast 
expanses, their undersides tinged brown from the reflected 
ruddiness of the earth. North-west of the Lhonak Peak 
were rolling snow peaks and snowfields. What a paradise 
for the ski-runner or mountaineer they would make, for 
there are many summits between 20,000 and 23,000 feet 
that are assailable either on ski or foot. 

I turned to descend. Schneider and Hoerlin were out of 
sight now. I could not even hear their voices. Eastwards 
of every peak and ridge, blue shadows were stealing over 
the snows, greedily gulping the sunlight ; now and again 
a chill, little wind puffed across and was gone. Here was 
a peace such as we had not experienced on Kangchenjunga, 
a peace unbroken by the grumble of ice avalanches. 
Quickly I scrambled down the rocks, and descended the 
couloir until it was possible to glissade safely. It had taken 
me nearly two hours to ascend to my highest point from the 
glacier ; I scrambled and glissaded down in a few minutes. 

I strolled down the glacier to Wood Johnson. His 
appearance shocked me. His face was drawn and haggard, 
and he showed every sign of being a sick man. I was even 
more shocked to learn that, some time after I had left 
him, he had had a stomach seizure, and had actually 
fainted. He recovered consciousness to find himself lying 
in the snow. I asked him whether he thought he would 
have the strength to ascend the ice ridge to the camp. He 
replicd that he was game to try. 

There were three things that might be done. I could 
return to camp and bring back porters. This I dismissed 


364 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


instantly as being impractical ; the porters would be more 
of a hindrance than a help on the ice ridge and could 
never be got back before nightfall. Moreover, they were 
not used to crampons, and steps would have to be cut the 
whole way—hours of work. We might remain where we 
were until Schneider and Hoerlin returned, but they would 
most likely be back late, possibly after dark, and they 
would be tired. The sole remaining alternative was for 
Wood Johnson and myself to start as soon as possible and 
take things very easily in the hope that Wood Johnson 
would be able to muster up sufficient strength. 

As we stood considering the situation, two minute dots 
passed slowly up the last snow slope towards the summit 
of the Jonsong Peak. They traversed to the right and dis- 
appeared, but in a few minutes more, reappeared, toiling 
upwards. At last they stood on the summit, barely dis 
tinguishable against the deep blue sky. It was a great 
moment. Schneider and Hoerlin had accomplished 4 
splendid feat of pluck and endurance. Taking into account 
the height lost in descending from the camp to the glacier, 
they had ascended about 3,000 feet in seven hour. 
Schneider had led magnificently whilst Hoerlin’s per 
formance, considering that not long before he had been 
ill with influenza, told of a splendid constitution. 

Wood Johnson’s strength must be kept up, and I in- 
sisted on him eating some chocolate. This put new life 
into him, and he decided to make an attempt to get back 
to camp then and there. It was a journey I shall not easil] 
forget for he was very weak, and every upward step 
cost him an intense effort. He had reached the stag’ 
of not caring what happened to himself, and only the 


THE JONSONG PEAK 365 


knowledge that he was roped to me, and that by slipping 
he would involve me, as well as himself, in disaster, pre- 
vented his complete collapse. It was one more example of 
how closely, spiritually as well as physically, two friends 
can be linked by a mere hempen line. I do not know how 
long we took to climb the ridge, the time seemed intermin- 
able. It was probably about three hours. Slowly, rope 
length by rope length we progressed. The declining sun 
flamed and died around us. A vivid furnace with bars of 
scarlet glared behind Everest ; the tropic night rushed 
down upon us. The wind rose again, and began to numb 
our hands and feet. 

A wall of mist gathered on the Lhonak side of the ridge. 
At one point near the crest of the ridge, the nearly horizon- 
tal sun thrust each man’s shadow against it, in a beautiful 
Brocken Spectre. As I lifted my ice-axe to plunge it into 
the icy snow, so did a ghostly figure, surrounded by a 
brilliant, prismatic halo, gesticulate, with a weird, eerie 
abandon. Slowly, the sun sank behind the ranges, its spear- 
like beams radiating far into the green heavens, like the 
spurts from some monstrous explosion. 

The wind pack fell upon us, beating our faces with 
painful spicule of snow and ice. A myriad stars looked 
down on a scene of intense effort and the snows around 
us had assumed a cold pallor as of death, as I took in the 
rope for the last time. We breasted the crest of the little 
ice peak, and looked down the broad easy snow ridge to 
the camp. Porters came rushing forth through the gloom 
to meet and greet us. Only then did Wood Johnson 
collapse. His effort had been one of which any moun- 
taineer might be proud. 


366 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


A minute or two later, our servants had pulled off our 
boots as we sat in our tents. Our feet had lost their feeling, 
my own had become encased in ice, for during the heat 
of the day, my boots had leaked, and my feet had become 
wet. In a trice, Nemu had my stockings off, and started to 
massage my toes with his horny hands. He proved himself 
an adept at it, and soon I was groaning under the exquisite 
torment of returning circulation. 

Food and fuel had arrived that day in the shape of a 
chicken and coolie food, some petrol and a primus stove. 
How we poured down hot tea, and gnawed the tough 
chicken! A meal was prepared for Schneider and Hoerlin. 
It was not until some time after dark that they arrived: 
they were very tired, but by no means exhausted. When 
we had all assembled once more, and not until then, a 
bottle of rum began to circulate steadily between the 
occupants of the two tents. One day, many years hence, 
the bottle in which this rum was contained will come out 
at the end of the glacier beneath, perhaps to provide some 
future generation of airmen with material for speculation 
as to what sort of men were those who elected to climb on 
their flat feet before the helicopteral age. , 

The wind was blowing hard again the next morning; 
and our start was delayed, even later than on the previous 
morning. This was unfortunate as it meant that by the 
time we got down below Camp Two, the sun had dont 
its worst, and the snow was in vile condition. It was 4 
curious fact that the principal precipitation of snow had 
been confined between 19,000 and 21,000 feet. Above and 
below that range of altitude there had been practically 
no new snow. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 367 


It was a trying descent for Wood Johnson. Once more 
he fainted, but soon recovered. It was a weary wade for 
him across the level glacier near Camp One, and it was a 
tired party that floundered through the snowy morass 
and plugged uphill to Camp One. 

At Camp One a surprise awaited us. Professor Dyhren- 
furth, Kurz, and Wieland had come up from the Base 
Camp with the intention also of climbing the Jonsong 
Peak. Schneider, Hoerlin, and Wood Johnson were to 
descend to the Base Camp the next day for a rest, after 
which the first two were to ascend to the Choten Nyima 
La, the 18,500 feet pass on the frontier of Sikkim and 
Thibet, whence they hoped to ascend the Dodang Peak, 
22,700 feet, the highest point of the limestone Dodang 
Nyima Range, bounding the northern side of the Lhonak 
Valley. I should like to have accompanied them, but I 
naturally preferred to attempt the Jonsong Peak once 
more, and although feeling in need of a rest, I decided 
to go back with Professor Dyhrenfurth’s party next day. 

Some cylinders of oxygen had been brought up from the 
Base Camp, more as an experiment than anything else, 
for there was certainly no necessity for oxygen. However, 
it can be extremely beneficial taken medicinally, as was 
demonstrated in the case of Wood Johnson. He had 
arrived practically exhausted at Camp One. As is common 
with exhausted men, his pulse rate was a high one, 115, 
but after a few minutes’ inhalation of oxygen it was found 
to be 95, and much of his strength had returned to him. 
Therefore, I would recommend that even if oxygen is not 
taken on future Everest expeditions as a help to actual 
climbing, it should be taken as a revivifier. Also it promotes 


368 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


warmth, and may thus stimulate the circulation, or mini- 
mise the effects of frostbite. A dose taken in the morning 
before the start of a climb should prove a valuable pre- 
liminary to a hard day’s work. 

Plenty of food and fuel were now available, and that 
evening we did our best to make up for the privations of 
the last few days. 

I cannot close this chapter without reference to the 
porters. Although on short commons, they had not once 
grumbled, but had carried out their arduous tasks with 
uncomplaining cheerfulness and fortitude. As a reward for 
their work, they were to be given three days’ rest at the 
Base Camp, and a bonus on their pay. All save one dl 
them were ready to descend. Nemu was not going to allow 
his sahib to return without someone to look after him ; he 
would accompany me once again up the Jonsong Peak. 


CHAPTER XVII 


THE CONQUEST OF JONSONG PEAK: 
THE SECOND ASCENT 


The following morning, June 4, dawned mistily. A slight 
sprinkling of snow had fallen overnight, but this vanished 
with the first lick of the kindly sun. The weather felt good, 
and the air was fresh, with that magical tang of the hills 
that presages a brilliant day. The frost crystals on the grey 
rocks round glittered defiantly, but slowly, insidiously, 
the sun absorbed them and relegated them to the Infinite. 
As on the last occasion when we had left Camp One, so 
with this ; it was easy to imagine that somewhere hidden 
by the grey shawls of mist was a little llyn or loch, the still 
green waters of which had yet to be disturbed by the slim 
brown trout flashing upwards for their breakfast. 

Wood Johnson was stronger, yet it was imperative that 
he should descend to the Base Camp for medical attention. 
What wretched luck ! Of all of us he was the one who most 
deserved to reach the summit. Among the porters who had 
come up from the Base Camp were some of the Bhutias 
who had previously grumbled at not being equipped to 
the same extent as the Sherpas. Several of them now took 
the opportunity of renewing their grievances, and declared 
it as their intention not to go on. Fortunately, they were 
prevailed upon to do so. It was unfortunate that Lobsang 
was still at the Base Camp, for his influence over the porters 


was great. Recently, he had completed the arduous task of 
ZK 369 


370 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


getting the remainder of the loads over the Jonsong La, 
and it had been arranged that as soon as he had had a Test, 
he should come up with a support party carrying food, 

Our first ascent of the Jonsong Peak had been dependent 
upon speed and good weather ; now, with the arrival of 
food and fuel both over the Jonsong La and from Lachen, 
we could afford to play a waiting game should the necessity 
arise, not an indefinite waiting game, but one that allowed 
for two or three days’ bad weather. 

To avoid having to wade through the glacier morass, we 
left early before the sun had time to soften the snow. The 
going was delightful. Of all sounds there is none more 
pleasant to the ear of the mountaineer than the musical 
creak of frozen snow beneath the nailed boot in the early 
morning. It is one that to me, at least, is charged with as 
much delight as the thud of an ice-axe pick meeting ice 
or the soft silken swish of a pair of ski parting powdery 
snow. On our first ascent we had waded for hours across 
the glacier, and up the ice-fall above, now we strolled, 
conscious that each upward swing of the leg was bringing 
us with the minimum of effort towards our goal. The 
porters seemed to realise this, too, and the importance of 
gaining as much height as possible before the snow was 
softened by the sun, for they came on well, their tireles 
gait telling of perfect training, coupled with a physique which 
makes them the finest natural mountaineers in the world. 

In spite of the last few days of hard work, I felt in good 
training too, and found myself sufficiently far ahead to ° 
able to lounge for an hour in the sun, on the former site 
of Camp Two. While doing so, I ate a meditative lunch, 
washing it down with long pulls from a large, new Thermo 


THE JONSONG PEAK 371 


flask, which had appeared mysteriously in place of my last 
one which had been broken on the first ascent. It was my 
fourth Thermos, for three had been broken, but in every 
case a new one had appeared in place of the smashed one. 
I did not think it politic to question Nemu as to the means 
or methods by which these miracles were accomplished. 
Naturally of an untidy and careless disposition, I had lost 
or broken a number of articles, but replacements of these 
had invariably appeared. Once or twice, it is true, I 
seemed to detect growls of discontent from other members 
of the expedition, but it seemed to me tactful not to enquire 
into them. I preferred to think that Nemu had, in some 
mysterious manner, discovered the secret of reincarnating 
the spirits of broken Thermos flasks into newer and better 
Thermos flasks. In this particular instance the reincar- 
nation had been so successfully accomplished, that I was 
now the proud possessor of the largest Thermos flask I 
had yet had. It was, in fact, the twin brother of one that 
I had seen Hoerlin using. While I was having my lunch, 
Nemu himself passed, carrying my tent and bedding. As 
he did so, I noted that his solemn brown eyes rested on the 
Thermos flask ; they seemed to lighten a little, almost 
twinkle in fact ; the creases in his forehead, which gave 
to him his habitual worried expression, were smoothed for 
an instant ; something—was it a smile ?—twitched at the 
corners of his broad mouth. 

So good was the snow, and so easy the going, that Professor 
Dyhrenfurth decided not to camp at the site of the former 
Camp Two, but to push on up to Camp Three. In view of 
the fact that the porters were carrying very heavy loads, 
that the altitude was not inconsiderable, that the Bhutias 


372 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


had before resented attempts to double march them, and 
that we had plenty of food and fuel, it would have been 
wiser to have stopped at Camp Two. At all events, by the 
time the platform beneath the icy waves, or bulges, below 
the ridge had been gained, it was obvious that a number of 
porters would not, or could not, proceed farther that day, 
and the camp had to be pitched. 

Kurz suggested that he and I should go on and prospect 
a way down the ice slopes from the ridge on which we 
had previously ¢itched Camp Three to the glacier we must 
ascend. This was necessary for two reasons. We hoped to 
make a shorter day of the final ascent by camping at the 
head of the glacier, for we were anxious to have enough 
time to carry out topographical, photographic, and cine- 
matographic work from the Jonsong Peak, then, while the 
ice ridge beyond Camp Three might be a reasonable 
traverse for Europeans, it was hardly suitable for laden 
porters. Whichever way we descended to the glacier a 
secure staircase and fixed ropes would be essential, and 
while we had enough rope for a direct descent to the 
glacier we had not enough for the ice ridge. 

We ascended by the same route as last time until we 
came to the commencement of the roof-like ice slope. 
Across this we cut horizontally to join a steepish snow ridge 
falling from the main ridge just below the site of Camp 
Three. There I anchored myself, and payed out a long 
length of rope as Kurz descended in search of the easiest 
route to the glacier 500 feet beneath. 

The slopes did not belie their appearance; they looked 
steep and they were steep, probably a good sixty degrees” 
angle. As I expected, Kurz returned with the news that 4 


IER 


% 
4 


GLAC 


mm 
< 
Z 
oO 
eo) 
4 
Q 
se 
= 
Oo 
~% 
fe 
ws 
< 
rs] 
A 
a 
< 
Z 
° 
jem) 
< 
3] 
x 
= 





THE JONSONG PEAK 373 


way could be forced down, but that it would entail hours 
of step-cutting and necessitate fixed ropes for the porters. 

The afternoon was drawing on, and the declining sun 
had lost its white heat and was slowly sinking, a red-hot 
ball, into the black abysses of night, as we descended to 
camp. The day had fulfilled its early promise. If only 
the good weather would hold. 

As I gulped my plateful of soup I peered out between the 
flaps of my tent on the beauties of a mountain sunset. 
Below in the Lhonak Valley a cold broth of mist was 
brewing. The glaciers and slopes up which we had passed 
had been won over to the advancing hordes of night, but 
above, the beautiful Lhonak Peak stood out like a glowing 
beacon, as though warning the fatigued and retreating 
hosts of day of their impending dissolution. Much later, 
when night had triumphed, and all the peaks about us had 
pinned its dark cockade on their crests, Everest and Makalu, 
like two great citadels, stood between night and the fleeing 
remnants of day. But, finally, they too were lost, and 
night’s hosts bivouacked on the ground they had won 
round a million starry fires. 

But night had allied itself to our old and capricious 
enemy, the wind. Impetuously, savagely, it smote our 
tents, and several times I awoke to listen to its futile 
snarlings and worryings. 

On our last ascent, the wind had had the decency to 
drop by 9 a.m., but on this occasion it evidently considered 
that such perfunctory politeness was no longer needed, and 
instead of dropping, it became if anything more violent, 
and joyfully seizing up the loose snow, hurled it with 
shrewd aim at the camp. 


374 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Eventually, we decided to make a start. I was first 
away, with the idea I must confess of finding a spot sheltered 
from the wind on one of the rocky outcrops projecting 
from the ice slope and lazing away an hour or so. But 
as I struggled against the buffeting onrushes of bitter 
wind across the roof-like slope, it seemed to me that I 
should have been wiser to have remained in my sleeping 
bag until the last moment. Descending, where Kurz had 
descended the previous day, I found what I was looking 
for, a little rock pinnacle with a sunny sheltered alcove 
on the leeward side, the floor of which was paved by 
a granite slab obviously intended for a lazy mountaineer. 
There I sat, smoking cigarette after cigarette. The wind 
moaned and sobbed above the pinnacle, but I listened to 
it with the complacent assurance of one immune from its 
scoldings. The sun was warm, and I leant languidly back. 
The mountain world floated unsubstantially between half 
closed eyelids ; the smoke spiral of my cigarette ascended 
gently, until caught by the wind it was whirled into 
nothingness ; the peace that is engendered by an ordered 
digestion and a warm body stole upon me... . 

I glanced at my watch. Something must have gone 
wrong with the mainspring. Two hours had passed in a 
few minutes. Where were the others ? They, too, seemed to 
have preferred to shelter from the wind, and were probably 
still in their sleeping bags. More anxious thoughts supe! 
vened. In the wind the roof-like slope would be no joke 
for laden porters ; a slip there . . . I hurried back. 

My anxieties were relieved as I turned the corner. No 
one appeared to have left the camp. The situation wa 
explained when I reached the camp. The long march on the 


THE JONSONG PEAK 375 


previous day plus the wind had been too much for the 
porters, and they had refused to start. 

The camp was in a peculiarly shelterless position, and 
even though a day’s climbing was lost we could, at least, 
find a better place for it. Between us and our old camping 
site on the ridge was the trough mentioned in the last 
chapter. Although formed by a choked crevasse, the snow 
was good and solid for the most part, and within an hour 
after my return we had broken camp and remade it there. 
At all events, there would have been little object in taking 
on the porters that day, for their presence during the cut- 
ting of steps down the ice slopes to the glacier would have 
been more dangerous than useful. Professor Dyhrenfurth 
and Wieland decided to spend the remainder of the day 
cutting some of these steps; Kurz and I, meanwhile, 
dug ourselves in, and built a wall of snow blocks as some 
protection for the tents against the onslaught of the wind. 
I felt proud of the work of Nemu and myself, a horse-shoe 
shaped wall higher than the top of my tent, and I had just 
stepped back with a sigh of contentment to admire it when 
I went up to my knees in a crevasse. It was not a particu- 
larly dangerous crevasse, but it was unpleasantly near to 
the door of my tent. Stepping out of one’s tent door into a 
crevasse would be tantamount to stepping out of the door 
of one of those economically constructed seaside lodging- 
houses where the unsuspecting visitor steps out of his bed- 
room, not on to a landing, but straight down the stairs. 

The evening meal had been cooked when Professor 
Dyhrenfurth and Wieland returned. They had done capital 
work, having cut steps about half-way down the slopes to 
the glacier. 


376 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The building of a snow wall was a cunning move, for 
shortly after it was completed the wind dropped, a phe- 
nomenon which reminded me of what promised to be a wet 
fortnight in the Isle of Skye, but which, after only two days 
of rain, had been changed to a dry fortnight by the zeal 
of two meteorologists, who planted a number of rain 
gauges round the district. 

The atmosphere, if chilly, was calm when we left the next 
morning. Our camp had been a cold one, and we had 
started for once unwarmed by the sun, but that kindly orb 
made full amends for its tardiness on the slopes to the 
glacier. Indeed, it glared upon us so furiously that we felt 
our now leather-like face covering (it is scarcely correct to 
call it skin) regaining that unpleasant drum-like tightness 
which we knew only too well preceded the disruption of our 
countenances. 

Professor Dyhrenfurth and Wieland had worked out a 
good route down to the glacier, and a straightforward bout 
of step-cutting was all that remained to be done. They had 
descended the same route as Kurz and I for some distance, 
then leaving it, cut downwards and across to a rib of rocks ; 
descending these as far as practicable, they had started to 
cut across steep and very hard ice towards a point where the 
bergschrund looked feasible. Wieland described the ice as 
being exceptionally tough and hard, a description that I 
was able to endorse as, held on the rope from the rock rib, 
I started on the task of continuing the staircase. 

Whether a man is acclimatised to altitude or not, cut 
ting in hard ice at nearly 22,000 feet will always be 
something more than a strenuous exercise. A minute OF 
two’s hard work, a few dozen blows, and the wind is non est. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 377 


Altitude has, metaphorically speaking, given you astraight 
left in the solar plexus, and you double up gasping for life- 
giving oxygen. Don’t gasp shallowly, but deeply, using 
your will-power to force the air into the lungs. In the Alps 
the respiratory organs function automatically, but in the 
Himalayas they have to be forced to work if they are to 
give of their best, and the same applies to other parts of the 
body. It is not a brainless machine, however efficient at a 
low level, that will get to the highest summits of the Hima- 
layas, but a machine ordered and directed by will-power, 
and not least, that other something we call the spirit. 

The axe hit the ice with a dull thud. Several blows were 
often necessary to dislodge a chip or flake. A step meant 
several dozen blows. A few steps, it was enough. I retired 
and Wieland took my place. Both of us could, of course, 
have gone on for a long time with intervals of rest, but it 
was much quicker to take turns, even though it meant re- 
treating each time back along the line of steps to the 
rocks. 

For twenty yards the ice was tough and transparent. 
Frequently, the pick stuck in it as it might hard glue, and 
had to be wriggled and coaxed out. Gradually it became 
more flaky, and easier to cut into. At last came hard 
snow with a soft ice under-stratum, in which it was safest 
to cut a step, for the sun would soften the snow by mid- 
day. We unroped, and while Wieland and Kurz proceeded 
to enlarge the steps, drive in pitons, and fix ropes I con- 
tinued to descend alone in order to discover the easiest 
way over the bergschrund. 

The slope here was in excellent condition, and a couple 
of good kicks sufficed to make a secure step. In a quarter of 


378 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


an hour or so I had reached the bergschrund. At this point 
it was perfectly feasible for roped men, but if possible, I 
wanted to find a place where it could be crossed safely by 
an unroped man, or two men on one rope, in case we had 
to send porters back. I accordingly traversed to the left to 
a point where the moat seemed to be well bridged by a 
thick tongue of snow. The upper lip of the bergschrund 
was steep and icy, and I cut two or three large steps in it. 
Standing on these, I probed the snow tongue with my axe— 
it seemed safe enough. With the axe pick driven well in, 
I stepped down cautiously, holding on to the shaft with 
my left hand. It was fortunate I did so, for with startling 
suddenness my feet went through the snow tongue into 
nothingness. My whole weight came on my left arm and 
ice-axe, and for an instant I swung free across the upper 
lip of the bergschrund. The next moment I pulled myself 
back into safety. The wrench upon my left arm and wrist 
had been considerable, and the twisting effect on the wrist 
as I oscillated for a moment on the lip had sprained the 
latter. It was not a bad sprain, but one that reminded me 
many times during the next week of a nasty moment. 

A yard or two to the right the bergschrund, although 
insecurely bridged, was so narrow that it was possible to 
jump it, and a few instants later I was gaily glissading down 
the snow slopes below it to the level floor of the glacier. 
There I sat down in the sun and watched Kurz and Wie- 
land, followed by Professor Dyhrenfurth and the porters, 
enlarging the ice steps and fixing ropes. They came straight 
down, and crossed the snow bridge at which I had first 
looked, which proved, despite its appearance, to be per 
fectly safe. Helped by fixed ropes as well as good steps, the 





THE ICE SLOPE ON THE JONSONG PEAK 


THE JONSONG PEAK 379 


porters soon descended, and the whole party forgathered 
on the glacier for lunch. 

So far, so good. Everything, excluding my sprained wrist, 
had gone splendidly, but the ice slopes had taken us a long 
time to descend, and evening was drawing on apace as we 
trudged up the glacier. We had hoped to make our camp on 
the glacier at its head, on or below the broad col in the 
North-west Ridge, but our old enemy, the wind, thought 
otherwise, and as the day declined, so did it, like an habitué 
of a night club, gird up its loins and prepare to spend a 
night of revelry and devilry. But we were now used to its 
little tantrums, and its blasts elicited nothing more than a 
conventional curse or two as we approached the col, 
although, for comfort and warmth’s sake, it was essential to 
find some place more or less sheltered from its venomous 
gusts. 

The crest of the col was defended by two or three 
crevasses, over which the wind had laid a thin covering of 
pie-crust-like snow as innocent looking as the sands of Mar- 
gate, but as treacherous as an elephant trap. Circumventing 
this, we reached the crest of the col and looked down the 
great ice face above Camp One. Just beneath us, and 
to the right, a little shelf ran along under an ice bulwark, 
below which the ice slopes dropped with appalling steep- 
hess for thousands of feet. It was the only break, and the 
only possible site for a camp where we might reasonably 
expect some shelter from the wind. We descended to it 
without difficulty, a shovel was produced, and we started 
to dig out platforms for our tents in a sloping snow-drift, 
as near to the protecting ice bulwark as possible. 

If we thought to find shelter here from the wind, we had 


380 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


made a sad mistake, for our relentless opponent poured 
over the col and descended upon us with a merciless joie de 
vivre. There is something almost human in the way it seeks 
out every niche and cranny in these Himalayan mountain- 
sides. 

By the time the tents were pitched and the pegs driven 
firmly and deeply into the snow in expectation of a wild 
night, the sun was setting. It was invisible to us from our 
chilly shelf, but its rays lit the snow eddies as they were 
blown furiously over the ridge above us, until they 
resembled gossamer-like scarves of spun gold trailed 
negligently from the white shoulders of the snow maidens. 

Wieland and I shared a tent, and after a chilly supper, 
Wieland, with characteristic enthusiasm, proceeded to 
indulge in what at first appeared to be some strange and 
mystic ceremony, but which he condescended to inform me 
is known as “ Determination of Height by means of a 
Boiling-Point Thermometer.” For some reason this 
necessitated the use of alcohol, but it seemed to me that 
this alcohol could be more beneficially employed elsewhere. 
But Science must be served, even at the expense of numbed 
fingers in a small tent which the wind is doing its best to 
carry away. Perhaps I should not speak so lightly of sacred 
things, but I must confess that at the time I was concerned 
not with the determination of height to three places of 
decimals, but to having a good night’s rest preparatory toa 
strenuous day. However, to cheer Wieland, I gave a short 
recital on my mouth organ. Beneath the insidious influence 
of “ She’s got Hot Lips,” the water boiled in great style 


1The height determined was 6,620 metres=21,720 feet, 2,624 feet below the 
summit of the Jonsong Peak. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 381 


round the thermometer, and the mercury rose to prodigious 
heights. Both performances ended in rum, and a sleep such 
as only rum can induce. 

The wind was still blowing when we awoke next morning. 
My companions were pessimistic, but on the strength of 
our experiences on the first ascent, I ventured to indulge in 
a little optimism, and even went so far as to declare that it 
would drop by g a.m. The wind, however, objected to 
having its fortune foretold in this way, and instead of 
completely dropping, as it fully intended to do, it com- 
promised with its dignity by only moderating. 

Our start was a chilly one. We took with us our 
servants Lewa, Tsinabo, and Nemu: the name of Wieland’s 
servant I do not remember. 

Just before leaving the camp one or two of the party took 
a cocktail of oxygen to wet their appetite for the thin air 
of 24,000 feet. Personally, I refused this extraneous aid, as 
I wanted to convince myself that I was capable, not only of 
getting to the top of the Jonsong Peak on my own lungs, but 
of going higher. 

The camp was reasonably sheltered, and the morning 
sun shone brilliantly over a cloudy carpet that covered all 
but the highest peaks in the east, but on the col above we 
met the full force of the wind, which seemed to cut into our 
flesh like a knife in spite of every stitch of spare clothing. 

On the first ascent, the little couloir leading up into the 
rocks had contained good snow, into which steps could be 
easily kicked, but since then the wind had done its worst 
and had blown its surface hard and icy and steps were 
necessary. I led, deriving some measure of warmth by 
slashing out steps as quickly as the altitude would permit. 


382 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


We might have saved ourselves twenty minutes’ work by 
wearing crampons, but on such a cold morning they would 
probably have numbed the feet, and circulation once lost 
is hard to regain over 22,000 feet. 

Arriving on the rock ledge where Hoerlin and Schneider 
had dumped their kit, we started to climb up the rocks of 
the face towards the ridge. They were easy enough rocks, 
yet a slip would have been hard to stop. They reminded me 
strongly of the photograph taken by Mr. Somervell of 
Colonel Norton at 28,000 feet on Everest. There, as here, 
were the same tile-like slabs of limestone, as dark and for- 
bidding as the rock of the Coolin Hills in Skye. Only here 
the angle was steeper than on Everest, and powdery snow 
burdened every ledge, sometimes concealing a glaze of ice. 

The wind was something more than unpleasant ; it 
roared across the gaunt slabs, licking up the powdery snow, 
and beating us with its stinging particles. Sometimes 
advance was impossible, and we crouched in close to the 
rocks, with bowed heads and turning our backs to its fury. 
Nevertheless, we made good progress, although we knew 
that should the wind increase as we gained height, we 
would not be likely to reach the summit. The porters did 
not like it. At the best of times they hate wind, and no 
weapon that a Himalayan peak can produce demoralises 
them to a greater extent. Soon I noticed that Nemu was 
going badly. He was finding it hard to keep up with Kur 
and myself, and was gradually dropping farther and farther 
behind. Obviously he was tired, and no wonder considering 
the work he had done on the expedition, especially since 
we had left our last Base Camp. In returning with me, 
instead of descending with the other porters of the first party 








WIND ! PORTERS DESCENDING THE JONSONG PEAK 


THE JONSONG PEAK 383 


to the Base Camp for a rest, he had shown of what stuff 
he was made. He was not one to spare himself, and he 
would, I knew, go on until he dropped if by so doing he 
could serve his master. I waited on the ledge until he had 
joined me, then, taking the rucksack he was carrying, which 
contained food, photographic apparatus, spare gloves, etc., 
I bade him go back. At first he pretended not to under- 
stand. I shouted at him again above the roaring wind 
that he must do so, and pointed downwards towards the 
camp. And Nemu went, after one reproachful look, like a 
faithful hound that has been ordered home for he knows 
not why. I felt really sorry for him, but the Jonsong Peak 
is no mountain for a tired or exhausted man. 

We had expected to find the wind worse on the ridge 
itself, but strangely enough, it was not nearly so strong. We 
could still see it sweeping the slopes below, driving the 
snow before it like sand. We seemed to have stepped from 
an area of storm into an area of comparative calm. In 
fact, once the ridge had been reached, there was no longer 
any doubt as to our gaining the summit so far as the 
weather was concerned. 

For some distance the ridge formed a sharp snow edge, 
but Kurz and Tsinabo, who were first, had stamped an 
excellent trail. Above the snow, the ridge rose steeply for 
two or three hundred feet, forcing us out on to the western 
face. Never have I seen more rotten rocks. This part of the 
Peak is nothing more than a festering sore of shale and 
limestone. There was scarcely a firm hold. The safest 
method of climbing such rock is to have always three 
points of attachment. This means that the climber should 
never trust to one hold only, but distribute his weight 


384 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


between at least three hand-holds and foot-holds. This may 
sound simple in theory, but it is not so simple in practice, 
Many accidents have resulted from yielding to the tempta- 
tion to rely on one seemingly good hold. 

For two hundred feet the climbing was steep, and the 
inadvisability of not using a rope might have been argued. 
But I think that the rope would have been more dangerous 
than useful, and Kurz had evidently assured himself that 
Tsinabo was sufficiently expert at rock climbing to climb 
without its aid. Tsinabo was certainly climbing in splendid 
style, and seemed to enjoy the work for its own sake. Both 
he and Lewa are excellent rock climbers, and with their 
wonderful strength and agility would probably be capable 
of leading the most difficult rock climbs in the Alps. 

Once or twice I glanced down the great mountainside. 
It was still in shadow, and looked terribly forbidding, its 
brutal black-jawed crags at savage variance with the 
peaceful serenity of the sunlit snow-fields. The peaks that 
had recently dominated our outlook had sunk beneath us. 
Even the Lhonak Peak looked formless and insignificant, 
and our gaze passed over the Dodang Nyima Range 
into the brown fastnesses of Thibet. 

The steep rocks eased off. We found ourselves on a slope 
of slabs similar to those below. We were now definitely 
feeling the altitude. Each upward step was an increasing 
effort. I felt strongly tempted to leave what now seemed 
an abominably heavy rucksack, but which only weighed 
about ten pounds, and climb to the top without it. Photo- 
graphic scruples came to the rescue. Had I not taken the 
expedition boots to the summit of the Ramthang Peak? 
And these with crampons had weighed nearly halfas much 


THE JONSONG PEAK 385 


again as my present rucksack. Heartened by this re- 
flection, I toiled on. 

The wind had by no means dropped, but it had lost much 
of its former venom, and the sun was shining with great 
power. Climbing at high altitudes is a “ slow motion” of 
climbing at low altitudes. Movement is the same, but it is 
slowed down, and the climber concentrates upon perform- 
ing every action with the minimum of effort. Thus, the man 
who is accustomed to climbing neatly and with a minimum 
expenditure of effort on Alpine peaks will, other things 
being equal, be a better climber at high altitudes than he 
who always relies on brute force rather than skill. 

Major J. B. L. Noel in his book, Through Tibet to 
Everest, wrote : ‘‘ Collect an Olympic team of fine young 
men who represent the manhood of the world, and send 
them equipped with modern scientific appliances and 
devices. Let them not attack or assault Everest, but let 
them walk up the mountain and prove its conquest without 
loss, injury or suffering to themselves. . . . It would be a 
victory for modern man.” These are magnificent senti- 
ments. Unfortunately, however, the Olympic athlete 
without mountaineering experience would be of little 
more use on Everest, or any other of the big peaks in the 
Himalayas, than Falstaff with gout. Mountaineering 
experience, and in this I include development and training 
of mental as well as physical powers, is the first essential. 
How often do young and brilliant batsmen fail when tried 
Out in a Test Match. It is simply lack of experience. The 
skill is there, but the brain is incapable of utilising it 
advantageously. Precisely the same applies to Himalayan 


mountaineering. Everest will be climbed not on a record 
AK 


386 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


of super athletism, but on a record of all-round mountain- 
eering experience coupled to a suitable temperament. 

The slabs petered out into a long slope of scree stretching 
up almost to the summit. Easy technically, it was yet 
trying work, for while the scree would delight the heart of 
a roadmender, or one of those evilly disposed Urban 
District Councils that cover up a perfectly good road with 
small sharp stones, it awakened no such response in our 
hearts, for it rested upon a frozen sub-stratum, and slipped 
back at every step. A few steps, a bout of panting while 
leaning on our ice-axes, then another few steps, was our 
method of progression. 

It is interesting to remember the thoughts that flash 
through the brain at such a time. My first thought was 
what an unutterably weary business it was, how “ fed up” 
I was, and what a fool I was toiling up there, when I 
might have been sitting in the Planters’ Club at Darjeeling, 
admiring the Himalayas through a telescope. I sat down 
for a rest. And as I sat fatigue magically departed, and | 
experienced to the full the joys of my wonderful position. 
But always, at the back of my mind like a cloud, hung the 
thought that I had to go on. I heaved myself to my feet, 
and went on. Two steps, and weariness returned, but thus 
time, I was able to counter it. I remember thinking that if 
would be quite easy if I could discipline my brain to think 
of the same things as when sitting down for a rest, but such 
a task the brain seemed incapable of performing. At i 
esthetic enjoyment had predominated, but it was 1m 
possible to experience esthetic enjoyment when heart 
and lungs were beating like sledge hammers, legs felt 
leaden, and knees ached at every upward step. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 387 


What the brain did was to compromise with the body, 
and compromise so effectively that it made me more than 
half forget that I was toiling up a vile scree slope at a height 
of over 24,000 feet. It brought a power of mental detach- 
ment. Without bidding, a number of trivial thoughts and 
remembrances flashed through my mind. They are not 
worth repeating, even to a psycho-analyst, and not many 
of those are likely to read this book. They were quite 
trivial, quite ordinary, some of them absurd, so that I 
wanted to laugh, and lose the wind I was so carefully 
trying to husband. Then, quite suddenly, the little devils of 
weariness returned with redoubled force. I halted, but 
when I glanced back I was surprised to find how far I had 
climbed from my last halting-place. 

I have mentioned these things because they are of 
interest to all who appreciate the real power of mind over 
body. I think the men who will eventually reach the 
summit of Mount Everest will not be of the type accus- 
tomed to set teeth and “bullock” forwards unthinkingly, 
they will be men capable of detaching their minds from 
the physical work which their bodies are performing. 
Nowhere else is the power of the mind over the body 
demonstrated to a greater extent than at high altitudes. It 
is not sufficient for the mind deliberately to force the body 
into action, it must humour it, even delude it into thinking 
that it is not working so hard as it really is. 

So far I have only mentioned the conscious control of 
mind over body. I have not mentioned the subconscious 
Control, yet that is what really counts, for when all else has 
failed, and the conscious mind and the body are united 


1 2 ° e e . ~ a 29 
IN one desire to quit, it is this subconscious “ something 


388 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


that will drive a worn-out body beyond the ultimate limits 
of endurance. 

The final slope was snow. Below it was a little outcrop 
of rocks on which we rested for a few minutes. Kurz and 
Tsinabo were first away. The summit was not more thana 
hundred feet above the rocks. After the stones, it was a 
relief to kick steps into firm snow. The worst thing about 
the stones was that rhythmical movement was impossible, 
but now, in spite of the height I found myself going much 
more easily than I had lower down. 

The slope steepened into a little lip a few feet high, 
forming the sky-line. Kurz and Tsinabo climbed over it 
and disappeared. There came a thin faint shout. I followed. 
Even in the hard work of those moments there was borne 
upon me an intense feeling of excitement. On the stones 
there had been merely weariness, but now weariness was 
forgotten. I had no longer consciously or subconsciously to 
force myself to go on, I wanted to. To see over that snowy 
lip was my one dominant idea. Something wonderful was 
the other side. As a small boy I had often longed to climb 
a hill behind the house where I lived. I was certain that a 
new and wonderful world lay the other side. One day I did 
climb it, to see—factory chimneys. The feeling now we 
much the same, only I knew that whatever I should see it 
would not be factory chimneys. 

My legs levered me up, my head rose over the lip, my 
eyes peered across a flat tabletop of snow and stones to 
meet vast pillars of cloud, blue depths, silver heights— 
Kangchenjunga and Jannu. The next moment my gloved 
hands were grasping those of Kurz and Tsinabo. The 
ascent of 2,624 feet from the camp had taken a little over 


THE JONSONG PEAK 389 


five hours, an average uphill speed of 500 feet an hour. 
This is fast going, especially taking into account the fact 
that the ascent had been by no means a walk, whilst we 
had been delayed a little by the wind on the lower portion 
of the climb. The wind had now dropped considerably, 
but what there was shortened a stay that will live in my 
memory. 

A savage mountain world surrounded us; our gaze 
passed at a glance over inconceivable distances, resting on 
mountains and glaciers unknown to man, seeking lan- 
guidly the infinitude of vast horizons in a subconscious 
attempt to escape from a nearer and an unvarying world 
of rock, snow, and ice. The atmosphere was wonderfully 
clear. Over the brown Thibetan plateau to the north-east 
rose two huge snowy peaks. Only their snow-covered upper 
parts were visible, their bases were beneath the horizon. 
We were 24,344 feet, the Thibetan plateau is about 
12,000 feet, yet the lower half of these mountains was 
below the horizon. How far were they away, and what was 
their height ? Their distance was so great that the tip of 
the little finger held out at arm’s length would have 
covered them both. 

I have seen Monte Viso from the summit of the Piz 
Bernina, a distance of about 180 miles as the crow flies, and 
these peaks were much farther. In direction, I should place 
them as being approximately in the same line as Lhasa. 
Lhasa is about 220 miles distant from the Jonsong Peak, 
so that it is probable that they were some 50 miles or more 
beyond Lhasa. On the other hand, 150 miles away, and 
slightly to the south of this last line are the peaks of Nang- 
kartse Dz, but I am positive that they cannot have been 


390 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


these. One hundred and fifty miles is no excessive distance 
to see in the clear air of Thibet. If these peaks were actually 
to the north-east of Lhasa, what could they have been? 
The only definite statement I can make is that a consider- 
able portion of their height was concealed by the horizon, 
a horizon consisting not of a high intervening range, but 
of the rolling hills and minor ranges common to this part 
of Thibet. Anyway, I will not commit myself to any positive 
statements as to their distance or height or exact direction, 
for we had no means of determining them. They looked 
immense mountains even at that great distance, and 
dominated everything. 

Westwards, and much nearer, were Everest and Makalu. 
From our lower camps we had seen them between gaps 
in the nearer ridges, and though these latter had not 
detracted from their magnificence, it was not so easy to 
appreciate their sovereignty over all other peaks. Seen 
from the summit of the Jonsong Peak, one realised to the 
full that Everest is indeed the ‘“‘ Goddess Mother of the 
World.” 

The whole country to the south-east was covered by the 
cloudy pall of the monsoon, above which the highest peaks 
stood out like a fairy archipelago. For the first time we saw 
Kangchenjunga without being misled by foreshortening. 
Had Mr. Freshfield seen it from the same vantage point, 
I doubt very much whether he would have held out any 
hopes whatever as to the possibility of climbing it from the 
Nepal side. Of course, looking at this side as we were 
from directly in front of it, we were liable to be deceived 
in the opposite extreme. Edward Whymper never dreamed 
of climbing the Matterhorn by the east face until he had 


THE JONSONG PEAK 391 


seen it in profile, for looked at from Zermatt, or the 
Riffel, it looks fearfully steep. The same applies, no doubt, 
to some extent to our view of Kangchenjunga from the 
Jonsong Peak, yet I am convinced that the impressions 
gained from what we saw were more accurate ones than 
those gained when viewing the mountain from Pangperma 
or the Jonsong Glacier. 

For one thing, the terraces which had appeared flat, or 
gently sloping, were now seen to be set at a much steeper 
angle than we had supposed, whilst in many places they 
consisted, not of snow-covered glacier, but of bare ice. 
Furthermore, we saw the summit pyramid in its true 
proportions. It is not easy to climb, and is likely to prove 
much harder than the final pyramid of Everest. The 
Everest pyramid is about 800 feet high, that of Kangchen- 
junga about 1,500 feet high. It will not be possible for 
climbers, who may one day try to storm it, to keep to the 
crest of the North Ridge above the highest terrace, for 
this rises directly above the terrace in a A-shaped cut-off. 
They will be forced out on to the face on the western side 
of the ridge, where they are likely to experience little 
gullies and chimneys filled with incoherent, powdery snow 
and smooth granite slabs. 

Because we failed, I have no wish to pour cold water on 
the aspirations of others, but let those who attempt the 
same route as the Munich expedition remember that the 
difficulties are not over when the upper and easier portion 
of the ice ridge is reached. Only the hardest of the technical 
difficulties are behind, the real difficulties, altitude, 
Powdery snow, wind, and rocks are to come, and they 
will tax the climber to the uttermost limits of his powers. 


392 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Only with the aid of exceptional and superlative good 
fortune can he hope to conquer them, and Kangchen- 
junga is not a mountain that bestows good fortune on 
those that woo it. 

We could see that the monsoon had already broken on 
Kangchenjunga and the country to the south. Indeed, we 
heard later that during the time that we were attacking 
the Jonsong Peak, rain poured for days on end at Dar- 
jeeling. It was difficult to believe that the sunny billows of 
cloud over which we gazed were in reality rain clouds, 
which were deluging the lower valleys. We were lucky to 
see Kangchenjunga, for it was smothered in new snow, 
and it was evident that the monsoon had already wreaked 
some of its fury on the great mountain. Even as we watched, 
we could see battalion after battalion of cloud marching 
up from the south endeavouring to encircle Kangchen- 
junga, and pour up the Jonsong Glacier. And the north 
wind was losing. Sullenly, doggedly, it was fighting a 
rearguard action. In a few days it would have been beaten 
back to its fortress keep, Thibet. There it would hold the 
monsoon, which would beat impotently on the ranges 
bounding the brown plateaux of that barren land. 

The advancing tide of the monsoon was slowly creeping 
towards us; its streams were pouring up the Teesta 
Valley to the east, and the Arun Valley to the west, slowly 
outflanking the dry corners of North-east Nepal and 
North-west Sikkim. One could say definitely that two oF 
three days’ marching down the Lhonak Valley would 
bring one into the monsoon area. It was an interesting 
spectacle, and one which meteorologists would have given 
much to see. 


THE JONSONG PEAK 393 


Here and there above the cloudy carpet to the south, 
huge columns and towers of cumuli-nimbus projected 
far into the clear blue sky like scattered trees rising from a 
vast snow-covered prairie. One or two of them were drawn 
out at their crests like anvils by upper air currents, a 
typical thunder formation, Occasionally, bits would 
become detached, and swim placidly up into the blue 
heaven like Zeppelins. The mountaineer who sees these 
long fish-bellied, smooth-looking clouds in the Alps, 
knows that almost invariably they precede bad weather. 
Here they preceded more than a mere storm, they were the 
forerunner of the south-west monsoon, the rains of which 
bring life to the sun-scorched plains of India. 

To the cartoonist, who is frequently led by some strange 
reasoning process to associate mountain tops with politics, 
there is only one type of mountain top. It is shaped like a 
dunce’s hat, and its summit is a mathematical point, on 
which is seated, a trifle uncomfortably, a mountaineer, 
who usually takes the form of some striped-trousered poli- 
tician, yodelling blithely some political profundity or 
sentiment. If there are other, and more fearful mountain 
tops, they are assuredly those that emanate from the fertile 
brain of Mr. Heath Robinson. His are too sharp even to 
sit upon, and are usually tenanted by a stout gentleman 
with a silk hat and spats, who, balancing upon one leg, 
Operates some fearful and wonderful magnetic mechanism 
which draws more stout gentlemen to the top. Exactly how 
they are to crowd together on the top is never explained. 

There was nothing so thrilling about the summit of the 
Jonsong Peak. It was, in fact, tame and dull, consisting as 
it did of a long drift of snow and a bed of loose stones. 


3904 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The stones were all of the same size and were evidently in- 
tended as a reserve dump for the Borough Engineer, whose 
job it is to repair the ravages of climbing parties on the 
scree slopes below. We were even able to promenade up 
and down, while indulging in that vigorous arm exercise 
practised by the drivers of taxi-cabs. In this way we pre- 
served some semblance of warmth in face of the wind, 
which cut across the summit, jabbing us cruelly with its 
icy stilettos. But even arm exercises and promenading can- 
not be carried out as vigorously at 24,000 feet as at sea 
level, and soon we decided that we had had enough, and 
after taking a number of photographs, and swinging our 
vision along that marvellous panorama in a vain attempt 
to capture some of its beauties, we turned to go. 

What a difference there is in the Himalayas between 
ascending and descending. On the ascent, the last little bit 
above the rocky outcrop had seemed by no means incon- 
siderable. Now, we strode down it like giants. How weary- 
ing the slope of scree had been to ascend, how ridiculously 
easy to descend. The mountains that had sunk below the 
horizon seemed almost to shoot up at us as we rattled 
down. 

In a minute or two we were off the scree, and scrambling 
down the slopes. There we met Professor Dyhrenfurth and 
Lewa. We had taken only a few minutes from the top, it 
would take them over another hour at least to get there, 
and perhaps longer, for as I shouted a greeting, I perceived 
at the same instant that Professor Dyhrenfurth was wearing 
the expedition boots. In what spirit of selflessness had he 
done this ? Was it in the same spirit that a scientifically 
minded friend of mine once declared that it was easier to 


THE JONSONG PEAK 395 


climb a mountain with the climbing boots carried in the 
rucksack than on the feet? He urged me to ascend the pre- 
cipitous slopes of Box Hill in this manner, first with boots, 
then without boots altogether, and then carrying the boots 
in the rucksack, while he timed my efforts with a stop-watch. 
In view of the broken bottles distributed there every week- 
end by motorists, I am happy to say that for some reason 
this experiment never materialised. Perhaps, therefore, it 
was something of the same spirit of scientific enquiry 
which led Professor Dyhrenfurth to don the expedition 
boots. Knowing that they weighed eight and a half pounds, 
and that they had to be carried through a height of 2,624 
feet, should provide a basis for a pretty calculation in 
horse-power and foot-pounds. 

I discovered what I had been looking for, a sheltered 
place out of the wind, where I could enjoy the view to the 
full. It was only 300 or 400 feet beneath the summit, and 
the panorama extended from Everest to Chomolhari, 
23,930 feet, the holy peak of Eastern Thibet. On the sum- 
mit esthetic appreciation of the view had been numbed 
by the wind, now I could even take off my boots, and toast 
chilled feet in the sun. As I laid my boots carefully on a 
rock beside me, I could not help shuddering at the thought 
of accidentally knocking them down the mountainside. 
Once I had been with a friend on a long walk in the 
country. It was a hot day, and we had sat down on a river 
bank to dip our feet into the cold waters of a mountain 
torrent. We were many miles from the nearest village, and 
my friend remarked on the fact, and said what a terrible 
thing it would be to lose a boot. He had hardly said so when 
one of his boots was snatched, as if by magic, from his hand 


396 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


and dropped into the mountain torrent. He never saw it 
again, Fortunately, however, we were able to discover 
lying under a hedge an aged and enormous boot which had 
apparently been discarded, after many years’ wear, by a 
fastidious tramp. I have not forgotten my friend’s remarks 
on his return to civilisation, or the size of his blisters when 
at length he did get there. To lose a boot on a Himalayan 
peak would be a much more serious business, and the man 
who did so would stand a good chance of losing his foot 
from frostbite, if he got down at all. I put my boots on 
very, very carefully. 

From my vantage point I looked down to the long, un- 
known glacier which flows in a north-westerly direction 
from the Jonsong Peak. It is at least 15 miles long, but 
even from this height, it was not possible to tell which 
river received its waters. In this corner of the Hima- 
layas there are many peaks accessible to ordinary moun- 
taineering parties, and it is certain that a party making 
the Lhonak Valley its headquarters could scale a dozen or 
more fine peaks in the course of a comparatively short 
holiday. Naturally, ambitious minded man is more anxious 
to climb the greater peaks of the Himalayas, but one cannot 
help thinking that he is beginning at the wrong end, and 
that by neglecting the many fine mountains of 20,000 to 
23,000 feet, he is denying himself the real pleasures of 
mountaineering. For instance, north-westwards of the 
Lhonak Peak there are a number of fine snow mountains, 
all of which can be climbed, whilst in the north-east 
corner of Nepal itself are dozens upon dozens of accessible 
mountains. 

Kurz had gone on down, but presently I was joined by 





UNEXPLORED COUNTRY TO NORTH-WEST OF JONSONG PEAK. A VIEW 
FROM THE SUMMIT 


THE JONSONG PEAK 397 


Wieland, whose servant had deserted him at about the 
same place from which Nemu had returned. Together we 
continued the descent, rattling down the rocks at an almost 
Alpine rate. With the approach of evening the wind began 
to rise once more, and by the time we had reached the 
lower slopes it was snarling at us with ever increasing 
ferocity. But, as we glissaded down the couloir and trod 
once more the friendly glacier, we could forgive it its spite- 
fulness, for taking all in all, it had been a wonderful day 
and the fates had been kind to us. 

We stood for a few moments on the col above the 
camp, bathed in the radiance of the reddening sun. Its 
gleams lit the steel heads of our trusty ice-axes, and our 
shadows were thrown blue and spider-like across the wind- 
rippled snow. Our eyes sought the long ridge we had de- 
scended for Professor Dyhrenfurth and Lewa. There was 
no sign of them ; obviously they would be late, but should 
they be benighted, the moon would aid them on their 
descent. 

Darkness fell ; the wind steadily increased as we lay in 
our sleeping bags. Driven snow lashed the tent Wieland and 
I were sharing. At 8 p.m., there was still no sign of Professor 
Dyhrenfurth. We looked outside : the air was full of snowy 
spindrift. Above the camp the wind was roaring over the 
col in a deep symposium of sound, like the bass note of a 
huge organ. Our anxiety increased. Ought we to get to- 
gether a rescue party ? Even supposing we did, what could 
we do on such a night ? It was nearly nine o’clock when we 
heard a whistle. An ice-sheeted figure sank down in the 
snow outside—Professor Dyhrenfurth. 

He was very tired, and no wonder, for not content with 


398 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


having climbed the highest summit of the Jonsong Peak, 
his geological enthusiasm had caused him to traverse the 
ridge to the lower summit. He told us that the descent had 
been a terrible one. He had expected moonlight, but the 
moon had not risen sufficiently high to light the western 
face of the ridge. The wind had harried them continuously, 
and in the driving clouds of snow raised by it, the way had 
been hard to find. Lewa had done simply magnificently. 

It had been a great effort for a man of forty-four years of 
age, especially in view of having climbed in the expedition 
boots. The boots had triumphantly vindicated themselves 
on the descent, for in spite of the wind and the cold, 
Professor Dyhrenfurth did not have frostbite. On the 
other hand, Lewa was wearing only ordinary boots, and 
he also had no frostbite. It is perhaps doubtful whether 
the party would have been benighted had Professor 
Dyhrenfurth not worn the expedition boots. 

The wind had done its worst, and we awoke to a morning 
of perfect calm. Leisurely we prepared for the descent, 
basking in the sunlight the while. We left at 9 a.m. and 
strolled down the glacier. If only we had known that the 
weather would hold like this, we should have postponed 
the climb, for no snowstreamers were being drawn from the 
mountain tops, and the Jonsong Peak rose calm and un- 
troubled into the blue. 

Up the ice slope we went, releasing the fixed ropes as we 
did so, and down the other side to our former camp. There 
we were greeted by Lobsang and several tins of Christmas 
pudding. Personally, I found the presence of the former 
more acceptable than the latter, for if there is one thing 
more calculated to disarrange the digestion at a high 


THE JONSONG PEAK 399 


altitude, it is tinned Christmas pudding. So far as I re- 
member there was only one member of the expedition 
who ever seemed to appreciate it, and that was 
Schneider, but even he used to find it necessary to help it 
down with salad dressing and Worcester sauce. 

Had the weather turned bad, the advent of Lobsang 
and his men with the Christmas puddings might have 
enabled us to have stuck it out, but I shudder to think of 
what life without exercise in a small tent would have been 
like on a diet of Christmas puddings. Full of Christmas 
pudding I glissaded with great velocity down the snow 
slopes. 

The day ended in a struggle and a wade through the 
inevitable glacier morass which, despite the passage of 
many porters and the ploughing out of a deep track, 
seemed to be worse than ever. After camping on snow 
for four nights it was pleasant to get back on to the stony 
ridge where Camp One was pitched. Seated on a granite 
slab, I watched the last of the porters swinging down the 
snow slopes. The sun was setting in a transparent bank of 
mist, and its rays lighted the ice crust already formed by 
Jack Frost until the snow gleamed like beaten silver. 

Slowly the last man came trudging in with his heavy 
load, yet as he sank gratefully on to his haunches, and 
slipped out of his head-band, that cheery grin that knows 
no tiredness broke over his countenance. As he passed one 
Tagged sleeve over his sweat-bedewed brow, his eyes swept 
upwards to the Jonsong Peak, and the grin was replaced 
almost by a look of awe. Was it possible that he had been 
up there near that great summit, glowing in the declining 
‘un with the sahibs, so near to the gods ? 


400 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


The following morning we packed up. After leaving two 
cairns that the porters had built ornamented with prayer 
flags, and a number of empty oxygen cylinders, we set off 
for the Base Camp. With the arrival of all the loads over 
the Jonsong La the Base Camp had been shifted to the end 
of the Lhonak Glacier. It was better, therefore, to descend 
to the northern branch of the glacier instead of the southern 
up which we had approached Camp One. Easy snow slopes 
led us to the crest of a steep declivity some three hundred 
feet high, consisting of ice overlaid with soft snow. Had it 
been a little longer it would have been dangerous from 
avalanches. As it was, those detached by glissading porters 
were not large enough to harm anyone. 

Nemu was the last down. Not for him the wild glissade, 
with load bumping one way and its owner the other. He 
followed Wieland, who thoughtfully cut steps for such 
porters who had to descend carefully on account of fragile 
loads. It was not until nearly half way down that he per- 
mitted himself to slide, using my tin box as a toboggan, 
descending with dignity and decorum. 

Below these slopes were rocks, between which meandered 
a little rivulet fringed with flowers and mosses. They were 
the first flowers I had seen since I had left the Base Camp, 
and I greeted them gratefully. What would mountains oF 
mountaineering be without its contrasts between the little 
things and the great things? These flowers were as 1m- 
portant to me as the Jonsong Peak, and perhaps even 
greater, for they were synonymous with the small and 
homely things of life, and these are the things which the 
mountaineer turns to with rejoicing and gratitude. Only 
by knowing the ugly can we adore the beautiful, and only 


THE LAST PORTER RETURNS TO CAMP ON THE JONSONG PEAK 





THE JONSONG PEAK 401 


by seeing the small can we appreciate the great. I remained 
behind to sit down and dream for a few moments among 
the flowers. 

We followed the side moraine of the glacier. Lower down 
we encountered some of the most lovely ice scenery upon 
which I have ever gazed. There was a little glacier lake 
bounded on three sides by walls of ice. Sun, evaporation 
and melting had sculptured these walls into fantastic forms. 
There was the Gothic, with its flying buttresses and daring 
minarets, the Roman, with its superb solidity, and not 
least, the Victorian, for many of the pillars ornamenting 
these walls bore a striking resemblance to those that flank 
the doorways of the more respectable houses in Kensington. 
In fact had M. Karel Capek seen one stretch of this ice 
wall he would most likely have compared it to the frozen 
respectability of Westbourne Grove. 

Apart from these things, there was in one corner a fine 
organ of ice with keyboard and pipes complete, and even 
as we passed there seemed to come from it a deeply resonant 
note—no doubt due to the movement of the glacier. 

After this the way became duller. The glacier was 
moraine covered, and included among the moraines were 
Many stones of singular beauty, mostly from the reddish- 
veined limestone of the Dodang Nyima range. I appro- 
priated several as paper weights. 

Traversing the junction of the east and west branches of 
the glacier was a tiresome business. Up and down we went 
over enormous moraine mounds, and soon any joy we 
might have had at descending to the Base Camp had 
completely disappeared. The trudge became weary and 


ype eB although brightened once or twice by little 
K 


402 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


clusters of Eidelweiss. We passed the pinnacled portion of 
the glacier, where I noticed that the beak-like structure 
which I had seen from Camp One was still preserved. 

Near the snout of the glacier Professor Dyhrenfurth and 
I left the main party in order to have a look at the curious 
earth pyramids which we had previously noted. They are 
indeed weird structures, and appeared so unstable that we 
did not linger beneath them longer than was necessary. 
This peregrination brought us opposite to the Base Camp, 
but on the wrong side of the glacier torrent. Fortunately, 
the latter here divides into a number of smaller streams. 
We waded across these, but the last stream, a deep and 
swift-torrent, daunted us. We shouted lustily. Our shouts 
were heard, and grinning porters soon arrived to carry us 
pick-a-back across. Not the least humorous spectacle of 
the expedition was the arrival of the leader at the Base 
Camp, clad in his pants. 

Wood Johnson was much better, and that night, before 
turning in, he and I strolled away from the camp. The 
soft turf muffled our tread. How pleasant it was to feel 
it again and scent its elusive fragrance. The moon was 
rising. Her soft rays illuminated the great terminal moraine 
of the Lhonak Glacier and the weird earth pinnacles. 
Almost, we fancied ourselves looking up at a titanic cinder 
heap, ejected from some mountain hell. 

Up and down we walked, yarning over the events of the 
past fortnight, and when at last we turned in the moon 
rode high in the heavens and the great peaks around stood 
radiant against the stars. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 


We had arrived back at the Base Camp on June to. 
The following day was necessarily a rest day, and we 
devoted it to lounging about the camp, writing letters to 
home, or making desperate endeavours to fill in many 
blank pages of our diaries. 

For some time I dutifully hammered away at a dispatch 
on the portable typewriter, but soon I gave even that up, 
and sitting in the sun on the warm springy turf allowed 
my mind to wander back over the events of the past 
fortnight. From May 29 to June 12 there had been for me 
only one rest day, and that was on June 1 when we had 
lain in our tents unable to move owing to a snowstorm. 
Kangchenjunga had been too nerve-wracking for enjoy- 
ment, but though we had had some tough and trying times 
on the Jonsong Peak we had enjoyed them, too ; we had 
not been merely avalanche fodder, we had climbed free 
from nerve-strain and anxiety, and life had been very good. 
Staying on in the Lhonak Valley as Professor Dyhrenfurth 
wanted to do might result in some useful exploration and 
geological work, but to me at least the thought of a hot bath 
submerged every other consideration. I looked at my 
hands ; they were brown and wrinkled with the sun and 
wind, the hands of an old man. My fingers explored my 
face, pulling on the red beard sprouting therefrom with a 


feeling, not of pride at its luxuriant growth, but of loathing. 
493 


404 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Hoerlin had been the only one to escape a beard, and had 
been known as Pallas (Pallas Athene). Dr. Richter had 
weighed us that morning. The work of the past twelve weeks 
had told, and we had all lost a stone or more each, Professor 
Dyhrenfurth as much as twenty-two pounds. 


TB Best e 
an AW, Wi . iB | PEAK) 
FYEREST % cantata 

oe mor 24.340.) 


tlle oa 


EE aon ‘Pa 


series ena cat 


pai 


Than 
PV incrent 


eg a vA, ae? 





By courtesy of The Times 


That afternoon Schneider and Hoerlin returned from the 
Dodang Nyima Range. They had added yet another 
success to their splendid climbing achievements by ascend- 
ing the Dodang Peak, 22,700 feet. With characteristic 
modesty they had little to say about it, beyond the fact that 
the climbing had been of a most difficult nature. They had 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 405 


cut steps for many hours in the toughest ice they had ever 
encountered, and the picks of their ice-axes bore striking 
witness to the toughness, for they were bent round out of 
alignment. First of all they had descended to the Choten 
Nyima La, across which runs the Thibetan frontier ; thence 
they had climbed the Dodang Peak. It had cost them nearly 
a day to work through a difficult ice-fall, and on the final 
climb they had only just escaped being benighted, so 
difficult had been the work. 

Wood Johnson, who was much better, was anxious to 
return to his tea estate, as his leave was nearly up. Frau 
Dyhrenfurth, Dr. Richter, Duvanel and myself decided to 
accompany him, leaving the remainder of the party to 
attempt the ascent of the Lhonak Peak, and afterwards 
cross over one of the passes into the Zemu Valley in order 
to view the great eastern precipices of Kangchenjunga and 
the ice ridge attempted by the Munich expedition. 
Whether or not they would be able to do this before the 
arrival of the monsoon was, however, doubtful. It needed 
only a glance down the valley to see the clouds flooding 
steadily up from the Teesta Valley, and it was practically 
certain that the latter part of their programme, at least, 
would be spoilt by the rains, as the Zemu Valley receives 
them earlier than the head of the Lhonak Valley. 

One march from the Base Camp down the Lhonak 
Valley was a yak-grazing ground, and a runner was sent 
down ordering yaks to be sent up for our luggage. Perhaps 
it was memories of Wood Johnson’s adventure with the 
Khunza yak that led Duvanel to object strongly to having 
his exposed films and cinematograph apparatus yak-borne 
down the valley. However, while even a Lhonak yak 


406 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


might have objected to the yakmanship of Wood Johnson, it 
apparently did not mind carrying Duvanel’s films, and the 
matter was thus amicably settled. As a matter of fact, I 
noticed no desire on the part of Wood Johnson to “ yak 
it’? down the valley. 

June 12 was another beautiful day, and Europeans, 
porters and yaks started off in great fettle. Frau Dyhren- 
furth was left behind, typing Professor Dyhrenfurth’s 
letters and articles, and was to follow with her servant later. 

A mile or two down the valley we turned for one last 
look at the beauties we were leaving. The huge snout of the 
Lhonak Glacier was thrust down the valley like some 
tremendous earthwork of the gods. Far above rose the 
Jonsong Peak, serene and peaceful. Had we really stood on 
that remote summit, so far above the world ? Dominating 
the head of the Lhonak Glacier stood the Lhonak Peak, 
rising in perfect symmetry and superb simplicity. North- 
wards, was the brown reef of mountains separating us from 
Thibet. Silently we stood gazing at the Jonsong Peak. It 
had taken and given some hard knocks. We had conquered 
it, but conquered not its spirit, it had merely suffered us. 
The true mountaineer does not regard a vanquished summut 
with contempt, but rather with increased respect. Kang- 
chenjunga is terrible, it is difficult to think of it in any other 
way. It is a giant, with all a giant’s meaningless passions 
and illogical rages. The Jonsong Peak is a more tolerant 
mountain. In stature it cannot rival Kangchenjunga, 
therefore, it is more sober, less blatant. After being cast out 
from the precincts of Kangchenjunga, we had approached 
it with humility, and it had welcomed us. 

One last regretful glance at brown valley, silver peak and 


dWVO A3SVa DNOSNOL AHL LV SUVA 





THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 407 


gentian sky. We turned. Soon a corner had hidden peaks 
and glacier from view. 

For some distance we strolled over turf and over the 
shoulders of rolling hills that put me in mind of the South 
Downs. We were well content with life ; so too were the 
porters. Even the “ Thundering Herd ” of yaks seemed to 
sense the gaiety of the occasion, and increased their normal 
speed of two miles to nearly two and a half miles per hour. 

We were short of coolie food, but word had been sent 
down to Lachen, and we were expecting to meet some loads. 
Unfortunately, they were sent on the other side of the 
glacier torrent, and it was only with considerable difficulty 
that a sack of coolie food was slung across on a rope, for it 
was impossible to ford the torrent. 

We passed the end of the valley leading up towards the 
range running south from the Langpo Peak. Looking up it 
we were rewarded with a fine view of the Tent Peak, with 
a plume of monsoon clouds tearing its summit. 

The grass, at first dry and green, became greener and 
more luscious. Brooks of clear, cool water babbled down the 
hillside to join the turgid mountain torrent that followed 
the valley. Little flowers grew beside them, many of which 
were familiar Alpine friends, and for the first time since 
leaving Kangbachen we came upon dwarf rhododendrons. 
The broad valley narrowed abruptly into a steeper defile. 
Just before it did so there was situated a little group of huts, 
marked on the map as Tancha. 

A stiff wind was blowing down the valley, and we took 
8ood care to pitch our tents to the windward of the filthy 
hovels in which dwelt the yakherds and their families. This 
Portion of the Lhonak Valley reminded me of a valley in 


408 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the Red Coolins of Skye, only here the ground was not bog- 
like, there was no misty drizzle, and neither bannock cakes 
nor whiskey were to be purchased at the yakherds’ huts, 
For the rest there were the same bare slopes, and colourful 
reddish rocks and broken crags, similar to those of the Red 
Coolins. At eventide when the sun gilded the hillcrests, I 
almost felt that I had only to walk to the crest of one of 
them to see the landlocked waters of the sea lochs, and the 
dim, blue isles of the Hebrides. The darkness fell more 
swiftly than it does over the Hebrides. Here was no linger- 
ing twilight, no gradual merging of blue and violet, violet 
and purple, but a sudden and brutal switch over from light 
to darkness. 

We began to feel anxious as to the whereabouts of Frau 
Dyhrenfurth, but presently we espied two figures in the 
gloom, and went out to greet her. She had been kept longer 
than had been anticipated by her typing duties, and it was 
not until long after we had left that she was able to leave 
the Base Camp, together with her servant, a youth of 
sixteen, named Kipa. She had forded the torrent under the 
impression that we had gone down the same route as that 
followed by the men carrying coolie food, and she had had 
to cross back. Kipa, who had carried her, had been nearly 
carried away and drowned by the swiftly running waters. 
As it was she was very wet, and anyone with a less tough 
constitution might well have caught a severe chill. 

My estimate as to the distance from the Base Gamp at 
which we might expect to meet the monsoon rains was not 
far out, for we had not marched more than a mile or so 
down the valley the following morning when we ran into a 
depressing drizzle and damp mists. Wood Johnson revelled 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 409 


in it, for being a North-countryman it naturally reminded 
him of the purlieus of Manchester and Wasdale Head. I 
fear that for my part I found it merely depressing. It soon 
cleared up, however, and as we descended to a flat plain 
marked on the map as Langpo, the sun peered out again. 

We were now on the north bank of the river, having 
forded it with some difficulty below Tancha. We began to 
encounter a number of side streams flowing from the main 
watershed of the Himalayas to the north, along which 
runs the Thibetan frontier. Sometimes, it was no easy 
matter fording these, but the porters were used to such 
work, and carrying us pick-a-back, picked their way sure- 
footedly through the rapids. 

One of these streams, the Chaka Chu, flows down the 
valley at the head of which is the Nakpo La Pass on the 
frontier of Sikkim and Thibet. It is a pass probably not 
often used, but we came across an old man with his son and 
a yak. The yak was laden with an extraordinary variety of 
objects. Had Lewis Carroll seen it he might have mounted 
his White Knight on a yak instead of the more conventional 
war-horse. If the White Knight had been so mounted, he 
would not have needed to fall off, he would have been 
thrown off, and that frequently. 

Tucking up their dirty robes, the old man and his son 
strove to coax the yak across the stream. First of all the son 
pulled on the bridle, while the old man shoved behind ; 
then the old man pulled on the bridle while the son shoved 
behind. These proceedings seemed merely to bore the yak, 
and it turned its brown eyes upon the two in the same 
pitying way that Wood Johnson’s yak had regarded him. 
At last, after many efforts to budge the yak had failed, the 


410 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


old man and his son halted, too exhausted even for pro- 
fanity. As they did so, the yak gave them one contemptuous 
glance, and with stately tread, crossed the stream of its own 
accord. 

A little distance beyond this stream we camped. Though 
our height was only 14,000 feet, wet snow was falling heavily. 
and the climate had degenerated into a rawness similar to 
that of a November day in England. For the first time on 
the expedition we felt really chilly. Up high we had 
experienced occasional numbness and had narrowly es- 
caped frostbite on two or three occasions, but though one 
might numb, one did not shiver. In order to experience a 
really unpleasant form of cold, it is unnecessary to leave 
Great Britain. Towards evening the sun broke through for 
a short time, but the snow instead of evaporating was 
resolved into a wet slush. 

The next morning saw us tramping along a path of 
muddiness reminiscent of a clay valley in Surrey. Wood 
Johnson rejoiced in it, for it reminded him once more of 
Manchester. We were now in a delightful country “ be- 
tween the pinewoods and the snow,” the alps of Kangchen- 
junga. I would that I were a botanist, and it was indeed 
unfortunate one was not included in the party. The whole 
hillside was covered in dwarf rhododendrons in full bloom ; 
there were clumps of gorgeous blue poppies, and every: 
where dwarf pines, to say nothing of many flowering 
mosses and rock flowers, some of which were familiar and 
some were not. 

The valley narrowed almost to a gorge. We ate out 
lunch near some great drifts of avalanche snow. Every- 
thing pointed to the fact that the rainfall and snowfall are 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 411 


far greater in the lower part of the Lhonak Valley than 
in the upper. The snow line was definitely lower, and the 
drifts still left on the hillside suggested a heavy winter 
snowfall. 

As we had only been able to take yaks to our last camping 
place, word had previously been sent to Lachen for local 
coolies to carry our loads. We met some twenty-five of them 
both men and women. They had come up from Lachen the 
same day, and expected to reach our last camping site ere 
nightfall, a prodigious piece of walking. These Lachen 
people are remarkably handsome, with finely chiselled 
features and smooth, clear skins. Like most of the peoples 
who dwell in these upper valleys of Sikkim and Nepal they 
had emigrated from the bleak plateaux of Thibet to the 
more fertile valleys south of the main Himalayan water- 
shed. 

Shortly after passing them, we entered the gorge of the 
Zemu Chu.' We were on the north-eastern bank of the 
stream, and it was essential to cross to the south-west bank 
in order to reach the camping place at Yaktang at the 
junction of the Zemu and Lhonak valleys.*. Former 
travellers have mentioned a huge boulder resting in the 
torrent bed, by utilising which it is possible to cross the 
torrent. This may be possible at normal times, but cer- 
tainly not during the rains. A party of our own men, under 
the charge of Tikeram, who had been sent on ahead some 
days pr eviously, and aided by the Lachen men had, how- 
‘ver, constructed a bridge from pine trunks to which cross 

"Chu equals River. 


i . 
The nomenclature is here somewhat confusing. The Zemu Chu is not the stream 


from the Z : i , 
the Lhon ak Valle but the lower portion of the Lambo Chu which flows down 


412 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


pieces were lashed with yak-hair rope. Though primitive in 
appearance, it was strong enough for its purpose, and well 
worth the fifteen rupees charge for the yak-hair rope by 
the Head Man of Lachen. We crossed it gingerly, one by 
one, for to have fallen into the boiling torrent beneath 
would have meant certain death. 

We were now down to the level of giant rhododendrons 
and coniferous trees. Beyond our home-made bridge the 
way had been prepared and a track hacked through the 
snaky tangle of rhododendrons. Had it not been prepared, 
we could not possibly have got to Yaktang that day. The 
gorge was a wild gloomy place, and its gloominess was 
enhanced by a low roof of cloud. We felt imprisoned. 
I found myself longing for the upland breezy slopes of the 
Lhonak Valley, for there is something terribly depressing 
about these great gorges that carry the melted snow waters 
of the Himalayas to the plains. 

The gorge opened suddenly out, dropping at the same 
time fully 1,000 feet to Yaktang. Down the pitch thus 
formed the swollen torrent of the Zemu Chu roared in a 
tremendous cataract. What a place for a hydro-electric 
station! A million or more horse power which could easily 
be harnessed are going to waste. 

We found ourselves once more in the region of deciduous 
trees, and for the first time since we had left Yoksam 4 
tropical forest enclosed us. Wild strawberries were growing 
everywhere, but they were watery and tasteless. The path 
became muddier and muddier. Wood Johnson and I were 
far ahead of the others, and we hurried on. . 

At the junction of the Zemu and Lhonak valleys there 1s 
a flat open space, where is situated the shepherd’s hut 





A HOMEMADE BRIDGE OVER THE LHONAK RIVER 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 413 


dignified by the title of Yaktang. Here we found the assis- 
tant cook, comfortably ensconced before a roaring fire, 
and proceeded to arouse him to a sense of his duties. It 
was found that he had in his possession a large tin of 
strawberries: these, together with a tin of condensed 
milk, were opened and engulfed—there is no better word 
to express our hunger and greed—by Wood Johnson and 
myself. A day or two after this episode, Frau Dyhrenfurth, 
when checking her list of stores, announced with joy that 
so far as she could remember there was still a tin of straw- 
berries unopened and uneaten. The cook was told to pro- 
duce them. He could not, neither, fortunately, could he 
speak English or German. His jabber in Nepali was, 
however, translated by Wood Johnson to the effect that 
the cook regretted it, but the strawberries had been eaten. 
A more literal translation would, however, have been to 
the effect that Wood Johnson and I had eaten the straw- 
berries and he, the cook, did not see why he should be 
blamed. Now, I fear, the “‘ Memsahib” will know the 
disgraceful truth as to the fate of that tin of strawberries. 

It was a dismal night, but despite the rain we preferred to 
camp on the wet grass outside the hut rather than on the 
years’ old layers of offal comprising the floor of the hut. 
We had hoped to obtain a view of Siniolchum, but the 
monsoon had now this part of the Himalayas in its grip, and 
we marched down the valley squelching through glutinous 
mud under a leaden sky. We reached Lachen before mid- 
day, and for the first time for over two months entered the 
door of a civilised dwelling. 

At Lachen there are two lady missionaries, one of whom, 
Miss Konquist, a Swedish lady, has been there for thirty 


414 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


years. Their good work is evidenced by the neatness and 
cleanliness of the village, and the industry of its inhabi- 
tants. The latter had been taught weaving, and I brought 
back with me to England a handsome rug, dyed in natural 
colours from the flowers of the Teesta Valley, and a quan- 
tity of cloth, as superior in quality as the finest Harris 
homespun. The fact that anyone should spend thirty years 
in such a remote corner of the world bears testimony to the 
charm of Lachen. It is indeed a beautiful little place, 
nestling on a shelf of the Teesta Valley, 8,000 feet above 
sea level, amid charming woodlands, dells and glades 
where many varieties of fruit and vegetables, including the 
homely apple tree, flourish. 

We were invited to tea at the Mission House. Surely it 
was never before invaded by such a set of blackguardly 
looking ruffians. I exclude, of course, the ‘‘ Memsahib,” 
whose appearance went far to redeem that of her be- 
whiskered companions. It was strange to be sitting in a 
drawing room again, balancing a cup of tea in one hand, 
and biting elegantly at a piece of bread and butter held in 
the other. I fear our bites were neither elegant nor few, and 
the excellent cakes and scones provided disappeared at 
almost an indecent speed. 

From Lachen to Gangtok is four marches. The weather 
was kind to us for the first two marches, and we were able 
to enjoy the scenery and flora of one of the loveliest valleys 
in the Himalayas, the great valley of the Teesta River. 
Owing to landships, it was impossible to take ponies moré 
than a few miles beyond Tsuntang, one march from 
Lachen. The rains had begun, so the missionaries told ba 
at Lachen eleven days ago, when we had been enjoying 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 415 


fine weather on the Jonsong Peak. They must have been 
very heavy indeed, amounting to a cloudburst, for between 
Tsuntang and Singhik the path had been obliterated in 
many places by landslides, which in some cases had swept 
broad tracks through the dense forests. We had expected to 
find many leeches, but curiously enough, we encountered 
hardly any, although in some places it was necessary to 
keep a sharp look-out. 

Singhik bungalow is in a delightful situation, and 
admirably placed for a stay of several days for botanists 
who like to browse among the varied flora of this part of 
the Teesta Valley, but after my own experience there, I 
think I should prefer to give it a miss in the future. 

In order to finish a dispatch to The Times, which was 
to be telegraphed from Gangtok, I sat up until after mid- 
night writing. The job done, I took up the candle by the 
light of which I had been writing, and started off to the 
room I was sharing with Wood Johnson. In order to get 
there I had to walk along the verandah. I had hardly 
passed out of the sitting-room door on to the latter, when 
suddenly I received a heavy blow on the neck almost 
sufficient to stun me. Thinking I was being attacked by 
some robber or other evil disposed person, I let out a yell, 
and dropping the candle turned round to face my attacker. 
There was no one there, the verandah was deserted ! 
Then came a horrid thought, above the verandah the roof 
was supported by rafters ; perhaps a snake hanging from 
one of these had struck the blow ! I put my hand to my 
neck, but there was no blood, neither was it bruised or sore, 
though the blow had seemed a heavy one. I took up the 
candle, relit it, and passing along the verandah, entered 


416 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


the bedroom. My yell had been sufficient to wake Wood 
Johnson, but not to get him out of bed—that would require 
nothing short of an earthquake, or some other natural 
cataclysm. The obvious explanation was a bat, owl, or 
some other nocturnal rover, yet, one of these could scarcely 
have felt like a human fist. There would, in addition, 
have been the beat of wings. Probably it was due to a 
lack of a suitable explanation but my sleep was a disturbed 
one. I dreamt that I was trying to escape from something 
malignant and horrible. Then the ground I was standing 
on began to rock in the grip of an earthquake. I awoke to 
find myself standing on the unfortunate Wood Johnson 
trying to climb out of the window. Altogether, it was a 
somewhat disturbed night. 

Between Singhik and Dikchu the weather during the 
day was no longer able to contain itself, and broke wrath- 
fully in what novelists writing of the tropics usually describe 
as “ ropes of rain.” I did not see anything that resembled 
‘ropes of rain,’ and it will probably give a better idea 
to the scientifically minded reader of the rainfall to say 
that it probably fell at the rate of about one inch pef 
hour. 

The bungalow at Dikchu is in a bad situation, and 1s 
only 2,000 feet above sea level, near the Teesta River, and 
in the middle of dense jungle. It is well within the malarial 
area, and as I have before remarked Teesta malaria is one 
of the most virulent forms of malaria known. Also, the 
moist heat was unpleasant after the clear cold air we had 
been used to. Lightning flamed through the jungle canopy; 
and the rain roared down so loudly as almost to drown 
the crash of thunder. We had no mosquito nets, and we 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 417 


were badly bitten during the night. It was probably here 
that Dr. Richter and Kurz got a touch of malaria. 

The weather rained itself out during the night, and we 
climbed up to the Penlong La in fine weather, save for a 
desultory shower or two. Near the pass we were met by 
servants of the Maharajah of Sikkim with the Maharajah’s 
own racing ponies. It was a kindly thought and the ponies 
fairly flew along guided by the familiar Chu ! Chu ! which 
is successful above all exclamations in this part of the world 
in galvanising ponies and yaks into activity. 

The first thing that encountered our gaze as we entered 
the dak-bungalow at Gangtok was a bottle of whiskey 
standing like a Serjeant-Major before a row of tins contain- 
ing various delicacies, a gift of the Maharajah’s. We were 
greeted also by Mr. Dudley, the Maharajah’s secretary, and 
his wife, whose hospitality we are never likely to forget. 

Gangtok is something like Darjeeling on a smaller scale. 
There are the same terraced roads, and platforms for 
houses cut in the hillsides. The following morning we 
called upon the Maharajah and the Maharanee, and were 
shown round a temple that was being constructed in the 
Palace grounds. The interior was being painted by expert 
native artists. Though there appeared to be little in the 
nature of any preliminary plans or drawings, the work was 
being executed with extraordinary accuracy as regards 
Spacing and attention to detail. The wonderful designs 
were Chinese in their conception, and were presumably 
intended to represent incidents in the life of Buddha and 
the beliefs of Buddhism. But in one corner was a squatting 
figure with a cruel countenance and sardonic grin, which 


a were told was the God of Kangchenjunga. Before we 
CK 


418 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


left I mentioned the little incident at Singhik to the 
Maharajah who told me that people avoid the bungalow as 
far as possible and even double march in preference to 
spending a night there. Possibly, however, he only told me 
this out of politeness to my story ! 

That evening the Maharajah entertained us to dinner. 
I fear that we were hardly dressed for the part, but any 
slight diffidence we may have felt regarding our beards and 
clothes was soon forgotten under the influence of an ex- 
cellent dinner, including one or two strange Chinese dishes 
with which we were not familiar. Indeed, I found myself 
relating to the Maharanee, who speaks excellent English, 
my best stories, which were translated into Thibetan for 
the benefit of a stout gentleman who sat on my other side, 
who, I gathered, was the Holiest Lama of Sikkim. That 
evening his holiness was not proof against certain Welsh 
stories into which I endeavoured to impart as much as 
possible of that accent for which the leader of another 
great Himalayan expedition is renowned. It was a con- 
vivial evening. Among other things we were told that once 
a year a great dinner is given by the Maharajah to the 
Lamas of the Sikkim Monasteries, and that it is considered 
an insult to the hospitality of the Maharajah if the Lamas 
are able to leave the Palace on their own legs. I can well 
believe that they never do. 

The following morning we said good-bye to Gangtok, 
and to Mr. and Mrs. Dudley with regret. We had hoped 
to be able to travel in motor-cars all the way to Darjeeling, 
but owing to floods and the main road bridge being gown 
at Tsingtang we walked and rode. Riding proved something 
more than exciting, for our ponies had been trained as 


THE RETURN TO DARJEELING 419 


racing ponies, and one and all hated to see another pony 
in front of them. Their mouths were like iron, and at times 
it was impossible to hold them in. I shall not easily forget 
mine bolting at a point where the road was narrow and 
turned a sharp corner, below which sheer cliffs two or 
three hundred feet high fell to the torrent beneath. For 
a non-horseman like myself it was a relief to cross the tem- 
porary bridge at Tsingtang to find a little fleet of docile 
“baby ” cars waiting to take us over the last stage of some 
forty miles to Darjeeling. 

We stopped at Gielle Tea Estate, where we were hospit- 
ably received by Mr. McKean, Wood Johnson’s Manager. 
Darkness and rain were falling as the gallant little cars, 
laden to overflowing, toiled up the steep hills to Darjeeling: 
A little later the fashionably dressed habitués of the ball- 
room at the Mount Everest Hotel were startled by the ap- 
pearance of a number of ill favoured tramps, the entrance 
of whom was greeted by the band with what some described 
as ““ Die Wache am Rhein” and others as “ The Star- 
spangled Banner ” or was it the Frothblowers’ Anthem ? 

Three days later we took leave of Wood Johnson and 
many hospitable friends at Darjeeling, and motored down 
to Siliguri. Our servants and porters said good-bye to us as 
we got into our cars and each of them slipped little cotton 
scarves over our shoulders as a mark of esteem. I shall 
always remember the grip of Nemu’s horny hand. 

Two glimpses with which we were rewarded on that 
journey are memorable. The first glimpse occurred as we 
came out of the monsoon mists which were enwrapping 
Darjeeling and the hills round with a grey shroud, to see 
the Plain of Bengal stretched out below us in the sunlight. 


420 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


For three months we had seen nothing but hills, mountains 
and valleys, now we looked upon one of those vast fertile 
plains which had been vouchsafed by Nature for the use 
of man. Far into the dim blue distances it stretched, with 
its dark green forest blurs, and the silver thread of the great 
Teesta River, no longer turbulent, but calm and serene, 
bearing the melted snows of the Himalayas to the ocean. 
To appreciate life to its full, you must sample its contrasts, 
We had toiled amid the snows, our cheeks had felt their 
harsh coldness, had been scorched by their burning suns, 
and lashed by their bitter blizzards. Now the soft warm 
air of the plain came up to meet us. Tropical forests en- 
closed us, and above the purr of the car we could hear the 
chanson of innumerable insects. 

The second view was later when we had left the hills, 
and were passing along the flat straight road near Siliguri. 
The last gleams of sunset were fading from earth and sky, 
the insect chorus had died away, and no sound came from 
the hushed forests on either hand. Before us stretched the 
plain, behind us rose the Himalayas. A range of towering 
cumuli clouds rested on the foothills, their crests sharply 
outlined against a saffron sky. Grand, solid, immovable, 
they rose, seemingly as eternal as the great mountain 
range over which they stood watch and ward. 


CHAPTER XIX 
LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 


Before the War little was known of the peculiar moun- 
taineering problems presented by the greatest peaks of the 
Himalayas. Peaks of 22,000 feet and 23,000 feet had been 
conquered by such pioneers as Dr. Longstaff and Dr. 
Kellas, the Duke of the Abruzzi had reached a height of 
24,000 feet in a bold but unsuccessful attempt on the Bride 
Peak in the Karakorams, and two of the giants, Kangchen- 
junga and Nanga Parbat, had been also vainly attempted. 
In the light of subsequent experience, however, these at- 
tempts can only be regarded as tentative, if valuable, 
reconnaissances into altitudes formerly deemed im- 
possible of access. The lack of knowledge as to the special 
equipment, and the elaborate camping and transport 
organisation necessary, and the absence of real information 
of the effect of altitude on the bodily functions made 
attempts on the greater peaks in those days foredoomed to 
failure. 

After the War, however, a new era of mountaineering 
was inaugurated by the three assaults on Mount Everest, 
in which Colonel Norton and Mr. Somervell, by reaching 
a height of 28,000 feet, showed that man’s body is capable 
of acclimatising itself to pressures of air as low as those into 
which Everest thrusts its crest. Curiously enough, Everest 
is the only great Himalayan peak which can definitely be 


said to be accessible to mountaineers. Other great peaks 
421 


422 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


may defy all comers for many generations, and among 
these I would number Kangchenjunga. 

Our attack on Kangchenjunga from the Nepal side 
was largely based on Mr. Douglas Freshfield’s analysis of 
the most likely lines of attack in his book “ Round Kang- 
chenjunga.”” Photographs of Kangchenjunga from the 
Kangchenjunga Glacier appear to indicate a mountain 
face of reasonable angle. Actually, they give an entirely 
false impression of this huge face. Distortion and fore- 
shortening misrepresent the scale and steepness of the rock 
and ice slopes, while in place of the rocky shelves, which 
Mr. Freshfield thought might form the head of the Eastern 
Tributary of the Kangchenjunga Glacier leading easily 
upwards to the col in the North Ridge separating Kang- 
chenjunga from the Twins, there is instead a rock and ice 
slope 4,000 feet high set at an impossible angle. 

Considering that, with the exception of Colonel Tobin 
and Wood Johnson, not one of the party had had previous 
Himalayan experience, the project of approaching the 
Base Camp site through Nepal by way of two high passes, 
the Kang La (16,373 feet), and the Mirgin La (14,853 
feet), was ambitious. Had we known what difficulties con- 
fronted us, in particular the lateness of the winter and con- 
sequent lowness of the snow-line, we should certainly have 
preferred the alternative route by way of the Teesta and 
Lhonak valleys and the 20,200 feet pass of the Jonsong La. 
The Jonsong La would have been much less difficult in 
spite of its height, and, as we proved later, we could have 
worked our transport in relays of trustworthy porters. 

There are two types of Himalayan expeditions, the large 
expedition with its correspondingly elaborate bandobast, 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 4.23 


and the small expedition burdened only with a light trans- 
port. The present expedition was probably the largest 
climbing expedition that has ever visited the Himalayas, 
and in its transport was unwieldy and top-heavy. The chief 
advantage that a small expedition has over a large one is 
that it can live more on the country. Had it not been 
for the generous help of the Maharajah of Nepal our ex- 
pedition would have been impossible, as not enough sup- 
plies could have been obtained from the sparsely populated 
valleys through which the expedition passed. The large 
expedition has, of course, several advantages over the small 
expedition. In the case of illness there is a reserve of climbers 
to carry on with the work, and the climbing party can be 
split up into two or more groups, one group undertaking 
the work of establishing high camps, leaving the others 
free to rest before their attempt on the summit. 

But provided its members keep fit the small expedition 
has other advantages besides those of easier provisioning. 
It is mobile, it needs comparatively few porters, and it can 
take its pick from first-rate men, thus making its plans 
secure and free from labour troubles. The ascent of the 
Jonsong Peak proved that four men backed up by good 
porters are capable of overcoming a great peak. The 
greater giants of the Himalayas, such as Everest and Kang- 
Chenjunga, demand the large expedition, if only on grounds 
of health, for altitude will surely weed out the climbing 
party, leaving perhaps from eight or ten men not more 
than two or three fit to make the final attempt on the sum- 
mit. 

Himalayan mountaineering only resembles Alpine 
mountaineering so far as the actual technique of climbing 


424 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


is concerned. In scale, snow and weather conditions, route 
finding, and general organisation, it is so different that only 
by experience can the Alpine-trained mountaineer learn 
safely to tackle its manifold problems—and this experience 
is gained all too frequently at the cost of valuable lives, 

Kangchenjunga is not merely a mountain built on a 
greater scale than an Alpine peak. It is a mountain that is 
a law unto itself. Its northern and western faces are among 
the most desperately dangerous mountainsides in the 
world. Had we realised how dangerous the western side 
of Kangchenjunga was we should have abandoned any 
attempt on it at the outset. But, not unnaturally, it was 
some time before we were able to accustom ourselves 
to conditions entirely different from those which any of 
us had previously experienced, and it was not until 
the mountain discharged an avalanche upon us of almost 
cataclysmic dimensions did we realise how utterly different 
was the work compared to that of the Alps. This, at least, 
was a bitter lesson, for it cost the life of Chettan, a porter 
of almost unparalleled Himalayan experience. 

In the Alps the risk of being overwhelmed by an aval- 
anche is sometimes taken, but such a risk is usually in- 
curred only for a few minutes when passing beneath a 
hanging glacier or under unstable ice pinnacles in an ice 
face. On Kangchenjunga the risk lasts as long as the party 
is on the mountain. Communications must be maintained, 
and parties go to and fro between camps. Thus, one short 
stretch of ground exposed to avalanches may have to be 
traversed not once, but many times, and the probability 
of accident is greatly increased. Himalayan porters do net 
appreciate danger, they place implicit trust in their sahibs, 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 425 


whom they are prepared to follow anywhere. Thus the 
sahib incurs a grave responsibility by risking the lives of 
his porters and cannot afford to betray such magnificent 
confidence. 

Ice avalanches are Kangchenjunga’s deadliest weapon. 
Ice walls, forming the edge of hanging glaciers 1,000 feet 
thick and running for miles across the face of the moun- 
tain bar approach. These hanging glaciers are in a con- 
stant state of downward movement. They break off in 
masses weighing millions of tons, which fall for thousands 
of feet down the granite precipices. 

The avalanche that on May 9g ended our attempt to 
reach the North Ridge of Kangchenjunga covered about a 
square mile of snowfield with débris several feet thick, 
which weighed at a rough estimate about 1,000,000 tons. 
Other and greater avalanches fell later, in particular one 
that completely swept the route between Lower and Upper 
Camp Two, and, not content with this, the site of Lower 
Camp Two, fortunately evacuated a few days before, 
nearly a mile from the foot of the mountain face. It is diffi- 
cult to appreciate the scale of such monstrous falls, and I 
shall always remember the period spent on Kangchenjunga 
as the most continually nerve-racking that I have ever ex- 
perienced. In several of the camps one never felt secure, 
although everything possible was done to pitch them in 
protected sites. It is easy to be wise after the event, but 
even such a great mountaineer as Mummery was deceived 
by the “ scale of things ” and perished on Nanga Parbat, 
together with his two Gurkha followers. 

The second attempt on Kangchenjunga by the North-west 
Ridge a week later taught lessons of a different kind. 


426 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Owing to scale and deceptive foreshortening, the difficulty 
of this route was under-estimated, for its length alone 
militated against any attempt. Yet an attempt was made 
more as a forlorn hope than anything else and, as we ex- 
pected, failed. Even if the knife edges of ice and rock, 
carved and split into icy towers, had proved practicable 
to the expert climbers of the expedition, the impossibility 
of establishing camps on the crest and of getting up laden 
porters would have made it a hopeless proposition. To 
tackle routes of advanced Alpine difficulty on such peaks 
as Kangchenjunga is a mere waste of time. 

Curiously enough, we seldom met with dangerous snow 
conditions and saw only a few snow avalanches. Generally 
speaking, conditions were similar to those of the Alps dur- 
ing late winter and early spring. Most of the party were 
expert winter mountaineers and ski runners, so that the 
danger of being involved in a snow avalanche was slight. 
As regards weather, Kangchenjunga is great enough to 
make its own local conditions and these are not favourable 
to the mountaineer. Sudden storms of wind and snow are 
liable to strike with but little warning. Wind, in particular, 
will ever be the climber’s bitter enemy, and on the upper 
ridges blows for days on end with paralysing intensity. 
Porters will face most things but wind demoralises them 
completely. Perhaps in its fury they recognise the wrath 
of the gods. 

Himalayan ice is frequently unusually tough, and cutting 
steps in it is a more gruelling task than in the Alps. This 
toughness or plasticity is probably due to rapid evapora 
tion, combined with a great range of temperature, varying 
from an almost tropical sun heat during the day to zero 


LESSONS OF wate EXPEDITION 427 


temperature at night. It i is “this capacity for bending that is 
partly due to the size of 1 ice avalanches. Where Alpine ice 
would break away in small quantities at a time, Himalayan 
ice does not fall until large overhanging masses of it are no 
longer able to resist the tug of gravity. The ice ridge en- 
countered on the Ramthang Peak afforded an interesting 
example of this peculiar tenaciousness. Though appearing 
to be precariously poised on the crest of the ridge, it was 
found possible to traverse edges and masses of ice that 
could not exist in Alpine ridges. It is undoubtedly this 
quality of elasticity and tenaciousness that results in the 
extraordinary ice ridges of many Himalayan peaks such as 
Siniolchum and the Wedge Peak. 

Will Kangchenjunga be climbed ? The answer is, Yes, 
but most likely not in this generation and not by present- 
day mountaineering methods. The only route offering any 
hope would appear to be that attempted in 1929 by the 
Munich Expedition. But the difficulties are likely to be 
so great on the final rock pyramid that, taken together 
with the effects of altitude and the inevitable wind, it is 
doubtful whether they can be overcome. 

In an analysis of the Munich Expedition as compared 
with the Everest Expedition in the Himalayan Journal, 
Colonel E. F. Norton compares the respective dangers and 
difficulties. Progress on Everest was more than twice as fast 
as that on Kangchenjunga, yet, whereas on Everest a 
height of 28,000 feet was reached, on Kangchenjunga but 
24,400 feet was reached after five and a half weeks of 
gruelling work before bad weather enforced retreat. The 
Bavarians considered that they had overcome the principal 


1 See Appendix : “ Glaciology : Snow Conditions and Avalanches.” 


428 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


difficulties. Such, however, is far from the case. These 
difficulties had scarcely begun. Altitude and its effects only 
begin to be really serious over 24,000 feet, and being on the 
sheltered side of the mountain they had not yet begun to 
experience that terrible west wind which sweeps the upper 
part of the North Ridge with such merciless severity. And 
last, but not least, is the final pyramid—a rock pile rivalling 
the upper part of the Matterhorn in its steepness and 
technical difficulty. 

Present day oxygen apparatus is too heavy for such 
climbing as is offered by Kangchenjunga, and it is the con- 
viction of the present expedition that only by some medical 
means which will artificially acclimatise the climber so 
that he is able to put forth the same effort at 25,000 feet 
as he would at sea level, or at least on Mont Blanc, will 
the upper part of Kangchenjunga be justifiably assailable. 
The present expedition were lucky to escape from an 
avalanche ; the Munich Expedition were luckier still to 
escape with no loss of life after being overtaken by a snow- 
storm of great severity. 

After we had abandoned the attack on Kangchenjunga, 
having been driven back by ice avalanches from the North 
Ridge, and by the sheer difficulty of the route from the 
North-west Ridge, we decided to cross the 20,200 feet 
Jonsong La. We were able to get over this pass by the 
efforts of Frau Dyhrenfurth and Wood Johnson, together 
with invaluable help in the shape of coolies from the 
Nepalese authorities. The number of loads far exceeded 
the number of porters available, so the transport had to 
operate in relays. Everything worked perfectly, but luck was 
with us. The season was well advanced and the monsoon 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 429 


imminent. Had the weather broken, the expedition might 
have found itself in a serious predicament with some 
of its loads on one side and some on the other side of 
the pass, and faced, in addition, with a possible desertion 
en masse of the coolies. The move proved weatherwise, 
for shortly afterwards the monsoon broke on Kangchen- 
junga, covering it with new snow, while the district at 
the head of the Lhonak Valley remained untouched by 
bad weather. 

In its topographical and geological work the expedition has 
added considerably to the previously little known country at 
the head of the Lhonak Valley and in North-eastern Nepal. 
The western and north-western glaciers of Kangchenjunga 
were thoroughly explored, while Schneider and Wieland 
found a practicable route over the Nepal Gap, thereby 
making a new pass between Sikkim and Nepal and solving 
a problem that had interested mountaineers for many 
years. The Dodang Nyima Range, separating the Lhonak 
Valley from Thibet, was also explored by Schneider and 
Hoerlin, who ascended its highest point, the 22,700 feet 
Dodang Peak, and traversed the Choten Nyima La. 

Some idea of how little is known of the district to the 
west of the watershed at the head of the Lhonak Valley 
may be gained from the fact that a glacier was observed at 
least fifteen miles long not marked in any map. When 
political prejudices and difficulties have been overcome, 
this district of Northern and North-eastern N epal will offer 
an interesting field for the explorer and mountaineer. 
Geologically, the district is extremely interesting, as it 
forms the junction of the Thibetan limestone with the 
granite of which Kangchenjunga and its satellites are 


430 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


composed. Fossils were discovered in the limestone Dodang 
Nyima range at a height of about 20,000 feet. 

There is indisputable evidence of a former ice age in the 
huge terraces of the Lhonak Valley. The topographical 
data collected by Kurz and the geological work of Professor 
Dyhrenfurth have yet to be analysed and classified. Much 
valuable information will be at the disposal of the topogra- 
phical and geological survey authorities. The meteorology 
of the district is remarkable. The difference of precipita- 
tion between that of Kangchenjunga and that of the 
Lhonak Valley is great, and the monsoon conditions quite 
different. Observations and photographs were made which 
should prove of interest in determining the approach and 
extent of the monsoon on this part of the Himalaya. 

In addition to Duvanel’s fine cinematograph work, Pro- 
fessor Dyhrenfurth took the highest film yet taken from 
the summit of the Jonsong Peak. Probably nowhere else 
does the actinic value of the light vary so much as in the 
Himalayas, and the photographers of the expedition had 
much difficulty in judging the correct exposure. In the 
lower regions, though the sunlight is brilliant, its yellow 
quality demands an aperture as great as f.8. and an ex- 
posure of 1/25 second. On the snowfields, however, the 
ultra-violet rays demand an aperture as small as f.22. and 
an exposure of 1/50 second. 

Much forethought was given to equipping the expedition. 
To guard against cold and frostbite, thick tricot suits were 
supplied. But these, together with the special high climbing 
boots, were found to be unnecessarily heavy, and to impede 
active movement on difficult ground. The climbing boot 
weighing 64]bs. the pair and containing over sixty nails 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 431 


each, proved extremely fatiguing, and most members 
climbed for preference in their ordinary Alpine boots. In- 
cidentally, such a large number of nails is unsuitable in 
the Himalayas, as they conduct cold to the feet. On Everest 
comparatively light boots, sparsely nailed, proved effective, 
so long as they were large enough to hold several pairs of 
socks. Heavy clothing does not necessarily spell warmth, 
and several layers of light clothing is preferable to one 
layer of heavy clothing. The writer found that three or 
four light Shetland sweaters, weighing but a few ounces 
each, beneath a light water-proof jacket, withstood the 
coldest winds. No member suffered frostbite. 

The feeding of climbers at high altitudes is a very real 
problem. A mountaineer climbs on his stomach even more 
than a soldier crawls on his. Altitude impairs the power of 
the stomach to assimilate food, and the strongest constitu- 
tion may be laid low by gastritis and other ‘‘ tummy 
troubles.”” The appetite must be kept up and the palate 
titillated if rapid deterioration of strength is to be prevented. 
At heights of over 20,000 feet light sugary foods were 
found most suitable, such as jams, biscuits, chocolate, 
sugar, tinned fish and fruit, and condensed milk. A little 
alcohol is a great aid to the digestion. Hot rum taken at 
bedtime is the best of all drinks to promote the sleep that is 
as essential as good feeding to the hardworked and mentally 
stressed mountaineer. 

Owing to transport difficulties, the climbers during the 
early stages of the attempt on Kangchenjunga had to sub- 
sist on yak flesh and other mostly unsuitable foods. As a 
result a marked deterioration soon became evident, and it 
is practically certain that much of the subsequent illness 


432 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


that weakened the party was due to this. Later, with the 
arrival of good food, there was a rapid pick-up, and to- 
wards the end of the expedition on the Jonsong Peak the 
climbers, though reduced by a stone or more in weight, 
were putting forth their best efforts. 

The general health of the expedition was well cared for 
by Dr. Richter. Attempts to combat the deleterious effects 
of altitude were made by blood-letting, to relieve blood 
pressure, as it was considered that the high blood pressure 
relative to the low pressure of the atmosphere is respon- 
sible for headaches and mountain sickness. 

Only two members, Professor Dyhrenfurth and Duvanel, 
submitted to having 200 cubic centimetres of blood with- 
drawn, and as they were both subsequently taken ill, Pro- 
fessor Dyhrenfurth within a few days, and Duvanel later, 
it is doubtful whether any good resulted from the experi- 
ment. More successful was the special liver preparation in- 
vented by Dr. Richter. This took the form of a pill, nine of 
which had to be swallowed daily. It is believed to have 
assisted the special formation of the essential hemoglobin 
corpuscles, which enable the climber to acclimatise to 
altitude. As on Everest, it was possible to form but few 
conclusions from physical tests made before the expedition. 
The capacity to hold the breath for a long period, or to 
blow up mercury to great heights has little or no bearing 
on the subsequent fitness of the climber on the mountain, 
where only genuine stamina, physique, and will-power 
avail. 

A certain amount of oxygen should always be taken bya 
Himalayan expedition, if only for medicinal purpose 
When Wood Johnson returned ill to camp on the Jonsong 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 433 


Peak, an inhalation of oxygen reduced the pulse rate from 
115 to 95 in a few minutes. If oxygen could be continuously 
used on the upper part of a peak, its effects would be good, 
but used intermittently it serves only to stimulate the body 
for a short time, while the subsequent reaction is severe. 
The weight of the apparatus prohibits prolonged use and 
by tiring the climber neutralises the effect of the oxygen. 
The experience of the last Everest Expedition makes it 
clear that, provided the actual climbing offers no great 
physical difficulty, the highest summits of the earth can 
be reached without oxygen. The secret of high climbing is 
slow acclimatisation, and this is best effected by living for 
several weeks as comfortably as possible at a height of about 
20,000 feet. At this height the appetite is unimpaired and 
sound sleep possible. A future Kangchenjunga or Everest 
expedition would do well to send its climbing party a 
month or so in advance of the date fixed for the attempt, 
build a substantial wooden hut, and make small expedi- 
tions to moderate altitudes, and thus acclimatise to their 
task. 

Himalayan mountaineering is mental as well as physical. 
Nowhere is the control, conscious and subconscious, of 
mind over matter better demonstrated than at great al- 
titudes, and the reaction of the body to the processes of the 
mind is marked. The man who dislikes the work is more 
likely to become ill than the man who enjoys it, and, though 
the greatest mountaineering enthusiast is likely to crock, 
the finest physique is useless without a proper mental 
complement. The men who will force their way to the 
summits of Everest and Kangchenjunga will be men 


capable of disciplining their minds as well as their bodies, 
Dpk 


434 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


genuine philosophers at heart, who experience in moun- 
taineering something far greater and finer than the mere 
physical joys of struggling with an inanimate opponent. 

Apart from the difficulties of the country and the 
weather, some mistakes were made at the outset. Expedi- 
tions starting from Darjeeling should give long notice of their 
intended date of departure, in order that coolies may have 
time to come in from remote villages. Unfortunately, this 
was not done, and it was found necessary to recruit many 
coolies entirely unsuitable to the work. The best porters are 
Sherpas and Bhutias, and while in carrying power and en- 
durance there is little to choose between these hardy races, 
the Sherpa is the better mountaineer on really difficult 
ground. Of those at Darjeeling, many are “rickshaw wal- 
lahs,”’ and such was their keenness to join the expedition, that 
they were prepared to throw up easy and profitable work 
at the beginning of the season to face dangers and hard- 
ships of the nature of which they were fully aware. 

To Colonel Tobin, the transport officer, who was in 
charge of the third party, fell the responsible task of getting 
the transport to the Base Camp. It is safe to say that 
without him and the two other British transport officers 
the expedition would have failed. 

Owing to permission to enter Nepal coming at the last 
moment, a complete reorganisation had to be made. Apart 
from the difficulties of the route, which included two snow 
clad passes, numerous problems had to be solved, of which 
shortage of reliable porters, shortage of boots, shortage of 
snow goggles, and the uncertainty of obtaining even 4 
limited number of local porters on the route were the most 
important. Most of these difficulties were foreseen and 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 435 


emphasised by Colonel Tobin before the start, but it was not 
easy to obviate, or even minimise them, and the leader 
decided to take the responsibility of facing all the risks 
involved. 

The first party with Wood Johnson as transport officer 
left on April 6, with two hundred and twenty porters, the 
second party with about one hundred and sixty porters 
under the charge of Hannah left the following day, and 
Colonel Tobin, chief transport officer left with eighty mule 
loads on April 12. Between April 7 and April 12, twenty- 
five other porters started with loads that had arrived late 
in Darjeeling. 

Darjeeling had been so denuded of porters, that the only 
method of transporting the remaining porter loads was on 
mules. These loads would, of course, have to be trans- 
ferred to porters for porterage over the Kang La, and it 
was arranged that as soon as the first two parties were over 
the Kang La, one hundred and fifty porters with a good 
sirdar should return to Dzongri. The farthest point to 
which mules could be taken was the bridge between Ting- 
ling and Yoksam. Colonel Tobin actually hoped that he 
would be able to get his loads to Dzongri by April 17 or 
18, carried by local porters and the porters sent back. It 
was also understood that a European member of the ex- 
pedition would remain at Khunza until the third party 
reached that place. Khunza was the most important point 
on the route, being the junction of the lines of supply from 
Darjeeling and Nepal. 

If this part of the scheme had been carried out, the loads 
of the first two parties would have been worked from 
Tseram to the Base Camp with two hundred porters. 


436 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


It was anticipated that supplies and equipment would 
thus reach the Base Camp sufficient for the work of 
fifteen days or more on Kangchenjunga. Had this plan 
been carried out the first two parties, with about three 
hundred loads, would have arrived at the Base Camp by 
about May 3. The first two hundred loads would, of 
course, have reached the Base Camp by about April 23. 
This was sufficient to start climbing operations, and it was 
arranged that one hundred and twenty to two hundred 
and fifty porters would then be available to return to 
Tseram for the remaining loads. 

Unforeseen circumstances prevented this plan from being 
carried out, with the result that it was not until May 3 
that any of these men returned to Tseram. Meanwhile, 
Colonel Tobin had succeeded in working his loads by 
means of a few locally raised porters to Dzongri by 
April 20, but these men refused to work beyond that 
place. After a delay, twenty men were obtained from 
Yoksam and Tingling, which are three and four marches 
respectively below Dzongri, and these agreed to lift the 
Dzongri loads up to the snow-line on the Kang La, but no 
farther. This was completed by April 28, and on that 
date in very foul weather Colonel Tobin crossed the Kang 
La with the intention of raising porters in Nepal, as it 
seemed that there was no prospect of getting any Darjeeling 
porters for an indefinite time. 

He reached Tseram on April 29, with only two of the 
nine men he had started with fit for anything. Of the re- 
mainder, two had deserted en route, two had left their 
loads in the snow, and three were snow-blind. On April 
30, seventeen coolies from Khunza arrived. They 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 437 


included six women and five small boys, and they were de- 
spatched to the Kang La, but were driven back by the 
heavy snow and the strong winds. On the second occasion, 
they had to carry back four of the boys, but at the third 
attempt they were more successful. 

Colonel Tobin sustained a fall on the Kang La. This, 
combined with the great physical and mental strain that 
he had been undergoing, made him unfit to go farther in 
the quest of transport. However, on May 3, seventy 
porters and a temporary sirdar arrived, and the clearing 
forward of the Kang La dump began in earnest, although 
the sirdar, Phuri, died on the pass. 

By May 8, many of the loads began to reach 
Khunza, and by May 11 they were arriving at the Base 
Camp. Further batches of porters meanwhile became avail- 
able. Messrs. Wood Johnson and Hannah were sent down 
the line to assist, for the food situation began to cause 
great anxiety. Indeed, the climbers had been on rather 
short commons. However, by the last named date, the 
situation had improved, and more local porters were being 
procured. 

But the absence of a responsible sirdar, and the presence 
of certain disaffected coolies had resulted in looting on 
the Kang La, and on the upper route, so that many of the 
boxes reached the Base Camp depleted. The expedition 
was able to carry on, though at one time it was feared that a 
temporary withdrawal would be imposed on it. 

The situation was greatly eased by the arrival of supplies 
ordered by the Maharajah of Nepal himself. Colonel 
Tobin gave over to Hannah at Tseram on May 12, 
and started back to Darjeeling down the Yalung Valley 


438 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


and through Nepal. By that date the Kang La dump 
was well on its way to the Base Camp. It was actually cleared 
by May 15. 

There are many lessons to be learnt from the above story, 
and it may be remarked that it was fortunate that the ex- 
pedition, though faced with a serious situation, had only 
a temporary set-back. 

Colonel Tobin made some interesting commentaries. He 
said that an expedition requiring an enormous quantity 
of stores and equipment should arrange for its transporta- 
tion a long time beforehand. Food packed in zinc cases 
which have to be cut open are superior to easily opened 
boxes fastened with nails or insecure padlocks. For an ex- 
pedition on such a large scale, it would be advisable to ar- 
range a series of food and equipment dumps the previous 
autumn season. Other members of the expedition should 
understand the supplies and transportation arrangements. 
Actually, the arrangements for an attack on Kangchenjunga 
via the Zemu route had been put on paper, but owing to 
the eleventh hour change of route, the scheme of opera- 
tions was not so carefully worked out, with the result that 
a serious situation nearly occurred. 

It should have been realised at Khunza that it was an 
important point, and that the presence there of a European, 
at least until supplies were assured, was imperative. Bauer, 
the leader of the Bavarian Expedition in 1929, with a less 
vital line of communication, kept one of his members half- 
way between his Base Camp and Lachen arranging opera- 
tions. Hard luck on the individual, no doubt, but each 
member of an expedition must remember that he is one of 
a team, and should have his definite job allotted. Large 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 439 


batches of coolies must be in charge of a reliable sirdar. 
Failure to arrange this was not only the cause of bad work, 
but also of desertion and looting. 

Until the expedition is concentrated, those engaged on 
transportation, at least, must be kept apprised of the local 
situation, as well as of the general position to ensure intel- 
ligent co-operation which is essential. Moreover, the work 
behind is dull, and men engaged on it are liable to become 
apathetic unless they are told what is going on at the front. 

An ample supply of good boots is necessary. Owing to 
the excessive number of coolies requiring these they were 
not available. On another occasion it would be better to 
issue these in Darjeeling, and risk the small loss due to de- 
sertion. Shortage of goggles was also due to so many coolies 
not being allowed for. 

After Colonel Tobin had returned to Darjeeling, the 
responsibility for transport devolved entirely upon Wood 
Johnson. Though theoretically a climbing member of the 
expedition, he undertook the arduous task of looking after 
the porters and arranging for supplies of food. No man 
should have been expected to shoulder the responsibility 
and do the work he did as well as climb, but it was 
entirely due to his efficient organisation that the expedition 
was able to carry out its programme, and it was entirely 
due too, to his unselfish and disinterested work on behalf 
of the expedition that he subsequently broke down on the 
Jonsong Peak. 

Nor must Frau Dyhrenfurth be forgotten. There were 
those who had said she would be little better than a pas- 
senger on the expedition. Her management of stores and 
supervising of communications, especially those over the 


440 THE KANGCHENJUNGA ADVENTURE 


Jonsong La, were invaluable to the expedition, and could 
not in its efficiency have been excelled by one well versed 
in the peculiar problems of commissariat in the Himalayas, 
And lastly, must be mentioned Naik Tikeram Thapa, who 
served as a valuable connecting link at Khunza and Lachen 
in the supply and dispatch of stores, added to which he 
supervised the porters’ pay roll. 

Did we make a mistake in attempting Kangchenjunga 
before the monsoon? Only time can tell. Heavy snow- 
storms appear more probable after the moonsoon, and 
the Bavarian party narrowly escaped disaster from a snow- 
fall of seven feet, while Mr. Freshfield was considerably 
hampered in his plans by a fall of similar severity. On the 
other hand, these two parties experienced little or no wind, 
and wind is the greatest enemy of the Himalayan moun- 
taineer. The present expedition had to withstand fierce 
winds, which according to porters were as bad as or worse 
than those on Everest. Nothing is more demoralising or 
lowers the vitality more than wind at a great altitude. The 
danger of being overtaken by a heavy snowfall, plus the 
increasing cold with the approach of winter after the mon- 
soon, is more than counterbalanced by the winds before the 
monsoon. On the whole, therefore, another party attacking 
Kangchenjunga will do better to go out after the monsoon. 

No general summary of the work of the expedition, and 
the lessons learned from it, would be complete that left out 
reference to the porters, without whom the expedition 
would have been impossible. It is absolutely essential that 
any Himalayan expedition should include transport 
officers who speak the language of the porters and under- 
stand them. The expedition was fortunate in having 


LESSONS OF THE EXPEDITION 441 


Colonel Tobin, who is well acquainted with local condi- 
tions, whilst Mr. Wood Johnson, by reason of tea-planting 
experience, speaks fluent Nepali, and thoroughly under- 
stands the child-like temperament of the splendid men to 
whom the expedition owes so much. 

The work of the chief Sirdar, Lobsang, was invaluable, 
and was equal in intelligence and trustworthiness to that 
of a sahib. Less spectacular, but also useful, was that of 
Naspati and Gyaljen, who were engaged with Colonel 
Tobin on the transport. Among those who did so well— 
and they are but a few among many equally good—must 
be mentioned the names of Nemu, Lewa, Sonam, Tsinabo, 
Ondi, Narsang, Kipa, Nima and, not least, Tencheddar, 
the cook, who, if frequently reviled, certainly did his best 
to propitiate rebellious palates. May but a short time 
elapse before I see again their broad, homely faces, with 
their infectious grins, and share once more with them the 
thrills and delights of mountaineering on the great peaks 
of the Himalayas. 


APPENDIX I 


GLACIOLOGY: SNOW CONDITIONS 
AND AVALANCHES 


The most striking property possessed by Himalayan 
glacier ice as found in the Kangchenjunga district is its 
plasticity. This results in several striking differences in 
the general characteristics of glaciers as compared to 
Alpine glaciers, which at first sight strike the Alpine 
mountaineer as curious. 

Why should Himalayan ice be more plastic than Alpine 
ice ? The answer is temperature range. Unfortunately, we 
did not measure the direct heat of the sun at mid-day on 
the snow-fields of Kangchenjunga, but it is considerably 
greater than that of an Alpine sun, for it shines almost 
directly overhead and to the climbers at least its rays 
seemed often to beat down with paralysing intensity. The 
air temperature is, however, at or below freezing-point as a 
rule even at mid-day. At night the temperature may drop 
to-30° F. or more below zero. Thus the temperature range 
between mid-day and midnight is enormous, probably over 
200° F. It will be seen from this that ordinary climatic con- 
ditions in the High Himalayas resemble a combination of 
winter and summer Alpine conditions, the night temper- 
atures being comparable to Alpine winter night temper- 
atures, and the sun temperatures during the day being far 
in excess of sun temperatures in the Alps at midsummer. 


The exact physical process that occurs in snow and ice 
443 


444 APPENDICES 


as a result of continual temperature fluctuations is a matter 
for physicists. Of its effects, I can only quote from my own 
observations. Let us consider exactly what happens to 
snow that is changed by pressure and temperature range 
into ice. First of all the snow is compacted and consolidated 
by the pressure of more snow falling on top of it ; it becomes 
at first brittle flaky ice, and then is changed by increasing 
pressure into harder and tougher ice. In the Alps pure ice 
is formed by pressure considerably below the surface of a 
snow-field. As the temperature of the ice once it has been 
covered by newly fallen snow, is more or less constant, 
it is only affected by pressure, and the effect of pressure 
is not the same as that of temperature range. Alpine 
ice is formed almost entirely by pressure and temperature 
range does not enter into its formation to nearly the same 
extent as it does in the Himalayas. 

In the Himalayas, owing to a far greater temperature 
range, snow is changed into pure ice nearer the surface 
than it is in the Alps. Pressure, of course, enters into it, 
but it is not principally pressure that forms Himalayan ice, 
but pressure assisted considerably by temperature range. 
Thus, instead of a flaky intermediate stage, snow is con- 
verted almost straight away into ice, and ice tougher and 
more glue-like than that found in most Alpine districts. 
Mountaineers who have climbed on the Brenva face of 
Mont Blanc declare the ice there to be exceptionally 
tough. I can vouch for this, for during the three ascents 
I have made of that face, I encountered ice so tough that 
many more strokes than usual were required to cut steps 
in it. Dr. Claude Wilson described it in the Alpine Journal 
as ‘‘ Steep slippery ice, of a hardness unknown to us before, 


APPENDICES 445 


and with a curious quality unique in our experience, born 
probably of great cold and enormous pressure—a quality 
of viscosity which gave the impression of cutting into some- 
thing which would not chip, but whose particles clung 
together like stiff tar . . . almost as hard as marble and 
tough as rubber.” 

Now, there is probably no mountain face in the Alps 
that experiences a fiercer sun, and lower night tempera- 
tures, and the temperature range is probably greater than 
on any other peak in the Alps. 

There is one more factor which enters into the question, 
evaporation. It is difficult to see how this can affect the 
formation of ice, but it probably results in the dis- 
appearance of the brittle surface ice, leaving only the 
tougher ice. 

The toughness of Himalayan ice leads to conditions of 
interest and vital importance to the mountaineer. The 
main ice streams of Himalayan glaciers have usually a con- 
venient corridor on either side, between the ice and the 
mountainside, which offers a convenient line of least 
resistance. Such corridors are seldom found in the Alps, 
owing to the fact that the ice being more brittle, breaks 
away at the side, filling any intermediate space that may 
be formed between the glacier and the mountainside. 

Still more interesting is the scarcity of crevasses. Even 
in a steep ice-fall where the ice is hummocked and pin- 
nacled, there are few actual crevasses. This again is due to 
the plasticity and bending capacity of the ice. Like glue, 
it prefers to bend over an inequality in the ground rather 
than split into crevasses. Pressure may raise its surface 
into mounds, knobs and even pinnacles, but it cannot break 


446 APPENDICES 


the ice as it does in the Alps. We frequently observed ice 
pinnacles bent over like candles in a heat wave, and it 
is not until the bending becomes so great and an enormous 
stress is exerted on the base of the pinnacle that the ice is 
fractured and the pinnacles collapsed. 

This quality of bending is no doubt partly responsible 
for the enormous avalanches that fall from the hanging 
glaciers of Kangchenjunga. As we learnt to our cost, these 


3 


hanging glaciers are very much “ alive” and the speed 
of their downward movement is, owing to the huge annual 
snowfall, considerably greater than that of similar hanging 
glaciers in the Alps. Also, these hanging glaciers are fre- 
quently of enormous thickness, and walls of ice 600 to 
1,000 feet high decorate the sides of Kangchenjunga. Were 
hanging glaciers of this size in the Alps, there would be 
great avalanches, but they would not be nearly so great 
as those that occur on Kangchenjunga. The reason is this : 
were these hanging glaciers in the Alps, the ice, owing to 
its brittleness, would break away more often, and there 
would be many avalanches, but none of a magnitude com- 
parable to those that fall from Kangchenjunga. On Kang- 
chenjunga the ice walls bend farther over the edge of 
precipices before breaking off, and when at last the ice is 
no longer able to withstand the internal stresses set up by 
unstable equilibrium, it cracks, and a huge avalanche 
occurs. 

Thus, it is not so much the size of a hanging glacier, but 
physical reasons that result in avalanches of almost cata- 
clysmic dimensions which sweep far across the level glaciers 
beneath. Until the Alpine-trained mountaineer learns to 
appreciate this fact, he will not be safe in the Himalayas. 


APPENDICES 447 


That the quality of ice is affected by climatic conditions 
is borne out by the different formations and structures it 
exhibits. The ice scenery at the head of the Jonsong 
Glacier and the Lhonak Valley is very different from that 
of Kangchenjunga. The Lhonak Glacier is in its lower 
portion broken up into pinnacles, similar to those of the 
Everest glaciers. It is not so easy to find an explanation for 
these pinnacles, but in view of the fact that the districts 
where they occur get a comparatively small precipitation of 
snow and a drier climate it seems probable that evapora- 
tion is the cause and that they are formed in a similar 
manner to nieves penitentes. 

As regards movement of the glaciers, it was unfortunate 
that we took no observations of it. The downward 
movement of the hanging glaciers is very rapid and that of 
the main ice streams must be rapid too. I am, however, no 
glaciologist, and have only touched on one subject which 
interested me especially. There are many other equally 
interesting points to be investigated in connection with the 
glaciers of the Kangchenjunga district, and of these the 
most interesting is the determination of their present 
rate of movement, and what relation this bears to the 
precipitation of snow. 

Evaporation plays a very important part in determining 
the size of Himalayan glaciers. I have already had occasion 
to mention the surprising smallness of the glacier streams ; 
apart from the rainy seasons, or periods of rapid melting 
they are usually little larger than Alpine streams. This is 
due to the fact that the rate of evaporation is far greater in 
the Himalayas than in the Alps. As we frequently observed, 


1See page 318. 


448 APPENDICES 


the surface drainage of a glacier is negligible, and the 
familiar streams and moulins such as are common on Alpine 
glaciers are almost entirely absent. Evaporation is the only 
reasonable explanation, and if therate of evaporation in the 
Himalayas was the same as that in the Alps, it is certain 
that their glaciers would be very much larger than they are. 

Perhaps I should make it clear that when I speak of 
evaporation, I do not necessarily mean that the snow or 
ice is melted first, and then evaporated, but that evapora- 
tion also takes place at temperatures below freezing-point. 
Such evaporation is probably due to the direct rays of the 
sun, and not to air temperature, which at high altitudes 
is usually below freezing. 

Evaporation also plays an important part in deter- 
mining snow conditions. It clears off new snow from rocks 
with extraordinary rapidity, so much so that even after 
a heavy snowfall, a rock mountain may be in climbing 
condition within twenty-four hours. Snow slopes sheltered 
from the sun should, however, be suspected of avalanches 
for a day or two. Owing to this partial clearance of snow by 
evaporation, the mountaineer may be led into thinking 
that because one portion of a mountainis safe, the mountain 
is safe everywhere else. But this by no means follows, and 
each slope and couloir must be studied on its merits. In this 
respect Himalayan mountaineering involves a closer study 
of snowcraft than Alpine mountaineering. 

On account of the great temperature range, Himalayan 
snow varies between powdery snow such as may be found 
in the Alps in mid-winter, and the slushy, or wet crystalline 
snow found on an Alpine snow-field on a hot summer's 
afternoon. In fact, it is safe to say that almost every variety 


APPENDICES 449 


of snow may be experienced in the space of twelve hours. 
On this account a man cannot climb safely in the Hima- 
layas until he has learnt to appreciate the rapidly changing 
conditions, and in snowcraft at least experience of winter 
mountaineering in the Alps is invaluable. A party of purely 
summer trained Alpine mountaineers, however skilled they 
might be in mountain craft and summer snow conditions, 
would be by no means safe in the Himalayas, where 
conditions more closely approximate to Alpine winter 
snow conditions. At least one avalanche disaster in the past 
could have been avoided if the party had been experienced 
winter mountaineers. 

Heavy snowfalls on Kangchenjunga are usually accom- 
panied by wind, and it is tolerably certain that wind slabs 
are formed on the leeward sides of ridges. The gravest 
objection to the proposed alternative route to avoid the 
steep portion of the North Ridge would have been danger 
from this particular form of avalanche, for so much snow is 
always blowing from the North Ridge that it probably 
compacts into wind slabs on the east or leeward side of 
the ridge. The same danger applies to Everest, and after a 
heavy snowfall from the west, the danger of wind slab 
avalanches will exist on the slopes leading to the North Col. 
After a heavy night’s snowfall the mountaineer must expect 
to find wind slab, or powdery snow avalanche conditions 
in the early morning, but after the sun has been at work for 
an hour or two wet snow avalanches must be expected. 


EEK 


APPENDIX II 
THE WEATHER OF KANGCHENJUNGA 


“Mountains make their own weather.” No better example 
of this truism is afforded by the weather which is made 
by Kangchenjunga. As has been pointed out elsewhere in 
this book, the mountaineer has only two short seasons in 
which to attack Kangchenjunga, before and after the 
monsoon. Both are short seasons, and neither of them can 
be called a summer season in an Alpine sense, they are 
merely two springs. Both are pitifully short, and the total 
time available for attacking Kangchenjunga is no longer 
than four or five weeks, and even this is liable to be in- 
terrupted by local bad weather. 

Standing as Kangchenjunga does, an isolated mountain 
group rising straight out of deep, humid, tropical valleys, 
local bad weather is only to be expected. Weather data is 
only to be gathered by experience, and so few parties have 
visited Kangchenjunga that it is not possible yet to say 
definitely whether it is better to attempt the mountain 
before or after the monsoon. 

Wind will always be the greatest enemy of those who at- 
tempt it before the monsoon. I do not remember a day on 
which snow was not being blown off the mountain by 
westerly winds. The Munich Expedition experienced but 
little wind, but they were on the sheltered side of the 
mountain, and the wind blows almost invariably between 


south and west, and west and north. On the other hand, 
450 


APPENDICES 451 


every day after the monsoon is bringing the winter nearer. 
The Munich party, who were overtaken by a snowfall 
of seven feet towards the end of their attempt of Kang- 
chenjunga in October, considered that they were excep- 
tionally unlucky, but others who know the mountain con- 
sidered them exceptionally lucky not to have had it before ! 
We had no heavy snowfalls but we experienced plenty of 
wind. That is the problem future expeditions will have to 
solve—whether they are prepared to endure winds before 
the monsoon, or risk a heavy snowfall after the monsoon. 

Passing through the lower tropical valleys we had, to 
begin with, heavy rainstorms in early April. As we ap- 
proached the Base Camp we came out of this area, or level 
of rain, and experienced only small snowstorms, depositing 
but a few inches of snow at a time. It would appear that 
at a certain level, about 15,000 feet, the dry westerly 
winds prevent the rain clouds in the lower valleys from 
rising higher. Above this level, local snowstorms are liable 
to occur, but they are definitely local, and the area covered 
by them is small, whereas the area covered by a rainstorm 
in the lower valleys may be very great. But sometimes the 
bad weather which pours up the local valleys is so intense 
that it is able to force its vanguard of storm clouds up the 
glaciers of Kangchenjunga. This is particularly noticeable 
in the case of two of the main bad weather avenues which 
we saw, the Kangchenjunga Glacier and the Zemu Glacier, 
but it is probable that there is even worse weather at the 
heads of the Yalung and Talung glaciers which stretch from 
the south side of the mountain. 

When ascending towards the Jonsong La it was interest- 
ing to note the bad weather seething up from Khunza. It 


452 APPENDICES 


was able to deposit snow on our Base Camp, but the 
clouds were unable to penetrate farther up the glaciers 
owing to the strong Thibetan winds pouring over the 
ranges to the north-west, and in particular over the 
Jonsong La. 

The difference of climate experienced within a few miles 
when ascending from the Base Camp to the Jonsong La was 
striking. As we turned the corner of Pangperma we left the 
moisture laden airs for drier airs, and that this was so was 
shown by the glaciers themselves. Only once on Kangchen- 
junga did we hear thunder, and that was when climbing the 
North-west Ridge. It came from the south, in the direction 
of the Yalung Valley, and it was far below us. Whether 
thunder-storms ever attack the upper part of Kangchen- 
junga is doubtful. It is probable that they never rise to 
a greater altitude than about 20,000 feet, although we 
remarked cumuli nimbus clouds, the summits of which 
were well above 25,000 feet. 

From the Jonsong Peak it was interesting to watch the 
monsoon clouds flooding up the Teesta and Arun valleys in 
an attempt to outflank and surround us. But they never got 
far over the main watershed of the Himalayas into Thibet 
before they were dissolved by the dry winds, although 
sometimes the plateaux of Thibet generated their own little 
clouds and storms. 

What is the cause of the relentless north-west wind which 
makes climbing so unpleasant in this part of the world? 
I think it is simply the colder air of the Thibetan plateaux 
circulating into the warmer valleys south of the water- 
shed. On the Jonsong Peak the strongest winds were at 
night, and they usually dropped by g a.m. This is possibly 


APPENDICES 453 


due to the fact that at night there is a greater variation of 
temperature between the lower valleys south of the water- 
shed and the Thibetan plateaux than during the daytime. 
At night the temperature may drop to thirty or forty de- 
grees below zero Fahrenheit, a total drop of possibly sixty 
or seventy degrees Fahrenheit. In the tropical valleys there 
is nothing like such a great temperature range, and by 
temperature range it must be understood that I mean the 
temperature of the air. Thus the circulation caused by the 
cold air rushing in to fill in spaces left by the rising of 
the hot air (and also compensating for its shrinkage when 
the temperature falls in the evening) is far more violent. 

So dry was the head of the Lhonak Valley, that we 
scarcely expected it to get the monsoon, but it did, al- 
though much later than Kangchenjunga and the south. 
Dr. Kellas has proved that it is possible to climb on the 
peaks of Northern Sikkim during the monsoon. 

The lowest temperatures we had were not on Kangchen- 
Junga, but on the Jonsong Peak. It was a pity that we had 
no maximum and minimum thermometer. No party 
should go into the Himalayas without one, for interesting 
data should be obtained if its readings are studied on a 
mountain group such as Kangchenjunga. Another useful 
instrument would be a wet and dry bulb thermometer. 
With these two simple pieces of apparatus, combined with 
a boiling point thermometer and an aneroid, some valu- 
able observations of weather could be made. 


INDEX 


Aas, Monrad, 30 
Abruzzi, Duke of the, 421 
Acclimatisation, 205, 428 
Aconcagua, height of, 53 
Agfa film packs, 67 
Agfa, Ltd., 11 
Aiguille Blanche de Pétéret, winter 
ascent of, 58 
Alai Pamirs, 58, 323 
Aletsch Glacier, 284 
Allwein, E., 37, 39, 42, 45 
Alpina ski bindings, 151 
Alpine mountaineering v. Himalayan, 
423, 443 et seq. 
Alpinisme Hivernal, 57 
Alps, accidents in, 228 
comparison of Kangchenjunga 
with, 198 
friendliness of, 209 
of Valais, 57 
Amery, Rt. Hon. L. S., 217 
Amstutz, Dr. W., 58 
Arun River, 350 
Arun Valley, 392 
Asoka, 120 
Aufschnaiter, Peter, 37, 41, 48 
Austin Seven cars for first stage, 105 
Avalanches, 229, 230, 238, 248 et seq., 
282, 424, 425, 446 


Baltoro Glacier, 326 

Base Camp, situation of, 196 

Bauer, Dr. Paul, 37 et seg., 96, 438 

Beale’s Alpine ropes, 68 

Beigel, E., 37, 41, 48, 49 

Bengal, Plain of, 420 

Bernese Oberland, 18 

Bill, W., 11 

Birdwood, Sir Wm., 10, 71 

Blizzard on Kangchenjunga, 272 

Blood, effects of climbing on, 205, 
206, 207, 432 


455 


Body ventilation in mountaineering, 
63 

Bogaerde, U. V., 9 

Boots for Himalayan expeditions, 61, 

62, 296, 439 

Bowfell, 344 

Bread, substitutes for, 69 

Breath-holding tests, 204 

Brenner, Julius, 37 

Brenva Ridge, 239, 269, 300, 331, 
444 

Bride Peak, 421 

Bruce, Hon. C. G., 10, 61, 64, go, 
92, 356 

Burrard, Colonel S. G., 19 


Cameras, 67, 68 
Camp One pitched, 218 

removed, 259, 261 

site of new, 261 
Camp Three, plans to establish, 247, 

251 
Camp Two, 223, 231, 261 
Campbell, Dr., 24 
Capek, Karel, 401 
Carroll, Lewis, 409 
Carter, Lieutenant, 24 
Chaka Chu River, 409 
Chakung, 103, 108, 112 
Chamonix Valley, 171 
Chettan, “Satan,” porter, 42, 46, 
96, 251, 255, 424 

Chilkoot Pass, 335 
Chomiomo, 337 
Chomolhari, 395 
Chortens (prayer shrines), 117, 177 
Choten Nyima La, 25, 367, 405, 429 
Chumbab La Pass, 32, 98 
Cine-cameras, 67 
Climbs and Ski Runs, 47 
Clothing for Himalayan expeditions, 


60, 430, 431 


456 INDEX 


Cobras, 118 

Concordia Hut, 284 

Cone Peak, 210 

Conway, Sir Martin, 60 
Cook, Mount, 57 

Coolin Hills, 382, 408 
Courmayeur, 332 

Crawford, C. G., 35 
Crowley, Aleister, 31, 32, 33 


Dak-bungalows in Sikkim, 111, 115, 
118 
Darjeeling, climate of, 106 
return to, 403 
start made from, 105 
tea gardens in, 107 
use of motor cars in, 105 
Das, Sarat Chandra, 25 
Dawkes, Colonel, 10, 71, 89 
Deakin, R., 9 
Debrie cine-camera, 67 
Decherol Monastery, 154, 156 
Dent du Géant, 143 
De-pung Monastery, 178 
De Righi, 31, 32, 33 
Devil dances, 119, 122, 178 
Dikchu, 416 
Dodang Nyima range, 21, 336, 339, 
363, 384, 401, 429, 430 
summit of, reached, 404 
Dodang Peak, 337, 362, 367 
Dongkya La, 25 
Dudley, Mr., 417, 418 
Dudley, Mrs., 417, 418 
Duvanel, C., 59, 71, 203, 316 
activities at Base Camp, 203 
attempt on the great ice wall, 214 
cinematographic work of, 430 
crosses the Jonsong La, 347 
escape from avalanche, 254 
goes to Base Camp to develop films, 
261 
illness of, 311 
on Western Tributary Glacier, 271 
photographs an avalanche, 260 
photographs the Lamas, 124 
returns to Camp One, 257 
returns to Darjeeling, 405 


Duvanel, C.—continued 
sets out to establish Camp Three, 
252 
slips on ice wall, 244 
submits to blood tests, 206, 432 
Dyhrenfurth, Dr. Oskar, 56 
Dyhrenfurth, Frau, 57, 71 
activities at Base Camp, 311, 924 
crosses the Jonsong La, 347 
endurance of, 114 
in charge of stores, 91, 103, 413 
in danger from boulders, 326 
returns to Darjeeling, 405 
tribute to, 439 
Dyhrenfurth, Professor, as leader of 
expedition, 71 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 367, 370 
attempt on the great ice wall, 214 
attempt to reach Kangbachen 
Peak, 278 
early mountaineering of, 56 
falls into crevasse, 217 
geological work of, 430 
letter from Maharajah of Nepal, 98 
moves to Camp One for conference, 
259 
on Ramthang Glacier, 298 
on Western Tributary Glacier, 271 
reaches summit of Jonsong Peak, 
397, 398 
returns to base camp, 228, 400, 402 
sets out on expedition, 71 
submits to blood tests, 206, 432 
suffers from throat congestion, 226 
tribute to, 439 
Dzongri, 129, 135, 435» 436 


Earthquake shock, 159 
East Rongbuk Glacier, 51, 193 
Eastern Tributary Glacier, 209, 222, 
298 
Eberl, Herr, 104, 109, 149 
Epstein, Isidore, 301 
Etui cameras, 68 
Everest, Mount, accessibility of, 4ai 
difficulties of, compared with 
Kangchenjunga, 59 
expeditions to, 29, 34, 37) 54 
first view of, 277 
height of, 20, 53 


INDEX 


Everest, Mount—continued 
North Col on, 53 
view of, from Jonsong Peak, 351, 


399 


Farmer, E. F., 34, 35, 36, 154, 156 
Farrar, Captain J. P., 56, 265 
Fendt, W., 37 
Film packs, 67 
Finch, Captain G. I., 356 
Fire in jungle, 128 
Food for mountaineering expeditions, 
68, 431 
Forests in Himalayas, 130 
Fossils, 430 
Freshfield, Douglas, as author, 23, 25, 
422 
camp of, 198 
explorations in Himalayas, 26, 27, 
38, go 
on Jonsong Glacier, 317 
on possibility of ascending Kang- 
chenjunga, 199 
Frostbite, stages of, 169 


Gangtok, 97, 414, 415, 417 

Garhwal Himalayas, 96, 323 

Garwood, Professor E., 28, 184 

Gawler, Colonel, 24 

Geological aspect of Jonsong Peak, 
354 

German expedition. See 
expedition 

Gielle Tea Estate, 79, 419 

Glacier lassitude, 143, 185, 193 

Glaciers, hanging, 446 

Glaciology of the Himalayas, 443 

Glencoe, Pass of, 186 

Glissading, 284 

Gourlay, G. B., 10 

Graham, W. W., 26, 143, 323 

Green Lake Plain, 37, 97 

Grindelwald, 331 

Ground sheets, 65, 262 

Guicha La, 28, 34 

Guides, suggested corps of Hima- 
layan, 307 

Gyaljen, sirdar, 94, 441 

Gyatso, Lama Ugyen, 25 


Munich 


457 


Hannah, J. S., 10, 97, 129, 435, 437 
arrives at Base Camp, 212 


as transport officer, 100, 237, 435 
joins expedition, 89 

reorganises transport, 294, 314 
retires from expedition, 315 

Harman, Captain H. J., 24 

Headaches, 146 

Himalayan Club, ro 
expeditions, clothing for, 60, 430, 

431 
equipment for, 60 
food for, 68, 431 
transport arrangements for, 59, 
434 
two types of, 422 
weather conditions and, go 
forests, 130 
guides, suggested corps of native, 
307 
ice, plasticity of, 210, 321, 426, 
443 
ice ridges, 266 
v. Alpine mountaineering, 423, 
443 et Seq. 

Himalayas, accidents in, 228 
conditions of climbing in, 55 
cruelty of, 209 
flora in, 410 
geological newness of, 188 
glaciology of, 443 
grandeur of, 116 
nomenclature in, 217 
photography in, 67, 68, 430 
post-war attempts on, 421 
pre-war attempts on, 421 
ski-ing in, 293 
superstitions surrounding, 83 
thunderstorms in, 85, 452 

Hoerlin, Herr, 58, 143, 146, 214 
ascends Dodang Peak, 404 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 339 
contracts a chill, 274 
escape from avalanche, 254 
on Dodang Peak, 429 
opinion of rocks, 268, 269 
reaches summit of Jonsong Peak, 

364 
returns to Base Camp, 366, 367 


458 


Hoerlin, Herr—continued 
returns to Camp One, 257 
sets out to establish Camp Three, 
252 
work on ice wall, 246 
Holditch, Sir Thomas, 19 
Hooker, Sir Joseph, 23, 24, 131, 137 
Howell, Mr., 10, 71, 89 
Huitfeldt ski bindings, 151 
Hurricane Smock Co., 11 
Hurrying at high altitudes, danger of, 


359, 360, 361 


Ice age, traces of former, 430 
cave making, 45 
conversion of snow into, 444 
cutting, 226, 233, 242, 376 
pinnacles, 327, 337 
plasticity of Himalayan, 210, 321, 
426, 443 
ridges on Kangchenjunga, 38, 198, 
266, 269 
wall on Kangchenjunga, 223 e¢ seq., 
252, 282, 425 
Irvine, A. C., 17, 355, 361 


Jacot-Guillarmod, Dr., 31, 32, 33 

Jaeger, Ltd., 11 

Jannu Glacier, 185, 188 

Jannu Peak, 147, 171, 172, 186, 187 
character of, 290 

Johnson, G. W. Wood, 10, 59, 72, 

73, 75 et seq., 97, 104, 428 
activities at Base Camp, 203 
against double marches, 131 
ascends the Jonsong La, 331 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 339 
attempt on the great ice wall, 214 
bids farewell to members of expedi- 
tion, 419 

difficulties with porters, 147, 148 
efforts to get coolie food, 175, 176 
exploratory climb, 211 
first attempts at ski-ing, 331 
loses his pass, 109 
reorganises transport, 294, 314 
returns to Base Camp, 367 
search for Farmer, 159 
starts on expedition, 106 


INDEX 


Johnson, G. W. Wood—continued 
suffers from sun glare, 150 
taken ill on Jonsong Peak, 359, 363 
transfers to transport work, 237 
visit to Tseram, 154 
yak riding, 182 

Jonsong Glacier, 198, 291, 321 

Jonsong La, 291, 347 
ascent to the, 326 et seq., 451 
crossing the, 25, 27, 99, 331 
plans for crossing, 311 
view from, 332 

Jonsong Peak, 29, 291, 321, 344 
character of summit, 393 
first ascent of, 339 
geological aspect of, 354 
plans for attacking, 311 
second ascent of, 369 
suggested attempt on, 259 
summit reached, 364, 388 
temperatures on, 453 
view from summit of, 389 
wind conditions on, 452 

Jungfraujoch, 323 

Jungle fire, 128 


K 2 peak, 18, 19, 20 
Kabru, ascent of, 26, 30, 116 
character of, 163 
Little, 137 
plans for attacking, 314 
Kabur, 137, 139 
Kachoperi Monastery, 127 
Kaji, Bada, 99 
Kalet Valley, 117 
Kang La, 255 28, 34> 94> 98, 1OT, 129) 
314, 422, 435 
ascent of, 138 et seq. 
crossing of, 138 et seq. 
scenery of, 144 
ski-running on, 15! 
Kangbachen, 22, 23, 25 
Dhudwallah of, 190, 317, 327» 329 
330 
expedition reaches, 190 
Kangbachen River, 188 
Kangbachen Valley, 170, 171! 
Kangchen River, 177 
Kangchenjau, 23, 337 


INDEX 459 


Kangchenjunga, approaches to, 22 

attempt on north-west ridge of, 258 

attempt on summit abandoned, 
286 

avalanches on, 283, 446 

climate of, 21 

comparison with Alps, 198 

cruelty of, 102 

description of, 18, 53 

difficulties of, 197, 391 ; compared 
with Everest, 50 

early attempts on, 31, 421 

east ridge of, 40 

evacuation of higher camps on, 311 

height of, 19, 20 

ice ridges of, 38 

lessons learnt from, 424, 425 

likelihood of climbing, 427 

Munich expedition’s attempt on, 
36 et seq. 

north-east side attempt, 37 

north ridge of, 38 

plans for ascending, 200, 201 

seen from Jonsong Peak, 390 

snowstorm on, 319 

south-east face of, 35 

south-western face of, 32 

superstitions attaching to, 83 

unassailability from Ramthang 
Glacier, 277 

weather on, 450 

west face of, 198 

Kangchenjunga Expedition of 1929, 

54, 84 

Kangchenjunga Expedition of 1930, 

arrival in Darjeeling, 89 ; on re- 
turn, 419 

attempt on Jonsong Peak, 311 et 
$€g., 339 et seg., 369 et seq. 

attempt on Nepal Gap, 315 e¢ seq. 

attempt on the Great Ice Wall, 214 

attempt on the north-west ridge, 
258 

bid farewell to servants and por- 
ters, 419 

Camp One, 217 

Camp Two pitched, 223, 231 

camps for, 97 

Chakung to Rinchenpung, 112 


Kangchenjunga Expedition—continued 


clothing for, 62, 430 

cooks for, 96 

crossing the Kang La, 138 et seq. 

Darjeeling to Chakung, 105 et seq. 

division into parties, 100 

equipment for, 430 

first fatality, 256 

geological work of, 429 

in Kangbachen, 190 

in Nepal, 163 

Kangbachen to Ramthang, 193 

Khunza to Kangbachen, 181 

Lamas visit, 118, 121 

lessons of, 421 

mail arrangements, 103 

make their Base Camp, 193, 195 

members of, 56 e¢ seq. 

mistakes made by, 434 

overtaken by avalanche, 256 

Pemayangtse to Tingling, 124 

permission granted to cross Nepal, 
98 

plans for, 53 

plans for approaching Kangchen- 
junga, 97 

porters for, 92, 93, 104 

project to attempt summit aban- 
doned, 286 

reach summit of Jonsong Peak, 364, 
388, 398 

realise inaccessibility of Kang- 
chenjunga’s summits, 278 

return to Base Camp, 402 

Rinchenpung to Pemayangtse, 116 

second ascent of Jonsong Peak, 369 

shortage of coolie food, 154 

start-off, 105 

stores for, 91 

tents for, 125 

Tingling to Yoksam, 127 

topographical work of, 429 

transport reorganised, 294 

unfitness of the party, 293, 294 

weather reports for, 10, 104 


Kangchenjunga Glacier, 27, 90, 99, 


72, 185, 190, 1gI, 193; 198, 214, 
268, 316 


Haradicnt of, 215 


460 


Karakoram Mountains, 18, 19, 291, 
326, 421 

Kaufmann, Mount, 37, 58, 323 

Kellas, Dr. A. M., 28, 291, 316, 320, 
327; 335» 339) 349, 341, 344, 421, 


453 
Kellas Col, 346, 349 


Khampa Dzong Monastery, 177 
Khatmandu, Io1, 177 
Khunza, 22, 99, 100, 170, 171, 435, 
436 
Monastery, 177, 178 
porters from, 314 
Kilimanjaro, height of, 53 
Kinamo cine-camera, 67 
Kipa, servant, 408 
Knubel, Josef, 58 
Konquist, Miss, 413 
Kukris, use of, 133 
Kurz, Marcel, 201 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 367, 370 
attempt on the great ice wall, 214 
climbing achievements of, 57 
contracts malaria, 417 
moves to Camp One for conference, 
258 
reaches summit of Jonsong Peak, 
388 
returns to Base Camp, 226, 400, 402 
ski-running, 170 
starts on expedition, 106 
topographical work of, 430 
Kydd, W. J., 10, 95, 103, 118 


Lachen, 317 

missionaries at, 413, 414 

to Gangtok march, 414 
Lachen Valley, 23, 97 
Lachung Valley, 23, 25 
Lamas, 118, 121 

intermarriage of, 178 

of Sikkim, 418 

superstitious influence of, 179 
Lamgebo Peak, 23 
Langpo Peak, 29, 320, 328, 335, 407 
Layton and Johnstone, 119, 180 
Leeches, 113 
Lenin, Pic, 58 
Lepchas of Sikkim, 74 


INDEX 


Leupold, Joachim, 37 
Lewa, porter, 42, 46, 96, 278, 282, 
298, 381, 394, 398, 441 
Lhakpa Chede, 95 
Lhasa, 389 
Lhonak Glacier, 337, 339, 343, 406 
Lhonak Peak, 340 
Lhonak Valley, 21, 25, 26, 28, 320, 
332, 336, 337 
flora in, 410 
meteorology of, 430 
topography of, 429 
traces of ice age in, 430 
Liver rations against poverty of blood, 
207, 432 
Lloyd Triestino Navigation Co., 11 
Lobsang, 34, 35, 94, 109, 159, 369, 
441 
Longstaff, Dr. T. G., 96, 421 
Lunn, Arnold, 293 
Lunn, George, 203 
Lunn, Sir Henry, 203 


Madonna Peak, 216 
Mails, arrangements for, 103 
Makalu Peak, 165, 324, 350 
Mallory, G. H. L., 16, 235, 355» 361 
Marwa, 180 
Mason, A. E. W., 300 
Matterhorn, 300, 390 
first climbed, 23 
superstitions surrounding, 82 
Maudit, Mont, 272 
McKean, Mr., 60, 79, 419 
Mentality, difference between native 
and European, 132 
Mer de Glace, 343 
Mi-go, the Abominable Snow Men, 
83, 84, 159, 187, 229, 326 
Mirgin La, 28, 98, 99, 153, 154» 314s 
422 
expedition reaches, 167 
Missionaries at Lachen, 413, 414 
Monsoon on Kangchenjunga, 392 
Mont Blanc, avalanches on, 239 
height of, 53 
Moore, Col, 239 
Mount Everest Hotel, 11 
Mount McKinley, height of, 53 


INDEX 


Mountain Craft, 55 
Mountain peaks, superstitions at- 
tached to, 82, 84 
photographs, advantage of taking, 
269 
sickness, 206 
Mountaineering, Alpine ». 
layan, 423, 443 et seq. 
an exact science, 231 
feeding problems in, 431 
problem of mind over body in, 433 
Mountains, types of, 18 
Mummery, A. F., 283 
Munich expedition to Kangchen- 
junga, 36 et seq., 89, 427, 428, 
450, 451 
Mustagh Tower, 291 


Hima- 


Nagpa, cook, 273 

Nakpo La Pass, 409 

Namgay, Prime Minister of Sikkim, 
24 

Namgyal, Rinzin, 25 

Nanga Parbat, 283, 351, 421 

Nangkartse Dz, 389 

Nango, Mount, 23, 25 

Narsang, sirdar, 94, 108, 136, 161, 
441 

Narsingh Peak, 29, 117 

Naspati, sirdar, 94, 95, 44! 

Nemu, 95, 96, 125, 160, 166, 187, 219, 
245, 254, 278, 309, 317, 325, 
349, 366, 368, 371, 381, 383, 
419, 44! 

Nepal, expedition enters, 163 

geology of, 429 
permission to cross, 434 

Nepal, Maharajah of, 10, 71, 89, 99, 
162, 423, 437 

Nepal Gap, 29, 315 

Nepal Peak, 324 

Nepalese, courtesy of, 347 

Nepali tea coolies, 80 

Nieves penitentes, 318, 320, 342, 447 

Nima, 278, 282, 310, 349; 441 

Noe, Lieut.-Colonel C. D., 71 

Noel, Captain J. B. L., 385 

North Ridge, 38, 199, 200, 229, 230 


461 


North-west Ridge, attempt on, 258 
character of, 265 
Norton, Colonel E. F., 50, 70, 382, 


421, 427 


Ober Gabelhorn, winter ascent of, 57 
Odell, Mr., 205, 361 

Olympus, Mount, mapping of, 57 
Ondi, porter, 211, 225, 441 
Oxygen, value of, 70, 367, 432 


Pache, Lieutenant, 31, 32, 33 
Pandim Mountain, 28, 137 
“ Pandits,”” 24, 25 
Pangperma, 198, 309, 317, 318, 452 
Pauhunri, first attempts on, 23 
Pemayangtse, 116, 118 
Pemayangtse Monastery, 120 
Pétéret, 269 
Photographic equipment, 67, 68 
Photography, difficulty of, in Hima- 
layas, 430 
Pike O’Stickle, 344 
Pilatus, superstitions concerning, 82 
Porter, H. E. L., 57 
Porters, best types of, 93, 434 
desertion of Nepali, 138 
early slackness of, 109 
eccentric costumes of, 167 
fortitude of, on Jonsong Peak, 368 
grievances of, 312, 313 
illnesses of, 92 
interest in ski-ing, 151 
mistakes made concerning, 434 
numbering of, 104 
reach summit of Jonsong Peak, 388, 
398 
tribute to, 440 
women, 168 
Praig Chu Valley, 136 
Prayer flags, 120 
shrines, 117, 177 
wheels, 121, 174 


Raeburn, Harold, 35 

Ramman River, 109 

Ramthang Glacier, 216, 267, 274, 
275, 276 

Ramthang Peak, 63, 90, 192, 216, 
259, 264 


462 


Ramthang Peak—continued 
attempt on, 288 
Rangit River, 124, 134 
Rangit Valley, 88, 107, 130 
Rangli Rangliot, 72, 77 
Ratho Valley, 111, 112 
Rathong Valley, 23, 34, 136, 139 
Reymond, M., 31, 32, 33 
Rhododendrons in Sikkim, 135, 136 
Rhythm essential for walking at high 
altitudes, 222, 289 
Richter, Dr., 58, 70, 71, 92, 109, 309, 
316 
contracts malaria, 417 
crosses the Jonsong La, 347 
devises aids to acclimatisation, 
205 
medical care of, 432 
moves to Camp One for conference, 
258 
nearly drowned, 124 
returns to Darjeeling, 405 
ski-running, 151, 170 
suffering from strained heart, 214 
teaches first aid, 204 
Rickmers, Rickmer, 58 
Riffel, 391 
Rinchenpung, 112 
Rishi Valley, 114 
Rochefort Ridge, 143 
Ropes, 68 
Rosengartenspitze, 56 
Round Kangchenjunga, 23, 25, 28, 38, 
47; 422 
Rubenson, C. W., 30 
Ruttledge, H., 11, 96 
Ruttledge, Mrs., 57 


Sands, Hunter, Ltd., 11 
Schneider, Herr, 58, 140, 143, 146, 
214, 237 

as ice cutter, 243 
as ski-runner, 292 
ascends Dodang Peak, 404 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 339 
attempt on Kangbachen Peak, 278 
escape from avalanche 254 
fine climbing of, 280 


INDEX 


Schneider, Herr—continued 
on Dodang Peak, 429 
on Nepal Gap, 316, 320, 323, 429 
on Ramthang Glacier, 290 
on Western Tributary Glacier, 271 
reaches summit of Jonsong Peak, 
364 
reaches summit of Ramthang Peak, 
304 
returns to Base Camp, 309, 367 
returns to Camp One, 257, 366 
sets out to establish Camp Three, 
251 
sets out to make track to new Camp 
One, 261 
Schumacher, Herr, 58 
Schuster ski, 151 
tents, 65 
Scott, Captain R., 14, 16 
Scrambles among the Alps, 149, 189 
Seligman, G., 10 
Sella, Signor, 171 
Sella, Vittoria, 27 
Sentinel Peak, 29 
Shackleton, Sir Ernest, 14, 61 
Shebbeare, E. O., 37, 84 
Sikkim, dak-bungalows in, I11, 115, 
118 
early explorations in, 24 
journey through, 105 
Maharajah of, 10, 336, 417, 418 
Maharanee of, 417, 418 
malaria in, 74 
Siliguri, 72, 73, 419 
Simvu Peak, 28, 29, 37, 41; 137 
Simvu Saddle, 29, 37 
Singalila Ridge, 23, 26, 32 
Singhik, 415, 416 
Singla, climate of, 106 
track from Darjeeling to, 105 
Singla Bazar, 103, 108, 
Siniolchum, 83, 195 
Sinon La, 171 
Ski-ing in the Himalayas, 293 
Ski for Himalayas, 151 
Sleeping bags, 6 
Saket F S. : activities at Base 
Camp, 203 
ascends the Jonsong La, 33! 


INDEX 


Smythe, F. S.—continued 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 339 
attempt on Kangbachen Peak, 278 
attempt on the great ice wall, 214 

et seq. 
correspondent for The Times, 71 
descent from Jonsong Peak, 398 
exploratory climb, 211 
fails to reach summit of Jonsong, 
363 

has fever, 134 
in danger from boulders, 324 
journey to Siliguri, 73 
meets a tiger, 74 
meets wild sheep, 189 
motor-cycle troubles, 75, 77 
on Kabru, 165 
on Kang La, 144 
on ski up Ramthang Glacier, 288 
photographs an avalanche, 260 


reaches summit of Jonsong Peak, 


388 

reaches summit of Ramthang Peak, 
394 

returns to Base Camp, 309, 400, 
402 


returns to Camp One, 257 

returns to Darjeeling, 405 

search for Farmer, 159 

second attempt on Jonsong Peak, 
367, 370 

sees first Himalayan thunderstorm, 
86 

sees ice wall collapse, 252 

sets out on expedition, 71, 106 

ski-running on Kang La, 151 

ski-running on Ramthang Peak, 

288 et seq. 

sprains his wrist, 378 

starts up Western Tributary Gla- 
cier, 262 

suggests attempting Jonsong Peak, 
259 

suffers from sun glare, 149 

superintends evacuation of old 
Camp One, 262 

visit to Tseram, 154 

Snow, conditions in Himalayas, 448 
conversion into ice, 444 


463 


Snow—continued 
difficulties of soft, 168, 169 
pinnacles, 318 
Snow blindness, effect of, 157 
prevention of, 64 
Somervell, T. H., 10, 70, 229, 382, 
421 
Spencer, Sydney, 10 
Statesman, Calcutta, help given by, 9 
Step-cutting in ice, 234 
Stephen, Sir Leslie, 235, 265 
Strutt, Lieut.-Colonel E. L., 10, 41, 61 
Sun glare, effect of, 149, 150 
Sunset on Kangchenjunga, 27! 
Superstitions attached to mountains, 
82 
Swedish biscuits as substitute for 
bread, 69 


Talung Glacier, 35, 45! 
Talung Saddle, 35 
Talung Valley, 25, 28 
Tamar Valley, 23 
Tancha, 407, 409 
Tangchang La, 28 
Tanner, Colonel H. C. V., 24 
Taschhorn, winter ascent of, 57 
Tashi Lhunpo, 25 
Tasman, Mount, 57 
Tea growing, 107 
Teesta malaria, 416 
Teesta Valley, 23, 25, 26, 28, 74, 392, 
414 
Tencheddar, cook, 96, 108, 110, 140, 
171, 254, 273, 310, 441 
Tent Peak, 41, 209, 261, 407 
Tents for mountaineering, 65, 126, 
355 
Terai hats, 107 
Thangchen River, 188 
Thapa, Naik Tikeram, 71, 126, 155) 
161, 181, 316, 411, 440 
The La, 28 
Thibet, expeditions to, 25 
monasteries in, 178 
music of, 87 
plateaux, temperature changes on, 


452 


464 


Thoenes, Alexander, 37, 39, 42, 46 

Thomas, Eustace, 58 

Throat congestion, 229 

Through Tibet to Everest, 385 

Thunderstorms in Himalayas, 85, 452 

Times, The, help given by, 9 
Smythe correspondent for, 71 

Tingling, 124 

Tobin, Lieut.-Colonel H. W., 10, 

23, 35, 37 

acts as transport officer, 59, 89 
advises division into parties, 100 
hampered in transport work, 236 
reorganises transport, 434 
retires through illness, 237 

Topees, 107 

Transport difficulties, 236, 434 
organisation, 59 
reorganisation, 314 

Trisul, 323 

Tseram, 435, 436 
camp shifted to, 161 

Tseram Village, 35, 36, 98 

Tsinabo, porter, 381, 383, 388, 441 

Tsingtang, 418, 419 

Tsuntang, 414, 415 

Tulung Monastery, 25 

Tumrachen River, 23 

Twain, Mark, 172 

Twins Glacier, 38 et seq., 197, 298 
Camp One pitched on, 217 


Vaccination, need for, 92 
Vajolet Towers, 332 

Visser, Frau, 57 

Von Kraus, Karl, 37, 41, 45, 46 


Walking at high altitudes, 222 
Walung Pass, 23 
Watson, Alfred, 9, 71, 103 
Weather reports, 10, 104 
Wedge Peak, 215, 216 222, 259, 319 
character of, 195 
difficulties of, 197 


INDEX 


Welzenbach, Herr, 233 
Western Tributary Glacier, 222, 259, 
262, 301 
Wetterhorn, 331 
White, Claude, 28 
Whymper, Edward, 14, 82, 149, 189, 
390 
Wieland, Herr, 58, 129 
attempt on Jonsong Peak, 367, 370 
attempt on Kangbachen summit, 
278 
escape from avalanche, 254 
exploratory climb, 208 
fine climbing of, 280 
in difficulties, 158 
on Nepal Gap, 316, 320, 323, 429 
on Ramthang Glacier, 298 
returns to Base Camp, 400, 402 
returns to Camp One, 257 
sets out to establish Camp Three, 
252 
starts up Western Tributary Glacier, 
262 
Wilson, Dr. Claude, 444 
Wind-slabs, 230 
Workman, Mrs. Bullock, 57 


Yaks, 182, 405 

Yaktang, 411 

Yalung Glacier, 25, 32, 33, 35, 102; 
154, 159, 163, 276, 451 

Yalung River, 154 

Yalung Valley, 23, 32, 35) 154 

Yamatari Glacier, 172, 173 

Yangma Pass, 23 

Yoksam, 100, 127, 128, 129, 153 

Young, G. M., 10 

Young, G. Winthrop, 17, 55: 58, 271 


Zemu Gap, 29, 40 

Zemu Glacier, 23, 26, 28, 29, 48, 49» 
97; 316, 323, 45! 

Zemu River, 411
