On the Inhalation of the Vapour of Ether in Surgical Operations
John Snow (1847)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Snow's 1847 pamphlet on ether anesthesia — the first scientific dosing study of a general anesthetic, with his inhaler design and case series. 1847 first edition. This edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

INHALATION


OF THE


VAP OUR--OF tf TH ihe


By JOHN SNOW, M.D.


LECTURER ON FORENSIC MEDICINE AT THE MEDICAL SCHOOL, ALDERSGATE STREET,


From the London Medical Gazette.


LONDON:


PRINTED BY WILSON AND OGILVY,
57, SKINNER STREET, SNOWHILL.


§ 2» =e


ix ae


Aes =
oi Ane


ON THE


INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER,


ce.


Ir will be at once admitted that the
medical practitioner ought to be ac-
quainted with the strength of the
various compounds which he applies
as remedial agents, and that he ought,
if possible, to be able to regulate their
potency. The compound of ether va-
pour and of air is no exception to this
rule, although it might be supposed to
form one, as the practitioner stands by
to watch its effects. For, in the first
place, these effects vary materially
according to the proportion of vapour
given with the air, and in the next
place, there is a counter process going
on with inhalation, viz. exhalation.
This increases with the amount of ether
absorbed into the blood, and there
arrives a point at which the exhalation
may equal and just balance the inhala-
tion, if the vapour be very much di-
luted ; and this may occur before insen-
sibility is produced. It is to this
circumstance that we are to attribute
the origin of the opinion that there are
some persons—hard drinkers, for in-
stance,—who are proof against the
influence of the vapour. There may
be persons on whom it does not act
favourably, but I believe that no sen-
tient being is proof against its in-
fluence.

It occurred to my mind that by re-
gulating the temperature of the air
whilst it is exposed to the ether, we
should have the means of ascertaining
and adjusting the quantity of vapour
that will be contained in it: for the
proportion of vapour in any given
volume of air saturated with it at any
particular temperature, is to the whole
volume as the elastic force of the vapour
at that temperature is to the atmos-
pheric pressure at the time and place.


cde.


This is true of all vapours in contact
with the liquid which gives them off.
Now the elastic force of the vapour of
ether has been investigated by Dalton
and Ure. I made some experiments
with air and ether in graduated tubes
over mercury, and found that the
quantity of ether vapour taken up at
various temperatures corresponded
with calculations made according to ~
the formula for the elastic force of the
vapour of ether, given by Dr. Ure in
his paper on Heat, in the Philosophical
Transactions for 1818. I accordingly
made use of his table and formula, as
I stated at the Westminster Medical
Society, in constructing the table pub-
lished in the MED. GazETTE on Jan. 29,
The ether I used was not altogether
free from alcohol, and I conclude this
must have been the nature of the ether
used by Dr. Ure in his experiments on
the elastic force of its vapour; for on
making observations afterwards on
washed ether, and on every kind of
ether over water, (for it then becomes
washed,) I found the quantity taken
up by air somewhat greater; but the
geometrical ratio of increase in the
quantity, according to temperature, is”
the same, as I have ascertained by
very numerous observations at all the
usual atmospheric temperatures. To
make the table I constructed correct
for washed ether,. which is always
used for inhaling, it is necessary to
subtract four degrees from the various
temperatures; for instance, the num-
bers opposite 40° are correct for 36°,
and so on. The ether I first used
in my observations boiled at 104°.
Washed ether boils at 100°, and if en-
tirely deprived of its water by potash,
at 98°. So long as ether contains no


4


alcohol its specific gravity does not
much influence the elastic force of its
vapour, nor consequently the quantity
that will mix with air; for water,
having a much weaker affinity for
ether than alcohol has, exerts less in-
fluence over its volatility.

The quantity of vapour of ether which
air will take up at different tempera-
tures, may be readily seen by intro-
ducing some ether to a measured
quantity of air in a graduated receiver
over the pneumatic trough, and noting
the expansion which takes piace, and
the temperature of the air within. The
vapour may be washed out of the air
by passing it through a quantity of
water, and the air may be again mea-
sured, when the experiment will have
been both synthetical and analytical.
The most convenient and satisfactory
way of investigating this subject, how-
ever, is over mercury, by means of a
graduated tube, bent in the form of
Dr. Ure’s eudiometer, the open leg
being the longest. Pass a portion of
_ air into the sealed leg of the tube,
about as much as will fill one fourth
of it, the quantity being carefully
noted, whilst the mercurial level is pre-
served in the two branches of the tube,
and the required temperature attained
by immersing the syphon over its
sealed branch, in water contained in
a tall glass jar. <A great portion of the
mercury being withdrawn from the
open leg by a long narrow tube, a few
drops of ether may be introduced by
means of the same tube through the
mercury to the airin the sealed leg, by
inclining the eudiometer a little, and
using a little pressure with the breath
on the surface of the ether.

By plunging the eudiometer in
water at various temperatures, mak-
ing a correction for the slight expan-
sion and contraction which takes place
in the air itself, from the increase and
diminution of heat, and keeping the
surface of the mercury level in the
two legs, a number of observations
may be made in a short space of time ;
and by washing the ether out of the
air afterwards, and observing that the
quantity of air is the same as at first,
the whole of the observations will be
verified.

The following tabie is suitable for
washed ether which boils at 100°, and
is quite free from alcohol but not al-
together free from water; this being


the kind of ether which is usually, and
I think very properly, used for inhal-
ing. The barometer is supposed to be
stationary, and at 30°. This table is
formed on a different plan from the
former, to shew the quantity of vapour
that air will take up; and as the air is
made a fixed quantity, and the variation
of the ether all exhibited in one column,
the influence which temperature exerts
over it is rendered more apparent
to those unaccustomed for along period
to arithmetical calculations. A table
formed in this manner is the most cor-
rect way of exhibiting the subject,
because, since the vapour of ether is
absorbed as fast as it arrives at the
pulmonary air cells, the quantity in-
haled will be influenced rather by the
volume of the air, than by that of the
mixture of air and vapour, provided
the patient’s respiration is not ob-
structed, and it never should be, by
the apparatus.


Table of the quantity of ether which 100


cubic inches of air will take up at various —
temperatures.


Temp. (Cubic inches of |


Fahr. vapour. Minimsof ether.
38° 34°4 37°8
40 36°9 40°5
42 39.4 43°3
44 42°2 46°4
46 45°3 49°8
48 48°6 51°4
50 a2 57°4
52 56'2 61°8
54 60°5 66°5
56 65°2 a Sar
58 70°6 77°6
60 76°4 84:0
62 83°0 91°3
64 90°1 99°1
66 O76 107°3
68 106°1 116°6
70 115°4 126°9
72 12722 139°9
74 140°3 154°3
76 156°4 172°0
78 175°4 192°9
80 200°0 20°0
82 227°8 2000
84 264°0 290°4
86 309°7 339°9
83 380°8 418°8
90 476'1 623°6


With the assistance of the above.
table we can determine the proportion
of ether to air, and by measuring the


iy


Te WO RA a


ether consumed in an operation, the
quantity of air, as well as of vapour,
breathed per minute, or throughout
the inhalation, can be easily deter-
mined by rule of three, and I shall
state it in some of the cases I have to
relate. This, however, can only be
done when an apparatus is used which
allows the temperature of the air pass-
ing through it to be accurately deter-


.mined and regulated. The instruments


at first used in America and in this
country did not allow of any regula-
tion of temperature, but were always
used at that of the apartment, what-
ever it might be, and this afforded no
index to the quantity of vapour taken
up, for the evaporation of ether ina
glass vessel containing sponges cools
the air, more or less, according to the
thickness of the glass and other cir-
cumstances, and it leaves the apparatus
many degrees colder than it entered,
as may be ascertained by passing air
through an apparatus of this kind,
and noting the temperature with a
delicate thermometer. Glass and
sponge being bad conductors of heat,
the caloric required to convert the
ether into vapour is taken ina great
measure from the air passing through
the apparatus, its temperature being
thereby reduced, and the quantity of
ether which it will take up diminished.
Instruments with compartments for
warm or hot water, without the means
of regulating the temperature of the
whole apparatus, are still more objec-
tionable than the former, for by them
there is a risk of administering all
vapour and no air. Hot water ought
never to come near an apparatus for
the inhalation of ether, nor even warm
water, and when its temperature ap-
proaches to tepid it ought to be care-
fully regulated.

All that was required to regulate the
temperature of both the ether and the
air, and, consequently, of the resulting
mixture, was to bring them into proxi-
mity with substances having a good
capacity for, and a good power of con-
ducting, caloric, The first we have in
water, and the second in the metals;
therefore, by placing the ether in a
metal vessel, and that vessel in a basin
of water brought to the desired tem-
perature by mixing cold and warm
water together, the object was attained.
Two or three pints of water supply the
caloric abstracted in the evaporation of


DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER. 5


an ounce or two of ether without being
much reduced in temperature; and,
as the water never requires to be many
degrees either above or below the heat
of the apartment, its temperature is
but little altered by the surrounding
air during the short time of an opera-
tion,

To ensure the saturation of air with
the vapour of ether, all that is required
is that the air should come in contact
with the ether. Thelarger the surface
of the ether exposed, the greater the
evaporation, under ordinary circum-
stances, because it is exposed to more
air; but the elastic force of the vapour
of ether, at all temperatures above the
freezing point of water, is such, that,
to saturate the quantity of air which
one person can breathe, requires no
very great extent of surface. There is
no necessity to make the air force its
way through the ether, or pass with
difficulty through sponges: the ether
lies imprisoned in the liquid state only
whilst kept down by air already satu-
rated with its vapour, and it is ready
to project itself immediately into every
fresh portion of air that has access to
it, as every one is well aware who has
made any experiments with it in jars
over the pneumatic trough. However,
to insure that the air should come in
contact with the ether, and to prevent
its being cooled by the contact, I had
the interior of the apparatus constructed
on the principle of the inhaler of Mr.
Jeffreys, described in the Mep. Gaz.
Feb. 1842, which I had always con-
sidered the best inhaler for aqueous
vapour. The coils of the tin volute
are not so numerous as in the latter,
but they are amply sufficient for so
volatile a liquid as ether. The air has
to pass through a pewter pipe before it
enters the spiral chamber; by this
means it gains the temperature we may
wish, and the further advantage is at-
tained, without the impediment of a
valve, of preventing evaporation of
ether into the room between the in-
spirations of the patient. In the other
instruments that I have seen, there is
either a waste of ether in this way, or
else there is a valve to admit the air
into the inhaler, which must be opened
by means of the muscular effort of the
patient. The vapour does not find its
way in a retrograde direction through
18 inches of curved pipe between the
inspirations of the patient; and, con-


Ke ey ae, Tey eee


6 DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER. |


sequently, whilst there is no impedi- | mouth-piece! have adopted is furnished .
ment to the free passage of air through | with the cushion and India-rubber de- ;
the apparatus, no ether escapes till it | scribed by Mr. Tracy in a _ recent
has been breathed by the patient. The! number of the Mep. GazeTtTre. I use,


1, Cap which unscrews to admit the air to | 7, External opening of ditto.


2, Metal pipe. 8, Flexible tube.

3, Entrance of ditto into 9, Ebony tube, containing ball valves of

4, Spiral chamber. cedar wood.

5, Star closing aperture for putting in or| 10, Portion of flexible tube to admit of
pouring out ether. change of position of


6, Two-way tap. 11, Mouth-piece, with soft cushion, &c.


ili


Interior of spiral chamber, the bottom being removed.
N.B.—The spiral tin plate is soldered to the top, and reaches nearly to the bottom.


DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER. ° 7


}
‘


however, the common, and not the
vulcanized, India-rubber, as I under-
stand that the latter frequently, if not
always, contains sulphuret of arsenic.
As the sudden access of air highly
charged with ether produces irritation
and cough in some persons, I was de-
sirous of having the means of diluting
the vapour to any extent, and Mr.
Ferguson, of Giltspur Street, who has
taken great pains to carry my wishes
into effect, got a tap cast of wide
caliber, opening two ways, by means
of which the patient can begin by
breathing unmedicated air, and have
this gradually turned offas the etherized
air is admitted in its place. This tap
offers the further advantage of enabling
the medical attendant to keep up the
state of insensibility during an opera-
tion by a more diluted vapour than
that which was necessary to produce
that state. All the passages through
the apparatus are not less than five-
eighths of an inch in diameter.

Those cases of administration of
ether are generally most successful in
which the insensibility is produced in
a short space of time; for instance,
from a minute and a half to three or
four minutes after the process is fully
begun. This we might expect for
various reasons; amongst the rest, that
no process of inhaling can be carried
on without interfering somewhat with
the natural state of the respiration and
embarrassing to some extent the circu-
lation ; therefore the shorter the pro-
cess the better. Although the patient
may begin by breathing air, and the
ether may be introduced by degrees,
yet, by turning the tap a little at each
inspiration, the transition may be
effected in from a quarter to half a
minute. It is necessary to the success
of the process that the nostrils and
mouth be carefully closed. The patient
should have plenty of air, it is true,
but it should all come charged with
the vapour, otherwise there can be no
certainty about the process, and the
patient will be more likely to become
inebriated than insensible. The tem-
perature I have nearly always applied
has been from 652 to 70°, between
which points the proportion of vapour
and of air does not differ much from
equality.

In those instances in which I have
watched the pupil of the eye narrowly,
I have observed it to dilate, as the


patient is getting under the influence
of the vapour. This dilatation is,
however, but transitory, and the pupil
usually becomes somewhat contracted,
and the eye turned up as in sleep, as
soon as the patient becomes insensible
to pain. The breathing at the same
time becomes deep, slow, and regular,
and there is an absence of voluntary
motion and a relaxation of the mus-
cles, the orbicularis muscle ceasing to
contract again on the eyelids being
raised by the finyer. An operation
may be commenced in this condition of
the patient, with confidence that he
will remain as passive as a dead sub-
ject. This having been found to be
the case, in order to maintain the
insensibility without further increasing
it, I am in the habit of partly turning
the two-way tap to dilute the vapour;
and it has seemed to me that by turn-
ing it about half way, so as to admit
an equal quantity of external air, and
reduce the vapour to about 25 per
cent., that object has been attained;
but a more extensive experience is re-
quired on this point, and perhaps the
proportion required may vary in differ-
ent patients. This method of con-
tinuing a more diluted vapour I have
found to keep up the insensibility
better than leaving off the process and
resuming it by turns. But if the re-
spiration becomes too. slow, or at all
stertorous, or if the pulse becomes very
small or feeble, the nostrils should be
at once liberated, and the admission of
fresh air will afford immediate relief.
I should think it unsafe to fasten a
mask on the face, by means of a strap
and buckle going behind the head, or
to use any means that would interfere
with the instantaneous admission of
air, for on one occasion I saw an ani-
mal killed by ether by a momentary
delay. It was placed in a small glass
jar, and when it appeared to have had
as much of the vapour as it could bear,
I attempted to take it out, but could
not reach it with my fingers, and whilst
turning round for some means of ex-
tricating it, it expired.

In nineteen cases out of twenty in
which the pulse was carefully noticed,
it increased in frequency during the
inhalation, often very much, becoming
as frequent as 180 in the minute in
some patients in whom, from debility,
it was frequent before the process
began. Generally the pulse has also


\


8 DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER.


Semen


become smaller and more feeble.
one instance, that of a lady reduced in
strength by malignant disease, it be-
came smaller, but not more frequent ;
and as soon as the inhalation was dis-
continued, it became fuller and stronger
than before the inhalation began. The
pulse generally recovers its volume
almost directly the inhalation is dis-
continued ; in several instances, as in
the above, becoming stronger than
before: but it remains frequent for
some minutes. The immediate effect
on the circulation, of the absorption of
the vapour in the lungs, appears to be
an impediment to the flow of blood
through the pulmonary capillaries.
Less blood reaches the left side of the
heart to be sent into the arteries,
which diminish in caliber, but the
heart contracts more frequently in order
to keep upasupply. The escape of
the vapour from the blood again seems
to exert a contrary effect on the circu-
lation, as evidenced, in general, by the
pulse. I may perhaps be allowed to
make a quotation bearing on this sub-
ject from a paper of mine in the Mep.
Gaz., vol. xxxi. :—“ Assafcetida, ether,
various essential oils, camphor, and
other volatile medicines, relieve diffi-
cult and impeded respiration........
They are all separated from the blood
in the lungs, and escape with the
breath........increasing very much
the quantity of vapour which exhales
from the pulmonary capillaries, and
thus giving additional impetus to the
blood: in this way lessening conges-
tion and relieving its distressing symp-
toms. As this class of medicines pro-
mote the function of respiration, I will
venture to call them diapnetics, from
dva and veo.”

I have seen two cases in which the
depressing effect of the inhalation was
considerable, and was not followed by
reaction directly it was discontinued.
As this appears to have been the case
in the instance attended with a fatal
result at Colchester, and_ related
in the Mepicat Gazette of the Sth
inst., it may be desirable to enter
into the particulars of one of these.
A lady, 41 years of age, in pretty
good general health, the patient of Dr.
Frederick Bird, inhaled ether on the
occasion of having a tumor removed
connected with the external generative
organs. She inhaled for eight mi-
nutes, during which time it was ob-


ie


served that the respiration was feeble
and slow. The pulse, however, which
had been about natural before the in-
halation, became feeble and very fre-
quent, and the patient began to
struggle as if suffering from want of
breath; the process was discontinued,
although she did not appear insensible,
and the operation was commenced.
She flinched and cried out at the first
incision, although she did not after-
wards remember the pain. She became
very faint during the operation, al-
though there was but little loss of
blood, and it was necessary to give
brandy, and lower the head to the hori-
zontal posture. Consciousness soon
returned, and as some sutures were
made in the skin, she spoke coolly of
beginning to feel a little pain. ‘The
feeling of faintness continued more or
less-all night, but her recovery was
very good. The apparatus in this in-
stance was placed in water at 70°,
being lower than the temperature of
the room. Two fluid ounces of ether
were put in, and three drachms re-
mained; consequently 13 drachms were
inhaled, equal to about 709 cubic
inches of vapour; andas it was washed
ether, each 115 cubic inches would be
combined with 100 cubic inches of
air; consequently only about 616 cubic
inches of air were breathed, making
1325 cubic inches of air and vapour:
but in eight minutes the patient ought
to have breathed about 2400 cubic
inches of air alone. The ether in this
instance appeared to act as a sedative
to the function of respiration, and the
small amount of air breathed may
perhaps account for the depressing
effects.

In two or three instances there have
been some struggling and a distended
state of the superficial veins, the skin
being rather purple, and the conjunc-
tives somewhat injected. In one in-
stance this seemed to arise from cough
being excited by the vapour, on ac-
count of the bronchial membrane being
in an irritable state, and in the others
I believe it arose from obstructed re-
spiration, which in future may be
avoided, rather than from the direct
effect of the vapour. By the kindness
of the surgeons to St. George’s Hos-
pital, I have had the honour of giving
the vapour of ether at thirteen surgical
operations—most of them important
ones—in the hospital during the last


DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER. ‘9


six weeks, having the valuable advice
of the surgeons, and occasionally also
of one or two of the physicians to the
hospital, to aid me in so giving it. It
has been successful in altogether pre-
venting pain in all the cases but one
or two, and even in these there was but
very little of the pain that there
otherwise would have been; and there
have been no ill effects of any kind
following the inhalation of the ether.
T allude to these cases to remark that
five of the patients were children of
various ages, from the fifth year up-
wards, and that they inhaled more
easily than the adults generally did;
that they were more quickly affected,
generally becoming quite insensible in
less than two minutes, and always with-
out any of the struggling which some-
times occurred in the adults. For a
variety of reasons, and from close ob-
servation, I have arrived at the conclu-
sion, that this difference has not arisen
strictly from a different effect of ether
on subjects of different ages, but from
a cause within our control. The same
inhaler was used in all, consequently
the tubes were wider in proportion for
children than for adults. I have de-
scribed all the passages of the appa-
ratus as not less than five-eighths of
an inch in diameter; but such is the
description rather of what I wanted
than of any instrument I have used.
Valves and tubes such as were already
in existence have been made use of,
and the caliber in some part of its ex-
tent has always been contracted to
half an inch, and this I consider only
enough for a child, but not for the
adult. As only half, and often not so
much as half, of what is inhaled is
air, it is particularly requisite that the
tubes should be wide. I am now
getting elastic tubes, valves and mouth-
tubes, made purposely for the appara-
tus three quarters of an inch in di-
ameter, as wide, in fact, as the barrel
of a fowling piece, and intend to give
ether as fair a trial in adults as hitherto,
I believe, it has had in children only.*
The pipe admitting air to the ether
will be five-eighths, and all the pas-
sages for the air expanded by vapour,
three-quarters of an inch in diameter.
It may be supposed that there is no
occasion to make the tubes larger than
Ee Cea ER Ss SS


* Since the above was written, I have used
these large tubes, and found them to answer my
expectation.


the trachea, but something ought to be:
allowed for the friction of the air
against the interior of the tubes. |

With respect to the psychological
phenomena produced by ether, I have
observed that consciousness seems to
be lost before the sensibility to pain,
and if an operation is commenced n
this stage, the patient will flinch, and
even utter cries, and give expressions
of pain, but will not remember it, and
will assert that he has felt none. Me-
taphysicians have distinguished be-
tween sensibility and perception—be-
tween mere sensation and the con-
sciousness or knowledge of that sensa-
tion, though the two functions have,
as they supposed, always been com-
bined. Ether seems to decompose
mental phenomena as galvanism de-
composes chemical compounds, allow-
ing us to analyse them, and showing
that the metaphysicians were right,
During the recovery of the patient,
consciousness, which first departed,
generally returns first, and the curious
phenomenon is witnessed of a patient
talking, often quite rationally, about
the most indifferent matters, whilst his
body is being cut or stitched by the
surgeon. I have never seen this insen-
sibility to pain during the conscious
state except where consciousness had
been previously suspended. In the
paper on the capillary circulation, in
the Mepicat Gazette, to which I have
alluded above, I offered the opinion
that the pain of inflammation depended
on a great increase of the natural sen-
sibility of the inflamed part. Under
the influence of ether we sometimes
see the converse of this, viz. what would
be pain reduced to an ordinary sensa-
tion; thus, some patients, whilst re-
covering their consciousness, feel the
cuts of the surgeon without the smart.
A nobleman, the patient of Mr. Tracy,
of Hill Street, Berkeley Square, de-
scribed the lancing of an abscess as the
sensation of something cold touching
the part; the manipulation of the
abscess, which at another time would
have been painful, he did not feel
at all.

If the patient will remain silent
during his recovery from the effects of
ether, as he generally will, it is better
not to trouble him with questions till
he has perfectly regained his faculties,
as conversation seems to increase the
tendency to excitement of the mind


A


10 DR. SNOW ON THE INHALATION OF THE VAPOUR OF ETHER. °


that sometimes exists for a few minutes
as the patient is recovering from the
effects of ether.
tion is sometimes amusing, but is not
a desirable part of the effects of ether,
more especially on so grave an occasion
as a serious surgical operation; and
therefore anything that may prevent
or diminish it is worthy of attention.
The children have all appeared to re-
cover their consciousness very quickly,
and without any kind of aberration of
mind.

Any organic disease which impedes
the flow of blood through the heart and
lungs would seem to contraindicate the
exhibition of ether by inhalation, and
I should consider a hurried state of
the circulation, such as that induced
by strong labour pains, likewise to
offer an objection to the process.

It was my intention to make some
remarks on the probable way in which
ether acts in suspending sensibility ;
but, as what I have already written is
probably sufficient for one article, I
will reserve that part of the subject for

‘a future communication, and will be
content, at present, to refer to a short
abstract of some of my experiments
and opinions which appeared in the
number for Feb., 26.


This kind of inebria-


In concluding, however, I should
wish to observe that 1 am inclined to
look upon the new application of ether
as the most valuable discovery in
medical science since that of vaccina-
tion. From what I have seen, I feel
justified in the conclusion that ether
may be inhaled for nearly all surgical
Operations, with the effect of prevent-
ing pain, not only with safety and
without ill consequences, where due
care is taken, but in many cases with
the further advantage of improving the
patient’s prospect of recovery; the
pain of an operation forming often a
considerable part of what renders it
dangerous, and many patients after
ether, having seemed to recover better
than might, without it, have been ex-
pected. In the amputations performed
at St. George’s Hospital whilst the pa-
tients were under the influence of ether,
it has been remarked, as was stated by
Mr. Cutler, on Feb. 11th, that there
has been an absence of the painful
spasmodic starting of the stump,
which usually renders it necessary for
a nurse to sit and hold it for some
hours after the operation,


54, Frith Street, Soho.


a


WILSON and OaiLvy, 57, Skinner Street, Snowhill, London.


Oa


eee;
ald
