The Interpretation of Radium (Frederick Soddy, 1909)
==========================================================
Atomic disintegration explained to the public; the book that seeded atomic-age imagination. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (interpretationr01soddgoog).

Google



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher lo a library and linally lo you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for
personal, non -commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/|



i


THE INTERPRETATION OF RADIUM



THE INTERPRETATION

OF RADIUM

BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF SIX FREE POPULAR
EXPERIMENTAL LECTURES DELIVERED AT THE

UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW



BY FREDERICK SODDY, M.A., F.R.S.

W
INDEPENDENT LECTURER IN PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY AND RADIOACTIVITY

IN THE UNIVERSITY OF GLASGOW



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS



THIRD EDITION
REVISED AND ENLARGED



t ••_"•' • • ,

... e *



4 * * ->


NEW YORK

G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS

1912


\ r


f,


PREFACE

THE present-day interpretation of radium* that
it is an element undergoing spontaneous dis-
integration, was put forward in a series of joint
scientific communications to the Philosophical Mag-
azine of 1902 and 1903 by Professor Rutherford,
now of Manchester University, and myself. As
its application is not confined to the physical
sciences, but has a wide and general bearing on
our whole outlook upon Nature, I have attempted
in this book a presentation of the subject in non-
technical language, so that the ideas involved, and
their bearing upon current thought, may be within
the reach of the lay reader. Although written in
non-technical language, no effort has been spared
to get to the root of the matter and to secure
accuracy, so that possibly the book may prove
serviceable to workers in other fields of science
and investigation as well as to the general public.
The book contains the main substance of six



256991



vi PREFACE

popular experimental lectures delivered in the Uni-
versity of Glasgow at the beginning of the year,
but being relieved from the necessity, always pre-
sent in lecturing, of co-ordinating the experimental
and descriptive sides, I have, while adhering to the
lecture form of address, entirely rearranged and
very largely rewritten the subject matter in order
to secure the greatest possible degree of continuity
of treatment Certain portions of the lectures, for
example those dealing with the X-rays and the
spectra of elements, have been omitted, and atten-
tion thereby concentrated upon radium, the chief
topic. In addition, I have briefly embodied the
results of important discoveries which have ap-
peared since the date of the lectures, particularly
the experiments of Professor Rutherford and Dr.
Geiger in counting the number of a-particles ex-
pelled by radium. The book also contains some
account of the arrangement by means of which I
have recently succeeded in detecting and measuring
the quantity of the helium generated from the
common radio elements uranium and thorium.

I have borrowed freely from numerous scattered
lectures and addresses bearing on the subject which
I have from time to time been invited to deliver,



PREFACE vii

and may mention in particular the Wilde lecture to
the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society,
1904, the Presidential and other addresses to the
Rontgen Society, 1906, the opening of the discus-
sion on the evolution of the elements in Section A
of the British Association Meeting in York, 1906,
and the Watt lecture to the Greenock Philosophical
Society, 1908.

FREDERICK SODDY.

The University, Glasgow,
November ■, 1908.



PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

IN revising this book and bringing it up to date,
I have made it conform to what I should have
said if I had been lecturing this year instead of four
years ago. The statements of the original edition
stand with hardly any serious modification, and this
is, perhaps, the best possible answer to any mis-
givings that it aroused, that the time had not yet
arrived for the full acceptance of the new views on
atomic disintegration, and the unreserved statement



viii PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

of all the logical consequences that the science of
radioactivity has rendered necessary. I have taken
the opportunity of including the latest and most
complete data available, and many new discoveries
and developments, in so far as, among those who
have devoted themselves to the subject, there is
a general consensus of opinion that the evidence
is good.

The original lectures dealt almost entirely with
radium and the other members of the uranium
series. But the thorium series, since the technical
production of the new radioactive substances,
mesothorium and radiothorium, now has a con-
siderable and growing importance. A new final
chapter has therefore been added, including this
series and that of actinium, in the hope of affording
those who wish to pursue the subject further a
comprehensive glimpse of the whole field of radio-
activity.

F. S.

The University, Glasgow,

August, 1 91 2.



CONTENTS



CHAPTER I

PAGI



The new science of radioactivity — Its discovery — The four ex-
perimental effects of radioactivity — The rays of radioactive
substances — The continuous emission of energy from the
radio-elements — The arresting feature of radioactivity • . i



CHAPTER II

Mme Curie's discovery of radium — Radioactivity an atomic
property — Its unalterability — The radioactivity of thorium —
Pitchblende — Quantity of radium in pitchblende — The inter-
national radium standard — The smallest quantity of radium
that can be detected — Experiments with pure radium bromide
— Doctrine of energy — Energy evolved by radium compared
with that from the burning of coal — Source of cosmical
energy — A quotation from Professor Tait — Radium and the
•* physically impossible" 16



CHAPTER III

The radiations of the radio-elements — a-, /S-, and y-rays — Test of
penetrating power — Experiments with the penetrating /9- and
y-rays — The non-penetrating a-rays — Experiment to show the
absorption of a-rays by air — Physical nature of radiations —
Necessity for an ether — Corpuscular and wave radiations —
a- and jS- rays due to the expulsion of particles — Can a single
a- par tide be detected? — The spinthariscope — Counting the
a particles expelled by radium 39

IX



x CONTENTS

CHAPTER IV

PACT

The £ rays — Their deviability by a magnet — The nature of the
0-particle — Analogy to cathode-rays or " Radiant Matter " —
The electron — Velocity of the 3-rays — The nature of the
a-particle — Its velocity — Its power of passing through atoms
of matter in its path — Scattering of a-particles — Method of
rendering the track of rays visible — a-Particles might be
expelled without their being detectable • . • . . 66



CHAPTER V

From where does the energy of radium come ? — The two alterna-
tives and their consequences — The internal energy of matter
— Atomic disintegration — Disintegration in cascade — The
successive outbursts of energy from otherwise impalpable
quantities of matter — The emanation of radium — Its proper-
ties — Experiments with the emanation — Its condensation by
liquid air — The infinitesimal quantity of the emanation from
radium — The chemical nature and atomic weight of the
emanation— The energy evolved by the emanation — The
decay of the emanation and its reproduction by radium — The
facts, not the theories, of radioactivity are revolutionary —
Unalterability of radioactive changes — Evanescent products
of radioactive change — All products equally knowable whether
short-lived or long 93



CHAPTER VI

The connection of the a-particle with radioactive changes — The
a-particle and helium — Accumulation of helium in geological
time — Discovery of helium in the sun and on the earth — Its
connection with radioactivity — Production of helium from
radium — Its production from uranium and thorium — Proof
that the a-particle is an atom of helium — The nature of the
first change of radium — Radioactive " recoil " . . . .128



CONTENTS xi

PAGB

CHAPTER VII

Atomic disintegration and the periodic law — Questions of nomen-
clature — Definition of the chemist's atom — Difference between
atoms and chemical compounds — The insufficiency of chemical
methods in many radioactive problems — The relation of radio-
activity to the electrical theory of matter — Hypotheses or
mental pictures — The two possible pictures of atomic dis-
integration — Sudden explosive character of the disintegration
— Law of radioactive changes— Chance of disintegration —
Average life of a disintegrating atom — Its expectation of life
— The "how," not the "why," of atomic disintegration ex-
plained — Determination of the period of average life of atoms
— Primary radio-elements and ephemeral transition-forms —
Radioactive equilibrium — Average life of radium — The total
energy evolved in the complete disintegration of radium . . 145



CHAPTER VIII

How is it there is any radium left? — The parent of radium —
Fixity of ratio between the quantity of uranium and radium
in all minerals — Period of average life of uranium — Relation
of uranium to radium — An analogy to the Glasgow water-
supply system — Age of pitchblende — Radioactivity of uranium
— Uranium X, Uranium I., and Uranium II. — Uranium not

- the direct parent of radium — Growth of radium by uranium —
Intermediate transition forms of long life — Ionium, the direct
parent of radium — The stately procession of elementary
evolution 168



CHAPTER IX

The subsequent changes of radium — The induced or excited
radioactivity — The active deposit of radium — The disintegra-
tion of the emanation — Radium A, B, C— Experiments with
the active deposit — Radium A gives only a-rays and has a
very short life — Radium B gives no rays— Radium C gives



xii CONTENTS

PAGl

a-, £-, and y-rays — The emanation only gives a-rays — The
later slow changes of radium — Radium D, E, and F —
Polonium — Its identity with radium F — The last disintegra-
tion — What is the ultimate product ? 190

CHAPTER X

Ratio of quantities of polonium and radium in minerals — Table
of the ratio of the quantities of all the products of uranium —
Difficulty of concentrating many of the long-lived products
of uranium— Increase of activity of radium with time —
Radioactivity a physical measure of value or rarity — The
currency metals and their rarity— Are they changing like
radium ? — Physical necessity for rarity of a changing element
— One aspect of the ultimate nature of matter — A quotation
from Clerk Maxwell— Evolution of the elements denied —
Similarity of all the atoms of the same element — The atom
a complex and perfect piece of mechanism — Professor
Schuster's analogy — The atom true to its character at dissolu-
tion — Similarity in the velocity of all a particles expelled from
a radio-element — The more stable the radio-element the
slower the a-rays expelled from it — Survival of the fittest or
most stable atoms — Universality of the conception of evolution
to the material universe, animate and inanimate • • • 210

CHAPTER XI

Why is radium unique among the elements? — Its rate of change
only makes it remarkable — Uranium is more wonderful than
radium — The energy stored up in a pound of uranium —
Transmutation is the key to the internal energy of matter —
The futility of ancient alchemy — The consequences if trans-
mutation were possible — Primitive man and the art of kind-
ling fire — Modern man and the problem of transmutation —
Cosmical evolution and atomic disintegration — Radioactivity
and geology — Quantity of radium in the earth's crust — The
earth probably not a cooling globe — The geological age and
the incandescent age — Ancient mythology and radioactivity —
The serpent " Ouroboros " — The " Philosopher's Stone " and



CONTENTS xiii

PAGB

the " Elixir of Life"— The * Fall of Man » and the "Ascent of
Man " — The great extension in the possible duration of past
time — Radium and the struggle for existence — Existence as a
struggle for physical energy — The new prospect • . . 230



CHAPTER XII
The thorium disintegration series — Source and radioactivity of
thorium compounds — Mesothorium and radiothorium — Varia-
tion of radioactivity of thorium compounds with time —
Analogy between the thorium and uranium series — Meso-
thorium and its changes of activity with time — Its chemical
resemblance to radium — Abundance of the raw material of
mesothorium — The thorium emanation — Experiments with
radiothorium — Thorium A — The actinium disintegration series
— The question of the origin of actinium — Its great scarcity —
Multiple atomic disintegration — The actinium emanation —
Actinium A — The unsolved riddle of matter .... 256

Index 279



«■



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



FIG.



:}
:}



1. Becquerel's uranium radiograph of an aluminium'

medallion ...

2. Welsbach mantle, taken by the rays from the

thorium contained in it . .

3. Photograph and radiograph of a piece of pitch-

blende (Sir William Crookes)

4. Photograph of silk tassel electrified by friction

5. The same discharged by the rays of radium

6. Radium writing on a photographic plate

7. Box of compasses taken by 7-rays of radium

8. Diagram of coated flask and radium-covered dish

for showing a-rays . .

9. Photograph of the same apparatus .

10. Diagram of Spinthariscope of Sir William

Crookes . . ...

11. Photograph of the Spinthariscope .

12. Photograph of the electro-magnet for deviating

the 0-rays . . ...

13. Diagram of magnetic deviation of 0-rays

14. Diagram of Crookes' tube to show magnetic devia-

tion of cathode-rays

15. Diagram of Strutt's radium clock

16. Photograph of radium clock

17. Photograph of tube containing willemite

18. Photograph of the same tube by its own light when

containing radium emanation

19. Diagram of apparatus for showing the condensa-

tion of the radium emanation

20. Diagram of the first disintegration of radium



To face 10



91



»



>1



»»



20

44



. 49
To face 49

60
To face 49



66
68



• 75
. 82

To face 66



»



108



. 112
. 129



XV



XVI



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS



nc.

21. Photograph of the spectrum-tube in which the pro-'

duction of helium from radium emanation was
observed . ...

22. Photograph by Dr. Giesel of the spectrum of

helium produced from radium

23. Photograph of apparatus for detecting and measur-

ing helium produced from uranium and thor-
ium . . . ...

24. Diagram showing the first change of radium

25. Diagram for the first disintegration of uranium

26. Diagram of the uranium-radium disintegration

series (initial changes) . ...

27. Diagram of the first four disintegrations of radium

28. Diagram of apparatus for obtaining the active

deposit of radium . ...

29. Photograph of the same apparatus

30. Diagram of the later disintegrations of radium

31. Diagram of the complete uranium disintegration

32. Diagram of the complete thorium disintegration

scries • • •

33. Diagram of the complete actinium disintegration

series • • • •



PACT



To f oca 137



138
142

181



188
194

196

To face 196
204

209

262

*73



• •••••• # • • •



• •«*<• •• •



• ■ • - # » •



• • • • • •



• _ •


THE INTERPRETATION

OF RADIUM



CHAPTER 1.

The new science of radioactivity— Its discovery — The four experi-
mental effects of radioactivity — The rays of radioactive substances
— The continuous emission of energy from the radio-elements —
The arresting feature of radioactivity.

ONE of the main duties of science is the corre-
lation of phenomena, apparently disconnected
and even contradictory. For example, chemistry
teaches us to regard under one aspect, as various
types of combustion or oxidation, the burning of
a candle, the rusting of metals, the physiological
process of respiration, and the explosion of gun-
powder. In each process there is the one common
fact that oxygen enters into new chemical com-
binations. Similarly to the physicist, the fall of
the traditional apple of Newton, the revolution
of the earth and planets round the sun, the appari-
tions of comets, and the ebb and flow of the tides

B



• • • • * „ f


2 THE NE W SCIENCE

are all phases of the universal law of gravitation
A race ignorant of the nature of combustion or of
the law of gravitation, and ignorant of the need
of such generalisations, could not be considered to
have advanced far along the paths of scientific
discovery. The phenomena with which I am con-
cerned in these lectures belong to the newly-born
science of radioactivity and to the spontaneous
disintegration of elements which the study of radio-
activity has revealed to us. It is a natural inquiry
to ask — To what most nearly are these new pheno-
mena correlated? Is it possible to give, by the
help of an analogy to familiar phenomena, any
correct idea of the nature of this new phenomenon
" Radioactivity " ? The answer may surprise those
who hold to the adage that there is nothing new
under the sun. Frankly, it is not possible, because
in these latest developments science has broken
fundamentally new ground, and has delved one
distinct step further down into the foundations of
knowledge.

During the century which has just closed there
occurred, it is true, at an ever-increasing rate, a
ceaseless extension of our knowledge of the nature
of matter upon which physical science is largely
based. Yet this advance was for the most part an
expansion rather than a deepening. It was con-
cerned with what may be termed atomic and



THE NE W SCIENCE 3

molecular architecture, the external qualities of
atoms and the construction and study of com-
plexes built of atoms — that is to say, molecules.
As buildings are built of bricks, so compounds can
nowadays be built up out of atoms. The atoms
are to the chemist and physicist what bricks are
to the architect — the units supplied ready-made to
a certain limited number of standard specifications
and dimensions capable of an endless variety of
combinations and arrangements, each with its own
peculiarities and external relationships.

The century which has just begun has seen the
first definite and considerable step taken into the
ultimate nature of these units of matter or atoms,
which is in one sense not merely an extension of
existing knowledge or principles, but a radically
new departure. Radioactivity is a new primary
science owing allegiance neither to physics nor
chemistry, as these sciences were understood before
its advent, because it is concerned with a know-
ledge of the elementary atoms themselves of a
character so fundamental and intimate that the old
laws of physics and chemistry, concerned almost
wholly with external relationships, do not suffice.
This first step has indeed emphasised how super-
ficial our knowledge of matter has really been.
If one were to demonstrate to an architect that
the bricks he habitually and properly employs in



4 THE NE W SCIENCE

his constructions were under other circumstances
capable of entirely different uses — let us say, for
illustration, that they could with effect be employed
as an explosive incomparably more powerful in its
activities than dynamite — the surprise of the archi-
tect would be no greater than the surprise of the
chemist at the new and undreamt of possibilities of
matter demonstrated by the mere existence of such
an element as radium. ^

In this first lecture our attention will be mainly
directed to the one outstanding feature in connec-
tion with radium, and the property of radioactivity
which it exhibits to an extraordinary degree, in
which the whole range of its remarkable features
are epitomised. \The radioactive substances evolve
a perennial supply of energy from year to year
without stimulus and without exhaustion^ It would
be idle to deny with regard to this that physical
science was taken completely by surprise. Had
any one twelve years ago ventured to predict
radium he would have been told simply that such
a thing was not only wildly improbable, but actually
opposed to all the' established principles of the
science of matter and energy. So drastic an
innovation was, it is true, unanticipated. Radium,
however, is an undisputed fact to-day, and there is
no question which would have triumphed in the



THE NE W SCIENCE 5

conflict, had its existence conflicted with the estab-
lished principles of science. Natural conservatism
and dislike of innovation appear in the ranks of
science more strongly than most people are aware.
Indeed, science is no exception. There was,
however, never the slightest ground for assuming
that because the new facts were startling and un-
expected they must necessarily conflict with older
knowledge. That would be to pay science a poor
compliment. Some of the new facts we shall
discuss in the lectures appeared at first, and may
even yet appear to you, almost incredible, but that
is only on account of the entire newness of the
whole region to which they belong. Into this
region the older chemistry and physics have, as we
have seen, never before penetrated. It is not
until we begin to apply to the new facts the estab-
lished principles of science, which have served so
well of old, that their full significance gradually
becomes evident. Keep in mind that our know-
ledge of nature is always of necessity partial, and
is bounded in all directions by certain inevitable
but too often forgotten limitations connected, for
example, with the briefness of human life and the
physical impossibility of pursuing investigations
except under conditions where the life of the in-
vestigator can be maintained. The laws and prin-



6 THE NEW SCIENCE

ciples of physical science, old and new, are alike
subject to these perpetual limitations, and are
necessarily only true within these limits. From
this point of view there is nothing in the many
surprising properties of radium which conflicts with
a single established principle of older science.
Physics and chemistry remain almost unchanged
where they were, and radioactivity, so far as it is
concerned with the correctness of their principles,
has, as a matter of fact, given to the old laws and
theories a fuller and truer significance than they
had before. The extension of the old theories
which has been rendered necessary has not been
revolutionary in any destructive sense. It is
wonderful how accommodating a true theory is to
new truth, apparently of a diametrically opposite
character, and this not in any sense of mere
ingenuity of explanation, but in a manner that
arrests the investigator, and is his sign that he is
on safe ground. It may seem a paradox, but from
the first the best proof of the newer views, to my
mind, was in the completeness with which the
strange, newly-won knowledge of radioactivity
harmonised with the old views of the chemist
about atoms and elements. On the other hand
this gratifying harmony, where conflict might have
been expected, is not a surrender. On every hand
new vistas of thought are opening out. We see



THE NEW SCIENCE 7

the simple and direct answer to many problems
before deemed ^insoluble. We recognise now
causes at work <where before we only saw effects,
many of them so familiar and ingrained in our
consciousness that the necessity for a cause had
been almost overlooked, or, if felt at all, met per-
functorily and wholly inadequately by existing
knowledge. Highly technical and complicated as
many of the researches on radioactivity are, the
main conclusions of the science are as simple
and certain as they are fundamental, and of
general interest. It is the duty of every educated
man to make hijnself aware of the chief bearings
of these conclusions, for they touch human life
strangely at many points, and are destined in the
future to influence profoundly the course of philo-
sophic thought In a few years the elementary
principles of radioactivity will be taught in all
schools as belonging to the very beginnings of
physical science. To-night, while all is strange
and new and the very name of the science even
unfamiliar, it may appear a far cry to attempt to
foretell the effects these discoveries, concerned
primarily with the ultimate nature of matter, are
destined to exert on our conceptions of the ultimate
destiny of man. But already the most direct con-
nection is apparent. Indeed, this aspect of the
advance is perhaps the most revolutionary. We



8 DISCOVERY OF RADIOACTIVITY

shall be able to see more clearly at the end how
this has come about. At present it is sufficient to
indicate- that radioactivity has introduced a new
conception into the fundamental problems of ex-
istence. By its conclusion that there is imprisoned
in ordinary common matter vast stores of energy,.
which ignorance alone at the present time prevents
us from using for the purposes of life, 1 radioactivity
has raised an issue which it is safe to say will mark
an epoch in the progress of thought. With all our
mastery over the powers of Nature we have
adhered to the view that the struggle for existence
is a permanent and necessary condition of life.
To-day it appears as though it may well be but
a passing phase, to be altogether abolished in the
future as it has to some extent been mitigated in
the past by the unceasing, and as it now appears,
unlimited ascent of man to knowledge, and through
knowledge to physical power and dominion over
Nature.

The first discovery of the property we now call
radioactivity was made in the year 1896 by M.
Henri Becquerel in Paris, and, like many other
great discoveries, the actual experiment itself owed
something to luck or chance or accident. Looking
backward, however, it appears rather that only the
particular day or month of the discovery was a



DISCOVERY OF RADIOACTIVITY 9

matter of chance. The time was just ripe for the
event, and it is certain that its coming could not
long have been delayed. Some slight historical
sketch of the conditions preceding and immediately
following the discovery is necessary before consider-
ing wherein lies its great significance. The memor-
able discovery of the X-rays by Professor Rontgen,
in 1895, which is known to all, familiarised scientific
workers with a type of radiation able to traverse
objects opaque to light The X-rays are them-
selves invisible to the unaided eye, but are able to
affect the photographic plate. This led to experi-
ments being made in order to see if similar types of
rays were not produced in other ways, As you all
know, certain substances exposed to sunlight shine
afterwards in the dark, and this property, which finds
an application in the manufacture of luminous paint,
is known as phosphorescence or fluorescence. Is
phosphorescent light entirely stopped by opaque
objects? Or does it in part consist of invisible
penetrating rays like the X-rays? M. Becquerel
wrapped a photographic plate in black paper and
placed on it a phosphorescent substance which was
then exposed to sunlight. By great good fortune
M. Becquerel chose as the particular phosphorescent
body a preparation of uranium, and found as the
result of the experiment that the photographic
plate beneath the preparation was darkened. The



io DISCOVERY OF RADIOACTIVITY

preparation had given out rays which, unlike sun-
light, were capable of penetrating the black paper.
It was soon found that these rays, like the X-rays,
even penetrated thin plates of metal, for when such
a thin plate was interposed between the preparation
and the film darkening still occurred. But one day,
the sun being obscured, the plate and the phos-
phorescent uranium preparation upon it were set
aside in a dark drawer for some weeks, and M. Bec-
querel, wishing to see if any darkening had occurred
without the sunlight, developed the plate as it was.
It was found that darkening had gone on just as
much in the darkness as in the light. Further
experiments soon established that neither sunlight
nor phosphorescence had anything to do with the
experiment. The action is an entirely new inherent
property of the element uranium. No other phos-
phorescent body would have darkened the plate
even in the sunlight, while all preparations contain-
ing uranium do so, whether they are phos-
phorescent or not, in total darkness as well as in
the light. Fig. i shows one of the photographs by
uranium rays obtained by M. Becquerel. Between
the patch of the uranium preparation and the plate
was placed an aluminium medallion, stamped with a
head of a figure in relief, which partially shielded
the plate beneath from the rays. The impression
under the thinner portions of the medallion is



L



Fig. i. BecquerePs Ura



WdsUch Mantle imprinted !>y its own T -



i



EFFECTS OF RADIOACTIVITY n

darker than under the thicker portions, thus causing
the head of the figure to be clearly apparent in the
photograph.

Although the radioactive process is itself without
analogy in science, the main effects which it
produces can almost all be more or less nearly
imitated, and were all more or less perfectly studied
prior to its discovery. The main effects of radio-
activity with which we are most concerned are
four. Firstly then, radioactive substances affect a
photographic plate in the same manner as light and
many other agencies. Secondly, they excite phos-
phorescence or fluorescence in certain substances
when brought in their neighbourhood. Thirdly,
radioactive bodies cause the air and other gases to
lose the insulating power they normally possess
and to become partial conductors of electricity. In
consequence, any electrified object has its elec-
tricity rapidly discharged in the neighbourhood of
a radioactive substance. But the same effect is
produced by X-rays, by incandescent bodies, and
even by a lighted match. The instrument em-
ployed to detect this effect is the gold-leaf electro-
scope, the first and simplest electrical instrument to
be invented, and for this purpose capable of so
great refinement that it affords the most delicate
and sensitive test it is possible to employ in



12 RAYS OF RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

the detection of radioactivity. Lastly, radioactive
bodies generate heat, as does coal or any other
substance burning. The photographic action and
the discharge of electricity from insulated charged
bodies are clearly shown by radioactive substances
even in the form in which they occur in Nature, as
all unsuspected they have been handled and ex-
amined by men for centuries. Hence you will
understand how it is that the discovery of radio-
activity could not under any circumstances have
been indefinitely delayed. But only the more power-
fully radioactive substances, like radium, give ap-
preciable phosphorescence or heat effects. In the
naturally occurring radioactive substances these
effects are far too small to be readily detectable.

Exact physical experiments have demonstrated
that all these effects of radioactivity owe their
origin to the fact that the radioactive substances
emit "rays." These rays are invisible to the un-
aided eye it is true. In this they resemble
Rontgen's X-rays. There are three different types
of rays given out by the radioactive substances,
which are known respectively as the a-, ,S-, and
y-rays. Each will require detailed future considera-
tion. But they all bear less resemblance to light
than to the recently discovered types of rays, of
which the X-rays of Rontgen are typical, produced



RAYS OF RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES 13

when an electric current is forced by powerful appli-*
ances to traverse a nearly vacuous space, a path
which it much prefers not to take if it can avoid it.
The first effects of most new things are old.
Motor-cars and railways do the old work of horses.
In commercial life a really new effect is generally
valueless until it has ceased to be new, as many
inventors know to their cost. In scientific dis-
covery a new effect does not usually proclaim itself
from the housetops. It often needs new instru-
ments and the way must first be paved for its dis-
covery, while old effects are generally recognised
first. It is natural that the first effects of radio-
activity to be discovered should be those more or
less familiar, But for the development to perfec-
tion of that marvellous thing, the photographic
plate, radioactivity would not have been discovered
in the way it was, and we should still be without
one of the readiest methods of detecting it. But
for the work on the conduction of electricity
through gases immediately following the discovery
of the X-rays, the only other method of detecting
radioactivity in the natural state would be unknown,
and therefore also in all probability radioactivity
itself. On the other hand, if radioactive substances
exhibit any entirely new kind of properties — and it
is quite possible that they do — it is very likely that
their very novelty would delay their discovery.



14 ARRESTING FEATURE OF RADIOACTIVITY

Why then, you may ask, if all of the effects of
radioactivity are shown in other ways do I insist
that radioactivity is a phenomenon unparalleled in
science ? The distinctive feature of radioactivity is
not, however, so much in the rays the radioactive
substances emit, though we shall find upon a closer
examination that these are distinctive and most
remarkable. The main interest of the new pro-
perty consists in the spontaneous and continuous
emission of energy of which the rays are but one
manifestation. \ Heat and light may be obtained in
numerous ways, but it is a new thing to find it being
given out by a substance, as it is by radium, year
in, year out, without apparent intermission or dimi-
nution, and without the substance being in any
apparent way consumed or altered. This was the
arresting fact. The radioactive substances appar-
ently were performing the scientifically impossible
feat of evolving a store of energy presumably out
of nothing. N So long as radioactivity was known
only on the scale and in the degree exhibited by
uranium, it was perhaps possible to explain away
this aspect of the question because of the minute-
ness of the amount of energy involved and the
difficulty of proving that it was not in some way
derived from the surroundings. But the work of
M. and Mme. Curie, by their discovery of radium,
made the world familiar with an element over a



ARRESTING FEATURE OF RADIOACTIVITY 15

million times as radioactive as uranium. In this
case the energy evolved is great enough to produce
effects which are obvious to all and which cannot be
explained away. In a strictly scientific sense there
is no difference of principle between the radio-
activity of radium and that of uranium. The
difference is one of degree only, but it is so great
that radium, though, as we shall come to see, not so
wonderful in reality as uranium, rapidly acquired a
monopoly of public interest and attention.



CHAPTER II.

Mme. Curie's discovery of radium — Radioactivity an atomic property
— Its unalterability — The radioactivity of thorium— Pitchblende-
Quantity of radium in pitchblende — The International Radium
Standard — The smallest quantity of radium that can be detected
— Experiments with pure radium bromide — Doctrine of energy —
Energy evolved by radium compared with- that from the burning
of coal— Source of cosmical energy— A quotation from Professor
Tait— Radium and the " physically impossible."

IT is worth while to stop to consider the
starting-point of Mme. Curie's discovery.
Chemistry analyses all known substances into their
component constituents or elements, all of which
are fundamentally different, the one from the other,
and inconvertible the one into the other. Uranium
is such an element, gold, silver, lead, and many of
the common metals are others, but uranium is dis-
tinguished by having relatively the heaviest of all
known atoms. The atom is the minimum unit
quantity of an element. The relative atomic
weight of an element is one of its most important
characteristics, and as a first approximation the
atom of hydrogen is chosen as the standard and is
assigned unit value. For exact work it is more
convenient to choose oxygen as the standard, with

16



MME. CURIES FIRST STEP 17

the value 16. On this basis the atomic weight of
hydrogen becomes i # oo8, and that of uranium 238*5.
Now radioactivity is an intrinsic property of the
element uranium, and therefore of the atom of
uranium. This Mme. Curie first recognised, and
it formed the starting-point of her work. In the
case of uranium, the element itself and all its various
compounds are radioactive, and the radioactivity of
each compound is conditioned simply by the relative
amount of uranium it contains. It does not matter
where the uranium comes from— it is always to the
same degree radioactive. Non-radioactive uranium
is unknown. Not only so, but it is absolutely im-
possible really to affect the radioactivity of uranium
or any other of the radioactive elements in the
slightest degree. In this the process is utterly
unlike any other process previously known in
Nature. Radioactivity is part and parcel of the
very nature of the element which possesses the
property, and therefore of the atom or unit quantity
of the element. The attempts that have been made
artificially to alter or to stop the radioactivity of
an element have met with signal failure. This is
still an impossible feat — a thing modern science
cannot do — and yet, as we shall come to see quite
clearly in the sequel, a thing which science must do
if mankind is to realise to the full the destiny these
discoveries have for the first time unveiled. There



1 8 THORIUM

is another still impossible feat, to the accomplish-
ment of which all the appliances of modern science
have been directed in vain, as well as all the utmost
power of man from the earliest time. It is trans-
mutation, or the conversion of one element into
another.

Radioactivity is the one process going on in
matter we cannot influence or stop, while trans-
mutation is the one process in matter we have
so far signally failed to effect. The juxtaposition
of radioactivity and transmutation is not a fanciful
one, because it will appear, as we proceed, that
the two processes are most intimately connected.

Radioactivity being a property of the element
uranium, it was natural to ask whether uranium
alone of all the eighty elements known possessed
it. This was the starting-point of Mme. Curies
illustrious researches in the subject. She found
only one other element among those known which
possessed the property — the element thorium,
which, at one time rare and little known, has come
into industrial prominence of recent years in the
manufacture of the Welsbach incandescent gas
mantle, 1 of which it forms the main constituent.
To the electrical test — the power of discharging

1 The cause of the action of the gas-mantle in generating light is
quite unconnected with the property of radioactivity.



THORIUM 1 9

>h- a gold-leaf electroscope — thorium preparations are

ice of about the same degree of radioactivity as

ost uranium ; but to the photographic plate thorium

ns- is far less active than uranium, owing to the fact

nto that the type of rays which affect the photographic
plate most strongly are not those with most effect

in on the electroscope. The radioactivity of thorium

ms- is a fact which can be beautifully demonstrated by

ave any one acquainted with the process of photo-

tion graphy. An incandescent mantle, after burning off

:iful the fibre, is cut open and pressed as flat as

that possible on a card. A photographic plate, which

1. has first been wrapped in a light-tight envelope,
is laid upon the flat mantle, and the whole is

lent left undisturbed for a fortnight or longer. On

jutn developing the plate it will be found that an image

5 sed of the mantle has been formed on the plate in the

r ie's dark by the rays from the thorium contained in

mnd the mantle. Any one can do this simple experi-

hich ment for himself.

iuiflf Fig- 2 (facing p. io) shows the result I obtained

jtie with a very thin piece of aluminium foil between

t be the film and the mantle. The foil, while quite

gas opaque, allows the a- as well as the £-rays to go

ien t through. Paper would stop the a-rays entirely.

jfaff The radioactivity of thorium, though producing

the same general effects as that of uranium, differs

jhtI5 from it entirely in detail. Indeed, by a few simple



20 PITCHBLENDE

tests on the radioactivity, any one of the radio-
active elements can be recognised and distinguished
far more quickly and certainly than by any of the
other chemical or spectroscopic tests, even when
present in very minute quantities. In the his-
torical development of the views now held in
radioactivity thorium played a leading part. But,
as it is quite foreign to my intention to give any-
thing approaching a detailed systematic account
of the subject, and as radium lends itself more
readily to experimental demonstrations, I shall
confine myself primarily to the properties of the
latter substance.

Although uranium and thorium were the only
two known elements possessing radioactivity, Mme.
Curie found that the natural minerals containing
uranium are more radioactive than can be accounted
for by the uranium present. Certain minerals,
called pitchblende, particularly the variety from
the celebrated Joachimsthal mine in Austria, con-
tain often more than 50 per cent of uranium in
the form of uranium oxide. The radioactivity of
pitchblende to the photographic plate is beautifully
shown by two photographs of Sir W. Crookes
(Fig. 3). The lower figure shows the polished
face of a piece of pitchblende photographed in
the ordinary way by daylight. The upper figure



Sir William Crookes"
igurt is t daylight phatogrj



PITCHBLENDE 21

was taken by placing the polished face of the
mineral on a photographic film wrapped in light-
tight paper. The lighter portions of the figure
indicate where the plate has been acted on by the
rays from the radioactive matter in the pitchblende.
Some pitchblendes are from three to four times
as radioactive as pure uranium oxide. This could
only be the case, Mme. Curie correctly argued, if
there existed in the minerals one or more unknown
elements more powerfully radioactive than uranium.
By the ordinary process of chemical analysis it is
easy to separate out the various constituent ele-
ments in pitchblende. There are a great number
of elements in pitchblende, though most of them
are present in very small amount. A fact that will
be found significant later is that lead is always
present in important quantity. Mme. Curie found
that of the elements so separated two in particular,
the bismuth and the barium, were strongly radio-
active. Now ordinary bismuth and barium are not
at all radioactive, and the radioactivity of these
elements, when separated from pitchblende, is really
due to the presence of two new elements in minute
amount mixed with them. The one associated
with bismuth was discovered first by Mme. Curie
and named Polonium^ after her native country. Its
consideration is more profitably delayed till later.
The other, which was discovered very soon after-



22 QUANTITY OF RADIUM IN PITCHBLENDE

wards, is associated with the barium and is
Radium.

The exact quantity of radium in pitchblende and
other uranium minerals is a fact of considerable
importance. There is one part of the element
radium for every three million two hundred thousand
parts of the element uranium in pitchblende. The
pitchblende may be of any degree of richness, from
only a few per cent, to over 50 per cent of uranium.
But of even the richest pitchblendes between 100
and 200 tons would be needed to produce an ounce
of pure radium. The compound usually sold,
radium bromide, contains, if pure, 58*5 per cent,
of radium. But what it lacks in quantity radium
makes up for in quality — that is to say, in radio-
activity. It is like the myriad of roses we are told
go to make a single drop of the real attar, which is
almost priceless. The radium that is extracted is a
million times more radioactive than the mineral, and
several million times more than pure uranium itself.
Conversely, just as you can buy quite a large bottle
of rose-water for a small sum, so quantity is not
the only consideration to be taken into account in
the buying of radium preparations. A very small
quantity of radium is sufficient to confer on a large
quantity of an inactive salt many of its own peculiar
properties. Particularly is this the case with the
property of glowing visibly in the dark. Weak
radium preparations, which contain usually barium,



QUANTITY OF RADIUM RECOGNISABLE 23

shine by themselves in the dark more strongly
even than the pure radium salts, owing to a phos-
phorescent action of the barium salts, although
they may hardly contain enough radium to affect
an X-ray screen through a piece of metal. If you
mix a very minute quantity of radium with a
quantity of a very highly phosphorescent body,
like sulphide of zinc, it will shine in the dark so
brilliantly that an inexperienced person might well
be deceived into believing that it must contain a
large quantity of radium. So great has become
the need that radium preparations should be of
definitely ascertainable quality that in 19 10 an
International Radium Standards Committee was
formed, with the result that there is now pre-
served in Paris an International Radium Standard
prepared by Mme. Curie, and consisting of a tube
containing twenty-two milligrams of the most care-
fully purified radium chloride. This standard is to
form the basis for the preparation of secondary
standards to be supplied to the official testing
institutions of the various countries, and henceforth
there should be as much definiteness about the
milligram of radium as there is about a pound of tea.

It is an interesting digression to consider here
the smallest absolute quantity of radium which can
be detected and identified with certainty in the
laboratory. One fifty-millionth of a milligram, or



24 EXPERIMENTS WITH RADIUM

one three-thousand-millionth of a grain of radium
is quite easy to recognise, whilst with special care
one-tenth of this amount could probably be detected.
This is far less than could be detected in the case
of any non-radioactive element by any method
known, not excluding even the spectroscope. If
the half of a grain of pure radium bromide, which is
in this room to-night, were divided equally among
every human being at present alive in the world,
and one such portion were returned to us, it would
prove sufficient for detection and identification by
means of a gold-leaf electroscope with the greatest
ease.' With half a grain of a pure radium com-
pound the main effects of radioactivity, which in the
case of uranium or thorium would either be too
feeble to show or would require the use of incon-
veniently delicate instruments, can be shown in a
striking and convincing manner to you all in the
simplest possible way.

Of the small amount of radium bromide, which
by a labour of love certain chemists have succeeded
in extracting from pitchblende, I am fortunate to
possess about a grain, or sixty-five milligrams.
Half of this quantity, which I shall use for most of
my lecture experiments, is contained in a small
ebonite capsule. The other half is dissolved in
water and not brought into this lecture-room, but
kept in the laboratory half a mile away. With the



■ •


• • ••

• • -



• • • •



• •.



• • •


EXPERIMENTS WITH RADIUM 25

room dark the radium in the capsule is hardly
visible to you, because the rays do not of them-
selves affect the unaided eye, but if I bring some
crystals of the fluorescent substance, barium platino-
cyanide, near to it, you will see that the crystals
shine out at once with a beautiful green light. An
ordinary X-ray fluorescent screen, which is simply
a piece of card painted over with the same
fluorescent substance in the form of powder, is
very convenient for these experiments. When thin
pieces of metal foil are placed between the radiuip
and the crystals you see their brightness is only
slightly reduced, while several shillings can be
interposed one above the other without altogether
stopping the rays from the radium. Those in the
front will see the crystals still shining faintly,
although the rays from the radium have first to
traverse more than half an inch of solid silver
before reaching the crystals. The electrical effect
oi radioactivity can be shown in a very rough and
simple way with this, comparatively speaking, large
quantity of radium. A silk tassel is stroked with a
rubber tobacco-pouch and so electrified. All the
threads then repel one another and stand out as
you see (Fig. 4). The moment the radium is
brought near the threads collapse at once (Fig. 5).
Lastly, the photographic action of the rays is seen
in the photograph (Fig. 6, facing p. 44) which was
obtained by slowly writing, with a small tube con-



26 VALUE OF RADIUM

taining a small fraction of a grain of radium bromide
as if it were a pencil, over a photographic plate
wrapped in black paper, and then developing the
plate without exposure to light.

By the aid of delicate thermometers it could also
be shown that this small quantity of radium is always
a few degrees hotter than the surrounding air.

The one fact about radium, which every one is
aware of, is its tremendous cost. When you con-
sider that even of the best ore several hundred-
weights must be worked up to obtain the small
quantity here exhibited, you can understand that
the price is necessarily very high. The price rose
rapidly from about 8s. the milligram for radium
bromide in 1903 to about £\$ the milligram in
191 2, and even at the latter price very inferior
preparations have found a ready sale. We
shall see, as we proceed, that from its very nature
any strongly radioactive body like radium must
always be excessively rare. Indeed, in the degree
of radioactivity we have a scientific standard of
rarity, and therefore of "value." There are un-
fortunately some fields of scientific investigation,
of which radioactivity is one, which cannot be
thoroughly explored without continuous and con-
siderable expenditure. The old boast of science,
that some of her grandest discoveries were made
with very simple apparatus, largely built up of wire



A SCIENTIFIC MONOPOLY 27

and sealing-wax, costing little or nothing, does not
apply to any of the discoveries with which we are
now concerned. The investigations of Mme. Curie
naturally have cost many thousands of pounds, pro-
vided in part by the Austrian Government and the
Rothschilds. This radium we are using to-night we
owe to the work of a German chemist, Dr. Giesel,
who undertook its extraction on a large scale in the
early days when the raw material was to be obtained
in the market, and who very unselfishly distributed
much of the radium he prepared among workers in
all parts of the world. To-day the Austrian Govern-
ment, who hold the monopoly of the Joachimsthal
mine, do not allow the ore to be exported, and there
is a great dearth of the raw material. Even those
who have borne the heat and burden of the day,
who have given the waste raw material its value,
and who have discovered the very methods of
extraction, are unable any longer to obtain the
raw material for their researches. A monopoly in
scientific research is an unfortunate innovation, but
such, alas ! so limited is the supply of radium, exists
to-day. The Royal Society recently obtained, as
a privilege, a thousand pounds' worth of the raw
material, but it produced less than fifty milligrams
of radium.

To-night it is not my intention to. take you
through the various phases of the new properties



28 DOCTRINE OF ENERG Y

of radium. We have to face squarely the great
general question which its simple existence has
demanded of physical science. Last century will
remain for ever memorable on account of the de-
velopment and establishment of the great doctrine
of energy. Those were great days for physical
science in Scotland, for that doctrine, which lies at
the root of all modern industry and enterprise, took
its rise largely in Scotland, and was developed by
Tait, of Edinburgh, and Lord Kelvin, of Glasgow.
For a full account of these stirring developments
you should read Tait's Recent Advances in Physical
Science, which, in spite of the fact that it is now over
thirty years old, still continues fresh and inspiring.
The first law, that of the conservation of energy, states
that energy is a real entity, and has a real existence
no less than matter, and no more than matter can
energy be created or destroyed, although the forms
it may assume are legion. The second law, that of
the availability of energy, is sufficiently accurately
stated for present purposes by saying that the same
energy is available for useful work but once. To
obtain useful work from any source of stored- up or
potential energy, it is necessary to transform it into
new forms which are kinetic, and by which some-
thing is made to move. As motion is invariably
attended by friction or similar processes, ultimately
the energy passes into heat. It is said to be de-



DOCTRINE OF ENERGY 29

graded into low-grade or waste energy, for although
all forms of energy tend, after assuming the kinetic
form, to turn into heat, the transformation of the
waste heat so produced back into useful forms can-
not be practically effected. The conversion is not
altogether impossible, but requires for its accom-
plishment the degradation of more fresh energy than
is gained, and so is practically out of the question.

The practical aspect of the question may be
summed up by saying that if you want useful energy
you must pay for it like any other commodity, and
the value of the energy, though not the energy
itself, is destroyed by use. The up-to-date street
car driven by the electric motor, which has displaced
the old horse-tram, although it has not the same
obvious incentive to locomotion as its predecessor,
nevertheless does not go by itself. It requires
energy or power, which is bought arid sold and
has a value as strictly as the oats and hay which
energised the now emancipated horse. The driving
power of the machinery of the modern world is often
mysterious, but the laws of energy state that nothing
goes by itself, and our experience, in spite of all the
perpetual motion machines which inventors have
claimed to have constructed, bore this doctrine out,
until we came face to face with radium. Nothing
goes by itself in Nature,' except apparently radium
and the radioactive substances. That is why, in



30 DOCTRINE OF ENERGY

radioactivity, science has broken fundamentally new
ground.

I cannot too plainly insist that available energy,
though immaterial and intangible, has a definite and
real physical existence. Were it not so, coal would
not be the very expensive commodity it unfortu-
nately is rapidly becoming. No one burns coal for
the sake of polluting the atmosphere, but simply
and solely because it gives out during combustion
a certain amount of energy as light or heat. Last
century civilisation may be said to have attained its
majority and to have entered upon the control of
an inheritance of energy stored up by the sun in
fuel during the long ages of the past, and now it is
dissipating that inheritance as quickly as it can.
With the lightheartedness and irresponsibility of
youth, it is taking no thought of the future,
but confidently assumes that the supply of natural
energy, upon which at every turn it is now entirely
dependent, will continue indefinitely. Well! if it
does not do so, new stores of energy cannot be
created to order, and there will be an end to the
age of energy in which we are living, and to civili-
sation as we have come to understand it.

Energy is susceptible of exact measurement and,
though it exists in many varieties, all forms of
energy can be most readily and completely con-



ENERGY EVOLVED BY RADIUM 31

verted into heat and measured as such. The
energy given out by radium, although it is in
nature new, is no exception to this rule. Practically
the whole of the energy is transformed into heat
when the radium is kept in a leaden vessel, so that
the rays are absorbed in the surrounding metal.
The actual amount of heat given out, for instance,
by this small quantity on the table is, of course, very
small, but in comparison with the quantity of sub-
stance producing it, it is very great indeed. Exact
experiments have proved that 1 gram ( = 1 5*4 grains)
of radium gives out 133 calories per hour. The
amount of heat evolved by any quantity of radium
in three-quarters of an hour is as much as is
required to raise a quantity of water equal in weight
to the radium from the freezing-point to the boiling-
point Radium bromide, if it is pure, consists
roughly of three-fifths by weight of the element
radium and two-fifths of the element bromine.
Half a grain of radium bromide thus evolves two
and a half calories every hour. This specimen of
half a grain of radium bromide has been in my
possession for nine years, and the outpouring of
energy has been going on ceaselessly day and night
at a steady rate. A simple calculation shows that
in this time about 200,000 calories have been evolved.
To obtain an idea of what this means consider the
amount of energy given out in the burning of coal.
A weight of coal equal to the weight of this radium



3 2 ENERG Y E VOL VED BY RADIUM

bromide would give out during complete combustion
only about 250 calories, so that this radium has
evolved in nine years 800 times the energy obtain-
able from the same weight of coal. I have chosen
coal for the comparison because the combustion of
carbon furnishes the modern world with its main
supply of energy. During the last nine years this
radium has given hundreds of times as much energy
as could be obtained from an equal weight of any
other kind of substance in any way known. Coal is
no longer coal when it is burnt and consumed. Gun-
powder and dynamite, once they have exploded and
evolved their stored-up energy, disappear as such,
and there remain incombustible and non-explosive
solids and gases, out of which no more energy can
be drawn. But this radium is as active as ever. So
far, careful measurements have failed to detect the
least diminution in the radioactivity of radium with
time. Rather it increases steadily, rapidly in the
first month and slowly for the first few years after
preparation, for certain profound reasons we shall
have to go into subsequently.

In the face of a new fact of this character it is
obvious that this doctrine of energy, which we
thought so well founded, requires further considera-
tion. Based as it has always been on the results of
our experience and the practical impossibility of



COSMIC A L ENERGY 33

achieving perpetual motion of any kind, it is con-
fronted with a natural example, going on apparently
for an unlimited space of time under our very eyes,
which not only does not come to a stop, but which
cannot be stopped by any means whatever. Now,
although the doctrine of energy accords well
enough with our terrestrial experiences, the student
of the physical sciences has only to turn his
thoughts from the laboratory to the heavens to
see there, in the larger laboratory of Nature, an
example of practical perpetual motion on the
grandest and most majestic scale. What, for ex-
ample, is the source of the apparently inexhaustible
supply of energy from the sun, upon the receipt of
a minute and insignificant fraction of which life on
this planet absolutely depends for its continued
existence from year to year? This is a question
which has been frequently asked and only im-
perfectly answered by physical science. It has
been the custom vaguely to connect the appar-
ently ehdless and inexhaustible outpourings of
energy going on everywhere in the universe with
its vast scale and dimensions. In the background
there has always been the tacit assumption that
the supply of fresh energy is only apparently
inexhaustible, and that in some remote future
a time will at length arrive when the supplies
of fresh energy are exhausted and all things



34 QUOTATION FROM PROFESSOR TAIT

will come to a stop and remain at rest for
ever. We have applied the teachings of the
laboratory, our knowledge of the laws of energy
and its conservation, and the impossibility of
perpetual motion, without modification to the
cosmos, only making allowance for its enormous
scale.

Astronomers, if one may judge from recent
utterances, still continue to regard cosmical evolu-
tion as proceeding on these old conventional lines.
That is, they seem to regard it still as only a
question of time before the sun and planets cool
down to a dead uniform temperature. In former
days this point of view was the only possible one.
A hot body radiating heat and light into space,
even when all possible sources of energy, such as
the accretion of meteorites, shrinkage, etc., have
been allowed for, must ultimately radiate away its
energy. The same is still true but with a differ-
ence. Thus Professor Tait, in his Recent Advances
in Physical Science (1876), says (p. 169) : ' " If we
were to trace the state of affairs back, instead of to
ten millions, to a hundred millions of years, we
should find that (if the earth then existed at all)
if that collocation of matter which we call the
earth was then actually formed, and if the physical
laws which at present hold have been in operation
during that hundred million years, then the surface



i



QUOTATION FROM PROFESSOR TAIT 35

of the earth would undoubtedly have been liquid
and at a high white heat, so that it would have
been utterly incompatible with the existence of life
of any kind such as we can conceive from what we
are acquainted with. Thus we can say at once to
geologists, that granting this premiss — that physical
laws have remained as they now are, and that we
know of all the physical laws which have been
operating during that time — we cannot give more
scope for their speculations than about ten or (say at
most) fifteen millions of years.

" But I dare say many of you are acquainted with
the speculations of Lyell and others, especially of
Darwin, who tell us that even for a comparatively
brief portion of recent geological history three
hundred millions of years will not suffice.

" We say, so much the worse for geology as at
present understood by its chief authorities, for, as
you will presently see, physical considerations from
various independent points of view render it utterly
impossible that more than ten or fifteen millions of
years can be granted.'

Again (p. 154): "Take (in mass equal to the
sun's mass) the most energetic chemicals known to
us, and in proper proportion for giving the greatest
amount of heat by actual chemical combination,
and, so far as we yet know their properties, we
cannot see the means of supplying the sun's present



36 NEW STORES OF NATURAL ENERGY

waste for even 5000 years. . . . This question
is totally unanswerable, unless there be chemical
agencies at work in the sun of a far more power-
ful order than anything that we meet with on the
earths surface."

I do not quote these utterances with any wish to
revive the old controversy between geologists and
physicists, long since tacitly abandoned by both
sides mutually as barren and unprofitable, but
because of their present extraordinary aptness.
To-day, science has come to know, by means of
radioactivity, of agencies at work on the earth s
surface of a far more powerful order than anything
that was known in the time of Professor Tait.
The discovery of radioactivity and the revelation
it has given of unsuspected stores of energy in
Nature available for cosmical purposes, of necessity
put the whole question of the evolution, the past
history and the future destiny of the universe in a
new light. This is one of the conclusions of
clearly general interest which follow from the
recent discoveries.

There is nothing of the vast scale and dimensions
of the universe about this tiny scrap of radium.
Yet it is giving out energy at a rate, relative to its
mass, which no sun or star is doing. Suppose, for
example, our sun, instead of being composed of the



THE INDIFFERENCE OF RADIUM 37

materials it is, which we know by the spectroscope
are practically the same as those of the earth, were
made of pure radium. Provided only that every
part of its mass gave out energy at the rate this
radium on the table is doing, there would then be
no difficulty in accounting for its outpourings of
energy. Rather, the light and heat that would be
given out from such a sun would be of the order of
a million times greater than they actually are. On
another count also one's thoughts almost uncon-
sciously revert from radium to the transcendental
phenomena of the larger universe, for in no other
phenomena are we so reduced to the position of
onlookers, powerless alike to influence or control.
All the powerful resources of the modern labora-
tory — extremes of heat and cold, and of pressure,
violent chemical reagents, the action of powerful
explosives and the most intense electrical dis-
charges — do not affect the radioactivity of radium
or the rate at which it works in the slightest
degree. It draws its supplies of energy from an
hitherto unknown source and obeys as yet un-
discovered laws. There is something sublime
about its aloofness from and its indifference to
its external environment. It seems to claim
lineage with the worlds beyond us, fed with the
same inexhaustible fires, urged by the same un-
controllable mechanicism which keeps the great



38 "PHYSICAL IMPOSSIBILITY"

suns alight in the heavens over endless periods
of time. This tiny speck of matter we can hold
in our hands exhibits in perfect miniature many
ancient mysteries, forgotten almost in their
familiarity, or mistakenly and too easily dismissed
as belonging and appropriate to the infinitely great
dimensions of the universe. The "physical im-
possibility" of one era becomes the commonplace
of the next, and in the controversy between the
geologists and the physicists we have a good
illustration that no theory can claim a universal
application. It is of necessity partial, and bounded
on all sides by the unknown and unexplored. It
is rarely proved false, so surely and truly are the
foundations of modern science laid, but it is
liable at any moment to be restricted in its appli-
cation to the particular cases for which it was
formulated and found not to apply in new spheres
at the time of its inception unsuspected. As we
shall see, the law of the conservation of energy
is not necessarily controverted by any of the
new facts with reference to radium, but prior to
these discoveries our knowledge of the avail-
able sources of energy in Nature has been partial
and superficial to a degree.



CHAPTER III.

The radiations of the radio-elements — a-, p- t and 7-rays — Test of
penetrating power — Experiments with the penetrating P~ and
7-rays — The non-penetrating a-rays — Experiment to show the
absorption of a-rays by air — Physical nature of radiations — Neces-
sity for an ether — Corpuscular and wave radiations — a- and 0-rays
due to the expulsion of particles — Can a single a-particle be de-
tected? — The spinthariscope—Counting the a-partides expelled
by radium.

IN the previous lectures we have considered the
bare fact that radium and the radioactive sub-
stances are continually evolving from themselves
a perennial supply of energy, and the fundamentally
new ground which this discovery opens up in
physical science. To-night our inquiries will be
directed to one special portion of the subject, namely,
the nature of the rays emitted by the radioactive
elements, by means of which, or rather of the
effects of which, the property was first discovered.
These rays themselves, apart from their effects, we
have hitherto scarcely considered, but they play an
essential part in the theoretical scheme by which
the activity of the radio-elements is now inter-
preted.

The tracing back of the main effects of radio-

39



40 RAYS OF RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES

activity, photographic, fluorescent, electrical, and
thermal, to definite radiations emitted by the radio-
elements came very early in the subject, but it must
not be forgotten that such tracing back is of the es-
sence of the discovery. Too frequently it is wrongly
assumed without such evidence that any substance
capable of simulating one or other of the various
effects of radioactivity is therefore a radioactive
substance. Naturally, the exact study of the new
radiations has been mainly the work of physicists.
They have succeeded, not only in clearly analysing
into distinct classes the complex radiations involved
and distinguishing the part played by each alone,
but also they have advanced very far towards a
solution of the real nature of each class of radiation
emitted. Much of this latter work, however, is
based upon reasoning of too specialised and in-
tricate character for general presentation, and as
these lectures are intended primarily for the general
public, and not for trained physicists, I propose con-
centrating attention for the most part on the con-
clusions which are universally accepted and of the
greatest general interest. Although the reasoning
is difficult, the chief conclusions are very simple and
easily followed, and they fit in with the general
scheme of the cause and nature of radioactivity in
a way which makes the whole subject clearer and
more easily visualised.



o-, P-, AND y-RAYS 41

The first analysis of the complex radiations
emitted by each of the radio-elements — uranium,
thorium, and radium — was done by Rutherford, and
much of the work we are considering is his, and
has called forth in their highest degree his well-
known experimental genius and energy. He
classed the rays into three main types, the a-, fl-,
and y-, distinguished from one another by enormous
differences in their power of penetrating matter.
I may say at once that the a-rays of radium, for
instance, are readily distinguishable in penetrating
power from the a-rays of uranium, and the latter
again from those of thorium. Moreover, the a-rays
of radium are themselves complex and consist of
no less than four separate types readily distin-
guished. The same is true of the f$- and y-rays
of radium, which are themselves complex and
recognisably different from the /3- and y-rays of
uranium or thorium. But the differences between
the a-rays as a class, for example, are small and
unimportant relatively compared to the enormous
difference between any a-ray and any )8-ray or
y-ray. The most penetrating a-ray known is not
much more than twice as penetrating as the least
penetrating known, whereas the /8-rays as a class
may be considered to be approximately a hun-
dred times more penetrating than the a-, and the
y-rays a hundred times more penetrating than



42 PENETRATION TEST

the P-. Again, the kind of matter penetrated,
although it has a certain influence which may be
different for different types of rays, is only of
secondary importance. For these rays, like the
new X-rays, and unlike light, are absorbed by
matter roughly in proportion to its density, and
quite independently of its optical qualities of trans-
parency and opacity. The first result of these re-
searches was to bring into prominence the a-class
of rays, which at first sight are of apparently little
importance, and to diminish relatively the impor-
tance of the fl-class of rays which had been operative
in the photographic effects hitherto mainly studied.
For the a-rays are completely absorbed by very
thin screens — even by a sheet of thin paper, or by
three inches of ordinary gaseous air, — and they pro-
duce but little action on the photographic plate in
comparison with the £-rays, which are able to pass
through a visiting card or piece of tinfoil with ease.
To the electrical test — the discharge, for example,
of an electrified silk tassel or electroscope — the
a-rays are immensely more effective than the P- and
y-rays together, and from this fact Rutherford con-
cluded, and the conclusion has been wholly borne
out by subsequent developments, that the energy
possessed by these feebly penetrating, and not at
first sight very striking, a-rays is always immensely
greater than that of the other two types taken



EXPERIMENTS WITH )3- AND y-RAYS 43

together. In fact, the ft- and y-rays at most possess
but a few per cent of the total energy of radiation,
and therefore are in this fundamental respect rela-
tively of less consequence than the previously
neglected a-class. Although less suited to lecture
experiments than the other more penetrating types,
the a-class have proved far the most instructive and
important in the theory of radioactive change.

The small capsule in which my radium is con-
tained is closed by a thin sheet of mica, which
effectively stops all the a-rays, so that in working
with the capsule only the fi- and y-rays are opera-
tive. The platinocyanide salts fluoresce most
brilliantly under the j8-rays. On interposing suc-
cessive thicknesses of thin copper or aluminium foil
the fluorescence is weakened, very rapidly at first,
but a point is soon reached when the feeble fluor-
escence remaining is not much further weakened
by additional thicknesses of foil. This is because
the j8-rays have all been absorbed, and there re-
main only the relatively feeble but extraordinarily
penetrating y-rays. These y-rays are always very
feeble, and comparatively unimportant, but their
chief interest lies in the fact that they are by fai
the most penetrating type of radiation at present
known. If the capsule is completely closed in a
box of steel; half an inch thick, and a platino-



44 y-RAYS

cyanide crystal laid on the top, those in front can
readily see that the crystal still fluoresces, and
stops the moment it is taken away from the radium.
Through a pile of twelve shillings, or pennies, the
effect can still be observed, while by means of a
sensitive gold-leaf electroscope it can readily be
shown that some of the rays still penetrate a foot
thickness of solid iron, or six inches of lead.

The rays from radium are not well adapted for
the taking of radiographs of the kind produced by
X-rays. The j8-rays are hardly sufficiently pene-
trating for this purpose, so that the flesh as well as
the bones of the hand, for example, casts a heavy
shadow. The y-rays, on the other hand, are far
too penetrating, and the bones hardly cast a
shadow at all. The picture (Fig. 7), however, is
a good example of a radium radiograph taken by
the y-rays of radium. A small box of compasses with
the lid shut was placed on a table. Over it, film
down, was placed an X-ray plate wrapped in a light-
tight envelope. On the floor beneath, at a distance
of twenty-five inches from the plate, was placed
one-tenth of a grain of pure radium bromide sealed
up in a tiny glass tube. The radium was placed
between the poles of an electro-magnet, as recom-
mended by Mme. Curie, to deflect away the
j8-rays which tend to blur the distinctness of the
picture. In this way the y-rays of radium were



Fie. 6. Wrilten liy Radium in the Dark.

idiograph by R. Kill Cromhie, Esq., Journal eftht Rtntgtn Society, Dec, 1906.)



Fill. 7. Closed Box of Compasses lakell w



y-RA YS 45

alone used. The exposure was five days. It will
be seen that the shadow cast by the wooden box is
scarcely noticeable, while even the metal compasses
and fastenings of the box by no means entirely
stop the rays. The metal parts appear in the
negative only slightly darker than the unprotected
portions of the plate. The negative was reduced
and intensified before reproduction.

At first the y-rays appeared to be a secondary
radiation produced by and accompanying the /3-rays,
much as X-rays are produced by and accompany
cathode-rays. The /3- and y-rays seemed always
to go together, any variation of the /3-rays being
accompanied by a similar variation of the y-rays.
This is now known, however, not to be invariably
the case, and the opinion is gaining ground that the
/3- and y-rays are not necessarily connected. The
real nature of the y-rays is at present an open ques-
tion as rival views are in the field, and as the rays
are not of primary importance at the present time we
may, with these experiments and remarks, dismiss
the subject and pass on to the more detailed con-
sideration of the two more important types of rays.

Before proceeding to show experiments with the
a -rays, it is necessary to touch on certain considera-
tions which come into play on account of their
very great absorption in passing through matter.
In the first place, radioactivity is a mass or volume



46 a-RA YS

phenomenon. That is to say, every part, not
the surface only but the inner portions also, of a
radium salt, for example, is giving out a-, /3- and
y-rays. All these rays are absorbed by the sub-
stance itself very considerably, for the salts of
radium are dense or heavy. But this absorption
naturally does not affect the more penetrating rays
nearly so much as the feebly penetrating a-rays.
That part of the latter, generated inside the salt,
does not escape at all. Only a very thin surface
film contributes to the a-radiation. The conse-
quence is that whereas, with the small quantities of
radium that we have to work with, the strength of
the penetrating rays is more or less proportional
to the quantity of radium employed, with the
a-rays this is no longer the case. The weight of the
substance is less important than the amount of sur-
face exposed. A very small quantity, say a milli-
gram, of radium bromide, spread out as a thin
film on a large plate, will give out immensely more
a-rays than the same quantity in the form of a small
crystal. In order to free the /8- and y-rays from the
a-rays, or the y-rays from the /8-rays, it suffices to
interpose screens of successively increasing thick-
ness until the more easily stopped type is completely
absorbed. But it is not possible so easily to eliminate
by physical methods the /8- and y-rays from the
a-rays in order to leave the latter by themselves.
For practical purposes, however, this result can be



*-RA YS 47

achieved very simply. If we take a very minute
quantity of a radium salt spread over a very large
area, the /8- and y-rays from so small a quantity
will be so feeble as to be practically negligible,
whereas the a-rays under these circumstances will
reach their greatest intensity. For practical pur-
poses a thin film of pure radium salt can be used
to give a-rays by themselves, essentially free from
£- and y-rays.

Such a thin film I have prepared for these ex-
periments. On this shallow platinum dish, about
a square inch in area, 1 have evaporated down a
solution containing about a milligram of pure radium
bromide, and the dish, with its precious film open
to the air, is carefully preserved when not in use in
a special tube containing a desiccating agent to
keep it dry, so that without undue risk of loss I can
work .with a bare film of radium salt and show you
the a-rays. Over the bare film I bring the electri-
fied silk tassel. It collapses instantly, in fact, much
faster than it does when brought over the whole
thirty milligrams of radium bromide contained in
the mica-covered capsule. The a-rays from one
milligram of radium produce more electrical effect
than the £- and y-rays from thirty milligrams. Now
I cover the bare film of radium with a single sheet
of thin writing-paper, which stops the a-rays com-
pletely, the j8- and y-rays scarcely at all. You



48 EXPERIMENTS WITH a,RAYS

observe the tassel remains now charged as if the
radium were absent. The £- and y-rays from so
small a quantity hardly appreciably discharge it.

But if I displace the paper ever so slightly and
expose a tiny part of the bare surface, the tassel
instantly collapses. From these experiments, and
the fact that it was the fashion at the time to cover
radioactive substances when experimenting with
them, you will have no difficulty in understanding
how it was that these feebly penetrating but in-
tensely powerful a-rays remained at first neglected
and almost unknown.

I now have to show you a very striking experi-
ment indeed, suggested by some profound investi-
gations of Professor Bragg in Adelaide, on the
a-rays, to which we shall again have occasion to
refer. So readily are these a-rays stopped that a
few inches of air suffice entirely to absorb them.
But the a-rays show this remarkable peculiarity not
exhibited by any other type known. Each individual
a-ray of any one homogeneous type travels exactly
the same distance in an absorbing medium, and is
stopped sharply and completely when a certain
thickness of matter has been penetrated. The con-
sequence is that if we work with a homogeneous
beam of a-rays, just without the distance of com-
plete absorption, there is absolutely no effect, while



Kit:. 9. Apparatus lo show Aliwirpiiun of (i-kiiv-i liy Air.



Fie. II. The Spinthariscope of Sir William Cruokes



ABSORPTION OF a-RA YS BY AIR 49

just within there is a very large effect. I have said
that the a-rays derived from radium are complex,
consisting of four different types, each with a
definite " range," as it is termed, or distance, it will
travel in any given absorbing medium. For the


Fig. 8.

purposes of this experiment, however, it is neces-
sary to consider only the most penetrating type,
which Bragg found could travel in air at atmo-
spheric pressure and ordinary temperature, 71
millimeters (or just under three inches) and no more.
Now this flask (Figs. 8 and 9) is a little more than
six inches in diameter, and it has been coated on the

B



I



50 ABSORPTION OF *RA YS BY AIR

upper hemisphere of the inside surface with a phos-
phorescent film of zinc sulphide. For these a-rays
the usual phosphorescers (e.g. the platinocyanides,
willemite, etc.), employed for the fi- and y-rays, are far
less sensitive than crystallised zinc sulphide, or, as it
is called, Sidot's hexagonal blende. The coated flask
is arranged so that I can plunge my platinum dish
with its bare radium film upward inside the flask
and hold it centrally by a cork. In the dark, the
flask being full of air, you observe hardly any
glow. The three inches of air surrounding the radium
film on all sides suffices completely to stop all the
a-rays, and the £- and y-rays, from so small a quantity
of radium, produce only a negligible effect on the
zinc sulphide. But I have connected the flask to
an air-pump and can pump out the air. At the
very first stroke of the pump the whole globe flashes
into luminescence, and as I continue pumping the
glow gets stronger and fairly illuminates the im-
mediate neighbourhood with its soft white light.
I now readmit the air, and the glow disappears as
suddenly as it came. So that you see with some-
what carefully designed arrangements, and keeping
in mind the peculiar properties of these a-rays
which physicists have exactly worked out, it is
possible even from a minute amount of pure radium
bromide to obtain quite a fair amount of light,
whereas the same quantity of radium less cunningly



NATURE OF RADIATION 51

disposed would give very little effect. Radium
compounds are usually preserved in sealed tubes
so as to prevent them absorbing moisture from
the atmosphere. Under these circumstances
the effects produced by these a-rays are not ob-
served.

Problems connected with the real physical nature
of radiation are, it is well recognised, among the
most fundamental in physics, and they involve more
deeply perhaps than any others the great under-
lying metaphysical relationships between the external
world of physical fact and the subjective mental
processes by which we attempt to visualise these
facts and obtain some sort of a reasonable explana-
tion of them. Take, for example, the great problem
that is always before us of the real nature of light.
Is there anything more difficult of mental com-
prehension? The difficulties are not minimised
but rather increased by the very definite view we
take to-day of energy as a separate entity having a
real physical existence.

Contemplate for a moment, if you can, the origin
of the energy which impels every moving thing in
earth or sea or sky. With the exception of a very
small and practically negligible movement contri-
buted by the tides and by volcanic agencies, and, it
must not be forgotten, by the radioactive substances



52 THE ETHER

themselves, all things which move do so directly
or indirectly by virtue of the energy reaching this
earth as radiations in the form of the sun's light
and heat. Great masses move hither and thither
here because of happenings at some time past, re-
mote or recent, 90 millions of miles away in the
sun. Inevitably, when we begin to contemplate
radiation phenomena, we are driven to inquire into
the medium filling the outer void of space by virtue
of which this immaterial, but vital entity — energy —
reaches us from far distant worlds. It is true we
call it ether, and try to give to it all sorts of material,
or pseudo-material, characteristics. Lord Kelvin
seems to have spent a large part of his leisure time
trying as it were to dematerialise matter into ether,
that is, trying by all sorts of mechanically ingenious
arrangements and analogy from material models —
the only possible models our minds can yet grasp —
to obtain a possible construction which would simu-
late the elusive but all-pervading ether. Others, on
the well-known principle that topsy-turvydom, if
only consistent and all-embracing enough, results
finally in a system no less logical and rational than
the original one, have given to the ether inconceiv-
ably great density, and to the atoms of matter the
character of holes or voids in it. The necessity for
the existence of a universal all-pervading medium,
or ether, capable of transmitting energy, no one in



THE ETHER 53

these days of wireless telegraphy would deny, but
on the question of its real nature opinion is as
divided as it well could be.

The tendency, however, in modern physics to-
day is rather to derive and explain material pheno-
mena from the properties of the ether than to
attempt to construct an ether on a material or
pseudo-material model. As yet, however, we know
little about the properties of the ether itself. One
definite thing we do know, for certain, and have
known for a very long time, namely the velocity
at which influences are transmitted across the ether.
It is 185,000 miles a second, the speed of light
So far as we yet know, all influences that are
transmitted by the ether travel at this one definite
velocity. Not only light, but also the electro-
magnetic radiations employed in wireless tele-
graphy, the magnetic storms, as they are termed,
which reach us from the sun, and also, we believe,
the X-rays, travel through the ether at this one
definite speed.

The great mind of Newton two centuries ago
appreciated to the full the fundamental difficulty
in the explanation of radiation, and proposed the
only way of escape from the more modern doctrine
of an ether which, so far as I know, has ever been
put forward.



54 CORPUSCULAR RADIATION

Light, on the Newtonian hypothesis, consisted
in the emission from the glowing body of exces-
sively minute material particles or corpuscles travel-
ling with immense velocity. This corpuscular
theory, so far as light is concerned, failed when
subjected to a closer examination, and gave way
to the present undulatory theory that light consists
in a transverse vibration of the ether, the existence
of which, it was beginning to be recognised, was
as great a necessity for the transmission of gravita-
tional, magnetic, and other forms of energy which
reach us from outer space as it was for the trans-
mission of radiation itself. Though proved wrong
so far as light is concerned, this idea of corpuscular
radiation, strangely enough, will rank as one of
the most suggestive flashes of Newton's genius, for
it, in fact, anticipated by two centuries the march
of experimental discovery. To-day, thanks to
radioactivity, science has been enriched by the
discovery of a-, £-, and y-rays, and two, at least,
out of these types, the a- and the j8-rays, are not,
like light, vibrations of the ether, but consist of the
emission of excessively minute material particles
(atoms and corpuscles) travelling with immense
velocity. This is one of two chief main lines
of evidence that radioactivity is an accompanying
manifestation of "atomic disintegration."

Into this aspect of the matter, however, I do not



WA VE THEOR Y OF LIGHT 55

propose entering to-night Its consideration is
more conveniently deferred. It is sufficient to say
that the a- and £-rays, or, as I shall henceforth also
refer to them, a- and j8-par tides, comprise the
lighter fragments, as it were, of the disintegrating
atoms of the radioactive substance. In ordinary
circumstances radium appears to be expelling both
a- and ^-particles together, but this as we shall
come to see is due to the fact that several successive
disintegrations are occurring, and the effect is a
composite one. The nature of <hese rays is so
utterly different from that of light that it is worth
while to stop and examine the difference a little
more closely.

The wave theory of light has often been illus-
trated by what happens when a stone is dropped
into a pool. Ripples extend outwards in concentric
circles from the disturbance. The water, as the
ripple reaches it, first rises above, then immediately
afterwards falls below the normal level. The dis-
turbance is propagated transversely, that is, out-
wards horizontally by a vertical, or up and down
wave-movement of the water. The surface dis-
closes the nature of the disturbance, but the same
type of disturbance is taking place below the
surface, and each circular ripple is in reality the
section of a hemispherical shell. It is not possible



56 DISCRETE THEORY OF RADIUM RAYS

to get an ether surface like a water surface, since
the ether is all-pervading. Light travels out from
an incandescent point in all directions in spherical
ripples, in which a to-and-fro motion of some kind
is going on in the ether, transverse to the direction
of propagation of the light Contrast with this what
is believed to be the nature of the a- and /8-rays
given out from a radioactive substance. The rays
are given out uniformly in all directions, not as a
succession of spherical waves, but as the random
flight of immense swarms of tiny projectiles ejected
from the radioactive substance. For shortness I
shall call this the "discrete theory," as contrasted
with the wave theory, because the radiation is
considered to be due to the flight, radially outward
from the substances like the spokes of a wheel, of
swarms of free-flying, independent discrete particles.
You could hardly imagine two more different pheno-
mena, and yet that it is not easy to distinguish
between their effects is shown by the fact that
for a long time a controversy raged between the
two views regarding the nature of light itself.

I must anticipate a little here for the sake of
clearness. It is now an old story that in the tiniest
grain of matter there is a mentally inconceivable
myriad of separate atoms. In this tiny quantity
of radium bromide, weighing half a grain, we know
with fair certainty there are fifty million billion



DISCRETE THEORY OF RADIUM RAYS 57

(5 x io 19 ) separate atoms of radium, assuming that
the compound is pure. It has been proved that,
roughly, one two-thousandth of these disintegrate
yearly. There are about 32,000,000 seconds in a
year, so that in every second of time rather less than
one thousand million of these radium atoms dis-
integrate, giving some small multiple of this number
of a- and ^-particles. So mighty a host projected
outwards in all directions at random, as you may
suppose, fill the surrounding space with their
trajectories to all intents and purposes as com-
pletely as if they advanced as one continuous
spherical wave-front. In other words, if only the
number of projected particles is sufficiently great
a discrete radiation will be, in many of its general
effects and laws of propagation, not different from
a wave-radiation. It is true that such a radiation
will show neither regular reflection, refraction, nor
polarisation in the manner that light does, and the
absence of these phenomena for the a- and /8-rays
is part of the evidence in favour of their discrete
nature. If, however, we continuously reduce the
number of particles ejected, in other words, if we
continuously diminish the quantity of radium em-
ployed, there should come a point when the
discrete radiation should no longer simulate the
wave-type. It should, as it were, break up and
show discontinuity, much as some of those faint



58 RESOLUTION OF a-RAYS

continuous light -patches in the heavens, known as
the planetary nebulae, when investigated by more
and more powerful telescopes, begin to break up and
show discontinuity, and finally are resolved into an
innumerable host of separate twinkling stars. Is
it possible so to resolve a swarm of a-rays ?

The older physicists who first deduced by accu-
rate computation the weight and measure of the
single individual atom and evaluated the number of
billions contained in the smallest portion of matter
perceptible to the senses, had they been soberly
asked whether it would be possible ever to observe
a single atom of matter, would have scouted the
bare possibility. A single atom of matter ! — A
single atom of matter ! — I recall this one exclama-
tion, repeated over and over again with varying
intonation by a distinguished foreign visitor, whose
years had been spent at the microscope on the border-
land between the perceptible and the imperceptible
worlds, when the question we are now considering
was under discussion at a British Association meeting.

Let us, however, now make a few calculations to
see whether there is any hope whatever of being
able to detect the effect of, say, a single a-particle
expelled from radium, in the same sense as it has
been found possible in astronomy to detect the indi-
vidual stars which go to make up a planetary nebula.



THE SPINTHARISCOPE 59

In my first lecture (p. 23) I alluded to the
smallest quantity of radium that could be detected
by the aid of the gold-leaf electroscope, that is,
therefore, by means of the a-rays emitted. It was
one three-thousand-millionth of a grain. Half a
grain, as we have seen, gives out a few thousand
million a-particles every second. So that the
smallest quantity of radium detectable by the
ordinary electroscope must be giving out only a few
individual a-particles per second. From a very
early stage it appeared not inconceivable to Ruther-
ford that a discontinuity in the emission of a-rays
might actually be detected by using a very minute
quantity of radium.

The Spinthariscope: — The problem was actually
solved, almost unawares, by Sir William Crookes,
by means of an instrument he devised and called
the Spinthariscope. The instrument is the only
genuine instrument worked by radium that it is
at present possible to buy at the optician's in the
ordinary way, and it can be bought — radium and
all — for a few shillings. The reason for this
apparent paradox is to be found in the fact that
it is in the essence of the result to be attained to
reduce the amount of radium to the smallest possible
quantity, and this unusual condition allows of a
practically unlimited number of spinthariscopes to



6o THE SPINTHARISCOPE

be made out of an almost invisible quantity of
radium bromide. The amount of radium in each
instrument is absolutely unweighable and invisible.
A needle, A, is made to touch a tiny phial which once
contained radium, and is then mounted (Figs. 10 and
1 1, opposite p. 49) centrally in a little brass tube, the


Fig. 10.

size of a small reel of cotton, at the bottom of which is
a phosphorescent screen, B, coated with zinc sulphide.
At the other end of the tube is a lens, C, for magnify-
ing the screen and, by means of a little screw, D, out-
side, the needle point may be moved nearer to or away
from the screen. If now in a dark room the screen
is observed through the lens, it will be seen to be
luminous, and this luminosity can be concentrated



THE SPINTHARISCOPE 61

or spread out by screwing the needle point nearer
to or farther from the screen. After the eye has
become used to the darkness it will be seen that the
luminosity is not just a quiet continuous glow. The
light, like that of the planetary nebulae, has been
resolved and shows discontinuity. It resembles
most nearly a shower of shooting stars. Bright
momentary flashes of light or scintillations, too
numerous at any instant to count, are appearing and
disappearing in the field of vision. These flashes
are caused by the a-particles of radium. This
minute insignificant trace of radium is positively
belching forth a-particles. It seems incredible that
the incessant bombardment of the screen can be
caused by such an infinitesimal amount of radium.
Yet so it is, and in a month's time, if the instrument
is re-examined, it will be found that the scintillations
are as numerous and as brilliant as formerly.
After a time, perhaps a year, the phosphorescent
screen itself will be worn out by the incessant
bombardment, will become insensitive and need
renewal. But replace it by a new one and the
radium will be found to be as energetic as ever.
The owner of the instrument will pass away, his
heirs and successors, and even his race will probably
have been forgotten before the radium shows any
appreciable sign of exhaustion.



62 THE INDIVIDUAL a-PARTICLE

The actual a-particle itself must, of course, be
extremely small. How else could a mere speck
of radium send out such an incessant and
numerous swarm ? As we have still to prove,
the a-particle is an atom of helium, the second
lightest atom of matter known. A grain of radium
bromide expels every second about ten thousand
million a-particles, and if we contemplate this
mighty swarm expelled once every second of time
throughout many centuries we may begin to have
some idea of how many atoms there must be in a
single grain of matter, and how small must be the
single atom. The philosophers of only a decade
ago would have ridiculed the hope that we should
ever be able to look through a magnifying-glass to
see the effect of a single atom of matter, yet each of
the scintillations of the spinthariscope is nothing
else.

The spinthariscope was the original, but to-day
it is only one of many lines of evidence which
have established the discrete character of the
a-radiation and the nature of the a-particle. We
know of many radioactive substances — polonium
is one — emitting a-radiations, which gradually and
completely lose their radioactivity with the lapse
of time. Anticipating, we may say that the dis-
integration of polonium proceeds so rapidly that it



THE INDIVIDUAL ^-PARTICLE 63

is complete in the course of a few years. Were the
process at all similar, for example, to the case of
a hot body cooling, one would expect a gradual
alteration in the character of the radiation with the
diminution of its intensity with lapse of time ;
whereas the character of the radiation is exactly
the same at the end, when it has nearly all decayed,
as it is at the beginning. This is explained simply
on the view that the number of a-particles expelled
grows less as the activity decays. The individual
a-particles have the same velocity and other charac-
teristics, whether expelled at the end or at the
beginning of the process. Professor Braggs dis-
covery that each a-particle has a definite " range,"
characteristic of it, is quite inexplicable on a wave
theory. The range of the a-particles emitted by
polonium, for example, is thirty-eight millimetres of
air, and though in the course of a few years the
a-radiation of polonium decays always completely,
the range of the a-particle expelled at the end is
exactly the same as at the beginning.

In this connection, finally, I may mention some
really wonderful work recently done by Professor
Rutherford and his co-worker Dr. Geiger, in which
they have actually succeeded in counting directly
the number of a-particles expelled from a given
quantity of radium every second. As you may



64 COUNTING THE ^PARTICLES

know, if two points are connected to an electrical
machine, or other method of generating an electric
force or tension, a spark will pass between them
under suitable circumstances. Now suppose the
distance apart of the two points is just so great
that no spark will pass with the particular electrical
tension applied, and that some radium is then
brought near to the points. Then a spark will
pass. The rays from radium by making the air
a conductor of electricity facilitate the passage of
the spark, so that under their influence the discharge
will leap across a greater distance than it otherwise
would. Substitute for the crude method of detect-
ing the discharge by means of a spark a highly
refined electrical instrument, known as the electro-
meter, in which, as in the galvanometer, a spot of
light is reflected from a mirror attached to a needle,
which can be arranged to move when a discharge
passes across the gap, and you have the essential
principle of Rutherford's arrangement. Such an
arrangement can be made so excessively sensitive
that the passage of a single a-particle from radium
through what corresponded to the "spark gap"
of the first arrangement described, is sufficient
to cause the spot of light from the needle of the
electrometer to move with a sudden jerk. The
experiment consists, then, in counting the number
of these sudden jerks of the electrometer needle in



COUNTING THE a-f 'ARTICLES 65

a given time, when a known quantity of radium is
placed at a known distance. The radium has to be
placed many yards away from the apparatus, and
the a-rays are fired along a long exhausted tube
with a small window at the end to admit the
passage of a very minute definite proportion of the
total number of a-particles, which proportion can be
calculated. In the actual experiments the distance
of the radium and the size of the window through
which the a-particles passed were such that, roughly,
only one out of every 100 million a-particles ex-
pelled found their way into the apparatus. The
total number of a-particles actually expelled per
second by a grain of radium in its normal condition
was found to be about ten thousand million. Per
milligram of radium the exact number per second
is 1 36 million. These results were also checked by
counting the number of scintillations per second in
a special form of spinthariscope. There have
always been scientific men who have regarded the
atom and the atomic theory with suspicion and
have never tired of insisting upon its "hypo-
thetical" character. It may therefore be rightly
regarded as one of the greatest triumphs of science
that an observer can now actually sit down in front
of a vessel and with the aid of a watch count the
number of atoms entering it every minute from a
quantity of radium outside,

F



CHAPTER IV.

The j8-rays — Their deviability by a magnet — The nature of the
j8-particle— Analogy to cathode-rays or " Radiant Matter "—The
electron — Velocity of the j8-rays — The nature of the a-particle —
Its velocity — Its power of passing through atoms of matter in its
path — Scattering of a-particles— Method of rendering the track of
rays visible— a- Particles might be expelled without their being
detectable.

IN addition to their varying power of penetrating
matter, there is another test which has proved
of great service in analysing the three types of rays
from radioactive bodies and in determining the real
nature of each. The trajectories of some of the
rays are powerfully influenced by a magnet, while
others are hardly if at all affected. Thus the j8-rays
of all radioactive substances if caused to traverse
the space between the poles of a magnet are very
strongly deflected, and if the magnet is a power-
ful one may be completely coiled up into closed
circles or spirals.

Faraday imagined that between the N-pole and
S-pole of a magnet there existed actual lines of
magnetic force. In the electro-magnet on the table
(Fig. 12), which is formed so that the N- and
S-poles are bent round so as to face one another,
the lines of force between the opposite faces of the

66



'

II
m

2 S3



M



THE ELECTRO-MAGNET 67

two pole-pieces are straight lines following the
shortest distance between them. It is convenient to
imagine with Faraday the actual existence of such
lines of force. An electro-magnet is simply an
arrangement in which a bar of soft iron can be
magnetised at will by passing an electric current
through a coil of wire wound round it. Soft iron
of good quality, unlike steel, retains no appreciable
permanent magnetism. It is very easily magnetised
by an electric current, and its magnetism continues
just so long as the current, and ceases practically
completely when the current is switched off.

Now suppose a beam of j8-rays of radium to
be fired through the space between the pole-pieces
at right angles to the lines of magnetic force. The
path of the rays is bent. The rays tend to coil
round the magnetic lines of force in circles. Suppose
we look along the lines of force stretching from the
N-pole to the S-pole, that is to say, suppose the
eye to be placed at the centre of the N-pole and
to be looking towards the centre of the S-pole.
Then the j8-rays will be coiled round into circles
in a direction of rotation opposite to that of the
hands of a clock, that is, as we say, counter clock-
wise. If we look from the S-pole to the N-pole
the direction of rotation is clock-wise. Now if
the radium is placed behind the poles of the electro-
magnet, and a screen of platinocyanide of barium



68 MAGNETIC DEVIATION OF &-EAYS

is placed in front, and the distance between them
is so adjusted to the strength of the magnet that
when the latter is excited by an electric current the



Magnet on.
Fio. 13-

£-rays from the radium are coiled up into circles of
lesser diameter than the distance between the radium
and the screen, none of the /3-rays will now reach
the screen. This will be seen from Fig. 13. In
this figure the eye is supposed to be at the centre
of the S-pole of the magnet, looking towards the



MAGNETIC DEVIATION OF p-JRAYS 69

face of the N-pole. The rays from the radium
passing up between the N-pole and the eye, in the
top diagram, reach the screen. In the lower dia-
gram the magnet is in action, and the rays are coiled
clock-wise into circles, none reaching the screen.

The radium is contained in its mica-covered
capsule so that only the ft and y-rays are dealt
with, the a-rays being suppressed. In the darkness
you see the phosphorescent screen brilliantly lumi-
nous so long as the magnet is not excited. I
switch on the current and the light of the screen
at once goes out almost completely. The faint
luminosity left behind is due to the y-rays, which
are not deviated at all, so far as we know, even by
the strongest magnetic forces. If I interpose a
penny in front of the radium so that the y-rays
have now to traverse it before reaching the screen
the faint luminosity is hardly diminished. Now I
switch off the exciting current and the magnet
almost instantly loses its magnetism, the j8-rays
spring back out of their circular into straight trajec-
tories, strike the screen and cause it again to flash
out into brilliance. Now the introduction of a
penny causes the luminosity practically to disappear,
all but for the faint glow due to the y-rays.

To a trained physicist the interest of this be-
haviour is due to the fact that it is exactly what



70 ACTION OF MAGNETISM

would happen to a current of electricity if it were
made to flow between the poles of a strong electro-
magnet. If we employed a piece of ordinary wire
to carry the current, the wire would tend to coil
up into a circle exactly like the j8-ray, and there
would be a battle between the natural stiffness of
the wire and the deviating magnetic force, and it
would depend on their relative strengths which
prevailed. With care, however, it is possible to
use a fluid wire, which has no stiffness. If a strong
current is passed through a thin aluminium wire it,
of course, gets hot and finally melts, but retains its
original form without breaking, hanging by virtue
of its weight as a beautiful loop of glowing molten
aluminium. Such a loop provides an extremely
sensitive means of investigating the laws of action
of magnets on currents, and you can see how
violently and powerfully it is deviated if it is hung
between the poles of the electro-magnet and the
magnet then excited. The j8-rays, as they traverse
their course, behave exactly like a current of elec-
tricity. If they consisted of extremely rapidly
moving particles — charged with electricity — we know
that such a stream would behave to a magnet ex-
actly like a current flowing in a flexible conductor.

Now we do know the direction in which the
j8-rays are moving, namely from the radium, but



UPON THE ELECTRIC CURRENT 71

we do not know, or at least did not till recently
know, the direction in which the electricity is mov-
ing in an electric current However, by long usage
we speak in a purely conventional way of the +
and - ends of a wire in which a current is flowing.
We do not yet know for certain whether there are
two kinds of electricity, a positive kind and a nega-
tive kind, or whether there is only one kind, the
effects of the opposite kind being due to a relative
electrical scarcity or vacuum. It is much the same
with heat and cold, except that we know the real
thing is heat and cold is the absence of it. A
trained physicist will speak of so much heat, or so
little heat, or of one body having so much less heat
than another, but he will not speak of so much cold,
or one body having more cold than another,
although often such a method of expression would
be convenient and would lead to no error. In this
sense we may speak both of positive and negative
electricity without error. A current of electricity
flowing along a wire from the positive to the
negative we may look upon as due to the transport
of positive electricity in the direction from + to - ,
or as the transport of negative electricity from - to
+ . The two ideas are equivalent and, in fact,
identical for the present purposes. On the view
that there is only one kind — the negative kind — of
electricity, a positively charged body or atom is



72 ELECTRIC CHARGE OF fi-RAYS

merely a body or atom with less negative electricity
than is normally present in an "uncharged" or
electrically neutral body.

In the j8-rays we have a movement of charged
particles from the radium, and we have to find out
whether the particles are positively or negatively
charged, using the terms positive and negative in
their conventional electrical significance. If the
rays were deviated in the same sense as a current
flowing from + to - in the same direction as the
rays, obviously we should conclude the j8-rays
were + ly charged. As a matter of fact, we find
the opposite is the case. When the j8-rays are
deviated clock-wise by the magnet a current of the
kind described would be deviated counter clock-
wise. To simulate the deviation of the j8-rays the
electric current must be a negative current, that is
to say, must be either negative electricity flowing in
the direction of the rays, or positive electricity
flowing in the opposite direction. As there is no
reason to doubt that the j8-rays do come from the
radium, the electric charge they carry must be
negative.

Modern views are definite on the point that if
there is only one electricity, that one is the kind
which by convention has, unfortunately, been
styled negative. The negative is the real electri-
city. The positive may, like cold, be the mere



ANALOGY TO CATHODE-RAYS 73

deficit of the real kind, or it may have a separate
existence, the mirror image as it were of the other
kind. I personally prefer the view that negative
electricity is "electrical heat" and positive electri-
city "electrical cold," but a real answer to this
question would no doubt prove itself to be a very
fundamental step, and may not be forthcoming for
a long time.

The behaviour of the j8-rays in a magnetic field
associates them at once with some previously
known radiations from the electrical discharge
tubes exhausted to an extremely high degree of
vacuum which are known generically as Crookes'
tubes, from their first systematic investigator. Into
this field of work I have no intention of entering
in detail, for it is the one aspect of this subject
which has received the most adequate treatment in
the accounts of radioactivity written for the benefit
of the public. A brief resume only must suffice.

The /J-rays are very similar in nature to the
"Radiant Matter" (also called " cathode-rays " or
" cathode-streams ") of Sir William Crookes, ob-
tained when an electric discharge or current is
passed through a vessel exhausted to a very high
degree of vacuum. The requisite degree of
vacuum can be obtained with a little trouble by
the aid of a mercury pump, based on the same



74 THE CROOKES* TUBE

principle as Toricelli's celebrated experiment with
the barometer. But far quicker and more efficient
methods have lately come into use. One such
consists in absorbing the last traces of gas in the
pores of the charcoal of cocoa-nuts cooled to the
temperature of liquid air, according to the dis-
covery of Sir James Dewar. Another method
consists in absorbing the last traces of gas with
the vapour of metallic calcium heated to a very
high temperature in a special vacuum furnace.
The discharge round the cathode, or negative pole,
in a high vacuum then consists of radiant streams
of particles travelling in straight lines and pro-
ducing vivid green phosphorescence where they
strike the glass walls of the vessel. Any obstacle
placed in their path casts a sharp shadow, the glass
beyond not fluorescing where protected from the
bombardment by the obstacle. These particles
also carry charges of negative electricity, and have
great energy, heating to whiteness a piece of
platinum interposed in their path, and causing the
most intense fluorescence of willemite in the same
way as the radium rays. Like the j8-rays they are
deviated by a magnet, and in the same sense, only
very much more easily. Here is a form (Fig. 14)
of Crookes' tube, designed to show the cathode-
rays and their deviation by the action of a magnet.



fin



w



76 DEVIATION OF CATHODE-RAYS

The electrodes consist of plates of metal, which are
attached to the terminals of an induction coil, or an .

electrical machine or other sufficiently powerful
source of electric tension. One electrode A is con-
nected to the positive pole, and the other electrode B
to the negative pole of the coil, and we have to con-
centrate our attention on the negative electrode, this
being what is also called the "cathode." The
tube has been exhausted by a pump until there
is only about one ten-thousandth of the air left,
and was then sealed up. Under such conditions
the glass of the tube shines with a brilliant fluores-
cence when a discharge is forced through it. This
fluorescence has been traced to " rays " inside the
vessel, proceeding from the cathode at right angles
to its surface and travelling in straight lines
through the tube. Wherever they strike the glass
they cause it to glow, just as the radium rays do.

In front of the cathode is a piece of mica with
a slit cut in it, which stops all the rays except a
narrow pencil passing through the slit. Along the
length of the tube is fixed a fluorescent screen in the
form of a plate painted with powdered willemite,
and as the narrow pencil of rays impinge on this
plate they trace out their path as a bright line of
green fluorescence. Now if one pole of a magnet <

is brought behind the tube the rays are bent
sharply to the left or right, depending on whether



THE ELECTRON 77

the N- or the S-pole of the magnet is presented to
the tube. The direction of the deviation is the
same as with the j8-rays, and before even the
/J-rays had been discovered the cathode-rays of the
Crookes' tube had been definitely shown to consist
of minute particles charged with negative electricity
flying off from the cathode with immense velocity.

What are these particles ? Crookes thought they
were matter in a new or fourth state. To-day
we know they are "electrons." The electron is a
new and somewhat startling conception to minds
trained on the older lines, although traces of it
date back from the discoveries of Faraday of the
laws of electrolysis. The electron is an atom of
electricity, divorced from matter, and the cathode-
rays consist of these separate individual and iso-
lated electrons, repelled out of the metal of the
negative pole under the action of powerful electric
stress, and, in the absence of gas, gathering terrific
speed in their passage through the exhausted tube.
Whatever the manner in which these electrons are
produced, under whatever circumstances they result,
they are always identical in their main character-
istics. Their charge is always the same, and also
their "mass/' although their velocity may and does
vary according to the conditions within very wide
limits. They and their motion are responsible for



78 "MASS" OF THE ELECTRON

the most varied and apparently unconnected
phenomena in nature, and in the empire of matter
they seem often to occupy a rdle in comparison with
the more massive material atoms analogous to the
part played by the planets in relation to the central
sun of a solar system. The mass of the electron
is only one thousandth part of that of the hydrogen
atom, the smallest particle previously known.

In some ways we know far more about the
electron than about the atom of matter. The elec-
tron cannot move without disturbing the medium
which occupies all space continuously, and which
we, not yet knowing too much about its real nature,
call the ether. It is the motion and change of
motion of the electron which give us light, the
X-rays, and the long ether waves used in wireless
telegraphy. It is the reaction of the ether on the
moving electron which gives it its " mass." Now this
"mass" of the electron, applied as the term was to
the atom of pure electricity entirely unassociated with
matter, needed very careful and clear thinking, or
it would appear utterly contradictory to the older
conceptions of matter. The term mass, used in
this sense, has nothing to do with the effect of
gravity or weight, as it is still absolutely unknown
whether electrons obey the law of gravitation.

In this region of new ideas we are now entering,



INERTIA 79

more difficulty, perhaps, is to be anticipated in the
meaning attached to the terms employed than in
the actual ideas themselves. Mass is often equiva-
lent to "weight," but here it is not so. The
mass of, meaning the quantity of, matter, is a
fundamental idea, while weight is a derived idea
due to the earth's attraction. A given quantity of
matter throughout the universe has an un-
changing mass. Its weight, of course, depends
upon the proximity and mass of the world
attracting it. What then is the measure of
mass as distinct from weight? Weight is, as a
matter of fact, invariably used on the earth to
measure mass because it is so convenient Yet if
we can imagine ourselves isolated in space at a great
distance from all worlds with a given quantity of
matter it is desired to know the mass of, we should
still have no difficulty in distinguishing the greater
mass, say of a sphere of lead, from the lesser mass
of a similar-sized sphere of wood. We should know
the difference by the difference of inertia. If we
struck each a similar blow the wood sphere would
start to move many times as fast as the lead sphere.
Neither would have appreciable weight under these
circumstances, but their relative inertia would still
be in proportion to their masses. A collision
between two "weightless" railway trains meeting in
mid-space would work just as much havoc to the trains



80 CATHODE-RAY AND ^PARTICLES

as it would if it occurred at the same speed upon the
earth. H ence, when a physicist speaks of the ' ' mass "
of a £-ray particle, or of a cathode-ray particle, no
considerations of weight are in his mind.

Sir J. J. Thomson, first with these cathode-rays,
afterwards with the j8-rays, showed how it was
possible to determine the velocity, the charge, and
the mass of the particles which constitute them.

The application of these methods resulted in
the proof that the charge and the mass of
the j8-particle were identical with that of the
cathode-ray particle of vacuum tubes, but the
velocity of the ^-particle was far higher than that
of the fastest known cathode-ray. Thus the
j8-particle ejected from the radium atom was
already known. It is true it is ejected more
violently by radium than in any previously known
case, but in its essential characteristics, its charge,
or the quantity of electricity it carries, and its mass
— it is the same particle as Sir William Crookes
dealt with in his vacuum tubes thirty years ago.
He christened them in a prophetic moment with the
name of " Radiant Matter," and was, like many
another prophet, ridiculed for his pains.

The cathode-ray particle, and also the £-ray
particle, were found to carry the same amount of
electricity as the charged hydrogen atom. Hence,



CATRO DE-RAY AND ^PARTICLES 81

whatever else the /8-particle of radium is, it is cer-
tainly an atom of negative electricity. With regard to
the velocity, just as the mass of these particles is
smaller than any known material particle, their ve-
locity is appropriately almost inconceivably greater
than that of any previously known material particle.
It approaches that of light itself, which has a velocity
of 185,000 miles per second. The average velocity
of the cathode-ray particle of the vacuum tube is
from 5,000 to 10,000 miles per second ; while that
of the fastest of the /?-particles of radium is so nearly
that of light as to be indistinguishable from it.
Most of the £-rays, however, travel with a velocity
from 40 to 80 per cent, of that of light.

This is one of the most general, as it is one
of the most remarkable, features about radium.
The effects produced by its rays, even the rays
themselves in some part, are not entirely new.
They can be simulated to some extent by arti-
ficial means. In passing from the effects produced
artificially to those produced by radium spontane-
ously, we are aware of great resemblances, and at
the same time of great differences. By the use of
exceedingly powerful electrical appliances, and the
expenditure of a considerable amount of energy,
we can simulate to some extent the £-rays of
radium, but no instrument maker at the present
time can provide you with the means of impressing

G



8a



THE "RADIUM CLOCK"



upon the artificially generated cathode-ray electron
of the Crookes* tube more than a small fraction
of the velocity with which the /8-ray electron is
being spontaneously expelled from radium. It is
the same in other matters. The utmost we are

able to effect by the most power-
ful forces at our disposal falls far
short of what is being done by
a mere speck of matter under-
going atomic disintegration.

Before leaving the subject of
j8-rays, I have to show you an
interesting instrument devised by
Professor Strutt and popularly
called the radium clock (Fig. 15).
It is the nearest approach to per-
petual motion that has yet been
devised, and it consists of a gold-
leaf electroscope, worked by the
negative electricity carried away
from the radium by means of the
j8-rays. A few milligrams of a
salt of radium are contained in a
thin-walled closed glass tube, A, through which the
j8-rays can easily penetrate, and this tube is sup-
ported from an insulating rod of quartz, B, within
a highly exhausted glass vessel. The tube in turn
carries at its lower end two gold leaves, C, after the


Fig. 15.



THE u RADIUM CLOCK" 83

manner of an electroscope. The £-rays shot out from
the radium carry away negative electricity, and there-
fore the radium itself left behind becomes positively
charged. The gradual accumulation of this charge
causes the gold leaves attached to the tube to
diverge little by little, until they touch the sides of
the vessel and are discharged, when the cycle of
operations recommences. The instrument on the
table (Fig. 16, opposite p. 66) was constructed many
years ago, and has been functionating about once
every three minutes ever since. There is no reason
why it should not do so for at least a thousand years
more, though at a slowly decreasing rate.

The methods we have been considering which
led to the elucidation of the real nature of the
j8-rays — the determination of the nature of the
expelled particle, its mass, charge, and velocity —
have been applied successfully also to the elucida-
tion of the real nature of the a-rays, though here
the task was almost infinitely more difficult experi-
mentally. Rutherford, to whom we owe our know-
ledge of this subject, worked for a long time before
he could detect any influence produced by the most
powerful magnets on the course of the a-rays, so
slight and insignificant it is compared with the
effect on the j8-rays. Finally, he proved that the
a-rays were deflected both by electric and by mag-
netic forces, but to an extent of the order of one



84 CHARGE OF THE a-PARTICLE

thousandth part of the effect that the j8-rays suffer
under similar circumstances. The deviation of the
a-rays, moreover, is in the opposite direction to
that of the j8-rays. Where the j8-rays are coiled
clock -wise, for example, the a-rays would tend to
turn counter clock-wise. By these, and numerous
other experiments, it has been shown that the
a-rays consist of positively charged particles. The
a-particle is however not, like the ^-particle,
only a disembodied electrical charge. It is a
charged material atotn. At first it was thought to
be twice as heavy as the hydrogen atom, on the
assumption that it was charged with a single
"atom" of positive electricity. Now, however, it
has been proved to carry two charges of positive
electricity, and to be an atom four times as heavy
as hydrogen. This is in accord with the whole of
the rest of the evidence of radioactive changes still
to be considered, which points unmistakably, though
indirectly, to the conclusion that the a-particle is an
atom of the element helium. The atomic weight
of helium is four, or, in other words, the helium atom
is four times as massive as the hydrogen atom,
which is always taken as unity.

Waiving the case of the /J-rays which, as we
have seen, are electrical rather than material in
nature, the a-rays of the radioactive substances



VELOCITY OF ^-PARTICLE 85

furnish without doubt one of the most wonderful
phenomena at present known. If radium did
nothing else but send out these a-particles, that
alone would of itself constitute a new epoch in
our knowledge of nature. Take their velocity, for
instance, which, though lower on the average
than that of the j8-rays, reaches in some cases
the very handsome value of over 12,000 miles
per second. This is hundreds of times faster than
the next fastest known material thing moving in
earth or air or space. The swiftest flight known
previously is that of some of the shooting stars,
which attain sometimes to a speed of from twenty
to forty miles a second, and from the attack of
which we are largely protected by the fact that
their velocity is so great that they are quickly
dissipated into vapour by the simple resistance of
the air. While such a meteor was traversing the
distance to the moon an a-particle would, given an
unimpeded path, reach the sun.

Such a velocity multiplied by itself, or squared,
gives us a measure of the energy possessed by the
a-particles. If their velocity is, say, half a thousand
times faster than any previously known, the kinetic
energy they possess is, mass for mass, a quarter of
a million times greater than any we have ever had
to do with before. In this fact lies the key to
many of the surprising revelations of radium.



86 ENERGY OF *-P ARTICLE

When we speak of being able to detect the effect
of a single a-particle, and therefore of a single
atom of matter, we mean the detection of its
energy, which is a quarter of a million times as
great as that of any other kind of atom known to
us. Similarly, when we speak of being able to
detect in a few seconds by radioactive methods
the course of a change which would have to pro-
ceed continuously for geological epochs before it
produced an effect detectable by the most sensitive
chemical test, it is because, firstly, we detect the
energy evolved by the change, not the change
itself; and, secondly, because the energy is at once
so relatively enormous and at the same time so
much more easily detected compared with any
other kind of energy outburst previously known
to us.

Matter moving with the speed of 10,000 miles
a second is so novel and strange to us at present
that it is doubtful whether our ordinary concep-
tions afford much guide or analogy. The muzzle-
velocity of a cannon-ball, for instance, is a small
fraction of one mile per second. Now we have
seen that the a-particle of radium is capable of
traversing very thin aluminium leaves and also
several inches of gaseous air. It is extremely
interesting to inquire what happens during the



A QUOTATION FROM PROFESSOR BRAGG 87

collision of an a-particle with a molecule of gas or
metal. Some at least of these collisions must be
full and direct, not simple grazing or glancing
coincidence ; and it seems at first sight difficult to
believe that an a-particle striking a gas-molecule
full and fair should not be stopped, however fast it
is moving. Nevertheless, it is not so. Upon this
matter the researches of Bragg and his colleagues
have thrown a flood of light. His conclusions
are as remarkable as they are definite. " Each
a-particle pursues a rectilinear course, no matter
what it encounters ; it passes through all the atoms
it meets, whether they form part of a solid or a
gas (or, in all probability, of a liquid), suffering no
deflection on account of any encounter until, at
any rate, very near the end of its course. ... A
thin metal plate may be placed in the way of the
stream, and so rob every particle of some of its
energy, but not a single one is brought to rest by
collision with the atoms of the metal, and the
number of particles in the stream remains un-
changed." Surely this vivid picture of the flight
of a swarm of a-particles raises anew the old
metaphysical conundrum of the schoolmen, whether
two portions of matter could occupy the same space
at the same time. For the only possible meaning
of Professor Bragg's conclusion is that the a-particle
must go clean through the atoms of matter it pene-



88 INTERPENETRAT10N OF ATOMS

trates as though they were not there, and therefore
at the instant of collision the two atoms do occupy
the same space at the same time. This power of
the interpenetration of masses may be one of the
peculiar properties of matter moving at these, what
may be termed ultra-material, velocities. We know
for certain it is not a normal property of matter.
The only apparent consequence of the passage of
the a-particle through the atoms it encounters is
that it ionises them, that is, they become charged,
some with + and some with - electricity, after the
collision. There is little doubt that the + charge
or charges on the a-particle itself can be explained
in the same way. Whereas in the case of the
/8-particle the charge of electricity is the particle,
in the case of the a-particle the charge is in all
probability a secondary consequence of the velocity
with which the particle is moving. At least it is
certain that no atom moving at 1 0,000 miles a
second would continue uncharged. The very first
collision with an atom of matter would "knock out
an electron," that is, charge the moving particle
positively.

Since the above quotation was written it has
been proved that some of the a-particles do suffer a
deflection or scattering in their passage through
matter. For the vast majority of the a-particles
this deflection is exceedingly slight, but for a very



SCATTERING OF a-PARTJCLES 89

small proportion of the whole the deflection may be
so great as practically to turn the a-particle back
the way it came. This is extremely interesting.
Since the a-particles alone have access to the real
interior of the atom of matter, it is quite possible
that a close study of this phenomenon may result
in information being obtained as to what the atoms
of matter consist of. Hitherto science has been
completely confined to the external characteristics
of atoms, and it is hoped that the a-particles, after
their passage through these atoms, will afford some
clue as to the nature of the unknown territory which
they have traversed.

The quotation from Professor Bragg (p. 87) pur-
sued the question of what happens to the a-particle
on collision only as far as the initial stages. Each
atom of matter penetrated robs the a-particle of
some of its energy, and its velocity is therefore
diminished as it pursues its path. But the more
slowly it moves the more energy is withdrawn from
it in passing through any given obstacle. In addi-
tion, the slower it moves the more easily is it
deviated from its course, or scattered. In conse-
quence, the speed is more and more quickly reduced
as the end of its path is approached, and the a-par-
ticle thus passes out of the range of detection some-
what suddenly.

By an ingenious arrangement, C. T. R. Wilson



90 MAKING THE PATHS

has succeeded recently in making the paths of many
of the new radiations in air, or other gas, visible
to the eye, and in actually photographing them.
These rays ionise the gas, and leave in their tracks
columns of ions, which are molecules of the gas
carrying an electric charge, and which, although
really moving about like all gaseous molecules at
great speed, are, by comparison with the much
swifter rays producing them, almost at rest. Now
these ions, the negative variety more easily than
the positive ions, afford nuclei for the condensation
of moisture from a supersaturated atmosphere.
Dust plays the same part, but all dust can readily
be removed. When moist air in a closed space is
suddenly expanded the air is cooled and the mois-
ture condenses as mist or rain on the dust particles
and carries them down, so freeing the air from such
impurities. If the pure air is now suddenly ex-
panded within certain well-defined limits, in the
absence of ions or dust, no condensation is produced.
But if the air is traversed by any of the new ionis-
ing radiations, the tracks of the rays, when the
ionisation chamber is suitably illuminated, appear
momentarily as long spider-threads of mist when-
ever the air is suddenly expanded and chilled. If a
flash of light is arranged to take place just after the
expansion, the threads may be photographed. The
tracks left by the «-par tides are almost all perfectly



OF RAYS VISIBLE 91

straight, but a very few show abrupt large deflec-
tions, and sometimes actually the direction of travel
is nearly reversed. The £-rays, on the other hand,
give very zigzag tracks. These rays are known
to be scattered and turned very readily by their
encounter with the molecules of matter. The ex-
periments have also thrown light on the nature of
the 7-rays, and have made it appear probable that
these rays do not ionise the gas directly, but first
cause the molecules struck to emit a kind of cathode-
or ^-radiation, and it is these secondary radiations
which produce the ionisation. Fluorescent, photo-
graphical, and electrical actions all cease simul-
taneously. It is estimated that at the moment the
a-particle ceases to be detectable it is still moving
with the velocity of several thousand miles a second.
For all that is known the particle may then suffer a
sudden stop, or it may continue its course without
ionising the atoms it encounters.

For us, who are concerned for the most part with
the broad limitations of our past and present know-
ledge, the most interesting feature of this pheno-
menon is that it indicates quite definitely that an
a-particle expelled with an initial velocity below
several thousand miles a second could not by any of
the present known methods be detected. Any of
the apparently stable and non-radioactive elements
might be disintegrating and expelling a-particles,


I



9a VNDISCOVERABLE PROCESSES

but if these did not attain this limiting speed we
should have no evidence of the fact. It is really by
a somewhat slender margin of velocity that the
a-particles have come within our knowledge at all.
The light we have gained has but served to intensify
the darkness by which we are surrounded on all
sides. Processes similar to and but little less
energetic than those which produce radioactivity,
may be going on unsuspected everywhere around
us, without producing any yet detectable effects.
Radioactivity is to be regarded rather as a bene-
volent hint given to us by Nature into secrets
we might never have guessed, rather than as the
necessary and invariable concomitant of the pro-
cesses of atomic disintegration.



CHAPTER V.

From where does the energy of radium come ? — The two alternatives
and their consequences — The internal energy of matter — Atomic
disintegration — Disintegration in cascade — The successive out-
bursts of energy from otherwise impalpable quantities of matter —
The emanation of radium — Its properties — Experiments with the
emanation— Its condensation by liquid air — The infinitesimal
quantity of the emanation from radium — The chemical nature and
atomic weight of the emanation — The energy evolved by the
emanation — The decay of the emanation and its reproduction by
radium — The facts, not the theories, of radioactivity are revolu-
tionary — Unalterability of radioactive changes — Evanescent pro-
ducts of radioactive change — All products equally knowable
whether short-lived or long.

IF we are to continue to regard energy in the
modern way as something having a definite
existence, we have to answer the question, " From
where does the energy of radium come ? " That it
comes from nowhere, or that it is being newly
created out of nothing by radium, is a view it is
not possible to entertain for a moment without
destroying the basis upon which nineteenth-century
physical science has largely been reared. "How
has it got the energy in it to do it ? " is the first
question that naturally arises in the mind with re-
gard to radium, but obviously we should first ask,
41 Has it the energy in it ? "

93



94 SOURCE OF THE ENERGY OF RADIUM

If the doctrine of energy is true, there are for-
tunately only two possible alternatives to be con-
sidered. Either the energy must be derived from
within the radium, which we shall call the first, and
as we think the true, alternative, or it must be
supplied from outside the radium, and this we shall
call the second alternative. This simple narrowing
down of all the possible issues to two alternatives may
appear to you somewhat trite, but in reality it carries
with it far more than appears on the surface. In
the first place, being an intrinsic property of the
element, radioactivity is therefore a property of the
atom, and if we take the first alternative and say
the energy comes from within, it means from within
the atom, and therefore that there must exist an
enormous and not previously suspected store of
energy in matter, or at least in radioactive matter,
in some way associated with its atoms or smallest
integral parts.

On the second alternative, which has often
been advanced, radium acts merely as a transform-
ing mechanism. There are electrical transformers
dotted all over this city, receiving the economically
transmitted but dangerous high-tension currents
from the central power station and delivering the
comparatively safe low-tension currents to your
houses, which are wasteful to transmit for long
distances. Are the atoms of radium acting as the



THE TWO ALTERNATIVES 95

transformers of a mysterious and hitherto unknown
source of external energy, first receiving it and then
delivering it up again in a form which can be recog-
nised ? It may be said at once that so vague a
view, postulating the existence of illimitable and
mysterious supplies of energy from without, cannot
be directly disproved. At first it seemed to provide
a way of escape from some of the more unpalatable
logical consequences of the first alternative and was
eagerly adopted. In reality, instead of a way of
escape, it proves to be a veritable will-of-the-wisp,
luring on its followers beyond the limits of credulity
into a quagmire of unsubstantial hypotheses, so
bottomless and unreal that even the facts of radium
are a wholly inadequate justification, and, even so,
incapable of throwing any light on the facts when
these are more nearly examined. Nevertheless, we
must pursue both alternatives impartially, if only
to leave no doubt that both have only to be fairly
considered for one to be dismissed.

On the second alternative the radium owes its
activity to a supply of energy from outside. One
has only to isolate the transformers which light this
city from all connection with the outside central
station to plunge the city in darkness. But we
have seen that to quench radioactivity or to modify
it in any way is one of the things science cannot
do. Experiment has proved that even in the



9$ SOURCE OF THE ENERGY OF RADIUM

natural state in the mine, hundreds of feet deep
down in the earth, pitchblende exhibits its normal
radioactivity. So that if it derives its energy from
without, this must be of a kind entirely different
from any at present known, for it must be capable
of traversing without loss hundreds of feet of solid
rock. This is as far as we need pursue the second
alternative for the moment. Provided we can call
into existence a new kind of radiant energy un-
limited in amount, permeating all space and unim-
peded by passage through matter of any thickness,
we may, but only so far as we have yet gone, seek
a bare explanation of the energy of radium on the
second alternative. Such a view would accord at
first sight with the continuous and permanent
activity of radium for an indefinite time, and there
would be no reason why radioactivity, however
intense and powerful, should decay or diminish
with the lapse of time.

But if the first alternative is true, and the energy
comes from within, large as the store of energy in
the atom must be to explain radioactivity it cannot
be infinite, and therefore it is to be expected that
the activity will slowly decay with the lapse of time.
If two radioactive bodies, one much more power-
fully radioactive than the other, are compared
together, it is to be expected on this view that the
activity of the more powerful body will decay faster



THE TWO ALTERNATIVES 97

than that of the other. But for both a time will
come, as soon as the internal stores of energy are ex-
hausted, when the radioactivity will come to an end.

By far the most important consequence of the
first alternative, however, has still to be considered.
Radium, if we call by that name the substance con-
taining the unevolved store of energy, can no
longer be radium when the energy is lost. Coal
is not coal after it is burnt. When energy is ob-
tained from matter the matter changes, and before
it can be regained in its former state the energy
evolved must be put back. In no case is it possible
for matter to part with its store of energy and re-
main the same, for otherwise you will readily see a
perpetual motion machine would be easy enough
to construct. Indeed, most of those attempted
involved this impossible assumption.

But we have seen that if the energy is stored
up in the radium it must be within the atom,
and, therefore, if radium changes, it must be
a change of the atom and of the element itself.
This change of an element would be transmutation,
which is a more fundamental and deep-seated change
than chemical change or any known kind of material
change, and until the discovery of radioactivity such
changes certainly had never been observed. If the
energy of radium comes from within, radium must
be suffering a spontaneous kind of transmutation



H



9* THE INTERNAL ENERGY OF MATTER

into other elements. So that, if we would avoid
the necessity of believing in the process of trans-
mutation, not as a vague possibility, for example,
in the sun and stars, under some unattainable trans-
cendental condition, but as actually going on im-
perturbably around us, which the first alternative
demands, we must seek a way of escape on the
second alternative which requires • none of these
bewildering heresies, but simply transfers the
mystery from the radium to the great external
unknown, and leaves it there in good company
with many of a similar kind.

At this stage it is well to ask the question, Is
there anything opposed either to reason or to prob-
ability in the view that the energy evolved from
radium is actually derived from an existing pre-
viously unsuspected internal store within the atom,
and that in this process the element suffers a trans-
formation into other elements? How is it that
such enormous stores of energy in matter have
remained so long unknown ?

One of the most elusive features of energy is
that you cannot say by mere observation, or by the
use of any instrument, how much or how little is
stored up in any kind of matter. For example,
this flask contains a large quantity of an oily yellow
liquid. We cannot tell by simple inspection the
amount of energy stored up in this fluid. It may



THE INTERNAL ENERGY OF MATTER 99

be some quiet and harmless oil, which can be
shaken vigorously with impunity, or it may be
nitro-glycerine, one of the most dangerous and
powerful explosives. Something more than obser-
vation is necessary to tell us the amount of energy
that may be stored within this substance, possibly
only awaiting a slight shock to be evolved. The
only way to find out is to try to explode it as
thoroughly as we can, and then if it will not ex-
plode we may conclude that, as far as we know, it
has no latent store of energy waiting to be loosed
from prison.

Explosion is merely a very rapid and violent type
of chemical change, and the same general idea holds
good for all the changes it is possible for matter to
undergo. We may determine the energy evolved
or absorbed in any change, that is, in the passage
from one kind of matter to another kind. We have
no means of telling the absolute amount of energy
in any kind of matter. But the one thing of which
the chemist is positive is that in all the material
changes matter undergoes — radioactivity being ex-
cepted — the elements do not change into one
another, but remain in their various compounds
essentially unaltered. If transmutation were pos-
sible, and one element could be changed into
another, it would be easy to measure the difference
in the amount of energy of the two elements.



ioo THE STABILITY OF ELEMENTS

As it is, the internal energy of the elements
remains always unaffected by previously known
material changes, and therefore till recently quite
unknowable.

Before we can find out how much or how little
energy is internally associated with the atoms we
must be able to study a case of transmutation.
The great stability of all elements under all condi-
tions — even in the sun the identical elements which
we know here persist, if we can rely on the evi-
dence of the spectroscope — is well in accord with
the view that all the elements contain a very large
store of internal energy, which is never released in
ordinary changes, but which makes them indifferent
to changes in their environment. Thus the internal
kinetic energy of a torpedo containing a revolving
gyrostat makes it successfully resist deflection from
its course by the wind and waves. The internal
energy of the solar system, taken as a whole, is the
sole reason why it continues to exist as a system
and does not drift apart.

So far then from there being anything opposed to
reason or probability in the view that the atom of
the element contains a great and hitherto unknown
store of internal energy, we see that if it possessed
such a store we could not know of it until it
changed, while the greater the store the more would
it resist change from without, and therefore the less



. • • * • •



• * « • • ••• * •• • • •



MINUTENESS OF THE EXPECTED CHANGES 101

likely should we be to suspect its existence. From
this point forward we shall find that the more the
apparent objections to the first alternative of internal
energy are faced the less serious they appear, while
with the second alternative of external energy the
contrary is the case.

Having with these preliminaries somewhat cleared
the ground, I now wish to attempt to explain a
series of experimental investigations which have
thrown a flood of light upon the nature of radio-
activity. Though by a superficial or merely external
observation of radium, even over the period of
a whole lifetime, it would hardly be possible to
detect the least change of any kind in the matter
itself or any exhaustion of its output of energy,
these investigations have proved that radium, and
every element that is radioactive, is actually
changing in a very peculiar and definite way.
These new changes in radioactivity are always
excessively minute as regards the actual quantities
of matter undergoing change in any period of time.
Except in very special circumstances they are quite
beyond the range of the most delicate methods of
investigation previously known to the chemist
The methods employed in their investigation are
in the first place wholly novel, but they are none
the less trustworthy or definite on that account.



• '! •".



• • • # r



••••••■••••"»• - • •



ioa THE CASCADE OF CHANGES

They depend on the important fact that when a
radioactive element changes it does not as a rule do
so once only, producing in a single step the final
product of its change. Usually there are several
successive changes following one another, so to
speak, in cascade. Just as a waterfall, instead of
taking one plunge into a lake, may cascade in a
series of successive leaps from pool to pool on the
way down, so a radioactive element like radium
passes in its change through a long series of inter-
mediate bodies, each produced from the one pre-
ceding and producing the one following. Whereas,
however, the first change is and must be slow, the
subsequent changes may be, and usually are, rela-
tively far more rapid.' But for the existence of
these ephemeral, rapidly changing, intermediate
substances, continually being produced and as
continually changing, it is safe to say the mystery
of radium would to-day be still unsolved.

Picture to yourselves exactly what this problem
involves. Out of a remote, and so far as we know
unlimited, past this world has gradually come into
the state we find it to-day, and what we find is
that there is a process known as radioactivity still
spontaneously going on in matter in its natural
state as it is dug out of the earth, which we cannot
in any way stop or retard, and which we recog-
nise as the intrinsic property of certain chemical



EXISTING METHODS INADEQUATE *°3

elements. We must conclude, until we have
evidence to the contrary, that radioactivity is not
a process which has started recently, or that it is
confined to the particular epoch of the earth's
history we are now living in. So long as the
radioactive elements have existed this process
must have been going on, and, if we are forced
to the conclusion that the radioactive elements
are changing, is it not obvious that the changes
must be excessively slow for any of the radio-
active elements to have survived? What could
the methods of chemistry avail in such a search ?
Delicate as these are to-day, beyond the limit
of what was even conceivable a hundred years
ago, infinitely finer and more sensitive methods
are required.

The geologists tell us, and we shall find in radio-
activity only confirmation, that the earth has
existed in much the same physical condition as
it exists to-day for hundreds if not thousands of
millions of years. A chemist could probably in
many cases detect the change of one thousandth
part of one element into another, whereas we shall
come to see that for even such a small fraction of a
primary radioactive element to change a period of
the order of a million years would almost certainly
be necessary.

You all know the stride that chemistry took for-



i°4 IMPONDERABLE QUANTITIES OF MATTER

wards when it impressed into its service the spectro-
scope, and was able to detect with certainty quantities
of new elements absolutely imperceptible in any other
way. For example, Bunsen and Kirchoff detected
by the spectroscope the unknown element casium
in the natural waters of the Durkheim spring in the
Palatinate, but to obtain enough caesium for their
chemical investigations they had to boil down forty
tons of this water. Coming nearer the present day,
Madame Curie made an equal or even greater step
forward when she impressed into the service of
chemistry the property of radioactivity and dis-
covered the new element radium in pitchblende,
though a ton of pitchblende contains only two
grains of radium. But we must improve even
on this. We have to detect the change in a
minute amount of radium which is changing so
slowly that it appears not to be changing at all.
The actual amount of new matter which this half-
grain of radium bromide would produce by its
change in, say, a month or a year, is a quantity so
small that one has only to attempt to conceive it to
be ready to give up the search in despair, Yet in
a moment I hope to show it to every one in this
large room, and to demonstrate to you a few of its
most striking properties in the clearest way.

Were radium to change in one single step into,
say, lead, which we believe may be the ultimate



SUCCESSIVE OUTBURSTS OF ENERGY 105

product in the main line of descent, this would be
impossible. Those of you in the back could hardly
see a quantity of lead equal in quantity to the
whole of this radium. How much less then could
you hope to be shown the infinitesimal fraction of
this small quantity which is produced in a month or
a year? No chemist has yet detected lead as the
final product of radium, and our evidence on this
point is at present only indirect, and not even very
conclusive. But radium does not change all at
once in one step. At least eight intermediate
bodies intervene, each one of which is formed
from the one preceding it with an outburst of energy,
and changes into the next with another outburst of
energy.

A soldier on a battlefield knows without any
doubt when he is being fired at, but it would take
him a long and patient examination to find out,
and it would be a matter of only secondary
interest, whether the bullets are made, say, of
lead or of nickel. The energy possessed by the
flying bullets are their, to him, practically im-
portant feature. After the energy is all spent the
bullet ceases to make its presence felt. So it is
with radium. The energy possessed by the
changing intermediate substances and evolved
from them is the sole but sufficient evidence of
their existence. After the energy is all spent and



106 ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE NEWER METHOD

the change is complete, only a most minute and
patient examination, which has still to be made
complete, will reveal the chemical nature of the
minute amount of dead products formed. But
before this stage is reached, in the long succes-
sion of energy outbursts which accompany the
change of one intermediate form into the next,
we have a succession of most remarkable and
obvious phenomena which enable us to detect
the separate changes and to discover the whole
nature and the periods of average life of all the
intermediate bodies, although these all exist only
in absolutely infinitesimal quantity, and not one
of them is known, or probably ever can become
known, to the chemist in the ordinary way. It is
one of the most wonderful triumphs in the whole
history of physical science that such changes
should have ever been detected. Let us turn to
the main evidence on which the view that radium
is changing was first based.

If this specimen of radium bromide was dis-
solved in water and the liquid evaporated down
to dryness in order to get back the solid com-
pound, it would be found that as the result of this
very simple operation the radium had lost the
greater part of its radioactivity in the process.
The penetrating #- and y-rays would have com-



THE EMANATION OF RADIUM 107

pletely disappeared, and the non-penetrating a-rays
would only be one quarter as powerful as initially.
Then a strange thing would happen. Left to
itself the radium would spontaneously recover its
lost activity, little by little from day to day, and
at the end of a month it would be not appreciably
less active than it at first was, or as it now is.

This appears to be in direct conflict with the
statement previously made that the radioactivity
of radium cannot be affected by any known
process, but it is only apparently so. If we
study the process carefully we shall find that
when the radium is dissolved in water "some-
thing" escapes into the air, and this "something"
is intensely radioactive. It diffuses about in the
air, but remains contained within a closed vessel,
if it is gas-tight. In short, this " something " is a
new gas possessing the property of radioactivity
to a very intense degree.

We owe the greater part of our knowledge of
this new radioactive gas to Professor Rutherford,
who has given to it a special name. He called it
the emanation of radium, or, for short, simply the
emanation. The vague term "emanation" is,
with our present exact knowledge of its real
nature, apt to mislead. Some, unfortunately,
have used the term "emanation" or "ema-
nations" in speaking of the various radiations



108 THE EMANATION OF RADIUM

which radium emits, and which we have already
considered in some detail. Sir William Ramsay
has proposed the name " Niton " for this new gas,
in order to emphasise its relationship to the other
argon gases. However, as similar new gases or
emanations are given by two other of the radio-
active elements, thorium and actinium, the original
term has been generally retained. The term
"emanation," qualified when necessary by the name
of the radioactive element producing it, denotes one
of these new gaseous bodies, and it is necessary not
to confuse this particular use with its older and
more general uses.

In the laboratory, half a mile from this lecture-
room, I have a further quantity of about half a
grain of pure radium bromide which has been
dissolved in water. The solution is kept in a
closed vessel. This morning I extracted the
emanation from the vessel, and I have brought
it here to show you. The radium from which it
was derived is not in the room, it is still in the
laboratory half a mile away. The emanation is
contained, mixed with air, in a little glass tube
(Fig. 17) provided with taps for its admission
and extraction, and inside this tube are some frag-
ments of the mineral willemite, a silicate of zinc.
This mineral has the appearance of an ordinary
cold greenish-grey stone, quite undistinguished
and not very different from many of the common



FlG. 17. Till* containing Willemite used to exhibit the Radium Em



[<;. 18. The same tuhe photograph"! in the 'lark l,y its own phosphorescent light.



• • • •


■••:•■



• -



THE EMANATION OF RADIUM 109

pebbles of the road or sea- shore. It however
possesses the power of fluorescing, under the
action of X-rays and the rays from radium, with
a brilliant greenish light, as you may see when I
bring my capsule containing half a grain of solid
radium bromide near to a block of the mineral
in the dark. Let us now in the dark examine
the tube containing the emanation and willemite
together. We find the willemite glowing with
a most remarkable light Even in ordinary lamp-
light or weak daylight the glow of the willemite
is clearly visible. Fig. 18 shows the tube
(Fig. 17), which has been placed in front of
the camera in the dark room, and, as you can
see, the pieces of glowing willemite have photo-
graphed themselves by their own light. In the
negative the walls of the glass tube, which also
are rendered feebly fluorescent by the emanation,
are faintly visible. The photograph proved some-
what difficult to obtain, as the light, consisting
almost wholly of green and yellow, is almost non-
actinic to the photographic plate. An isochromatic
plate must be employed and a long exposure given.
Under these circumstances the #. and y-rays from
the tube, as they are not refracted by the lens,
themselves fog the plate uniformly to a consider-
able extent. The photograph gives no idea of
the beauty of the original tube. Willemite
glowing in the emanation of radium is one of



no THE EMANATION OF RADIUM

the most beautiful sights I know, and considered
with reference to the origin of its light and all
that the phenomenon foreshadows for humanity,
it raises feelings which only a poet adequately
could express.

What is the emanation of radium ? I shall treat
this question to-night solely as though the emana-
tion was a body with no connection whatever with
radium, because a knowledge of its own nature is
necessary before its real relation to radium can be
appreciated. In the first place, it is intensely radio-
active on its own account — that is to say, it gives
out the new kinds of rays very similar in character to
those given by other radioactive bodies and capable
of producing the same effects. What I am about to
say refers only to a tube in which the radium ema-
nation has been confined for some hours. At first
the emanation gives only a- but no j8- or y-rays, as
we shall consider more nearly later (Chapter VIII.).

This tube, in which the emanation is confined,
glows in the dark because the phosphorescent
willemite it contains is being bombarded by the
rays from the emanation. Some of these rays
penetrate the glass walls of the tube, as you may
see if I bring the X-ray screen between your eyes
and the tube. Moreover, if a very thin plate of metal
is interposed at the back of the screen it does not
perceptibly diminish the effect, for the rays from
a tube containing the emanation, like the radium-



THE EMANATION OF RADIUM in

rays themselves, are capable of penetrating a con-
siderable thickness of metal. They consist, in fact,
of a-, £- and 7-rays together. Any of the other
phosphorescent bodies — for example, zinc sulphide
— would, if placed inside this vessel with the ema-
nation, glow in its characteristic way just as if
exposed to radium itself. Similarly, a photographic
plate would be fogged almost instantly, and an elec-
trified silk tassel would be discharged at once by the
rays proceeding from the emanation confined in
this tube. The similarity between the a-rays from
the emanation and those from radium have been
proved by exact physical experiments.

The next point is that the emanation is not a
solid form of matter dispersed like fine particles
of smoke in the air which carries it. It is a true
gas. This has been proved by innumerable ex-
periments ; but I wish to show you one which is
particularly beautiful, and which has, I think, con-
vinced every one who has ever seen it performed
that the emanation of radium is a true gas with
the property of radioactivity. It was first per-
formed by Professor Rutherford and myself in
Montreal in November, 1902. If the emanation
is a gas there ought to be some temperature,
though, perhaps a very low one, at which it loses
its gaseous form and is condensed or frozen. All
our attempts to effect such a condensation at tern-



ii2 THE CONDENSATION OF THE EMANATION

peratures down to - ioo° Centigrade had proved
futile, and we had no means of obtaining the very
low temperatures now daily employed in a modern
laboratory. But a liquid air machine was given
to the laboratory by its generous founder, and on
its first run the emanation of radium was success-


FiG. 19.

fully condensed. Exact experiments showed that
the emanation is condensed quite sharply when
the temperature falls below —150° Centigrade (or
— 238 Fahrenheit), and it volatilises and again
resumes its gaseous state quite sharply when the
temperature rises above this. We shall perform
the experiment in the following manner (Fig. 19).
To one of the tubes of the vessel containing the



THE CONDENSATION OF THE EMANATION 113

emanation is attached a rubber blowing-ball, for
blowing out the emanation. The other tube is
connected with a U-tube of glass containing some
fragments of willemite, immersed in a vessel of
liquid air and so kept at the very low temperature
of about - 1 83 Centigrade or - 300 Fahrenheit,
into which the emanation is blown. Exposed to
this extreme cold the emanation instantly loses its
gaseous state and condenses in the tube. To make
the experiment more striking, between the tube
containing the emanation and the cooled U-tube I
have interposed several yards of narrow tubing
which the emanation has to traverse before reach-
ing the tube in which it condenses. As you see,
when I open the taps and gently blow a blast of
air to sweep out the emanation into the cold U-tube,
the willemite in the cold tube suddenly shines out
brilliantly, at the point where the emanation con-
denses.

So long as the U-tube is kept in the liquid air
the emanation will remain there, though I continue
to send a gentle blast of air from the bellows. But
a few moments after taking the tube out of the
liquid air, it warms up to the point ( - 1 50 Centi-
grade) at which the emanation again resumes its
gaseous form, and now we can blow it out with
a single puff of air. See ! I blow it out through
the narrow tubing, which I have connected to the

U-tube, into a large flask dusted over its inside
1



H4 THE RADIUM EMANATION

surface with the phosphorescent sulphide of zinc.
In the dark the globe shines out with a soft white
light like some fairy lantern, and I can see to read
my watch by its light. The physiological effects
of the radium emanation are imperfectly investi-
gated and are probably potent. This is a field of
investigation I personally have no desire to explore,
so that we must not forget to cork the globe and so
prevent the emanation from diffusing out into the
air of the room.

After this demonstration you may have some
difficulty in really believing that the actual amount
of gaseous emanation which has produced these
beautiful effects is almost infinitesimal. By making
use of the same property — its condensation by
liquid air — the actual volume occupied by the
radium emanation freed by freezing from all other
gases was measured by Sir William Ramsay and
myself. Imagine a bubble of air the volume of a
good -sized pin's head, say, one cubic millimetre, or
one fifteen-thousandth part of a cubic inch. It
would require thirty times more emanation than was
actually employed in the last experiment to fill
a bubble of this size. Of course, in the experiments
this small quantity of emanation was mixed with
a considerable volume of air for convenience in
manipulation.



ITS INFINITESIMAL QUANTITY 115

It requires a distinct step for the mind to assimi-
late the important fact that the property of radio-
activity, which so far has been studied only in solid
substances and minerals, could be shown equally
by a gas, and this fact accounted for the true
nature of the emanation remaining largely unrecog-
nised even after the conclusive experiment I have
shown you. There is, of course, nothing contrary
to the nature of radioactivity in the fact that it is
shown by a gas. When we apply Mme. Curies
theory that radioactivity is an intrinsic property
of the atom, and of the element in question, the
difficulty is not that the emanation is a gas, for
many elements are gases, but how it is that a new
radioactive element, such as the emanation un-
doubtedly is, should result when radium compounds
are dissolved in water, and this question we have
purposely deferred.

The emanation, as we have employed it in our
experiments, is mixed with ordinary air, and in this
way it can be dealt with and treated like any other
gas. We have blown it through tubes from one
end of the lecture table to the other. If it had
been an ordinary gas, like air, no one could have
seen it, or known what became of it. But being
intensely radioactive, although its actual quantity
is almost inconceivably small, the radioactivity



n6 CHEMICAL NATURE OF THE EMANATION

serves as a sufficient evidence of its presence or
absence, making it, as a matter of fact, far easier
to work with and to investigate than an ordinary
gas in ordinary quantity. If a mining engineer
wished to know how the air he pumped into his
mine got distributed among the various shafts and
pits, he could not do better than to put a little
radium emanation into the entering air, and then
subsequently to take samples at various parts of
the mine, and have them tested for content of
radium emanation by a gold-leaf electroscope.
Many other practical problems in the flow of gases,
which are difficult to solve by ordinary methods,
might be readily solved by the help of this new gas.

It has even been found possible to settle the
chemical nature of this new gas, and to place it in
its proper family of elements in the periodic table.
Almost all gases, according to their various natures,
are absorbed when subjected to the action of
various chemical reagents. Thus oxygen is ab-
sorbed by phosphorus, hydrogen by heated copper
oxide, nitrogen by heated magnesium, and so on.
The exceptions, namely, gases which are not ab-
sorbed by any reagents and which will not combine
with anything, are the newly discovered gases of
Lord Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay — argon,
helium, neon, etc. — which exist in atmospheric air.
The quantity in the air of these gases is extremely



THE ARGON FAMIL Y 117

minute except in the single case of argon, which
is present to the extent of one per cent. The
radium emanation, like argon, is not absorbed by
any known reagent, and does not appear to possess
any power of chemical combination. It may be
passed unchanged through absorbents, or subjected
to drastic chemical treatment which would suffice
to absorb every known gas except those of the
argon type, and therefore we say the emanation
is probably an element of the same family nature
as the argon gases. Like them, it exists in the
form of single atoms — that is, its molecule is mon-
atomic. Radium, on the other hand, in its chemical
nature is extremely similar to barium, strontium,
and calcium, a family known as the alkaline-earth
elements. None other of the argon elements or the
alkaline-earth elements are radioactive, and yet the
radioactive elements are quite normal in their chemi-
cal properties, closely resembling ordinary elements,
and being associated in the clearest and closest way
with one or other of the old well-known types or
families. Quite recently, by using quantities of
radium about fifteen times as great as those used to-
night in our experiments, it has been possible to
obtain enough of the emanation for it to be possible
to photograph its spectrum. This proves to be a
new and characteristic bright-line spectrum, re-
sembling in general character the spectra of the
other argon gases.



n8 ENERGY EVOLVED FROM THE EMANATION

It has been found possible to obtain some idea of
the density of the emanation of radium, and there-
fore of the weight of its atom, from experiments on
the rate of its diffusion from one place to another.
These indicate that the gas is extremely dense —
denser probably than mercury vapour — and there-
fore that it has a very heavy atom. Finally, by
means of a new special micro-balance thousands of
times more sensitive than the most delicately
constructed chemist's balance, the emanation has
actually been weighed by Sir William Ramsay and
Mr. Whytlaw-Gray. These experiments and the
whole of the available evidence agree in indicating
that the atomic weight of the emanation is 222,
which is four units below that of radium, and there-
fore is the fourth heaviest known.

The heat given out by a gram of radium, as we
have seen, is 133 calories per hour, but it must be
understood that this refers to radium in its normal
condition containing its full quota of emanation.
After solution in water, that is, after the emanation
is extracted, the radium gives out heat to the
extent of only thirty- three calories per hour, while
the emanation produces one hundred calories per
hour. That is to say, the emanation of radium
gives three times as much energy as the radium
from which it is derived, although the actual amount



ENERGY EVOLVED FROM THE EMANATION 119

of matter in the emanation is itself practically
imperceptible.

Now, perhaps it is easy to understand how it is
that the minuteness of the quantities of material
offers no barrier in the investigation of radioactivity.
Mass is not the only consideration. A very small
bullet suffices to work terrible havoc, in spite of its
smallness, by means of the kinetic energy with
which it is impelled. A little torpedo, stuffed full
of imprisoned energy in the form of explosives,
suffices to sink an enormous battleship. A quantity
of emanation, which certainly does not weigh a
hundred-thousandth part of a grain, gives out enough
energy to produce effects plainly visible to you all
at the very back of the room.

If, instead of the thirtieth part of a pin's head
full, we could obtain a pint of this gas — and to
obtain such a quantity half a ton of pure radium
would be required — it would radiate the energy
of a hundred powerful arc-lamps. Indeed, as
Rutherford has said, no vessel would hold it.
Such a quantity would instantly melt and dispel in
vapour any material known.

These new facts, which transpire the moment we
begin to make a systematic investigation of the
radioactivity of radium, make the second alterna-



120 THE DECAY OF THE EMANATION

tive, that the energy of radium is derived from
outside, well-nigh incredible. For to account for
the energy evolved from the emanation we must
suppose all space to be everywhere traversed by
new and mysterious forms of radiant energy of
such tremendous and incredible power that the
explanation is harder to believe than the fact it
is supposed to explain. To avoid the necessity
of supposing that the energy resides within the
comparatively small amounts of radioactive matter
in existence, we must fill the whole of external space
with radiant energy of a similar order of magnitude.
This is straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel.

Fortunately there is a crucial test by which we
are now in a position to decide between the two
alternative views. Let us apply the theorem we
have already deduced (p. 96) from general princi-
ples. If the energy comes from within the radio-
active matter, its radioactivity must in course of
time diminish and decay — the more rapidly the
more powerfully radioactive it is. Whereas, if the
energy comes from the outside, however powerful the
radioactivity may be, there is no reason why it should
not continue indefinitely with undiminished power.

We have seen that the emanation is, mass for
mass, far more intensely radioactive even than
radium, and, if the energy comes from within, it
is to be expected that the activity of the emana-
tion will be short-lived in comparison with that



THE DECAY OF THE EMANATION 121

of radium, whereas, if the energy is derived from
outside, no such decay is to be anticipated. Does
the radioactivity of the radium emanation diminish
or decay, or does it continue permanently ?

The answer to this question is that the radio-
activity of the emanation rapidly decays away from
day to day. Four days hence the activity will be
but one-half of what it now is. In eight days the
activity will be reduced to one-fourth, in twelve
days to one-eighth, in sixteen days to one-sixteenth,
and so on, diminishing practically to zero at the end
of a month in a descending geometrical progression
with the lapse of time.

The light from the glowing willemite in this
tube, when it is left entirely to itself, will gradually
fade, and at the end of a month will have died
almost completely. Vast as is the store of energy in
matter which is released in the radioactive process,
it is not infinite, and in the radium emanation we
have an example of a change proceeding so rapidly
that only a few weeks are necessary for its com-
pletion.

Half a mystery is usually greater than the whole,
and in science when mysteries begin to appear on
all sides, the explanation is often near at hand.
We dissolved a compound of radium in water, and
the greater part of its activity disappeared in the
process. Then little by little the lost activity was



122 THE REPRODUCTION OF THE EMANATION

spontaneously recovered, and at the end of a month
the radium was not appreciably less active than at
first. The disappearance of the greater part of the
activity after solution was explained by the fact that
an extremely radioactive gas — the emanation — was
liberated during the act of solution, and this carried
away with it the whole of the radioactivity which
the radium had lost But, lo! while the radium
slowly recovered its original radioactivity, the
emanation lost what it had at first possessed. A
quantitative examination of these two processes of
decay and recovery at once showed that the total
radioactivity had not been affected, but had re-
mained constant in spite of the treatment to which
the radium had been subjected. This is a funda-
mental law of universal application to all radioactive
bodies, and it has been called the Law of the Con-
servation of Radioactivity. Whatever you do to
any radioactive substance you cannot artificially
alter the total radioactivity, though you may
frequently, as in this example, divide it into several
parts, for reasons that will soon be clear.

It is easy enough on the first alternative to
account for the comparatively rapid decay of the
activity of the emanation of radium. It is dissipat-
ing its internal store of energy so rapidly that it is
soon exhausted. It is a clear case of a short life
and a merry one. But how is the gradual recovery
of the radioactivity of the radium in the course of



THE REPRODUCTION OF THE EMANATION 123

time to be explained ? This is the key to the
whole problem, and on the second alternative no
answer whatever can be given. The explanation
that the energy of radioactive substance is derived
from outside is not merely incredible. It is alto-
gether insufficient

Imagine that a month has elapsed, and that the
radium, which has now recovered completely its
lost activity, is again dissolved in water and evapo-
rated down to dryness exactly as before. Again
you would find that in the process the radium had
lost the same large proportion of its radioactivity,
and again you would obtain from it a new amount of
emanation no less than that which is on the table
to-night. Repeat the experiment as often as you
please and you will find the result always the same.
While the emanation you separate from the radium
is decaying away from day to day, a fresh crop is
being spontaneously manufactured by the radium.
The change of the radium into the emanation is, as
a matter of fact, only the first of a long series of
successive changes of a similar character. The
gaseous emanation in turn rapidly changes into a
third body, not a gas, called Radium A ; this into a
fourth, called Radium B ; and so on. Nine suc-
cessive changes are at present known, which we
shall have to give some account of later.

This explanation of radioactivity, which has come



4



1 24 A TOMIC DISINTEGRA TION

to be known as the theory of atomic disintegration,
was put forward by Professor Rutherford and my-
self as the result of a long series of experimental
investigations carried out in the Macdonald Physical
and Chemical laboratories at M'Gill University,
Montreal. It has, since, not only shown itself
capable of interpreting all the very complicated
known facts of radioactivity, but also of predicting
and accounting for many new ones. Although on
the surface a revolutionary addition to the theories
of physical science, it must be remembered that it
is the facts of radioactivity which are really re-
volutionary. While accommodating these strange
new facts the disintegration theory conserves in a
truly remarkable way the older established prin-
ciples of physical science. Without such a guiding
hypothesis, reconciling the old and the new, it is
safe to say that the facts of radioactivity would
ultimately have wrought a far greater change in
scientific theory than has actually taken place.
Although the emanation of radium is not and, as
we shall come to see, never can be obtained in
palpable quantities — it is changing too rapidly for
that — we know almost as much about its nature and
properties as we do about any of the older gases.

A very important point is that just as we cannot
really alter the radioactivity of a body artificially in



RADIOACTIVE EQUILIBRIUM i*5

any way, we cannot and do not in any process in-
fluence the rate at which the emanation is being
formed from radium or the rate at which it in turn
sporitaneously changes. The same amount is always
in existence whether you separate it or not. The
apparent constancy of the radioactivity of radium
is not the real constancy to be expected of a trans-
forming mechanism. It is the apparent constancy
produced by the equilibrium between continuous
and opposing changes, on the one hand the rapid
decay of the part of the radioactivity due to the
emanation, and on the other the regeneration of
fresh emanation as fast as the old disappears.
This process of regeneration is always going on at
a perfectly definite and unalterable rate, and the
property of producing a certain definite amount of
emanation in a given time is as much a part and parcel
of the very nature of radium — and indeed the best
and most easily applied qualitative and quantitative
test for the presence of radium in the minutest
quantity that we possess — as is its power of
giving the rays which lit up the X-ray screen and
discharged the silk tassel, or as its power of gener-
ating heat.

All of these properties are but the various
aspects of a single primary cause. The element
radium is changing, so slowly it is true, that at



126 OLD AND NEW METHODS CONTRASTED

first sight it appears not to be changing at all,
and yet with so tremendous and unparalleled an
evolution of energy that the transformation of an
otherwise imperceptible part of its mass is accom-
panied by an amount of energy so great that the
change could not by any possibility have remained
unknown. The emanation is the first main pro-
duct of the change of radium. If the emanation
were like lead or any ordinary element it would
take years of accumulation and the most minute
and patient investigation to detect its production.
But it is not. The emanation changes again into
a third type of matter we have not yet considered
(the nature of which does not yet concern us),
but whereas it would take hundreds of years for
any appreciable fraction of the radium itself to
change, the change of the emanation is rapid and
goes to practical completion within a single month.
It is precisely on this account that we can work
with and detect such almost infinitesimal quantities.
What may be termed the material evidence of
radioactive change, the detection, by purely chemi-
cal or spectroscopic methods, of the materials
formed in the changes, is still scanty, although not
altogether lacking. But the radioactive evidence,
which depends not on the material produced, but
upon the energy evolved, and on the way in which
the energy is manifested, is abundant and suffi-



OLD AND NEW METHODS CONTRASTED 127

cient. So long as the energy evolved is sufficient
in quantity, and of a kind suitable for detection
in any of the various ways I have illustrated, the
actual quantity of matter producing the energy is
of no consequence.

But the amount of energy produced by any
change depends not only on the quantity of matter
changing, but also on the time the change lasts,
that is, on the period of life of the changing matter
Chemical and spectroscopic methods of detecting
matter depend on quantity, whereas radioactive
methods depend on quantity divided by life. The
shorter the life of the changing substance the less
of it is necessary for its detection by means of radio-
activity. This is a merely preliminary and tenta-
tive indication of the operation of an exactly com-
pensating principle of great importance, which later
it will be possible to formulate as a general law.
Its result in the long run is this. Each of the
ephemeral intermediate substances in the cascade
of changes comes equally within our powers of
investigation, whether it changes slowly or rapidly,
whether it lasts long enough to accumulate in
ponderable quantity, or whether it is changing so

rapidly that it

anon,

Like snow upon the desert's dusty face,

Lighting a little hour or two, is gone.



CHAPTER VI.

The connection of the o-particle with radioactive changes — The a-par.
tide and helium— Accumulation of helium in geological time-
Discovery of helium in the sun and on the earth— Its connection
with radioactivity — Production of helium from radium— Its pro-
duction from uranium and thorium— Proof that the a- particle is
an atom of helium — The nature of the first change of radium-
Radioactive " recoil."

LAST week we studied the first step in the
* evidence that radium is changing, and con-
sidered in some detail the chief practical reason why
such changes have proved within our powers of
discovery, namely, that the change is not single but
proceeds in cascade from stage to stage, producing
ephemeral intermediate transition-forms, of which
the radium emanation is one, almost inconceivably
minute in their actual quantity but evolving in their
next change very large amounts of energy, by
means of which it is possible to trace them and
study their nature with ease. We considered the
first product of the change of radium, namely, the
emanation of radium, its nature and properties, and
its continual production from radium. We reserved
purposely the examination of the connection between
radium and the emanation it produces. Now I wish
to combine with the knowledge we have gained of

1 23



RADIOACTIVE CHANGE 129

the nature of the radium emanation that already
considered (Chapters III. and IV.) with reference to
the nature of the a-particle.

A radium salt is dissolved in water, and the
imprisoned emanation, which was formed but stored
during the previous month throughout the whole
mass of the substance, is thereby liberated and
escapes. The radium left to itself continues to
produce fresh emanation at a steady rate. The
released stores of emanation begin to lose their
radioactivity. We shall confine our attention at
first solely to the case of the radium.

When radium in this way is freed from all pre-
viously formed emanation it still gives out a-fiar-
ticles, although only about one-fourth as many as it
gives out when it contains its full quota of emana-
tion and other products. These a-particles we
regard as produced from the radium atom in the
same change as that in which u

the emanation is produced. The /^^V



00



emanation is regarded, in fact, as

radium that has lost One a- Radium. Emanation.
. , Fig. 20.

particle.

This, which is a perfectly general point of view,
was proved five years ago by the consideration of a
mass of evidence accumulated with reference to the
similar changes going on in the element thorium,
but much of this lies beyond the scope of the



I



130 HELIUM AND RADIOACTIVE CHANGE

present course. The evidence that has since been
accumulated enables the same deduction to be more
simply made, and this alone need be considered.
Henceforth the original reasoning as to the nature
of atomic disintegration, although it was, when first
put forward, very complete and convincing to those
acquainted with the whole of the experimental facts,
will be largely replaced by the more direct evidence
since obtained.

We have seen in considering the nature of the
a-rays that they are now regarded as due to the
flight of swarms of helium atoms expelled from the
radioactive substance with an almost inconceivable
speed of from 8000 to 12,000 miles per second.
Long before the real nature of the a-particle was
known, helium had been first predicted to be and
then proved experimentally to be a product of the
radioactive changes of radium, and this chapter in
the development of the subject has something more
than an historical interest.

Before proceeding, one underlying consideration
governing the view that an atom of helium
and an atom of emanation are simultaneously
formed when an atom of radium disintegrates,
must be made clear. It refers to the relative
quantities of each product, helium and emana-
tion, which it may be expected will be formed by



L



RADIOACTIVE EQUILIBRIUM *3'

the continuous operation of the process. Helium
we know is not radioactive, and therefore there is
no evidence that helium is changing in any way,
and we may in this sense refer to it as one of the
ultimate products of the change. The emanation,
on the other hand, is changing so rapidly that the
change may be regarded as complete in the course
of a single month. The bodies it is changing into
we have not yet dealt with, and they do not
immediately concern us.

Now a changing substance, like the emanation,
cannot possibly accumulate in quantity with lapse of
time beyond a certain very small extent. It is true
it is constantly being formed from radium in the
same way as helium, but whereas the helium, being
a stable substance, may be expected to accumulate
in a quantity that is proportional to the time
that elapses, the quantity of emanation will not
increase beyond a certain point. For in a very
short time after the process of accumulation of
emanation from the radium begins, as much emana-
tion will itself change as is formed, and the quantity
from that time on will remain constant. This
condition is known generally as " radioactive
equilibrium," and when we speak of the emanation
being in equilibrium with the radium we mean that
the quantity of emanation has reached a maximum
and does not further accumulate with further lapse



132 ACCUMULATION OF PRODUCTS

of time. In the case of the emanation practical
equilibrium results in the comparatively short time of
a few weeks. That is to say, however long radium
is left undisturbed to accumulate its emanation, the
quantity of the latter never exceeds a practically
almost infinitesimal one, for it is a quantity which is
produced from the change of the radium in quite
a short period of time. Its quantity is therefore
excessively minute. It is so very minute that were
it not changing and evolving energy it would not be
detectable by any ordinary method.

You will see that it follows at once from this
point of view that if any element were produced in
the disintegration of radium, which itself did not
change but was permanent, then on the one hand,
owing to the extreme smallness of the amount
formed, it would not be easy in a short period to
obtain evidence of its production, by means of
ordinary chemical tests, but, on the other hand, the
quantity would go on accumulating indefinitely
with lapse of time.

As we saw last week, the first evidence of atomic
disintegration was dynamical and due solely to the
energy which is evolved in the process. The
answer to the question as to what are the ultimate
products of atomic disintegration must be looked for
on quite different lines. The ultimate products
formed will be too small for detection in the ordi-



HELIUM IN MINERALS *33

nary way by the statical methods of chemistry and
physics, but they will accumulate indefinitely.

Since the processes go on steadily, so far as we
know, in the minerals in which the radioactive
elements are found, the ultimate products, formed
through past ages of disintegration, must accumulate
therein from one geological epoch to the next. So
that at the present day one ought to find in the
radioactive minerals the ultimate products of the
disintegration process, accumulated in sufficient
quantity to be capable of detection by the ordinary
methods of chemistry.

Now the radioactive minerals are always very
complex, and contain a very large proportion of the
total number of elements known, so that in most
cases it is impossible to deduce very much from
this evidence. Nevertheless, there was one clear
definite exception, and that was the element
helium.

The history of our knowledge of this element is
unsurpassed by that of any other in interest. Its
very name (from n\io?, the sun) stands witness to
the fact that it was known to exist in the sun as an
element before it was known to exist on the earth
at all. It was discovered in 1868 by the spectro-
scope in the suns chromosphere, by means of the
characteristic bright yellow line in its spectrum,



i 3 4 PROPERTIES OF HELIUM

which is technically known as " D 8 ". Then, in
1895, Sir William Ramsay discovered it in certain
minerals found in the earth's crust, and made a
systematic investigation of its physical and chemical
nature. It is a gas, the second lightest known,
only twice as dense as hydrogen, and for long was
the only gas which successfully resisted all efforts
made to liquefy it by extreme cold and pressure. In
1908, however, Kammerlingh Onnes succeeded by
the exercise of wonderful experimental skill and
persistence in reducing helium to the liquid state,
attaining thereby a far lower temperature (270
Centigrade, or only 3 from the absolute zero of
temperature) than has ever before been reached.
It is readily evolved from the minerals in which it
is found, either by heating them or by dissolving
them, but once evolved it cannot again be absorbed
by the minerals or by any other substance known.
Indeed, helium resembles argon perfectly in chemi-
cal nature, in that it is quite without any combining
power, and exists free as single atoms without
being known to form compounds of any kind what-
ever. Its atomic weight is four (hydrogen = 1 ).
Sir William Ramsay drew attention to the fact
that all the minerals in which he found helium
contained either uranium or thorium. This was
before the days of radioactivity, and for long
the origin of the helium — a non-condensable, non



.HELIUM AN ULTIMATE PRODUCT 135

combining gas — in minerals containing uranium and
thorium was a matter for comment and specula-
tion. In certain cases the volume of helium
evolved is nearly a hundred times as great as the
volume of the mineral in which it is contained.

The disintegration theory enabled Professor
Rutherford and myself at once to give a probable
explanation which has since proved to be correct.
We regarded helium as one of the ultimate products
of the disintegration of the radioactive elements,
radium, uranium, and thorium. Forming during
the long ages of the past throughout the mass of
the mineral, which is often of a glassy nature, it is
unable to escape until the mineral is heated or
dissolved, and it steadily accumulates with the
passage of geological time. We ventured to
predict that helium was one of the ultimate pro-
ducts of radioactive changes, being formed in
Nature from radium, uranium, and thorium, exces-
sively slowly, but still fast enough to ensure that all
minerals containing these elements must contain
helium also. This has since been proved to be
the case. It is true that in certain uranium
minerals — e.g., autunite and carnotite, the amount
present is often excessively minute, but these also
are just the minerals which it is believed are of
extremely recent geological formation.



136 PRODUCTION OF HELIUM FROM RADIUM

From this point the work proceeded along two
separate lines. Rutherford, in an ' exhaustive ex-
amination of the nature of the a-rays, which we
have already considered, proved first that they con-
sisted of positively charged atoms expelled with
great velocity. At first their mass was given as
twice that of hydrogen, on the assumption they
carried one atomic charge. Then, as the sequel to
the beautiful counting experiments we have con-
sidered, it was proved in 1908 that each a-particle
carries two atomic charges of positive electricity.
Therefore the mass of the a-particle is four, that
is to say, it is the same as that of the atom of
helium. This made it very probable, therefore, that
the a-particle is an atom of helium.

The prediction that helium was a product of
radioactive changes was proved directly by Sir
William Ramsay and myself in 1903. We chose
for the particular case of radioactive change studied
that of the emanation of radium, since it is rapid,
and the emanation can readily be obtained, free
from other gases, first by the action of suitable
absorbents, and finally by condensing it with liquid
air and removing the gases not condensed with a
pump. So purified, it was sealed up in a small
spectrum tube, so that the spectrum of the gas
could be examined at will, and then it was left to



1

1



* *



J *



Gas (



Fir;. 22. Dr. Giesel's Photograph of the Spectrum nt the Gas from Radium
{II 10 minutes'. III 5 minutes' espjiure). I is tiu- Sp^clrum of Helium,
IV thai of Hydrogen, for compitison.



PRODUCTION OF HELIUM FROM RADIUM 137

itself. At first no helium was present. Helium,
not being condensable by liquid air, could not have
been present in the tube as first prepared. But in
the course of three or four days, as the emanation
disintegrated, the spectrum of helium gradually
made its appearance, and finally the whole char-
acteristic spectrum of helium was given by the
tube. Fig. 21 shows a photograph of one of the
original spectrum tubes in which the production of
helium from radium was proved. This observation
of the production of the element helium from the
radium emanation, and therefore (since the emana-
tion in turn is produced from radium) from the
element radium, has since been verified and con-
firmed by numerous investigators in various parts
of the world. It has also been found by Debierne
in a similar manner by the spectroscope that
actinium, a radioactive substance found by him in
pitchblende, produces helium. Dr. Giesel has
actually succeeded in photographing the spectrum
of the gases generated by radium, and one of his
photographs is reproduced in Fig. 22. It repre-
sents four separate spectra, one below the other
in parallel strips. The uppermost (I) is ordinary
helium. The second and third (II and III) are
two photographs obtained from the gas generated
by radium. In the second an exposure of twenty
minutes, and in the third one of five minutes



138 HELIUM FROM URANIUM AND THORIUM

were given. The lowest spectrum (IV) is that
of hydrogen. It will be seen that many of the
helium lines are present in the spectrum of the
gas from radium. The other lines are those of
hydrogen, due, no doubt, to the presence of a
trace of moisture. The figures above and below
the plate refer to the stronger lines of helium and
hydrogen respectively clearly visible in photo-
graph II. They refer to the wave-lengths in

o

Angstrom units (io** 10 metre). It must be re-
membered that the (visually) brilliant yellow line
D 8 , owing to its colour, appears far less intense in
the photograph than the blue and violet lines.

I have been engaged for four years in an
attempt to detect the production of helium from
the primary radio-elements uranium and thorium,
and I have recently succeeded in proving in both
cases that helium is produced, and, moreover, that
the rate of production is almost exactly what is to
be expected from the theory of atomic disintegra-
tion. This quantity is about one five-hundred-
thousand-millionth of the mass of the uranium or
thorium per annum ! A photograph of the ap-
paratus employed, as it at present stands in the
Physical Chemistry Laboratory, is shown in Fig. 23.
These are seven exactly similar arrangements
side by side, each of which is quite separate and



Ho HELIUM AND THE a PARTICLE

of mercury into the smallest-sized spectrum tube
that can be made and its spectrum examined. As
shown in numerous special experiments, the D, line
of the helium spectrum can be detected with cer-
tainty if one millionth part of a cubic centimetre,
or one five-thousand-millionth part of a gram of
helium is present This is certainly the smallest
quantity of any element that has ever been
detected by the spectroscope.

By frequently repeated experiments one can find
for each Bask a period of accumulation that must
be allowed before helium can be detected in the
expelled gases, and so one can obtain a measure of
the rate of production of helium. In this way
I have obtained helium repeatedly from both
uranium and thorium salts, and the rate of produc-
tion, though the measurements are not yet finished,
has been found to be of the same order as that pre-
viously calculated from the disintegration theory.
For the case of uranium the rate of production is
about two milligrams of helium from a thousand
tons of uranium per year.

The position is then this. Helium has actually
been found to be produced from the various radio-
active substances — radium, thorium, uranium,
actinium — which have in common the fact that they
all expel a-particles. The mass of these particles



HELIUM AND THE a PARTICLE 141

has been measured and found to agree with the
mass of the helium atom. All a-particles have
been proved to have the same mass and to differ
only in the initial velocity of expulsion, whether
expelled from radium itself, from the emanation,
from actinium, uranium, thorium, or any other of
the bodies which expel them. Hence we are
justified in concluding that the a-particle is an atom
of helium, or at least becomes one after the
velocity with which it is expelled is lost and it is
brought to comparative rest.

One further step in this long converging series
of experiments clinches the argument. We have
seen that the a-particle, though but feebly penetrat-
ing, has a very definite small penetrating power.
Now glass is a substance that can be blown to an
excessive degree of thinness and yet retain to the
full its air-tight properties. I have succeeded in
blowing small windows of glass thin enough to
allow the a-particle to get through, and yet strong
enough and tight enough to stand the pressure of
the air on one side when there was an almost
perfect vacuum on the other. So that it ought to
be possible, if the a-particle is an atom of helium,
by storing the radioactive substance in a very thin-
walled air-tight glass vessel, to get helium produced
outside the vessel, although no helium or other gas
in the ordinary state confined inside the vessel



142 ATOMIC WEIGHT OF THE EMANATION

could escape. This experiment has been per-
formed by Rutherford and Royds with a large
quantity of radium loaned by the Austrian Govern-
ment. The emanation from the radium, which
gives a-particles and has been shown to give
helium, was stored in an excessively thin-walled
but still perfectly gas-tight tube, enclosed within
a wider vessel. After some days the gas in the
outer vessel was found to contain helium. It
was proved that when helium was stored in the
inner tube, none got through into the outer vessel.
This final experiment clinches the proof that the
a-particle is an atom of helium.

So we are justified in writing the first disintegra-
tion suffered by radium : —



0=0



+0



Radium. Emanation. Helium
Fig. 24.

There is a great deal of evidence which proves
that one atom of a radioactive body expels but one
a-particle at each disintegration. Hence, since the
atomic weight of radium is 226, and that of helium
4, the atomic weight of the emanation is pre-
sumably 222. This is the value obtained by direct
experiment (Chapter V.).



RADIOACTIVE RECOIL 143

The above diagram is typical of no less than
nineteen different radioactive changes, in all of
which an atom of mass between 240 and 200 expels
an a-particle, or helium atom, of mass 50 or 60
times less. By the usual dynamical law it is to be
expected that the heavy residue of the original atom,
whatever it is, should recoil in the direction opposite
to that in which the a-particle is expelled with a
velocity between 50 and 60 times less than the
a-particle, that is to say, with a velocity between
150 and 250 miles a second. The kinetic energy
of this recoiling atom, since it depends upon the
mass multiplied by the square of the velocity, will
also be between 50 and 60 times less than that of
the a-particle. The velocity and kinetic energy
possessed by a recoiling atom, though greatly inferior
to that of an a-particle, are nevertheless greatly
superior to that possessed by an ordinary gas
molecule at any attainable temperature.

The phenomenon of radioactive recoil comes into
evidence in a very curious and interesting manner,
which at the same time has proved of very great
practical utility. Very many of the products
resulting from the expulsion of a-rays, although
after their formation they are either not at all
volatile or can only be volatilised at a high tem-
perature, yet at the moment of production behave
like volatile substances, and are carried away under



144 RADIOACTIVE RECOIL

suitable circumstances from the preparation in which
they are produced, and deposited on the nearest
available surface. The best conditions are obtained
by working in a good vacuum, and charging the
preparation positively, and the surface, on which it
is required to deposit the recoil product, negatively.
The residual atom, after the a-particle is expelled,
carries a positive charge, and so is attracted to the
negatively charged surface. It is essential that the
preparation should be in the form of a very thin
layer in order to give the recoiling product a chance
of escaping from it. In this way many products, of
period of life too short to allow of their being
separated by any other method, have been isolated
and identified with ease.



CHAPTER VII.

Atomic disintegration and the periodic law — Questions of nomen-
clature — Definition of the chemist's atom — Difference between
atoms and chemical compounds — The insufficiency of chemical
methods in many radioactive problems — Relation of radioactivity
to the electrical theory of matter — Hypotheses or mental
pictures — The two possible pictures of atomic disintegration —
Sudden explosive character of the disintegration — Law of radio-
active changes — Chance of disintegration — Average life of a dis-
integrating atom — Its expectation of life — The "how," not the
" why," of atomic disintegration explained — Determination of the
period of average life of atoms— Primary radio-elements and
ephemeral transition-forms — Radioactive equilibrium — Average
life of radium — The total energy evolved in the complete disinte-
gration of radium.

THE question, How can an element or the atom
of an element change, has given rise to
many arguments, of etymological rather than
scientific importance. What we now certainly know,
and what radioactivity has given us for the first
time the opportunity of learning is, first, that some
elements do change, and secondly, how they
change. The element radium changes, by the loss
of an atom of helium, into the emanation, which
is about as different from radium in its chemical or
material nature as two elements well could be.
The one is a member of the group of alkaline-
earth, the other of the argon family of elements.
l 145



j 4 6 ATOMIC DISINTEGRATION

After all, is not this rather to be anticipated?
When we arrange the elements in order of
their atomic weights — an arrangement which led
to the recognition of what is known as the
Periodic Law — the most sudden and surprising
differences appear between succeeding elements.
Chlorine, potassium, and argon are three succeed-
ing elements in such an arrangement, and there is
no resemblance whatever between them. In the
nine successive transformations radium undergoes,
the atom suffers, in most but not in all, a disintegra-
tion in which a helium atom is expelled. The
heavy residues of the original atom remaining after
the successive loss of one, two, three and so on
of these helium atoms constitute the intermediate
bodies — the emanation, Radium A, Radium B, and
Radium C — successively produced, each from the
preceding. It is therefore rather to be expected
that the succeeding transition-substances produced
one after the other should differ entirely from one
another in their material characteristics, and this,
so far as we have been able to discover them, we
find to be fully borne out.

Let us from the point we have gained now face
the question, which has proved a difficulty to so
many, of how it is we find that the elements and
the atoms are actually changing. The word atom



1



QUESTIONS OF NOMENCLATURE M7

is, of course, derived from the Greek, and at first
meant the indivisible or the undivided. For a long
time it had a subjective meaning only, being the
smallest particle imaginable, rather than the
smallest particle obtainable, and as such it belongs

to metaphysics, not to physical science. The idea

•

of the atom was first given ah objective meaning
by Dal ton. He showed that chemical change be-
tween two elements occurs in definite proportions
by weight of the two elements. If unit weight of
one is taken, the weight of the other will have a
definite fixed value. But often the same two
elements unite to form more than one compound
in different proportions. Then, if unit weight of
the one is still taken for reference throughout, the
ratio of the weights of the other in various com-
pounds will be simple multiples or submultiples
of one another, indicating that elements do not
combine in haphazard proportions, but "atom for
atom " by fixed increments or units of combination
having definite relative weight. These units of
chemical combination of definite relative weight
are the atoms of the chemist. In all the various
changes of matter which chemistry has investigated
it has sufficed to regard all combination as taking
place atom by atom, and fractions of an atom or
the subdivision of atoms has not been necessary.
In compounds the component atoms preserve their



148 THE ATOM NOT A CHEMICAL COMPOUND

individuality and identity, because compounds can
always be decomposed to give back the same
elements out of which they are formed and not
new ones. In none of these changes does any
deep change of the component atoms themselves
take place. As chemical changes till recently were
the most fundamental material changes known, the
chemist's atom fulfilled in a derived sense the
ancient meaning of the smallest particle that exists.
It did not suffer subdivision in the most funda-
mental changes known. But in this sense its mean-
ing was coupled with that of the particular element
to which it referred. Thus the atom of uranium
is about 240 times as massive as the atom of
hydrogen. An atom of uranium is the smallest
particle of uranium which exists. An atom 240
times lighter than this is known, but it is not
uranium, it is hydrogen.

The discoveries in radioactivity have left this
meaning of the word atom unchanged. The
atom of radium is the smallest particle of radium
that exists, and is the unit of all the chemical
changes radium undergoes. When, by new and
more fundamental changes than those before
known, it changes, it is no longer an atom of
radium. The matter formed is as unlike radium as
any body well could be. You may, if you like,
regard the radium atom as a compound of the



THE ATOM NOT A CHEMICAL COMPOUND M9

atom of emanation, and of the helium atom which
result on its disintegration, as it certainly is such
a compound, but you must make it quite clear that
you do not mean a mere chemical compound, which
may at will be formed from and decomposed into
its constituents. Were radium a chemical com-
pound of helium it would, as Sir William Huggins
recently pointed out to me, show the spectrum of
helium. Instead, it shows an entirely new spectrum,
clearly analogous to but distinct from that shown
by barium, its nearest chemical relative. The
spectrum of helium is not shown until after the
radium has disintegrated. The radium spectrum
does not contain a single helium line.

The most vital distinction, however, between
an element and a compound in the chemical sense
is this. Both are ultimately compound. Of that
there can be now no doubt. But the energy
change which attends the resolution of an element
into its constituent parts is of an order of a
million times greater than in the case of the resolu-
tion of any chemical compound. Although this is
a question of degree, it is of a degree of so
entirely different an order of magnitude that it
completely differentiates the two types of com-
plexes, and nothing but confusion can result from
giving to each the same name. Radium is as much
an element as any of the other eighty. If radium



150 WORDS AND FACTS

is complex, so, almost certainly, are all to greater
or less degree. If radium changes, so may
(perhaps even so do) all. Their complexity is of
a completely different character from that of chemi-
cal compounds, and it is best in the end to retain
the old words "atom" and "element" in the
sense they have had since the time of Dalton
rather than attempt to meddle with this tradi-
tional, and to scientific men, well-understood
nomenclature. The atom of the chemist remains
exactly what it was. Why, therefore, alter its
name? If you call it a molecule, how are you
to distinguish it from the chemical molecule, which
has also its own definite meaning distinct from the
chemical atom ?

These questions of nomenclature at first diverted
attention from the experimental /acts, and gave rise
to much more or less random criticism of the younger
workers in radioactivity. Another source of con-
fusion has been the tendency to associate the
discoveries in radioactivity with other entirely
distinct discoveries made somewhat earlier with
reference to the nature of the negative electron.

It was thought at one time that it would be
possible to explain the atoms of matter as being
built up entirely of electrons or atoms of electricity,
which is as little in accord with actual evidence as it



ELECTRICAL THEORY OF MATTER 151

would be to regard the solar system as composed
entirely of planets and to neglect the central sun.
The problem of the real nature of the atoms of
matter has not been completely solved by either of
these independent scientific advances.

The electrical theory of matter offers a possible
view of what the atoms might be, if — and the as-
sumption is not a small one — two kinds of electricity,
the unknown hypothetical positive electricity as well
as the experimentally known negative electricity, are
assumed to exist. Radioactivity, on the other hand,
is not primarily concerned with such views, but
offers new and definite experimental evidence of
what the atom actually is. It is primarily concerned
with matter and not with electricity, and it tends
rather than otherwise to reveal the extravagance of
the assumptions contained in the view that matter
is constituted entirely out of electricity.

Another objection to the validity of radioactive
evidence has been the minuteness of the amounts
of matter on which the evidence is based.

It has been stated that it is impossible to come to
any settled conclusions in regard to radioactivity,
until enough of the materials can be obtained to
suffice for the requirements of chemical investiga-
tion. But surely, this criticism puts weight on mere
familiarity with the older methods rather than on
their real intrinsic value. The tests by which we



152 MENTAL PICTURES

can recognise and identify with ease, and measure
with accuracy the amount of, say, one billionth
of a milligram of the radium emanation, possess
a philosophical foundation which would challenge
comparison with any of the tests of the chemist on
any kind of matter, in any quantity great or small.

It is my intention to give you, so far as I am
able with accuracy, broad general mental pictures
of radioactive processes, rather than the detailed
technical investigations on which these pictures are
based. Bear in mind exactly the relation of such
mental pictures to the discovered facts. The pictures
may not be true, but they are not demonstrably false
at the present time. That is to say, you may in any
case, without fear of being led into error, apply the
picture you have to what is taking place, and the
view will lead you to expect certain consequences,
and these consequences in every known case agree
with the facts. Without such mental pictures, or
generalising hypotheses, no man could encompass
even a small part of one science. So long as the
deductions from the hypothesis are in agreement
with facts and can be used to predict them accu-
rately, even when they are still unknown, thus
saving the memory, the hypothesis or mental
picture is not even supposed or expected to be
the absolute truth. So long as all the known facts



NATURE OF ATOMIC DISINTEGRATION 153

occur as though the hypothesis were true, the latter
serves a very useful purpose, although at any time
it may be replaced by a deeper view, one step
nearer to absolute truth.

In the early history of the subject two possible
alternatives had to be taken into account with
reference to the exact nature of radioactive changes.
Radioactivity is an atomic phenomenon, and the
radio-elements are slowly undergoing changes.
What do we mean by " slowly " in this connection ?
Two possibilities arise. Either the slow changes
may result from a slow gradual alteration, through
all the atoms of a radioactive substance gradually
evolving their stores of internal energy and
changing by slow degrees into new kinds of matter.
This point of view it was never possible to enter-
tain for a moment. Or, the change is slow and
gradual with regard only to the mass of the sub-
stance as a whole, but sudden and explosive in
character with regard to each individual atom as its
turn to disintegrate arrives. This, from the first,
the only possible point of view, is in accordance
with all that has since been discovered with regard
to the nature of the successive disintegrations and
of the a-rays expelled. Radioactive changes pro-
ceed in cascade, from step to step, the accomplish-
ment of each successive step taking on the average
a definite time. But as regards the individual atom



/



iS4 NATURE OF ATOMIC DISINTEGRATION

disintegrating, the change is sudden in time and of
the nature of an explosive disruption, in which an .

a-particle is expelled with enormous speed, and the
old atom becomes ipso facto a new one, of atomic
weight four units less. Regarding the individual
radium atom, for example, there is no gradual
change into the emanation and helium atoms. Re-
garding the whole mass of radium, there is a very
gradual change in the sense that some definite
small proportion of the whole suffers disintegration
in each unit of time.

This, then, is the very vivid mental picture of
atomic disintegration which the detailed researches
in radioactivity have established. Any one radio-
element like radium being considered at any instant,
among its innumerable host of atoms, most of which
are destined to last for hundreds, some for thousands
of years, a comparatively very small proportion
every second fly apart, expelling a-particles and
becoming emanation atoms. Next second the lot
falls to a fresh set to disintegrate, and so the pro-
cess goes on, a-particles being expelled as a con-
tinuous swarm, and yet so small a fraction of the
whole changing that the main part of the radium
will remain unchanged even after hundreds of
years. Now consider the emanation atoms formed.
These are much less stable than the atoms of



THE CHANCE OjF DISINTEGRATION 155

radium. A much larger fraction of these disinte-
grate every second, producing more a-particles and
a new body not yet considered.

It is now necessary to consider briefly the exact
nature of radioactive change and the laws it follows.
The deduction of these laws is a matter for the mathe-
matician. We are chiefly concerned with the general
conclusions which have transpired. I will first state
the most important of these in words divested of
mathematical symbols. The chance at any instant
whether any atom disintegrates or not in any
particular second is fixed. It has nothing to do
with any external or internal consideration we know
of, and in particular it is not increased by the fact
that the atom has already survived any period of
past time. The events of the past in radioactive
change have, so far as we can tell, no influence
whatever on the progress of events in the future.
This follows from the consideration of the one
general mathematical law which all known cases of
atomic disintegration so far investigated have been
found to follow. Fortunately the law itself is
simple. Its application in individual cases is often
complicated, but I shall confine myself to the
simplest, which are at the same time the most
generally important, consequences. The chemist
has to do with many types of change all following
different laws. In some the rate of change, that is,



f



156 LAW OF RADIOACTIVE CHANGE

the quantity of the substance changing in the unit
of time, is proportional to the quantity of the sub-
stance changing, in others to some power of this
quantity. Now, in radioactive change the rate of
change is invariably simply proportional to the
quantity of changing substance. This seems easy
enough, but I would warn the uninitiated that they
must not overlook the important fact that since the
quantity of a changing substance itself changes as
time goes on, owing to the progress of the change,
the rate of change being proportional to the quantity
also continuously changes, and at no time has a
constant value. Hence you cannot get much
further by simple arithmetic and algebra. Of
course, in the case of a slow change like that of
radium itself, when even in a lifetime the quantity
of radium is not very appreciably reduced by the
operation of the change, it is allowable to neglect
the slow alteration of the rate of change with the
time and to consider the rate of change as con-
stant, since for short periods of time it essentially is
so. In most cases some knowledge, withal a slight
one, of the mathematics of continuously varying
quantities is essential for the complete deduction of
the laws of radioactive change. However, as my
intention is to avoid mathematics, I shall simply
state these consequences ex cathedra.

The rate of change in any single case of atomic



THE AVERAGE LIFE OF AN ATOM 157

disintegration is proportional to the quantity of the
substance which is changing. The usual plan is
to let the symbol X represent the fraction of the
total changing per second, and to this symbol X is
given the special name "the radioactive constant."
X may represent a small or a large fraction, accord-
ing to the particular case, according as the dis-
integration process is slow or rapid. The important
point is that it is a real constant of nature in every
case, independent of the past and future history of
the substance, its actual amount whether large or
small, and of every other consideration whatever.
Thus for the emanation of radium, X, the radio-
active constant, has the value 1/481,250, which
signifies that in this case 1 /,481,250th of the total
amount of emanation in existence changes per
second. The next step, skipping the mathematics, 1
is that the average period of life of the atom of a
radioactive substance, that is to say, the period of
time in seconds it exists on the average before its
turn comes to disintegrate, is simply the reciprocal
of the radioactive constant, or i/X. Thus the
average life of the radium emanation is 481,250
seconds, or 5 57 days.

Now as radioactive change proceeds during
every instant at the rate proportional only to

1 So far as I know, the period of average life was first deduced by
Mr. J. K. H. Inglis, to whom I put the problem.



\



158 THE EXPECTATION OF FUTURE LIFE

the total quantity of substance undergoing the
change, which is present and remains unchanged
at that instant, and as in this method of look-
ing at the changes we do not consider at all
the absolute quantities, only the fraction of the
whole changing, it follows that X is always of the
same value throughout the process from start to
finish. It also follows that i/A, the period of average
life of the remaining atoms, does not, as you might
be inclined to suppose, tend to lessen as time goes
on. The atoms disintegrating first have a far
shorter period of life, and those disintegrating last
have a far longer total period than the average. But
at any instant throughout, considering only the atoms
still remaining unchanged at that instant, then from
that instant the average period of life is always i/X.
Our own period of average life, of course, fol-
lows very different and far more complicated laws.
The expectation of life at any age is a practical
problem for the actuary. But every one knows,
owing to the mortality among infants, that the ex-
pectation of life at birth is less than shortly after-
wards, when it reaches a maximum and then gets
less and less with increasing age. The "expectation
of life" of a radioactive atom is independent of
its age — as it happens the simplest possible law and
one lending itself, as will appear, to some most
beautiful deductions.



"WHY" AND "HOW" OF DISINTEGRATION 159

This answers fully the general question, how
does an element change ? You will probably wish
to know why it changes in this particular way.
That cannot be said, although the true answer
would undoubtedly take us far. All that can be
stated is that the immediate cause of atomic dis-
integration appears to be due to chance. If the
destroying angel selected out of all those alive on
the world a fixed proportion to die every minute,
independently of their age, whether young or old, if
he regarded nothing but the number of victims and
chose purely at random one here, and one there, to
make up the required number, then our expectation
of life would be that of the radioactive atoms. This,
of course, is all that is meant by the statement that
the course of atomic disintegration appears to be
due to the operation of " chance."

It is natural to inquire why this particular law is
followed. On this fundamental question no light is
yet forthcoming. There is always " a cause of the
ultimate cause." Atomic disintegration is assuredly
the ultimate cause of radioactivity. It does not
weaken this deduction that as yet we have not
found the ultimate cause of atomic disintegration.
Various possible causes have been discussed. Most
of them, so far from helping the elucidation of the
11 why/' do not conform even to the "how." The law
of radioactive changes shows clearly that the past



160 THE PERIOD OF HALF-CHANGE

history of an atom does not increase its chances of
undergoing disintegration in the future, which is a
fundamental step gained, although it leaves the
ultimate problem unsolved.

There is another way of stating the law of radio-
active changes, and that is by saying that as the
time increases in arithmetical progression the
amount of substance remaining decreases in geo-
metrical progression. Suppose in a time of t
seconds one half of the total amount changes and
one half remains unchanged. In the next period
of r seconds, 2 t altogether, one half of what is
left, that is, one quarter, changes, and one quarter of
the total remains unchanged. In 2 r the quantity is
reduced to 1 /2 2 . In any period of time represented by
N t seconds, where N is any multiple or submultiple,
the quantity of substance remaining is i/2 N . It remains
to state what relation the time r required for the
half-change to occur, bears to the period of average
life i/X of the former way of considering the change.
There is a fixed ratio between these two periods,
the latter being always 1*45 times the former. In
a time equal to the period of average life i/X, the
quantity of substance present is reduced to i/e = 0*368
of the initial quantity.

These considerations would have little interest to
us but for the fact that they afford the means where-
by the period of average life of any radioactive



EPHEMERAL AND PERMANENT 161

element can by their aid be exactly determined, not
only for those transition-bodies like the emanation,
which change so rapidly that we can watch their
complete transformation in the course of a few
days or weeks, but also for the primary radio-
elements, some of which we know require thousands
of millions of years to run their course of change.
The average life of a radioactive element, represent-
ing as it does a fundamental constant of nature, is
one of its most important attributes. Our own
period of average life being strictly limited, it
naturally affects very much our way of looking at
the various radioactive bodies. If, for example,
the average life is a matter of a few days, as in the
case of the radium emanation, we regard the body
as an ephemeral transition-form. If it is, as in the
case of radium, a few thousand years we are in-
clined to look upon the substance as a permanent
and primary radio-element. There is really not
this sharp difference. But it is convenient to
divide radioactive bodies into two classes, and in
the one to put those for which the periods of
average life are short compared to our own, and in
the other to put those for which the periods are
long. The method employed to determine the
value of this fundamental and all-important constant
is naturally quite different in the two cases. In

M



1 62 RADIO-ELEMENTS

the first, simple direct observation suffices. Thus
if we measure the decay of the activity of any
separated quantity of the emanation of radium
with time, we shall find that it decays in a geo-
metrical progression with the time to half its initial
value in the course of 3*84 days. The period of
average life is 1*45 times greater, or 5*57 days. But
in the case of a body, of which one thousandth, or
one thousand-millionth as the case may be, changes
annually, simple direct observation does not help
much. How are we to proceed ?

In the first place, let us consider the cases of
uranium and radium. We may determine how
many times more powerfully radioactive radium
is than uranium. The radioactivity of radium is
several million times that of uranium when the
a- rays of equal quantities of the two elements are
compared. From this it may be concluded that
the period of uranium is several million times longer
than that of radium, and if the latter is known, that
of uranium may be roughly estimated, although it is
a period of some thousands of millions of years.

As a matter of fact, there is a very beautiful
generalisation, I have already referred to briefly,
and which later on I shall try to develop further
by the aid of an analogy, by means of which the
periods of average life of the radio -elements of
the second class, those, that is, which are long-lived



AVERAGE LIFE OF LONG-LIVED ATOMS 163

compared with ourselves, have come into the
region of exactly knowable quantities. If the
period of average life of a single member of a
series of successive atomic disintegrations is known
the others can be calculated, provided certain data,
not entirely impossible to obtain, are known. It
will clear the ground considerably if I attempt to
give you the main idea succinctly in the case of
radium itself and of the first product of its dis-
integration, the emanation of radium. I have
already alluded to the fact that owing to the very
rapid disintegration of the emanation its quantity
does not continuously accumulate, but reaches an
equilibrium ratio with respect to the radium pro-
ducing it, in which the amount of already formed
emanation disappearing is exactly counterbalanced
by the amount of new emanation formed.

This state of things is known generally by the
name of radioactive equilibrium. The importance
of the existence of this state of radioactive equi-
librium it is impossible to overrate. Many prob-
lems, as we shall come to see, which, to us with
our limited period of life, might well appear abso-
lutely insoluble, connected as they are with periods
of time so vast that our little life by comparison
appears a mere moment, are solved directly by
the proper application of this principle. Now I
am only giving you the main idea and one specific



1 64 AVERAGE LIFE OF LONG-LIVED ATOMS

illustration of what is in fact a law of great
generality.

By the law of radioactive change, if \ is the
radioactive constant of radium, i.e. the fraction of
the whole changing per second, and N is the total
number of radium atoms dealt with, then the
number of radium atoms changing into the emana-
tion per second, and therefore also the number
of atoms of fresh emanation produced per second,
is XiN. But in equilibrium this equals the number
of emanation atoms disappearing. If the radio-
active constant of the emanation is X 2 , and the
number of atoms of emanation present during equi-
librium is denoted by X, the number of emanation
atoms disappearing per second is X*X. Hence we
have

AjN = A,X and js — jp

This law, the most important in radioactivity,
thus states that in successive disintegrations the
product accumulates in quantity until a fixed ratio
with respect to the parent body is attained, and this
ratio is inversely proportional to their respective
radioactive constants or directly proportional to
their respective average lives. It is necessary for
the law to hold true that the period of the parent
body should be much longer than the periods of any
of its products, and in this case the product selected



A VERAGE LIFE OF RADIUM 165

need not necessarily be the first product, but may
be any one of the successive products formed in the
series.

Xj is well known by direct observation. Now if
X/N, the ratio between the number of atoms of
emanation and of radium in equilibrium together,
can be found, then X lf the radioactive constant and
therefore i/X b the period of average life of radium
can be deduced. That is the important thing — the
period of the average life of radium, the rate at
which it is changing, and a host of vitally impor-
tant consequences, can be deduced. For a slowly
changing body like radium the second is an incon-
veniently short unit of time to employ and it is
better to take a year. What is wanted is the
fraction of any quantity of radium which changes
in a year. The quantity X/N, which is the ratio
of the number of atoms of emanation and of
radium in equilibrium together, can be deduced by
ordinary physico-chemical laws if the actual volume
of emanation in equilibrium with a given quantity of
radium can be determined. As already mentioned
(p. 114), this volume was first measured by Sir
William Ramsay and myself in 1904. The actual
volume of emanation is excessively minute, but
it is just within the range of measurement. From
our results we concluded about 1/1 150th part of the
radium changes annually, so that the period of



1 66 AVERAGE LIFE OF JR AVIUM

average life on this estimate is 1 1 50 years. Owing to
the excessive minuteness of the volume, the method
is not an accurate one, tending, since the volume
of emanation is likely to be too great unless every
trace of other gas is absent, to give too short a
period. With the growth of the subject other
methods, less direct but more accurate, have
become available. Professor Rutherford recently,
from a consideration of a large number of separate
data accumulated by himself and others bearing on
this question, came to the conclusion that the period
of average life of radium is not very far removed from
2500 years, and we shall take this value as the most
probable. It may suffer slight further alteration
as fresh data are accumulated, but it is very
improbable that it is seriously in error. Within
narrow limits the average life of radium may be
taken to be 2500 years.

A knowledge of this important constant enables
us at once to say how much energy any quantity of
radium would evolve in the course of its complete
change, that is, during a period of some thousands
of years. We saw (p. 31) that a gram of pure
radium evolved about 133 calories of heat per hour.
There are 8760 hours in the year, so that in a year
a gram of radium evolves about 1,160,000 calories.
In a year 1/2 500th part changes. Therefore in the
complete change of one gram of radium no less



TOTAL ENERGY EVOLVED BY RADIUM 167

than 2,900,000,000 calories would be evolved. The
energy evolved in the change of radium is nearly
a million times greater than that evolved from a
similar weight of matter undergoing any change
known previously to the discovery of radioactivity.
By the burning of a gram of coal, for example,
only about 8,000 calories are obtained. In this
change, however, 2§ grams of oxygen are also con-
sumed, so that per gram of the two substances taken
together the heat evolved is only 2,200 calories.
On this basis of calculation the energy of radium is
well over a million times that furnished from the
combustion of coal. No wonder then that to
account for the boundless energy displayed every-
where in the starry heavens proved a difficult
problem for physicists, acquainted with no more
energetic chemical process than the burning of
coal !



CHAPTER VIII.

How is it there is any radium left ? — The parent of radium— Fixity
of ratio between the quantity of uranium and radium in all min-
erals — Period of average life of uranium — Relation of uranium to
radium — An analogy to the Glasgow water supply system — Age of
pitchblende — Radioactivity of uranium — Uranium X — Uranium
I and uranium II — Uranium not the direct parent of radium —
Growth of radium by uranium — Intermediate transition-forms of
long life— Ionium, the direct parent of radium — The stately pro-
cession of elementary evolution.

ONE of our chief duties will be to follow out
this theory of the disintegration of atoms in
radioactivity. The bare idea of elements spon-
taneously changing raises so many obvious and
apparently insurmountable difficulties that it will be
interesting to consider them as they arise and to
consider what answer can be made to them. To-
night we must concentrate on one of the chief of
these — a difficulty which no doubt has already pre-
sented itself in many of your minds. If radium is
changing at the rate of nearly one two -thousandth
part every year, how is it that there is any radium
left at the present time ? Even at the beginning of
the time recorded in past history there must have
existed several times as much radium as there is
now, if the rate of disintegration has been constant

1 68



HOW IS RADIUM MAINTAINED! l6 9

over that period, while a hundred thousand years
ago it can be calculated that there must have existed
a thousand billion times as much as to-day, had the
steady disintegration been going on at its present
rate. That is to say, even if the whole world were
originally pure radium, in a period of time brief
compared to that which we know from geological
evidence it has actually been in existence, there
would be practically none left, and certainly not as
much as actually exists to-day. Or, looking
forward instead of backward, if we put this half-
grain of radium bromide in a safe place, and then
could revisit the earth say twenty-five thousand
years hence, we should find less than one-thousandth
part of it remaining. The slow disintegration
would have done its work and changed the radium
into the non-radioactive elements which are being
formed from it This question, apparently so
insoluble, in reality admits of the most direct and
satisfactory answer on the disintegration theory and
serves as a good example of how a theory, if it is
worth the name, must be able to predict future dis-
covery as well as to explain the existing facts.

An analogy to facts we have already discussed
will help us to find the solution of this difficulty.
In the emanation of radium we have become
acquainted with a body changing so rapidly that at
the end of a month none of the original quantity



170 HOW IS &ADIUM MAINTAINED t

remains. How is it there is any emanation in
existence at all ? Because it is being reproduced as
fast as it disappears. Is there any reproduction of
radium going on, balancing the effect of its disin-
tegration and maintaining its quantity from age to
age? Radium is the direct parent of the emana-
tion. Itself changing more than a hundred thousand
times slower than its product, it maintains the quan-
tity of emanation in existence over a period a hun-
dred thousand times longer than would otherwise
be the case. Is there then a parent of radium?
Does there exist any other element producing
radium by its own disintegration as fast as that
already in existence disappears ?

Do not regard this thirty milligrams of radium
bromide as something merely by itself. Consider
its history. By infinite labour and patience this
tiny quantity of radium has been separated from
several hundredweights of the mineral pitchblende.
Suppose in this operation all the rest of the mineral,
after the extraction of the radium, were preserved
and put in a safe place. When we revisited our
specimen of radium twenty-five thousand years
hence, and found practically none of it remaining,
should we find that the mineral from which it was
extracted had in the meantime grown a fresh crop
of radium ? The answer is that we should. !
This was one of the first predictions made



REPRODUCTION OF RADIUM 171

from the theory of atomic disintegration and
one of the most recent to be confirmed by
experiment. Long before the data were available
which enabled an exact estimate of the life of
radium to be calculated, it was recognised that
radium, though at first sight a permanent and
primary radio-element, is changing so rapidly that,
had there existed no process in which fresh radium
is supplied to replace that changing, none could
possibly have survived till the present day, and
from general principles it was possible to make
a shrewd prediction as to which element was the
parent of radium. We have already considered the
general principles which enabled the prediction that
helium was one of the ultimate products of radio-
active changes to be made. Ultimate products
must co-exist with the radio-elements producing
them in all the natural minerals in which the latter
are found. Something of the same reasoning
applies to the parent of radium, only in this case it
is far more definite and elegant. The parent of
radium must co-exist with radium in all minerals in
which radium is present. Now it is at once
obvious, if this explanation of the parent of radium
is to meet the case, that such a body must be
changing very much more slowly than radium,
otherwise there would arise the same necessity to
assume the existence of a parent of the parent



172 REPRODUCTION OF RADIUM

as there is of a parent of radium. The original
first parent of radium must be changing excessively
slowly to maintain a steady supply of radium over
long epochs of geological time.

By the law already formulated on page 164, in
two successive, not necessarily consecutive, disin-
tegrations of which the second is much more rapid
than the first, the more rapidly changing body
accumulates in quantity until a fixed ratio with
respect to the parent body is attained, and this
ratio is inversely proportional to the ratio of their
respective rates of change, or directly proportional
to the ratio of their respective periods of average
life. Let us apply this law. The parent body
is the parent of radium. The quantity of radium
in minerals must therefore attain a fixed ratio
with respect to the quantity of the parent of
radium, and this ratio is the ratio of the period
of average life of radium to that of its parent. The
quantity of helium that accumulates in a mineral
continually increases as time goes on, assuming the
helium does not succeed in escaping, and no
definite proportion between helium and radium is
to be expected. But the case is different with
radium and its parent. There must be a fixed
ratio, independent of the age of the mineral ex-
amined. As the original first parent of radium



URANIUM AND RADIUM 173

must be changing excessively slowly to survive
geological epochs of past time, there must be
always a very large quantity of it in the mineral.
As the radium is changing, from the standpoint
of geological epochs of time, very rapidly, there
must always be a very small quantity of radium.
Between these quantities great and small there
must exist the same ratio as between the respective
periods of average life of the two bodies.

A very cursory examination of the minerals in
which Mme. Curie found radium was sufficient to
point strongly to the probability that uranium is
the primary parent of radium. Uranium was, as
we have seen, the original . element for which the
property of radioactivity was discovered, and its
radioactivity is several million times more feeble
than that of radium. Now the radioactivity depends
only on the atoms actually breaking up, and there-
fore in comparing uranium with radium it follows
that uranium must be disintegrating several million
times more slowly even than radium, so that if
uranium produces radium the quantity of uranium
must be several million times greater than the
quantity of radium in minerals. But this is exactly
what Mme. Curie found to be the case in the
minerals she worked up for radium. So that from
the very first there existed a strong presumption



174 URANIUM AND RADIUM

that uranium is the original parent of radium. The
evidence in support of this view at the present
time is indirect, but quite satisfactory. We owe
it to the careful work of McCoy, Strutt and Bolt-
wood that the genetic relation between uranium and
radium has been established. They determined
the ratio between the quantities of uranium and
of radium in a large number of minerals. In every
mineral examined containing uranium there was
found to exist a direct proportionality between the
quantity of uranium and that of radium. To
Rutherford and Boltwood together we owe the
exact determinations of this important constant of
proportionality. They found that for every one
part of radium there always exists 3,200,000
parts of uranium. This constant gives directly,
unless other undetermined factors interfere, the
ratio of the average lives of the two elements. As
we have seen, that of radium is 2500 years. Hence
it follows that that of uranium is 8,000,000,000
years. Enormous as this period is, it is not
now merely a deduced or calculated value. I
obtained the same result by direct experiment
from the rate of production of helium from
uranium.

It will help us considerably if we try to find
some analogy to the important and intricate rela-



URANIUM AND RADIUM 175

tions that exist between uranium and radium. We
may take for illustration the magnificent system of
waterworks which supply this city, which we will
suppose have been given over to us by the Cor-
poration to control for the purposes of our illustra-
tion. As you know, we in Glasgow are supplied
ultimately from Loch Katrine through an inter-
mediate reservoir at Milngavie. We shall first cut
off Loch Katrine from all fresh sources of supply
of water, and from all outlets except to the
intermediate reservoir at Milngavie, and we shall
see to it also that the latter receives no water
except from Loch Katrine, and delivers none
except to Glasgow. We shall then issue to our
engineers the instructions that there must be
delivered every hour at Milngavie from Loch
Katrine approximately one eight-millionth part
of the total store of water in Loch Katrine,
and from Milngavie to Glasgow every hour one
two -thousand -five -hundredth part of the total
store of water at Milngavie. Then, if instead
of hours we read years, the quantity of water
in Loch Katrine represents the quantity of
uranium, and the quantity of water in Milngavie
that of radium. For the sake of brevity we shall
term Loch Katrine the source and Milngavie the
reservoir.

First we shall suppose that our regulations have



176 URANIUM AND RADIUM

been in operation already a considerable number of
hours, as this is the condition in which, reading years
for hours, we find uranium and radium together in
minerals in Nature, for example, in a piece of
pitchblende. What relation will the quantity of
water in the source bear to the quantity in the
reservoir, that is, the quantity of uranium to the
quantity of radium? The amount of water the
reservoir receives is quite independent of the amount
it contains, but the amount it delivers is propor-
tional to the amount it contains. Similarly the
amount of radium produced from uranium does not
depend at all on the amount of radium already
present, while the amount that itself changes de-
pends only on and is proportional to the amount
present. Nevertheless, we shall find that there
is about three million times more water in
the source than in the reservoir. Because only
under this condition is the intake of the reservoir
equal to the outflow from the reservoir, that is, the
production of new radium equal to the disappear-
ance of the old. Imagine, for example, that there
was just twice as much water as this ratio in the
reservoir, then twice as much would flow out as
flows in, and the supply in the reservoir would be
rapidly depleted. Or, if there were but one half
as much in the reservoir, twice as much would flow
in as out, and the supply in the reservoir would



AGE OF PITCHBLENDE *77

increase. In either case, intake and outflow would
ultimately become equal, and no further change
would then occur until both the source and the
reservoir were empty. But let us now disconnect
Loch Katrine from Milngavie reservoir, which is
equivalent to separating, as Mme. Curie did, the
radium from the uranium in pitchblende. Obviously
the reservoir by itself will now be able to supply
water for a very much shorter time than it did
before, and, in general, with the conditions stated,
source and reservoir together will last three million
times longer than the source alone. The radium
on the table will have half disintegrated, so that
only half will remain, in about 1750 years. Where-
as had it remained in the mineral associated
with its parent uranium, the quantity of radium
in the mineral will not be reduced to one half
what it is now until 5,000,000,000 years have
elapsed.

Thus we can say, following a cautious reservation
once made by Professor Tait, provided the causes
that are now at work have always been in con-
tinuous operation in the past as they are now, and
that we know of all the causes that have been at
work, . 5,000,000,000 years ago there must have
been about twice as much uranium and radium in
this piece of pitchblende as there is to-night.
Since, however, there is actually in this pitchblende

N



178 MAINTENANCE OF RADIUM

now over 50 per cent of uranium, it is not possible
that it can have been in existence in its present
form more than 5,000,000,000 years. But, even
from a geological point of view, this is a very long
period of time indeed; longer, perhaps, than it
would be profitable in the present state of science
to push back our inquiries. That, then, is the
position with regard to the maintenance of radium
in Nature. Even when we deliberately leave out
of account the possibility there may exist in Nature
entirely unknown processes replenishing the sup-
plies of uranium, just as there are replenishing
Loch Katrine, there is no difficulty in accounting
for the continuous maintenance of radium over a
period of the past as great as, or greater than,
there is any reason to believe the earth has been
in existence in its present condition. This is as
far as we need pursue our analogy for the moment,
but we shall again find it useful at a later period.
We must pass on to another aspect of the
question.

At this stage it will be well to make a short digres-
sion into the radioactivity of uranium itself, and how
it is explained on the theory of atomic disintegra-
tion. Uranium and its compounds in their normal
state give out both a- and /8-rays. As in all other
cases, the fl-rays, being photographically the most



URANIUM X 179

active and being the more penetrating, were the
first chiefly studied. Sir William Crookes and also
M. Becquerel found that by certain chemical pro-
cesses a new substance in minute quantity could be
separated from uranium, to which Crookes gave the
name Uranium X, and this new body produced
the whole of the photographic activity of uranium.
The uranium after this treatment no longer affected
a photographic plate. Crookes concluded that the
radioactivity was due in reality to the presence of
the foreign substance in minute amount, which he
called uranium X, and that pure uranium was not
radioactive. I repeated these experiments, and
found that only the £-rays of uranium belonged
to the uranium X. Uranium freed from uranium X
gave its normal amount of a-rays. Then it was
found that the /8-radiation of uranium X decayed
steadily in a geometrical progression with the time,
whereas the uranium that had been freed from
uranium X and at first gave no )8-rays, gradually
and completely recovered its power of producing
/8-rays. Uranium grows uranium X, in exactly the
same way as radium grows the emanation. The
activity of uranium X after separation from uranium,
consisting entirely of £-rays, steadily decays in a
geometrical progression with the time, falling to
one half the initial value in 24*6 days. The average
life of uranium X is thus 35*5 days. A variety of



180 URANIUM I AND II

evidence, some of which may be dealt with more
profitably later, has lately established the conclusion
that the change suffered by the uranium atoms when
the a-particles are expelled, is not, as first supposed,
a single change. The substance uranium, which
chemists have hitherto considered an element, differs
from every other known substance expelling a-rays,
in that, per atom disintegrating, two ^-particles are
expelled instead of one. Moreover, these two
o-particles are expelled at slightly different initial
velocities, with the result that the " ranges " of the
two sets of a-rays in air are slightly different. Most
probably the two a-particles are not expelled from
the uranium atom simultaneously but successively.
In consequence, what chemists hitherto have
accepted as a single element is, in reality, a mixture
of two, chemically so much alike that they have not
yet been separated, the first having the atomic weight
238*5, and which has been termed provisionally
uranium I ; the second, resulting after the expulsion
of the first a-particle, having the atomic weight
234 # 5. It has been termed uranium II. It is
probable that this uranium II is present ir
relatively very insignificant proportion by weight
although it contributes one-half of the total a-radia
tion. Its period of life can only be estimated fron
very indirect and incomplete data at the presen
time, but this estimate, such as it is, attributes



URANIUM X 181

period to the substance of about two million years.
We must leave for the present these highly inter-
esting recent developments to resume the considera-
tion of uranium X. The disintegration of uranium
up to the point so far discussed is represented on
the following scheme, though it may again be em-
phasised that the evidence as regards the existence
and properties of uranium 1 1 is still very indirect.

Uranium Uranium Uranium
I. II. X.

8,000.000,000 2,000,000 35 '5
years. years (?). days.

Fig. 25.

This is as far as the methods of radioactivity
enable us to trace the disintegration of uranium
at the present time. The substance produced —
uranium X — is only an ephemeral transition -form,
lasting on the average 35*5 days, and when it dis-
integrates, the process appears to come to a stop
so far as our experimental methods have yet been
able to disclose.

Now, on the view that has been developed that
uranium is the parent of radium, it is natural to
suppose that uranium X in the course of time
turns into radium. A little consideration will show



i8a ATTTEMPS TO DETECT

that if this were the case it might easily be
overlooked at first on account of the very long
period of life of radium compared with that of
uranium X. As already explained (p. 127), chemi-
cal and spectroscopic methods of detecting matter
depend only on quantity, but radioactive methods
depend upon quantity divided by life. Assuming
equal effects produced in the disintegration of an
atom of uranium X and of an atom of radium,
since the life of the latter is 30,000 times that of
the former, it will be necessary to have 30,000 times
as much radium as of uranium X to produce equal
radioactive effects.

In 1903 I started a series of special experiments
which have been continued ever since I came to
Glasgow, partly in conjunction with Mr. T. D.
Mackenzie, to see whether uranium does, in fact,
produce radium. The uranium, after being purified
as completely as possible by chemical methods from
radium, is left sealed up in a flask and is periodic-
ally tested to see if a growth of radium has
occurred. The method of testing for minute traces
of radium is a very simple and accurate one, allow-
ing quantities of radium of only a few million-
millionths part of a grain to be detected with
certainty and measured with exactitude. Use is
made of the characteristic emanation generated



A GROWTH OF RADIUM 183

by radium. Uranium does not generate any emana-
tion. The uranium solution to be tested for
radium, after standing sealed up in a glass flask for
a period of at least a month to allow the equi-
librium quantity of emanation to accumulate, is
boiled in a vacuum, and the gases expelled are
collected and introduced into a sensitive gold-leaf
electroscope. If radium is present in the solution,
its emanation causes the leaf to lose its charge,
and the rate at which the discharge occurs under
defined conditions can be used accurately as a
measure of the amount of radium present. The
test is qualitative as well as quantitative, and there
is no possibility of making a mistake as to the
identity of the emanation and of the radium from
which it is formed.

The present result of these experiments, while
they furnished the first evidence of a growth of
radium, withal in very minute amount, have clearly
proved that this growth is not due to uranium.
In the first experiments the uranium salt was only
specially purified from radium, not from any other
impurities that might have been present, derived
from the minerals from which uranium is obtained,
and a very slow growth of radium from the prepara-
tion was actually observed.

In later experiments more perfect methods of
purifying the uranium initially were adopted, with



184 INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS

the result that the growth now of radium occurred
chiefly in the impurities separated, whilst the growth
in the purified radium was reduced to an excessively
minute amount. In these the greatest growth
recorded is only one fifty-millionth of a milligram of
radium after six years. At this rate, even at the
pr^ent enormous price of radium, it would require
sixty thousand years to produce one pennyworth.

Now if uranium X, when it disintegrates, pro-
duced radium directly, then with the quantities of
materials used in these later experiments, the
amount formed in a single hour would be greater
than has actually been formed in six years. In
the earlier experiments, with not specially purified
uranium, the growth of radium, although quite
detectable, was still only one thousandth part of
what would have occurred had uranium X changed
directly into radium. In spite of this apparently
conclusive negative result, it is practically certain
at the present time that uranium is the original
parent of radium, and that in the course of years
our preparations will begin to grow radium.

The natural explanation of this failure to detect
a growth of radium from uranium is, that one or
more intermediate bodies of long life exist in the
disintegration series between uranium and radium.
On the analogy proposed, this means that between



INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS 185

Loch Katrine and Milngavie reservoir one or
more large intermediate reservoirs exist, which
have to fill up before the water reaches Milngavie.
Uranium X represents the first of such a series of
intermediate reservoirs, it is true, but owing to its
short period of life and the large fraction of the
total quantity always passing through on the >* r ay
to the next, such a reservoir would be an extremely
small one, and for periods such as we are considering
its effect on the flow would be practically negligible.
It would be quite otherwise if one or more
reservoirs as large as Milngavie — if one or more
intermediate substances as long-lived as radium —
existed in the series. I well remember one fact
told me by the engineer in charge of the mag-
nificent scheme of waterworks, supplying the mines
at Kalgurli, in Western Australia, from a source
near the coast across three hundred miles of desert
There are several intermediate reservoirs on the
way. The plant installed is capable of pumping
five million gallons of water daily, and yet it took
a period of many weeks since pumping operations
began before the water appeared in Kalgurli.
When uranium is carefully purified from all other
substances one can be sure that one starts with all
the intermediate reservoirs empty, that is, with none
of the intermediate substances present. Water is
flowing steadily from the source all the time, as the



1 86 INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS

disintegration of uranium is always going on. We
have been watching and waiting seven years at the
radium reservoir — strictly speaking, at the one
beyond radium, since the emanation of radium, not
radium itself, is actually employed for the test.
But the flow has not reached there yet and the
radium reservoir remains practically as empty as at
the start. But there is no doubt it will come, and
there is good reason to expect that some of us, at
least, will be still alive when it arrives.

It is not beyond the resources of mathematics to
find out a good deal about these intermediate
reservoirs. The present results indicate that if
there is but one long-lived intermediate body
between uranium and radium, then its period of
average life must be at least 100,000 years, that is,
forty times that of radium itself. On our analogy,
then, between Loch Katrine and Milngavie, there
must exist a reservoir of forty times the capacity
of Milngavie, provided there is only one. There
may be several. Several small ones would be
much more effective than one large one. Since
the equilibrium quantity to which an intermediate
body accumulates is proportional to its period of
average life, then if there is only one intermediate
parent of radium between radium and uranium, there
must be forty times as much of it in minerals con-
taining radium as there is of radium itself.



THE DIRECT PARENT OF RADIUM 187

This leads me to the next step. The failure
to detect a production of radium from uranium
merely foreshadowed the discovery of one or
more intermediate substances of long period of
life. Boltwood in America has, however, actually
succeeded in isolating one from minerals contain-
ing radium, and this one proves to be the
direct parent of radium. Whether there are
others it remains to be seen. The one found
possesses the property of producing radium directly
from itself by disintegration, and it has been
called Ionium. It expels a-rays during its dis-
integration into radium, and these a-rays possess
a relatively low velocity. Their range is very
little more than one inch of air. Chemically,
ionium resembles thorium so completely that the
two substances, if mixed, cannot be separated.
This gives the means of separating the new
body from minerals. Some thorium is added
and separated by the well-known methods of
chemical analysis. It is then purified as com-
pletely as possible. The parent of radium is not
separated from the thorium by this treatment,
although all other substances are. The chemical
resemblance between the two substances is
analogous to that between radium and barium or
polonium and bismuth, and does not signify any
genetic connection between the substances.



1 88 THE PRODUCT OF URANIUM

The disintegration series thus reads : —



0-0


Uranium I. Uranium II. Uranium X. Ionium Radium. Emanation.

8,000,000,000 2,000,000 35*5 days. 200,000 2,500 56 days,

years. years (?) years (?) years.

Fig. 26.

as far as we have yet considered it. In the centre
is placed the known or presumed atomic weights of
the various bodies. It is to be noticed that a gap
still remains between uranium X and the parent of
radium. As the mass of the ^-particle is practically
negligible, the product of uranium X should still
have an atomic weight of 230, so that there are
presumably no more changes in which a-particles
are expelled. There is little doubt that the gap
will soon be filled up. All that it is required now is
to prove that uranium X is the parent of ionium.
A long research, which involved the repeated separa-
tion of the uranium X from a hundredweight of
pure uranium nitrate, failed to establish this, doubt-
less on account of the very long period of ionium.
Indeed, it is possible to say now that to command
success, and settle the question definitely, half a ton
of uranium nitrate would probably be required.
The reason for this is, as already explained, the
enormous period of ionium by comparison with that
of uranium X, which an indirect estimate, to be
later considered, indicates to be about 200,000 years.



ELEMENTAR Y E VOL UT10N 1 89

So far t then, as we have inquired, uranium,
uranium X, the parent of radium, radium, and the
emanation represent respectively the starting-point
and the four successive stopping-stations in the long
journey of continuous devolution from the heaviest
and most complex atom known into less heavy and
complex atoms which is going on around us, or, to
preserve our original analogy, the source and four
successive intermediate reservoirs in the flow of
elementary evolution. " All things flow " was one
of the dogmas of ancient philosophy, and in this, as
in many others, the ancients guessed truer than they
knew. Instead of four stopping-stations or inter-
mediate reservoirs in this stately procession of
elements disclosed by radioactivity, there are
already known no less than eleven, starting from the
element uranium, but for our present purposes of
illustration these four will suffice. But this new
transformation scene on which the curtain of the
twentieth century has been rung up, beginning as it
has done with the transformation of the most
fundamental and permanent of the existences
which physical science has recognised in the past,
extends beyond physical science and transfigures
with new light some of the most fundamental and
permanent ideas which in one form or another are
deep-rcoted in the world's philosophies.



CHAPTER IX.

The subsequent changes of radium — The induced or excited radio-
activity — The active deposit of radium — The disintegration of the
emanation — Radium A, B, C — Experiments with the active deposit
— Radium A gives only a-rays and has a very short life — Radium B
gives no rays — Radium C gives a-, /3-, and y-rays — The emanation
only gives a-rays — The later slow changes of radium — Radium
D, E, and F — Polonium — Its identity with radium F — The last
disintegration— What is the ultimate product?

WE have attempted to trace radium to its
source. It remains to follow through its
disintegration briefly to the end. This was a task
to which Rutherford particularly devoted himself,
after the main principles of atomic disintegration
had become familiar, with the consequence that,
with the exception of a lacuna here and there still
to be supplied, our knowledge of the whole process
from the start to finish is now tolerably complete.
In addition, some new considerations have trans-
pired which concern us nearly in the broad general
application of the principles of atomic disintegration,
so that for this reason, if for no other, the work
claims our attention.

Most of you who have read at all in the subject

will be aware of one mysterious and extraordinary

190



SUBSEQUENT CHANGES OF RADIUM 191

power possessed by radium, which I have hitherto
carefully avoided all mention of, not wanting to
have too many irons in the fire at once. Radium
possesses the power of endowing with some of its
own radioactivity neighbouring objects. Thorium,
which is very like radium in many ways, particularly
in giving a gaseous emanation (which, however,
has the very short period of average life of only
a little over a minute), also possesses a similar
power. The phenomenon was discovered by the
Curies for radium and termed " induced radio-
activity," and for thorium simultaneously by
Rutherford and termed "excited radioactivity."
With the explanation of the property the original
names have largely fallen into disuse. We shall, as
usual, confine ourselves to the case of radium. Any
object left in the immediate neighbourhood of a
radium salt becomes radioactive, but after it is
removed the radioactivity decays away rapidly and
almost completely, abnormally at first, but subse-
quently in a geometrical progression with the time,
with a half-value period of about thirty minutes.
The temporary activity so " induced " consists of
a-, £-, and y- rays. The activity exists as an invisible
film or deposit over the surface of the object
rendered radioactive, for, by sand -papering, the
activity can be rubbed off and then is found on
the sand-paper. It is now customary in con-



iQ2 ACTIVE DEPOSIT OF HADIUM

sequence to refer to it as the " active deposit of
radium."

This power is, strictly speaking, not a property of
radium itself, for if the radium is contained in a
completely closed vessel — it does not matter how
thin-walled so long as it is air-tight — no radio-
activity whatever is produced outside. The first
step in understanding the nature of the phenomenon
consisted in tracing it to the action of the emanation
of radium. In the ordinary condition the emanation
is always diffusing away to some extent from radium
salts unless they are contained in air-tight vessels.
The "active deposit " is the product of the disin-
tegration of the emanation. Just as radium cannot
exist without continuously producing the emanation,
so in turn the emanation cannot exist without con-
tinuously producing this active deposit. In any
vessel containing radium emanation this body is
being continuously deposited on the walls of the
vessel, so that if the emanation is at any time
blown out, the active deposit remains behind.
Radium expels one a-particle and changes into the
emanation. The emanation expels a second a-par-
ticle and changes back again into a solid, or at least
into a non-gaseous form of matter, the first of the
" active deposit " group. The latter in turn expels
more <*- and also £- particles, and so the course of
successive disintegrations goes on. In the active
deposit itself at least three changes follow one



ACTIVE DEPOSIT OF RADIUM 193

another with great rapidity, so that the analysis
of them proved a complicated task.

You know that if a moisture-laden atmosphere is
sufficiently chilled, the vapour of water condenses
directly into the solid form, and a snowstorm
results. Something of this kind is always happen-
ing in an atmosphere containing the radium
emanation. Every second two out of every million
of the atoms of emanation disintegrate, expelling
a-particles and leaving a solid residue, so that there
is a sort of continuous snowstorm silently going on
covering every available surface with this invisible,
unweighable, but intensely radioactive deposit.
Unlike snow, however, the particles of this active
deposit are charged with positive electricity, so that
if two surfaces are provided, one charged nega-
tively and the other positively, the deposit is
attracted almost entirely to the negatively charged
surface. The other surface repels the particles and
so does not get coated. By making the negatively
charged surface very small the active deposit can
be almost entirely concentrated upon it. This
enables me to show you more effectively the pro-
duction of the active deposit from the emanation
and some of its chief properties. The separation
of the non-volatile product of a volatile parent or
emanation by this use of a negatively charged sur-
face is a very simple operation, much more so than
o



i 9 4 RADIUM A, £, AND C

when the parent substance is non-volatile and the
recoil of the product is used to effect its separation
and concentration on a negatively charged surface,
as discussed on p. 144.

It would take us too long and too far if we
attempted first to study these properties, and then
tried from them to deduce their explanation. It
must suffice if I give you first the explanation of
the facts according to the theory of atomic dis-
integration and then illustrate as many of the
points in it as possible experimentally. I have said
that after the disintegration of the emanation at
least three successive disintegrations, following one
another rapidly, occur. The bodies produced are
referred to as Radium A, Radium B, Radium C,
in order to avoid the necessity of inventing a host
of new names for bodies having such fleeting
existence (Fig. 27).

Radium. Emanation. Radium A. Radium B. Radium C.

* „ '

Active deposit of rapid change.

2,500 years. 5*6 days. 4*3 3 8 '5 2 8'i

minutes. minutes. minutes.

Fig. 27.

As before, the presumed atomic weights are
placed inside the circles corresponding with the
successive products. The periods of average life



RADIUM A % B, AND C 195

are placed below. The symbol 08) here and
throughout indicates that £-rays are expelled, but
that they are not the normal penetrating £-rays, but
rays akin to the cathode-rays in their low pene-
trating power and low velocity. They only come
into evidence in special experiments, and are not of
great general importance. The first body produced
from the emanation, radium A, changes with great
rapidity with a period of average life of 4/3 min-
utes, expelling an a-particle. The body radium B
resulting undergoes a change which was at first
thought to be entirely "rayless." Neither a- nor
£-rays of the ordinary kind can be detected,
although a very feebly penetrating £-ray is produced,
which we need not further consider. The period
of this substance is 38*5 minutes. The body pro-
duced, radium C, changes, expelling both a- and
£- particles and 7- rays also. The period is 28*1
minutes. It is probable that this change is complex,
and that the &• and y-rays are given off in a separate
change to that in which the a-rays result. The
point is still being investigated, and need not further
concern us now.

We started our description of the rays of radium
with the statement that they consisted of a-, £-,
and y-rays. One of the most interesting points of
the above scheme is to show that the fi- and y-rays
do not come from radium itself, any more than they



196



RADIUM A, £, AND C



do from uranium itself, but from the later products.
It is loose, but convenient, to talk of the P- and
y-rays of radium. Really we mean the 0- and
y-rays of radium C. The emanation, like radium
itself, gives only a-rays. The whole of the £-rays
result in the later changes of the active deposit.


Fig. 28.



We have seen that, freshly prepared from solution,
radium salts give only a- rays. The £- and 7-rays
make their appearance only after the subsequent
products have accumulated.



On the table there is a small glass vessel silvered
internally (Figs. 28 and 29) containing the emana-



Fm. 29. Apparatus fur obtaining the Active Deposit of Kadiun



EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ACTIVE DEPOSIT 197

tion from half a grain of radium bromide. It is
arranged so that steel knitting-needles can be
inserted into the emanation and withdrawn through
a glass tube held in a cork. The needle is con-
nected to the negative pole of the electric supply
and the silver coating to the positive pole. If only
the point of the needle is made to project beyond
the glass tube, the whole of the active deposit can
be concentrated on the point. Some hours before
this lecture a needle — we will call it No. 1 — was so
inserted, and by now its point should be coated
to its maximum degree of radioactivity with the
products of the disintegration of the emanation.
After some hours the products all arrive at the
state of radioactive equilibrium, in which the
quantity is at its maximum for all the products,
radium A, radium B, and radium C, as much of
each changing as is produced from the emanation.
The disintegrations all going on together, the wire
should give a-, £-, and y-rays, the j8- and y-rays
being as intense as those given from the half-grain
of radium bromide from which the emanation was
derived. Now I withdraw No. 1 needle from the
emanation, and with the room darkened we will
examine its active deposit.

To detect the o-rays we will use a glass
translucent screen, thinly coated with phos-
phorescent zinc sulphide on one side. I bring the
point of the needle gradually near the coated side



198 EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ACTIVE DEPOSIT

of the screen. As soon as it comes within a
distance of three inches the screen lights up, and
when the point is only a little distance removed
from the screen a most brilliant phosphorescence
is produced. Now if I interpose between the wire
and the screen a single sheet of paper, the effect
practically entirely ceases. The a-radiations pro-
ducing this effect come both from radium A and
from radium C.

To detect the /J-rays we will use an ordinary
cardboard X-ray screen of barium platinocyanide.
Bringing the needle behind the screen, so that the
rays have to penetrate the cardboard, you observe
the screen lights up as brightly as with half a grain
of radium bromide itself. In the dark I happened
actually to touch the back of the screen with the
active needle-point, and in so doing some of the
active deposit has been transferred to the back of
the screen. You can see where the back of the
screen was touched, because this spot still glows
though the needle has been removed.

If now the needle is again presented to the back
of the X-ray screen with thin pieces of metal foil
interposed, you see that the rays are only slightly
stopped by having to traverse the foil. When
a piece of thick lead sheet is interposed, a faint
luminosity on the screen still remains produced by
the y-rays. In fact the active needle-point gives



EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ACTIVE DEPOSIT 199

all the penetrating rays given by half a grain of
radium bromide.

It is now several minutes since the needle was
removed from the emanation. If we now again
examine the a-rays you will notice they already
are very perceptibly less intense than at first.
Practically all the radium A, of which the period
of average life is only 4*3 minutes, has already
disintegrated, and in consequence the a-rays now
come only from the radium C, and are only half as
intense as at first.

Now if, instead of exposing the needle to the
emanation for some hours so as to allow all the
successive products time to be produced, we expose
it to the emanation for a very short time, say for five
minutes by the watch, we shall get quite a different
set of effects. Here is a new needle, we will call
it No. 2. Before putting it in I will test it with
the screen to show you that at present it is an
ordinary needle, not at all radioactive. We will
let it stay in the emanation, connected to the
negative pole as before, for five minutes and
withdraw it, and test its a-rays immediately, exactly
as before. You observe that it is already giving
a-rays abundantly. Comparing it with No. 1, the
two are now very similar in their a-ray-giving
power, No. 1 being only slightly the better. The
a-rays from No. 2 come entirely from radium A,



200 EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ACTIVE DEPOSIT

for there has not yet been time for any appre-
ciable quantity of radium C to be formed The
a-rays from No. i come entirely from radium C,
and this radiation has not yet had time appre-
ciably to decay. Let us, however, test their 0-rays.
You observe that No. 2 gives no 0-rays worth
considering, whereas No. 1 still gives i8-rays in
practically undiminished intensity. Radium A
gives no j8-rays, and as there is no appreciable
quantity of radium C formed there yet, the con-
sequence is that No. 2 wire gives no #-rays.

I can show you at this stage a very striking
experiment with another needle, No. 3, which has
been in the emanation a few minutes. I take it
out and draw the point once through a piece of
emery - cloth and expose the latter to the zinc
sulphide screen. You observe that a single rub
has removed a large part of the active deposit
from the needle and transferred it to the emery-
cloth, so that the latter makes the screen glow
almost as brilliantly as the needles themselves.

Now we will contrast the decay of the activity
of the needles Nos. 1 and 2. The activity due to
radium A by itself decays very rapidly, half
disappearing every three minutes. The con-
sequence is, if we now again test the a-rays of
No. 2, we shall find they have already nearly



EXPERIMENTS WITH THE ACTIVE DEPOSIT 201

disappeared, whereas No. 1 still continues to
give a-rays at about the same strength as it did
when last examined. In ten minutes the a-rays
of No. 2 practically disappear.

It is thus not difficult to give you a certain
amount of experimental evidence in favour of
the conclusion that the first change of the active
deposit is a very rapid one in which a-, but
no j8-rays are expelled, and that this is followed
by a less rapid change in which both a- and j8-rays
are expelled. It is more difficult to give you
in a lecture satisfactory evidence of the exist-
ence of radium B, a body not itself giving rays,
intermediate between the first and second changes
in which rays are expelled. If we examine care-
fully the decay of the a- and j8-rays of wire No. 1,
in which at first all these products co-existed in
equilibrium, we shall find, as already shown, that
for the first half-hour after removal from the
emanation the /8-rays suffer hardly any change
and then quite definitely the decay begins. In
the next half-hour the jS-rays decay to one half
their original intensity, and the decay then goes
on at this rate regularly and continuously to the
end. After two hours they are only a few per
cent of what they originally were, and in three
or four hours they can no longer be detected.
The initial pause before decay begins is due to
the quantity of radium C being maintained, in



202 THE RAYS FROM THE EMANATION

spite of the fact that it is disintegrating all the
time, expelling a- and jS-rays, by the disintegra-
tion of radium B. The latter continues to supply
new radium C to replace that disappearing for
the first half-hour or so after the needle is re-
moved from the emanation. Exactly the same
pause occurs in the decay of the a-rays. As we
saw with No. i, within a very few minutes after the
needle was removed from the emanation the a-rays
had decayed very perceptibly, owing to the dis-
appearance of the a-ray-giving radium A. Then,
however, no further change occurred. It is now
about half an hour since No. i was first tested,
and the a-activity is about the same as it was
when last tested twenty minutes ago. The a-rays
of No. 2 have now almost completely disappeared.
If we continued to examine No. i, we should
find, from now on, a rapid decay of both a- and
£-rays at the same rate, so that at the end of the
lecture both will be much enfeebled, and by
midnight both will have ceased so far as we
could tell by these rough methods.

Now that we have finished with the emanation
used in the preceding experiments, it is an
interesting experiment to show that itself it gives
no j8-rays. If we blow the emanation out into
a U-tube of thin glass cooled in liquid air, it



THE LATER SLOW CHANGES OF RADIUM 203

is condensed in the cold tube. The tube can
then be sealed up to prevent the emanation from
escaping. The tube contains some phosphorescent
zinc sulphide and glows brightly owing to the
a-rays from the emanation inside. But if we hold
the tube against the X-ray screen, you can see
that no penetrating rays come from the tube. The
emanation itself gives no £-rays, only a-rays. By
the end of the lecture, however, sufficient radium C
will probably have been formed inside the tube
to give an appreciable j8-radiation. Owing to
the existence of the intermediate body radium B,
there occurs a similar pause in the growth of /8-rays
from the emanation to that which, as we have seen,
occurs in their decay, after the emanation is taken
away. But in two or three hours the £-rays from all
the needles will have decayed, and that from the
sealed U-tube will have reached a maximum.

This finishes this subject and brings us to the
next. What happens to radium C when it disinte-
grates ? Is this the real or only the apparent end
of the process ? It is, in fact, a very long way
from the end. Madame Curie discovered that the
rapid and almost complete decay of the active
deposit, at the end of a few hours after removal
from the emanation, is not in fact quite complete.
A very small residual radioactivity remains and per-



204 XADIUM A E, AND F

sists for years. The series of changes have now
entered on a stage which is as slow as the previous
ones were rapid. The next change requires almost
as many years as the last required minutes for com-
pletion. The effect of these further changes is in
consequence extremely small, but they last a very
long time. Continuing our diagram where it last
ended at radium C, the next stage is represented in
Fig. 30.


1 1 *°)—+l 2#ol-^f a/ol— »r 206I



Radium C. Radium D. Radium E. Radium F. Radium G.

(Polonium.) (Lead?)

Active deposit of slow change.
28*1 24 7*5 days. 202 days,

minutes. years (?)

Fig. 30.

The body produced from radium C, radium D, has
a period of many years. It is too early yet to state
it exactly. One recent estimate makes it twenty-
four years. No very important rays are given in its
change. 0-rays, however, result from the body pro-
duced from it, which changes rapidly again with a
period of only a few days. We shall pass over these
intermediate changes and consider the last known
change of the series, that of radium F, which has
a period of average life of 202 days, in which an
a-particle is expelled. Radium F is the polonium



POLONIUM 205

of Madame Curie, having been separated by her
from pitchblende first before she discovered radium.

A digression may here conveniently be made on
what is known about polonium, before its connec-
tion with radium is considered. Chemically it re-
sembles bismuth, and was separated first from
pitchblende in association with the bismuth con-
tained in the mineral. Its radioactivity, which
consists entirely of a-rays, slowly and completely
decays, so that a few years after it has been pre-
pared, the most intensely active preparations of it
lose practically all their activity. The work was
carried on by Marckwald in Germany, who dis-
covered new and simple methods of extracting
polonium from the mineral and worked up many
tons of pitchblende for this substance. His careful
chemical investigations of the nature of the body
made it clear that it was quite as nearly allied in
chemical nature to the element tellurium as to bis-
muth, and he first proposed the name "radio-
tellurium " for it, which, however, with the elucidation
of its identity with polonium, has fallen into disuse.
He proved that there is far less polonium in the
mineral even than radium. In a ton of mineral
there is less than a thousandth part of a grain of
polonium, but the radioactivity is correspondingly
intense, and greatly exceeds, so far as the a-radiation



io6 POLONIUM

is concerned, that of pure radium itself. The period
of average life, 202 days, is deduced by direct
observation from the rate of decay of the radio-
activity.

Returning now to the consideration of radium C,
we saw that after its activity had decayed there
existed still a residual activity which is very feeble.
This steadily increases with time, and consists both
of a- and £-rays, which, however, increase at dif-
ferent rates. The a-rays are due to polonium, or
radium F. These go on increasing for the first
two years and then a maximum is reached, the
amount of the radium F formed being in equilibrium.
The jS-rays, however, reach a maximum much
more quickly. The j8-ray product (radium E)
having a much shorter period, equilibrium is reached
in a few weeks. If at any time the active matter
is subjected to the chemical processes worked out
by Marckwald for the separation of polonium, the
a-ray body radium F can be separated from the
other products, and its activity then decays away
completely at exactly the same rate as in the case
of polonium. Moreover, it shows the property of
being volatile at a temperature of a bright red heat,
which is the basis of one of the methods originally
used by Madame Curie in separating polonium
from the bismuth in pitchblende. This is merely



WHAT IS THE ULTIMATE PRODUCT '? 207

a sketch of the evidence in favour of regarding
polonium as the last radioactive substance produced
in the disintegration of uranium.

One more step remains to be discussed, and then
this long story of continuous transformation is at
an end. What is the ultimate product ? When
radium F or polonium expels its a-particle, what
is produced ? The estimated atomic weight of
polonium is 210*5, which is deduced by subtracting
from the atomic weight of uranium (238*5) the
weight of the seven atoms of helium known to be
expelled in the form of a-particles. This agrees
well with its chemical nature, for there is a vacant
place in the periodic table for an element, the next
heavier than bismuth (atomic weight, 208*5), and
this element would be chemically analogous to
tellurium. The expulsion of an a-particle would
further reduce the atomic weight four units, leaving
a residue of atomic weight 206*5. What is it ?

Now, if this is really the final product and not
merely a very slowly changing substance, the forma-
tion of which in proportion to the degree of slow-
ness of the change would be difficult experimentally
to detect, then it follows that the ultimate product
must accumulate in quantity indefinitely with time
in the minerals containing the elements of the
uranium-radium series, and must therefore be a
well-known common element. There seems to be



208 LEAD IN RADIUM MINERALS

only a possible choice of two such elements. Lead
has the atomic weight of 207*1, and bismuth, 208 # o.
The next known element is thallium (204), and then
comes mercury (200).

For long it has looked as if lead would prove to
be the ultimate product. It must be remembered
that the atomic weight of helium is not very accu-
rately known, and is probably a little below, rather,
than above, 4. So that the atomic weight of lead,
207*1, agrees fairly well with the estimate 206*5, ob-
tained by subtracting from the atomic weight of
radium 226*5, the weight of the five a-particles, or
helium atoms, known to be expelled. Lead is found
in all the common minerals containing uranium in
considerable quantity, and there is some evidence
that the older the geological formation from which
the mineral is obtained, the greater the percentage
of lead present. Recently a uranium mineral,
autunite, has been found containing no chemically
detectable quantity of lead. But then the same
mineral contains only an excessively minute trace of
helium, and less than its full equilibrium amount of
radium. There is every reason to believe that its
formation as a mineral has occurred in quite recent
times.

This question is still unsettled. We may rest
assured that the patient application of the methods
which have already resulted in the brilliant solution
of many problems in radioactivity, at first apparently



DISINTEGRATION SERIES OF URANIUM 209

insoluble except by researches extending over im-
possible periods of time, will cause this last strong-
hold to capitulate. The only method of settling it
is to study the change of polonium, separated from
enormous quantities of pitchblende, by the aid of
the spectroscope, and on this task Mme. Curie and
her colleagues have for long been engaged

Uranium I. Uranium II. Uranium X. Ionium. Radium.

8,000,000.000 2,000,000 35- 5 days. 200.000 2,500

years. years (?) years (?) years.


Emanation. Radium A. Radium B. Radium C.



Active deposit of rapid change.

56 days. 4*3 38'5 ? 81

minutes. minutes. minutes.



{ft •ft**



fno\— *QllOj<


Radium D. Radium E. Radium F. Radium G.

(Polonium.) (Lead?)

v_ f '

Active deposit of slow change.
24 years (?) 7*25 days. 202 days.

Fio. 31.

Fig. 31 shows, so far as it is at present known,

the complete disintegration series of uranium,
p



CHAPTER X.

Ratio of quantities of polonium and radium in minerals — Table of the
ratio of the quantities of all the products of uranium — Difficulty of
concentrating many of the long-lived products of uranium — Increase
of activity of radium with time — Radioactivity a physical measure
of value or rarity — The currency metals and their rarity — Are they
changing like radium ? — Physical necessity for rarity of a changing
element — One aspect of the ultimate nature of matter — A quota-
tion from Clerk Maxwell — Evolution of the elements denied —
Similarity of all the atoms of the same element — The atom a
complex and perfect piece of mechanism — Professor Schuster's
analogy — The atom true to its character at dissolution — Similarity
in the velocity of all a particles expelled from a radio -element —
The more stable the radio -element the slower the a-rays expelled
from it — Survival of the fittest or most stable atoms— Universality
of the conception of evolution to the material universe, animate
and inanimate.

• • *

FROM the law, which has already been found
so useful, we can calculate the ratio of the
quantities of radium and polonium that exist
together in a mineral from their periods of average
life. The period of average life of radium is 4500
times that of polonium, so that there must be 4500
times more radium than polonium in minerals. A
good pitchblende contains about an ounce of radium
in 150 tons. The same quantity of polonium would
therefore be contained in about 700,000 tons. The
whole output of the Joachimsthal mine per annum,

reckoned as 15 tons, contains about one hundredth

210



THE LA W OF PROPORTIONALITY



21 I



of a grain of polonium. This is borne out by
MarckwalcTs experiments, already referred to.

Let us apply the law not only to radium and
polonium, but to the whole list of known transition-
forms existing as products of uranium. In the table
this has been done. The first column gives the
name of the substance, the second its period of
average life, and the third its relative quantity in
minerals, the quantity of uranium being considered
1,000,000,000. If these numbers are taken to refer
throughout to milligrams ( i milligram is about ^ of
a grain), then since 1,000,000,000 milligrams is
roughly a ton, the quantities refer to an amount of
mineral containing one ton of the element uranium.



TABLE.



Period.



Uranium I, 8,000,000,000 years.
Uranium II, 2,000,000 years (?).



Uranium X ..
Ionium
Radium
Emanation ..
Radium A
Radium B
Radium C ..
Radium D
Radium E
Radium F
(Polonium)



35-5 days.
200,000 years (?).
2,500 years.
5*6 days.
4*3 minutes.
38*5 minutes.
28*1 minutes.
24 years.

7 '5 davs -
202 days.



Quantity.

1,000,000,000 mg. (=1 ton).

250 grams (?).

One eightieth mg.

25 grams (?).

312-5 mg.

One five-hundredth mg.

One millionth mg.

Nine millionths mg.

Seven millionths mg.

3mg.

One four-thousandth mg.

One fourteenth mg.



212 DIFFICULTY OF

These respective quantities in the last column
emit a similar number of a-particles per second in
the six cases where a-particles are expelled at all,
and so produce similar radioactive effects. This is
an illustration of the compensating principle I spoke
of earlier, that the quantity of a radioactive sub-
stance divided by its life, not the quantity only,
gives a measure of its radioactive effects. It can
readily be calculated that the actual amount of
radium A used in our experiments, which produced
powerful and striking effects on the phosphorescent
screen, was much below one ten-millionth of a
milligram, or below one thousand-millionth of a
grain. For it was derived from 30 mg., i.e. half a
grain of radium bromide. Yet while it lasts it
comes into evidence through the energy of the
a-particles expelled in its rapid disintegration no
less than any of the other products.

The table brings out clearly that radium is but
one of many radioactive substances in uranium
minerals, which would be of value if they could be
extracted. Uranium II, ionium and radium D, all
possess sufficiently extended periods of life to repay
recovery. Ionium gives only very feebly penetrating
a-rays, and so would not be so generally useful as
radium, whereas uranium II and radium D both,
being followed by short-lived products which give
£-rays, would be of great general utility. The



SEPARATING RADIO-ELEMENTS 213

reason which has precluded the practical separation
of these substances in the past is a general one,
which undoubtedly is of the highest philosophical
significance in the chemistry of these new ephemeral
elements. They all so closely resemble one or
other of the known elements that the separation is
impossible. The resemblance between radium and
barium is of great practical utility, because these
two elements, though very closely alike in chemical
nature, can be separated from each other after they
have first been separated from every other element.
Taking them in order, uranium II cannot yet be
separated from uranium I, ionium cannot be separ-
ated from thorium, nor radium D from lead. Lead,
as has been stated, is almost always present in
considerable quantity in uranium minerals, and so
usually is thorium, but to a much more variable
extent. Hence, though it is easy to separate
radium D from the mineral with the lead, it is at
present useless practically, as it cannot be con-
centrated from the lead. By choosing suitable
minerals like secondary pitchblendes, which do not
contain ponderable quantities of thorium, intensely
active preparations of ionium can however be
separated. It is at present the only one in the
uranium series likely to become useful, and its
lack of penetrating rays is a serious drawback.
Polonium, with its period of less than a year and



214 INCREASE OF ACTIVITY

its absence of penetrating rays, hardly repays ex-
traction, except for purely scientific investigations.
There is, however, another disintegration series,
that of thorium, which offers a better chance of
providing an efficient substitute for radium, and
this series will therefore be briefly considered in
the concluding chapter.

The increase of the radioactivity of radium after
it is prepared is due to the steady growth of the
products undergoing further disintegration. As
we know, when freshly prepared from solution,
the activity of radium is due solely to its own
disintegration and consists of a-rays. After four
weeks the first four products accumulate to their
equilibrium, and the activity now consists of
a-, /8-, and 7-rays, the a-rays being four times as
great as initially. It is not difficult to see that the
later slow changes must also cause a very slow
further continuous increase of all these types of
rays. There is reason to believe that the change
of radium C is double, two /8-particles and one
a-particle being expelled in the double change, but
that is not yet settled. These considerations are
embodied in the following table giving an analysis
of the total radioactivity of a radium preparation,
kept in a sealed vessel so that none of the products
escape, at different periods since preparation : —



OF RADIUM WITH AGE 215

a- PARTICLES. 0-PARTICLBS.

I. Freshly prepared. 1 (due to radium itself ) o

II. After one month. 4(1 due to radium) 1 or 2

(1 due to emanation) (due to Ra C)
(1 due to radium A)
(1 due to radium C)

III. After a century. 5 (as in II and 1 due 2 or 3

to radium F) (1 due to Ra E 2 )

The idea, which is a necessary consequence of
the atomic disintegration theory, that fixed definite
relationships must exist between the quantities of
elements formed from one another — for example,
between uranium, radium, and polonium — forms the
first indication that physical laws may exist regulat-
ing the relative abundance and scarcity of elements
in Nature. Gold and platinum, for example, are
valuable or rare metals, and we do not know why.
Radioactive bodies like radium are rare because of
the rapidity with which they are changing. The
degree of radioactivity of an element being pro-
portional to the rate at which it is changing, it
follows that radioactive elements are scarce and
valuable in proportion to their radioactivity. In
this case degree of radioactivity is a physical
measure of value or rarity. It is, for example,
so far as we can see, an impossibility that an
element like radium will ever be found in greater
abundance in any minerals than in those already
known.



216 A PHYSICAL MEASURE OF RARITY

Naturally, in the consideration of some of these
questions of general interest upon which we are
now entering, we are, be it said, in sharp contrast
to almost everything we have dealt with in the
subject up to now, frankly speculating. But it is
helpful and legitimate to speculate upon how far,
if at all, the process of atomic disintegration, dis-
covered for the radio-elements, applies to the case
of elements not radioactive, of which there is as yet
no positive evidence that they are changing at all.
The workers in radioactivity have within their
province explored thoroughly the process of atomic
disintegration. They have made clear the laws it
follows, they have measured the rates at which
it occurs, and they have established what may be
termed its inevitableness or independence from all
known influences. But there is no reason why the
process should be limited in its scope to the some-
what special phenomena which led to its discovery.

It is, for example, natural to inquire whether the
scarcity of elements like gold is fixed by the opera-
tion of similar physical laws to those which regulate
the rarity of radium. The race has grown used
from the earliest times to the idea that gold is a
metal possessing a certain fixed degree of value,
enabling it to be used safely for the purposes of
currency and exchange. It is no exaggeration to



i



THE GOLD CURRENCY 217

say that the whole social machinery of the Western
world would be dislocated if gold altered violently
in its degree of rarity — if, for example, in some
hitherto unpenetrated fastness of the globe a moun-
tain of gold came to be discovered. Is there not
at least a strong presumption that this is really as
contrary to the operation of natural law as the dis-
covery of a mountain of pure radium would be ?

It may, I think, be taken for granted that an
element changing more rapidly than uranium, for
example, — that is with a period of average life of
less than 8,000,000,000 years — is not likely to be
much more plentiful in nature than uranium, and
therefore that all the common elements — lead,
copper, iron, oxygen, silicon, etc. etc. — have
periods of average life of many thousands of
millions of years. So far, the traditional view
that the elements are permanent and unchanging
is substantially correct. At the same time, we
cannot but recognise that inevitably the effects
of atomic disintegration, too slow to be other-
wise detectable, would result in the accumulation
of the more stable and longest-lived elements at
the expense of the others, resulting in some sort
of equilibrium in which the relative abundance of
the elements was proportional to their respective
periods of average life. For example, the ratio
between the relative abundance of gold and silver



2iS RELATIVE ABUNDANCE OF ELEMENTS

is roughly but pretty certainly known, owing to
these metals being employed for currency purposes
from the earliest times. It is at least a possible
view to take that the elements gold and silver
belong to the same disintegration series, both
changing very slowly, but the gold many times
more rapidly than the silver. Obviously we are
only at the beginning. But already it cannot be
gainsaid that the interest and importance of this
process of atomic disintegration is not confined to
radioactivity only or even to physical science. It
extends into almost every region of thought.

This is the chief reason, and must be my excuse
for being so bold as to attempt to bring before
a general audience so much of the, in one sense,
highly technical discoveries of radioactivity. It
would be a pity if mere technicalities and strange
words barred the progress of ideas and their
application to everyday thought. Otherwise the
scientific discoverer would, so far as his own times
were concerned, labour half in vain, and worse, the
accurate and complete application of his work to
other fields of thought would be delayed by erro-
neous and partial ideas, mere half-truths, springing
up in their place.

I now propose considering briefly another ques-
tion of general philosophical interest in connection



THE NATURE OF ATOMS 219

with the recent advances of physical science.
Naturally the discoveries in radioactivity have not
been made without influencing considerably our
ideas on the ultimate nature of atoms. In some
points older conceptions have had to be modified,
while in others these conceptions have been
strangely confirmed. It has always been a matter
for remark, considering the myriads of individual
atoms which go to make up the smallest perceptible
quantity of matter, that there are so few different
kinds. The number of atoms which go to make
up this world, for example, would run into at least
fifty-four figures, yet among them all there are less
than a hundred different varieties. Moreover, it
has come to be regarded as one of the greatest
philosophical generalisations of physical science
that all the atoms of one kind, that is to say of
one element, are exactly and completely similar in
character. There is, for example, not the shadow
of distinction between gold found in the Klondyke,
in Australia, or in S. Africa. Not only so, but
we have learned from the spectroscope that this
similarity of nature extends throughout the whole
universe. In this connection," both to set forth the
idea and to illustrate the deductions which have
been drawn from it, I cannot do better than to
quote a celebrated utterance of Clerk Maxwell to
the British Association in 1873. I may remark



220 A QUOTATION FROM CLERK MAXWELL

that Clerk Maxwell throughout used the word
molecule in the sense of "atom" as this word is
employed by the chemist, and throughout these
lectures.

"In the heavens we discover by their light, and
by their light alone, stars so far distant from each
other that no material thing can ever have passed
from one to another ; and yet this light, which is
to us the sole evidence of the existence of these
distant worlds, tells us also that each of them is
built up of molecules of the same kinds as those
which we find on earth. A molecule of hydrogen,
for example, whether in Sirius or in Arcturus,
executes its vibrations in precisely the same time.

" Each molecule therefore throughout the uni-
verse bears impressed upon it the stamp of a metric
system as distinctly as does the metre of the
Archives at Paris, or the double royal cubit of the
temple of Karnac.

"No theory of evolution can be formed to
account for the similarity of molecules, for evolu-
tion necessarily implies continuous change, and the
molecule is incapable of growth or decay, of
generation or destruction.

" None of the processes of Nature, since the
time when Nature began, have produced the
slightest difference in the properties of any mole-
cule. We are therefore unable to ascribe either
the existence of the molecules or the identity of



FOUNDATION-STONES OF THE UNIVERSE 221

their properties to any of the causes which we call
natural.

" On the other hand, the exact equality of each
molecule to all the others of the same kind gives
it, as Sir John Herschel has well said, the essential
character of a manufactured article, and precludes
the idea of its being eternal and self-existent.

" Thus we have been led, along a strictly scien-
tific path, very near to the point at which science
must stop ; not that science is debarred from study-
ing the internal mechanism of a molecule which
she cannot take to pieces, any more than from
investigating an organism which she cannot put
together. But in tracing back the history of
matter, Science is arrested when she assures herself,
on the one hand, that the molecule has been made,
and on the other, that it has not been made by any
of the processes we call natural.

"Science is incompetent to reason upon the
creation of matter itself out of nothing. We have
reached the utmost limits of our thinking faculties
when we have admitted that because matter cannot
be eternal and self-existent it must have been
created. "

You will admit that, in the light of all that has
transpired in the thirty-five years since Maxwell
used these words, science has advanced far. The
concluding words of the address are even more
striking from this point of view.



222 COMPLEXITY OF ATOMS

" Natural causes, as we know, are at work, which
tend to modify, if they do not at length destroy, all
the arrangements and dimensions of the earth and
the whole solar system. But though in the course
of ages catastrophes have occurred and may yet
occur in the heavens, though ancient systems may
be dissolved and new systems evolved out of their
ruins, the molecules out of which these systems are
built — the foundation-stones of the material universe
— remain unbroken and unworn."

Before we dwell upon the modifications that have
been made in this point of view, let us rather con-
sider the chief basis of the argument, namely, that
all the atoms of any one element are exactly alike.
On this fundamental question the evidence to-day
is far more complete and striking than it was in
1873, an d we believe more firmly than ever in the
absolute similarity of all the atoms of the same
element.

We no longer regard the atom as a simple thing.
On the contrary, we now look upon it as an almost
infinitely complex piece of mechanism. The late
Professor Rowland, of Baltimore, once made the
remark that a grand piano must be a very simple
piece of mechanism compared with an atom of
iron. For in the spectrum of iron there is an
almost innumerable wealth of separate bright lines,
each one of which corresponds to a sharp definite
period of vibration of the iron atom. Instead of



AND THEIR SIMILARITY 223

the hundred-odd sound vibrations which a grand
piano can emit, the single iron atom appears to
emit many thousands of definite light vibrations.
Two pianos would be regarded as in perfect tune
together when there was a comparatively rough
approximation of period between the various notes.
Whereas by the spectroscope a difference in " tune "
or period in the vibrations emitted by different
atoms of only one part in many millions would be
easily detectable, and no such variation exists. In
a similar vein Professor Schuster, referring to the
broad teachings of the spectroscope, has compared
the atoms of the same element to an innumerable
number of clocks all wound and regulated to go at
the same period. If all these clocks were set at the
same time, not one of them would vary by a single
second even after many days. No clockmaker
could make such clocks. Yet these almost infinitely
complicated pieces of mechanism we call atoms are
turned out by Nature with such undeviating accu-
racy and fidelity that in all the myriads in existence
there are less than a hundred different kinds
known.

We can, however, from the point of view of

recent researches in radioactivity, push this idea

even one step further, to the case of atoms actually

in the condition of breaking up. We have seen

that it is a property of the a-rays to possess a



224



VELOCITIES OF THE a PARTICLES



very sharp and definite range. In a beam of
homogeneous o-rays passing through a homoge-
neous absorbing medium the number of a-particles
suffers little or no diminution until the extreme
end of the path is reached, and then they cease
altogether. Just without the extreme range, there
is absolutely no effect perceptible, while just within
this range, the effect, per small element of path, is
at the maximum. Every a-particle expelled from
the radio-element in the same change travels
exactly the same distance before it ceases to be
detectable, and, as Rutherford has shown by direct
measurement of the magnetic and electric devia-
tion, is expelled at the same velocity.

In the table following, the approximate initial
velocities of the a-particles from the changes in the
uranium series have been collected, together with
their " ranges " or distances in millimetres they will
penetrate in air at 15 C. and 760 mm. of mercury
pressure.


Velocity


a-PARTICLE FROM


(miles per secor


id).


Range.


Uranium I ...


• • ■


8,8oo


• • •


25


Uranium II


* • •


• ■ •


9>3°°


• • * i


29


Ionium


• •


■ • •


9,400


• • • 1


3«>


Radium


» • •


* •


9,600


• • •


33


Emanation .


• •


• • *


10,400


• • •


42


Radium A


t • •


• • •


10,900


a • •


47'S


Radium C


• ■


• • •


1 2,400


■ • • 1


69-5


Radium F


• •


• • •


10,200


* • •


377



The atom thus retains its role of a perfect



MATERIAL EVOLUTION 225

piece of mechanism even up to and during the
moment of its dissolution. So exactly alike are
all the atoms of the same radioactive element, that
when the break-up occurs the velocity with which
the fragments of the atom, or a-particles, are ex-
pelled is exactly the same in each case. We may
liken the disintegration of an element to the burst-
ing of shells, in which the fragments of the different
shells all are expelled with the same velocity.
Certainly no shells ever constructed would answer
this requirement. Truly, in the words of Sir John
Herschel, thfe atom bears the essential character of
a manufactured article, but of a degree of per-
fection humanly unattainable.

But with regard to the process of manufacture
and of the cause of this undeviating fidelity to a
few types, what a revolution of thought has taken
place in the last few years ! The evolution, or
rather devolution, of matter, its continuous change,
the generation and destruction of atoms — all of
the things which seemed impossible in Clerk Max-
well's day — we know to be going on before our eyes.
It is true the processes call for periods of time
so vast, even in the most favourable cases, that
the physicist of a generation ago would have
dismissed them as physically inconceivable. Yet
these periods are to-day actually determined by

direct measurement in the laboratory.
Q



226 CONNECTION BETWEEN PERIOD

Before leaving this question a very interesting
development may be mentioned, which has resulted
in a connection being established between the ranges
or velocities of the various types of «-rays, and the
periods of life of the atoms from which they are
derived. As a general rule — not, it is true, entirely
without exceptions, but possibly the exceptions may
prove to be only apparent — the more rapidly a
radioactive substance disintegrates, or the shorter
its period of average life, the greater is the velocity
with which the a-particle is expelled from the atom,
and the greater therefore is the range of the a-particle.
Thus, the most stable radio-elements, uranium and
thorium, give a-rays having the lowest ranges, and
the low range of the a-rays of ionium is additional
evidence that its period must be very long. The
greatest ranges occur in the short-lived " active
deposit" products. The very long ranges of the
a-rays of radium C (69*5 mm.), and of the corres-
ponding thorium C (86 mm.), is generally explained
by the supposition that the real atoms giving these
rays have periods of the order of only a millionth
of a second, and therefore that it is impossible to
separate them from their parents, which thus appear
to be giving rays which in reality come from their
products. Two actual cases of such a sequence will
be considered in the last chapter. Latterly, this
generalisation has been put into stricter form by the



AND RANGE OF a-RAYS 227

discovery that if the logarithm of the period is plotted
against the logarithm of the range or of the velocity,
straight lines result for each of the three known
disintegration series. The three straight lines are
parallel to but not identical with one another.
The reason for this is still obscure. Some mathe-
matical connection exists between the two quantities,
and that is all that can yet be said. On the other
hand, it has been found possible to calculate some
of the unknown periods — like that of ionium, so
estimated at 200,000 years, for example — from the
ranges of the a-rays by means of this relation. For
long it was known that uranium was exceptional
in that it appeared to give out two a-particles per
atom disintegrating instead of one, as in all other
cases. A very careful investigation revealed the
fact that the ranges of these two sets of a-particles
were not exactly alike. One set, those from
uranium I, presumably, have a range of 25 mm.,
and the other set, those from its shorter- lived
product, uranium II, presumably, a range of 29 mm.
The period corresponding with 29 mm. of range
is, in the uranium series, two million years, and
this is the main evidence for believing that such
a product, uranium II as it is called, exists, and
that it has so far not been separated from uranium
because of the identity of the chemical properties
of the two elements.



228 MATERIAL EVOLUTION

Instead of regarding the hundred or less ele-
ments which exist to-day as manufactured, created,
once for all time, we rather regard them as
existing because they have survived. All other
forms less stable than those we recognise as
elements have been weeded out. Over sufficiently
great periods of time the rarity or abundance of
an element must be controlled by its degree of
instability or stability. Probably for every stable
atom many unstable ones could be, even are being,
formed. But only the stable forms can accumu-
late in quantity and become known to us as
ordinary chemical elements. We have seen that
the rarest of such in all probability must have
a period of thousands of millions of years, while
for the more common elements, if they are chang-
ing at all, periods of billions of years may be
anticipated.

At first glance only, the material universe gives
the impression of a permanent and finished
creation. In reality the now familiar remorseless
operation of slow, continuous change moulds even
"the foundation-stones" themselves. By this last
step the doctrine of evolution has become universal,
embracing alike the animate and inanimate worlds.
But whereas in the former slight changes of
environment effect the profoundest modifications,
in the latter the controlling factors still remain



MATERIAL EVOLUTION 229

absolutely unknown. By the spectroscope a partial
material survey of the whole universe has been
rendered possible, and what we find is every-
where an essential similarity of composition. For
example, there is no evidence that in the sun
or stars large quantities of elements unknown to
us exist. The reason why some atoms are
stable and others are not is a mystery we have
not yet begun to probe. Yet this question, to
us only of academic interest and possibly some-
what remote at that, will, as we shall soon come
to see, be one of life and death to the inheritors
of our civilisation.



CHAPTER XI.

Why is radium unique among the elements ? — Its rate of change only
makes it remarkable — Uranium is more wonderful than radium —
The energy stored up in a pound of uranium — Transmutation is
the key to the internal energy of matter — The futility of ancient
alchemy — The consequences if transmutation were possible —
Primitive man and the art of kindling fire — Modern man and the
problem of transmutation — Cosmical evolution and atomic dis-
integration — Radioactivity and geology — Quantity of radium in
the earth's crust — The earth probably not a cooling globe — The
geological age and the incandescent age — Ancient mythology and
radioactivity — The serpent "Ouroboros" — The "Philosopher's
Stone " and the u Elixir of Life "—The " Fall of Man " and the
" Ascent of Man " — The great extension in the possible duration
of past time — Radium and the struggle for existence — Existence
as a struggle for physical energy — The new prospect.

•

THIS interpretation of radium is drawing to
a close, but perhaps the more generally
interesting part of it remains to be dealt with.
We have steadily followed out the idea of atomic
disintegration to its logical conclusions, so far
as they can at present be drawn, and we have
found it able to account for all the surprising
discoveries that have been made in radioactivity,

and capable of predicting many, and perhaps even

230



WHY RADIUM IS UNIQUE 231

more unexpected, new ones. Let us from the
point of vantage we have gained return to the
starting - point of our inquiries and see what a
profound change has come over it since the riddle
has been read. Radium, a new element, giving
out light and heat like Aladdin's lamp, apparently
defying the law of the conservation of energy,
and raising questions in physical science which
seemed unanswerable, is no longer the radium
we know. But although its mystery has vanished,
its significance and importance have vastly gained
At first we were compelled to regard it as unique,
dowered with potentialities and exhibiting pecu-
liarities which raised it far above the ordinary
run of common matter. The matter was the mere
vehicle of ultra- material powers. If we now ask,
why is radium so unique among the elements, the
answer is not because it is dowered with any ex-
ceptional potentialities or because it contains any
abnormal store of internal energy which other
elements do not possess, but simply and solely
because it is changing comparatively rapidly,
whereas the elements before known are either
changing not at all or so slowly that the change
has been unperceived. At first sight this might
seem an anti-climax. Yet it is not so. The
truer view is that this one element has clothed
with its own dignity the whole empire of common



232 WHY RADIUM IS UNIQUE

matter. The aspect which matter has presented
to us in the past is but a consummate disguise, con-
cealing latent energies and hidden activities beneath
an hitherto impenetrable mask. The ultra-material
potentialities of radium are the common possession
of all that world to which in our ignorance we used
to refer as mere inanimate matter. This is the
weightiest lesson the existence of radium has
taught us, and it remains to consider the easy
but remorseless reasoning by which the conclusion
is arrived at.

Two considerations will make the matter clear.
In the first place, the radioactivity of radium at
any moment is, strictly speaking, not a property of
the mass of the radium at all, although it is
proportional to the mass. The whole of the new
set of properties is contributed by a very small
fraction of the whole, namely, the part which is
actually disintegrating at the moment of observa-
tion. The whole of the rest of the radium is as
quiescent and inactive as any other non -radioactive
element. In its whole chemical nature it is an
ordinary element. The new properties are not
contributed at all by the main part of the matter,
but only by the minute fraction actually at the
moment disintegrating.



THE ENERG Y IN URANIUM 233

Let us next compare and contrast radium with
its first product, the emanation, and with its
original parent, uranium. Uranium on the one
hand, and the emanation on the other, represent,
compared with radium, diametrically opposed
extremes. Uranium is changing so slowly that
it will last for thousands of millions of years, the
emanation so rapidly that it lasts only a few weeks,
while radium is intermediate with a period of
average life of two thousand five hundred years.

We have seen that in many ways the emanation
is far more wonderful than radium, as the rate its
energy is given out is relatively far greater. But
this is compensated for by the far shorter time
its activity lasts. Also, if we compared uranium
with radium, we should say at once that radium
is far more wonderful than the uranium, whereas
in reality it is not so, as the uranium, changing
almost infinitely more slowly, lasts almost infinitely
longer.

The arresting character of radium is to be
ascribed solely to the rate at which it happens
to be disintegrating. The common element
uranium, well known to chemists for a century
before its radioactivity was suspected, is in reality
even more wonderful. It is only very feebly
radioactive, and therefore is changing excessively
slowly, but it changes, we believe, into radium,



234 THE ENERG Y IN URANIUM

expelling several a-particles and so evolving large
amounts of energy in the process. Uranium is a
heavier element than radium, and the relative
weights of the two atoms, which is a measure of
their complexity, is as 238 is to 226. This bottle
contains about a pound of an oxide of uranium
which contains about seven-eighths of its weight of
the element uranium. In the course of the next
few thousand million years, so far as we can tell,
it will change, producing over thirteen ounces of
radium, and, in that change into radium alone,
energy is given out, as radioactive energy, aggre-
gating of itself an enormous total, while the radium
produced will also change, giving out a further
enormous aggregate quantity of energy.

So that uranium, since it produces radium, con-
tains all the energy contained in a but slightly
smaller quantity of radium and more. It may
be estimated that uranium evolves during com-
plete disintegration some thirteen per cent, more
energy than is evolved from the same weight of
radium. But what are we to say about the other
heavy elements — lead, bismuth, mercury, gold,
platinum, etc. — although their atoms are not quite
so heavy as uranium or radium, and although none
of them, so far as we yet know, are disintegrating
at all ? Is this enormous internal store of energy
confined to the radioactive elements, that is to



THE INTERNAL ENERGY OF ALL MATTER 235

the few which, however slowly, are actually chang-
ing? Not at all, in all probability. Regarded
merely as chemical elements between radioactive
elements and non-radioactive elements, there exists
so complete a parallelism that we cannot regard
the radioactive elements as peculiar in possessing
this internal store of energy, but only as peculiar
in evolving it at a perceptible rate. Radium
especially is so completely analogous in its whole
chemical nature, and even in the character of its
spectrum, to the non-radioactive elements, barium,
strontium, and calcium, that chemists at once
placed radium in the same family as these latter,
and the value of its atomic weight confirms the
arrangement in the manner required by the
Periodic Law. It appears rather that this in-
ternal store of energy we learned of for the
first time in connection with radium is possessed
to greater or lesser degree by all elements in
common and is part and parcel of their internal
structure.

Let us, however, for the sake of conciseness,
leave out of account altogether the non-radioactive
elements, of which as yet we know nothing cer-
tainly. At least we cannot escape from the
conclusion that the particular element uranium
has relatively more energy stored up within it



236 USEFUL AND USELESS ENERGY

even than radium. Uranium is a comparatively
common element. The world's output per year is
to be reckoned in tens of tons.

I have already referred to the total amount of
energy evolved by radium during the course of its
complete change. It is about 360,000 times as much
energy as is evolved from the same weight of coal in
burning. The energy evolved from uranium would
be some thirteen per cent, greater than from the same
weight of radium. This bottle contains about one
pound of uranium oxide, and therefore about fourteen
ounces of uranium. Its value is about £1. Is it
not wonderful to reflect that in this little bottle there
lies asleep and waiting to be evolved the energy of
at least one hundred and sixty tons of coal ? The
energy in a ton of uranium would be sufficient to
light London for a year. The store of energy in
uranium would be worth a thousand times as much
as theuranium itself, if only it were under our control
and could be harnessed to do the world's work in the
same way as the energy in coal has been harnessed
and controlled.

There is, it is true, plenty of energy in the
world which is practically valueless. The energy
of the tides and of the waste heat from steam fall
into this category as useless and low-grade energy.
But the internal energy of uranium is not of this
kind. The difficulty is of quite another character.



THE PROBLEM OF TRANSMUTATION 237

As we have seen, we cannot yet artificially ac-
celerate or influence the rate of disintegration of
an element, and therefore the energy in uranium,
which requires a thousand million years to be
evolved, is practically valueless. On the other
hand, to increase the natural rate, and to break
down uranium or any other element artificially,
is simply transmutation. If we could accomplish
the one so we could the other. These two great
problems, at once the oldest and the newest in
science, are one. Transmutation of the elements
carries with it the power to unlock the internal
energy of matter, and the unlocking of the internal
stores of energy in matter would, strangely enough,
be infinitely the most important and valuable con-
sequence of transmutation.

Let us consider in the light of present knowledge
the problem of transmutation, and see what the
attempt of the alchemist involved. To build up an
ounce of a heavy element like gold from a lighter
element like silver would require in all probability
the expenditure of the energy of some hundreds of
tons of coal, so that the ounce of gold would be
dearly bought. On the other hand, if it were
possible artificially to disintegrate an element with
a heavier atom than gold and produce gold from it,
so great an amount of energy would probably be



238 THE PROBLEM OF TRANSMUTATION

evolved that the gold in comparison would be of
little account. The energy would be far more
valuable than the gold. Although we are as ignor-
ant as ever of how to set about transmutation,
it cannot be denied that the knowledge recently
gained constitutes a very great help towards a
proper understanding of the problem and its ulti-
mate accomplishment. We see clearly the magnitude
of the task and the insufficiency of even the most
powerful of the means at our disposal in a way not
before appreciated, and we have now a clear per-
ception of the tremendous issues at stake. Looking
backwards at the great things science has already
accomplished, and at the steady growth in power
and fruitfulness of scientific method, it can scarcely
be doubted that one day we shall come to break
down and build up elements in the laboratory as
we now break down and build up compounds,
and the pulses of the world will then throb with
a new source of strength as immeasurably re-
moved from any we at present control as they in
turn are from the natural resources of the human
savage.

It is, indeed, a strange situation we are confronted
with. The first step in the long, upward journey
out of barbarism to civilisation which man has ac-
complished appears to have been the art of kindling



THE ART OF KINDLING FIRE 239

fire. Those savage races who remain ignorant of
this art are regarded as on the very lowest plane.
The art of kindling fire is the first step towards the
control and utilisation of those natural stores of
energy on which civilisation even now absolutely
depends. Primitive man existed entirely on the
day-to-day supply of sunlight for his vital energy,
before he learned how to kindle fire for himself.
One can imagine before this occurred that he
became acquainted with fire and its properties from
naturally occurring conflagrations.

With reference to the newly recognised internal
stores of energy in matter we stand to-day where
primitive man first stood with regard to the energy
liberated by fire. We are aware of its existence
solely from the naturally occurring manifestations
in radioactivity. At the climax of that civilisation
the first step of which was taken in forgotten ages
by primitive man, and just when it is becoming
apparent that its ever-increasing needs cannot in-
definitely be borne by the existing supplies of
energy, possibilities of an entirely new material
civilisation are dawning with respect to which we
find ourselves still on the lowest plane— that of on-
lookers with no power to interfere. The energy
which we require for our very existence, and which
Nature supplies us with but grudgingly and in
none too generous measure for our needs, is in



2 4 o KEY TO THE NEW STORES OF ENERGY

reality locked up in immense stores in the matter
all around us, but the power to control and use it is
not yet ours. What sources of energy we can
and do use and control, we now regard as but the
merest leavings of Nature's primary supplies. The
very existence of the latter till now have remained
unknown and unsuspected. When we have learned
how to transmute the elements at will the one into
the other, then, and not till then, will the key to this
hidden treasure-house of Nature be in our hands.
At present we have no hint of how even to begin
the quest.

The question has frequently been discussed
whether transmutation, so impossible to us, is not
actually going on under the transcendental condi-
tions obtaining in the sun and the stars. We have
seen that it is actually going on in the world under
our eyes in a few special cases and at a very slow
rate. The possibility now under consideration, how-
ever, is rather that it may be going on universally
or at least much more generally, and at a much more
rapid rate under celestial than under terrestrial con-
ditions. From the new point of view it may be said
at once that if it were so, many of the difficulties
previously experienced in accounting for the enor-
mous and incessant dissipation of energy throughout
the universe would disappear.



WORLD- CUE All AG INFLUENCES 241

Last century has wrought a great change in
scientific thought as to the nature of the gigantic
forces which have moulded the world to its present
form and which regulated the march of events
throughout the universe. At one time it was cus-
tomary to regard the evolution of the globe as the
result of a succession in the past times of mighty
cataclysms and catastrophes beside which the erup-
tions of a Krakatoa or Petee would be insignificant.
Now, however, we regard the main process of
moulding as due rather to ever-present, continuous,
and irresistible actions, which, though operating
so slowly that over short periods of time their effect
is imperceptible, yet in the epochs of the cosmical
calendar effected changes so great and complete
that the present features of the globe are but a
passing incident of a continually shifting scene.
Into the arena of these silent world-creating and
destroying influences and processes has entered a
new-comer — "Radioactivity" — and it has not re-
quired long before it has come to be recognised
that in the discovery of radioactivity, or rather of
the sub-atomic powers and processes of which radio-
activity is merely the outward and visible manifesta-
tion, we have penetrated one of Natures innermost
secrets.

Whether or no the processes of continuous
atomic disintegration bulk largely in the scheme



242 ULTIMATE SOURCE OF COSMICAL ENERGY

of cosmical evolution, at least it cannot be gain-
said that these processes are at once powerful
enough and slow enough to furnish a sufficient and
satisfactory explanation of the origin of those
perennial outpourings of energy by virtue of which
the universe to-day is a going concern rather than
a cold, lifeless collocation of extinct worlds. Slow,
irresistible, incessant, unalterable, so apparently
feeble that it has been reserved to the genera-
tion in which we live to discover, the processes
of radioactivity, when translated in terms of a
more extended scale of space and time, appear
already as though they well may be the ultimate
controlling factors of physical evolution. For slow
processes of this kind do the effective work of
Nature, and the occasional intermittent displays of
Plutonic activity correspond merely to the creaking
now and again of an otherwise silent mechanism
that never stops.

It is one of the most pleasing features of this new
work that geologists have been among the very
first to recognise the applicability and importance
of it in their science. I am not competent to deal
adequately with or discuss the geological problems
that it has raised. But this story would be incom-
plete if I did not refer, though it must be but briefly,
to the labours of Professor Strutt who initiated



RADIUM IN ROCKS 243

the movement and to those of Professor Joly who
has carried it on. These workers carried out
careful analyses of the representative rocks in the
earth's crust for the amount of radium they con-
tained Absolutely, the quantity of radium in com-
mon rocks is* of course very small, although with the
refined methods now at the disposal of investigators
it is quite measurable. The important fact which
has transpired, however, is that the rocks examined
contain on the average much larger quantities of
radium, and therefore necessarily of its original
parent uranium, than might be expected. The
amount of heat which finds its way in a given time
from the interior of the globe to the surface and
thence outwards into external space has long been
accurately known. Strutt concluded that if there
existed only a comparatively thin crust of rocks less
than fifty miles thick of the same composition, as
regards the content of radium, as the average of
those he examined, the radium in them would
supply the whole of the heat lost by the globe to
outer space. He concluded that the surface rocks
must form such a thin crust, and that the interior
of the globe must be an entirely different kind of
material, free from the presence of radium. Other-
wise the world would be much hotter inside than is
known to be the case. So far then as the earth is
concerned, a quantity of radium less than in all
probability actually exists would supply all the heat



*44 RADIOACTIVITY

lost to outer space. So that there is no difficulty in
accounting for the necessary source of heat to main-
tain the existing conditions of temperature on the
earth over a period of past time as long as the
uranium which produces the radium lasts, that is to
say, for a period of thousands of millions of years.

Professor Joly in his interesting work, " Radio-
activity and Geology," has considered in detail some
of the consequences of the existence of radioactive
materials in the earth. One of the specific instances
is the effect of the radium in the rocks of the Simplon
Tunnel in producing the unexpectedly high tempera-
tures there encountered. From a radioactive analysis
of these rocks he came to the conclusion that without
undue assumptions it is possible to explain the differ-
ences in the temperature of the rocks encountered in
boring the tunnel by the differences in their radium
content.

The presence in the rock of a proportion
amounting to a few million millionths of radium
above the normal quantity very nearly wrecked the
whole enterprise. From the importance of radio-
activity in this instance, of a tunnel a few miles
long bored through a mountain, some idea may be
obtained of the significance of the new discoveries
in the general problem of the thermal condition of
the interior of the globe. Since Strutt's original
work, it has been established that not only radium,



AND GEOLOGY 245

but all the other radioactive materials, including the
whole thorium disintegration series, must contribute
an important quantity of heat, so that his estimate
of a crust only fifty miles thick is in reality too
great, and a much thinner crust would suffice. Joly
has had the courage to push the argument to its
logical conclusion, and has supposed that the radio-
active materials are not confined to a thin surface
crust, but are equally distributed throughout the
globe in much the same proportions as they are in
the crust If this is so, there is no escape from the
conclusion that the interior of the earth, so far from
gradually parting with its heat and cooling down,
must actually be getting steadily hotter. The heat
generated within, even after the lapse of hundreds
of millions of years, would scarcely appreciably
escape from the surface, for, as Lord Kelvin deduced,
the central core of the earth must be almost insulated
thermally from the surface, owing to the low con-
ductivity of the rocks composing the crust. He
assumes throughout an average composition of the
globe of two parts of radium per million million,
which is considerably below the average he found
for the rocks of the crust, and he calculates that in
the course of a hundred million years this minute
quantity will produce a rise of the temperature of
the central core of no less than i,8oo° C. Unless,
therefore, this heat is utilised in some unknown



246 THE GEOLOGICAL AND

way, or the disintegration of the radio-elements is
prevented by the high temperature and pressure,
the ultimate fate of the globe must be very much as
depicted in the Biblical tradition. Sooner or later
the crust must succumb to the ever increasing
pressure within, and the earth must become again,
what it is supposed once to have been, a vastly
swollen globe of incandescent gas. As Joly remarks,
there is no evidence that this has not already
occurred more than once, nor assurance that it will
not recur. So far as physical science yet can deduce,
the accumulation of thermal energy within a world
containing elements undergoing atomic disintegra-
tion during the " geological age" must alternate
with a state of things which might be termed " the
incandescent age," in which this accumulated energy
is dissipated by radiation. This periodic cycle of
changes must continue until the elements in question
have disintegrated — that is, over a period which
radioactive measurements indicate is of the order
of tens or hundreds of thousands of millions of years.
During the incandescent age the loss of heat by
radiation, which increases according to the fourth
power of the temperature, is immensely greater than
could be supplied even by atomic disintegration.

Thus, if the known laws hold, it is certain that the
present loss of heat of the sun cannot be supplied by
the presence of radium. For this to be the case a
very large part of the sun's mass must consist of



THE INCANDESCENT AGES 247

uranium, and this we know from the spectroscope
is very improbable. Still, it is by no means to
be concluded that the heat of the sun and stars is
not in the first place of internal rather than, as has
been the custom to regard it, of external origin.

As soon as sufficient of the heat energy of the
sun has been radiated away for a solid crust to form,
the poor thermal conductivity of this crust at once
reduces the radiation loss to a negligible figure
again, a fresh geological age is inaugurated, and
again the heat accumulates within. This view, that
the elements contain within themselves the energy
from which Nature obtains her primary supplies,
and that in cosmical time "geological age" and
" incandescent age " alternate as the night and day,
however imperfect it may still be, is at least more
in harmony with existing knowledge than the older
conventional view that the universe was wound up
once for all in the beginning like a clock to go for
a certain time, for the most part quietly and unevent-
fully, pursuing its allotted path towards ultimate
physical stagnation and death. But what a picture
it conjures up of life and of the precariousness of
its tenure — from its lowest beginnings to its highest
evolution, not a permanent accomplishment, but
a process to be inaugurated and consummated afresh,
if at all, between the ending and beginning of each
new cosmical day !



248 COSMIC AL EVOLUTION

To escape from this conclusion it is necessary to
suppose that atomic disintegration is cosmically not
the inevitable uncontrollable process it has hitherto
been proved to be under all laboratory conditions,
but that under conditions of pressure and tempera-
ture, such as exist in the inferior of a world, it may
either be stopped altogether, or compensated for by
unknown complementary processes of atomic syn-
thesis in which energy is taken up.

Be that as it may, our outlook on the physical
universe has been permanently altered. We are no
longer the inhabitants of a universe slowly dying
from the physical exhaustion of its energy, but of
a universe which has in the internal energy of its
material components the means to rejuvenate itself
perennially over immense periods of time, inter-
mittently and catastrophically, which is the first
possibility that presents itself, or continuously and
in orderly fashion, if there exist compensating
phenomena still outside the ken of science.

The world probably being of much greater antiquity
than physical science has thought to be possible, it
is interesting and harmless to speculate whether man
has shared with the world its more remote history.

In this connection it is curious how strangely some
of the old myths and legends about matter and
man appear in the light of the recent knowledge.



OLD LEGENDS RECALLED 249

Consider, for example, the ancient mystic symbol of
matter, known as Ouroboros — " the tail devourer " —
which was a serpent, coiled into a circle with the
head devouring the tail, and bearing the central
motto, "The whole is one." This symbolises
evolution ; moreover, it is evolution of matter — the
very latest aspect of evolution — the existence of
which was strenuously denied by Clerk Maxwell and
others of only last century. The idea which arises
in one's mind as the most attractive and consistent
explanation of the universe in the light of present
knowledge is, perhaps, that matter is breaking down
and its energy being evolved and degraded in one
part of a cycle of evolution, and in another part, still
unknown to us, the matter is being again built up
with the utilisation of the waste energy If one
wished to symbolise such an idea, in what better
way could it be done than by the ancient tail-
devouring serpent ?

Some of the beliefs and legends which have
come down to us from antiquity are so universal
and deep-rooted that we are accustomed to consider
them almost as old as the race itself. One is
tempted to inquire how far the unsuspected apt-
ness of some of these beliefs and sayings to the
point of view so recently disclosed is the result of
mere chance or coincidence, and how far it may be
evidence of a wholly unknown and unsuspected



250 THE ELIXIR OF LIFE

ancient civilisation of which all other relic has dis-
appeared It is curious to reflect, for example,
upon the remarkable legend of the philosophers
stone, one of the oldest and most universal beliefs,
the origin of which, however far back we penetrate
into the records of the past, we do not probably
trace to its real source. The philosopher's stone
was accredited the power not only of transmuting
the metals, but of acting as the elixir of life. Now,
whatever the origin of this apparently meaningless
jumble of ideas may have been, it is really a perfect
and but very slightly allegorical expression of the
actual present views we hold to-day. It does not
require much effort of the imagination to see in
energy the life of the physical universe, and the
key to the primary fountains of the physical life
of the universe to-day is known to be transmuta-
tion. Is then this old association of the power
of transmutation with the elixir of life merely a
coincidence ? I prefer to believe it may be an echo
from one of many previous epochs in the unre-
corded history of the world, of an age of men
which have trod before the road we are treading
to-day, in a past possibly so remote that even the
very atoms of its civilisation literally have had time
to disintegrate.

Let us give the imagination a moment's further
free scope in this direction, however, before closing.



THE FALL AND ASCENT OF MAN 351

What if this point of view that has now suggested
itself is true, and we may trust ourselves to the
slender foundation afforded by the traditions and
superstitions which have been handed down to us
from a prehistoric time ? Can we not read into
them some justification for the belief that some
former forgotten race of men attained not only to
the knowledge we have so recently won, but also
to the power that is not yet ours ? Science has
reconstructed the story of the past as one of a con-
tinuous Ascent of Man to the present-day level of
his powers. In face of the circumstantial evidence
existing of this steady upward progress of the race,
the traditional view of the Fall of Man from a
higher former state has come to be more and more
difficult to understand. From our new standpoint
the two points of view are by no means so irrecon-
cilable as they appeared. A race which could
transmute matter would have little need to earn its
bread by the sweat of its brow. If we can judge
from what our engineers accomplish with their
comparatively restricted supplies of energy, such
a race could transform a desert continent, thaw the
frozen poles, and make the whole world one smiling
Garden of Eden. Possibly they could explore the
outer realms of space, emigrating to more favour-
able worlds as the superfluous to-day emigrate to
more favourable continents. The legend of the



252 THE NEW PROSPECT

Fall of Man, possibly, may be all that has survived
of such a time before, for some unknown reason,
the whole world was plunged back again under the
undisputed sway of Nature, to begin once more its
upward toilsome journey through the ages.

The vistas of new thought which have opened
out in all directions in the physical sciences, to which
man is merely incidental and external, must in turn
react powerfully upon those departments of thought
in which man is central and supreme. We find our-
selves in consequence of the progress of physical
science at the pinnacle of one ascent of civilisation,
taking the first step upwards out on to the lowest
plane of the next. Above us still rises indefinitely
the ascent to physical power — far beyond the dreams
of mortals in any previous system of philosophy.
These possibilities of a newer order of things, of a
more exalted material destiny than any which have
been foretold, are not the promise of another world.
They exist in this, to be fought and struggled for in
the old familiar way, to be wrung from the grip of
Nature, as all our achievements and civilisation
have, in the past, been wrung by the labour of the
collective brain of mankind guiding, directing, and
multiplying the individual's puny power. This is
the message of hope and inspiration to the race
which radium has contributed to the great problems
of existence. No attempt at presentation of this



THE NEW PROSPECT 253

new subject could be considered complete which did
not, however imperfectly, suggest something of this
side. It is fitting to attempt to see how far purely
physical considerations will take us in delimiting
the major controlling influences which regulate our
existence.

Surveying the long chequered, but on the whole
continuous, ascent of man from primeval conditions
to the summit of his present-day powers, what has
it all been at bottom but a fight with Nature for
energy — for that ordinary physical energy of which
we have said so much ? Physical science sums up
accurately in that one generalisation the most funda-
mental aspect of life in the sense already defined.

Of course life depends also on a continual supply
of matter as well as on a continual supply of energy,
but the struggle for physical energy is probably the
more fundamental and general aspect of existence
in all its forms. The same matter, the same chemical
elements, serve the purposes of life over and over
again, but the supply of fresh energy must be con-
tinuous. By the law of the availability of energy,
which, whether universal or not, applies universally
within our own experience, the transformations of
energy which occur in Nature are invariably in
the one direction, the more available forms pass-
ing into the waste and useless unavailable kind, and
this process, so far as we yet know, is never reversed.



I



254 THE NEW PROSPECT

The same energy is available but once The
struggle for existence is at the bottom a continuous
struggle for fresh physical energy.

This is as far as the knowledge available last
century went What is now the case? Th<e
aboriginal savage, ignorant of agriculture and of the
means of kindling fire, perished from cold and
hunger unless he subsisted as a beast of prey
and succeeded in plundering and devouring other
animals. Although the potentialities of warmth
and food existed all round him, and must have been
known to him from natural processes, he knew not
yet how to use them for his own purposes. It is
much the same to-day. With all our civilisation,
we still subsist, struggling among ourselves for a
sufficiency of the limited supply of physical energy
available, while all around are vast potentialities of
the means of sustenance, we know of from naturally
occurring processes, but do not yet know how to use
or control. Radium has taught us that there is no
limit to the amount of energy in the world available
to support life, save only the limit imposed by the
boundaries of knowledge.

It cannot be denied that, so far as the future
is concerned, an entirely new prospect has been
opened up. By these achievements of experimental
science Man's inheritance has increased, his aspi-
rations have been uplifted, and his destiny has



THE NEW PROSPECT 255

been ennobled to an extent beyond our present
power to foretell. The real wealth of the world is
its energy, and by these discoveries it, for the first
time, transpires that the hard struggle for existence
on the bare leavings of natural energy in which the
race has evolved is no longer the only possible or
enduring lot of Man. It is a legitimate aspira-
tion to believe that one day he will attain the
power to regulate for his own purposes the primary
fountains of energy which Nature now so jealously
conserves for the future. The fulfilment of this
aspiration is, no doubt, far off, but the possibility
alters somewhat the relation of Man to his environ-
ment, and adds a dignity of its own to the actuali-
ties of existence.



CHAPTER XII.

The thorium disintegration series — Source and radioactivity of
thorium compounds — Mesothorium and radiothorium — Variation
of radioactivity of thorium compounds with time — Analogy
between the thorium and uranium series — Mesothorium and its
changes of activity with time — Its chemical resemblance to radium
— Abundance of the raw material of mesothorium — The thorium
emanation — Experiments with radiothor urn — Thorium A — The
actinium disintegration series — The question of the origin of
actinium — Its great scarcity — Multiple atomic disintegration — The
actinium emanation — Actinium A — The unsolved riddle of matter.

THOSE who have mastered the intricacies of
the uranium disintegration series may wish
to know something of the other two great dis-
integration series known to science, the thorium
and the actinium series. The thorium disintegra-
tion series is becoming increasingly important,
and its consideration does not involve any new
principles. Thorium is an element which was at
one time rare and little known even to chemists, but
has come into prominence during the last twenty
years, because of its use as a constituent of the
incandescent gas-mantle, which is composed of about

99 per cent, of thorium oxide, and i per cent, of

256



MONAZITE SAND 257

cerium oxide. Fairly abundant sources of thorium
have been discovered in the sands of certain coasts
in Brazil, North and South Carolina, India, etc.,
where a natural concentration has taken place by
the action of the sea-waves of the particles of the
heavy mineral monazite, which occurs as a minute
constituent in many rocks, and in the sands derived
from them by the action of weathering agencies.
Monazite sand usually contains about 4 per cent, of
thorium oxide, and from it every year hundreds of
tons of pure thorium salts are now manufactured for
the gas-mantle industry. As already described, the
usual a-radioactivity of commercial thorium com-
pounds is of about the same strength as that of
pure uranium compounds, but the £- and 7-, or
penetrating activity, is several times less intense.
We have seen (p. 212) that in the uranium minerals,
although several intermediate products of the dis-
integration of uranium are present, with periods of
life sufficiently long, and radioactivity sufficiently
important, to repay extraction, it is practicable to
extract only one of these — namely, radium. In the
thorium minerals there are two such products, named
mesothorium and radiothorium, and though their
periods of average life, about eight years and three
years respectively, are very much less than that of
radium, they are sufficiently long to make their extrac-
tion and utilisation practicable. Whereas the sources
s



258 THE IMPORTANCE OF

of radium are costly and comparatively limited in
amount, the by-products of the thorium industry,
after the extraction of the technically valuable
thorium, are the source from which mesothorium
and radiothorium are extracted. Much greater
quantities of these by-products have to be handled,
it is true, than in the extraction even of radium from
pitchblende to produce similar results. The new
substances must, on this account, always be some-
what costly to produce. But in the by-products of
a single year's manufacture of thorium the new
products capable of being extracted possess as
much radioactivity as at least an ounce of pure
radium. They thus offer an abundant source of
radioactive material, which at present is mostly
wasted, and the product, while it lasts, is in every
respect the equal of radium in its properties. The
only disadvantages it possesses is its relatively
much shorter period of life.

The discoveries in the thorium series of these
two technically valuable members were made by
Otto Hahn, who has worked both with Sir
William Ramsay and Professor Rutherford, com-
paratively recently, after the rest of the members
had become quite well known. The historical
development of the subject from the first discovery
of the radioactivity of thorium compounds up to the
present time is a most interesting chapter to the



THE THORIUM SERIES 259

student, but would unduly complicate the subject if
considered here. It is better to proceed in order
through the thorium disintegration series as it is
at present known, apart from historical considera-
tions as to the order in which they were discovered,
though as a matter of fact, the first members were
the last discovered.

Unlike pure uranium salts, which, a few months
after preparation, have a definite constant radio-
activity, consisting of all three types of rays, the
a-activity being due to uranium, and the /3- and <y-
activity to the short-lived uranium X in equilibrium
with it, thorium salts, though chemically pure, vary
continuously in their whole radioactivity for twenty
or thirty years after manufacture. Even after these
periods, slight changes must still be going on, and
probably fifty years would have to elapse before
they became quite inappreciable. But in spite of
the great apparent differences between the two
elements, there is a real close analogy in their
disintegration series, every one of the eleven known
members of the thorium series having an analogue
in the eleven members of the uranium series as far
as radium D, at which point the thorium disintegra-
tion appears to come to an end. These analogous
members in the two series usually give out similar
kinds of rays, and although their periods are often
widely different, there is a rough correspondence in



260 THE URANIUM AND

the two series between the relative periods of the
successive members, the periods in the thorium
series being, however, usually much less than in the
uranium series. Thus uranium I, with its period of
8,ooo,ooaj'years, gives a-rays, and is followed by
uranium II, also giving a-rays, of estimated period of
a few million years. This is followed by uranium X,
giving /8-rays, of period 35*5 days. This produces
ionium, which gives a-rays, and has the estimated
period of 200,000 years. Ionium, in turn, produces
radium, which gives a-rays, and has a period of 2,500
years. Thorium itself is provisionally estimated to
have a period about three times longer than uranium I,
and gives only a-rays. It produces by its disintegra-
tion " mesothorium I," which does not give any im-
portant rays, and has a period of 7*9 years. It corre-
sponds with uranium II, except that no a-rays are
expelled. Its product is called "mesothorium II,"
which corresponds very closely with uranium X,
giving out powerful £- and 7- rays, and having a
period of only 8*9 hours. It produces in turn
"radiothorium, ,, which corresponds perfectly with
ionium, giving a-rays, and having a period of 2*9
years. These last two substances are chemically
identical with one another, and also with thorium
itself, and cannot be separated by any known method
when mixed together. This fact is of considerable
importance, as thorium when separated from a



THORIUM SERIES COMPARED 261

mineral, always contains at first all the radiothorium
in the mineral and also all the ionium, if uranium
was also present, as is almost invariably the case.
The product of radiothorium is thorium X, which
corresponds with radium, giving a-rays, but hav-
ing a period of only 5*6 days. Thorium X is
chemically identical with radium, and also with
mesothorium I. This chemical identity of radium
and mesothorium I is the dominating fact in the
separation of these new substances, as will later be
more clear. After thorium X, the thorium emana-
tion results, corresponding perfectly in its whole
nature as a member of the argon family of gases,
with the radium emanation, giving a-rays, but having
the much shorter period of only 76 seconds. Its
product is the thorium active deposit, of which
the first three members, called thorium A, B, C,
are almost precisely analogous to the corresponding
radium members, except in period. The period of
thorium A is only one-fifth of a second. Those of
thorium B and C are 15*3 hours and 79 minutes
respectively. These last are the only two, except
thorium itself, possessing periods longer than the
corresponding members of the uranium series.
Lastly, there exists, as the product of thorium C,
thorium D, the last active member known, which
gives f}~ and 7- rays, and has the short period of 4*5
minutes. It has little analogy to radium D. The



262



MESOTHORIUM



ultimate product of thorium is quite unknown. All
that can yet be said is that its atomic weight,
calculated from that of thorium and the number of
a-particles expelled, is 208, and this is the atomic
weight of bismuth! This is one of the problems
time alone will settle, but it should be settled in a
very few years. The complete thorium disintegra-
tion series is shown below :

Thorium. Meso- Meso- Radio- Thorium

ihorium I. thorium II. thorium. X.

25,000,000,000 7 9 8*9 2*91 5 -35

(?) years. years. hours. years. days.



Emanation.

76

seconds.



Thorium
A.

0*2
second.



Thorium
B.



15*3
hours.



Thorium
C.

79
minutes.



Thorium Thorium

D. E.

4*5 (unknown.)
minutes.



Fig. 32.



It is clear that mesothorium I, with the period of
average life of nearly eight years, being both the
first and the longest lived of the successive products,
is the centre of interest The radioactivity of the
element thorium itself, consisting only of low-range
a-rays, of relatively feeble intensity because of the
enormous period of the element, is technically and
scientifically even of less interest than that of uranium.



MES0TH0R1UM 263

Mesothorium, however, corresponds to radium in that
it can be concentrated, and the greater part of the
radioactivity of many tons of minerals can be separated
in a preparation weighing less than a gram. Just as
when radium is first prepared it gives only the rela-
tively unimportant a-activity proper to itself, but in
course of time develops enormously in all its activity
due to the growth and accumulation of its products,
so it is with mesothorium. Freshly prepared and
free from its products, it has practically no activity.
In the course of a few hours the strong penetrating
activity of its short-lived product, mesothorium II,
develops, and in two or three days this reaches a
maximum or equilibrium value. This part of the
activity then remains, so long as the preparation is
not chemically treated, apparently constant, but
actually decaying very slowly. This decay is to
half the initial value after 5*5 years, to a quarter
after 1 1 years, and so on. But the product of this
change is radiothorium, which gives a-rays; and, just
as in the case of radium, this is followed by a small
host of short-lived products, some of which give <*-
and others £- and 7-rays. What actually happens,
therefore, is that in addition to the rapid growth of
&- and y-rays already discussed, a slow, steady
increase of the a-, £-, and y-activity of a mesothorium
preparation takes place for many years after its pre-
paration, due to the growth and accumulation of



264 RADIOTHORTUM AND

radio thorium and its products. It is calculated that
this increase will go on for about four and a half
years, and then the activity of the preparation will
reach a maximum, the penetrating activity (£- and
7-rays) being then nearly twice that at two days after
preparation. From then onwards the regular slow
decay of all the radioactivity will set in, and continue
with the half-period of five and a half years, as already
considered. Twenty years after preparation the
activity will be some 12 per cent, whilst after a
century it would be less than 1, oooth per cent, of
the maximum activity.

In practice, however, the change is even more
complicated than this on account of the invariable
presence of radium in the mesothorium preparations.
Radium and mesothorium form, as already remarked,
an example of which now so many exist in radio-
activity, of two different elements, having entirely
different radioactive, but entirely identical, chemical
character. For a long time the nature of the
chemical processes used to extract mesothorium from
the by-products of monazite was kept secret It was
thought that they were peculiarly difficult and for-
bidding. I was therefore surprised and interested
to find — and the same discovery was made at about
the same time by Professor Marckwald in Berlin —
that mesothorium and radium behaved in chemical
processes identically. In consequence the extraction



MESOTHORIUM 265

of mesothorium from monazite residues is entirely
similar in principle to that of radium from pitch-
blende residues. Since monazite always contains a
minute amount of uranium, and therefore the corre-
sponding quantity of radium, the mesothorium
separated always contains the radium also. No suc-
cessful separation has as yet been achieved. After a
lengthy fractional crystallisation of the mixture I
found the relative proportions of the two elements
entirely unaltered. Technical mesothorium owes
about 12 per cent, of what has been termed its
maximum activity (that after four and a half years) to
radium. This activity will remain when all that due
to mesothorium has completely decayed away. In
practice, therefore, the decay of the preparations will
be appreciably slower than if radium were absent.

These discoveries have thus resulted in the pro-
vision of an effective substitute for radium, which for
such purposes as medical application, or for general
researches in the properties of the new radiations,
are, while the activity lasts, its equal in every respect.
Indeed, it is possible to obtain mesothorium pre-
parations many times more concentrated in their
activity than pure radium salts. There is no dearth
of the raw material, which hitherto has been a wasted
product. A single years production would suffice to
produce a preparation having many times the activity
of all the radium ever extracted in the whole world.



266 THE EMANATION

But of course, from the strictly scientific point of
view, the radioactivity of mesothorium is as distinct
from that of radium as copper is from zinc, or as one
flower is from another. It will be of interest to con-
centrate upon some of the chief resemblances and
differences in the two disintegration series.

The thorium emanation was the first of the three
emanations to be discovered, and had been fairly
completely investigated by Rutherford before the
others were known. It is given off in greater or less
degree by all thorium compounds. If the radio-
activity of the compound is measured by placing it
in a closed electroscope, the activity is found to
increase for about ten minutes, owing to the accumu-
lation of the emanation, and then remains constant if
the instrument is not disturbed. But if a current of
air is blown through the instrument, it sweeps out the
emanation, and the activity is correspondingly re-
duced. On stopping the blast of air, it rises again
precisely as at first. Uranium compounds show no
trace of this behaviour, as they do not generate an
emanation. The products of the disintegration of the
thorium emanation are known as the thorium active
deposit, and they manifest themselves in much the
same way as the radium active deposit, being attracted
to the negatively charged surface in an electric field.
They last much longer, however, the period of half-
decay being about eleven hours instead of about



OF THORIUM 267

half an hour, and, in consequence, they take longer
to accumulate. In a vessel containing a thorium
or, better, a radiothorium preparation, which acts as
a constant source of the evanescent thorium emana-
tion, the active deposit on the walls of the vessel (or
on the negative electrode, if an electric field is used),
goes on increasing in amount for about two days,
whereas in the radium emanation the active deposit
reaches the maximum value in about three hours.

Radiothorium is the most powerful and convenient
source of the emanation and active deposit of
thorium. As already explained, radiothorium is not
separable from thorium by any chemical process.
Freshly prepared thorium compounds contain practi-
cally all the radiothorium of the original mineral,
but its parent meisothorium being absent, this radio-
thorium in the course of a few years decays. Before
it decays completely, however, mesothorium has
been regenerated by the thorium, and in time begins
to produce fresh radiothorium. The consequence
is that commercial thorium compounds always
contain more or less radiothorium, and always,
therefore, furnish more or less of the emanation and
active deposit. But the amount is insignificant
compared with what can now be obtained from a
commercial radiothorium preparation. Mesothorium,
after it is separated from the mineral and left to
itself, produces, as we have seen, radiothorium.


268 RADIOTHORIUM

After a year or more of accumulation these two
substances may with advantage be separated. A
trace of a thorium salt is added to the solution, and
then precipitated by adding ammonia as thorium
hydroxide, which carries with it the whole of the
radiothorium, leaving the mesothorium in solution.
This radiothorium preparation in turn generates
thorium X, and after a few weeks becomes a
powerful source of the thorium emanation during
the few years it lasts.

It is of interest to note that, were it not for the
existence of mesothorium intermediate between and
chemically distinct from thorium and radiothorium,
the separate existence of the latter might not have
been suspected. In the case of uranium I and
uranium II there is no such intermediate member,
and in consequence the evidence for the existence
of two elements remains indirect One can hardly
help wondering how many of the well-known
common so-called elements may not be mixtures
of more than one element with chemically identical
properties.

Radiothorium may be used to show, in a striking
way, by means of phosphorescent screens, many of
the older classical experiments on the growth and
decay of radioactive substances on which the existing
theory of atomic disintegration has been built up.
For example, if a radiothorium preparation or old



RADIOTHORIUM 269

mesothorium preparation containing radiothorium,
is kept in a tube through which a puff of air can be
sent from a rubber blower, and the accumulated
emanation is thus blown out into a flask internally
coated with zinc sulphide, as shown in Figs 8 and 9,
it will cause it to phosphoresce brilliantly in the
dark. The decay of the emanation in the flask can
then be watched from minute to minute with the
eyes, and its concomitant reproduction in the radio-
thorium tube can easily be demonstrated. For
example, the radiothorium tube may first be
thoroughly blown out, and then the effect observed
of blowing through it into a zinc sulphide flask
immediately, before any emanation has had time to
accumulate, and then after waiting successive
periods of, say, ten, twenty, thirty seconds, one, two,
ten, or more minutes. For the shorter intervals the
amount of emanation produced is very nearly
proportional to the time, but for the longer ones
the decay of that produced first during the period ot
accumulation begins to tell, and the increase with
time gets less and less. So that after five or ten
minutes no more results, however long a time is
allowed to elapse. The emanation is then in
"equilibrium," as much decaying per second as is
produced per second.

In this way many of the simple laws of the decay
and reproduction of the emanation, on which the



{



*7o THORIUM A

whole superstructure of radioactive theory was at
first largely based, may now be shown to a large
audience. All this original work was done with
delicate electrical instruments long before anyone
had ever observed a single visible effect, or had any
other than indirect electrical evidence of the exist-
ence of the evanescent emanation.

The most recent member to be added to the
thorium disintegration series is thorium A, the
direct product of the emanation, which, on account
of its short period of average life — about one-fifth
of a second only — had hitherto not been separately
distinguished from the emanation. It was put in
evidence by Rutherford and his colleagues in the
following ingenious manner : An endless wire
passed along the axis of a cylinder, containing a
radiothorium preparation, through holes in ebonite
stoppers closing the ends of the cylinder, and over
suitable pulleys outside of the cylinder driven by an
electric motor. In this way the wire was kept
passing through a cylinder filled with thorium
emanation. The wire was connected to the negative
and the cylinder to the positive pole of a battery, so
as to concentrate the active deposit on the wire.
It was found that the wire immediately after leaving
the cylinder was intensely active, giving out power-
ful o-rays, and capable of lighting up a zinc sulphide
screen brought near to the wire. This activity on



THORIUM A 271

the wire lasts only a small fraction of a second, so
that after the wire has moved away a little from
the cylinder its activity has practically disappeared.
Thus, although the wire is being driven at a high
speed all the time, it is only the part immediately
issuing from the cylinder which is active, and which
causes the sulphide screen to glow. Thorium A is a
non-volatile product of the gaseous emanation, and
is attracted to the negative electrode. But almost
as soon as it is deposited it breaks up, giving a- rays.
On the principle of a short life and a merry one,
the effect of this product is far more marked than
that of the longer-lived products it in turn produces.
Though it would be easy to show that the wire,
after the large activity due to thorium A is over,
still possesses activity due to the products formed,
this activity is usually far too small to light up
a phosphorescent screen. In this way the existence
of this almost hopelessly unstable element has been
demonstrated. There are many problems of acute
interest in connection with the thorium active de-
posit still being investigated, but their consideration
hardly yet comes within the scope of this volume.

The Actinium Disintegration Series.

In conclusion, a few words may be said for the
sake of completeness on the third and least known
disintegration series, but one which, for that reason,



272 THE ACTINIUM

is the most interesting to the student of the present
time. In addition to the polonium and radium sepa-
rated from pitchblende by M. and Mme. Curie, a
colleague, M. Debierne, was successful in isolating
a third new radio-element, to which he gave the name
Actinium. So far as is known, actinium is at least
a fairly permanent radio-element, for although it
was discovered very shortly after radium, the
original preparations t have retained their activity,
and no certain decay with lapse of time has taken
place. Actinium is separated with the " rare earths "
in uranium minerals, and chemically it resembles
most closely the rare-earth element, lanthanum,
although it is probably not completely identical
with it in properties. In radioactive properties
its disintegration series is very closely analogous to
that of thorium, and consists of eight members, in
addition to itself, the first of which, known as radio-
actinium, corresponds with radiothorium. The next
is actinium X, corresponding perfectly with thorium
X, and after that the actinium emanation, actinium
A, B, C, and D, follow in regular order, almost
exactly as in the thorium series. The analogous
products in the two series in each case give out the
same kinds of rays, and are, so far as is known,
chemically identical in character. But, almost
without exception, the periods in the actinium
series are uniformly shorter than in the thorium



DISINTEGRATION SERIES 273

series, the longest, that of radioactinium, being only
twenty-eight days, and the shortest, that of actinium
A, being only 7 ^th of a second. The full series is
shown in Fig. 33.

Actinium Radio- Actinium Emanation. Actinium.
(?). actinium. X.

281 15 5-6 0*003

days. days. seconds. second.



Actinium


Actinium


Actinium Actinium


B.


C.


D. E.


52'i


3'i


6*83 (unknown).


minutes.


minutes.


minutes.



Fig. 33.

Whereas it is customary to regard the uranium
and thorium series each as starting from a primary
parent of so long life, that, old as the world is, some
still survives unchanged, the problems connected
with the real nature and origin of actinium are still
shrouded in mystery. It is possible that actinium
may be an independent primary radio-element, like
the other two, but this has not been the view that
has so far gained most support. So far as knowledge
has been gained, actinium appears to be found only
in the uranium minerals and in all of these which
have been examined for it. It is natural to conclude

T



*74 ACTINIUM

from this that it is a product of uranium. But here
a difficulty arises. In the disintegration of actinium
at least five a-particles are given out per atom dis-
integrating, representing a loss in atomic weight
of 20 units. There is certainly no room for the
actinium series between uranium and polonium, and
there is no evidence that it comes after polonium.

The important piece of evidence, however, which
shows conclusively that actinium cannot be in the
main uranium-polonium series, and which at the same
time serves to distinguish this series from the others,
and to make it practically the most difficult to investi-
gate, is the extraordinarily small relative quantity of
actinium in uranium minerals. Although the actinium
series gives out at least five a-particles per atom as
compared with eight given out by the uranium-
radium-polonium series, the a- radiation contributed
by the whole actinium series is only about one-
fifteenth or one-sixteenth of that contributed by the
uranium series. Whereas, if actinium were in the
main line of descent from uranium, the a-activity
of its series should be of the order of five-eighths
of that of the uranium series, in accordance with
the principle discussed on p. 212. Two possi-
bilities may be advanced. Either actinium is an
entirely separate and independent primary radio-
element, and, if so, its occurrence always in uranium
minerals, and only in those minerals, is difficult to



MULTIPLE DISINTEGRATION 275

understand ; or actinium may be derived from
uranium as a branch, or offshoot, not in the main line
of descent. One may suppose that at some stage of
the disintegration of the uranium atom a choice of
two modes of disintegration presents itself. The
large majority of the atoms choose one way — the way
leading to polonium — whilst a small minority choose
a second way, the way leading through the actinium
series. If this is true, it can be calculated that out of
every eight uranium atoms, seven go through the
main line of descent towards polonium, and one goes
through the actinium line. This mode of explaining
actinium has been rendered the more worthy of
credence because of the discovery very recently of
an actual case of such a multiple disintegration in the
end of the thorium series, among the active deposit
products, which, however, cannot be dealt with here.
The practical aspect of this peculiarity of actinium,
is that the substance is very much rarer and more
difficult to obtain than the members of either of the
other two series. If it were more common, it would
lend itself to many demonstrations and experiments
similar to those detailed under radiothorium, but of an
even more striking character. Actinium is relatively
poor in penetrating rays, and even the most active
preparations it is possible to procure are disappoint-
ing in this respect when compared with radium.
The glory of actinium, however, is its emanation, a



a76 ACTINIUM EMANATION

gaseous disintegration product, precisely analogous
in every respect to those of radium and of thorium,
but having a period of average life of only 5*6 seconds.
The usual principle of a short life and a merry one
applies. The dominating characteristic of the radio-
activity of actinium preparations is the emanation
that is given off. In the dark room, if a preparation
is held over a zinc sulphide screen, the emanation
diffusing away lights up the screen in patches, which
are wafted from one part of the screen to another by
draughts or any gentle puffs of air. The rapid
decay of the emanation and corresponding rapid re-
generation from the actinium preparation makes it
quite possible to experiment thus with the emanation
in the open-air of the room. Whereas if the radium
emanation were dealt with in this way, once it had
been dissipated throughout the air of a room, some
weeks would have to elapse before a fresh supply
was available. Giesel, who rediscovered the sub-
stance subsequently independently of Debierne,
actually named it " Emanium " before it was found
to be identical with actinium.

The only other product of actinium which calls
for special mention is actinium A, the direct pro-
duct of the emanation, which, like thorium A, has
an extraordinarily short period of life. Indeed,
actinium A is the most unstable element known,
its period being only about ^J^th of a second. It



ACTINIUM A 277

may be put into evidence by the same device as that
described for thorium A (p. 270), but, of course,
the endless wire has to be driven considerably more
rapidly than is necessary to exhibit the thorium
product. As a matter of fact, a forgotten experi-
ment of Giesel, eight years before the discovery
of actinium A, clearly puts the existence of that
substance into evidence when rightly interpreted.
If a zinc sulphide screen is brought opposite to
the open end of a tube containing an actinium
preparation, and a little distance away from it, there
is a diffuse luminosity produced on the screen in the
dark, due to the emanation escaping from the tube.
If the screen is now connected with the negative
pole of an electrical machine, instantly there flashes
out on the screen a sharply-defined bright spot of
the same geometrical form as the opening of the
tube. On discharging the screen this spot instantly
disappears. Giesel thought he was dealing with a
new kind of radiation, attracted by a negatively
charged surface, and called the supposed radiation
the "E-ray," in brief for "emanation ray." How-
ever, it is not the ray, but the excessively short-
lived product giving an ordinary a-ray, which is
attracted to the negative surface ; but owing to the
infinitesimal time this product remains in existence
it appears as if it is the ray, rather than the product,
which is affected by the electric field. Another way



278 THE UNSOLVED PROBLEM

of showing the same experiment is to coat a wire
with zinc sulphide, and to immerse it in a flask con-
taining an actinium preparation. On charging the
wire negatively to the flask, the zinc sulphide instantly
flashes out and remains brilliantly luminous ; but
on discharging the wire, the luminosity disappears
apparently instantaneously.

Thus, with the discovery of this last substance,
the science of radioactivity now embraces over
thirty examples of elements in the course of spon-
taneous change, with periods varying from tens of
thousands of millions of years on the one hand, to a
few thousandths of a second on the other, whilst the
existence of other products, with periods of the order
of a millionth of a second, have been indicated
(p. 226). It is unlikely that very many more of these
unstable elements remain to be discovered, unless
some entirely unknown and unsuspected source of
radioactive materials is found. But science has still
much to glean from the examples already known of
that most fundamental and inaccessible problem,
which at the same time appears to be the problem of
ultimately the most practical significance — the real
internal nature of matter. How is the atom of
matter put together, and how can it be pulled apart ?
These are the questions which the discoveries of
radioactivity raise in a pressing form without as yet
affording a hint of the answer.



L



INDEX



a-particles, Collision of, with
matter, 86-9

— Connection of, with helium, 62,

84, 128-42

— Energy of, 85

— from radium itself, 129

— from the emanation, no, 203

— Individual, 58, 62-5, 86

— Limiting velocity of, 89, 91

— Mass of, 83, 136

— Number of, expelled by radium,

57. 59* 62-5

— Positive charges carried by,

83,88

— Proof of identity with helium

of, 142

— Scattering of, 89

— Velocity of, 83, 84-6, 130, 224
tt-rays, 39-92

— Absorption of, 46
by air, 49-50

— Connection between range of,

and period of substance,
226

— Magnetic deflection of, 83, 84

— Making paths of visible, 90-1

— Range of, 49, 63, 187, 224,

226-7

— Resolution of, 58-65
Accumulation of products, 13 1-3,

135. 172
Actinium, disintegration series,
256, 271-8

— Emanation, 272, 275

— Origin of, 273-5

— Production of helium from,

I37» M°



Actinium A, 273, 276-8

— B, C, and D, 272

— X, 272

Active deposit of actinium, 272-8

of thorium, 267-71

of radium, 191-202

Residual activity from,

203-7
Age of the earth, 35, 103, 244-52
Ages, The geological and incan-
descent, 246-7
Alkaline-earth elements, 117, 145
Alternative theories of radio-
active energy, 94, 123
Analogies between the disinte-
gration series, 259-62, 272-3
Argon, 116, X17, 134
Atom, Definition of, 145-52
Atomic disintegration, 54, 82, 93,

124,130,135,158,216,271

Cause of, 159

Multiple, 275

— property, Radioactivity an, 17,

18, 2i. 94. 102, «5» *53

— synthesis, 248, 278

Atoms, 3, 16, 57, 65, 84, 88, 118,
146, 219-23

— Interpenetration of, 88
Average life, Determination of, 162

of common elements, 217

of emanation, 157

of radium, 165, 174

of uranium, 162, 174

Period of, 157



^-particles, 70-83

— Charge of, 70, 72, 82



279



280



INDEX



^-particles, Mass of, 80

— Velocity of, 80-1
/3-rays, 39-92

— Magnetic deflection of, 66, 82

— Making paths of visible, 90-1
Barium, 21, 115, 187
Becquerel, Henri, 8, 9, 10, 179
Bismuth, 21, 187, 207, 262
Boltwood, B., 174, 187

Bragg, Professor, 48, 49, 63, 87,

89
Bunsen, 104

C

rrays, 43-45

— Radiograph by, 44
Caesium, 104

Calcium, Absorption of gases by,

74. 139
Cascade of changes, 102
Cathode-rays, 73-82
Cause of atomic disintegration,

159
Chance of disintegration, 155

Change, Law of radioactive, 156

— of radio-elements, 97, 103, 125,

127 et seq.
Chemists and radioactivity, 152
Cloud method of making paths of

rays visible, 90-1
Conservation of radioactivity, 122
Constancy of radioactivity, 14, 17,

32. 33* 37* 61, 95* 96, 107. 126,

237
Control of natural energy, 8, 17,

238, 252, 256
Corpuscular theory of radiation,

54. 56-°5
Cosmical aspect of life, 247-8

— energy, 33, 167, 240-8, 246
Cost of scientific investigations,

26, 27
Crookes, Sir William, 20, 59, 73,

80, 179
Crookes' tubes, 73, 81
Curie, M. and Mme., 16, 18, 21,

104, X15, 173, 191, 205, 272

D

" D 8 " line, 134, 138, 140
Dalton, John, 147, 150



Debierne, 137, 272, 275
Decay of radioactivity, 96, 121
Definition of the atom, 145-52
Detection of infinitesimal quan-
tities, 104, 106, 114, 118, 124,
126, 130, 152
Determination of average life, 162
Dewar, Sir James, 74
Discovery of radioactivity, 8
Discrete theory of radium rays,

56, 62
Disintegration, see Atomic dis-
integration
— , Chance of, 155

— series, Analogies between,
259-62, 272-3

of actinium, 256, 271-8

of thorium, 245, 256-71

of uranium, 168-209

Doctrine of energy, 26, 38, 51, 93.
246, 254

£

" E-ray," 277

Earth, Age of the, 35, 103, 244-52

— Internal heat of, 245-6
Effects of radioactivity, n-13
Electric current, Action of magnet

on, 70
Electricity, Discharge of, 11, 18,

25. 47, 64, 90
Electro-magnet, 66
Electron theory of matter, 151
Electrons, 77-82, 88, 15X
Electroscope, Gold leaf, 11, 23, 59,

116
Elements, Stability of, 99, 217,
228-9

— Unchanging character of, 99,
101, 228-9

Elixir of life, 250
Emanation of radium, 107-30

— a-particles from, no, 203

— Atomic weight of, 118, 142

— Average life of, 157, 161, 170

— Chemical nature of, 116, 117,

145

— Condensation of, n 1-4

— Density of, 118

— Heat generated by, 118, 119.

233



INDEX



281



Emanation, Physiological action
of, 114

— Rate of decay of, 121, 123

— Reproduction of, 122, 123, 125,

170

— Spectrum of, 117

— Volume of, 114, 165

— of actinium, 272, 275

— of thorium, 191, 261, 266-71
Emanations and radiations con-
trasted, 107

Emanium, 275

Energy, Internal, of matter, 94,

97, 98-101, 120, 121, 126,

132, 149, 232-42

— Measurement of, 30, 98

— of coal, 30, 31, 97, 167

— of radioactive substances, 4,

8, 14, 81, 87, 93* i* 6 » I2 7»
236

— of radium, 31, 118, 167, 236

— of uranium, 233-6

— Transformers of, 94, 95* I2 5
Ephemeral transition-forms, 102,

127, 160-6, 169, 180, 271,
276-8
Equilibrium, Radioactive, 125,

I3 X » l6 3* 269
Ether. The, 52, 53, 78
Evolution of elements, 189, 225,
228

— of universe, 36, 167, 24X-7
Existence, Struggle for, 8, 250-5



Facts and theories of radio-
activity, 124, 150

Faraday, 66, 77

Fluorescence, 9, 24, 43, 74, 91,
108, 109, 268



Gas, A radioactive, 107, in, 115

Geiger, 63

Geological bearing of radioac-
tivity, 36, 103, 241-8

Geology, Controversy between
physics and, 36

Giescl, 26, X37, 275, 277

Gold currency, 216



H

Hahn, Otto, 258

Heat generated by radium, 12, 25,
31, n8 f 166, 245

in the earth, 245-6

Helium, 62, 84, 116, 130-42

— Discovery of, 133

— Liquefaction of, 134

— Prediction concerning the

origin of, 135

— Production of, by radium, 130,

136

by actinium, 137, 140

by thorium and uranium,

138-40

— in radioactive minerals, 133,135
Volume of, 135

— Spectrum of, 137
Herschell, Sir John, 221, 225
High vacua, 72, 74
Huggins, Sir William, 149



Incandescent age, 246-7

— gas-mantle, 19, 256
Increase of activity of radium

with time, 22, 214

Indifference of radium to its en-
vironment, 37, 107, 225

" Induced radioactivity," 191

Inertia, 79

Infinitesimal quantities, Detection
of, 104, 106, 114, 118, 124, 126,

130. 152
Inglis, J. K. H., 157
Intermediate substances, 102, 105,

106, 184-9
Internal energy of matter, 94, 97,
98-101, 120, 121, 232

— heat of earth, 245-6
Interpenetration of atoms, 88
Ionisation, 88, 90

Ionium, 187, 212, 213, 226, 260

— Estimated period of, 188, 226

— and uranium X, Connection

between, 188



Joachimsthal mine, 20, 27, 210
Joly, Professor, 243-6



a8a



INDEX



K

Kelvin, Lord, 28, 52, 245
Kirchoff, 104

L

Lanthanum, 272

Law of proportionality, 164% 172,
210-2

— of radioactive change, 155
Lead and radium, Connection be-
tween, 21, 105, 208, 209

Life from the cosmical standpoint,
247-8

— of radio-elements, 127

— Period of average, 157
Light, Nature of, 51, 55

— Velocity of, 53, 81
Limitations of knowledge, 5, 8,

92, 238, 246-8

M

Macdonald laboratories of M'Gill
University, 124

Mackenzie, T. D., 182

Magnetic deflection of cathode-
rays, 76

Maintenance of radium, 168-88

— sun's energy, 33, 167, 246
Marckwald, Professor, 205, 206,

264
Mass of the electron, 77-80
Matter, Electron theory of, 151

— Unsolved problems of , 151, 278
Maxwell, J. Clerk, 220, 225, 249
McCoy, H. N., 174
Measurement of energy, 30, 98
Mental pictures, 152

Mercury, 118, 208

Mesothorium, 258-66

Minerals, Helium in radioactive,

133. 135

— Lead in radioactive, 21, 208

— Quantity of radium in, 22,

104, 172-8, 210

— Ratio between quantities of

uranium and its products in,

211
Minimum quantity of helium de-
tectable, 140
radium detectable, 23, 59



Molecules, 3, 150, 220
Monazite sand, 257, 265
Monopoly, Radium a scientific, 27

N
Negative and positive electricity.

Neon, 116

Newton, 53, 54

" Niton," 108

Nomenclature concerning atoms

and molecules, 147-50
Non - separable radio - elements,

212, 257, 268



Onnes, X., 134
Ouroboros, 249



Parent of ionium, 188

— of radium, 170-189
Penetration test of rays, 10, 41,

42, 43, no
Period of average life, 157

connection with range

of a-rays, 226

— half change, 160
Periodic law, 146
Perpetual motion, 29, 33, 82
Phosphorescence, see Fluores-
cence

Photographic effects of radio-
activity, n, 19, 25, 91, in
Physical impossibility, 38
Pitchblende, 20, 104, 177, 213,

258
Platino-cyanides, 24, 50, 178
Polonium, 21, 62, 187, 204-7, 213,

274
Positive and negative electricity.

7i
Prediction of origin of helium, 135

Proportionality, Law of, 164, 172,

210-2

Q
Quantity of helium detectable by
spectroscope, 140



INDEX



283



#■''



Quantity of helium in minerals,

135

— of radium in minerals, 21,

104, 172-8

R

Radiant matter, 73, 80
Radiation, Nature of, 51-6
Radiograph by y-rays, 44
Radio-tellurium, 205, 207
Radio-thorium, 258-68
Radium and uranium, connection
between, 173-88

— Average life of, 165, 174

— Chemical nature of, 21

— clock, 82

— Maintenance of, 168-88

— Substitute for, 214, 258, 265
Radium A, 123, 146, 194-202,

211-2

— B, 123, X46, 194-202

— C, 144, 194-202, 2 1 1-2, 226

— D, 212-3, 258, 261

— D, E, and F, 204-7

— F, Identity of, with polonium,

206-7
Ramsay, Sir William, 108, 114,

n6, 118, 134, 136, 165, 258
Ratio between uranium and its

products, 211
Rayleigh, Lord, 116
Rays of radioactive substances,

12, 39 et seq.
Recoil, Radioactive, 143-4
Recovery of radioactivity of

radium, 107, 121
Rowland, Professor, 222
Royds, T., 142
Rutherford, Professor, 41, 42, 63,

64. 83, 107, in, 119, 124. J 36,

142, 166, 174, 190, 258, 270



Scattering of o-particles, 89
Schuster, Professor, 223
Sidot's hexagonal blende, 50
Silk tassel experiment, 25, 47
Simplon Tunnel, Radium in rocks
of, 244


Spectroscope, 104, 126, 127, 133,
136, 140, 182

Spinthariscope, 59, 63

Stability of elements, 99, 217, 228-9

Standard, The International
radium, 23

Struggle for existence, 8, 250-5

Slruti, 82, 174,242-3

Substitute for radium, 214, 258,
265

Successive changes of radio ele-
ments, 102, 106, 123, 153, 162,
180-8, 194, 204-9

Sun's energy, Maintenance of, 33,
167, 245-7

Synthesis of atoms, 248, 278



Tait, 5, 28, 34, 36
Thallium, 208

Theories and facts of radio-
activity, 124, 150
Thomson, Sir J. J., 80
Thorium, 18, 129, 134, 135, 138-
40, 187, 191, 213, 256-71

— Active deposit of, 267-71

— disintegration series, 245, 256-

— Production of helium from,

138-40

— Ultimate product of, 262
Thorium A, 261, 270-1

— B, C, D, 226, 261

— Emanation, 261, 266-71
— - X, 261, 268

Total energy in radium, 166

in uranium, 234, 236

Transcendental character of radio-
activity, 37, 81
Transformers of energy, 94, 95
Transmutation, 18, 97, 98, 100,
237-40, 250

U

Ultimate product of thorium, 262

— products of radium, 105, 131,

171, 207, 208
Ultra-material velocities, 88
Unchanging character of elements,
99, 101, 228-9



284



INDEX



Unsolved problem of matter, 151,

278

Uranium, 9. I7» *34. *35» ioa,

173-89. «o8-9> 233-7. 259.
260, 266

— Average life of, 162, 174

— Production of helium from,

138-40

— and radium. Connection be-

tween, 173-88
Uranium I and II, 180, 212, 226,
260, 268

— X, 179-82, 188, 259

and ionium, Connection

between, 188



Vacua, High, 72, 74

Value, Gold, physical explanation
to account for the unchang-
ing. 217

— of radium, 25, 26, 215

Velocities, Ultra-material, 88



Velocity of cathode-ray particle,
81

— of light, 53, 81

Visible, Making the paths of rays,

90-1
Volume of helium in minerals, 135

— emanation in equilibrium with

radium, 114, 165

W

Wave theory of light, 55
Wkytlaw-Gray, R. t 118
Willemite, 50, 74, 76, 108, 109,

112
Wilson, C. T. R., 89
Writing by radium, 25



X-rays, 9, 42, 44, 53, 109

Z

Zinc sulphide, 50, no, 197, 269,



271, 275, 278



BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD



13



RETURN CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT
TO—* 202 Main Library


LOAN PERIOD 1

HOME USE


2 :


3


4


5 <


b


AU tOOKS MAY If RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS

Rofftowols md Roclioroos inoy do ntodo 4 ooys prior fo fno ooo oofo*
looks may bo ionowod by coiling 442-3409


DUE AS STAMPED B&O W


MAR 011994


*


,1^3-1


FORM NO. DD6



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
BERKELEY, CA 94720



et



U.C. BERKELEY LIBRARIES


C021A00A0?


