The Justification of the Good: An Essay on Moral Philosophy (Vladimir Solovyov (Nathalie A. Duddington, trans.), 1918)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/justificationofg0000solo). Solovyov's systematic moral philosophy — the good as the absolute ground of ethics.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tfbs  4s

£  A-O/,0fS


A

Vbb


NUNC  COGNOSCO  EX  PARTE

THOMAS  J .  BATA  LI  BRARY
TRENT  UNIVERSITY


CONSTABLE’S  RUSSIAN  LIBRARY  UNDER  THE  EDITORSHIP  OF

STEPHEN  GRAHAM


THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


CONSTABLE'S  RUSSIAN  LIBRARY

EDITED  WITH  INTRODUCTIONS
By  STEPHEN  GRAHAM.


THE  SWEET-SCENTED  NAME

By  Fedor  Sologub

WAR  AND  CHRISTIANITY:

THREE  CONVERSATIONS

By  Vladimir  Solovyof

THE  WAY  OF  THE  CROSS

By  V.  Doroshevitch

A  SLAV  SOUL,  AND  OTHER  STORIES

By  Alexander  Kuprin

THE  EMIGRANT

By  L.  F.  Dostoieffskaya


THE  REPUBLIC  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  CROSS,
AND  OTHER  STORIES

By  Valery  Brussof


THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

By  Vladimir  Solovyof


THE  JUSTIFICATION
OF  THE  GOOD

AN  ESSAY  ON  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY

By  VLADIMIR  SOLOVYOF


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  RUSSIAN

By  NATHALIE  A.  DUDDINGTON,  M.A.

WITH  A  NOTE

By  STEPHEN  GRAHAM


LONDON

CONSTABLE  AND  COMPANY  LTD.


First  Published  1918.


DEDICATED  TO


MY  FATHER,  THE  HISTORIAN

SERGEY  MIHAILOVITCH  SOLOVYOF

AND  TO  MY  GRANDFATHER,  THE  PRIEST

MIHAIL  VASSILYEVITCH  SOLOVYOF

WITH  A  LIVING  AND  GRATEFUL  RECOGNITION


OF  AN  ETERNAL  BOND


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2019  with  funding  from
Kahle/Austin  Foundation


https://archive.org/details/justificationofgOOOOsolo


EDITOR’S  NOTE

It  may  be  of  use  to  the  reader  approaching  Solovyof  for  the  first
time  if  I  state  in  an  elementary  form  the  ideas  to  which  the
Russian  philosopher  specially  consecrated  his  life  and  energies.
They  were  :

The  universal  Church,  the  idea  of  the  unity  of  Christendom,
and  beyond  that  ultimately  the  conscious  unity  of  mankind.
Not  a  world-republic,  however,  but  a  world-church.

The  evolution  of  the  God-man,  not  the  superman  with  his
greater  earth-sense  and  fierceness,  but  the  God-man  with  his
greater  heaven-sense,  mystical  sense.

The  Eternal  Feminine,  a  characterisation  of  all  humanity  at
one  in  the  mystical  body  of  the  Church.  Woman  as  the  final
expression  of  the  material  world  in  its  inward  passivity.

Love  as  the  highest  revelation,  the  gleam  of  another  world
upon  our  ordinary  existence.  Love,  therefore,  as  the  proof  of
immortality,  the  guerdon  and  sense  of  it.

Sancta  Sophia,  the  Heavenly  Wisdom,  the  grand  final  unity
of  praise,  the  wall  of  the  city  of  God.

The  Justification  of  the  Good  is  the  book  in  which  Solovyof
elucidates  the  laws  of  the  higher  idealism.  It  is  a  classical  work
of  the  utmost  importance  in  Russian  studies.  All  that  is  positive
in  modern  Russian  thought  springs  from  the  teaching  of  Solovyof.
Time  is  only  now  coming  abreast  of  him  and  he  appears  especially
as  the  prophet  of  this  era,  with  his  vision  of  united  humanity  and
the  realisation  of  the  kingdom.  All  students  of  thought  and
religion,  both  here  and  in  America,  ought  to  feel  indebted  to

vii


viii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Mrs.  Duddington  for  the  brilliant  translation  she  has  done.
Tolstoy  we  know  ;  Dostoievsky  we  know  ;  and  now  comes  a
new  force  into  our  life,  Solovyof,  the  greatest  of  the  three.
Through  Solovyof  we  shall  see  Russia  better  and  Europe  better.

STEPHEN  GRAHAM.


SOLOVYOF’S

PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION


The  object  of  this  book  is  to  show  the  good  as  truth  and  righteous¬
ness. ,  that  is,  as  the  only  right  and  consistent  way  of  life  in  all
things  and  to  the  end,  for  all  who  decide  to  follow  it.  I  mean  the
Good  as  such  ;  it  alone  justifies  itself  and  justifies  our  confidence
in  it.  And  it  is  not  for  nothing  that  before  the  open  grave,
when  all  else  has  obviously  failed,  we  call  to  this  essential  Good
and  say,  “  Blessed  art  Thou,  О  Lord,  for  Thou  hast  taught  us
Thy  justification.”

In  the  individual,  national,  and  historical  life  of  humanity,  the
Good  justifies  itself  by  its  own  good  and  right  ways.  A  moral
philosophy,  true  to  the  Good,  having  discovered  these  ways  in  the
past,  indicates  them  to  the  present  for  the  future.

When,  in  setting  out  on  a  journey,  you  take  up  a  guide-book ,
you  seek  in  it  nothing  but  true,  complete,  and  clear  directions  with
regard  to  the  route  chosen.  This  book  will  not  persuade  you  to
go  to  Italy  or  Switzerland  if  you  have  decided  to  go  to  Siberia,
nor  will  it  provide  you  with  money  to  traverse  the  oceans  if  you
can  only  pay  the  fare  down  to  the  Black  Sea.

Moral  philosophy  is  no  more  than  a  systematic  guide  to  the
right  way  of  life’s  journey  for  men  and  nations  ;  the  author  is
only  responsible  for  his  directions  being  correct,  complete,  and
coherent.  But  no  exposition  of  the  moral  norms  of  the  con¬
ditions,  i.e.  for  attaining  the  true  purpose  of  life— can  have  any
meaning  for  the  man  who  consciously  puts  before  him  an  utterly


IX


X  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

different  aim.  To  indicate  the  necessary  stations  on  the  road  to
the  better,  when  the  worse  has  been  definitely  chosen,  is  not
merely  a  useless  but  an  annoying  and  even  insulting  thing  to  do,
for  it  brings  the  bad  choice  back  to  one’s  mind,  especially  when
in  our  inmost  heart  the  choice  is  unconsciously  and  in  spite  of
ourselves  felt  to  be  both  bad  and  irrevocable.

I  have  not  the  slightest  intention  of  preaching  virtue  and
denouncing  vice  ;  I  consider  this  to  be  both  an  idle  and  an  immoral
occupation  for  a  simple  mortal,  since  it  presupposes  an  unjust  and
proud  claim  to  be  better  than  other  people.  What  matters,  from
the  point  of  view  of  moral  philosophy,  are  not  the  particular  devia¬
tions  from  the  right  way,  however  great  they  may  be,  but  only
the  general,  definite,  and  decisive  choice  between  two  moral  paths,
a  choice  made  with  full  deliberation.  The  question  may  be  asked
whether  every  man  makes  such  a  choice.  It  certainly  is  not  made
by  people  who  die  in  their  infancy,  and,  so  far  as  clear  conscious¬
ness  of  self  is  concerned,  many  grown-up  people  are  not  far
removed  from  babes.  Moreover,  it  should  be  noted  that  even
when  conscious  choice  has  been  made,  it  cannot  be  observed  from
outside.  The  distinction  of  principle  between  the  two  paths  has
no  empirical  definiteness ,  and  cannot  be  practically  defined.  I  have
seen  many  strange  and  wondrous  things,  but  two  objects  have  I
never  come  across  in  nature  :  a  man  who  has  finally  attained
perfect  righteousness,  and  a  man  who  has  finally  become  utterly
evil.  And  all  the  pseudo-mystical  cant  based  upon  external  and
practically  applicable  divisions  of  humanity  into  the  sheep  and
the  goats,  the  regenerate  and  the  unregenerate,  the  saved  and  the
damned,  simply  reminds  me  of  the  frank  words  of  the  miller _

Long  have  I  travelled
And  much  have  I  seen,

But  copper  spurs  on  water  pails
Saw  I  never  ne’en.

At  the  same  time  I  think  of  the  lectures  I  heard  long  ago
at  the  University  on  embryology  and  zoology  of  the  inverte-


PREFACE


xi


brate.  These  lectures  enabled  me,  among  other  things,  to  form  a
definite  conception  of  the  two  well-known  truths,  namely,  that
at  the  lowest  stages  of  organic  life  no  one  but  a  learned  biologist,
and  sometimes  not  even  he,  can  distinguish  the  vegetable  from  the
animal  forms,  and  that  at  the  early  stages  of  the  intra-uterine  life
only  a  learned  embryologist  can  tell,  and  not  always  with  certainty,
the  embryo  of  man  from  the  embryo  of  some  other  creature,  often
of  a  distinctly  unpleasant  one.  It  is  the  same  with  the  history  of
humanity  and  with  the  moral  world.  At  the  early  stages  the  two
paths  are  very  close  together,  and  outwardly  indistinguishable.

But  why,  it  will  be  asked,  do  I  speak  with  regard  to  the  moral
world,  of  the  choice  between  two  paths  only  ?  The  reason  is,  that
in  spite  of  all  the  multiplicity  of  the  forms  and  expressions  or
life,  one  path  only  leads  to  the  life  that  we  hope  for  and  renders  it
eternal.  All  other  paths,  which  at  first  seem  so  like  it,  lead  in  the
opposite  direction,  fatally  draw  farther  and  farther  away  from  it,
and  finally  become  merged  together  in  the  one  path  of  eternal
death.

In  addition  to  these  two  paths  that  differ  in  principle,  some
thinkers  try  to  discover  a  third  path,  which  is  neither  good  nor
bad,  but  natural  or  animal.  Its  supreme  practical  principle  is  best
expressed  by  a  German  aphorism,  which,  however,  was  unknown
both  to  Kant  and  to  Hegel  :  Jedes  Tierchen  hat  sein  Plaisirchen.
This  formula  expresses  an  unquestionable  truth,  and  only  stands  in
need  of  amplification  by  another  truth,  equally  indisputable  :  Allen
Tieren  fatal  1st  z и  krepiren.  And  when  this  necessary  addition
is  made,  the  third  path — that  of  animality  made  into  a  principle —
is  seen  to  be  reduced  to  the  second  path  of  death.1  It  is  impos¬
sible  for  man  to  avoid  the  dilemma,  the  final  choice  between  the
two  paths — of  good  and  of  evil.  Suppose,  indeed,  we  decide  to  take
the  third,  the  animal  path,  which  is  neither  good  nor  bad,  but

1  The  pseudo-superhuman  path,  thrown  into  vivid  light  by  the  madness  of  the
unhappy  Nietzsche,  comes  to  the  same  thing.  See  below,  Preface  to  the  First
Edition.


ХІІ  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

merely  natural.  It  is  natural  for  animals,  just  because  animals  do
not  decide  anything,  do  not  choose  between  this  path  and  any
other,  but  passively  follow  the  only  one  upon  which  they  have
been  placed  by  a  will  foreign  to  them.  But  when  man  actively
decides  to  follow  the  path  of  moral  passivity ,  he  is  clearly  guilty  of
falsehood,  wrong,  and  sin,  and  is  obviously  entering  not  upon  the
animal  path,  but  upon  that  of  the  two  human  paths  which  proves
in  the  end,  if  not  at  the  beginning,  to  be  the  path  of  eternal  evil
and  death.  It  is  indeed  easy  to  see  from  the  first  that  it  is  worse
than  the  animal  path.  Our  younger  brothers  are  deprived  of
reason,  but  they  undoubtedly  possess  an  inner  sense  ;  and  although
they  cannot  consciously  condemn  and  be  ashamed  of  their  nature
and  its  bad,  mortal  way,  they  obviously  suffer  from  it ;  they  long
for  something  better  which  they  do  not  know  but  which  they
dimly  feel.  This  truth,  once  powerfully  expressed  by  St.  Paul
(Rom.  viii.  19-23),  and  less  powerfully  repeated  by  Schopen¬
hauer,  is  entirely  confirmed  by  observation.  Never  does  a  human
face  bear  the  expression  of  that  profound,  hopeless  melancholy
which,  for  no  apparent  reason,  overshadows  sometimes  the  faces
of  animals.  It  is  impossible  for  man  to  stop  at  the  animal  self-
satisfaction,  if  only  because  animals  are  not  in  the  least  self-satisfied.
A  conscious  human  being  cannot  be  an  animal,  and,  whether  he  will
or  no,  he  must  choose  between  two  paths.  He  must  either  become
higher  and  better  than  his  material  nature,  or  become  lower  and
worse  than  the  animal.  And  the  essentially  human  attribute
which  man  cannot  be  deprived  of  consists  not  in  the  fact  that  he
becomes  this  or  that,  but  in  the  fact  that  he  becomes.  Man  gains
nothing  by  slandering  his  younger  brothers  and  falsely  describing
as  animal  and  natural  the  path  of  diabolical  persistence  in  the
wrong — the  path  which  he  himself  has  chosen,  and  which  is
opposed  both  to  life  and  to  nature.


What  I  most  desired  to  show  in  this  book  is  the  manner  in
which  the  one  way  of  the  Good,  while  remaining  true  to  itself,


PREFACE


хш


and,  consequently,  justifying  itself,  grows  in  completeness  and
definiteness  as  the  conditions  of  the  historical  and  natural  environ¬
ment  become  more  complex.  The  chief  claim  of  my  theory  is  to
establish  in  and  through  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality
the  complete  inner  connection  between  true  religion  and  sound
politics.  It  is  a  perfectly  harmless  claim,  since  true  religion
cannot  force  itself  upon  any  one,  and  politics  are  free  to  be  as
unsound  as  they  like — at  their  own  risk,  of  course.  At  the  same
time  moral  philosophy  makes  no  attempt  to  guide  particular
individuals  by  laying  down  any  external  and  absolutely  definite
rules  of  conduct.  If  any  passage  in  the  book  should  strike  the
reader  as  ‘  moralising  ’  he  will  find  that  either  he  has  misunder¬
stood  my  meaning  or  that  I  did  not  express  myself  with  sufficient
clearness.

But  I  have  done  my  best  to  be  clear.  While  preparing  this
second  edition  I  read  the  book  over  five  times  in  the  course  of
nine  months,  every  time  making  fresh  additions,  both  small  and
great,  by  way  of  explanation.  Many  defects  of  exposition  still
remain,  but  I  hope  they  are  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  lay  me
open  to  the  menace,  “  Cursed  is  he  who  doeth  the  work  of  God
with  negligence.”

Whilst  I  was  engaged  in  writing  this  book  I  sometimes  ex¬
perienced  moral  benefit  from  it ;  perhaps  this  is  an  indication  that
the  book  will  not  be  altogether  useless  for  the  reader  also.  If  this
should  be  the  case  it  will  be  enough  to  justify  this  ‘justification
of  the  good.’

VLADIMIR  SOLOVYOF.


Moscow,  December  8,  1898.


SOLOVYOF’S

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION


A  PRELIMINARY  CONCEPTION  OF  THE  MORAL  MEANING

OF  LIFE

Is  there  any  meaning  in  life  ?  If  there  is,  is  that  meaning  moral
in  character,  and  is  its  root  in  the  moral  sphere  ?  In  what  does
it  consist,  and  what  is  the  true  and  complete  definition  of  it  ?
These  questions  cannot  be  avoided,  and  there  is  no  agreement
with  regard  to  them  in  modern  consciousness.  Some  thinkers
deny  all  meaning  to  life,  others  maintain  that  the  meaning  of  life
has  nothing  to  do  with  morality,  and  in  no  way  depends  upon  our
right  or  good  relation  to  God,  men,  and  the  world  as  a  whole  ;
the  third  admit  the  importance  of  the  moral  norms  for  life,  but
give  conflicting  definitions  of  them,  which  stand  in  need  of  analysis
and  criticism.

Such  analysis  cannot  in  any  case  be  dismissed  as  unnecessary.
At  the  present  stage  of  human  consciousness  the  few  who  already
possess  a  firm  and  final  solution  of  the  problem  of  life  for  themselves
must  justify  it  for  others.  An  intellect  which  has  overcome  its
own  doubts  does  not  render  the  heart  indifferent  to  the  delusions
of  others.


I

Some  of  those  who  deny  the  meaning  of  life  are  in  earnest
about  it,  and  end  by  taking  the  practical  step  of  committing
suicide.  Others  are  not  in  earnest,  and  deny  the  meaning  of  life
solely  by  means  of  arguments  and  pseudo-philosophic  systems.  I


xv


xvi  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

am  certainly  not  opposed  to  arguments  and  systems,  but  I  am
referring  to  men  who  regard  their  philosophising  as  a  thing  on  its
own  account ,  which  does  not  bind  them  to  any  concrete  actions  or
demand  any  practical  realisation.  These  men  and  their  intellectual
exercises  cannot  be  taken  seriously.  Truths  like  the  judgment
that  the  angles  of  a  triangle  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles
remain  true  quite  independently  of  the  person  who  utters  them
and  of  the  life  he  leads  ;  but  a  pessimistic  valuation  of  life  is  not
a  mathematical  truth — it  necessarily  includes  the  personal,  sub¬
jective  attitude  to  life.  When  the  theoretical  pessimist  affirms
as  a  real  objective  truth  that  life  is  evil  and  painful,  he  thereby
expresses  his  conviction  that  this  is  so  for  every  one ,  including
himself.  In  that  case,  why  does  he  go  on  living  and  enjoying
the  evil  of  life  as  though  it  were  a  good  ?  It  is  sometimes  urged
that  instinct  compels  us  to  live  in  spite  of  the  rational  conviction
that  life  is  not  worth  living.  But  this  appeal  to  instinct  is  vain.
Instinct  is  not  an  external  mechanically  compelling  force,  but  is
an  inner  condition  which  prompts  every  living  creature  to  seek
certain  states  which  appear  to  it  to  be  pleasant  or  desirable.  The
fact  that  in  virtue  of  his  instinct  the  pessimist  finds  pleasure  in
life  seems  to  undermine  the  basis  of  his  pseudo-rational  conviction
that  life  is  evil  and  painful.  He  may  say  that  the  pleasures  of  life
are  illusory.  What,  however,  can  be  the  meaning  of  these  words
from  his  point  of  view  ?  If  one  recognises  the  positive  meaning
of  life  many  things  may  be  dismissed  as  illusory  in  comparison,  as
drawing  our  attention  away  from  the  chief  thing.  St.  Paul  could
say  that  by  comparison  with  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is
won  through  a  life  of  renunciation,  all  carnal  affections  and
pleasures  are  as  dung  and  rubbish  in  his  eyes.  But  a  pessimist
who  does  not  believe  in  a  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  attaches  no
positive  significance  to  a  life  of  renunciation,  can  have  no  standard
for  distinguishing  illusion  from  truth.

From  this  point  of  view  everything  is  reduced  to  the  state  of
pleasure  or  of  pain  which  is  being  actually  experienced  ;  but  no


PREFACE


XVII


pleasure  while  it  is  being  experienced  can  be  an  illusion.  The
only  way  to  justify  pessimism  on  this  low  ground  is  childishly  to
count  the  number  of  pleasures  and  pains  in  human  life,  assuming
all  the  time  that  the  latter  are  more  numerous  than  the  former,
and  that,  therefore,  life  is  not  worth  living.  This  calculus  of
happiness  could  only  have  meaning  if  arithmetical  sums  of  pleasures
and  pains  actually  existed,  or  if  the  arithmetical  difference  between
them  could  itself  become  a  sensation  ;  since,  however,  in  actual
reality  sensations  exist  only  in  the  concrete,  it  is  as  absurd  to
reckon  them  in  abstract  figures  as  to  shoot  at  a  stone  fortress  with
a  cardboard  gun.  If  the  only  motive  for  continuing  to  live  is  to
be  found  in  the  surplus  of  the  pleasurable  over  the  painful  sensa¬
tions,  then  for  the  vast  majority  of  men  this  surplus  is  a  fact :
men  live  and  find  that  life  is  worth  living.  With  them,  no  doubt,
must  be  classed  such  theoreticians  of  pessimism  who  talk  of  the
advantages  of  non-existence,  but  in  reality  prefer  any  kind  of
existence.  Their  arithmetic  of  despair  is  merely  a  play  of  mind
which  they  themselves  contradict,  finding,  in  truth,  more  pleasure
than  pain  in  life,  and  admitting  that  it  is  worth  living  to  the  end.
From  comparing  their  theory  with  their  practice  one  can  only
conclude  that  life  has  a  meaning  and  that  they  involuntarily  sub¬
mit  to  it,  but  that  their  intellect  is  not  strong  enough  to  grasp
that  meaning.

Pessimists  who  are  in  earnest  and  commit  suicide  also  involun¬
tarily  prove  that  life  has  a  meaning.  I  am  thinking  of  conscious
and  self-possessed  suicides,  who  kill  themselves  because  of  disap¬
pointment  or  despair.  They  supposed  that  life  had  a  certain
meaning  which  made  it  worth  living,  but  became  convinced  that
that  meaning  did  not  hold  good.  Unwilling  to  submit  passively
and  unconsciously — as  the  theoretical  pessimists  do — to  a  different
and  unknown  meaning,  they  take  their  own  life.  This  shows,  no
doubt,  that  they  have  a  stronger  will  than  the  former,  but  proves
nothing  as  against  the  meaning  of  life.  These  men  failed  to
discover  it,  but  what  did  they  seek  it  in  ?  There  are  two  types

b


xviii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  passionate  men  among  them  :  the  passion  of  some  is  purely
personal  and  selfish  (Romeo,  Werther),  that  of  others  is  connected
with  some  general  interest  which,  however,  they  separate  from
the  meaning  of  existence  as  a  whole  (Cleopatra,  Cato  of  Utica).
Neither  the  first  nor  the  second  care  to  know  the  meaning  of
universal  life,  although  the  meaning  of  their,  own  existence
depends  upon  it.  Romeo  killed  himself  because  he  could  not
have  Juliet.  The  meaning  of  life  for  him  was  to  possess  that
woman.  If,  however,  this  really  were  the  meaning  of  life,  it
would  be  wholly  irrational.  In  addition  to  Romeo  forty  thousand
gentlemen  might  find  the  meaning  of  their  life  in  possessing  that
same  Juliet,  so  that  this  supposed  meaning  would  forty  thousand
times  contradict  itself.  Allowing  for  difference  in  detail,  we  find
the  same  thing  at  the  bottom  of  every  suicide  :  life  is  not  what  in
my  opinion  it  ought  to  be,  therefore  life  is  senseless  and  is  not  worth
living.  The  absence  of  correspondence  between  the  arbitrary
demands  of  a  passionate  nature  and  the  reality  is  taken  to  be  the
result  of  some  hostile  fate,  terrible  and  senseless,  and  a  man  kills
himself  rather  than  submit  to  this  blind  force.  It  is  the  same  thing
with  persons  belonging  to  the  second  type.  The  queen  of  Egypt,
conquered  by  the  world-wide  power  of  Rome,  would  not  take  part
in  the  conqueror’s  triumph,  and  killed  herself  by  means  of  a
poisonous  snake.  Horace,  a  Roman,  called  her  a  great  woman  for
doing  it,  and  no  one  would  deny  that  there  is  a  grandeur  about
her  death.  But  if  Cleopatra  was  looking  to  her  own  victory  as
to  a  thing  that  ought  to  be,  and  regarded  the  victory  of  Rome  as
simply  the  senseless  triumph  of  an  irrational  force,  she,  too,  took
her  own  blindness  to  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  the  truth
of  the  whole.

The  meaning  of  life  obviously  cannot  coincide  with  the
arbitrary  and  changeable  demands  of  each  of  the  innumerable
human  entities.  If  it  did,  it  would  be  non-meaning — that  is,  it
would  not  exist  at  all.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  a  disappointed
and  despairing  suicide  was  not  disappointed  in  and  despaired  of  the


PREFACE


XIX


meaning  of  life,  but,  on  the  contrary,  of  his  hope  that  life  might
be  meaningless.  He  had  hoped  that  life  would  go  in  the  way  he
wanted  it  to,  that  it  would  always  and  in  everything  directly  satisfy
his  blind  passions  and  arbitrary  whims,  i.e.  that  it  would  be  sense¬
less — of  that  he  was  disappointed  and  found  that  life  was  not  worth
living.  But  the  very  fact  of  his  being  disappointed  at  the  world
not  being  meaningless  proves  that  there  is  a  meaning  in  it.  This
meaning,  which  the  man  recognises  in  spite  of  himself,  may  be
unbearable  to  him  ;  instead  of  understanding  it  he  may  only  repine
against  some  one  and  call  reality  by  the  name  of  a  ‘  hostile  fate,’
but  this  does  not  alter  the  case.  The  meaning  of  life  is  simply
confirmed  by  the  fatal  failure  of  those  who  reject  it  :  some  of  them
(the  theoretic  pessimists)  must  live  unworthily ,  in  contradiction  to
their  own  preaching,  and  others  (the  practical  pessimists  or  the
suicides)  in  denying  the  meaning  of  life  have  actually  to  deny
their  own  existence.  Life  clearly  must  have  a  meaning,  since
those  who  deny  it  inevitably  negate  themselves,  some  by  their
unworthy  existence,  and  others  by  their  violent  death.

II

“  The  meaning  of  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  aesthetic  aspect  of
it,  in  what  is  strong,  majestic,  beautiful.  To  devote  ourselves  to
this  aspect  of  life,  to  preserve  and  strengthen  it  in  ourselves  and  in
others,  to  make  it  predominant  and  develop  it  further  till  super¬
human  greatness  and  new  purest  beauty  is  attained,  this  is  the
end  and  the  meaning  of  our  existence.”  This  view,  associated  with
the  name  of  the  gifted  and  unhappy  Nietzsche,  has  now  become  the
fashionable  philosophy  in  the  place  of  the  pessimism  that  has  been
popular  in  recent  years.  Unlike  the  latter,  it  does  not  require
any  criticism  imported  from  outside,  but  can  be  disproved  on  its
own  grounds.  Let  it  be  granted  that  the  meaning  of  life  is  to  be
found  in  strength  and  beauty.  But,  however  much  we  may
devote  ourselves  to  the  aesthetic  cult,  we  shall  find  in  it  no  protec-


XX  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

tion,  nor  the  least  hope  of  protection,  against  the  general  and
inevitable  fact  which  destroys  this  supposed  independence  of
strength  and  beauty,  and  renders  void  the  divine  and  absolute
character  they  are  alleged  to  possess.  I  mean  the  fact  that
the  end  of  all  earthly  strength  is  impotence,  and  the  end  of  all
earthly  beauty  is  ugliness.

When  we  speak  of  strength,  grandeur,  and  beauty  there  rises
to  the  mind  of  every  one,  beginning  with  the  Russian  provincial
schoolmaster  (see  Gogol’s  Inspector-  General )  and  ending  with
Nietzsche  himself,  one  and  the  same  image,  as  the  most  perfect
historical  embodiment  of  all  these  aesthetic  qualities  taken  together.
This  instance  is  sufficient.

“And  it  happened  after  that  Alexander,  son  of  Philip,  the
Macedonian,  who  came  out  of  the  land  of  Chittim,  had  smitten
Darius,  King  of  the  Persians  and  Medes,  that  he  reigned  in  his
stead,  the  first  over  Greece,  and  made  many  wars,  and  won  many
strongholds,  and  slew  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  went  through  to
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  took  spoils  of  many  nations,  insomuch
that  the  earth  was  quiet  before  him,  whereupon  he  was  exalted,  and
his  heart  was  lifted  up.  And  he  gathered  a  mighty  strong  host,
and  ruled  over  countries,  and  nations,  and  kings,  who  became
tributaries  unto  him.  And  after  these  things  he  fell  sick,  and
perceived  that  he  should  die  ”  (Book  I.  of  the  Maccabees).

Is  strength  powerless  before  death  really  strength  ?  Is  a
decomposing  body  a  thing  of  beauty  ?  The  ancient  pattern  of
beauty  and  of  strength  died  and  decayed  like  the  weakest  and  most
hideous  of  creatures,  and  the  modern  worshipper  of  beauty  and  of
strength  became  in  his  lifetime  a  mental  corpse.  Why  is  it  that
the  first  was  not  saved  by  his  strength  and  beauty,  and  the  second
by  his  cult  of  it  ?  No  one  can  worship  a  deity  which  saves
neither  those  in  whom  it  is  incarnate,  nor  those  who  worship  it.

In  his  last  works  the  unhappy  Nietzsche  turned  his  views  into
a  furious  weapon  against  Christianity.  In  doing  so  he  showed
a  low  level  of  understanding  befitting  French  free-thinkers  of


PREFACE


xxi


the  eighteenth  century  rather  than  modern  German  savants.  He
looked  upon  Christianity  as  belonging  exclusively  to  the  lower
classes,  and  was  not  even  aware  of  the  simple  fact  that  the  Gospel
was  from  the  first  received  not  as  a  doubtful  call  to  rebellion  but
as  a  joyful  and  certain  message  of  sure  salvation ,  that  the  whole
force  of  the  new  religion  lay  in  the  fact  that  it  was  founded  by
‘  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept,’  who  had  risen  from  the  dead,
and,  as  they  firmly  believed,  secured  eternal  life  to  His  followers.
To  speak  of  slaves  and  pariahs  in  this  connection  is  irrelevant.
Social  distinctions  mean  nothing  when  it  is  a  question  of  death
and  resurrection.  Do  not  ‘  the  gentle  ’  die  as  well  as  ‘  the  simple’  ?
Were  not  Sulla  the  Roman  aristocrat  and  dictator,  Antioch  the
king  of  Syria,  and  Herod  the  king  of  Judaea  eaten  up  by  worms
while  still  alive  ?  The  religion  of  salvation  cannot  be  the  religion
for  slaves  and  ‘  Chandals  ’  alone — it  is  the  religion  for  all,  since  all
need  salvation.  Before  beginning  to  preach  so  furiously  against
equality,  one  ought  to  abolish  the  chief  equaliser — death.

Nietzsche’s  polemic  against  Christianity  is  remarkably  shallow,
and  his  pretension  to  be  c  antichrist  ’  would  be  extremely  comical
had  it  not  ended  in  such  tragedy.1

The  cult  of  natural  strength  and  beauty  is  not  directly  opposed
to  Christianity,  and  it  is  not  Christianity  that  makes  it  void,  but
its  own  inherent  weakness.  Christianity  does  not  by  any  means
reject  strength  and  beauty,  but  it  is  not  satisfied  with  the  strength
of  a  dying  invalid  or  the  beauty  of  a  decomposing  corpse.  Chris¬
tianity  has  never  preached  hostility  to  or  contempt  for  strength,
grandeur,  or  beauty  as  such.  All  Christian  souls,  beginning  with
the  first  of  them,  rejoiced  at  having  had  revealed  to  them  the  in¬
finite  source  of  all  that  is  truly  strong  and  beautiful,  and  at  being
saved  by  it  from  subjection  to  the  false  power  and  grandeur  of  the
powerless  and  unlovely  elements  of  the  world.  “  My  soul  doth
magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  hath  rejoiced  in  God  my  Saviour.

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  after  passing  through  a  mania  of  greatness  this  un¬
fortunate  writer  fell  into  complete  idiocy.


xxii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

.  .  .  For  He  that  is  mighty  hath  done  to  me  great  things  ;  and  holy
is  His  name.  .  .  .  He  hath  shewed  strength  with  his  arm  ;  He
hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  hearts.  He
hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  exalted  them  of
low  degree.  He  hath  filled  the  hungry  with  good  things,  and
the  rich  He  hath  sent  empty  away.”  It  is  obvious  that  the  con¬
tempt  here  is  only  for  the  false,  imaginary  strength  and  wealth,
and  that  humility  is  not  the  absolute  ideal  or  the  final  end  but
only  the  necessary  and  the  right  way  to  heights  unattainable  to
the  proud.

Strength  and  beauty  are  divine,  but  not  in  themselves  :  there
is  a  strong  and  beautiful  Deity  whose  strength  is  never  exhausted
and  whose  beauty  never  dies,  for  in  Him  strength  and  beauty  are
inseparable  from  the  good.

No  one  worships  impotence  and  ugliness  ;  but  some  believe
in  the  eternal  strength  and  beauty  which  are  conditioned  by  the
good  and  which  actually  liberate  their  bearers  and  worshippers
from  the  power  of  death  and  corruption,  while  others  extol  strength
and  beauty  taken  in  the  abstract  and  fictitious.  The  first
doctrine  may  be  waiting  for  its  final  victory  in  the  future,  but
this  does  not  make  things  any  better  for  the  second  ;  it  is  con¬
quered  already,  it  is  always  being  conquered — it  dies  with  every
death  and  is  buried  in  all  the  cemeteries.


Ill

The  pessimism  of  false  philosophers  and  of  genuine  suicides
inevitably  leads  us  to  recognise  that  life  has  a  meaning.  The
cult  of  strength  and  beauty  inevitably  shows  that  that  meaning
is  not  to  be  found  in  strength  and  beauty  as  such,  but  only  as
conditioned  by  the  triumphant  good.  The  meaning  of  life  is  in
the  good  ;  but  this  opens  the  way  for  new  errors  in  the  definition
of  what  precisely  we  are  to  understand  by  the  good.

At  first  sight  there  appears  to  be  a  sure  and  simple  way  of


PREFACE


XXI 11


avoiding  any  errors  in  this  connection.  If,  it  will  be  urged,  the
meaning  of  life  is  the  good,  it  has  revealed  itself  to  us  already  and
does  not  wait  for  any  definition  on  our  part.  All  we  have  to  do
is  to  accept  it  with  love  and  humility,  and  subordinate  to  it  our
existence  and  our  individuality,  in  order  to  make  them  rational.
The  universal  meaning  of  life  or  the  inner  relation  of  separate
entities  to  the  great  whole  cannot  have  been  invented  by  us  ;  it
was  given  from  the  first.  The  firm  foundations  of  the  family
have  been  laid  down  from  all  eternity  ;  the  family  by  a  living,
personal  bond  connects  the  present  with  the  past  and  the  future  ;
the  fatherland  widens  our  mind  and  gives  it  a  share  in  the  glorious
traditions  and  aspirations  of  the  soul  of  the  nation  ;  the  Church,
by  connecting  both  our  personal  and  our  national  life  with  what
is  absolute  and  eternal,  finally  liberates  us  from  the  limitations  of
a  cramped  existence.  What,  then,  is  there  to  trouble  about  ?
Live  in  the  life  of  the  whole,  widen  on  all  sides  the  limits  of  your
small  self,  ‘take  to  heart’  the  interests  of  others  and  the  interest
of  all,  be  a  good  member  of  the  family,  a  zealous  patriot,  a  loyal
son  of  the  Church,  and  you  will  know  the  good  meaning  of  life
in  practice  and  have  no  need  to  seek  for  it  and  look  for  its  defini¬
tion.  There  is  an  element  of  truth  in  this  view,  but  it  is  only
the  beginning  of  truth.  It  is  impossible  to  stop  at  this — the  case
is  not  so  simple  as  it  looks.

Had  life  with  its  good  meaning  assumed  at  once,  from  all
eternity,  one  unchanging  and  abiding  form,  then  there  would
certainly  be  nothing  to  trouble  about.  There  would  be  no  prob¬
lem  for  the  intellect,  but  only  a  question  for  the  will — to  accept
or  unconditionally  to  reject  that  which  has  been  unconditionally
given.  This  was  precisely,  as  I  understand  it,  the  position  of  one
of  the  spirits  of  light  in  the  first  act  of  the  creation  of  the  world.
But  our  human  position  is  less  fateful  and  more  complex.  We
know  that  the  historical  forms  of  the  Good  which  are  given  to  us
do  not  form  such  a  unity  that  we  could  either  accept  or  reject
them  as  a  whole.  We  know  also  that  these  forms  and  principles


xxiv  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  life  did  not  drop  down  ready  made  from  heaven  but  were
developed  in  time  and  on  earth.  And  knowing  that  they  had
become  what  they  are,  we  have  no  rational  ground  whatever  for
affirming  that  they  are  finally  and  wholly  fixed,  and  that  what  is
given  at  the  moment  is  entirely  completed  and  ended.  But  if
it  is  not  ended,  it  is  for  us  to  carry  on  the  work.  In  the
times  prior  to  ours  the  higher  forms  of  life  —  now  the  holy
heritage  of  the  ages — did  not  come  to  be  of  themselves  but  were
evolved  through  men,  through  their  thought  and  action,  through
their  intellectual  and  moral  work.  Since  the  historical  form  of
the  eternal  good  is  not  one  and  unchanging,  the  choice  has  to  be
made  between  many  different  things,  and  this  cannot  be  done
without  the  critical  work  of  thought.  It  must  have  been
ordained  by  God  Himself  that  man  should  have  no  external
support,  no  pillow  for  his  reason  and  conscience  to  rest  on,  but
should  ever  be  awake  and  standing  on  his  own  legs.  “What  is  man,
that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  and  the  son  of  man,  that  Thou
visitest  him  ?  ”  Piety  itself  forbids  us  to  despise  in  ourselves  and
in  others  that  which  God  Himself  respects,  for  the  sake  of  which
He  remembers  and  visits  us— namely,  the  inner,  unique,  and
invaluable  dignity  of  man’s  reason  and  conscience.  And  those
who  are  guilty  of  such  contempt  and  seek  to  replace  the  inner
standard  of  truth  by  an  external  one,  suffer  natural  retribution  in
the  fatal  failure  of  their  attempt.  The  concrete,  clear,  and
consistent  minds  among  them — minds  that  cannot  be  content
with  vague  phrases  —  accomplish  with  remarkable  rapidity  a
direct  descent  from  the  certain  to  the  doubtful,  from  the  doubt¬
ful  to  the  false,  and  from  the  false  to  the  absurd.  “God,”
they  argue,  “manifests  His  will  to  man  externally  through
the  authority  of  the  Church  ;  the  only  true  Church  is  our
Church,  its  voice  is  the  voice  of  God  ;  the  true  representatives  of
our  Church  are  the  clergy,  hence  their  voice  is  the  voice  of  God  ;
the  true  representative  of  the  clergy  for  each  individual  is  his
confessor  ;  therefore  all  questions  of  faith  and  conscience  ought


PREFACE


XXV


in  the  last  resort  to  be  decided  for  each  by  his  confessor.”  It  all
seems  clear  and  simple.  The  only  thing  to  be  arranged  is  that
all  confessors  should  say  the  same  thing,  or  that  there  should  be
one  confessor  only — omnipresent  and  immortal.  Otherwise,  the
difference  of  opinion  among  many  changing  confessors  may  lead  to
the  obviously  impious  view  that  the  voice  of  God  contradicts  itself.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  this  individual  or  collective  repre¬
sentative  of  external  authority  derives  his  significance  merely
from  his  official  position,  all  persons  in  the  same  position  have
the  same  authority  which  is  rendered  void  by  their  contradicting
one  another.  And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  one  or  some  of
them  derive  their  superior  authority  in  my  eyes  from  the  fact  of
my  confidence  in  them,  it  follows  that  I  myself  am  the  source  and
the  creator  of  my  highest  authority,  and  that  I  submit  to  my
own  arbitrary  will  alone  and  find  in  it  the  meaning  of  life.  This
is  the  inevitable  result  of  seeking  at  all  costs  an  external  support  for
reason,  and  of  taking  the  absolute  meaning  of  life  to  be  some¬
thing  that  is  imposed  upon  man  from  without.  The  man
who  wants  to  accept  the  meaning  of  life  on  external  authority
ends  by  taking  for  that  meaning  the  absurdity  of  his  own
arbitrary  choice.  There  must  be  no  external,  formal  relation
between  the  individual  and  the  meaning  of  his  life.  The  ex¬
ternal  authority  is  necessary  as  a  transitory  stage,  but  it  must  not
be  preserved  for  ever  and  regarded  as  an  abiding  and  final  norm.
The  human  ego  can  only  expand  by  giving  inner  heartfelt  re¬
sponse  to  what  is  greater  than  itself,  and  not  by  rendering  merely
formal  submission  to  it,  which  after  all  really  alters  nothing.

IV

Although  the  good  meaning  of  life  is  greater  than  and  prior
to  any  individual  man,  it  cannot  be  accepted  as  something  ready
made  or  taken  on  trust  from  some  external  authority.  It  must  be
understood  by  the  man  himself  and  be  made  his  own  through


xxv i  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

faith,  reason,  and  experience.  This  is  the  necessary  condition
of  a  morally-worthy  existence.  When,  however,  this  necessary
subjective  condition  of  the  good  and  rational  life  is  taken  to  be  its
essence  and  purpose,  the  result  is  a  new  moral  error,  namely,  the
rejection  of  all  historical  and  collective  manifestations  and  forms
of  the  good,  of  everything  except  the  inner  moral  activities  and
states  of  the  individual.  This  moral  amorphism  or  subjectivism  is
the  direct  opposite  of  the  doctrine  of  the  conservative  practical
humility  just  referred  to.  That  doctrine  affirmed  that  life  and
reality  in  their  given  condition  are  wiser  and  better  than  man,
that  the  historical  forms  which  life  assumes  are  in  themselves
good  and  wise,  and  that  all  man  has  to  do  is  reverently  to  bow
down  before  them  and  to  seek  in  them  the  absolute  rule  and
authority  for  his  personal  existence.  Moral  amorphism,  on  the
contrary,  reduces  everything  to  the  subjective  side,  to  our  own
self-consciousness  and  self-activity.  The  only  life  for  us  is  our
own  mental  life  ;  the  good  meaning  of  life  is  to  be  found  solely
in  the  inner  states  of  the  individual  and  in  the  actions  and  rela¬
tions  which  directly  and  immediately  follow  therefrom.  This
inner  meaning  and  inner  good  is  naturally  inherent  in  every  one,
but  it  is  crushed,  distorted,  and  made  absurd  and  evil  by  the
different  historical  developments  and  institutions  such  as  the  state,
the  Church,  and  civilisation  in  general.  If  every  one’s  eyes  were
open  to  the  true  state  of  things,  people  would  be  easily  persuaded
to  i enounce  these  disastrous  perversions  of  human  nature  which
aie  based  in  the  long  run  upon  compulsory  organisations,  such  as
the  law,  the  army,  etc.  All  these  institutions  are  kept  up  by
intentional  and  evil  deceit  and  violence  on  the  part  of  the
minority,  but  their  existence  chiefly  depends  upon  the  lack  of
understanding  and  self-deception  of  the  majority  which,  besides,
employ  various  artificial  means  for  blunting  their  reason  and  con¬
science  wine,  tobacco,  etc.  Men,  however,  are  beginning  to
realise  the  error  of  their  ways,  and  when  they  finally  give  up  their
present  views  and  change  their  conduct,  all  evil  forms  of  human


PREFACE


XXVI 1


relations  will  fall  to  the  ground  ;  evil  will  disappear  as  soon  as
men  cease  to  resist  it  by  force,  and  the  moral  good  will  be
spontaneously  manifested  and  realised  among  the  formless  mass  of
c  tramping  ’  saints.

In  its  rejection  of  different  institutions  moral  amorphism  for¬
gets  one  institution  which  is  rather  important — namely,  death,
and  it  is  this  oversight  which  alone  renders  the  doctrine  plausible.
For  if  the  preachers  of  moral  amorphism  were  to  think  of  death
they  would  have  to  affirm  one  of  two  things  :  either  that  with  the
abolition  of  the  law  courts,  armies,  etc.,  men  will  cease  to  die,  or
that  thegood  meaning  of  life,  incompatiblewith  political  kingdoms,
is  quite  compatible  with  the  kingdom  of  death.  The  dilemma  is
inevitable,  and  both  alternatives  to  it  are  equally  absurd.  It  is
clear  that  this  doctrine,  which  says  nothing  about  death,  contains
it  in  itself.  It  claims  to  be  the  rehabilitation  of  true  Christianity.
It  is  obvious,  however,  both  from  the  historical  and  from  the
psychological  point  of  view,  that  the  Gospel  did  not  overlook
death.  Its  message  was  based  in  the  first  place  upon  the  resurrec¬
tion  of  one  as  an  accomplished  fact,  and  upon  the  future  resurrec¬
tion  of  all  as  a  certain  promise.  Universal  resurrection  means  the
creation  of  a  perfect  form  for  all  that  exists.  It  is  the  ultimate
expression  and  realisation  of  the  good  meaning  of  the  universe,
and  is  therefore  the  final  end  of  history.  In  recognising  the
good  meaning  of  life  but  rejecting  all  its  objective  forms,  moral
amorphism  must  regard  as  senseless  the  whole  history  of  the  world
and  humanity,  since  it  entirely  consists  in  evolving  new  forms  or
life  and  making  them  more  perfect.  There  is  sense  in  rejecting
one  form  of  life  for  the  sake  of  another  and  a  more  perfect  one,
but  there  is  no  meaning  in  rejecting  form  as  such.  Yet  such
rejection  is  the  logical  consequence  of  the  anti-historical  view.
If  we  absolutely  reject  the  forms  of  social,  political,  and  religious
life,  evolved  by  human  history,  there  can  be  no  ground  for  recog¬
nising  the  organic  forms  worked  out  by  the  history  of  nature  or
by  the  world  process,  of  which  the  historical  process  is  the  direct


xxviii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  inseparable  continuation.  Why  should  my  animal  body  be
more  real,  rational,  and  holy  than  the  body  of  my  nation  ?  It
will  be  said  that  the  body  of  a  people  does  not  exist,  any  more
than  its  soul,  that  the  idea  of  a  social  collective  organism  is  merely
a  metaphor  for  expressing  the  totality  of  distinct  individuals.
If,  however,  this  exclusively  mechanical  point  of  view  be  once
adopted,  we  are  bound  to  go  further  still  and  say  that  in  reality
there  is  no  individual  organism  and  no  individual  soul,  and  that
what  exists  are  merely  the  different  combinations  of  elementary
particles  of  matter,  devoid  of  all  qualitative  content.  If  the  prin¬
ciple  of  form  be  denied,  we  are  logically  bound  to  give  up  the
attempt  to  understand  and  to  recognise  either  the  historical  or
the  organic  life  or  any  existence  whatever,  for  it  is  only  pure
nothing  that  is  entirely  formless  and  unconditional.

V

I  have  indicated  two  extreme  moral  errors  that  are  contra¬
dictory  of  one  another.  One  is  the  doctrine  of  the  self-effacement
of  the  human  personality  before  the  historical  forms  of  life  recog¬
nised  as  possessing  external  authority, — the  doctrine  of  passive
submission  or  practical  quietism  ;  the  other  is  the  doctrine  of
the  self-affirmation  of  the  human  personality  against  all  historical
forms  and  authorities — the  doctrine  of  formlessness  and  anarchy.
The  common  essence  of  the  two  extreme  views,  that  in  which,
in  spite  of  the  opposition  between  them,  they  agree,  will  no  doubt
disclose  to  us  the  source  of  moral  errors  in  general,  and  will  save
us  from  the  necessity  of  analysing  the  particular  varieties  of  moral
falsity  which  may  be  indefinite  in  number.

The  two  opposed  views  coincide  in  the  fact  that  neither  of
them  take  the  good  in  its  essence,  or  as  it  is  in  itself^  but  connect
it  with  acts  and  relations  which  may  be  either  good  or  evil  accord-
ing  to  their  motive  and  their  end.  In  other  words,  they  take
something  which  is  good,  but  which  may  become  evil,  and  they


PREFACE


XXIX


put  it  in  the  place  of  the  Good  itself,  treating  the  conditioned  as  the
unconditional.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  a  good  thing  and  a  moral
duty  to  submit  to  national  and  family  traditions  and  institutions
in  so  far  as  they  express  the  good  or  give  a  definite  form  to  my
right  relation  to  God,  men,  and  the  world.  If,  however,  this
condition  is  forgotten,  if  the  conditional  duty  is  taken  to  be
absolute  and  4  the  national  interest  ’  is  put  in  the  place  of  God’s
truth,  the  good  may  become  evil  and  a  source  of  evil.  It  is
easy  in  that  case  to  arrive  at  the  monstrous  idea  recently  put
forth  by  a  French  minister:  “It  is  better  to  execute  twenty
innocent  men  than  to  attack  ( porter  atteinte)  the  authority  of  a
national  institution.”  Take  another  instance.  Suppose  that  in¬
stead  of  paying  due  respect  to  a  council  of  bishops  or  to  some
other  ecclesiastical  authority,  as  a  true  organ  of  the  collective
organisation  of  piety,  from  which  I  do  not  separate  myself, — 1
submit  to  it  unconditionally,  without  going  into  the  case  for
myself.  I  assume  that  this  particular  council  as  such  is  an  unfailing
authority,  that  is,  I  recognise  it  in  an  external  way.  And  then
it  turns  out  that  the  council  to  which  I  submitted  was  the  Robber
Council  of  Ephesus,  or  something  of  the  kind,  and  that  owing  to
my  wrong  and  uncalled-for  submission  to  the  formal  expression
of  the  supposed  will  of  God,  I  have  myself  suddenly  become  a
rebellious  heretic.  Once  more  evil  has  come  out  of  the  good.
Take  a  third  instance.  Not  trusting  the  purity  of  my  conscience
and  the  power  of  my  intellect,  I  entrust  both  my  conscience  and
reason  to  a  person  vested  with  divine  authority  and  give  up
reasoning  and  willing  for  myself.  One  would  think  nothing
could  be  better.  But  my  confessor  proves  to  be  a  wolf  in  sheep’s
clothing,  and  instils  in  me  pernicious  thoughts  and  evil  rules.
Once  more,  the  conditional  good  of  humility,  accepted  uncon¬
ditionally,  becomes  an  evil.

Such  are  the  results  of  the  erroneous  confusion  of  the  good
itself  with  the  particular  forms  in  which  it  is  manifested.  The
opposite  error,  which  limits  the  nature  of  the  good  by  rejecting


XXX


THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  historical  forms  of  its  expression,  comes  to  the  same  thing.
In  the  first  case  the  forms  or  institutions  are  taken  to  be  the
absolute  good,  which  does  not  correspond  to  truth  and  leads  to
evil.  In  the  second  case  these  forms  and  institutions  are  un¬
conditionally  rejected,  and  therefore  are  recognised  as  uncon¬
ditionally  evil,  which  is  again  contrary  to  the  truth,  and  can¬
not  therefore  lead  to  anything  good.  The  first  maintain,  for
instance,  that  the  will  of  God  is  revealed  to  us  through  the  priest
only  ;  the  second  affirm  that  this  never  happens,  that  the  Supreme
will  cannot  speak  to  us  through  the  priest,  but  is  revealed  solely
and  entirely  in  our  own  consciousness.  It  is  obvious,  however,
that  in  both  cases  the  will  of  God  has  been  left  out  of  account  and
replaced,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the  priest,  and  in  the  second  by
the  self-affirming  ego.  And  yet  one  would  think  there  could  be
no  difficulty  in  understanding  that  once  the  will  of  God  is
admitted  its  expression  ought  not  to  be  restricted  to  or  ex¬
hausted  by  the  deliverances  either  of  the  inner  consciousness  or
of  the  priest.  The  will  of  God  may  speak  both  in  us  and  in  him,
and  its  only  absolute  and  necessary  demand  is  that  we  should  in¬
wardly  conform  to  it  and  take  up  a  good  or  right  attitude  to
everything,  including  the  priest,  and  indeed  putting  him  before
other  things  for  the  sake  of  what  he  represents.  Similarly,  when
the  first  say  that  the  practical  good  of  life  is  wholly  contained  in
the  nation  and  the  state,  and  the  second  declare  the  nation  and
the  state  to  be  a  deception  and  an  evil,  it  is  obvious  that  the  first
put  into  the  place  of  the  absolute  good  its  conditional  manifesta¬
tions  in  the  nation  and  the  state,  and  the  second  limit  the
absolute  good  by  rejecting  its  historical  forms.  In  their  view  the
rejection  is  unconditional,  and  the  good  is  conditioned  by  it.
But  it  ought  to  be  obvious  that  the  true  good  in  this  sphere
depends  for  us  solely  upon  our  just  and  good  relation  to  the  nation
and  to  the  state ,  upon  the  consciousness  of  our  debt  to  them,
upon  the  recognition  of  all  that  they  have  contained  in  the  past
and  contain  now,  and  of  what  they  must  still  acquire  before  they


PREFACE


XXXI


can  become  in  the  full  sense  the  means  of  embodying  the  good
that  lives  in  humanity.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  take  up  this  just
attitude  to  the  Church,  the  nation,  and  the  state,  and  thus  to
render  both  ourselves  and  them  more  perfect ;  we  can  know  and
love  them  in  their  true  sense,  in  God’s  way.  Why,  then,  should
we  distort  this  true  sense  by  unconditional  worship,  or,  worse  still,
by  unconditional  rejection  ?  There  is  no  reason  why,  instead  of
doing  rightful  homage  to  the  sacred  forms,  and  neither  separating
them  from,  nor  confusing  them  with,  their  content,  we  should
pass  from  idolatry  to  iconoclasm,  and  from  it  to  a  new  and  worse
idolatry.

There  is  no  justification  for  these  obvious  distortions  of  the
truth,  these  obvious  deviations  from  the  right  way.  It  is  as  clear
as  day  that  the  only  thing  which  ought  to  be  unconditionally
accepted  is  that  which  is  intrinsically  good  in  itself,  and  the  only
thing  which  ought  to  be  rejected  is  that  which  is  wholly  and
essentially  evil,  while  all  other  things  ought  to  be  either  accepted
or  rejected  according  to  their  actual  relation  to  this  inner  essence
of  good  or  evil.  It  is  clear  that  if  the  good  exists  it  must  possess
its  own  inner  definitions  and  attributes,  which  do  not  finally  depend
upon  any  historical  forms  and  institutions,  and  still  less  upon  the
rejection  of  them.

The  moral  meaning  of  life  is  originally  and  ultimately  deter¬
mined  by  the  good  itself,  inwardly  accessible  to  us  through  our
reason  and  conscience  in  so  far  as  these  inner  forms  of  the  good
are  freed  by  moral  practice  from  slavery  to  passions  and  from  the
limitations  of  personal  and  collective  selfishness.  This  is  the
ultimate  court  of  appeal  for  all  external  forms  and  events.  “  Know
ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  angels  ?  ”  St.  Paul  writes  to  the  faithful.
And  if  even  the  heavenly  things  are  subject  to  our  judgment,  this
is  still  more  true  of  all  earthly  things.  Man  is  in  principle  or  in
his  destination  an  unconditional  inner  form  of  the  good  as  an  uncon¬
ditional  content ;  all  else  is  conditioned  and  relative.  The  good
as  such  is  not  conditioned  by  anything,  but  itself  conditions  all


xxxii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

things,  and  is  realised  through  all  things.  In  so  far  as  the  good
is  not  conditioned  by  anything,  it  is  pure  ;  in  so  far  as  it  con¬
ditions  all  things,  it  is  all-embracing  ;  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  realised
through  all  things,  it  is  all-powerful.

If  the  good  were  not  pure,  if  it  were  impossible  in  each  practical
question  to  draw  an  absolute  distinction  between  good  and  evil,
and  in  each  particular  case  to  say  yes  or  no ,  life  would  be  altogether
devoid  of  moral  worth  and  significance.  If  the  good  were  not  all-
embracing,  if  it  were  impossible  to  connect  with  it  all  the  concrete
relations  of  life,  to  justify  the  good  in  all  of  them,  and  to  correct
them  all  by  the  good,  life  would  be  poor  and  one-sided.  Finally,
if  the  good  had  no  power,  if  it  could  not  in  the  end  triumph  over
everything,  including  ‘the  last  enemy  death,’ — life  would  be  in
vain.

The  inner  attributes  of  the  good  determine  the  main  problem
of  human  life  ;  its  moral  meaning  is  to  be  found  in  the  service  or
the  pure,  all-powerful,  and  all-embracing  good.

To  be  worthy  of  its  object  and  of  man  himself,  such  service
must  be  voluntary ,  and  in  order  to  be  that  it  must  be  conscious.
It  is  the  business  of  moral  philosophy  to  make  it  an  object  of
reflective  consciousness,  and  partly  to  anticipate  the  result  which
our  reflection  must  attain.  The  founder  of  moral  philosophy  as  a
science ,  Kant,  dwelt  upon  the  first  essential  attribute  of  the  absolute
good,  its  purity,  which  demands  from  man  a  formally  uncon¬
ditional  or  autonomous  will.  The  pure  good  demands  that  it
should  be  chosen  for  its  own  sake  alone  ;  any  other  motives  are
unworthy  of  it.  Without  repeating  what  Kant  has  done  so  well
with  regard  to  the  question  of  the  formal  purity  of  the  good  will,
I  have  paid  particular  attention  to  the  second  essential  attribute  of
the  good,  namely,  its  all-embracing  character.  In  doing  so  I  did
not  separate  it  from  the  other  two  attributes  (as  Kant  had  done
with  regard  to  the  first),  but  directly  developed  the  rational  and
ideal  content  of  the  all-embracing  good  out  of  the  concrete  moral
data  in  which  it  is  contained.  As  a  result,  I  obtained  not  the


PREFACE


ХХХ1П


dialectical  moments  of  the  abstract  Idea,  as  in  Hegel,  nor  the
empirical  complications  of  natural  facts,  as  in  Herbert  Spencer,  but
complete  and  exhaustive  moral  norms  for  all  the  fundamental
practical  relations  of  the  individual  and  the  collective  life.  It  is
its  all-embracing  character  alone  which  justifies  the  good  to  our
consciousness  ;  it  is  only  in  so  far  as  it  conditions  all  things  that
it  can  manifest  both  its  purity  and  its  invincible  power.


VLADIMIR  SOLOVYOF.


CONTENTS


Editor’s  Note  ......

Preface  to  the  Second  Edition  .  .  .  .

Preface  to  the  First  Edition  {A  Preliminary  Conception  of  the
Moral  Meaning  of  Life )  .....

The  General  Question  as  to  the  Meaning  of  Life  :

I.  Two  ways  of  denying  the  meaning  of  life. — Theoretical
pessimism. — The  inner  inconsistency  of  persons  who  argue  about
the  advantages  of  non-existence,  but  in  truth  prefer  existence. —
The  fact  that  they  cling  to  life  proves  that  life  has  a  meaning
though  they  do  not  understand  it. — Practical  pessimism  which
finds  its  final  expression  in  suicide. — Suicides  also  involuntarily
prove  that  life  has  a  meaning,  for  their  despair  is  due  to  the  fact
that  life  does  not  fulfil  their  arbitrary  and  contradictory  demands.
These  demands  could  only  be  fulfilled  if  life  were  devoid  of
meaning  ;  the  non-fulfilment  proves  that  life  has  a  meaning  which
these  persons,  owing  to  their  irrationality,  do  not  wish  to  know
(instances  :  Romeo,  Cleopatra)  .....

II.  The  view  that  life  has  an  exclusively  aesthetic  meaning,
which  expresses  itself  in  whatever  is  strong,  majestic,  beautiful,
without  relation  to  the  moral  good. — This  view  is  unanswerably
refuted  by  the  fact  of  death,  which  transforms  all  natural  strength
and  greatness  into  nothingness,  and  all  natural  beauty  into  utter
ugliness  (explanation  :  words  of  the  Bible  about  Alexander  of
Macedon).  —  Nietzsche’s  pitiful  attacks  on  Christianity. — True
strength,  grandeur,  and  beauty  are  inseparable  from  the  absolute
good  ........

III.  The  view  which  admits  that  the  meaning  of  life  is  to  be
found  in  the  good,  but  affirms  that  this  good,  as  given  from  above,
and  realised  in  forms  of  life  laid  down  once  for  all  (family,  father-
land,  Church),  merely  demands  that  man  should  submit  to  it
without  asking  any  questions. — The  insufficiency  of  this  view,
which  forgets  that  the  historical  forms  of  the  good  possess  no
external  unity  and  finality. — Man  therefore  must  not  submit  to

XXXV


xxxv i  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

them  implicitly,  but  must  know  their  nature  and  further  their

growth  and  development  ..••••

IV.  The  opposite  error  (moral  amorphism),  which  asserts  that
the  good  is  to  be  found  only  in  the  subjective  mental  states  of
each  individual  and  in  the  good  relations  between  men  which
naturally  follow  therefrom,  and  that  all  collectively  organised
forms  of  society  lead  to  nothing  but  evil,  since  they  are  artificial
and  make  use  of  compulsion. — But  the  social  organisation  brought
about  by  the  historical  life  of  humanity  is  the  necessary  continua¬
tion  of  the  physical  organisation  brought  about  by  the  life  of  the
universe.— All  that  is  real  is  complex,  nothing  exists  apart  from
this  or  that  form  of  collective  organisation  ;  and  the  principle  of
moral  amorphism  consistently  worked  out,  logically  demands  the
rejection  of  all  that  is  real  for  the  sake  of  emptiness  or  non-being  .

V.  The  two  extreme  forms  of  moral  error — the  doctrine  of
absolute  submission  to  the  historical  forms  of  social  life  and  the
doctrine  of  their  unconditional  rejection  (moral  amorphism) —
coincide  in  so  far  as  neither  of  them  takes  the  good  as  such,  and
both  regard  as  unconditionally  right  or  as  unconditionally  w'rong
things  which  in  their  nature  are  conditional  (explanatory  examples).
— Man  in  his  reason  and  conscience  as  the  unconditional  inner
form,  the  unconditional  content  of  which  is  the  good. — The
general  inner  properties  of  the  good  as  such  :  its  purity  or
autonomy,  in  so  far  as  it  is  not  conditioned  by  anything  external
to  it ;  its  fulness  or  its  all-embracing  character  in  so  far  as  it  con¬
ditions  everything  ;  its  power  or  actuality,  in  so  far  as  it  is  realised
through  all  things. — The  purpose  of  moral  philosophy,  and
especially  of  the  system  put  forward  in  the  present  work  .


INTRODUCTION

Moral  Philosophy  as  a  Science.

I.  The  formal  universality  of  the  idea  of  the  good  at  the  lower
stages  of  moral  consciousness  independently  of  its  material  content
(examples  and  explanations). — The  growth  of  moral  consciousness,
gradually  introducing  into  the  formal  idea  of  the  good  a  more
befitting  content  which  is  more  connected  with  it  inwardly,
naturally  becomes  the  science  of  Ethics  or  Moral  Philosophy

II.  Moral  philosophy  does  not  wholly  depend  upon  positive
religion. — St.  Paul’s  testimony  as  to  the  moral  law  ‘  written  in  the
hearts  ’  of  the  Gentiles. — Since  there  exist  many  religions  and
denominations,  disputes  between  them  presuppose  a  common
ground  of  morality  (explanations  and  examples),  and,  consequently,


PAGE

xxiii


XXV


xxviii


CONTENTS


хххѵи


PAGE

the  moral  norms  to  which  the  disputing  parties  appeal  cannot
depend  upon  their  religious  and  denominational  differences  .  3

III.  The  independence  of  the  moral  from  the  theoretical

philosophy  (from  epistemology  and  metaphysics). — In  moral
philosophy  we  study  our  inner  attitude  to  our  own  actions  (and
that  which  is  logically  connected  with  it),  i.e.  something  unquestion¬
ably  knowable  by  us,  since  it  is  produced  by  ourselves  ;  the  dis¬
puted  question  as  to  the  theoretical  certainty  concerning  other
kinds  of  being,  not  connected  with  us  morally,  is  in  this  respect
irrelevant. — The  critique  of  knowledge  can  go  no  further  than
doubt  the  objective  existence  of  that  which  is  known,  and  such
theoretical  doubt  is  insufficient  to  undermine  the  morally  practical
certitude  that  certain  states  and  actions  of  the  subject  are  binding
as  possessed  of  inner  worth. — Besides,  theoretical  philosophy  itself
overcomes  such  scepticism  in  one  way  or  another. — Finally,  even
if  it  were  possible  to  be  perfectly  certain  of  the  non-existence  of
the  external  world,  the  inner  distinction  between  good  and  evil
would  not  thereby  be  abolished  ;  for  if  it  be  wrong  to  bear  malice
against  a  human  being,  it  is  still  more  so  against  an  empty  phantom  ;
if  it  be  shameful  slavishly  to  surrender  to  the  promptings  of  actual
sensuality,  to  be  slave  to  an  imaginary  sensuality  is  worse  still  .  9

IV.  Moral  philosophy  does  not  depend  upon  the  affirmative

answer  to  the  metaphysical  question  of  *  free  will,’  since  morality
is  possible  on  the  hypothesis  of  determinism,  which  asserts  that
human  actions  have  a  necessary  character.— In  philosophy  we
must  distinguish  the  purely  mechanical  necessity,  which  in  itself
is  incompatible  with  any  moral  action,  from  the  psychological
and  the  ethical  or  the  rationally  ideal  necessity. — The  unquestion¬
able  difference  between  mechanical  movement  and  a  mental  reaction
necessarily  called  forth  by  motives,  i.e.  by  presentations  associated
with  feelings  and  desires. — Difference  in  the  quality  of  motives  that
prevail  in  the  life  of  this  or  of  that  individual  enables  us  to  dis¬
tinguish  a  good  spiritual  nature  from  a  bad  one,  and,  in  so  far  as
a  good  nature,  as  we  know  from  experience,  can  be  consciously
strengthened  and  developed,  and  a  bad  consciously  corrected  and
reformed,  we  are  given  in  the  domain  of  psychological  necessity
itself  certain  conditions  for  ethical  problems  and  theories  .  .  14

V.  In  the  case  of  man,  the  universal  rational  idea  of  the  good,
expressing  itself  as  the  consciousness  of  absolute  duty  to  conform
to  it,  may  become  the  prevailing  motive  of  action,  over  and  above
different  psychological  impulses.  Man  may  do  good  quite  irre¬
spectively  of  considerations  of  pleasure  and  pain,  for  the  sake  of
the  good  as  such  or  of  the  unconditionally  excellent. — The  con¬
ception  of  moral  necessity  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  of  rational
freedom. — Just  as  the  psychological  necessity  (due  to  mental  affec¬
tions)  is  superior  to  mechanical  necessity,  and  means  freedom  from


xxxviii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

PAGE

it,  so  the  moral  necessity  (due  to  the  idea  of  the  good  as  the  pre¬
vailing  motive),  while  remaining  necessary,  is  superior  to  the
psychological  necessity  of  mental  affections,  and  means  freedom
from  the  lower  motives.- — In  order  that  the  absolute  idea  of  the
good  should  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  human  action,  the  subject
must  have  a  sufficient  degree  of  moral  receptivity  and  a  sufficient
knowledge  of  the  good  (explanations  and  Biblical  examples). — It
is  metaphysically  possible  that  absolute  evil  may  be  arbitrarily  pre¬
ferred  to  the  absolute  good. — Moral  philosophy,  being  a  complete
knowledge  of  the  good,  is  presupposed  in  the  correct  formulation
and  solution  of  the  metaphysical  question  concerning  the  freedom
of  choice  between  good  and  evil,  and  its  content  does  not  depend
upon  the  solution  of  that  question  .  .  •  J7


PART  I

THE  GOOD  IN  HUMAN  NATURE

«

CHAPTER  I

The  Primary  Data  of  Morality.

I.  The  feeling  of  shame  (originally  of  sexual  modesty)  as  the

natural  root  of  human  morality. — Actual  shamelessness  of  all  animals
and  the  supposed  shamelessness  of  certain  savage  peoples  ;  the  latter
indicates  difference  in  external  relations  and  not  in  the  feeling
itself. — Darwin’s  erroneous  inference  from  phallism  .  .  25

II.  The  profound  meaning  of  shame  :  that  which  is  ashamed
in  the  mental  act  of  shame  separates  itself  from  that  of  which  it
is  ashamed.  In  being  ashamed  of  the  fundamental  process  of  his
animal  nature,  man  proves  that  he  is  not  merely  a  natural  event  or
phenomenon,  but  has  an  independent  super-animal  significance  (con¬
firmation  and  explanation  out  of  the  Bible).  The  feeling  of  shame

is  inexplicable  from  the  external  and  the  utilitarian  point  of  view .  28

III.  The  second  moral  datum  of  human  nature — pity  or  the
sympathetic  feeling  which  expresses  man’s  moral  relation  not  to
the  lower  nature  (as  in  shame)  but  to  living  beings  like  himself. —

Pity  cannot  be  the  result  of  human  progress,  for  it  exists  among
the  animals  also.— Pity  is  the  individual  psychological  root  of  the

right  social  relations  .  .  .  .  .  .32

IV.  The  third  moral  datum  of  human  nature — the  feeling  of
reverence  or  of  piety,  which  expresses  man’s  due  relation  to  the


CONTENTS

higher  principle  and  constitutes  the  individual  psychological  root
of  religion. — Darwin’s  reference  to  the  rudiments  of  religious  feel¬
ing  in  tame  animals  ......

V.  The  feelings  of  shame,  pity,  and  reverence  exhaust  the
whole  range  of  moral  relations  possible  for  man,  namely,  of  rela¬
tions  to  that  which  is  below  him,  on  a  level  with  him,  and  above  him.
— These  normal  relations  are  determined  as  the  mastery  over  material
sensuality,  as  the  solidarity  with  other  living  beings,  and  as  the  inner
submission  to  the  superhuman  principle.— Other  determinations  of
moral  life — all  the  virtues — may  be  shown  to  be  modifications  of
these  three  fundamental  facts,  or  as  a  result  of  the  interaction
between  them  and  the  intellectual  nature  of  man  (example)

VI.  Conscience  as  a  modification  of  shame  in  a  definite  and
generalised  form. — The  supposed  conscience  of  animals  .

VII.  From  the  fundamental  facts  of  morality  human  reason

deduces  universal  and  necessary  principles  and  rules  of  the  moral
life  ........


CHAPTER  II

The  Ascetic  Principle  in  Morality.

I.  The  moral  self-affirmation  of  man  as  a  supermaterial  being,
half-conscious  and  unstable  in  the  simple  feeling  of  shame,  is,  by
the  activity  of  reason,  raised  into  the  principle  of  asceticism. —
Asceticism  is  not  directed  against  the  material  nature  in  general  :
that  nature  cannot,  as  such,  be  recognised  as  evil  from  any  point  of
view  (proofs  from  the  chief  pessimistic  doctrines — the  Vedanta,  the
Sankhya,  Buddhism,  Egyptian  gnosis,  Manicheism)

II.  The  opposition  of  the  spiritual  principle  to  the  material
nature,  finding  its  immediate  expression  in  the  feeling  of  shame  and
developed  in  asceticism,  is  called  forth  not  by  the  material  nature
as  such,  but  by  the  undue  preponderance  of  the  lower  life,  which
seeks  to  make  the  rational  being  of  man  into  a  passive  instrument  or
a  useless  appendage  of  the  blind  physical  process. — In  analysing  the
meaning  of  shame,  reason  logically  deduces  from  it  a  necessary,
universal,  and  morally  binding  norm  :  the  physical  life  of  man
must  be  subordinate  to  the  spiritual  ....

III.  The  moral  conception  of  spirit  and  of  flesh. — Flesh  as
excited  animality  or  irrationality,  false  to  its  essential  definition
to  serve  as  the  matter  or  the  potential  basis  of  the  spiritual
life. — Real  significance  of  the  struggle  between  the  spirit  and
the  flesh  ........

IV.  Three  chief  moments  in  the  conflict  of  the  spirit  with  the
flesh  :  (i)  inner  distinction  of  the  spirit  from  the  flesh;  (2)  actual


xxxix

PAGE

34

35
37

39


41

44

45


xl  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

PAGE

struggle  of  the  spirit  for  its  independence  ;  (3)  clear  preponder¬
ance  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh  or  abolition  of  the  evil  carnal
element. — Practical  importance  of  the  second  moment,  which  gives
rise  to  the  definite  and  binding  demands  of  morality  and,  in  the
first  place,  to  the  demand  for  self-control  .  .  .  -47

V.  Preliminary  tasks  of  asceticism  :  acquisition  by  the  rational

will  of  the  power  to  control  breathing  and  sleep  .  .  -49

VI.  Ascetic  demands  with  regard  to  the  functions  of  nutrition

and  reproduction. — Misunderstandings  concerning  the  question  of
sexual  relations. — Christian  view  of  the  matter  .  .  .50

VII.  Different  aspects  of  the  struggle  between  the  spirit  and
the  flesh. — The  three  psychological  moments  in  the  victory  of  the
evil  principle  :  thought,  imagination,  possession. — The  correspond¬
ing  ascetic  rules  intended  to  prevent  an  evil  mental  state  from
becoming  a  passion  and  a  vice  :  “  dashing  of  the  babes  of  Babylon
against  the  stones  ”  ;  thinking  of  something  different  ;  performing

a  moral  action  .......  54

VIII.  Asceticism,  or  abstinence  raised  into  a  principle,  is
unquestionably  good. — When  this  good  is  taken,  as  such,  to  be
the  whole  good,  we  have  evil  asceticism  after  the  pattern  of  the
devil,  who  neither  eats  nor  drinks,  and  remains  in  celibacy. — Since
an  evil  or  pitiless  ascetic,  being  an  imitator  of  the  devil,  does  not
deserve  moral  approbation,  it  follows  that  the  principle  of  asceticism
itself  has  a  moral  significance  or  is  good  only  on  condition  of
its  being  united  with  the  principle  of  altruism,  which  has  its  root

in  РІ4У . 57


CHAPTER  III

Pity  and  Altruism.

I.  The  positive  meaning  of  pity. — Just  as  shame  singles  man
out  from  the  rest  of  nature  and  opposes  him  to  other  animals,
so  pity  inwardly  connects  him  with  the  whole  world  of  the
living  ........

II.  The  inner  basis  of  the  moral  relation  to  other  beings  is  to  be
found,  apart  from  all  metaphysical  theories,  in  compassion  or  pity
only,  and  notin  co-pleasure  or  co-rejoicing. — Positive  participation
in  the  pleasure  of  another  contains  the  approval  of  that  pleasure,
which  may,  however,  be  evil. — Participation  in  it  may  therefore  be
good  or  evil  according  to  the  object  of  the  pleasure. — Since  the  co¬
rejoicing  may  itself  be  immoral,  it  cannot  in  any  case  be  the  basis
of  moral  relations. — Answer  to  certain  objections  .

III.  Pity  as  a  motive  of  altruistic  action  and  as  a  possible  basis
of  altruistic  principles  .....


60

63


CONTENTS


IV.  Schopenhauer’s  theory  of  the  irrational  or  mysterious

character  of  compassion  in  which,  it  is  urged,  there  is  an  immediate
and  perfect  identification  of  one  entity  with  another,  foreign  to  it. —
Criticism  of  this  view. — In  the  fundamental  expression  of  compas¬
sion — the  maternal  instinct  of  animals — the  intimate  real  connec¬
tion  between  the  being  who  pities  and  the  object  of  its  pity  is
obvious. — Speaking  generally,  the  natural  connection  given  in
reason  and  experience  between  all  living  beings  as  parts  of  one
whole  sufficiently  explains  its  psychological  expression  in  pity,
which  thus  completely  corresponds  to  the  clear  meaning  of  the
universe,  is  compatible  with  reason,  or  is  rational. — The  erroneous
conception  of  pity  as  of  an  immediate  and  complete  identification
of  two  beings  (explanations)  .....

V.  Infinite  universal  pity  described  by  St.  Isaac  the  Syrian

VI.  Pity  as  such  is  not  the  only  foundation  of  all  morality,
as  Schopenhauer  mistakenly  asserts. — Kindness  to  living  beings
is  compatible  with  immorality  in  other  respects. — Just  as  ascetics
may  be  hard  and  cruel,  so  kind-hearted  people  may  be  intemperate
and  dissolute,  and,  without  doing  direct  and  intentional  evil,
injure  both  themselves  and  their  neighbours  by  their  shameful
behaviour  ........

VII.  The  true  essence  of  pity  is  not  simple  identification  of
oneself  with  another,  but  the  recognition  of  another  person’s  inner
worth — of  his  right  to  existence  and  to  the  greatest  possible  happi¬
ness. — The  conception  of  pity,  taken  in  its  universality  and  inde¬
pendently  of  subjective  mental  states  connected  with  it  (i.e.  taken
logically  and  not  psychologically),  is  the  conception  of  truth  and  of
justice  :  it  is  true  that  other  people  are  similar  to  me  and  have  the
same  nature,  and  it  is  just  that  my  relation  to  them  should  be  the
same  as  my  relation  to  myself. — Altruism  corresponds  to  truth  or
to  that  which  is,  while  egoism  presupposes  untruth  or  that  which
is  not,  for  in  reality  an  individual  self  does  not  possess  the  exclusive
and  all-important  significance  which  it  egoistically  assigns  to  itself.
—The  expansion  of  personal  egoism  into  the  family,  national,
political,  and  religious  egoism  is  a  sign  of  historical  progress  of
morality,  but  does  not  disprove  the  false  principle  of  egoism,  which
contradicts  the  absolute  truth  of  the  altruistic  principle

VIII.  Two  rules — of  justice  (to  injure  no  one)  and  of  mercy  (to
help  every  one) — that  follow  from  the  principle  of  altruism. — The
mistaken  division  and  opposition  of  mercy  and  of  justice,  which  are
in  truth  merely  the  different  aspects  or  manifestations  of  one  and
the  same  moral  motive. — The  moral  principle  in  the  form  of  justice
does  not  demand  the  material  or  qualitative  equality  of  all  indi¬
vidual  and  collective  subjects.  It  merely  demands  that  in  the
presence  of  all  the  necessary  and  desirable  differences  there  should
be  preserved  something  that  is  unconditional  and  the  same  for  all,


xlii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

PAGE

namely,  the  significance  of  each  as  an  end  in  himself,  and  not
merely  as  a  means  for  the  purposes  of  others  .  .  -74


CHAPTER  IV

The  Religious  Principle  in  Morality.

I.  The  peculiarity  of  the  religiously-moral  determinations. —

Their  root  is  in  the  normal  relation  of  children  to  parents,  based
upon  an  inequality  which  cannot  be  reduced  to  justice  or  deduced
from  pity  :  a  child  immediately  recognises  the  superiority  of  his
parents  to  himself  and  his  dependence  upon  them,  feels  reverence  for
them  and  the  necessity  of  obeying  them  (explanation)  .  .  77

II.  The  original  germ  of  religion  is  neither  fetishism  (proof),

nor  naturalistic  mythology  (proof),  but  pietas  erga  parentes — first  in
relation  to  the  mother  and  then  to  the  father  .  .  .80

III.  The  religious  relation  of  children  to  parents  as  to  their

immediate  providence  becomes  more  complex  and  is  spiritualised,
passing  into  reverence  for  the  departed  parents,  lifted  above  ordinary
surroundings  and  possessed  of  mysterious  power  ;  the  father  in  his
lifetime  is  only  a  candidate  for  a  god,  and  a  mediator  and  priest
of  the  real  god — of  the  dead  grandparent  or  ancestor. — The  char¬
acter  and  significance  of  ancestor-worship  (illustrations  from  the
beliefs  of  ancient  peoples)  .  .  .  .  .  .82

IV.  Whatever  the  difference  in  the  religious  conceptions  and

manner  of  worship  may  be,- — from  the  primitive  cult  of  tribal
ancestors  up  to  the  Christian  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth  of  the
one  universal  Heavenly  Father,— the  moral  essence  of  religion
remains  the  same.  A  savage  cannibal  and  a  perfect  saint,  in  so  far
as  both  are  religious,  are  at  one  in  their  filial  relation  to  the  higher
and  in  their  resolution  to  do  not  their  own  will  but  the  will  of  the
Father. — Such  natural  religion  is  the  inseparable  part  of  the  law
written  in  our  hearts,  and  without  it  a  rational  fulfilment  of  other
demands  of  morality  is  impossible  .  .  .  .  .85

V.  Supposed  godlessness  or  impiety  (example). — Cases  of  real
impiety,  i.e.  of  not  recognising  anything  superior  to  oneself,  are  as
little  proof  against  the  principle  as  piety  and  its  binding  character,
as  the  actual  existence  of  shameless  and  pitiless  people  is  a  proof
against  the  duties  of  abstinence  and  kindness. — Apart  from  out-
having  or  not  having  any  positive  beliefs,  we  must ,  as  rational
beings,  admit  that  the  life  of  the  world  and  our  own  life  has  a
meaning,  and  that  therefore  everything  depends  upon  a  supreme
rational  principle  towards  which  we  must  adopt  a  filial  attitude,
submitting  all  our  actions  to  ‘the  will  of  the  Father,’  that  speaks
to  us  through  reason  and  conscience


87


CONTENTS


xliii


PAGE

VI.  In  the  domain  of  piety,  as  of  all  morality,  higher  demands
do  not  cancel  the  lower,  but  presuppose  and  include  them  (examples).

— Our  real  dependence  upon  the  one  Father  of  the  universe  is  not
immediate,  in  so  far  as  our  existence  is  determined  in  the  first
instance  by  heredity,  i.e.  by  our  ancestors,  and  the  environment
created  by  them. — Since  the  Supreme  Will  has  determined  our
existence  through  our  ancestors,  we  cannot,  in  bowing  down  before
Its  action,  be  indifferent  to  Its  instruments  (explanations). — The
moral  duty  of  reverence  to  providential  men  .  .  .89


CHAPTER  V

Virtues.

I.  Three  general  aspects  of  morality  :  virtue  (in  the  narrow

sense — as  a  good  natural  quality),  norm  or  the  rule  of  good  actions,
and  moral  good  as  the  consequence  of  them. — The  indissoluble
logical  connection  between  these  three  aspects  permits  us  to  re¬
gard  the  whole  content  of  morality  under  the  first  term- — as  a
virtue  (in  the  wide  sense)  .  .  .  .  .  .92

II.  Virtue  as  man’s  right  relation  to  everything.  Right

relation  is  not  an  equal  relation  (explanation). —  Since  man  is
neither  absolutely  superior  nor  absolutely  inferior  to  everything
else,  nor  unique  of  his  kind,  but  is  conscious  of  himself  as  an
intermediary  being  and  one  of  many  intermediary  beings,  it  follows
with  logical  necessity  that  the  moral  norms  have  a  triple  character,
or  that  there  are  three  fundamental  virtues  in  the  proper  sense  of
the  term. — These  are  always  alike  in  all,  since  they  express  the
essential  moral  quality,  determined  in  the  right  way  and  giving
rise  to  right  determinations. — All  the  other  so-called  virtues  are
merely  qualities  of  the  will  and  manners  of  action  which  have  no
moral  determination  within  themselves  and  no  constant  corre¬
lation  with  the  law  of  duty,  and  may  therefore  be  sometimes
virtues,  sometimes  indifferent  states,  and  sometimes  vices  (explana¬
tions  and  examples)  ...  .  .  93

III.  Moral  valuation  depends  upon  our  right  attitude  to  the
object  and  not  upon  the  psychological  quality  of  volitional  and
emotional  states. — The  analysis — from  this  point  of  view  —  of
the  so-called  cardinal  or  philosophical  virtues,  and  especially
of  justice. — It  is  understood  as  rectitude,  as  aequitas,  as  justitia,
and  as  legalitas. — In  the  first  sense — of  what  is  right  in  general
— it  goes  beyond  the  boundaries  of  ethics  ;  in  the  second,  of  im¬
partiality,  and  in  the  third — of  ‘injuring  no  one’ — justice  corre¬
sponds  to  the  general  principle  of  altruism  (since  the  rules  ‘injure
no  one  ’  and  ‘  help  all  ’  are  inseparable)  ;  in  the  fourth  sense — of


PAGE


xliv  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

absolute  submission  to  existing  laws — justice  is  not  in  itself  a  virtue,
but  may  or  may  not  be  according  to  circumstances  (classical
examples :  Socrates,  Antigone)  .  .  .  •  -95

IV.  The  so-called  ‘theological  virtues’  have  moral  worth  not
unconditionally  and  in  themselves,  but  in  relation  to  other  facts. —

Faith  is  a  virtue  only  on  three  conditions  :  (i)  that  its  object  is  real ;

(2)  that  it  has  worth  ;  (3)  that  the  relation  of  faith  to  its  real  and
worthy  object  is  a  worthy  one  (explanations). — Such  faith  coincides
with  true  piety. — The  same  is  true  of  hope. — The  positive  com¬
mandment  of  love  is  conditioned  by  the  negative  :  do  not  love  the
world,  nor  all  that  is  in  the  world  (demand  for  abstinence  or  the
principle  of  asceticism).— Love  to  God  coincides  with  true  piety,
and  love  to  our  neighbours  with  pity. — Thus  love  is  not  a  virtue,
but  the  culminating  expression  of  all  the  fundamental  demands  of
morality  in  the  three  necessary  respects  :  in  relation  to  the  higher,

to  the  lower,  and  to  the  equal  .  .  .  .  .100

V.  Magnanimity  and  disinterestedness  as  modifications  of
ascetic  virtue. — Liberality  as  a  special  manifestation  of  altruism. —

The  different  moral  significance  of  patience  and  tolerance,  accord¬
ing  to  the  object  and  the  situation  .  .  .  .  102

VI.  Truthfulness. — Since  speech  is  the  instrument  of  reason  for

expressing  the  truth,  misuse  (in  lying  and  deception)  of  this  formal
and  universally-human  means  for  selfish  and  material  ends  is  shame¬
ful  for  the  person  who  lies,  insulting  and  injurious  to  the  persons
deceived,  and  contrary  to  the  two  fundamental  moral  demands  of
respect  for  human  dignity  in  oneself  and  of  justice  to  others. —
Consistently  with  the  conception  of  truth,  the  reality  of  a  parti¬
cular  external  fact  must  not  be  arbitrarily  separated  from  the
moral  significance  of  the  given  situation  as  a  whole. — Difference
between  material  falsity  and  moral  falsehood. — Detailed  analysis  of
the  question  as  to  whether  it  is  permissible  to  save  a  man’s  life  by
verbally  deceiving  the  murderer  .  .  .  .  .104

VII.  The  conception  of  truth  or  rightness  unites  in  a  supreme
synthesis  the  three  fundamental  demands  of  morality,  in  so  far  as
one  and  the  same  truth  demands  from  its  very  nature  a  different
attitude  to  our  lower  nature  (the  ascetic  attitude),  to  our  neighbours
(the  altruistic  attitude),  and  to  the  supreme  principle  (the  religious
attitude). — Opposition  between  the  absolute  inner  necessity  or  the
binding  nature  of  truth  and  its  accidental  and  conditional  character
as  a  sufficient  motive  of  human  actions. — Hence  the  desire  to  re¬
place  the  conception  of  the  moral  good  or  the  unconditional  duty
by  the  conception  of  happiness  or  of  the  unconditionally  desirable


in


CONTENTS


xlv


CHAPTER  VI

The  Spurious  Basis  of  Moral  Philosophy  (. A  Critique  of
Abstract  Hedonism  in  its  Different  Forms).

I.  In  so  far  as  the  (moral)  good  is  not  desired  by  a  person  and
is  not  regarded  by  him  as  desirable,  it  is  not  a  good  for  him  ;  in  so
far  as  it  is  regarded  by  him  as  desirable,  but  does  not  determine  his
will,  it  is  not  an  actual  good  for  him  ;  in  so  far  as  it  determines  his
will  but  does  not  give  him  the  power  to  realise  in  the  whole  world
that  which  ought  to  be,  it  is  not  a  sufficient  good. — Owing  to  such
empirical  discrepancy  the  good  is  regarded  as  distinct  from  the
right,  and  is  understood  as  welfare,  (eudaemonia). — The  obvious
advantage  that  the  eudaemonic  principle  has  over  the  purely  moral
one  is  that  welfare  is  from  the  very  definition  of  it  desirable  for  all.
— The  nearest  definition  of  welfare  is  pleasure,  and  eudaemonism
becomes  hedonism  .......

II.  The  weakness  of  hedonism. — Universality  involved  in  the
conception  of  pleasure  is  formal  and  logical  or  abstract  only,  and
does  not  express  any  definite  and  actual  unity,  and  therefore  supplies
no  general  principle  or  rule  of  action. — Man  may  find  real  pleasure
in  things  which  he  knows  lead  to  destruction,  i.e.  in  things  which
are  most  undesirable. — Transition  from  pure  hedonism  to  extreme
pessimism  (Hygesias  of  Cyrenae — ‘  the  advocate  of  death  ’)

III.  Analysis  of  pleasure. — What  is  really  desired  (or  is  an
object  of  desire)  are  certain  represented  realities  and  not  the
pleasurable  sensations  aroused  by  them  (proof). — The  desirability
of  certain  objects  or  their  significance  as  a  good  depends  not  upon
the  subjective  pleasurable  states  that  follow,  but  upon  the  known
or  unknown  objective  relation  of  these  objects  to  our  bodily  or
mental  nature. — Pleasure  as  an  attribute  of  the  good. — From  this
point  of  view  the  highest  welfare  consists  in  possessing  such  good
things  which  in  their  totality  or  as  a  final  result  give  the  maximum
of  pleasure  and  the  minimum  of  pain — the  chief  practical  signifi¬
cance  here  belongs  not  to  pleasure  as  such,  but  to  a  careful  con¬
sideration  of  the  consequences  of  this  or  of  that  line  of  conduct  ;
prudent  hedonism  .......

IV.  If  the  final  end  is  welfare,  the  whole  point  is  the  actual
attainment  and  the  secure  possession  of  it  ;  neither  the  one  nor
the  other,  however,  may  be  ensured  by  prudence  (proof). — The
insufficiency  of  ideal  (intellectual  and  aesthetic)  pleasures  from  the
hedonistic  point  of  view. — Since  pleasures  are  not  abiding  quan¬
tities  which  can  be  added  together,  but  merely  transitory  subjective
states  which,  when  past,  cease  to  be  pleasures,  the  advantage  of
prudent  hedonism  over  reckless  enjoyment  of  life  is  apparent  only


PAGE


1 14


1 1 6


'  117


120


xlvi  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

V.  Self-sufficient  hedonism,  whose  principle  is  the  inner  freedom

from  desires  and  affections  which  render  man  unhappy.  Being
purely  negative,  such  freedom  can  only  be  a  condition  of  obtaining
a  higher  good  and  not  that  good  itself  .  •  ‘  •

VI.  Utilitarianism  affirms  as  a  supreme  practical  principle
the  service  of  the  common  good  or  of  general  happiness,  which
coincides  with  individual  happiness  rightly  understood.  Utili¬
tarianism  is  mistaken  not  in  its  practical  demands,  in  so  far  as
they  correspond  with  the  demands  of  altruistic  morality,  but  in  its
desire  to  base  these  demands  upon  egoism,  contrary  to  the  testimony
of  experience  (self-sacrifice  of  individual  entities  to  the  genus
among  animals  and  savage  races  ;  ‘  struggle  for  the  life  of

others’)  .  •  •  •  •  •  /

VII.  It  is  logically  erroneous  to  establish  the  connection  utili¬
tarianism  establishes  between  personal  gain  and  general  happiness.
_ General  weakness  of  utilitarianism  and  all  hedonism. — Happi¬
ness  remains  an  indefinite  and  unrealisable  demand ',  to  which  the
moral  demand  of  the  good  as  duty  is  in  every  respect  superior.
— Transition  to  Part  II.


PART  II

THE  GOOD  IS  FROM  GOD

CHAPTER  I

The  Unity  of  Moral  Principles.

I.  Conscience  and  shame  .....

II.  The  feeling  of  shame,  primarily  and  fundamentally  con¬
nected  with  the  sexual  life,  transcends  the  boundaries  of  the
material  existence,  and,  as  the  expression  of  formal  disapprobation,
accompanies  every  violation  of  the  moral  law  in  all  spheres  of  activity

III.  For  an  animal  entity  the  infinity  of  life  is  given  in  geni-
talibus  only,  and  the  entity  in  question  feels  and  acts  as  a  limited,
passive  means  or  instrument  of  the  generic  process  in  its  bad  in¬
finity  ;  and  it  is  here,  in  this  centre  of  the  natural  life,  that  man
becomes  conscious  that  the  infinity  of  the  genus,  in  which  the  animal
finds  its  supreme  destination,  is  insufficient. — The  fact  that  man  is
chiefly  and  primarily  ashamed  of  the  very  essence  of  the  animal
life,  of  the  fundamental  expression  of  the  physical  nature,  directly
proves  him  to  be  a  super-animal  and  super-natural  being. — In  sexual
shame  man  becomes  human  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term  .


PAGE


123


I24


126


J35


136


137


CONTENTS


xlvii


IV.  The  eternal  life  of  the  genus  based  upon  the  eternal  death
of  individual  entities  is  shameful  and  unsatisfactory  to  man,  who
both  wrants,  and  feels  it  his  duty,  to  possess  eternal  life,  and  not
merely  to  be  its  instrument. — The  true  genius

V.  The  path  of  animal  procreation  or  of  the  perpetration  of
death,  felt  at  the  beginning  to  be  shameless,  proves  subsequently
to  be  both  pitiless  and  impious  :  it  is  pitiless,  for  it  means  the  ex¬
pulsion  or  the  crowding  out  of  one  generation  by  another,  and  it
is  impious  because  the  expelled  are  our  fathers

VI.  Child-bearing  as  a  good  and  as  an  evil. — The  solution  of
the  antinomy  :  in  so  far  as  the  evil  of  child-bearing  may  be
abolished  by  child-bearing  itself,  it  becomes  a  good  (explanation)  .

VII.  The  positive  significance  of  the  ecstasy  of  human  love. —

It  points  to  the  hidden  wholeness  of  the  individual  and  to  the  way
of  making  it  manifest. — Uselessness  of  the  ecstasy  of  love  for
animal  procreation  ......

VIII.  The  essential  inner  connection  between  shame  and  pity.
Both  are  a  reaction  of  the  hidden  wholeness  of  the  human  being
against  (i)  its  individual  division  into  sexes  ;  and  (2)  a  further
division — resulting  from  that  first  one — of  humanity  into  a  number
of  conflicting  egoistic  entities  (shame  as  individual  and  pity  as
social  continence)  .......

IX.  The  same  is  true  with  regard  to  (3)  piety  as  religious  con¬

tinence  which  opposes  man’s  separation  from  the  absolute  centre
of  life  .......

X.  The  one  essence  of  morality  is  the  wholeness  of  man  rooted

in  his  nature  as  an  abiding  norm ,  and  realised  in  the  individual
and  historical  life  as  right-doing  and  struggle  with  the  centrifugal
and  dividing  forces. — The  norm-preserving  element  in  shame. —
Modifications  of  the  original  (sexual)  shame :  conscience  as
essentially  inter-human  shame,  and  the  fear  of  God  as  religious
shame  ........

XI.  In  so  far  as  the  wholeness  of  the  human  being  (attained
in  three  directions)  becomes  a  fact,  the  good  coincides  with  happi¬
ness. — Since  true  happiness  is  conditioned  by  the  moral  good,  the
ethics  of  pure  duty  cannot  be  opposed  to  eudaemonism  in  general,
which  necessarily  enters  into  it. — Human  good  fails  to  give  com¬
plete  satisfaction  and  happiness  simply  because  it  itself  is  never
complete  and  is  never  fully  realised  (explanations)

XII.  To  be  truly  autonomous  the  good  must  be  perfect,  and

such  a  good  is  bound  to  involve  happiness. — If  the  good  and  happi¬
ness  are  wrongly  understood,  empirical  cases  of  virtue  coinciding
or  not  coinciding  with  happiness  are  of  no  moral  interest
whatever  (instances)  ......

XIII.  Critical  remarks  concerning  the  insufficiency  of  Kantian

ethics  ...••■•■


■ЧГ


PAGE

138

140

141

142

143

!45

146

150

152
1 5  3


xlviii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


XIV.  Kant’s  religious  postulates  ill-founded. — Reality  of  the
super-human  good,  proved  by  the  moral  growth  of  humanity


CHAPTER  II

The  Unconditional  Principle  of  Morality.

I.  Morality  and  the  world  of  fact. — In  shame  man  actually
separates  himself  ofF  from  material  nature;  in  pity  he  actually
manifests  his  essential  connection  with  and  similarity  to  other

living  beings  .  •  •  •  •  '

II.  In  religious  feeling  the  Deity  is  experienced  as  the  actuality
of  the  perfect  good  (  =  happiness)  unconditionally  and  entirely
realised  in  itself. — The  general  basis  of  religion  is  the  living
experience  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  Deity,  of  the  One  which
embraces  all  (explanation)  ...•••

III.  The  reality  of  God  is  not  a  deduction  from  religious  ex¬
perience  but  its  immediate  content — that  which  is  experienced.
Analysis  of  this  content,  as  of  a  given  relation  of  man  to  God,
from  the  point  of  view  of  (i)  the  difference  between  them  (‘the
dust  of  the  earth  ’  in  us)  ;  (2)  their  ideal  connection  (‘  the  image
of  God  ’  in  us)  ;  and  (3)  their  real  connection  (‘  the  likeness  of  God  ’
in  us). — The  complete  religious  relation  is  logically  resolvable  into
three  moral  categories:  (1)  imperfection  in  us;  (2)  perfection  in
God  ;  (3)  attaining  perfection  as  the  task  of  our  life

IV.  The  psychological  confirmation  :  ‘joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit’
as  the  highest  expression  of  religion. — The  formally  moral  aspect
of  the  religious  relation.— The  duty  ‘  to  be  perfect,’  its  ideal  exten¬
sion  and  practical  significance — ‘  become  perfect  ’  .

V.  Three  kinds  of  perfection  :  (1)  that  which  unconditionally
is  in  God  {actus  purus)  ;  (2)  that  which  potentially  is  in  the  soul ;
(3)  that  which  actually  comes  to  be  in  the  history  of  the  world. —
Proof  of  the  rational  necessity  of  the  process.  A  mollusc  or  a
sponge  cannot  express  human  thought  and  will,  and  a  biological
process  is  necessary  for  creating  a  more  perfect  organism  ;  in
like  manner  the  supreme  thought  and  will  (the  Kingdom
of  God)  cannot  be  revealed  among  semi-animals,  and  requires
the  historical  process  of  making  the  forms  of  life  more
perfect  ........

VI.  The  necessity  of  the  universal  process  which  follows  from

the  unconditional  principle  of  the  good. — The  world  as  a  system
of  preliminary  material  conditions  for  the  realisation  of  the
kingdom  of  ends. — The  moral  freedom  of  man  as  the  final  condition
of  that  realisation  ....  .


PAGE

*56


160


161


1 64


1 66


168


170


CONTENTS


xlix


PAGE

VII.  The  demands  of  religious  morality  :  ‘  have  God  in  you  ’
and  ‘  regard  everything  in  God’s  way.’ — God’s  relation  to  evil. —

The  full  form  of  the  categorical  imperative  as  the  expression  of

the  unconditional  principle  of  morality  .  .  .  .173

VIII.  The  higher  degrees  of  morality  do  not  abolish  the  lower,
but  when  being  realised  in  history  presuppose  them  and  are  based

upon  them. — Pedagogical  aspect  of  the  matter  .  .  .174

IX.  Natural  altruism  becomes  deeper,  higher,  and  wider  in
virtue  of  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality. — The  determining
power  of  that  principle  in  relation  to  collective  historical  institu¬
tions  intended  for  serving  the  good. — Our  highest  duty  is  not  to
serve  these  institutions  uncritically  (since  they  may  fail  to  fulfil  their
destination),  but  to  help  them  to  serve  the  good  or,  if  they  swerve

from  the  right  course,  to  point  out  their  true  duties  .  .  176

X.  When  man’s  relation  to  the  Deity  is  raised  to  the  level  of

absolute  consciousness,  the  preserving  feeling  of  continence  (shame,
conscience,  fear  of  God)  is  finally  seen  to  safeguard  not  the  relative
but  the  absolute  dignity  of  man — his  ideal  perfection  which  is  to
be  realised. — Ascetic  morality  is  now  seen  to  have  a  positive
eschatological  motive,  namely,  to  re-create  our  bodily  nature  and
make  it  the  destined  abode  of  the  Holy  Spirit  .  .  .178


CHAPTER  III

The  Reality  of  the  Moral  Order.

I.  Since  the  reality  of  the  spiritual  is  inseparable  from  the
reality  of  the  material,  the  process — to  be  considered  by  moral
philosophy — whereby  the  universe  attains  perfection,  being  the
process  of  manifestation  of  God  in  man,  must  necessarily  be
the  process  of  manifestation  of  God  in  matter. — The  series  of  the
concrete  grades  of  being  most  clearly  determined  and  characteristic
from  the  point  of  view  of  moral  purpose  realised  in  the  world-
process — the  five  ‘  kingdoms  ’  :  the  mineral  or  inorganic,  the
vegetable,  the  animal,  the  naturally  human,  and  the  spiritually
human  or  the  kingdom  of  God. — Description  and  definition  of
them. — Their  external  interrelation  :  inorganic  substances  nourish
the  life  of  plants,  animals  exist  at  the  expense  of  the  vegetable
kingdom,  men  at  the  expense  of  animals,  and  the  kingdom  of  God
consists  of  men  (explanations). — The  general  character  of  the
ascent  :  just  as  a  living  organism  consists  of  chemical  substance
which  has  ceased  to  be  mere  substance,  so  natural  humanity  con¬
sists  of  animals  who  have  ceased  to  be  mere  animals,  and  the  king¬
dom  of  God  consists  of  men  who  have  ceased  to  be  merely  human


1


THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

PAGE

but  have  entered  into  a  new  and  higher  plan  of  existence  where
their  purely  human  objects  become  the  means  and  instruments  of
another,  final  purpose  .  .  -  •  •  .180

II.  The  stone  exists  ;  the  plant  exists  and  lives  ;  the  animal,
in  addition  to  this,  is  conscious  of  its  life  in  its  concrete  states  and
correlations,  the  natural  man,  existing,  living,  and  being  conscious
of  his  actual  life,  comes,  besides,  to  be  gradually  aware  of  its
general  meaning  according  to  ideas  ;  the  sons  of  God  are  called
to  realise  this  meaning  in  all  things  to  the  end  (explanation). — The
development  of  the  human  kingdom  in  the  ancient  world. — The
real  limit — a  living  man-god  (apotheosis  of  the  Caesars). — As  in
the  animal  kingdom  the  appearance  of  the  anthropomorphic  ape
anticipates  the  appearance  of  the  real  man,  so  in  natural  humanity

the  deified  Caesar  is  the  anticipation  of  the  true  God-man  .  183

III.  The  God-man  as  the  first  and  essential  manifestation  of
the  kingdom  of  God. — Reasons  for  believing  in  the  historical
existence  of  Christ  (as  the  God-man)  from  the  point  of  view  of

the  evolution  of  the  world  rationally  understood  .  .  .186

IV.  Positive  unity  of  the  world-process  in  its  three  aspects  :  (1)

the  lower  kingdoms  form  part  of  the  moral  order  as  the  necessary
conditions  of  its  realisation  ;  (2)  each  of  the  lower  forms  strives
towards  a  correspondingly  higher  form  ;  (3)  each  of  the  higher
forms  physically  (and  psychologically)  includes  the  lower. — The
process  of  gathering  the  universe  together. — The  task  of  the
natural  man  and  humanity  is  to  gather  together  the  universe  in
idea  ;  the  task  of  the  God-man  and  the  divine  humanity  is  to
gather  the  universe  together  in  reality  .  .  .  .188

V.  Positive  connection  between  the  spiritual  and  the  natural
man,  between  grace  and  natural  goodness. — Historical  confirmation

of  the  essential  truth  of  Christianity  .  .  .  .190

VI.  Christ  as  the  perfect  individual. — Reason  why  He  first

appeared  in  the  middle  of  history  and  not  at  the  end  of  it  .  193

VII.  The  perfect  moral  order  presupposes  the  moral  freedom
of  each  person,  and  true  freedom  is  acquired  by  a  finite  spirit
through  experience  only  :  hence  the  necessity  of  historical  develop¬
ment  after  Christ. — The  ultimate  significance  of  that  development.

— -The  actual  task  morality  has  before  it  inevitably  brings  us  into
the  realm  of  conditions  which  determine  the  concrete  historical
existence  of  society  or  of  the  collective  man  .  .  .193


CONTENTS


И


PART  III

THE  GOOD  THROUGH  HUMAN  HISTORY


CHAPTER  I

PAGE

The  Individual  and  Society.

I.  The  separation  between  the  individual  and  society  as  such

is  nothing  but  a  morbid  illusion  (explanation)  .  .  .199

II.  Human  personality  as  such,  in  virtue  of  the  reason  and

will  inherent  in  it,  is  capable  of  realising  unlimited  possibilities,  in
other  words,  it  is  a  special  form  with  infinite  content. — The
chimera  of  self-sufficient  personality  and  the  chimera  of  impersonal
society. — Society  is  involved  in  the  very  definition  of  personality  as
a  rationally  knowing  and  morally  active  force,  which  is  only
possible  in  social  existence  (proofs). — Society  is  the  objectively
realisable  content  of  the  rational  and  moral  personality — not  its
external  limit,  but  its  essential  complement. — It  embodies  the
indivisible  wholeness  of  universal  life,  partly  realised  already
in  the  past  (common  tradition),  partly  realisable  in  the  present
(social  service)  and  anticipating  the  perfect  realisation  in  the
future  (the  common  ideal). — To  these  abiding  moments  of  the
individually  social  life  there  correspond  three  main  stages  in
the  historical  development :  the  tribal  (past) ;  the  nationally-
political  (present)  ;  and  the  world-wide  (future). — A  clear  distinc¬
tion  between  these  grades  and  aspects  of  life  actually  shows
itself  in  history  as  the  successive  transformation  of  one  into
another  and  not  as  the  exclusive  presence  of  any  one  of  these
forms  .  .......  200

III.  Society  is  the  completed  or  the  expanded  individual,  and
the  individual  is  the  compressed  or  concentrated  society. — The
historical  task  of  morality  lies  not  in  creating  a  solidarity  between
the  individual  and  society  but  in  rendering  this  solidarity  conscious,
in  transforming  it  from  involuntary  into  voluntary,  so  that  each
person  should  understand,  accept,  and  carry  out  the  common  task

as  his  own  .......  203

IV.  True  morality  is  a  right  interaction  between  the  individual
and  his  environment. — Man  is  from  the  first  an  individually-
social  being,  and  the  whole  history  is  a  process  of  gradually
deepening,  widening,  and  raising  to  a  higher  level  this  two-sided,
individually-social  life.  Of  these  two  indivisible  and  correlative
terms  the  individual  is  the  movable,  the  dynamic  element,


PAGE


Hi  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


while  society  is  the  inert,  conservative,  and  static  element  of
history. — There  can  be  no  opposition  of  principle  between  the
individual  and  society  but  only  between  the  different  stages  of  the
individually-social  development  .....

V.  The  clan  (in  the  wide  sense)  as  the  rudimentary  embodi¬
ment  of  morality  as  a  whole  (religious,  altruistic,  and  ascetic),
or  as  the  realisation  of  the  individual  human  dignity  in  the
narrowest  and  most  fundamental  social  sphere  (explanations  and
proofs)  ........

VI.  The  moral  content  of  the  clan  life  is  eternal,  the  form  of
the  clan  is  broken  up  by  the  historical  process. — The  general
course  of  this  breaking  up. — Transition  from  the  clan  through  the
tribe  to  the  nation  and  the  state.- — The  profound  significance  of
the  word  ‘  fatherland  ’

VII.  When  a  new  and  wider  social  whole  (the  fatherland)  is
formed,  the  clan  becomes  the  family  (explanation). — The  signifi¬
cance  of  the  individual  element  in  the  transition  from  the
clan  to  the  state  .......

VIII.  Every  social  group  has  only  a  relative  and  conditional

claim  on  man. — Social  organisation,  even  of  a  comparatively  high
type — e.g.  the  state — has  no  right  at  all  over  the  eternal  moral
content  which  is  present  even  in  the  relatively  lower  forms  of
life — in  the  clan  life,  for  instance  (detailed  explanation  out  of
Sophocles’s  Antigone )  ......


204


206


207


210


213


CHAPTER  II

The  Chief  Moments  in  the  Historical  Development  of
the  Individually-Social  Consciousness.

I.  Moral  progress  (on  its  religious  and  altruistic  side)  corre¬
sponds  to  the  social  progress  (explanatory  remarks)  .  .220

II.  Achievements  of  civilisation  as  a  condition  of  progress  for

ascetic  morality,  which  is  not  the  work  of  individuals  taken  as
such,  but  of  man  as  an  individually-social  being  (historical  ex¬
planation  and  confirmation). — Conditions  which  render  conscious¬
ness  of  spiritual  independence  possible  .  .  .222

III.  Recognition  by  the  human  personality  of  its  purely
negative  or  formal  infinity  without  any  definite  content. — The
religion  of  Awakening  :  “  I  am  above  all  this  ;  all  this  is  empty.” —
Buddhist  confession  of  the  ‘  three  treasures  ’  :  I  believe  in  Buddha,

I  believe  in  the  doctrine,  I  believe  in  the  community” — i.e.  all  is
illusion  with  the  exception  of  three  things  worthy  of  belief :  the
man  who  is  spiritually  awake,  the  words  of  awakening,  and  the
brotherhood  of  the  awakened. — Buddhism  as  the  first  extant


CONTENTS


liii


stage  of  human  universalism  rising  above  the  exclusive  nationally-
political  structure  of  pagan  religion  and  society. — The  moral
essence  of  the  Buddhist  doctrine  :  reverence  for  the  first  awakened,
the  commandment  of  will-lessness  and  of  universal  benevolence  .

IV.  Criticism  of  Buddhism  :  its  inner  contradictions  .

V.  Final  definition  of  the  Buddhist  doctrine  as  religious  and
moral  nihilism  (in  the  strict  sense),  which  denies  in  principle  every
object  and  every  motive  for  reverence,  pity,  and  spiritual  struggle

VI.  Logical  transition  from  Hindu  nihilism  to  Greek  idealism.
— Greeks  no  less  than  Hindus  felt  the  emptiness  of  sensuous
being  :  the  pessimism  of  Greek  poetry  and  philosophy. — But  from
sensuous  emptiness  Greeks  passed  to  the  intelligible  fulness  of  the
Ideas. — Statement  of  the  Ideal  theory  (historical  instances  and
explanations)  ........

VII.  The  impossibility  of  consistently  contrasting  the  two

worlds. — Three  relative  and  analogous  wrongs  (anomalies)  of  the
phenomenal  world  :  the  psychological  (the  subjection  of  reason
to  passions),  the  social  (the  subjection  of  the  wise  man  to  the  mob),
and  the  physical  (the  subjection  of  the  living  organic  form  to  the
inorganic  forces  of  substance  in  death). — Idealism  attempts  to
combat  the  first  two  anomalies  but  is  blind  and  dumb  to  the
third. — The  whole  of  our  world  (not  only  the  mental  and  the
political  but  the  physical  as  well)  is  in  need  of  salvation,  and  the
Saviour  is  not  the  Hindu  ascetic  or  the  Greek  philosopher  but  the
Jewish  Messiah — not  one  who  rejects  life  in  the  name  of  non-being
or  in  the  name  of  abstract  Ideas,  but  one  who  makes  life  whole
and  raises  it  up  for  eternity  .....

VIII.  Comparison  between  Buddhism,  Platonism,  and  Christi¬
anity  :  negative  universalism,  one-sided  universalism,  and  positive,
complete,  or  perfect  universalism. — The  weakness  of  Platonism
from  the  moral  point  of  view. — Preparatory  significance  of  Buddh¬
ism  and  Platonism  ;  their  fruitlessness  when  they  are  taken  to
be  doctrines  complete  in  themselves. — Christianity  as  an  absolute
event,  an  absolute  promise,  and  an  absolute  task


CHAPTER  III

Abstract  Subjectivism  in  Morality.

I.  The  erroneous  view  which  denies  as  a  matter  of  principle

that  morality  has  an  objective  task  or  is  the  work  of  the  collective
man. — Statement  of  the  question  .  .  .  .  .

II.  The  insufficiency  of  morality  as  subjective  feeling  only. —
Historical  confirmation  ......

III.  The  insufficiency  of  morality  which  addresses  its  demands
to  individuals  only. — Historical  confirmation


PAGE

227

230

233

236


24О

244

248

250


254


liv  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

IV.  The  demand  for  organised  morality  (theoretical  explana¬
tion). — The  degree  of  the  individual’s  subordination  to  society
must  correspond  to  the  degree  to  which  society  itself  is  subordinate
to  the  moral  good.  Apart  from  its  connection  with  the  moral
good, social  environment  has  no  claimwhatever  upon  the  individual.


CHAPTER  IV

The  Moral  Norm  of  Social  Life.

I.  The  error  of  social  realism,  according  to  which  social  in¬
stitutions  and  interests  have  a  supreme  and  decisive  significance
in  themselves.— Man  is  not  merely  a  social  animal. — The  concep¬
tion  of  a  social  being  is  poorer  in  intension  but  wider  in  extension
than  the  conception  of  man. — Description  of  the  social  life  of  ants

II.  The  unconditional  value  of  the  individual  for  society. — No
man  under  any  circumstances  and  for  any  reason  may  be  regarded
as  merely  a  means  or  an  instrument — neither  for  the  good  of
another  person,  nor  for  the  good  of  a  group  of  persons,  nor  for  the
so-called  ‘common  good’  (explanations). — Religion,  family,  and
property  in  relation  to  the  unconditional  moral  norm

III.  Rights  of  man  wrongly  understood  as  the  privilege  of  the
one  (eastern  monarchies)  or  of  the  few  (classical  aristocracies)  or
of  the  many  (democracies). — The  three  chief  anomalies  of  the
ancient  society  — the  denial  of  human  dignity  to  the  external
enemies,  to  slaves,  and  to  criminals. — Progress  of  social  morality
in  the  consciousness  of  the  ancient  world. — The  absolute  affirma¬
tion  of  human  dignity  in  Christianity  ....

IV.  The  task  of  the  present  is  to  make  all  social  institutions
conformable  to  the  unconditional  moral  norm  and  to  struggle
with  the  collective  evil  ......


CHAPTER  V

The  National  Ouestion  from  the  Moral  Point  of  View.

The  collective  evil  as  a  threefold  immoral  relation  :  between
different  nations,  between  society  and  the  criminal,  between
different  classes  of  society  ......

I.  Nationalism  and  cosmopolitanism.  —  Moral  weakness  of

nationalism  .......

II.  The  absence  of  strictly  national  divisions  in  the  ancient
world.  —  Eastern  monarchies  and  western  city  states  did  not
coincide  with  nations  (historical  references)


PAGE

258


261

264

268

272

276

277

279


CONTENTS


III.  Jews  have  never  been  merely  a  nation. — Christianity  is
not  negative  cosmopolitanism,  but  positive  super-national  and
all-national  universalism.  It  can  as  little  demand  absence  of
nationality  as  absence  of  individuality  (explanation  and  his¬
torical  instances)  .......

IV.  Universalism  of  new  European  nations. — Historical  survey :
Italy,  Spain,  England,  France,  Germany,  Poland,  Russia,  Holland,
Sweden  ........

V.  Deduction  from  the  historical  survey  :  a  nation  as  a  parti¬

cular  form  of  existence  derives  its  meaning  and  its  inspiration
solely  from  its  connection  and  its  harmony  with  what  is  universal.
— Moral  weakness  of  cosmopolitanism. — Positive  duty  involved  in
the  national  question  :  love  (in  the  ethical  sense)  all  other  nations
as  your  own  (explanation) .  ....


CHAPTER  VI

The  Penal  Question  from  the  Moral  Point  of  View.

Statement  of  the  question  .  .  .  .  .

I.  To  be  ethically  right  the  opposition  to  crime  must  give
moral  help  to  both  parties. — The  duty  to  defend  the  injured  and
to  bring  the  injurer  to  reason.  —  The  two  prevalent  erroneous
doctrines  deny  either  the  one  or  the  other  aspect  of  the  matter

II.  The  conception  of  punishment  as  retribution. — Its  root  is  in
the  custom  of  blood  vengeance  of  the  patriarchal  stage. — The  trans¬
formation  of  this  custom  into  legal  justice,  and  the  transference  of
the  duty  of  vengeance  from  the  clan  to  the  State  .

III.  The  genesis  of  legal  justice  is  wrongly  taken  to  be  its  moral
justification. — Absurd  arguments  in  favour  of  the  savage  conception
of  punishment  as  revenge  or  retribution  ....

IV.  Immoral  tendency  to  preserve  cruel  penalties. — Since  the
absurdity  of  retribution  is  universally  recognised,  cruel  penalties
are  justified  upon  the  principle  of  intimidation. — The  essential
immorality  of  this  principle.— Fatal  inconsistency  of  its  adherents  .

V.  The  chaotic  state  of  modern  justice. — The  doctrine  of  non-
resistance  to  evil  as  applied  to  the  penal  question.  —  Detailed
analysis  and  criticism  of  this  doctrine  ....

VI.  The  moral  principle  admits  neither  of  punishment  as
intimidating  retribution,  nor  of  an  indifferent  relation  to  crime  and
of  allowing  to  commit  crimes  unhindered. — It  demands  real  opposi¬
tion  to  crime  as  a  just  means  of  active  pity,  which  legally  and
compulsorily  limits  certain  external  manifestations  of  the  evil  will
not  only  for  the  sake  of  the  safety  of  the  community  and  of  its
peaceful  members,  but  also  in  the  interest  of  the  criminal  himself. —


ІѴ

PAGE

282

286

295

299

3°°

302

306

310

314


lvi  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Normal  justice  in  dealing  with  crime  must  give,  or  at  any  rate  aim
at,  equal  realisation  of  three  rights  :  of  the  right  of  the  injured
person  to  be  protected,  of  the  right  of  society  to  be  safe,  and  of
the  right  of  the  injurer  to  be  brought  to  reason  and  reformed. —
Temporary  deprivation  of  liberty  as  the  necessary  preliminary  con¬
dition  for  carrying  out  this  task. — The  consequences  of  the  crime
for  the  criminal  must  stand  in  a  natural  inner  connection  with  his
actual  condition. — The  necessity  of  reforming  the  penal  laws  in  a
corresponding  way  :  ‘  conditional  sentences  ’  as  the  first  step  towards
such  reformation  .......

VII.  The  possibility  of  reforming  the  criminal  ;  the  right  and
the  duty  of  society  to  care  about  it. — The  necessary  reform  of
penal  institutions  .......


CHAPTER  VII

The  Economic  Ouestion  from  the  Moral  Point  of  View.

I.  The  connection  of  criminality  and  national  hostility  with
the  economic  conditions. — The  simple  nature  of  the  economic
problem. — Theoretically  wrong  solutions  of  it  on  the  part  of
the  orthodox  economists  and  of  the  socialists

II.  Erroneous  and  immoral  isolation  of  the  economic  sphere  of
relations  as  though  it  were  independent  of  the  moral  conditions  of
human  activity  in  general. — Free  play  of  chemical  processes  can
only  take  place  in  a  dead  and  decomposing  body,  while  in  the
living  organism  these  processes  are  connected  together  and  deter¬
mined  by  biological  purposes. — There  is  not,  and  there  never  has
been,  in  human  society  a  stage  so  low  that  the  material  necessity
for  obtaining  means  of  livelihood  was  not  complicated  by  moral
considerations  (explanations)  .....

III.  In  its  economic  life,  too,  society  must  be  an  organised
realisation  of  the  good. — The  peculiarity  and  independence  of
the  economic  sphere  lies  not  in  the  fact  that  it  has  inexorable  laws
of  its  own,  but  in  the  fact  that  from  its  very  nature  it  presents  a
special  and  peculiar  field  for  the  application  of  the  one  moral  law.
— The  ambiguous  beginning  and  the  bad  end  of  socialism. — The
principle  of  the  St.  Simonists  :  the  rehabilitation  of  matter. — The
true  and  important  meaning  of  this  principle  :  matter  has  a  right
to  be  spiritualised  by  man. — This  meaning  soon  gave  way  to
another :  matter  has  the  right  to  dominate  man. — Gradual  degenera¬
tion  of  socialism  into  economic  materialism,  which  is  inwardly  and
essentially  identical  with  plutocracy  (explanation)  .

IV.  The  true  solution  of  the  economic  question  is  in  man’s
moral  relation  to  material  nature  (earth),  conditioned  by  his  moral


CONTENTS

relation  to  men  and  to  God. — The  commandment  of  labour  :  with
effort  to  cultivate  material  nature  for  oneself  and  one’s  own,  for  all
humanity,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  material  nature  itself.— The  insuf¬
ficiency  of  the  ‘  natural  harmony  ’  of  personal  interests. — Criticism
of  Bastiat’s  doctrine  ......

V.  The  duty  of  society  to  recognise  and  to  secure  to  each  the
right  of  worthy  human  existence. — The  immorality  of  certain
conditions  of  labour  (instances,  confirmations,  and  explanations)  .

VI.  The  main  conditions  which  render  human  relations  in  the
sphere  of  material  labour  moral  :  (i)  material  wealth  must  not  be
recognised  as  the  independent  purpose  of  man’s  economic  activity  ;
(2)  production  must  not  be  at  the  expense  of  the  human  dignity
of  the  producers,  and  not  a  single  one  of  them  must  become  merely
a  means  of  production  ;  (3)  man’s  duties  to  the  earth  (material
nature  in  general)  must  be  recognised  (explanations). — The  rights
of  the  earth. — Man’s  triple  relation  to  the  material  nature  :  (1)
subjection  to  it ;  (2)  struggle  with  it  and  its  exploitation ;  (3)
looking  after  it  for  one’s  own  and  its  sake. — Without  loving  nature
for  its  own  sake  one  cannot  organise  the  material  life  in  a  moral
way. — The  connection  between  moral  relation  to  the  external  nature
and  the  relation  to  one’s  body  .....

VII.  It  is  insufficient  to  study  the  producing  and  the  material
causes  of  labour. — Full  definition  of  labour  from  the  moral  point
of  view  :  labour  is  the  interrelation  of  men  in  the  physical  sphere,
which  interrelation  must,  in  accordance  with  the  moral  law,
secure  to  all  and  each  the  necessary  means  of  existing  worthily  and
of  perfecting  all  sides  of  one’s  being,  and  is  finally  destined  to  trans¬
form  and  spiritualise  material  nature  ....

VIII.  Analysis  of  the  conception  of  property. — The  relativity
of  its  grounds  .......

IX.  The  right  of  each  to  earn  sufficient  wages  and  to  save. —
The  normal  origin  of  capital. — The  right  and  the  duty  of  society
to  limit  the  misuse  of  private  property. — The  striving  of  socialism
for  an  undesirable  extension  of  this  public  right  and  duty. — The
moral  meaning  of  the  handed  down  or  inherited  (family)  property.
— The  special  significance  of  family  inheritance  with  regard  to
landed  property  :  it  is  necessary  not  to  limit  it,  but,  as  far  as
possible,  to  secure  it  to  each  family. — Objections  answered

X.  Exchange  and  fraud.— Commerce  as  public  service  which
cannot  have  private  gain  for  its  sole  or  even  its  main  object. — The
right  and  duty  of  society  compulsorily  to  limit  abuses  in  this
sphere. — Transition  to  the  morally-legal  question  .


Ivii

PAGE

336

340

345

348

349

354

358


lviii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


CHAPTER  VIII

Morality  and  Legal  Justice.

I.  The  unconditional  moral  principle,  as  a  commandment  of
or  demand  for  perfection,  contains  in  its  very  nature  a  recognition
of  the  relative  element  in  morality,  namely,  of  the  real  conditions
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  perfection. — Comparative  predomin¬
ance  of  this  relative  element  constitutes  the  legal  sphere  of  relations
and  comparative  predominance  of  the  unconditional  side  —  the
moral  sphere  in  the  strict  sense  .....

II.  Alleged  contradiction  between  legality  and  morality

(examples  and  explanations)  .....

III.  The  different  grades  of  moral  and  legal  consciousness.—
The  unchangeable  legal  norms  or  the  natural  right. — Legal  con¬
servatism. — Progress  in  legality  or  the  steady  approximation  of  the
legal  enactments  to  the  norms  of  legality  conformable  to,  though
not  identical  with,  the  moral  norms  ....

IV.  The  close  connection  between  morality  and  legal  justice,
vitally  important  for  both  sides. — Verbal  and  etymological  con¬
firmation  of  it

V.  Difference  between  legal  and  moral  justice  :  (i)  the  un¬
limited  character  of  the  purely  moral  and  the  limited  character  of
the  legal  demands — in  this  respect  legal  justice  is  the  lowest  limit
or  a  definite  minimum  of  morality  ;  (2)  legal  justice  chiefly  demands
an  objective  realisation  of  this  minimum  of  good,  or  the  actual  aboli¬
tion  of  a  certain  amount  of  evil  ;  (3)  in  demanding  such  realisation
legal  justice  admits  of  compulsion  .....

VI.  A  general  definition  :  legal  justice  is  a  compulsory  demand

for  the  realisation  of  a  definite  minimum  of  good,  or  for  an  order
which  does  not  allow  of  certain  manifestations  of  evil. — The  moral
ground  for  this  :  interests  of  morality  demand  personal  freedom
as  a  condition  of  human  dignity  and  moral  perfection  ;  but  man
can  exist  and  consequently  be  free  and  strive  for  perfection  in
society  only  ;  moral  interest,  therefore,  demands  that  the  external
manifestations  of  personal  liberty  should  be  consistent  with  the
conditions  of  the  existence  of  society,  i.e.  not  with  the  ideal  perfec¬
tion  of  some,  but  with  the  real  security  of  all. — This  security  is  not
safeguarded  by  the  moral  law  itself,  since  for  immoral  persons  it
does  not  exist,  and  is  ensured  by  the  compulsory  juridical  law  which
has  force  for  the  latter  also  .  ...  .

VII.  Positive  legal  justice  as  the  historically-movable  definition
of  the  necessary  and  compulsory  balance  between  the  two  moral
interests  of  personal  liberty  and  of  the  common  good. — The  moral
demand  that  each  should  be  free  to  be  immoral ;  this  freedom  is


PAGE


362

364


365

367


369


371


CONTENTS


lix


PAGE

secured  by  positive  laws  (explanations). — The  necessary  limit  to
the  compulsion  exercised  by  all  collective  organisations  .  .  374

VIII.  The  legal  view  of  crime  .  .  .  -378

IX.  From  the  very  definition  of  legal  justice  it  follows  that  the

interest  of  the  common  good  can  in  each  case  only  limit  personal
liberty,  but  can  never  abolish  it  altogether. — Hence  capital  punish¬
ment  and  imprisonment  for  life  is  impermissible  .  .  -379

X.  The  three  essential  characteristics  of  law  (publicity,  con¬
creteness,  real  applicability). — The  sanction  of  the  law. — Public
authority. — The  three  kinds  of  authority  (legislative,  juridical,
executive). — The  supreme  authority  .—The  state  as  the  embodiment

of  legal  justice. — Limits  to  the  legal  organisation  of  humanity  .  380

CHAPTER  IX

The  Significance  of  War.

I.  Three  questions  are  involved  in  the  question  of  war  :  the
generally  moral,  the  historical,  and  the  personally-moral. — The
answer  to  the  first  question  is  indisputable  :  war  is  an  anomaly

or  an  evil  ........  385

II.  War  as  a  relative  evil  (explanations). — Transition  to  the

question  as  to  the  historical  meaning  of  war  .  .  .387

III.  Wars  between  clans  naturally  led  to  treaties  and  agree¬
ments  as  guarantees  of  peace. — The  formation  of  the  state. — The
organisation  of  war  in  the  state  as  an  important  step  towards  the
coming  of  peace. — ‘The  world  empires’ — their  comparative  char¬
acteristic. — Pax  Romana. — Wars  in  which  ancient  history  abounds
increased  the  sphere  of  peace. — Military  progress  in  the  ancient
world  was  at  the  same  time  a  great  social  and  moral  progress,  since

it  enormously  decreased  the  proportion  of  lives  sacrificed  in  war  .  389

IV.  Christianity  has  abolished  war  in  principle  ;  but  until  this
principle  really  enters  human  consciousness,  wars  are  inevit¬
able,  and  may,  in  certain  conditions,  be  the  lesser  evil,  i.e.  a
relative  good. — The  Middle  Ages. — In  modern  history  three  general
facts  are  important  with  reference  to  the  question  of  war:  (1)

Most  nations  have  become  independent  political  wholes  or  ‘  perfect
bodies  ’  ;  (2)  international  relations  of  all  kinds  have  been  de¬
veloped  ;  (3)  European  culture  has  spread  throughout  the  globe
(explanations). — The  war-world  of  the  future  .  .  .  394

V.  The  general  historical  meaning  of  all  wars  is  the  struggle
between  Europe  and  Asia — first  local  and  symbolical  (the  Trojan
war),  finally  extending  to  the  whole  of  the  globe. — The  end  of
external  wars  will  make  clear  the  great  truth  that  external  peace  is


lx  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

PAGE

not  as  such  a  real  good,  but  becomes  a  good  only  in  connection
with  the  inner  (moral)  regeneration  of  humanity  .  .  .  399

VI.  The  subjectively  moral  attitude  to  war. — False  identifica¬
tion  of  war  and  military  service  with  murder. — War  as  the  conflict
between  collective  organisms  (states)  and  their  collective  organs
(armies)  is  not  the  affair  of  individual  men  who  passively  take  part
in  it ;  on  their  part  possible  taking  of  life  is  accidental  only. —

Refusal  to  perform  military  service  required  by  the  state  is  of
necessity  a  greater  moral  evil,  and  is  therefore  impermissible. —

Moral  duty  of  the  individual  to  take  part  in  the  defence  of  his
country. — It  is  grounded  on  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality
(explanatory  instances). —  Unquestionable  dangers  of  militarism
are  not  an  argument  against  the  necessity  of  armaments. — Biblical
illustration  .......  402

VII.  It  is  our  positive  duty  not  merely  to  defend  or  protect

our  fatherland,  but  also  to  bring  it  to  greater  perfection,  which  is
inseparable  from  the  general  moral  progress  of  humanity. — To
approach  a  good  and  lasting  peace  one  must  act  against  the  evil
root  of  war,  namely,  against  hostility  and  hatred  between  the  parts
of  the  divided  humanity. — In  history  war  has  been  the  direct  means
of  the  external  and  the  indirect  means  of  the  internal  unification
of  humanity  ;  reason  forbids  us  to  throw  up  this  means  so  long  as
it  is  necessary,  and  conscience  commands  us  to  strive  that  it  should
cease  to  be  necessary,  and  that  the  natural  organisation  of  humanity,
divided  into  hostile  parts,  should  actually  become  a  moral  or  spiritual
unity  ........  406


CHAPTER  X

The  Moral  Organisation  of  Humanity  as  a  Whole.

I.  Differences  between  the  natural  and  the  moral  human  solid¬
arity,  which  Christianity  puts  before  us  as  a  historical  task,  de¬
manding  that  all  should  freely  and  consciously  strive  for  perfection
in  the  one  good. — The  true  subject  of  this  striving  is  the  individual
man  together  with  and  inseparably  from  the  collective  man. — The
three  permanent  embodiments  of  the  subject  striving  for  perfection,
or  the  three  natural  groups  which  actually  give  completion  to  the  in¬
dividual  life  :  the  family,  the  fatherland,  humanity. — Corresponding
to  them  in  the  historical  order  we  have  the  three  stages — the  tribal,
the  nationally  political,  and  the  spiritually  universal ;  the  latter  may
become  actually  real  only  on  condition  that  the  first  two  are  spiritual¬
ised. — The  concrete  elements  and  forms  of  life  as  conditional  data
for  the  solution  of  an  unconditional  problem. — The  given  natural
bond  between  three  generations  (grandparents,  parents,  children)
must  be  transformed  into  the  unconditionally  moral  one  through  the
spiritualisation  of  the  family  religion,  of  marriage,  and  education  .


CONTENTS


II.  Homage  paid  to  the  forefathers. — Its  eternal  significance

recognised  even  in  the  savage  cults.— Christian  modification  of  the
ancient  cult  ......

III.  Marriage. — It  unites  man  with  God  through  the  present,
just  as  religious  regard  for  the  forefathers  unites  man  with  God
through  the  past.— In  true  marriage  the  natural  sexual  tie  is  not
abolished  but  transubstantiated.— The  necessary  data  for  the  moral
problem  of  such  transubstantiation  are  the  natural  elements  of  the
sexual  relation  :  (i)  carnal  desire  ;  (2)  being  in  love  ;  (3)  child¬
bearing.— Marriage  remains  the  satisfaction  of  the  sexual  desire,
but  the  object  of  that  desire  is  no  longer  the  satisfaction  of  the
animal  organism,  but  the  restoration  of  the  image  of  God  in  man. —
Marriage  as  a  form  of  asceticism,  as  holy  exploit  and  martyrdom.
—  Child  -  bearing,  unnecessary  and  impossible  in  a  perfect
marriage,  is  necessary  and  desirable  in  a  marriage  which  strives
after  perfection  ;  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  perfection  not
yet  attained,  and  a  natural  means  of  attaining  it  in  the  future

IV.  The  purpose  of  the  bringing  up  of  children  in  a  spiritually
organised  family  is  to  connect  the  temporary  life  of  the  new  genera¬
tion  with  the  eternal  good,  which  is  common  to  all  generations,
and  restores  their  essential  unity  .....

V.  True  education  must  at  one  and  the  same  time  be  both
traditional  and  progressive. — Transferring  to  the  new  generation  all
the  spiritual  heritage  of  the  past,  it  must  at  the  same  time  develop
in  it  the  desire  and  the  power  to  make  use  of  this  heritage  as  of  a
living  moving  power  for  a  new  approach  to  the  supreme  goal. —
Fatal  consequences  of  separating  the  two  aspects. — The  moral  basis
of  education  is  to  inspire  the  descendants  with  a  living  concern  for
the  future  of  their  ancestors  (explanation). — Moral  progress  can  only
consist  in  carrying  out  further  and  better  the  duties  which  follow
from  tradition. — The  supreme  principle  of  pedagogy  is  the  indis¬
soluble  bond  between  generations  which  support  one  another  in
carrying  out  progressively  the  one  common  task  of  preparing  for  the
manifestation  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and  for  universal  resurrection

VI.  The  normal  family  is  the  immediate  restoration  of  the
moral  wholeness  of  man  in  one  essential  respect — that  of  succession
of  generations  (the  order  of  temporal  sequence).— This  wholeness
must  be  also  restored  in  the  wider  order  of  coexistence — first  of  all
within  the  limits  of  the  nation  or  the  fatherland. — In  accordance
with  the  nature  of  moral  organisation,  the  nation  does  not
abolish  either  the  family  or  the  individual,  but  fills  them  with  a
vital  content  in  a  definite  national  form,  conditioned  by  language.
— This  form  must  be  peculiar  but  not  exclusive  :  the  normal
multiplicity  of  different  languages  does  not  necessitate  their
isolation  and  separateness.  —  The  Babylonian  principle  of  the
division  of  humanity  through  identity  in  confusion  and  the  Sion


Ixii  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

principle  of  gathering  mankind  together  through  unanimity  in
distinctness.— The  true  universal  language  means  the  community
and  understandability  of  many  separate  languages  which,  though

divided,  do  not  divide  .  •  •  •  ■

VII.  The  unity  of  mankind.— All  the  grounds  which  justify
us  in  speaking  of  the  unity  of  a  people  have  still  greater  force  when
applied  to  humanity. — The  unity  of  origin  ;  the  unity  of  language,
irrespective  of  the  number  of  different  tongues  ;  the  unity  of
universal  history  apart  from  which  there  can  be  no  national  history
(proofs  and  explanations).— The  indivisibility  of  the  moral  good.

_ The  evil  of  exclusive  patriotism. — Humanity  as  the  subject  of

moral  organisation.— Transition  to  the  discussion  of  the  universal
forms  of  the  moral  order

VIII.  The  universal  Church  as  the  organisation  of  piety
(explanation). — The  essence  of  the  Church  is  the  unity  and  holiness
of  the  Godhead  in  so  far  as  it  remains  and  positively  acts  in  the
world  through  humanity  (or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  Church
is  the  creation  gathered  together  in  God). — The  unity  and  holiness
of  the  Church  in  the  order  of  coexistence  is  its  catholicity  or  whole¬
ness  and,  in  the  order  of  succession,  is  the  apostolic  succession. —
Catholicity  abolishes  all  divisions  and  separations,  preserving  all
the  distinctions  and  peculiarities  .....

IX.  Participation  in  the  absolute  content  of  life  through  the
universal  Church  positively  liberates  and  equalises  all,  and  unites
men  in  a  perfect  brotherhood  which  presupposes  a  perfect  father¬
hood

X.  The  religious  principle  of  fatherhood  is  that  the  spiritual
life  does  not  spring./5w>2  ourselves. — Hence  messengership  or  apostle-
ship  in  contradistinction  to  imposture. — Christ  ‘sent  of  God’  and
doing  the  will  of  the  Father  who  sent  Him  and  not  His  own  will
is  the  absolute  prototype  of  apostleship. — Its  continuation  in  the
Church  :  “  As  my  Father  sent  me,  so  I  send  you.” — Since  filial
relation  is  the  prototype  of  piety,  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God
— the  Son  by  pre-eminence — being  the  embodiment  of  piety  is  the
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life  of  His  Church,  as  of  an  organisation
of  piety  in  the  world. — The  way  of  piety  is  the  way  of  hierarchy
— it  is  from  above  (the  significance  of  ordination  and  consecration).
— The  truth  of  the  Church  is  not,  at  bottom,  either  scientific,  or
philosophical,  or  even  theological,  but  simply  contains  the  dogmas
of  piety  ;  the  general  meaning  of  the  seven  CEcumenical  Councils.
— The  life  of  piety  ;  the  meaning  of  the  seven  sacraments

XI.  The  question  as  to  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  the  state
or  the  problem  of  the  Christian  state. — Important  instance  in  the
New  Testament  (the  story  of  Cornelius  the  centurion)

XII.  Moral  necessity  of  the  state. — Explanations  with  regard
to  Christianity  .......


PAGE

423

426

432

435


437

440


443


CONTENTS


Ixiii


XIII.  The  state  as  collectively -organised  pity.  —  Vladimir
Monomakh  and  Dante  (explanation)  ....

XIV.  Analysis  of  the  objection  generally  urged  against  the
definition  of  the  normal  state  .....

XV.  Analysis  of  legal  misunderstandings

XVI.  In  addition  to  the  general  conservative  task  of  every
state — to  preserve  the  essentials  of  common  life,  without  which
humanity  could  not  exist — the  Christian  state  has  also  a  progressive
task  of  improving  the  conditions  of  that  life  by  furthering  the  free
development  of  all  human  powers  destined  to  bring  about  the
coming  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (explanation)

XVII.  The  normal  relation  between  the  Church  and  the  state.
— From  the  Christian  (the  divinely-human)  point  of  view  both  the
independent  activity  of  man  and  his  whole-hearted  devotion  to
God  are  equally  necessary  ;  but  the  two  can  only  be  combined  if
the  two  spheres  of  life  (the  religious  and  the  political)  and  its  two
immediate  motives  (piety  and  pity)  are  clearly  distinguished — -
corresponding  to  the  difference  in  the  immediate  objects  of  action,
the  final  purpose  being  one  and  the  same. — Fatal  consequences
of  the  separation  of  the  Church  from  the  state  and  of  either
usurping  the  functions  of  the  other. — The  Christian  rule  of  social
progress  consists  in  this,  that  the  state  should  as  little  as  possible
coerce  the  inner  moral  life  of  man,  leaving  it  to  the  free  spiritual
activity  of  the  Church,  and  at  the  same  time  secure  as  certainly
and  as  widely  as  possible  the  external  conditions  in  which  men  can
live  worthily  and  become  more  perfect  ....

XVIII.  The  special  moral  task  of  the  economic  life  is  to  be
the  collectively-organised  abstinence  from  the  evil  carnal  passions,
in  order  that  the  material  nature  —  individual  and  universal —
could  be  transformed  into  a  free  form  of  the  human  spirit. — The
separation  of  the  economic  life  from  its  object  at  the  present  time
and  historical  explanation  of  that  fact  ....

XIX.  Moral  significance  of  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy.
— The  value  of  the  collectively-organised  abstinence  depends  upon
the  success  of  the  collective  organisations  of  piety  and  pity.— The
unity  of  the  three  tasks  ......

XX.  Individual  representatives  of  the  moral  organisation  of

humanity. — The  three  supreme  callings — that  of  the  priest,  the
king,  and  the  prophet. — Their  distinctive  peculiarities  and  mutual
dependence  .......


CONCLUSION


PAGE

447

449
45 1

455


457

460

465

467


The  Final  Definition  of  the  Moral  Significance  of  Life  and
the  Transition  to  Theoretical  Philosophy


470


.


t


INTRODUCTION


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE

I

The  subject-matter  of  moral  philosophy  is  the  idea  of  the  good ;
the  purpose  of  this  philosophical  inquiry  is  to  make  clear  the
content  that  reason,  under  the  influence  of  experience,  puts  into
this  idea,  and  thus  to  give  a  definite  answer  to  the  essential
question  as  to  what  ought  to  be  the  object  or  the  meaning  of
our  life.

The  capacity  of  forming  rudimentary  judgments  of  value  is
undoubtedly  present  in  the  higher  animals,  who,  in  addition  to
pleasant  and  unpleasant  sensations ,  possess  more  or  less  complete
ideas  of  desirable  or  undesirable  objects.  Man  passes  beyond
single  sensations  and  particular  images  and  rises  to  a  universal
rational  concept  or  idea  of  good  and  evil.

The  universal  character  of  this  idea  is  often  denied,  but  this
is  due  to  a  misunderstanding.  It  is  true  that  every  conceivable
kind  of  iniquity  has  at  some  time  and  in  some  place  been
regarded  as  a  good.  But  at  the  same  time  there  does  not  exist,
nor  ever  has  existed,  a  people  which  did  not  attribute  to  its  idea
of  the  good  (whatever  that  idea  might  be)  the  character  of  being
a  universal  and  abiding  norm  and  ideal.1  A  Red  Indian  who
considers  it  a  virtue  to  scalp  as  many  human  heads  as  possible,
takes  it  to  be  good  and  meritorious,  not  for  one  day  merely  but

1  In  these  preliminary  remarks,  which  are  merely  introductory,  I  intentionally  take
the  idea  of  the  good  in  its  original  complexity,  i.e.  not  merely  in  the  sense  of  the  moral
worth  of  our  actions,  but  also  in  the  sense  of  objects  which  are  generally  regarded  as
desirable  to  possess  or  to  enjoy  (“all  one’s  goods,”  etc.).  Some  doctrines  deny  that
there  is  any  such  distinction,  and  I  cannot  presuppose  it  before  the  matter  has  been
subjected  to  a  philosophical  analysis.


I


В


2  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

for  all  his  life,  and  not  for  himself  alone,  but  for  every  decent
man.  An  Esquimo  whose  idea  of  the  highest  good  is  the
greatest  possible  supply  of  putrid  seal  and  cod-fish  fat,  undoubtedly
regards  his  ideal  as  of  universal  application  ;  he  is  convinced  that
what  is  good  for  him  is  also  good  for  all  times  and  all  people,
and  even  for  the  world  beyond  the  grave  ;  and  if  he  be  told  of
barbarians  to  whom  putrid  fat  is  disgusting,  he  will  either  dis¬
believe  that  they  exist  or  will  deny  that  they  are  normal.  In
the  same  way,  the  famous  Hottentot  who  maintained  that  it  is
good  when  he  steals  a  number  of  cows  and  bad  when  they  are
stolen  from  him ,  did  not  intend  this  ethical  principle  for  himself
only,  but  meant  that  for  every  man  the  good  consisted  in
successful  appropriation  of  other  people’s  property,  and  evil  in
the  loss  of  one’s  own.

Thus  even  this  extremely  imperfect  application  of  the  idea
of  the  good  undoubtedly  involves  its  formal  universality,  i.e.  its
affirmation  as  a  norm  for  all  time  and  for  all  human  beings,
although  the  content  of  the  supposed  norm  {i.e.  the  particular
answers  to  the  question,  What  is  good  ?)  does  not  in  any  way
correspond  to  this  formal  demand,  being  merely  accidental,
particular,  and  crudely  material  in  character.  Of  course  the
moral  ideas  even  of  the  lowest  savage  are  not  limited  to  scalped
heads  and  stolen  cows  :  the  same  Iroquois  and  Hottentots  manifest
a  certain  degree  of  modesty  in  sexual  relations,  feel  pity  for  those
dear  to  them,  are  capable  of  admiring  other  people’s  superiority.
But  as  long  as  these  rudimentary  manifestations  of  true  morality
are  found  side  by  side  with  savage  and  inhuman  demands,  or  even
give  precedence  to  the  latter,  as  long  as  ferocity  is  prized  above
modesty,  and  rapacity  above  compassion,  it  has  to  be  admitted  that
the  idea  of  the  good,  though  preserving  its  universal  form,  is
devoid  of  its  true  content.

The  activity  of  reason  which  gives  rise  to  ideas  is  inherent  in
man  from  the  first,  just  as  an  organic  function  is  inherent  in
the  organism.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  alimentary  organs  and
their  functions  are  innate  in  the  animal  ;  but  no  one  takes  this
to  mean  that  the  animal  is  born  with  the  food  already  in  its
mouth.  In  the  same  way,  man  is  not  born  with  ready-made
ideas,  but  only  with  a  ready-made  faculty  of  being  conscious
of  ideas.


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


3


The  rational  consciousness  in  virtue  of  which  man  possesses
from  the  first  a  universal  idea  of  the  good  as  an  absolute  norm,
in  its  further  development  gradually  supplies  this  formal  idea  with
a  content  worthy  of  it.  It  seeks  to  establish  such  moral  demands
and  ideals  as  would  in  their  very  essence  be  universal  and
necessary,  expressing  the  inner  development  of  the  universal
idea  of  the  good  and  not  merely  its  external  application  to
particular  material  motives  foreign  to  it.  When  this  work  of
human  consciousness  developing  a  true  content  of  morality,  attains
a  certain  degree  of  clearness  and  distinctness,  and  is  carried  on
in  a  systematic  way,  it  becomes  moral  philosophy  or  ethics.  The
different  ethical  systems  and  theories  exhibit  various  degrees  of
completeness  and  self-consistency.

II

In  its  essence  moral  philosophy  is  most  intimately  connected
with  religion,  and  in  its  relation  to  knowledge  with  the  theoretical
philosophy.  It  cannot  at  this  stage  be  explained  what  the
nature  of  the  connection  is,  but  it  is  both  possible  and  necessary  to
explain  what  it  is  not.  It  must  not  be  conceived  of  as  a  one¬
sided  dependence  of  ethics  on  positive  religion  or  on  speculative
philosophy — a  dependence  which  would  deprive  the  moral  sphere
of  its  special  content  and  independent  significance.  The  view
which  wholly  subordinates  morality  and  moral  philosophy  to  the
theoretical  principles  of  positive  religion  or  philosophy  is  extremely
prevalent  in  one  form  or  another.  The  erroneousness  of  it  is
all  the  more  clear  to  me  because  I  myself  at  one  time  came
very  near  it,  if  indeed  I  did  not  share  it  altogether.  Here  are
some  of  the  considerations  which  led  me  to  abandon  this  point  of
view  5  I  give  only  such  as  can  be  understood  before  entering
upon  an  exposition  of  moral  philosophy  itself.

The  opponents  of  independent  morality  urge  that  “only  true
religion  can  give  man  the  strength  to  realise  the  good  ;  but  the
whole  value  of  the  good  is  in  its  realisation  ;  therefore  apart  from
true  religion  ethics  has  no  significance.”  That  true  religion
does  give  its  true  followers  the  strength  to  realise  the  good,
cannot  be  doubted.  But  the  one-sided  assertion  that  such
strength  is  given  by  religion  alone ,  though  it  is  supposed  to  be


4


THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

made  in  the  higher  interests  of  religion,  in  truth,  directly
contradicts  the  teaching  of  the  great  defender  of  faith,  St.  Paul,
who  admits,  it  will  be  remembered,  that  the  heathen  can  do  good
according  to  the  natural  law.  “For  when  the  Gentiles,”  he
writes,  “  which  have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the  things
contained  in  the  law,  these,  having  not  the  law,  are  a  law  unto
themselves  :  which  show  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their
hearts,  their  conscience  also  bearing  witness,  and  their  thoughts
the  meanwhile  accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another.”  1

In  order  to  receive  the  power  for  realising  the  good,  it  is
necessary  to  have  a  conception  of  the  good  otherwise  its  realisations
will  be  merely  mechanical.  And  it  is  not  true  that  the  whole
value  of  good  is  in  the  fact  of  its  realisation  :  the  way  in  which
it  is  realised  is  also  important.  An  unconscious  automatic
accomplishment  of  good  actions  is  below  the  dignity  of  man
and  consequently  does  not  express  the  human  good.  The
human  realisation  of  the  good  is  necessarily  conditioned  by  a
consciousness  of  it,  and  there  can  be  consciousness  of  the  good  apart
from  true  religion  as  is  shown  both  by  history  and  by  everyday
experience,  and  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  so  great  a
champion  of  the  faith  as  St.  Paul.2

Further,  though  piety  requires  us  to  admit  that  the  power
for  the  realisation  of  the  good  is  given  from  God,  it  would  be
impious  to  limit  the  Deity  with  regard  to  the  means  whereby
this  power  can  be  communicated.  According  to  the  witness
both  of  experience  and  of  the  Scriptures,  such  means  are  not
limited  to  positive  religion,  for  even  apart  from  it  some  men  are
conscious  of  the  good,  and  practise  it.  So  that  from  the  religious
point  of  view  also,  we  must  simply  accept  this  as  true,  and
consequently  admit  that  in  a  certain  sense  morality  is  independent
of  the  positive  religion  and  moral  philosophy  of  a  creed.3

1  “Oral'  ybp  ІѲѵг)  ret  m  vbpov  (хоѵта  фбаеі  та  тоѵ  vbpov  тоі у,  оѵтоі  vbpov  рт\
ІХоѵте?  eavrols  dm  vbpoz'  otnves  Іѵдеікѵѵѵтаі  тд  (pyov  тоѵ  vbpov  урачгтЬѵ  iv  rats
KapSlais  аіітшѵ ,  оѵррартѵроі<гг)%  аѵтйѵ  Trjs  <гѵѵп8гі<геи*  каі  рета^іі  aWrjXwv  тйѵ
Хоуитрйѵ  катіруороЬѵтозѵ  >}  каі  ЬлгоХоуоѵрЬѵіѵѵ, — Rom.  іі.  14*15*

2  What  St.  Paul  says  of  the  Gentiles  of  his  time  is  no  doubt  applicable  to  men
who  in  the  Christian  era  were  unable  to  accept  Christianity  either  because  they  had
not  heard  of  it  or  because  it  had  been  misrepresented  to  them.  And  when  they  do
good  they  do  it  according  to  the  natural  law  “written  in  their  hearts.”

3  Of  course,  what  is  here  denied  is  dependence  in  the  strict  sense,  i.e.  such  a
relation  between  two  objects  that  one  of  them  is  entirely  presupposed  by  the  other  and


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


5


A  third  consideration  leads  to  the  same  conclusion.  However
great  our  certainty  of  the  truth  of  our  own  religion  may  be,
it  does  not  warrant  our  overlooking  the  fact  that  there  exists  a
number  of  religions,  and  that  each  of  them  claims  for  itself  to  be
the  only  true  one.  And  this  fact  creates  in  every  mind  that  is
not  indifferent  to  truth  a  desire  for  an  objective  justification  of
our  own  faith — for  such  proof  in  favour  of  it,  that  is,  as  would  be
convincing  not  only  to  us  but  also  to  others,  and,  finally,  to  all.
But  all  the  arguments  in  favour  of  religious  truth  which  are
universally  applicable  amount  to  a  single  fundamental  one — the
ethical  argument,  which  affirms  that  our  faith  is  morally
superior  to  others.  This  is  the  case  even  when  the  moral
interest  is  completely  concealed  by  other  motives.  Thus  in
support  of  one’s  religion  one  may  point  to  the  beauty  of  its
church  services.  This  argument  must  not  be  dismissed  too
lightly.  Had  not  the  beauty  of  the  Greek  service  in  the
cathedral  of  St.  Sophia  impressed  the  envoys  of  prince  Vladimir
of  Kiev  as  much  as  it  did,  Russia  would  probably  not  have
been  Orthodox  now.  But  whatever  the  importance  of  this
side  of  religion  may  be,  the  question  is  in  what  precisely  does
the  aesthetic  value  of  one  service  as  compared  with  another
consist  ?  It  certainly  does  not  lie  in  the  fact  that  its  form  and
setting  should  be  distinguished  by  any  kind  of  beauty.  Beauty
of  form  as  such  (i.e.  the  perfection  of  the  sensuous  expression  of
anything)  may  attach  to  the  most  diverse  objects.  A  ballet,  an
opera,  a  military  or  an  erotic  picture,  a  firework,  may  all  be
said  to  have  a  beauty  of  their  own.  But  the  introduction  of
such  manifestations  of  the  beautiful,  in  however  small  a  degree,
into  a  religious  cult,  is  rightly  censured  as  incompatible  with  its
true  dignity.  The  aesthetic  value  of  a  religious  service  does  not
then  lie  merely  in  the  perfection  of  its  sensuous  form,  but  in  its.
expressing  as  clearly  and  as  fully  as  possible  the  spiritual  contents

cannot  exist  apart  from  it.  All  I  maintain  so  far  is  that  ethics  is  not  in  this  sense
dependent  upon  positive  religion,  without  at  all  prejudging  the  question  as  to  the
actual  connection  between  them  or  their  mutual  dependence  in  concrete.  As  to  the
so-called  natural  or  rational  religion,  the  very  conception  of  it  has  arisen  on  the
ground  of  moral  philosophy  and,  as  will  be  shown  in  its  due  course,  has  no  meaning
apart  from  it.  At  present  I  am  only  concerned  with  the  view  which  has,  of  late,
become  rather  prevalent,  that  the  moral  life  is  wholly  determined  by  the  dogmas  and
institutions  of  a  positive  religion  and  must  be  entirely  subordinate  to  them.


6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  true  religion.  These  contents  are  largely  dogmatic,  but  chiefly
ethical  (in  the  wide  sense) — the  holiness  of  God,  His  love  for
men,  the  gratitude  and  the  devotion  of  men  to  their  Heavenly
Father,  their  brotherhood  with  one  another.  This  ideal  essence,
embodied  in  the  persons  and  events  of  sacred  history,  finds,  through
this  sacred  historical  prism,  new  artistic  incarnation  in  the  rites,
the  symbols,  and  the  anthems  of  the  Church.  The  spiritual
essence  of  religion  appeals  to  some  men  only  as  thus  embodied  in
the  cult,  while  other  men  (whose  number  increases  as  conscious¬
ness  develops)  are  able,  in  addition,  to  apprehend  it  directly  as  a
doctrine ;  and  in  this  case  again  the  moral  side  of  religious
beauty  clearly  predominates  over  the  dogmatic  side.  The  meta¬
physical  dogmas  of  true  Christianity,  in  spite  of  all  their  inward
certainty,  are  undoubtedly  above  the  level  of  ordinary  human
reason,  and  therefore  have  never  been,  nor  ever  can  be,  the
original  means  of  convincing  non-Christians  of  the  truth  of  our
religion.  In  order  to  realise  the  truth  of  these  dogmas  by  faith,
one  must  already  be  a  Christian  ;  and  in  order  to  realise  their
meaning  in  the  sphere  of  abstract  thought,  one  must  be  a  philo¬
sopher  of  the  school  of  Plato  or  of  Schelling.  And  as  this  cannot
be  possible  for  every  one,  all  that  remains  for  persuading  people
belonging  to  other  religions  of  the  truth  of  our  faith  is  its  moral
superiority.1  And  indeed,  in  the  disputes  between  the  different
branches  of  one  and  the  same  religion,  as  well  as  between
different  religions,  each  side  seeks  to  justify  its  own  faith  by
means  of  moral  and  practical  arguments.  Thus  Roman
Catholics  most  readily  quote  in  their  own  favour  the  solidarity
and  the  energetic  work  of  their  clergy,  united  by  the  religious
and  moral  power  of  the  papal  monarchy,  the  unique  moral
influence  of  their  clergy  on  the  masses  of  the  people,  the  part  the
Pope  plays  as  the  defender  of  universal  justice  and  the  supreme
judge  and  peacemaker  ;  and  they  especially  point  to  the  multitude
of  works  of  charity  in  their  missions  at  home  and  abroad.
Protestants,  who  originally  separated  off  from  the  Roman  Church
precisely  on  the  ground  of  moral  theology,  claim  in  their  turn  as
their  essential  advantage  the  moral  loftiness  and  purity  of  their

1  One  of  my  critics — heaven  judge  him  ! — took  me  to  mean  that  that  religion  is
true  to  which  the  greatest  number  of  good  people  belong.  I  wish  he  had  suggested
some  method  for  such  moral  statistics  !


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


7


doctrine  which  liberates  the  individual  conscience  and  the  life  of
the  community  from  many  practical  abuses  and  from  slavery  to
external  observances  and  to  traditions,  in  their  view,  senseless.
Finally,  the  champions  of  Orthodoxy  in  their  polemic  against
Western  Christianity  generally  have  recourse  to  moral  accusa¬
tions.  They  accuse  the  Roman  Catholics  of  pride  and  love  of
power,  of  striving  to  appropriate  for  the  head  of  their  Church  that
which  belongs  to  God  as  well  as  that  which  belongs  to  Caesar  ;
they  accuse  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy  of  fanaticism,  of  loving  the
world  and  of  cupidity,  make  it  responsible  for  the  sin  of  persecut¬
ing  heretics  and  infidels.  Like  the  Protestants  they  lay  stress
on  three  main  charges — the  Inquisition,  Indulgences,  and  Jesuit
morality  ;  and  finally,  independently  of  the  Protestants,  they
bring  against  the  Roman  Catholics  the  charge  of  moral  fratricide
which  found  expression  in  the  arbitrary  adoption  by  the  latter
(without  the  knowledge  of  the  Eastern  Church)  of  the  local  Western
traditions.  The  moral  charges  they  bring  against  Protestantism
are  less  striking  but  just  as  serious.  They  accuse  it  of  in¬
dividualism  which  does  away  with  the  Church  as  a  concrete  moral
whole,  they  reproach  it  with  destroying  the  bond  of  love  not
only  between  the  present  and  the  past  of  the  historical  Church
(by  rejecting  the  traditions),  but  also  between  the  visible  and  the
invisible  Church  (by  rejecting  prayers  for  the  dead,  etc.).

Without  going  into  theology  or  pronouncing  on  the  value  of
or  the  need  for  such  disputes 1  I  would  only  draw  attention  to
the  fact  that  neither  of  the  disputants  rejects  the  moral  principles
proclaimed  by  the  other  side,  but  simply  tries  to  turn  them  to  his
own  account.  Thus  when  the  Roman  Catholics  boast  of  works
of  charity  which  especially  characterise  their  Church,  neither
their  Protestant  nor  their  Greco-Russian  opponents  would  say
that  charity  is  a  bad  thing  ;  they  would  merely  argue  that  the
Roman  Catholic  charitable  institutions  serve  the  purposes  of
ambition,  and,  being  thus  vitiated  by  extraneous  elements,  more
or  less  lose  their  moral  worth.  In  answer  to  this,  the  Roman
Catholics,  for  their  part,  would  not  say  that  ambition  is  a  good
thing  or  that  Christian  charity  must  be  subordinate  to  worldly

1  Concerning  the  reproach  in  ‘moral  fratricide’  see  my  article  in  Dogmatitcheskoe
Razvitic  Tserkvi  ( The  Dogmatic  Development  of  the  Church)  in  the  Pravoslavnoe  Obozrenie
for  1885.


8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

considerations,  but  would,  on  the  contrary,  repudiate  the  charge  of
ambition  and  argue  that  power  is  not  for  them  an  end  in  itself,
but  only  a  necessary  means  for  carrying  out  their  moral  duty.
Similarly  when  the  Orthodox — as  well  as  the  Roman  Catholics —
reproach  the  Protestants  with  their  lack  of  filial  piety  and  their
contempt  for  the  Patristic  tradition,  no  sensible  Protestant  would
urge  that  tradition  ought  to  be  despised,  but  would,  on  the
contrary,  try  to  prove  that  Protestantism  is  a  return  to  the
most  honourable  and  ancient  traditions  of  Christianity,  freed
from  any  false  and  pernicious  admixture.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  disputing  parties  stand  on  one  and  the
same  moral  ground  (which  alone  renders  dispute  possible),  that
they  have  the  same  moral  principles  and  standards,  and  that  the
dispute  is  merely  about  their  application.  These  principles  do
not  as  such  belong  to  any  denomination,  but  form  a  general
tribunal  to  which  all  equally  appeal.  The  representative  of  each
side  says  in  fact  to  his  opponent  simply  this  :  “  I  practise  better
than  you  the  moral  principles  which  you,  too,  wish  to  follow  ;
therefore  you  must  give  up  your  error  and  acknowledge  that  I  am
right.”  The  ethical  standards,  equally  presupposed  by  all  denomi¬
nations,  cannot  themselves,  then,  depend  upon  denominational
differences.

But  morality  proves  to  be  just  as  independent  of  the  more
important  religious  differences.  When  a  missionary  persuades  a
Mahomedan  or  a  heathen  of  the  moral  superiority  of  the  Christian
teaching  he  evidently  presupposes  that  his  listener  has  the  same
moral  standards  as  his  own,  at  least,  in  a  potential  form.

This  means  that  the  norms  which  are  common  both  to  the
Christian  and  to  the  heathen,  and  are  £  written  ’  in  the  latter’s
heart,  are  altogether  independent  of  positive  religion.  Besides,  in
so  far  as  all  positive  religions,  including  the  absolutely  true  one,
appeal  in  the  disputes  to  the  universal  moral  norms,  they  admit
that  in  a  certain  sense  they  are  dependent  upon  the  latter.  Thus
during  a  judicial  trial  both  the  right  and  the  wrong  party  are
equally  subordinate  to  the  law  ;  and  inasmuch  as  they  have
both  appealed  to  it,  they  have  acquiesced  in  such  subordination.


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


9


III

Moral  philosophy  has  then  a  subject-matter  of  its  own  (the
moral  norms)  independent  of  particular  religions,  and  even  in  a
sense  presupposed  by  them  ;  thus  on  its  objective  or  real  side  it  is
self-contained.  The  question  must  now  be  asked  whether  on  its
formal  side — as  a  science — moral  philosophy  is  subordinate  to
theoretical  philosophy,  especially  to  that  part  of  it  which  examines
the  claims  and  the  limitations  of  our  cognitive  faculty.  But  in
working  out  a  moral  philosophy,  reason  simply  unfolds,  on  the
ground  of  experience,  the  implications  of  the  idea  of  the  good  (or,
what  is  the  same  thing,  of  the  ultimate  fact  of  moral  consciousness)
which  is  inherent  in  it  from  the  first.  In  doing  this,  reason  does
not  go  beyond  its  own  boundaries  ;  in  scholastic  language  its  use
here  is  immanent ,  and  is  therefore  independent  of  this  or  of  that
solution  of  the  question  as  to  the  transcendent  knowledge  of  things
in  themselves.  To  put  it  more  simply,  in  moral  philosophy  we  are
concerned  with  our  inward  relation  to  our  own  activities,  i.e.  with
something  that  can  unquestionably  be  known  by  us,  for  it  has  its
source  in  ourselves.  The  debatable  question  as  to  whether  we  can
know  that  which  belongs  to  other  realms  of  being,  independent
of  us,  is  not  here  touched  upon.  The  ideal  content  of  morality  is
apprehended  by  reason  which  has  itself  created  it ;  in  this  case,
therefore,  knowledge  coincides  with  its  object  (is  adequate  to  it)
and  leaves  no  room  for  critical  doubt.  The  progress  and  the
results  of  this  process  of  thought  answer  for  themselves,  pre¬
supposing  nothing  but  the  general  logical  and  psychological
conditions  of  all  mental  activity.  Ethics  makes  no  claim  to  a
theoretical  knowledge  of  any  metaphysical  essences  and  takes  no
part  in  the  dispute  between  the  dogmatic  and  the  critical  philo¬
sophy,  the  first  of  which  affirms,  and  the  second  denies,  the
reality,  and  consequently  the  possibility,  of  such  knowledge.

In  spite  of  this  formal  and  general  independence  of  ethics  of
the  theoretical  philosophy,  there  are  two  metaphysical  questions
which  may  apparently  prove  fatal  to  the  very  existence  of
morality.

The  first  question  is  this.  The  starting  point  of  every  serious
speculation  is  the  doubt  as  to  the  objective  validity  of  our  know-


10  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

ledge  :  Do  things  exist  as  they  are  known  to  us  ?  The  doubt
about  our  knowledge  gradually  leads  us  to  doubt  the  very  existence
of  that  which  is  known ,  i.e.  of  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it.
This  world  is  made  up  of  our  sense  perceptions  which  the
understanding  unites  into  one  coherent  whole.  But  is  not  the
perceived  merely  our  sensation  and  the  connectedness  of  things
merely  our  thought  ?  And  if  this  be  so,  if  the  world  as  a  whole
be  only  my  presentation,  then  all  the  beings  to  whom  I  stand  in
the  moral  relation  prove  also  to  be  nothing  but  my  presentations,
for  they  are  inseparable  parts  of  the  presented  world,  given  in
knowledge  like  everything  else.  Now  moral  rules,  or  at  least  a
considerable  number  of  them,  determine  my  right  relation  to
other  people.  If  other  people  do  not  exist,  do  not  these  moral
rules  themselves  become  objectless  and  unrealisable  ?  This
would  be  the  case  if  the  non-existence  of  other  human  beings
could  be  known  with  the  same  indubitable  certainty  which
attaches  to  moral  precepts  in  their  sphere.  If  while  my  con¬
science  definitely  compelled  me  to  act  morally  in  relation  to
certain  objects,  theoretical  reason  proved  with  equal  definiteness
that  these  objects  did  not  exist  at  all,  and  that  therefore  rules
of  action  relating  to  them  were  meaningless — if  practical
certainty  were  thus  undermined  by  equal  theoretical  certainty,
and  the  categoric  character  of  the  precept  were  negated  by  the
indubitable  knowledge  of  the  impossibility  of  carrying  it  out —
then  indeed  the  position  would  be  hopeless.  But  in  truth  there
is  no  such  conflict  between  two  equal  certainties,  and  there
cannot  be.  Doubt  as  to  the  independent  existence  of  external
things  is  not,  and  can  never  become,  certainty  of  their  non-exist¬
ence.  Suppose  it  were  proved  that  our  senses  and  our  under¬
standing  are  untrustworthy  witnesses  as  to  the  existence  of  other
beings,  the  untrustworthiness  of  the  witnesses  merely  makes  their
testimony  doubtful,  but  does  not  make  the  opposite  true.  Even  if
it  were  positively  proved  that  a  given  witness  had  falsely  testified
to  a  fact  which  in  reality  he  had  not  witnessed  at  all,  it  would  be
impossible  to  conclude  from  this  that  the  fact  itself  never  existed.
Other  witnesses  might  vouch  for  it,  or  indeed  it  might  not  have
been  witnessed  by  any  one  and  yet  be  a  fact.  Our  senses  and  our
intellect  tell  us  of  the  existence  of  human  beings  other  than  our¬
selves.  Suppose  that  investigation  were  to  show  that  this  is  false,


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


1 1

and  that  these  means  of  knowledge  warrant  the  existence  of  objects
as  our  presentations  only  and  not  their  existence  as  independent
realities — which  we  consequently  begin  to  doubt.  But  to  go
further  and  replace  our  former  certitude  of  the  existence  of  other
beings  by  the  certitude  of  the  opposite  and  not  merely  by  doubt
would  only  be  possible  on  the  supposition  that  whatever  is  not
actually  contained  in  our  senses  and  our  thought  cannot  exist  at
all.  This,  however,  is  quite  an  arbitrary  assumption,  for  which
there  is  neither  logical  ground  nor  any  reasonable  foundation.

If  we  cannot  in  relation  to  the  existence  of  other  selves  go
further  than  doubt,  we  may  rest  satisfied  about  the  fate  of
moral  principles ;  for  theoretical  doubt  is  evidently  insufficient  to
undermine  moral  and  practical  certainty.  It  must  also  be
remembered  that  critical  doubt  is  not  the  final  point  of  view  ot
philosophy,  but  is  always  overcome  in  one  way  or  another.  Thus
Kant  draws  the  distinction  between  phenomena  and  noumena
(appearances  and  things  in  themselves),  restoring  to  the  objects  of
moral  duty  as  noumena  the  full  measure  of  independent  existence
which  as  phenomena  they  do  not  possess.  Other  thinkers  dis¬
cover  new  and  more  trustworthy  witnesses  of  the  existence  of  the
external  world  than  sense  and  thought  (Jacobi’s  immediate  faith ,
Schopenhauer’s  Will  which  is  experienced  as  the  root  of  our  own
reality,  and,  by  analogy,  of  that  of  other  beings),  or  they  work  out
a  system  of  a  new  and  more  profound  speculative  dogmatism
which  re-establishes  the  objective  significance  of  all  that  is.
(Schelling,  Hegel,  and  others.)

But  however  great  the  force  and  the  significance  of  the  critical
doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  other  beings  may  be,  it  has  bearing
merely  on  one  aspect  of  morality.  Every  ethical  precept  as  such
touches  upon  the  object  of  the  action  (other  men)  only  with  its  outer
end,  so  to  speak  ;  the  real  root  of  it  is  always  within  the  agent
and  cannot  therefore  be  affected  by  any  theory — whether  positive
or  negative — of  the  external  world.  And  the  external  aspect  or
the  moral  law  which  links  it  to  the  object  belongs,  properly
speaking,  to  the  sphere  of  legal  justice  and  not  of  morality  in
the  narrow  sense.  As  will  be  shown  in  due  course  legal  justice
depends  upon  morality  and  cannot  be  separated  from  it,  but  this
does  not  prevent  us  from  clearly  distinguishing  the  two  spheres.
When  one  and  the  same  action,  e.g.  murder,  is  condemned


12  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

equally  by  a  criminologist  and  by  a  moralist,  they  both  refer  to
one  and  the  same  totality  of  psychological  moments  resulting
in  the  material  fact  of  taking  life,  and  the  conclusions  are
identical,  but  the  starting  point  and  the  whole  train  of  reasoning
is  entirely  different  and  opposed  in  the  two  cases.  From  the
legal  point  of  view,  what  is  of  primary  significance  is  the
objective  fact  of  murder — an  action  which  violates  another
person’s  rights  and  characterises  the  culprit  as  an  abnormal
member  of  society.  To  make  that  characteristic  full  and
complete,  the  inner  psychological  moments  must  also  be  taken
into  account,  first  and  foremost  among  them  being  the  presence
of  criminal  intention,  the  so-called  animus  of  the  crime.  But  the
subjective  conditions  of  the  action  are  of  interest  solely  in  their
relation  to  the  fact  of  murder,  or  in  causal  connection  with  it.
If  a  man  breathed  vindictiveness  and  murder  all  his  life,  but  his
subjective  mental  state  found  no  expression  in  actual  murder  nor
attempt  at  one,  nor  in  any  violence,  that  person  in  spite  of  all
his  diabolical  malice  would  not  come  within  the  range  of  the
criminologist  as  such.  On  the  contrary,  from  the  moral  point
of  view,  the  slightest  emotion  of  malice  or  anger,  even  though  it
never  expressed  itself  in  action  or  speech,  is  in  itself  a  direct
object  of  ethical  judgment  and  condemnation  ;  and  the  fact  of
murder  from  this  point  of  view  has  significance  not  on  its
material  side,  but  simply  as  an  expression  of  the  extreme  degree
of  the  evil  feeling  which  throughout  all  its  stages  is  deserving  of
moral  condemnation.  For  a  criminologist  murder  is  an  infringe¬
ment  of  right  or  a  loss  unlawfully  inflicted  upon  the  victim  and
upon  the  social  order.  But  from  the  purely  moral  point  of  view,
being  deprived  of  life  is  not  necessarily  a  loss,  and  may  even  be  a  gain
for  the  victim  ;  murder  is  an  unquestionable  loss  for  the  murderer
alone,  not  as  a  fact,  but  as  the  culminating  point  of  the  malice
which  is  in  itself  a  loss  to  a  man  in  so  far  as  it  lowers  his  dignity
as  a  rational  being.  Of  course,  from  the  ethical  point  of  view,
too,  murder  is  worse  than  a  mere  outburst  of  anger.  But  this
is  simply  because  the  former  involves  a  greater  degree  of  the
same  evil  passion  than  the  latter,  and  it  is  certainly  not  because
one  is  a  harmful  action  and  the  other  merely  a  feeling.  If  with  the
firm  intention  of  causing  death  to  his  enemy  a  man  stabs  a  wax
effigy,  he  is  from  the  moral  point  of  view  a  full-fledged  murderer,


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


13


though  he  has  killed  no  one  and  interfered  with  no  one’s
rights  ;  but  for  this  very  reason,  from  the  legal  point  of  view
his  action  is  not  even  remotely  akin  to  murder,  and  is  at  most
an  insignificant  damage  to  another  person’s  property.

Extreme  idealism  which  recognises  the  subject’s  inner  states
as  alone  real  does  not  deny  that  there  exist  qualitative  differences
between  these  states,  expressing  a  greater  or  lesser  degree  of
activity  in  the  self.  Therefore  from  this  point  of  view  also  our
actions,  in  spite  of  the  illusory  character  of  their  object,  preserve
their  full  moral  significance  as  indicative  of  our  spiritual
condition.  Thus  the  feeling  of  anger  or  malice,  e.g .,  indicates
like  every  other  passion  the  passivity  of  the  spirit  or  its  inward
subordination  to  the  illusory  appearances,  and  is  in  that  sense
immoral.  It  is  clear  that  the  degree  of  immorality  is  directly
proportionate  to  the  strength  of  the  passion  or  to  the  degree  of
our  passivity.  The  stronger  the  passion,  the  greater  passivity
of  the  spirit  does  it  indicate.  Therefore  a  passion  of  anger
leading  to  premeditated  murder  is  more  immoral  than  a  passing
irritability,  quite  apart  from  the  theoretical  question  as  to  the
illusory  character  of  external  objects.  Even  from  the  point  of
view  of  subjective  idealism,  then,  bad  actions  are  worse  than  bad
emotions  which  do  not  lead  to  actions.

The  conclusion  that  follows  from  this  is  clear.  If  the
universe  were  merely  my  dream,  this  would  be  fatal  only  to  the
objective,  the  external  side  of  ethics  (in  the  broad  sense),  and  not
to  its  own  inner  sphere ;  it  would  destroy  my  interest  in
jurisprudence,  politics,  in  social  questions,  in  philanthropy,  but  it
would  not  affect  the  individually  moral  interests  or  the  duties
to  myself.  I  should  cease  to  care  about  safeguarding  the  rights
of  others,  but  would  still  preserve  my  own  inner  dignity.  Not
feeling  any  tender  compassion  for  the  phantoms  surrounding  me,
I  should  be  all  the  more  bound  to  refrain  from  evil  or  shameful
passions  in  relation  to  them.  If  it  be  opposed  to  moral  dignity
to  bear  malice  against  a  living  human  being,  it  is  all  the  more
so  against  a  mere  phantom  ;  if  it  be  shameful  to  fear  that  which
exists,  it  is  still  more  shameful  to  fear  that  which  does  not  exist  ;
if  it  be  shameful  and  contrary  to  reason  to  strive  for  the  material
possession  of  real  objects,  it  is  no  less  shameful  and  far  more
irrational  to  entertain  such  a  desire  with  regard  to  phantoms  of


14  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

one’s  own  imagination.  Quite  apart  from  the  theory  that  all
that  exists  is  a  dream,  when  in  the  ordinary  way  we  dream  of
doing  something  immoral  we  feel  ashamed  of  it  even  after
awakening.  Of  course  if  I  dream  that  I  have  killed  some  one,  on
waking  I  am  not  so  much  ashamed  of  my  action  as  pleased  at
its  having  been  only  a  dream  ;  but  of  the  vindictive  feeling
experienced  in  the  dream  I  am  ashamed  even  when  awake.

In  view  of  all  these  considerations,  the  following  general
conclusion  seems  inevitable.  Theoretical  philosophy  (namely,  the
critique  of  knowledge)  may  engender  doubt  as  to  the  existence
of  the  objects  of  morality,  but  it  certainly  cannot  create  a
conviction  of  their  non-existence.  The  doubt  (which,  however,
is  disposed  of,  in  one  way  or  another,  by  the  theoretical
philosophy  itself)  cannot  outweigh  the  certainty  which  attaches
to  the  deliverances  of  conscience.  But  even  if  it  were  possible
to  be  certain  of  the  non-existence  of  other  beings  (as  objects  of
moral  activity),  this  would  only  affect  the  objective  side  of  ethics,
leaving  its  own  essential  sphere  altogether  untouched.  This
conclusion  sufficiently  safeguards  the  independence  of  moral
philosophy  with  regard  to  the  first  point  raised  by  the  critique
of  knowledge.  The  second  difficulty  arises  in  connection  with
the  metaphysical  question  of  the  freedom  of  will.

IV

It  is  often  maintained  that  the  fate  of  moral  consciousness
depends  upon  this  or  that  view  of  the  freedom  of  will.  It  is
urged  that  either  our  actions  are  free  or  they  are  determined,  and
then  it  is  affirmed  that  the  second  alternative,  namely,  deter¬
minism,  or  the  theory  that  all  our  actions  and  states  happen  with
necessity,  makes  human  morality  impossible  and  thus  deprives
moral  philosophy  of  all  meaning.  If,  they  say,  man  is  merely
a  wheel  in  the  world  machine,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  of
moral  conduct.  But  the  whole  force  of  the  argument  depends
upon  an  erroneous  confusion  between  mechanical  determinism
and  determinism  in  general — a  confusion  from  which  Kant  himself
is  not  altogether  free.  Determinism  in  general  merely  affirms
that  everything  that  happens,  and  therefore  all  human  conduct,  is
determined,  ( determinate — hence  the  name  of  the  theory)  by  sufficient


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


*5


reasons ,  apart  from  which  it  cannot  take  place,  and  given  which  it
happens  with  necessity.  But  although  the  general  concept  of
necessity  is  always  identical  with  itself,  necessity  as  actual  fact
varies  according  to  the  sphere  in  which  it  is  realised  ;  and
corresponding  to  the  three  chief  kinds  of  necessity  (with  reference
to  events  and  actions)  there  may  be  distinguished  three  kinds  of
determinism  :  (1)  mechanical  determinism ,  which  certainly  is

exclusive  of  morality  ;  (2)  psychological  determinism ,  which  allows
for  some  moral  elements  but  is  hardly  compatible  with  others  ;
(3)  rationally  ideal  determinism ,  which  gives  full  scope  to  the
demands  of  morality.

Mechanical  necessity  is  undoubtedly  present  in  phenomena,
but  the  assertion  that  it  is  the  only  kind  of  necessity  that  exists
is  simply  a  consequence  of  the  materialistic  metaphysics  which
would  reduce  all  that  is  to  mechanical  movements  of  matter.
This  view,  however,  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  conviction  that
everything  that  happens  has  a  sufficient  reason  which  determines  it
with  necessity.  To  regard  man  as  a  wheel  in  the  world  machine,
one  must  at  least  admit  the  existence  of  such  a  machine,  and  by
no  means  all  determinists  would  agree  to  this.  Many  of  them
regard  the  material  world  merely  as  a  presentation  in  the  mind  of
spiritual  beings,  and  hold  that  it  is  not  the  latter  who  are  mechanic¬
ally  determined  by  real  things,  but  that  phenomena  are  mentally
determined  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  inner  life  of  the
spiritual  beings,  of  which  man  is  one.

Leaving  metaphysics  for  the  present  on  one  side  and  confining
ourselves  to  the  limits  of  general  experience,  we  undoubtedly  find
already  in  the  animal  world  inner  psychological  necessity  essentially
irreducible  to  mechanism.  Animals 1  are  determined  in  their
actions  not  merely  externally,  but  also  from  within,  not  by
the  push  and  pressure  of  things,  but  by  impelling  motives,  i.e.  by
their  own  ideas.  Even  granting  that  these  motives  are  caused


1  In  a  certain  sense  of  course  the  same  may  be  said  of  plants  and  even  of  the  different
parts  of  the  inorganic  world,  for  there  does  not  exist  in  nature  pure  mechanism  or
absolute  soullessness  ;  but  in  these  preliminary  remarks  I  wish  to  keep  to  what  is
indisputable  and  generally  understood.  Concerning  the  different  kinds  of  causality
or  necessity  in  connection  with  the  problem  of  the  freedom  of  will  see  in  particular
Schopenhauer,  Grundprobl.  des  Ethik  and  Wille  in  dcr  Natur.  I  have  given  the  essence
of  his  views  in  my  Kritika  otvletchonnih  natchal  ( Critique  of  Abstract  Principles ),
chap.  ix.


1 6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

by  outer  objects,  they  nevertheless  arise  and  act  in  the  animal  s
mind  in  accordance  with  its  own  nature.  This  psychological
necessity  is  of  course  not  freedom,  but  it  cannot  be  identified  with
mechanical  necessity.  Where  Kant  attempts  to  identify  the  two,
the  erroneousness  of  his  contention  is  betrayed  by  a  curiously  un¬
fortunate  comparison  he  makes.  In  his  words  the  freedom  of
being  determined  by  one’s  own  ideas  is  in  truth  no  better  than
the  freedom  of  a  roasting-jack  which  being  once  set  going  pro¬
duces  its  movements  by  itself.  Not  only  Kant,  who  was  opposed  to
any  kind  of  hyloism  (animation  of  matter),  but  the  most  poetically
minded  Natur-philosoph  would  certainly  not  ascribe  to  such  an
object  as  a  roasting-jack  the  power  of  spontaneously  producing  its
movements.  When  we  say  that  it  turns  by  itself  we  simply
mean  that,  owing  to  the  force  of  the  impetus  it  has  received,  it
continues  to  move  alone.  The  words  “by  itself”  mean  here  “  with¬
out  the  help  of  any  new  additional  agent” — the  same  as  the
French  tout  seulx — and  in  no  way  presupposes  that  the  object
moved  contributes  anything  of  itself  to  the  movement.  But
when  we  say  of  an  animal  that  it  moves  by  itself,  we  mean
precisely  its  inward  participation  in  producing  movements.  It
flees  from  an  enemy  or  runs  towards  food,  not  because  these
movements  have  been  externally  communicated  to  it  beforehand,
but  because  at  that  moment  it  experiences  fear  of  the  enemy  or
desire  for  food.  Of  course  these  psychological  states  are  not  free
acts  of  will,  nor  do  they  immediately  produce  bodily  movements  ;
they  merely  set  going  a  certain  mechanism  which  is  already  there,
fitted  for  the  execution  of  certain  actions.  But  the  special
peculiarity  which  does  not  allow  of  animal  life  being  reduced  to
mere  mechanism  is  that,  for  the  normal  interaction  between  the

1  In  the  Polish  language  the  word  sam  has  kept  only  this  negative  sense — alone  without
the  others  (the  derivative  samotny  =  lonely)  ;  in  the  Russian  and  the  German  languages  both
meanings  are  possible,  and  if  the  positive  (the  inner,  spontaneous  causality)  is  given  the
negative  (absence  of  any  other  cause)  is  presupposed,  but  not  nice  -versa.  Thus  the
word  samouchka  (self-taught)  denotes  a  man  who  has  himself  been  the  cause  of  his  educa¬
tion  and  who  studied  alone  without  the  help  of  others.  The  two  meanings  are  here
combined  as  in  similar  words  in  other  languages,  e.g.  the  German  Selbsters&iehung  or  the
English  self-help.  But  when  we  say  that  a  roasting-jack  moves  {sam)  by  itself  ( Selbst ),  the
word  has  merely  the  negative  meaning  that  at  the  present  moment  nothing  external  is
pushing  the  object.  But  it  is  certainly  not  meant  that  the  jack  is  the  spontaneous
cause  of  its  movements  5  the  cause  is  wholly  contained  in  the  previous  impetus,  external
to  the  object.


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


17


animal  organism  and  the  external  environment  to  take  place,  the
latter  must  take  for  the  animal  the  form  of  a  motive  and
determine  the  animal’s  movements  in  accordance  with  its  own
pleasant  or  unpleasant  feelings.  The  presence  or  absence  of  the
capacity  for  feeling  which  is  inseparably  connected  with  the  two
other  faculties  of  willing  and  of  representing — i.e.  the  presence
or  absence  of  an  inner  life — is  the  most  important  difference  that
we  can  conceive.  And  if  we  grant  the  presence  of  this  inner
life  in  the  animal  and  deny  it  to  a  mechanical  automaton,  we
have  no  right  to  identify  the  two  as  Kant  does.1

The  psychical  life  as  manifested  in  the  different  species  and  in
individual  animals  (and  in  man)  presents  qualitative  differences
which  enable  us,  for  instance,  to  distinguish  between  the  ferocious
and  the  meek,  the  brave  and  the  cowardly,  etc.  Animals  are  not
aware  of  these  qualities  as  either  good  or  bad  ;  but  in  human
beings  the  same  qualities  are  regarded  as  indicating  a  good  or  a
bad  nature.  There  is  a  moral  element  involved  here,  and  experi¬
ence  unquestionably  proves  that  good  nature  may  develop  and  bad
be  suppressed  or  corrected  ;  we  already  have  here  a  certain  object
for  moral  philosophy  and  a  problem  of  its  practical  application,
though  of  course  there  is  as  yet  no  question  as  to  the  freedom  of
will.  The  final  independence  of  ethics  of  this  metaphysical
problem  is,  however,  to  be  discovered  not  within  the  sphere  of
psychical  life  which  is  common  to  man  and  animal,  but  within
the  sphere  of  human  morality  proper.

V

Just  as  in  the  animal  world  psychological  necessity  is  super-
added  to  the  mechanical  without  cancelling  the  latter  or  being
reduced  to  it,  so  in  the  human  world  to  these  two  kinds  of
necessity  is  added  the  ideally  rational  or  moral  necessity.  It
implies  that  the  motives  or  sufficient  reasons  of  human  actions  are
not  limited  to  concrete  particular  ideas  which  affect  the  will  through

1  The  logical  right  to  doubt  the  presence  of  a  mental  life  in  animals  must  be  based
upon  the  same  grounds  upon  which  I  doubt  the  existence  of  minds  other  than  my  own
(see  above).  An  exact  solution  of  this  purely  theoretical  problem  is  impossible  in  the
domain  of  ethics  and  is  not  necessary  for  it  ;  it  is  a  question  for  epistemology  and
metaphysics.

C


i8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  pleasant  or  unpleasant  sensations,  but  may  be  supplied  by
the  universal  rational  idea  of  the  good  acting  upon  the  conscious
will  in  the  form  of  absolute  duty  or,  in  Kant’s  terminology,
in  the  form  of  a  categorical  imperative.  To  put  it  more  plainly,
man  may  do  good  apart  from  and  contrary  to  any  self-interested
considerations,  for  the  sake  of  the  good  itself,  from  reverence
for  duty  or  the  moral  law.  This  is  the  culminating  point  of
morality,  which  is,  however,  quite  compatible  with  determinism
and  in  no  way  requires  the  so-called  freedom  of  will.  Those  who
affirm  the  contrary  ought  first  to  banish  from  the  human  mind
and  language  the  very  term  “moral  necessity,”  for  it  would  be  a
contradict 10  in  adjecto  if  morality  were  possible  only  on  condition
of  free  choice.  And  yet  the  idea  expressed  by  this  term  is  not  only
clear  to  every  one,  but  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case.
Necessity  in  general  is  the  absolute  dependence  of  an  action
(in  the  broad  sense,  effectus)  upon  a  ground  which  determines
it,  and  is  therefore  called  sufficient.  When  this  ground  is  a
physical  blow  or  shock,  the  necessity  is  mechanical;  when  a
mental  excitation,  the  necessity  is  psychological  ;  and  when  the
idea  of  the  good,  it  is  moral.  Just  as  there  have  been  futile
attempts  to  reduce  psychology  to  mechanics,  so  now  an  equally
futile  attempt  is  made  to  reduce  morality  to  psychology,  i.e.  to
show  that  the  true  motives  of  human  action  can  only  be  mental
affections  and  not  a  sense  of  duty — in  other  words,  to  prove  that
man  never  acts  for  conscience’  sake  alone.  To  prove  this  is,  of
course,  impossible.  It  is  no  argument  to  say  that  the  moral  idea
is  comparatively  seldom  a  sufficient  ground  for  action.  Plants
and  animals  are  only  an  insignificant  quantity  as  compared  with
the  inorganic  mass  of  the  earth  ;  but  no  one  could  conclude
from  this  that  there  is  no  fauna  and  flora  on  the  earth.  Moral
necessity  is  simply  the  finest  flower  on  the  psychological  soil  of
humanity,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  all  the  more  important  for
philosophy.

Everything  that  is  higher  or  more  perfect  presupposes  by
its  very  existence  certain  freedom  from  the  lower,  or,  to  speak
more  exactly,  from  the  exclusive  domination  by  the  lower.
Thus  the  capacity  of  being  determined  to  action  by  means  of
ideas  or  motives  means  freedom  from  the  exclusive  domination  by
material  impact  and  pressure — i.e.  psychological  necessity  means


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


*9


freedom  from  mechanical  necessity.  In  the  same  way  moral
necessity,  while  wholly  retaining  its  necessary  character,  means
freedom  from  the  lower,  psychological  necessity.  If  a  person’s
actions  can  be  determined  by  the  pure  idea  of  the  good  or  by  the
absolute  demands  ot  moral  duty,  it  means  that  he  is  free  from
the  overpowering  influence  of  emotions  and  may  successfully
resist  the  most  powerful  of  them.  But  this  rational  freedom  has
nothing  in  common  with  the  so-called  freedom  of  will  which
means  that  the  will  is  determined  by  nothing  except  itself,
or,  according  to  the  incomparable  formula  of  Duns  Scotus,
“  nothing  except  the  will  itself  causes  the  act  of  willing  in  the
will”  ( nihil  aliud  a  voluntate  causat  actum  volendi  in  voluntate).
I  do  not  say  that  there  is  no  such  freedom  of  will ;  I  only  say
that  there  is  none  of  it  in  moral  actions.  In  such  actions  will  is
determined  by  the  idea  of  the  good  or  the  moral  law  which  is
universal  and  necessary,  and  independent  of  will  both  in  its
content  and  in  its  origin.  It  may  be  thought,  however,  that
the  act  itself  of  accepting  or  not  accepting  the  moral  law  as  the
principle  of  one’s  will  depends  on  that  will  alone,  and  that  this
explains  why  one  and  the  same  idea  of  the  good  is  taken  by
some  as  a  sufficient  motive  for  action  and  is  rejected  by  others.
The  different  effects  are  due,  however,  in  the  first  place,  to  the
fact  that  one  and  the  same  idea  has  for  different  people  a  different
degree  of  clearness  and  completeness,  and  secondly,  to  the  unequal
receptivity  of  different  natures  to  moral  motives  generally.  But
then  all  causality  and  all  necessity  presupposes  a  special  receptivity
of  given  objects  to  a  certain  kind  of  stimuli.  The  stroke  of  a
billiard  cue  which  moves  a  billiard  ball  has  no  effect  whatever  on
a  sun  ray  ;  juicy  grass  which  excites  irrepressible  longing  in  a
deer  is  not,  as  a  rule,  a  motive  of  willing  in  a  cat,  and  so  on.  If
the  indifference  of  the  sun  ray  to  the  strokes  of  a  cue  or  the
dislike  of  vegetable  food  by  a  carnivorous  animal  be  regarded  as  a
manifestation  of  free  will,  then,  of  course,  man’s  good  or  bad
actions  must  also  be  considered  arbitrary.  But  this  is  simply  a
gratuitous  introduction  of  misleading  terminology.

For  the  idea  of  the  good  as  duty  to  become  a  sufficient
reason  or  motive  for  action,  a  union  of  two  factors  is  necessary  :
sufficient  clearness  and  fulness  of  the  idea  itself  in  consciousness
and  sufficient  moral  receptivity  of  the  subject.  Whatever  the


20  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

one-sided  schools  of  ethics  may  say,  it  is  clear  that  the  presence
of  one  of  these  factors  in  the  absence  of  the  other  is  insufficient
for  producing  the  moral  effect.  Thus,  to  use  a  Biblical
example,  Abraham,  who  had  the  greatest  moral  receptivity  but
an  insufficient  knowledge  of  what  is  contained  in  the  idea  of  the
good,  decided  to  kill  his  son.  He  was  fully  conscious  of  the
imperative  form  of  the  moral  law  as  the  expression  of  the  higher
will,  and  accepted  it  implicitly  ;  he  was  simply  lacking  in  the
conception  of  what  may  and  what  may  not  be  a  good  or  an
object  of  God’s  will — a  clear  proof  that  even  saints  stand  in  need
of  moral  philosophy.  In  the  Bible  Abraham’s  decision  is
regarded  in  two  ways — (i)  as  an  act  of  religious  devotion  and
self-sacrifice,  which  brought  to  the  patriarch  and  his  posterity
the  greatest  blessings,  and  (2)  as  involving  the  idea  that  God’s
will  is  qualitatively  indifferent — an  idea  so  erroneous  and  so
dangerous  that  interference  from  above  was  necessary  in  order
to  prevent  his  intention  being  carried  out.  (I  need  not  here
touch  upon  the  connection  of  the  event  with  heathen  darkness  nor
upon  its  mysterious  relation  to  Christian  light.)  In  contradistinc¬
tion  to  Abraham,  the  prophet  Balaam,  in  spite  of  his  being  fully
conscious  of  the  right  course,  was  led  by  his  vicious  heart  to
prefer  the  king’s  gifts  to  the  decree  of  the  Divine  will  and  to
curse  the  people  of  God.

When  the  moral  motive  is  defective  in  the  one  respect  or
the  other,  it  does  not  operate  ;  and  when  it  is  sufficient  in  both
respects  it  operates  with  necessity  like  any  other  cause.  Suppose
I  accept  the  moral  law  as  a  motive  for  action  solely  for  its  own
sake,  out  of  reverence  for  it  and  without  any  admixture  of
extraneous  motives.  This  very  capacity  to  respect  the  moral
law  so  highly  and  so  disinterestedly  as  to  prefer  it  to  all  else  is
itself  a  quality  of  mind  and  is  not  arbitrary,  and  the  activity  that
follows  from  it,  though  rationally  free,  is  entirely  subject  to  moral
necessity  and  cannot  possibly  be  arbitrary  or  accidental.  It  is  free
in  the  relative  sense,  free  from  the  lower  mechanical  and
psychological  necessity,  but  it  is  certainly  not  free  from  the
inner  higher  necessity  of  the  absolute  good.  Morality  and  moral
philosophy  are  entirely  based  upon  rational  freedom  or  moral
necessity,  and  wholly  exclude  from  their  sphere  the  irrational
unconditional  freedom  or  the  arbitrary  choice.


MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  AS  A  SCIENCE


21


In  order  that  the  conscious  choice  of  man  might  be  deter¬
mined  by  the  idea  of  the  good  with  full  inward  necessity  and  have  a
sufficient  motive,  the  content  of  this  idea  must  be  sufficiently
developed  ;  the  intellect  must  present  the  idea  to  the  will  in
its  full  force — and  to  do  this  is  precisely  the  function  of  moral
philosophy.  Thus  ethics  is  not  only  compatible  with  deter¬
minism,  but  renders  the  highest  form  of  necessity  possible.
When  a  man  of  high  moral  development  consciously  subordinates
his  will  to  the  idea  of  the  good,  which  is  completely  known  to
him  and  has  been  fully  thought  out,  it  is  clear  that  there  is  no
shadow  of  arbitrariness  in  his  submission  to  the  moral  law,  but
that  it  is  absolutely  necessary.

And  yet  there  is  such  a  thing  as  an  absolute  freedom  of  choice.
It  is  found  not  in  the  moral  self-determination,  not  in  the  acts  of
the  practical  reason  where  Kant  sought  it,  but  just  at  the  opposite
pole  of  the  inner  life.  At  present  I  can  only  indicate  my  meaning
partially  and  imperfectly.  As  already  said,  the  good  cannot  be  the
direct  object  of  arbitrary  choice.  Granted  the  requisite  degree  of
understanding  and  of  receptivity  on  the  part  of  the  subject,  its
own  excellence  is  quite  a  sufficient  reason  for  preferring  it  to  the
opposite  principle,  and  there  is  here  no  room  for  arbitrary  choice.
When  I  choose  the  good,  I  do  so  not  because  of  my  whim  but
because  it  is  good,  because  it  has  value,  and  I  am  capable  of
realising  its  significance.  But  what  determines  the  opposite  act
of  rejecting  the  good  and  choosing  the  evil  ?  Is  such  choice
entirely  due  to  the  fact  that,  as  a  certain  school  of  ethics  supposes,
I  do  not  know  evil  and  mistakenly  take  it  for  the  good  ?  It  is
impossible  to  prove  that  this  is  always  the  case.  A  sufficient
knowledge  of  the  good  in  combination  with  a  sufficient  re¬
ceptivity  to  it  necessarily  determines  our  will  in  the  moral  sense.
But  the  question  still  remains  whether  an  insufficient  receptivity
to  the  good  and  a  receptivity  to  evil  is  merely  a  natural  fact,  or
whether  it  depends  on  the  will,  which  in  this  case,  having  no
rational  motive  to  determine  it  in  the  bad  direction  (for  to
submit  to  evil  rather  than  to  good  is  contrary  to  reason),  is
itself  the  ultimate  cause  of  its  own  determination.  For  a  rational
being  there  can  be  no  objective  reason  for  loving  evil  as  such,
and  the  will  therefore  may  only  choose  it  arbitrarily — on  the  con¬
dition,  of  course,  that  there  be  full,  clear  consciousness  of  it ;  for


22  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

when  there  is  only  half-consciousness,  the  bad  choice  is  sufficiently
explained  by  a  mistake  of  judgment.  The  good  determines  my
choice  in  its  favour  by  all  the  infinite  fulness  of  its  positive
content  and  reality.  This  choice  is  therefore  infinitely  deter¬
mined  ;  it  is  absolutely  necessary,  and  there  is  no  arbitrariness  in
it  at  all.  In  the  choice  of  evil,  on  the  contrary,  there  is  no  deter¬
mining  reason,  no  kind  of  necessity,  and  therefore  infinite
arbitrariness.  The  question  then  assumes  the  following  form  :
given  a  full  and  clear  knowledge  of  the  good,  can  a  rational  being
prove  to  be  so  unreceptive  to  it  as  to  reject  it  utterly  and
unconditionally  and  choose  the  evil  ?  Such  lack  of  receptivity  to
the  good  that  is  perfectly  known  would  be  something  absolutely
irrational,  and  it  is  only  an  irrational  act  of  this  description  that
would  truly  come  under  the  definition  of  absolute  freedom
or  of  arbitrary  choice.  We  have  no  right  a  priori  to  deny  its
possibility.  Definite  arguments  for  or  against  it  may  only  be
found  in  the  obscurest  depths  of  metaphysics.  But  in  any  case,
before  asking  the  question  whether  there  can  exist  a  being  who,
with  a  full  knowledge  of  the  good,  may  yet  arbitrarily  reject  it
and  choose  the  evil,  we  must  first  make  clear  to  ourselves  all
that  the  idea  of  the  good  contains  and  involves.  This  is  the
task  of  moral  philosophy  which  is  thus  seen  to  be  presupposed  by
the  metaphysical  question  as  to  the  freedom  of  will  (if  this  question
is  to  be  treated  seriously),  and  certainly  not  to  depend  upon  it.1
Before  going  into  any  metaphysics  we  can  and  must  learn  what
our  reason  finds  to  be  the  good  in  human  nature,  and  how  it
develops  and  expands  this  natural  good,  raising  it  to  the  significance
of  absolute  moral  perfection.

1  A  considerable  part  of  my  theoretical  philosophy  will  be  devoted  to  the  inquiry
into  the  problem  of  free  will.  So  far,  it  is  sufficient  for  me  to  show  that  this  problem
has  no  immediate  bearing  upon  moral  philosophy  which  is  concerned  with  the  conception
of  the  good,  whether  the  good  be  regarded  as  an  object  of  arbitrary  choice  or  as  a
motive  which  necessarily  determines  the  acts  of  rational  and  moral  beings.  In  what
follows  I  shall  always  mean  by  human  freedom,  individual  freedom,  etc.,  either  moral
freedom  which  is  an  ethical  fact,  or  political  freedom  which  is  an  ethical  postulate,
without  any  more  referring  to  the  absolute  freedom  of  choice  which  is  merely  a
metaph  sical  problem.


PART  I

THE  GOOD  IN  HUMAN  NATURE


23


CHAPTER  I


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY

I

However  convincing  or  authoritative  a  moral  teaching  may
be,  it  will  remain  fruitless  and  devoid  of  power  unless  it  finds
a  secure  foundation  in  the  moral  nature  of  man.  In  spite  of
all  the  differences  in  the  degree  of  spiritual  development  in  the
past  and  in  the  present,  in  spite  of  all  the  individual  variations  and
the  general  influences  of  race,  climate,  and  historical  conditions,
there  exists  an  ultimate  basis  of  universal  human  morality,  and
upon  it  all  that  is  of  importance  in  ethics  must  rest.  The
admission  of  this  truth  does  not  in  any  way  depend  upon  our
metaphysical  or  scientific  conception  of  the  origin  of  man.
Whether  the  result  of  a  long  evolution  of  animal  organisms  or
an  immediate  product  of  a  higher  creative  act,  human  nature,
with  all  its  characteristic  features — the  most  important  among
them  being  the  moral  features — is  in  any  case  a  fact.

The  distinctive  character  of  the  psychical  nature  of  man  is
not  denied  by  the  great  representative  of  the  evolutionary  theory.
K  No  doubt  the  difference  in  this  respect  (between  man  and  other
animals)  is  enormous,  even  if  we  compare  the  mind  of  one  of  the
lowest  savages,  who  has  no  words  to  express  any  number  higher
than  four,  and  who  uses  hardly  any  abstract  terms  for  common
objects  or  for  the  affections,  with  that  of  the  most  highly
organised  ape.  The  difference  would,  no  doubt,  still  remain
immense,  even  if  one  of  the  higher  apes  had  been  improved  or
civilised  as  much  as  a  dog  has  been  in  comparison  with  its  parent-
form,  the  wolf  or  jackal.  The  Fuegians  rank  amongst  the
lowest  barbarians,  but  I  was  continually  struck  with  surprise  how

25


26  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

closely  the  three  natives  on  board  H.M.S.  Beagle ,  who  had  lived
some  years  in  England,  and  could  talk  a  little  English,  resembled
us  in  disposition  and  in  most  of  our  mental  faculties.”  1

Further  on  Darwin  declares  that  he  entirely  agrees  with  the
writers  who  hold  that  the  greatest  difference  between  man  and
animals  consists  in  the  moral  sentiment,2  which  he,  for  his  part,
regards  as  innate  and  not  as  acquired.3  But  carried  away  by  his
desire — within  certain  limits  a  legitimate  one — to  fill  up  the
‘  immense  ’  distance  by  intermediary  links,  Darwin  makes  one
fundamental  error.  He  regards  all  human  morality  as  in  the
first  instance  social ,  thus  connecting  it  with  the  social  instincts
of  animals.  Personal  or  individual  morality  has,  according  to
Darwin,  merely  a  derivative  significance,  and  is  a  later  result  of
historical  evolution.  He  maintains  that  the  only  virtues  which
exist  for  savages  are  those  that  are  required  by  the  interests  of
their  social  group.4  But  one  simple  and  universal  fact  is  sufficient
to  disprove  this  contention.

There  exists  one  feeling  which  serves  no  social  purpose,  is
utterly  absent  in  the  highest  animals,  but  is  clearly  manifested  in
the  lowest  of  the  human  races.  In  virtue  of  this  feeling  the  most
savage  and  undeveloped  man  is  ashamed  of — i.e.  recognises  as
wrong — and  conceals  a  physiological  act  which  not  only  satisfies
his  own  desire  and  need,  but  is,  moreover,  useful  and  necessary  for
the  preservation  of  the  species.  Directly  connected  with  this  is
the  reluctance  to  remain  in  primitive  nakedness ;  it  induces
savages  to  invent  clothes  even  when  the  climate  and  the  simplicity
of  life  make  them  quite  unnecessary.

This  moral  fact  more  sharply  than  any  other  distinguishes
man  from  all  the  other  animals,  for  among  them  we  find  not  the
slightest  trace  of  anything  approaching  to  it.  Darwin  himself,
discussing  as  he  does  the  religious  instinct  of  dogs,  etc.,  never
attempts  to  look  to  animals  for  any  rudiments  of  shame.
And  indeed,  not  to  speak  of  the  lower  creatures,  even  the  highly-
endowed  and  well- trained  domestic  animals  are  no  exception.
The  noble  steed  afforded  the  prophet  in  the  Bible  a  suitable
image  for  depicting  the  shamelessness  of  the  dissolute  young  men
of  the  Jerusalem  nobility  ;  the  loyal  dog  has  of  old  been  rightly

1  Darwin,  The  Descent  of  Man  (beginning  of  chap.  iii.).  a  Ibid.  chap,  iii

3  Ibid.,  the  answer  to  Mill.  4  Ibid.,  on  social  virtues.


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY


27

considered  a  typical  example  of  utter  shamelessness  ;  and  among
the  wild  animals,  the  creature  which  in  certain  respects  is  still
more  developed,  the  monkey,  affords  a  particularly  vivid  instance
of  unbridled  cynicism,  all  the  more  apparent  because  of  the
monkey’s  external  likeness  to  man,  and  its  extremely  lively
intelligence  and  passionate  temperament.

As  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  discover  shame  among  animals,
naturalists  of  a  certain  school  are  compelled  to  deny  it  to  man.
Not  having  discovered  any  modest  animals,  Darwin  talks  of  the
shamelessness  of  the  savage  peoples.1  From  the  man  who  went
round  the  world  on  his  ship  Beagle  we  might  expect  the
positive  and  definite  evidence  of  an  eye-witness  ;  but  instead  he
merely  makes  a  few  brief  and  unsupported  remarks,  convincing  to
no  one.  Not  only  savages  but  even  the  civilised  peoples  of  Biblical
or  Homeric  times  may  strike  us  as  shameless,  in  the  sense
that  the  feeling  of  shame  which  they  undoubtedly  possessed
did  not  always  express  itself  in  the  same  way,  nor  extend  to
all  the  details  of  everyday  life  with  which  it  is  associated  in  our
case.  So  far  as  this  goes,  however,  there  is  no  need  to  appeal  to
distant  places  and  times :  people  who  live  side  by  side  with  us,  but
belong  to  a  different  class,  often  consider  permissible  things  of
which  we  are  ashamed.  And  yet  no  one  would  contend  that  the
feeling  of  shame  was  unknown  to  them.  Still  less  is  it  possible
to  make  any  general  deductions  from  cases  of  absolute  moral
deficiency  which  are  found  in  the  annals  of  crime.  Headless
monsters  are  sometimes  born  into  the  human  world,  but  never¬
theless  a  head  remains  an  essential  feature  of  our  organism.

To  prove  his  contention  that  primitive  man  is  devoid  of
shame,  Darwin  also  briefly  refers  to  the  religious  customs  of  the
ancients,  i.e.  to  the  phallic  cult.  But  this  important  fact  is  rather
an  argument  against  him.  Intentional,  exaggerated  shameless¬
ness — shamelessness  made  into  a  religious  principle — evidently
presupposes  the  existence  of  shame.  In  like  manner  the  sacrifice

1  The  Descent  of  Man.  When  dealing  with  savages  even  serious  scientists  sometimes
show  remarkable  thoughtlessness.  The  other  day  I  saw  an  amusing  instance  of  it  in
the  writings  of  the  anthropologist  Brocke.  He  affirms  that  the  aborigines  of  the
Andaman  Islands  wear  no  clothes  5  for,  he  says,  one  cannot  regard  as  such  a  thin  belt
with  a  piece  of  leather  attached  to  it.  I  think  one  could  with  more  ground  deny  the
essential  function  of  clothes  to  the  European  dress-coat.


28  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

by  the  parents  of  their  children  to  the  gods  certainly  does  not
prove  the  absence  of  pity  or  of  parental  love,  but,  on  the  contrary,
presupposes  it.  The  main  point  about  these  sacrifices  is  that  the
loved  children  were  killed  :  if  that  which  was  sacrificed  were  not
dear  to  the  person  who  gave  it,  the  sacrifice  would  be  of  no  value
and  would  lose  its  character  of  sacrifice.  (It  is  only  later,  as
the  religious  feeling  became  weaker,  that  this  fundamental  con¬
dition  of  all  sacrifice  came  to  be  avoided  by  means  of  different
symbolical  substitutes.)  No  religion  at  all,  not  even  the  most
savage  one,  could  be  based  upon  a  mere  absence  of  shame,  any
more  than  upon  a  mere  absence  of  pity.  False  religion  as  much  as
the  true  presupposes  the  moral  nature  of  man,  and  does  so  in  the
very  demand  for  its  perversion.  The  demoniac  powers,  wor¬
shipped  in  the  bloody  and  dissolute  cults  of  ancient  heathendom,
were  nurtured  and  lived  by  this  real  perversion,  by  this  positive
immorality.  These  religions  did  not  require  merely  the  natural
performance  of  a  certain  physiological  act.  No,  their  essence
was  the  intensification  of  depravity,  the  overstepping  of  all  bounds
imposed  by  nature,  society,  and  conscience.  The  religious  char¬
acter  of  the  orgies  proves  the  extreme  importance  of  this  circum¬
stance.  If  they  involved  nothing  beyond  natural  shamelessness,
what  could  be  the  source  of  the  strained,  the  perverted,  the
mystical  element  in  them  ?

It  is  obvious  that  it  would  not  be  necessary  for  Darwin  to  use
such  unconvincing  indirect  arguments  in  support  of  his  view
could  he  produce  any  trustworthy  facts  to  show  the  presence  of
even  rudimentary  modesty  among  animals.  But  there  are  no  such
facts,  and  shame  undoubtedly  remains,  even  from  the  external  and
empirical  point  of  view,  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  man.

II

The  feeling  of  shame  (in  its  fundamental  sense)  is  a  fact
which  absolutely  distinguishes  man  from  all  lower  nature.  No
other  animal  has  this  feeling  in  the  least  degree,  while  in  man  it
has  been  manifested  from  time  immemorial  and  is  subject  to
growth  and  development.

But  that  which  is  involved  in  this  fact  gives  it  a  further  and
a  far  deeper  significance.  The  feeling  of  shame  is  not  merely


a


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY


29


distinctive  feature  whereby  man  is  separated  off  for  external
observation  from  the  rest  of  the  animal  world  ;  in  it  man
actually  separates  himself  from  material  nature,  his  own  as  well  as
that  external  to  him.  In  being  ashamed  of  his  own  natural
inclinations  and  organic  functions,  man  proves  that  he  is  not
merely  a  material  being,  but  is  something  other  and  higher.
That  which  is  ashamed  separates  itself  in  the  very  mental  act
of  shame  from  that  of  which  it  is  ashamed.  But  material  nature
cannot  be  foreign  to  or  external  to  itself.  Hence  if  I  am
ashamed  of  my  material  nature,  I  prove  by  that  very  fact  that
I  am  not  identical  with  it.  And  it  is  precisely  at  the  moment
when  man  falls  under  the  sway  of  the  material  nature  and
is  overwhelmed  by  it  that  his  distinctive  peculiarity  and  inner
independence  assert  themselves  in  the  feeling  of  shame,  in  and
through  which  he  regards  the  material  life  as  something  other,
as  something  foreign  to  himself,  which  must  not  dominate
him.

Even  if  individual  cases  of  sexual  shame  were  to  be  found
among  animals,  it  would  simply  be  a  premonition  of  the  human
nature.  For  in  any  case  it  is  clear  that  a  being  who  is  ashamed
of  his  animality  in  that  very  fact  proves  himself  to  be  more  than  a
mere  animal.  No  one  who  believes  the  story  of  the  speaking  ass
of  Balaam  ever  denied,  on  that  ground,  that  the  gift  of  rational
speech  is  a  characteristic  peculiarity  of  man  as  distinct  from  other
animals.  But  still  more  fundamental  in  this  sense  is  the  meaning
of  sexual  shame.

This  fundamental  fact  of  history  and  of  anthropology — un¬
noticed  or  intentionally  omitted  in  the  book  of  the  great  modern
scientist  —  had  been  noted  three  thousand  years  before  in  an
inspired  passage  in  a  book  of  far  more  authority  :  “  And  the

eyes  of  them  both  were  opened  (at  the  moment  of  fall)  and  they
knew  that  they  were  naked  ;  and  they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,
and  made  themselves  aprons.  And  they  heard  the  voice  of  the
Lord  God  .  .  .  and  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from  the
presence  of  the  Lord  God  amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden.  And
the  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said  unto  him,  IVhere  art
thou  ?  And  he  said,  I  heard  Thy  voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was
afraid,  because  I  was  naked  ;  and  I  hid  myself.  And  He  said,
Who  told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  ?  ”


30  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

At  the  moment  of  fall  a  higher  voice  speaks  in  the  depth  of
the  human  soul,  asking  :  Where  art  thou  ?  where  is  thy  moral
dignity  ?  Man,  lord  of  nature  and  the  image  of  God,  dost  thou
still  exist  ?  And  the  answer  is  at  once  given  :  I  heard  the
Divine  voice  and  I  was  afraid  of  laying  bare  my  lower  nature.  I am
ashamed ,  therefore  I  exist ;  and  not  physically  only,  but  morally
— I  am  ashamed  of  my  animality,  therefore  I  still  exist  as  man.

It  is  by  his  own  action  and  by  testing  his  own  being  that
man  attains  to  moral  self-consciousness.  Materialistic  science
would  attempt  in  vain  to  give,  from  its  point  of  view,  a  satis¬
factory  answer  to  the  question  asked  of  man  long  ago  :  “  Who
told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked  ?  ”

The  independent  and  ultimate  meaning  of  the  sense  of
shame  would  be  explained  away  if  this  moral  fact  could  be
connected  with  some  material  gain  for  the  individual  or  for  the
species  in  the  struggle  for  existence.  In  that  case  shame  could  be
accounted  for  as  a  form  of  the  instinct  of  animal  self-preservation
—  individual  or  social.  But  there  is  no  such  connection.

The  feeling  of  shame  associated  with  the  sexual  act  might
be  useful  to  the  individual  and  to  the  species  as  a  preventive
against  the  abuse  of  this  important  organic  function.  In  the
case  of  animals  which  follow  their  instincts  we  do  not  find  any
injurious  excesses  ;  but  in  the  case  of  man,  owing  to  a  superior
development  of  the  individual  consciousness  and  will,  excesses
become  possible  ;  and  against  the  most  dangerous  of  them — the
abuse  of  the  sexual  instinct — a  useful  check  is  provided  in  the
feeling  of  shame  which  develops  under  the  general  conditions  of
natural  selection.  This  is  a  plausible  argument,  but  it  is  not
really  valid.  To  begin  with,  it  involves  an  inner  contradiction.
If  the  strongest  and  the  most  fundamental  of  instincts — the  instinct
of  self-preservation— is  powerless  to  prevent  man  from  dangerous
excesses,  how  could  this  be  done  by  a  new  and  derivative  instinct
of  shame  ?  And  if  the  instinctive  promptings  of  shame  do
not  have  sufficient  influence  over  man,  which  is  really  the  case,
no  specific  utility  can  attach  to  shame,  and  it  remains  inexplicable
from  the  utilitarian  and  materialistic  point  of  view.  Instead  of
checking  the  excesses,  which  are  a  violation  of  the  normal  order,
it  itself  simply  proves  to  be  an  additional  object  of  such  a
violation — i.e.  an  utterly  useless  complication.  Connected  with


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY


31


this  is  another  consideration  which  contradicts  the  utilitarian
view  of  shame, — the  fact,  namely,  that  this  feeling  manifests  itself
most  clearly  before  entering  upon  sexual  relations  :  shame  speaks
most  clearly  and  emphatically  virginibus  puerisque ,  so  that  if  shame
had  a  direct  practical  significance,  so  far  from  being  useful,  it
would  be  detrimental  both  to  the  individual  and  to  the  species.
But  if  shame  has  no  practical  effect  even  when  it  is  felt  most,
no  subsequent  effect  can  be  expected  from  it.  So  long  as  shame
is  felt  there  can  as  yet  be  no  question  of  sexual  abuse ;  and  when
there  is  abuse,  it  is  too  late  to  speak  of  shame.  The  normal
person  is  sufficiently  safeguarded  from  dangerous  excesses  by
the  simple  feeling  of  satisfied  desire,  and  an  abnormal  person  or
one  with  perverted  instincts  is  least  of  all  noted  for  his  sense  of
shame.  Thus,  speaking  generally,  where  shame  might,  from
the  utilitarian  point  of  view,  be  useful,  it  is  absent,  and  where  it
is  present  it  is  of  no  use  at  all.

In  truth  the  feeling  of  shame  is  excited  not  by  the  abuse  of
a  certain  organic  function,  but  by  the  simple  exercise  of  that
function  :  the  natural  fact  is  itself  experienced  as  shameful.
If  this  is  a  manifestation  of  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  it  is
so  in  quite  a  special  sense.  What  is  being  safeguarded  here  is
not  the  subject’s  material  welfare,  but  his  highest  human  dignity  ;
or  rather  that  dignity  evinces  itself  as  still  safe  in  the  depths  of
our  being.  The  strongest  manifestation  of  the  material  organic
life  calls  forth  a  reaction  on  the  part  of  the  spiritual  principle
which  reminds  the  personal  consciousness  that  man  is  not  merely
a  natural  fact,  that  he  must  not  as  a  passive  instrument  serve
the  vital  purposes  of  nature.  This  is  only  a  reminder ,  and  it
rests  with  the  personal  rational  will  to  take  advantage  of  it.  As
I  have  already  said,  this  moral  feeling  has  no  direct  real  effect,
and  if  its  promptings  are  in  vain,  shame  itself  gradually  disappears
and  is  at  last  completely  lost.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  even  if  it  were  true  that  individual  persons
or  entire  tribes  are  devoid  of  shame,  this  fact  would  not  have
the  significance  ascribed  to  it.  The  unquestionable  shamelessness
of  individual  persons  as  well  as  the  questionable  shamelessness
of  entire  peoples,  can  only  mean  that  in  these  particular  cases
the  spiritual  principle  in  man  which  lifts  him  above  material
nature  is  either  still  undeveloped  or  is  already  lost — that  this


32  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

particular  man  or  this  particular  group  of  men  have  either  not
yet  risen  above  the  bestial  stage  or  have  once  more  returned  to
it.  But  the  hereditary  or  acquired  animality  of  this  or  that
person  or  persons  cannot  destroy  or  weaken  the  significance  of
the  moral  dignity  of  man,  which  with  the  enormous  majority  of
people  clearly  asserts  itself  in  the  feeling  of  shame — a  feeling
absolutely  unknown  to  any  animal.  The  fact  that  infants  at
the  breast,  or  the  mute,  are,  like  animals,  unable  to  speak,  does
not  in  any  way  diminish  the  significance  of  language  as  the
expression  of  a  distinctive,  purely  human  rationality,  not  found
in  other  animals.


Ill

Apart  from  all  empirical  considerations  as  to  the  genesis  of
the  feeling  of  shame  in  humanity,  the  significance  of  that
feeling  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  determines  man’s  ethical  relation
to  his  material  nature.  Man  is  ashamed  of  being  dominated  or
ruled  by  it  (especially  in  its  chief  manifestation),  and  thereby
asserts  his  inner  independence  and  his  superior  dignity  in
relation  to  it,  in  virtue  of  which  he  must  possess  and  not  be
possessed  by  it.

Side  by  side  with  this  fundamental  moral  feeling  determining
the  right  attitude  to  the  lower,  material  principle  in  each  of  us,
there  exists  in  human  nature  another  feeling  which  serves  as  a
basis  for  a  moral  relation  to  other  human,  or,  speaking  generally,
to  other  living  beings  that  are  like  us — namely,  the  feeling  of  pity.1
The  essence  of  it  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  given  subject  is  conscious
in  a  corresponding  manner  of  the  suffering  or  the  want  of
others,  i.e.  responds  to  it  more  or  less  painfully,  thus  more
or  less  exhibiting  his  solidarity  with  the  others.  The  ultimate
and  innate  character  of  this  moral  feeling  is  not  denied  by  any
serious  thinker  or  scientist,  if  only  because  the  feeling  of  pity
or  compassion — in  contradistinction  to  that  of  shame — is  present,
in  its  rudimentary  stage,  in  many  animals,2  and  consequently  from

1  I  use  the  simplest  term,  the  most  usual  in  technical  works  on  the  subject  being
the  terms  sympathy  or  compassion.

2  A  number  of  facts  showing  this  are  to  be  found  in  works  of  descriptive  zoology
(particularly  in  Brehm’s  Life  of  Animals),  and  also  in  the  literature  on  animal
psychology  that  has  of  late  been  considerably  developed.


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY


33

no  point  of  view  can  be  regarded  as  a  later  product  of  human
development.  Thus  if  a  shameless  man  reverts  to  the  brute
stage,  a  pitiless  man  falls  lower  than  the  animal  level.

The  close  connection  of  the  feeling  of  pity  with  the  social
instincts  of  men  and  animals  cannot  be  doubted  owing  to  the  very
nature  of  that  feeling.  In  its  essence,  however,  it  is  an  individual
moral  state,  and  even  in  the  case  of  animals  it  is  not  reducible  to
social  relations,  much  less  so  in  the  case  of  man.  If  the  need  for
a  social  unit  were  the  only  foundation  of  pity,  that  feeling  could
only  be  experienced  towards  the  creatures  that  belong  to  one  and
the  same  social  whole.  This  is  generally  but  by  no  means
always  the  case,  at  any  rate  not  among  the  higher  animals.
Numerous  facts  of  the  tenderest  love1  between  animals  (both
wild  and  domestic)  belonging  to  different  and  sometimes  remote
zoological  groups  are  well  known.  It  is  very  strange  that  in  the
face  of  this  fact  Darwin  should  maintain — without  adducing  any
evidence  to  prove  his  contention — that  among  savage  peoples
sympathetic  feelings  are  limited  to  members  of  one  and  the
same  narrow  group.  Of  course  among  the  cultured  nations,
too,  most  people  show  real  sympathy  chiefly  towards  their
own  family  and  most  intimate  friends,  but  the  individual
moral  feeling  in  all  races  may  transcend  —  and  did  do  so
of  old — not  only  these  narrow  limits,  but  all  empirical  limits
altogether.  To  accept  Darwin’s  contention  unconditionally
would  be  to  admit  that  a  human  savage  cannot  attain  to
the  moral  level  sometimes  reached  by  dogs,  monkeys,  and  even
lions.2

The  sympathetic  feeling  can  grow  and  develop  indefinitely,
but  its  ultimate  essence  is  one  and  the  same  among  all  living
beings.  The  first  stage  and  the  fundamental  form  of  all
solidarity  in  the  animal  kingdom  and  in  the  human  world  is


1  Love  in  the  purely  psychological  sense  (apart  from  the  materially  sexual  and  the
aesthetic  relation)  is  firmly  established,  permanent  pity  or  compassion  (sympathy).
Long  before  Schopenhauer  the  Russian  people  identified  these  two  things  in  their
language  :  “to  love”  and  “to  pity”  is  one  and  the  same  for  them.  One  need  not  go
so  far,  but  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  the  fundamental  subjective  manifestation  of  love
as  a  moral  feeling  is  pity.

2  It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  such  cases  with  regard  to  wild  animals  can  only  be
properly  observed  when  the  animals  are  in  captivity.  It  is  very  probable  indeed  that
the  sympathetic  feelings  in  question  are  awakened  chiefly  in  captivity.


D


34  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

parental  (and  in  particular  maternal)  love.  This  is  the  simple
root  from  which  springs  all  the  complexity  and  multiplicity  of
the  internal  and  external  social  relations  ;  and  it  is  here  that
we  see  most  clearly  that  the  individually-psychological  essence  of
the  moral  bond  is  no  other  than  pity.  For  no  other  mental
state  can  express  the  original  solidarity  of  the  mother  with  her
weak,  helpless,  piteous  offspring  wholly  dependent  upon  her.

IV

The  feelings  of  shame  and  of  pity  essentially  determine  our
moral  attitude  in  the  first  place  to  our  own  material  nature,  and
in  the  second  to  all  other  living  beings.  In  so  far  as  a  man  is
modest  and  pitiful  he  stands  in  a  moral  relation  ‘to  himself  and  to
his  neighbour  ’  (to  use  the  old  terminology) ;  shamelessness  and
pitilessness,  on  the  contrary,  undermine  the  very  roots  of  his
character.  Apart  from  these  two  feelings  there  exists  in  us  a
third  one,  irreducible  to  the  first  two,  and  as  ultimate  as  they  ;  it
determines  man’s  moral  attitude  not  to  his  own  lower  nature
and  not  to  the  world  of  beings  similar  to  him,  but  to  something
different  recognised  by  him  as  the  higher  as  that  which  he  can
be  neither  ashamed  of,  nor  feel  pity  for,  but  which  he  must  revere.
This  feeling  of  reverence  ( reverentia\  or  of  awe  (piety,  pietas\
before  the  higher  forms  in  man  the  moral  basis  of  religion,  and  of
the  religious  order  of  life.  When  abstracted  by  philosophical
reflection  from  its  historic  manifestations,  it  constitutes  the  so-
called  ‘  natural  religion.’  The  ultimate  and  the  innate  character
of  this  feeling  cannot  be  denied  for  the  same  reason  that  the
innateness  of  pity  is  not  seriously  denied  by  any  one.  In  a
rudimentary  form  both  the  feeling  of  pity  and  of  reverence  are
found  among  animals.  It  is  absurd  to  expect  to  find  among
them  religion  in  our  sense  of  the  term.  But  the  general  element¬
ary  feeling  upon  which  human  religion  is  ultimately  based _

namely,  the  feeling  of  reverence  and  awe  in  the  presence  of  some¬
thing  higher — may  unconsciously  spring  up  in  creatures  other
than  man.  In  this  sense  the  following  remarks  must  be  said  to
be  true  :  “  The  feeling  of  religious  devotion  is  a  highly  complex
one,  consisting  of  love,  complete  submission  to  an  exalted  and
mysterious  superior,  a  strong  sense  of  dependence,  fear,  reverence,


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY  35

gratitude,  hope  for  the  future,  and  perhaps  other  elements.  No
being  could  experience  so  complex  an  emotion  until  advanced  in
his  intellectual  and  moral  faculties  to  at  least  a  moderately  high
level.  Nevertheless,  we  see  some  distant  approach  to  this  state
of  mind  in  the  deep  love  of  a  dog  for  his  master,  associated  with
complete  submission,  some  fear,  and  perhaps  other  feelings.  The
behaviour  of  a  dog  when  returning  to  his  master  after  an  absence,
and,  as  I  may  add,  of  a  monkey  to  his  beloved  keeper,  is  widely
different  from  that  towards  their  fellows.  In  the  latter  case  the
transports  of  joy  appear  to  be  somewhat  less,  and  the  sense  of
equality  is  shown  in  every  action.”  1  The  representative  of  the
scientific  evolutionary  view  admits  then  that  in  the  quasi-religious
relation  of  the  dog  or  of  the  monkey  to  a  higher  being  (from
their  point  of  view)  there  is,  in  addition  to  fear  and  self-interest,
a  moral  element  and  one  quite  distinct  from  the  sympathetic
feelings  which  these  animals  exhibit  in  relation  to  their  equals.
This  specific  relation  to  the  higher  is  precisely  what  I  call
reverence  ;  and  if  one  admits  it  in  dogs  and  monkeys  it  would  be
strange  to  deny  it  to  man,  and  to  deduce  human  religion  from
fear  and  self-interest  alone.  These  lower  feelings  undoubtedly
contribute  to  the  formation  and  the  development  of  religion.
But  the  ultimate  basis  of  it  is  the  distinctive  religiously  moral
feeling  of  man’s  reverent  love  to  what  is  more  excellent  than
himself.


V

The  fundamental  feelings  of  shame ,  pity ,  and  reverence  exhaust
the  sphere  of  man’s  possible  moral  relations  to  that  which  is  below
him,  that  which  is  on  a  level  with  him,  and  that  which  is  above
him.  Mastery  over  the  material  senses,  solidarity  with  other
living  beings,  and  inward  voluntary  submission  to  the  superhuman
principle — these  are  the  eternal  and  permanent  foundations  of
the  moral  life  of  humanity.  The  degree  of  mastery,  the  depth
and  the  extent  of  solidarity,  the  completeness  of  the  inward
submission  vary  in  the  course  of  history,  passing  from  a  lesser  to

1  Darwin,  op.  cit.,  end  of  ch.  iii.  Darwin  had  been  speaking  before  of  the  intellectual
side  of  religion — of  the  acknowledgment  of  an  invisible  cause  or  causes  for  unusual
events.  He  finds  this  too  among  the  animals.


36  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

a  greater  perfection,  but  the  principle  in  each  of  the  three  spheres
of  relation  remains  one  and  the  same.

All  other  phenomena  of  the  moral  life,  all  the  so-called  virtues,
may  be  shown  to  be  the  variations  of  these  three  essentials  or  the
results  of  interaction  between  them  and  the  intellectual  side  of
man.  Courage  and  fortitude ,  for  instance,  are  undoubtedly  exempli¬
fications — though  in  a  more  external  and  superficial  form — of  the
same  principle,  the  more  profound  and  significant  expression  of
which  is  found  in  shame, — the  principle,  namely,  of  rising  above
and  dominating  the  lower  material  nature.  Shame  (in  its  typical
manifestation)  elevates  man  above  the  animal  instinct  of  generic  self-
preservation  ;  courage  elevates  him  above  another  animal  instinct
— that  of  personal  self-preservation.  But  apart  from  this  dis¬
tinction  in  the  object  or  the  sphere  of  application,  these  two
forms  of  one  and  the  same  moral  principle  differ  more  profoundly
in  another  respect.  The  feeling  of  shame  necessarily  involves  a
condemnation  of  that  with  which  it  is  associated  :  that  of  which  I
am  ashamed  is  declared  by  me,  in  and  through  the  very  act  of  being
ashamed,  to  be  bad  or  wrong.  But  a  courageous  feeling  or  action,
on  the  contrary,  may  simply  express  the  nature  of  a  given  individual,
and,  as  such,  contains  no  condemnation  of  its  opposite.  For  this
reason  courage  is  found  among  animals,  having  in  their  case  no
moral  significance.  As  the  function  of  obtaining  and  assimilat¬
ing  food  gets  more  complex  and  developed  it  becomes  in  some
animals  the  destructive  predatory  instinct  which  may  sometimes
outweigh  the  instinct  of  self-preservation.  This  domination  of  one
instinct  over  another  is  precisely  what  is  meant  by  animal  courage.
Its  presence  or  absence  is  simply  a  natural  fact,  not  inwardly
connected  with  any  self-valuation.  No  one  would  think  of
saying  that  hares  or  hens  are  ashamed  of  their  timidity  ;  courage¬
ous  animals  when  they  happen  to  be  afraid  are  not  ashamed
of  it  either — nor  do  they  boast  of  their  courage.  In  man,  too,
the  quality  of  courage  as  such  is  essentially  of  that  character.  But
owing  to  our  higher  nature  and  to  the  intervention  of  the  in¬
tellectual  elements  this  quality  acquires  a  new  meaning  which
connects  it  with  the  root  of  the  distinctly  human  morality — with
shame.  Man  is  conscious  of  courage  not  merely  as  of  the  pre¬
dominance  of  the  predatory  instinct,  but  as  the  power  of  the  spirit
to  rise  above  the  instinct  of  personal  self-preservation.  The


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY  37

presence  of  this  spiritual  power  is  recognised  as  a  virtue,  and  the
absence  of  it  is  condemned  as  shameful.  Thus  the  essential  kin¬
ship  between  shame  and  courage  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the
absence  of  the  second  virtue  is  condemned  in  accordance  with  the
standard  set  by  the  first :  a  lack  of  courage  becomes  the  subject
for  shame.  This  does  not  apply  with  the  same  force  to  other
virtues  (charity,  justice,  humility,  piety,  etc.)  ;  their  absence  is
generally  condemned  in  a  different  way.  And,  when  judging
other  people’s  feelings  and  actions,  malice,  injustice,  haughtiness,
impiety  strike  us  rather  as  hateful  and  revolting  than  as  shameful  ;
the  latter  definition  is  specially  restricted  to  cowardice  and
voluptuousness,1  i.e.  to  such  vices  which  violate  the  dignity  of
the  human  personality  as  such,  and  not  its  duties  to  others  or
to  God.

The  inner  dependence  of  other  human  virtues  upon  the  three
ultimate  foundations  of  morality  will  be  shown  in  due  course.

VI

Of  the  three  ultimate  foundations  of  the  moral  life,  one,  as  we
have  seen,  belongs  exclusively  to  man  (shame),  another  (pity)  is  to
a  large  extent  found  among  animals,  and  the  third  (awe  or
reverence  for  the  higher)  is  in  a  small  degree  observed  in  some
animals.  But  although  the  rudiments  of  moral  feeling  (of  the
second  and  third  kind)  are  found  in  the  animal  world,  they  differ
essentially  from  the  corresponding  feelings  in  man.  Animals
may  be  good  or  bad,  but  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil  as
such  does  not  exist  for  their  consciousness.  In  the  case  of  man
this  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  is  given  immediately  in  the  feel¬
ing  of  shame  that  is  distinctive  of  him,  and,  gradually  developing
from  this  first  root  and  refining  its  concrete  and  sensuous  form,
it  embraces  the  whole  of  human  conduct  in  the  form  of  con¬
science.  We  have  seen  that  within  the  domain  of  man’s  moral
relation  to  himself  or  to  his  own  nature,  the  feeling  of  shame  (which
has  at  first  a  distinctly  sexual  character)  remains  identical  in
form  whether  it  is  opposed  to  the  instinct  of  generic  or  of  indi-

1  A  complex  wrong-doing  like  treason  is  recognised  both  as  revolting  and  as  shame¬
ful  for  the  same  reason,  in  so  far  as  treason  includes  cowardice  which  prefers  secret
treachery  to  open  enmity.


38  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

vidual  self-preservation  :  a  cowardly  attachment  to  the  mortal
life  is  as  shameful  as  giving  oneself  up  to  the  sexual  desire.  When
from  the  relation  to  oneself  as  a  separate  individual  and  a  member
of  a  genus  we  pass  to  the  relations  to  other  people  and  to  God —
relations  infinitely  more  complex,  varied,  and  changeable, — the
moral  self- valuation  can  no  longer  remain  a  simple  concrete
sensation.  It  inevitably  passes  through  the  medium  of  abstract
thought  and  assumes  the  new  form  of  conscience.  But  the  two
facts  are  no  doubt  essentially  the  same.1  Shame  and  conscience
use  different  language  and  on  different  occasions,  but  the  mean¬
ing  of  their  deliverances  is  one  and  the  same  :  this  is  not  good ,  this
is  wrong ,  this  is  unworthy.

This  is  the  meaning  of  shame  ;  conscience  adds  to  it  the
analytic  explanation,  “  if  you  do  this  wrong  or  unlawful  thing,
you  will  be  guilty  of  evil,  sin,  crime.”

The  voice  of  conscience,  in  determining  as  good  or  as  evil  our
relations  to  our  neighbours  and  to  God,  alone  gives  them  a  moral
significance  which  otherwise  they  would  not  possess.  And  as
conscience  is  simply  a  development  of  shame,  the  whole  moral  life
of  man  in  all  its  three  aspects  springs,  so  to  speak,  from  one  root —
a  root  that  is  distinctly  human  and  essentially  foreign  to  the
animal  world.

If  the  ultimate  foundation  of  conscience  is  the  feeling  of
shame,  it  is  clear  that  animals  which  are  devoid  of  this  more
elementary  feeling  cannot  possess  the  more  complex  development
of  it — conscience.  The  presence  of  conscience  in  them  is  some¬
times  deduced  from  the  fact  that  animals  which  have  done
something  wrong  look  guilty.  But  this  conclusion  is  based  on  a
misunderstanding — on  a  confusion,  namely,  between  two  facts
which,  as  we  know  from  our  own  experience,  are  essentially  distinct.
The  moral  state  of  being  reproached  by  conscience,  or  the  state  of
repentance,  has  an  analogy  in  the  intellectual  sphere  in  the  con¬
sciousness  of  mistake  or  miscalculation,  i.e.  of  an  act  which  from
the  utilitarian  or  the  practical  point  of  view  is  purposeless  or
unprofitable  and  is  followed  by  a  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  with

1  The  expressions  mnie  stydno  (‘  I  am  ashamed  ’)  and  mnie  soviestno  (‘  I  am  conscience-
stricken’)  are  used  in  the  Russian  language  as  synonymous,  and,  indeed,  from  the  nature
of  the  case  it  is  impossible  to  draw  a  sharp  line  of  demarcation  between  the  two  mental
states.


THE  PRIMARY  DATA  OF  MORALITY  39

oneself.  These  two  facts  are  similar  in  form,  and  both  express
themselves  externally  as  confusion  (physiologically  as  the  flushing  of
the  face).  But  although  they  sometimes  coincide,  their  nature  is
so  different  that  often  they  exist  separately  and  even  directly
exclude  one  another.  Thus,  for  instance,  when  the  town-captain
in  Gogol’s  Inspector  General  is  terribly  indignant  with  himself  for
having  been  deceived  by  Hlestakov  and  not  having  deceived  the
latter  instead,  or  when  a  card-sharper  in  sudden  confusion  curses
himself  for  not  having  been  clever  enough  at  cheating,  such  self-
condemnation  obviously  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  awakening
of  conscience,  but  rather  proves  an  inveterate  absence  of  con¬
science.  Intellectual  self-condemnation  is  undoubtedly  present
in  the  higher  animals.  When  a  well-brought-up  dog  is  so  keenly
conscious  of  its  own  misdemeanours  that  it  actually  tries  to  con¬
ceal  them,  this  certainly  proves  its  intelligence,  but  has  no  relation
whatever  to  its  conscience.


VII

The  highest  moral  doctrine  can  be  no  other  than  a  complete
and  correct  development  of  the  ultimate  data  of  human  morality,
for  the  universal  demands  involved  in  them  cover  the  whole  sphere
of  possible  human  relations.  But  it  is  precisely  the  universality
of  these  relations  that  forbids  us  to  stop  at  establishing  their
existence  as  simply  given  in  our  nature  and  renders  a  further
development  and  justification  of  them  necessary.

The  primitive,  natural  morality  we  have  been  considering  is
no  other  than  the  reaction  of  the  spiritual  nature  against  the
lower  forces  —  fleshly  lust,  egoism,  and  wild  passions  —  which
threaten  to  submerge  and  overpower  it.  The  capacity  for  such  a
reaction  makes  man  a  moral  being  ;  but  if  the  actual  force  and  the
extent  of  the  reaction  is  to  remain  indefinite,  it  cannot,  as  such,  be
the  foundation  of  the  moral  order  in  the  human  world.  All  the
actual  manifestations  of  our  moral  nature  are  merely  particular  and
accidental  in  character.  Man  may  be  more  or  less  modest,  com¬
passionate,  religious  :  the  universal  norm  is  not  given  as  a  fact.
The  voice  of  conscience  itself  speaks  more  or  less  clearly  and
insistently,  and  can  (in  so  far  as  it  is  a  fact )  be  binding  only  to
the  extent  to  which  it  is  heard  in  each  given  case.


40  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

But  reason,  which  is  as  innate  in  man  as  the  moral  feelings,
from  the  first  puts  to  his  moral  nature  its  demand  for  universality
and  necessity.  Rational  consciousness  cannot  rest  content  with
the  accidental  existence  of  relatively  good  feelings  from  which  no
general  rule  can  be  deduced.  The  primary  distinction  between
good  and  evil  already  implies  an  idea  of  the  good  free  from  any
limitations ,  containing  in  itself  an  absolute  norm  of  life  and  activity.
In  the  form  of  a  postulate  the  idea  of  the  good  is  inherent  in
human  reason,  but  its  actual  content  is  determined  and  developed
only  through  the  complex  work  of  thought.

From  the  ultimate  data  of  morality  we  inevitably  pass  to  the
general  principles  which  reason  deduces  from  them,  and  which  have
in  turn  played  the  foremost  part  in  the  different  ethical  theories.


CHAPTER  II

THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY

I

The  fundamental  moral  feeling  of  shame  psychologically  con¬
tains  man’s  negative  relation  to  the  animal  nature  which  seeks  to
overpower  him.  To  the  strongest  and  most  vivid  manifestation
of  that  nature  the  human  spirit,  even  at  a  low  stage  of  development,
opposes  the  consciousness  of  its  own  dignity  :  I  am  ashamed  to
submit  to  the  desire  of  the  flesh,  I  am  ashamed  to  be  like  an  animal,
the  lower  side  of  my  nature  must  not  dominate  me — such  domina¬
tion  is  shameful  and  evil.  This  self-assertion  of  the  moral  dignity
— half-conscious  and  unstable  in  the  simple  feeling  of  shame — is
worked  up  by  reason  into  the  principle  of  asceticism.

The  object  of  condemnation  in  asceticism  is  not  material  nature
as  such.  From  no  point  of  view  can  it  be  rationally  maintained
that  nature  considered  objectively — whether  in  its  essence  or  in
its  appearances — is  evil.  It  is  usually  supposed  that  the  so-called
Oriental  religions,  which  are  noted  for  extreme  asceticism,  are
specially  characterised  by  their  identification  of  the  principle  of
evil  with  physical  matter,  in  contradistinction  to  true  Christianity,
which  finds  the  source  of  evil  in  the  moral  sphere.  But,  strictly
speaking,  such  identification  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  system  of
Oriental  philosophy  or  religion.  It  is  sufficient  to  mention  the
three  most  typical  systems  of  India,  the  classical  country  of
asceticism  —  the  orthodox  Brahmin  Vedanta,1  the  independent
Sankhya,  and,  finally,  Buddhism.

1  It  assumed  its  present  form  only  about  the  time  when  Buddhism  disappeared  from
India  (VIII.  and  XIII.  c.a.d.),  but  the  fundamental  conceptions  involved  in  it  are  to  be
found  as  early  as  the  ancient  Upanishads.


41


42  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

According  to  the  Vedanta,  evil  is  illusion  of  the  mind,  which
takes  material  objects  for  entities  separate  from  one  another  and
from  the  self,  and  takes  the  self  to  be  an  entity  separate  from  the
one  absolute  Being.  The  cause  of  this  illusion  is  the  one  ultimate
Spirit  itself  (Paramatman)  which  suddenly,  in  a  moment  of  incom¬
prehensible  blindness  or  ignorance  (Avidya), conceived  the  possibility
of  something  other  than  itself,  desired  that  other,  and  thus  fell  into
an  illusory  duality,  from  which  sprang  the  world.  This  world
does  not  exist  on  its  own  account  (as  external  to  the  One)  but  is
erroneously  taken  so  to  exist — and  therein  lies  the  deception  and
the  evil.  When  a  traveller  in  the  wood  takes  the  chopped-oft
branch  of  a  tree  for  a  snake,  or,  vice  versa ,  a  snake  for  a  branch  of
a  tree,  neither  the  image  of  the  snake  nor  of  the  branch  is  in  itself
evil :  what  is  evil  is  the  one  being  taken  for  the  other,  and  both
being  taken  for  something  external  to  the  self.  The  ignorant
think  that  their  evil  works  are  distinct  from  the  one  Reality.
But  the  evil  deed,  the  evil  doer  himself,  and  the  false  thought  about
their  separateness  are  all  part  of  the  one  absolute  and  ultimate
Spirit  in  so  far  as  it  partly 1  is  in  the  state  of  ignorance.  Its
self-identity  is  re-established  in  the  thought  of  the  wise  ascetics
who  by  mortifying  the  flesh  have  conquered  in  themselves  the
illusion  of  separateness  and  learnt  that  all  is  one.  According  to
such  a  system  of  thought  evil  clearly  cannot  belong  to  material
nature,  for  that  nature  is  regarded  as  non-existent.  Its  reality  is
acknowledged  in  another  important  Indian  system— in  the  in¬
dependent  or  atheistic  Sankhya.  In  it  the  pure  spirit  (Purusha),
existing  only  in  the  multitude  of  separate  entities,  is  opposed  to
first  matter  or  nature  (Prakriti).  But  the  latter  is  not  as  such
the  principle  of  wrong  or  of  evil  :  evil  (and  that  only  in  the
relative  sense)  is  in  the  abiding  connection  of  the  spirit  with  it.
These  two  elements  must  be  connected,  but  only  in  a  transient
fashion  :  nature  must  be  the  temporal  means,  and  not  the  purpose,
of  the  spirit.  The  paralysed  man  who  can  see  (the  spirit)  must
make  use  of  the  blind  athlete  (nature),  on  whose  shoulders  he  can
attain  the  end  of  his  journey  ;  but  once  the  end  is  reached,  they
must  part.  The  end  of  the  spirit  is  self-knowledge — that  is,

1  Some  Hindu  books  determine  the  ‘part’  of  ignorance  arithmetically  as  forming
one-fourth  (or,  according  to  others,  one-third)  of  the  Absolute.  Probably  in  order  that
the  relation  may  remain  unaltered  the  birth  of  the  ignorant  is  equalised  by  the  en¬
lightenment  of  the  wise.


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  43

knowledge  of  itself  as  distinct  from  nature.  But  if  the  spirit  is  to
learn  that  it  is  distinct  from  nature,  it  must  first  know  nature —
and  this  is  the  only  justification  of  the  connection  between  the
two.  Nature  is  the  dancer,  spirit  the  spectator.  She  has  shown
herself,  he  has  seen  her,  and  they  may  part.  The  ascetic  who
resists  natural  inclinations  is  simply  the  wise  man  who  refrains
from  using  means  which  are  no  longer  necessary  once  the  end
has  been  reached.  Orthodox  Brahmanism  affirms  that  only  the
One  exists,  and  that  there  is  no  other  (the  principle  of  Advaiti —
of  unity  or  indivisibility).  The  Sankhya  philosophy  admits  the
existence  of  c  the  other  ’ — i.e.  of  nature— but  maintains  that  it  is
foreign  to  the  spirit,  and,  once  a  knowledge  of  it  has  been  attained,
unnecessary.  Buddhism  reconciles  this  duality  in  a  general  in¬
difference  :  spirit  and  nature,  the  One  and  its  other  are  equally
illusory.  c  All  is  empty  ’  ;  there  is  no  object  for  will ;  the  desire
to  merge  one’s  spirit  in  the  absolute  is  as  senseless  as  the  desire
for  physical  enjoyment.  Asceticism  is  here  reduced  to  a  mere
state  of  not  willing.

Turning  from  the  Hindu  systems  to  a  different  type  of
philosophy  developed  in  Egypt,  we  find  that  the  striking  and
original  form  it  finally  received  in  the  gnosticism  of  Valentine’s
school,  involved  a  conception  of  the  natural  world  as  mixed  and
heterogeneous  in  character.  The  world  is,  in  the  first  place,  the
creation  of  the  evil  principle  (Satan),  secondly,  the  creation  of  the
neutral  and  unconscious  Demiurgus  who  is  neither  good  nor  evil,
and  thirdly,  it  contains  manifestations  of  the  heavenly  Wisdom
fallen  from  higher  spheres.  Thus,  the  visible  light  of  our  world
was  taken  by  the  thinkers  in  question  to  be  the  smile  of  Sophia
remembering  the  celestial  radiance  of  the  Pleroma  (the  absolute
fulness  of  being)  she  had  forsaken.  Materiality  as  such  was  not,
then,  regarded  by  the  Gnostics  as  evil ;  light  is  material  and  yet  it
is  a  manifestation  of  the  good  principle.  Matter  is  not  created  by
Satan  because  it  is  in  itself  evil,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  evil  only
in  so  far  as  it  is  created  by  Satan,  i.e.  in  so  far  as  it  manifests  or
externally  expresses  the  inward  nature  of  evil — in  so  far  as  it  is
darkness,  disorder,  destruction,  death — or,  in  a  word,  chaos.

The  Persian  system  of  thought  (Manicheism),  which  is  more
pronouncedly  dualistic,  no  more  identifies  material  nature  with  evil
than  does  the  Egyptian  gnosis.  The  natural  world  contains  the


44  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

element  of  light,  which  proceeds  from  the  divine  kingdom  of  the,
good  ;  this  element  is  manifested  in  the  phenomena  of  light  and
is  also  present  in  vegetable  and  animal  life.  The  highest  godhead  is
imagined  by  the  Manicheans  in  no  other  form  than  that  of  light.

None  of  these  ‘  Oriental  ’  systems,  then,  are  guilty  of  the
meaningless  identification  of  evil  with  material  nature  as  such.
But  the  contention  that  there  is  evil  in  the  material  nature  of  the
world  and  of  man  would  be  granted  by  all  the  earnest  thinkers  both
of  the  East  and  the  West.  This  truth  does  not  depend  upon  any
metaphysical  conception  of  matter  and  nature.  We  ourselves
share  in  material  nature  and  can  know  from  our  own  inner
experience  in  what  respect  nature  can,  and  in  what  respect  it
cannot,  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  spirit.

II

In  spite  of  Plotinus’s  well-known  assertion  to  the  contrary,
the  normal  man  of  the  highest  degree  of  spiritual  development  is
not  in  the  least  ashamed  of  being  a  corporeal  or  material  entity.
No  one  is  ashamed  of  having  an  extended  body  of  a  definite  shape,
colour,  and  weight  ;  that  is,  we  are  not  ashamed  of  all  that  we
have  in  common  with  a  stone,  a  tree,  a  piece  of  metal.  It  is  only
in  relation  to  characteristics  we  have  in  common  with  beings
which  approach  us  most  nearly  and  belong  to  the  kingdom  of
nature  contiguous  to  us,  that  we  have  the  feeling  of  shame  and  of
inner  opposition.  And  this  feeling  shows  that  it  is  when  we  are
essentially  in  contact  with  the  material  life  of  the  world  and  may
be  actually  submerged  by  it,  that  we  must  wrench  ourselves  away
from  and  rise  above  it.  The  feeling  of  shame  is  excited  neither
by  that  part  of  our  corporeal  being  which  has  no  direct  relation
to  the  spirit  at  all  (such  as  the  above-mentioned  material  qualities
which  the  spirit  has  in  common  with  inanimate  objects),  nor  by
that  part  of  the  living  organism  which  serves  as  the  chief  expression
of  the  specifically  human  rational  life — the  head,  the  face,  the
hands,  etc.  The  object  of  shame  is  only  that  part  of  our  material
being  which,  though  immediately  related  to  the  spirit,  since  it  can
inwardly  affect  it,  is  not  an  expression  or  an  instrument  of  the
spiritual  life,  but  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  means  whereby  the  pro¬
cesses  of  purely  animal  life  seek  to  drag  the  human  spirit  down


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  45

into  their  sphere,  to  master  and  overpower  it.  The  reaction  of
the  spiritual  principle,  which  finds  an  immediate  expression  in  the
feeling  of  shame,  is  evoked  by  material  life  thus  encroaching  upon
the  rational  being  of  man  and  seeking  to  make  him  into  a  passive
instrument  of  or  a  useless  appendage  to  the  physical  process.  The
rational  affirmation  of  a  certain  moral  norm  assumes  psychologically
the  form  of  fear  to  violate  it  or  of  sorrow  at  having  violated  it
already.  The  norm  logically  presupposed  by  the  feeling  of  shame,
is,  when  expressed  in  its  most  general  form,  as  follows  :  the  animal
life  in  man  must  he  subordinate  to  the  spiritual.  This  judgment  is
apodictically  certain,  for  it  is  a  correct  deduction  from  fact  and  is
based  on  the  logical  law  of  identity.  The  very  fact  of  man’s
shame  at  being  merely  animal  proves  that  he  is  not  a  mere  animal,
but  is  also  something  else  and  something  higher  ;  for  if  he  were
on  the  same  or  on  a  lower  level,  shame  would  be  meaningless.
Looking  at  the  matter  from  the  formal  side  alone  it  cannot  be
doubted  that  clear  consciousness  is  better  than  blind  instinct,  that
spiritual  self-control  is  better  than  the  surrender  to  the  physical
process.  And  if  man  unites  in  himself  two  different  elements
related  as  the  higher  and  the  lower,  the  demand  for  the  subordina¬
tion  of  the  latter  to  the  former  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  the
case.  The  fact  of  shame  is  independent  of  individual,  racial,  and
other  peculiarities  ;  the  demand  contained  in  it  is  of  a  universal
character  ;  and  this,  in  conjunction  with  the  logical  necessity  of
that  demand,  makes  it  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term  a  moral  principle.

Ill

Man,  like  the  animals,  participates  in  the  life  of  the  universe.
The  essential  difference  between  the  two  lies  simply  in  the  manner
of  the  participation.  The  animal,  being  endowed  with  conscious¬
ness,  shares  inwardly  and  psychically  in  the  processes  of  nature
which  hold  it  under  their  sway.  It  knows  which  of  them  are
pleasant  or  unpleasant,  it  instinctively  feels  what  is  detrimental  to
itself  or  to  the  species.  But  this  is  true  only  with  reference  to
the  environment  which  immediately  affects  the  animal  at  a  given
time.  The  world  process  as  a  whole  does  not  exist  for  the  animal
soul.  It  can  know  nothing  of  the  reasons  and  ends  of  that  process,
and  its  participation  in  it  is  purely  passive  or  instrumental.  Man,


46  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

on  the  other  hand,  passes  judgment  on  the  part  he  takes  in  the
world  process,  both  with  reference  to  the  given  events  that  affect
him  as  psychological  motives ,  and  to  the  general  principle  of  all
activity.  That  principle  is  the  idea  of  worth  or  of  lack  of  worth,
of  good  or  of  evil,  and  it  can  itself  become  the  ground  or  the
motive  of  human  activity.  This  higher  consciousness  or  inward
self-valuation  places  man  in  a  definite  relation  to  the  world  process
as  a  whole ,  the  relation,  namely,  of  actively  participating  in  its
purpose  ;  for  in  determining  all  his  actions  by  the  idea  of  the  good,
man  shares  in  the  universal  life  only  in  so  far  as  its  purpose  is  the
good.  But  since  this  higher  consciousness  as  a  fact  grows  out  of
the  material  nature  and  exists,  so  to  speak,  at  its  expense,  that  lower
nature  or  the  animal  soul  in  man  is  naturally  opposed  to  it.  There
thus  arise  two  conflicting  tendencies  in  our  life — the  spiritual  and
the  carnal.1  The  spiritual  principle,  as  it  immediately  appears  to
our  present  consciousness,  is  a  distinct  tendency  or  process  in  our
life,  directed  towards  realising  in  the  whole  of  our  being  the
rational  idea  of  the  good.  Likewise  the  carnal  principle  with
which  in  our  inner  experience  we  are  concerned,  is  not  the
physical  organism  nor  even  the  animal  soul  as  such,  but  merely  a
tendency  excited  in  that  soul,  and  opposed  to  the  higher  conscious¬
ness,  seeking  to  overpower  and  to  drown  in  the  material  process
the  beginnings  of  spiritual  life.

In  this  case  material  nature  is  indeed  evil,  for  it  tries  to  destroy
that  which  is  worthy  of  being  and  which  contains  the  possibility
of  something  different  from  and  better  than  the  material  life.
Not  in  itself,  but  only  in  this  bad  relation  to  the  spirit,  man’s
material  nature  is  what  in  scriptural  terminology  is  called  the  fesh.

The  idea  of  ‘  flesh’  must  not  be  confused  with  the  idea  of  ‘  body.’
Even  from  the  ascetic  point  of  view  body  is  the  temple  of  the
spirit  ;  bodies  may  be  ‘spiritual,’  ‘  glorified,’  ‘  heavenly,’  but  ‘  flesh
and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven.’ 2  Flesh  is
excited  animality,  animality  that  breaks  loose  from  its  bounds  and

1  This  is  a  fact  of  our  inner  experience,  and  neither  its  psychological  reality  nor  its
ethical  significance  depend  upon  the  metaphysical  or  any  other  view  which  may  be
taken  of  the  essence  of  spirit  and  matter.

2  Sometimes  in  the  Scriptures  the  word  ‘  flesh  ’  is  used  in  the  wide  sense  of  material
being  in  general  :  eg.  ‘  The  word  became  flesh,’  i.e.  became  a  physical  event,  which  did
not  prevent  the  incarnate  Word  from  being  a  purely  spiritual  and  sinless  God-man.  But
usually  the  terms  flesh  and  fleshly  are  used  m  the  Scriptures  in  the  bad  sense  of  material


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  47

ceases  to  be  the  matter  or  the  hidden  (potential)  foundation  of  the
spiritual  life — as  the  animal  life  ought  to  be  both  on  its  physical
and  on  its  mental  side.

At  the  elementary  stages  of  his  development  man  is  a
spiritual  being  potentially  rather  than  actually  ;  and  it  is  just
this  potentiality  of  a  higher  spiritual  life,  manifested  as  self-
consciousness  and  self-control  in  opposition  to  blind  and  un¬
controlled  physical  nature,  that  is  endangered  by  fleshly  lust.
Flesh,  i.e.  matter  which  has  ceased  to  be  passive  and  is  striving
for  independence  and  infinity,  seeks  to  attract  the  spiritual  power
to  itself,  to  drag  it  in  and  absorb  it  in  itself,  increasing  its  own
power  at  its  expense.  This  is  possible  because,  as  incarnate,  as
actually  manifested  in  the  concrete  man,  spirit,  or  rather  the
life  of  spirit,  is  only  a  transformation  of  material  existence
(more  immediately,  of  the  animal  soul),  although  in  their  ideal
essence  spirit  and  matter  are  heterogeneous.  Regarded  con¬
cretely,  spiritual  and  material  being  are  two  kinds  of  energy
which  can  be  transformed  into  one  another — just  as  mechanical
motion  can  be  transformed  into  heat  and  vice  versa.  The
flesh  (i.e.  the  animal  soul  as  such)  is  strong  only  in  the  weakness
of  the  spirit  and  lives  only  by  its  death.  Therefore,  for  the
spirit  to  preserve  itself  and  to  increase  in  power,  the  flesh  must
be  subdued  and  transferred  from  the  actual  to  the  potential
state.  This  is  the  real  meaning  of  the  moral  law  that  flesh
must  be  subordinate  to  the  spirit,  and  the  true  basis  of  all  moral
asceticism.


IV

The  moral  demand  to  subordinate  the  flesh  to  the  spirit
conflicts  with  the  actual  striving  of  the  flesh  to  subject  the
spirit  to  itself.  Consequently  the  ascetic  principle  has  a  double
aspect.  It  requires  in  the  first  place  that  the  spiritual  life  should
be  safeguarded  from  the  encroachments  of  the  flesh,  and  secondly,
that  the  animal  life  should  be  made  merely  the  potentiality  or
the  matter  of  the  spirit.  Owing  to  the  intimate  inner  con-


nature  which  violates  its  due  relation  to  the  spirit,  is  opposed  to  and  exclusive  of  it.
Such  terminology  is  found  both  in  the  New  and  in  the  Old  Testament  ;  e.g.  “My  spirit
shall  not  dwell  in  these  men  for  they  are  flesh."


48  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

nection  and  constant  interaction  between  the  spiritual  and  the
carnal  aspects  of  the  human  being  as  a  whole,  these  two
demands — the  preservation  of  the  spirit  from  the  flesh  and  the
realisation  of  the  spirit  in  the  flesh — cannot  be  fulfilled  separately,
but  inevitably  pass  into  one  another.  In  actual  life  spirit  can
defend  itself  against  the  encroachments  of  the  flesh  only  at  the
expense  of  the  latter,  that  is,  by  being  partially  realised  in  it  ;  at
the  same  time  the  realisation  of  the  spirit  is  only  possible  on  the
condition  of  its  constantly  defending  itself  against  the  continued
attempts  of  the  flesh  to  destroy  its  independence.

The  three  chief  moments  in  this  process  are:  (i)  the
distinction  which  the  spirit  inwardly  draws  between  itself  and  the
flesh  ;  (2)  the  struggle  of  the  spirit  for  its  independence  ;  (3)  the
supremacy  achieved  by  the  spirit  over  nature  or  the  annihilation
of  the  evil  carnal  principle  as  such.  The  first  moment,  which
is  characteristic  of  man  in  contradistinction  to  animals,  is  directly
given  in  the  feeling  of  shame.  The  third,  being  the  consequence
of  the  moral  perfection  already  attained,  cannot  at  the  present
stage  be  the  direct  object  of  the  moral  demand  or  rule.  It  is
useless  to  confront  even  a  moral  man,  while  he  is  still  imperfect,
with  the  categorical  imperative  “become  at  once  immortal  and
incorruptible  !  ”  Thus  only  the  second  moment  is  left  for  ethics,
and  our  moral  principle  may  be  more  closely  defined  as  follows  :
subordinate  the  flesh  to  the  spirit ,  in  so  far  as  it  is  necessary  for  the
dignity  and  the  independence  of  the  latter.  Hoping  finally  for  a
complete  mastery  over  the  physical  forces  in  yourself  and  in  nature
as  a  whole ,  take  for  your  immediate  and  binding  purpose  not  to  be ,
at  any  rate ,  the  bondman  of  rebellious  matter  or  chaos.

Flesh  is  existence  that  is  not  self-contained,  that  is  wholly
directed  outwards;  it  is  emptiness,  hunger,  and  insatiability;  it
is  lost  in  externality  and  ends  in  actual  disruption.  In  contradis¬
tinction  to  it,  spirit  is  existence  determined  inwardly,  self-contained
and  self-possessed.  Its  outward  expression  is  due  to  its  own
spontaneity,  and  does  not  cause  it  to  become  external  or  to  be
lost  and  dissolved  in  externality.  Hence  self-preservation  of  the
spirit  is,  above  all  things,  the  preservation  of  its  self-control.
This  is  the  main  point  of  all  asceticism.

The  human  body,  in  its  anatomic  structure  and  physiological
functions,  has  no  moral  significance  of  its  own.  It  may  be  the


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  49

expression  and  the  instrument  both  of  the  flesh  and  of  the
spirit.  Hence  the  moral  struggle  between  these  two  aspects  or
our  being  takes  place  in  the  domain  of  the  bodily  or  the  organic
life  as  well,  and  assumes  the  form  of  a  struggle  for  the  mastery
over  the  body.

V

With  regard  to  the  corporeal  life  our  moral  task  consists  in
not  being  passively  determined  by  fleshly  desires,  especially  in
reference  to  the  two  most  important  functions  of  our  organism —
nutrition  and  reproduction.

By  way  of  preliminary  exercise,  which  in  itself,  however,  has
no  moral  value,  it  is  important  for  the  spirit  to  acquire  power
over  such  functions  of  our  animal  organism  as  are  not  directly
related  to  the  ‘  lusts  of  the  flesh  ’ — namely,  over  breathing  and
sleep.1

Breathing  is  the  fundamental  condition  of  life  and  the
constant  means  of  communication  between  our  body  and  its
environment.  For  the  power  of  the  spirit  over  the  body  it  is
desirable  that  this  fundamental  function  should  be  under  the
control  of  the  human  will.  Consequently  there  arose  long
ago  and  everywhere  different  ascetic  practices  with  regard  to
breathing.  The  practice  and  theory  of  breathing  exercises  is
found  among  the  Indian  hermits,  among  the  sorcerers  of  ancient
and  more  recent  times,  among  the  monks  of  Mount  Athos  and
similar  monasteries,  in  Swedenborg,  and,  in  our  own  day,  in
Thomas  Lake-Harris  and  Laurence  Oliphant.  The  mystical
details  of  the  matter  have  nothing  to  do  with  moral  philosophy.
I  will  therefore  content  myself  with  a  few  general  remarks.  A
certain  control  of  the  will  over  breathing  is  required  by  ordinary
good  manners.  For  ascetic  purposes  one  merely  goes  further  in
this  direction.  By  constant  exercise  it  is  easy  to  learn  not  to
breathe  through  the  mouth  either  when  awake  or  when  asleep  ;
the  next  stage  is  to  learn  to  suppress  breathing  altogether  for  a
longer  or  shorter  time.2  The  power  acquired  over  this  organic

1  I  mean  normal  sleep  ;  abnormal  will  be  dealt  with  further  on.

2  The  so-called  ‘nostril  breathing,’  and  also  complete  stoppage  of  breathing,  used
to  be,  and  in  places  still  is  zealously  practised  by  Orthodox  ascetics,  as  one  of  the
conditions  of  the  so-called  ‘meditation.’


E


50  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

function  undoubtedly  increases  the  strength  of  the  spirit  and
gives  it  a  secure  foundation  for  further  ascetic  achievements.

Sleep  is  a  temporal  break  in  the  activity  of  the  brain  and  of
the  nervous  system — the  direct  physiological  instruments  of  the
spirit — and  it  therefore  weakens  the  tie  between  the  spiritual
and  the  bodily  life.  It  is  important  that  the  spirit  should  not
in  this  case  play  a  purely  passive  part.  If  sleep  is  caused  by
physical  causes,  the  spirit  must  be  able,  for  motives  of  its  own,
to  ward  it  off,  or  to  interrupt  sleep  that  has  already  begun.
The  very  difficulty  of  this  task,  which  is  undoubtedly  a  possible
one,  shows  its  importance.  The  power  to  overcome  sleep  and
to  wake  at  will  is  a  necessary  demand  of  spiritual  hygiene.
Moreover,  sleep  has  another  aspect,  which  distinguishes  it  from
breathing  and  other  organic  functions  that  are  in  the  moral
sense  indifferent,  and  connects  it  with  nutrition  and  reproduction.
Like  the  two  latter  functions  sleep  may  be  misused  to  the
advantage  of  the  carnal  and  to  the  detriment  of  the  spiritual
life.  The  inclination  to  excessive  sleep  in  itself  shows  the
predominance  of  the  material  or  the  passive  principle ;  a  sur¬
render  to  this  inclination  and  actual  abuse  of  sleep  undoubtedly
weaken  the  spirit  and  strengthen  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  This
is  the  reason  why  in  the  history  of  ascetic  practices  —  for
instance  in  Christian  monasticism — struggle  with  sleep  plays
so  important  a  part.  Of  course,  the  loosening  of  the  bond
between  the  spiritual  and  the  corporeal  life  (or  more  exactly
between  the  conscious  and  the  instinctive  life)  may  be  of  two
kinds  :  sleepers  must  be  distinguished  from  dreamers.  But  as  a
general  rule  a  special  faculty  to  dream  significant  and  prophetic
dreams  indicates  a  degree  of  spiritual  power  that  has  been  already
developed  by  ascetic  practices — struggle  with  the  pleasure  of
carnal  sleep  among  them.

VI

In  animals  the  predominance  of  matter  over  form  is  due  to
excess  of  food,  as  can  be  clearly  seen  in  caterpillars  among  the
lower,  and  fattened  pigs  among  the  higher,  animals.1  In  man  the
same  cause  (excess  of  food)  leads  to  a  predominance  of  the  animal

1  See  Krasota  и  prirodie  ( Beauty  in  Nature )  by  the  present  author.


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  51

life,  or  the  flesh,  over  the  spirit.  This  is  why  abstinence  in  food
and  drink — fasting — has  always  and  everywhere  been  one  of  the
fundamental  demands  of  ethics.  Abstinence  has  reference,  in
the  first  place,  to  the  quantity — with  regard  to  which  there  can  be
no  general  rule — and  secondly,  to  the  quality  of  food.  In  this
last  respect  the  rule  has  always  and  everywhere  been  abstinence
from  animal  food  and  especially  from  meat  (i.e.  from  the  flesh  of
warm-blooded  animals).  The  reason  is  that  meat  is  more  easily
and  completely  converted  into  blood,  and  increases  the  energy  of
the  carnal  life  more  powerfully  and  rapidly  than  other  foods  do.1
Abstinence  from  flesh  food  can  unquestionably  be  affirmed  as  a
universal  rule.  Objections  to  it  cannot  stand  the  test  of  criticism,
and  have  long  ago  been  disposed  of  both  by  ethics  and  by  natural
science.  There  was  a  time  when  eating  raw  or  cooked  human
flesh  was  regarded  as  normal.2  From  the  ascetic  point  of  view
abstinence  from  meat  (and  animal  food  in  general)  is  doubly
useful,  first,  because  it  weakens  the  force  of  the  carnal  life,  and
secondly,  because  the  hereditary  habit  has  developed  a  natural
craving  for  such  food,  and  abstinence  from  it  exercises  the  will
at  the  expense  of  material  inclinations  and  thus  heightens  the
spiritual  energy.

As  to  drinking,  the  simplest  good  sense  forbids  excessive  use
of  strong  drinks  that  leads  to  the  loss  of  reason.  The  ascetic
principle  requires,  of  course,  more  than  this.  Speaking  generally,
wine  heightens  the  energy  of  the  nervous  system,  and,  through
it,  of  the  psychical  life.  At  our  stage  of  spiritual  development
the  soul  is  still  dominated  by  carnal  motives,  and  all  that  excites
and  increases  the  nervous  energy  in  the  service  of  the  soul  goes
to  strengthen  this  predominant  carnal  element,  and  is  therefore
highly  injurious  to  the  spirit  5  so  that  here  complete  abstinence
from  wine  and  strong  drink  is  necessary.  But  at  the  higher

1  Another  moral  motive  for  abstaining  from  meat  food  is  not  ascetic  but  altruistic,
namely,  the  extension  to  animals  of  the  law  of  love  or  pity.  This  motive  is  pre¬
dominant  in  the  ethics  of  Buddhism  and  the  ascetic  one  in  the  Christian  Church.

2  According  to  the  Biblical  teaching  the  food  of  the  normal  human  being  before  the
Fall  consisted  solely  of  raw  fruits  and  herbs.  This  is  still  the  rule  for  the  strictest
monastic  fast,  both  in  the  East  and  in  the  West  (the  trappists).  Between  this  extreme
and  the  light  Roman  Catholic  fast  for  the  laity  there  are  many  degrees  which  have  a
natural  foundation  ( e.g .  the  distinction  between  the  warm-  and  the  cold-blooded  animals,
owing  to  which  fish  is  regarded  as  a  food  to  be  taken  during  fasts)  but  involve  no
question  of  principle  and  have  no  universal  significance.


52  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

stages  of  moral  life  which  were  sometimes  attained  even  in  the
pagan  world — for  instance  by  Socrates  (see  Plato’s  Symposium) —
the  energy  of  the  organism  serves  the  spiritual  rather  than  the
carnal  purposes.  In  that  case  the  increase  of  nervous  energy  (of
course  within  the  limits  compatible  with  bodily  health)  heightens
the  activity  of  the  spirit  and  therefore,  in  a  certain  measure,  may
be  harmless  or  even  directly  useful.  There  can  be  here  only  one
absolute  and  universal  rule  to  preserve  spiritual  sobriety  and  a  clear
mind }

The  most  important  and  decisive  significance  in  the  struggle
of  the  spirit  with  the  flesh  in  the  physiological  sphere  belongs  to
the  sexual  function.  The  element  of  moral  wrong  (the  sin  of
the  flesh)  is  not  to  be  found  of  course  in  the  physical  fact  of
childbirth  (and  conception)  which  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  certain
redemption  of  the  sin — but  only  in  the  unlimited  and  blind  desire
(lust  of  the  flesh,  concupiscentia )  for  an  external,  animal,  and
material  union  with  another  person  (in  reality  or  imagination),  a
union  taken  to  be  an  end  in  itself,  an  independent  object  of  en¬
joyment.  The  predominance  of  flesh  over  spirit  expresses  itself
most  strongly,  clearly,  and  permanently  in  the  carnal  union  of  two
persons.  It  is  not  for  nothing  that  the  immediate  feeling  of
shame  is  connected  precisely  with  this  act.  To  stifle  or  to
pervert  its  testimony  ;  after  many  thousands  of  years  of  inward
and  outward  development,  and  from  the  heights  of  a  refined  in¬
telligence  to  pronounce  good  that  which  even  the  simple  feeling  of
the  savage  acknowledges  to  be  wrong — this  is,  indeed,  a  disgrace
to  humanity  and  a  clear  proof  of  our  demoralisation.  The  actual
or  the  supposed  necessity  of  a  certain  act  for  other  purposes  can¬
not  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  judging  of  its  essential  quality  as
such.  In  some  diseases  it  may  be  necessary  to  take  poison,  but
that  necessity  is  itself  an  anomaly  from  the  hygienic  point  of
view.

The  moral  question  with  regard  to  the  sexual  function  is  in
the  first  place  the  question  of  one’s  inner  relation  to  it,  of  passing

1  At  the  present  moral  level  of  humanity  the  mastery  of  the  carnal  desires  is  the
rule,  and  the  predominance  of  spiritual  motives  the  exception,  and  one  not  to  be  de¬
pended  upon  5  so  that  total  abstinence  from  strong  drinks  and  all  other  stimulants  may
well  be  preached  without  any  practical  disadvantage.  But  this  is  a  pedagogical  and  pro¬
phylactic  question  involving  no  moral  principle.


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  53

judgment  upon  it  as  such.  How  are  we  inwardly  to  regard  this
fact  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  final  norm,  of  the  absolute
good — are  we  to  approve  of  it  or  to  condemn  it  ?  Which  path
must  we  choose  and  follow  in  respect  to  it :  to  affirm  and  develop
or  to  deny,  limit,  and  finally  to  abolish  it  ?  The  feeling  of  shame
and  the  voice  of  conscience  in  each  concrete  case  definitely  and
clearly  give  the  second  answer,  and  all  that  is  left  for  the  moral
philosophy  to  do  is  to  give  it  the  form  of  a  universal  rational
principle.  The  carnal  means  of  reproduction  is  for  man  an  evil  ;
it  expresses  the  predominance  of  the  senseless  material  process
over  the  self-control  of  the  spirit ;  it  is  contrary  to  the  dignity  of
man,  destructive  of  human  love  and  life.  Our  moral  relation  to
this  fact  must  be  absolutely  negative.  We  must  adopt  the  path
that  leads  to  its  limitation  and  abolition  ;  how  and  when  it  will
be  abolished  in  humanity  as  a  whole  or  even  in  ourselves  is  a
question  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  ethics.  The  entire  trans¬
formation  of  our  carnal  life  into  spiritual  life  does  not  as  an  event
lie  within  our  power,  for  it  is  connected  with  the  general  con¬
ditions  of  the  historical  and  cosmical  process.  It  cannot  therefore
be  the  object  of  moral  duty,  rule,  or  law.  What  is  binding  upon
us,  and  what  has  moral  significance,  is  our  inner  relation  to  this
fundamental  expression  of  the  carnal  life.  We  must  regard  it  as
an  evil,  be  determined  not  to  submit  to  that  evil,  and,  so  far  as  in
us  lies,  conscientiously  carry  out  this  determination.  From  this
point  of  view  we  may  of  course  judge  our  external  actions,  but
we  may  only  do  so  because  we  know  their  connection  with  their
inner  moral  conditions  ;  other  people’s  actions  in  this  sphere  we
may  not  judge — we  may  only  judge  their  principles.  As  a
principle  the  affirmation  of  the  carnal  relation  of  the  sexes  is  in

any  case  an  evil.  Man’s  final  acceptance  of  the  kingdom  of

death  which  is  maintained  and  perpetuated  by  carnal  repro¬
duction  deserves  absolute  condemnation.  Such  is  the  positive
Christian  point  of  view  which  decides  this  all-important  ques¬
tion  according  to  the  spirit  and  not  according  to  the  letter,
and  consequently  without  any  external  exclusiveness.  cc  He
that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive  it.”  Marriage  is
approved  and  sanctified,  child-bearing  is  blessed,  and  celibacy
is  praised  as  c  the  condition  of  the  angels.’  But  this  very  de¬
signation  of  it  as  angelic  seems  to  suggest  a  third  and  higher


54  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

path— the  divine.  For  man  in  his  ultimate  destiny  is  higher
than  the  angels.1

If  the  Divine  Wisdom,  according  to -its  wont,  brings  forth
out  of  evil  a  greater  good  and  uses  our  carnal  sins  for  the  sake  of
perfecting  humanity  by  means  of  new  generations,  this,  of  course,
tends  to  its  glory  and  to  our  comfort,  but  not  to  our  justification.
It  treats  in  exactly  the  same  way  all  other  evils,  but  this  fact
cancels  neither  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil  nor  the
obligatoriness  of  the  former  for  us.  Besides,  the  idea  that  the
preaching  of  sexual  abstinence,  however  energetic  and  successful,
may  prematurely  stop  the  propagation  of  the  human  race  and  lead
to  its  annihilation  is  so  absurd  that  one  may  justly  doubt  the
sincerity  of  those  who  profess  to  hold  it.  It  is  not  likely  that
any  one  can  seriously  fear  this  particular  danger  for  humanity.
So  long  as  the  change  of  generations  is  necessary  for  the  develop¬
ment  of  the  human  kind,  the  taste  for  bringing  that  change  about
will  certainly  not  disappear  in  men.  But  in  any  case,  the  moment
when  all  men  will  finally  overcome  the  fleshly  lust  and  become
entirely  chaste — even  if  that  moment,  per  impossible ,  came  to¬
morrow — will  be  the  end  of  the  historical  process  and  the  begin¬
ning  of  ‘the  life  to  come’  for  all  humanity;  so  that  the  very
idea  of  child-bearing  coming  to  an  end  ‘too  soon’  is  absolute
nonsense,  invented  by  hypocrites.  As  if  any  one,  in  surrendering
to  the  desire  of  the  flesh,  had  ever  thought  of  safeguarding  thereby
the  future  of  humanity  !  2


VII

All  the  rules  of  ascetic  morality  in  the  sphere  of  the  bodily
life— to  acquire  power  over  breathing  and  sleep,  to  be  temperate  in
food  and  to  abstain  from  fleshly  lust — have  essentially  an  inward
and  morally  psychological  character,  as  rules  for  the  will  ;  but
owing  to  the  difference  in  their  objects  they  do  not  stand  in  the

1  See  Srnysl  liubvi  ( The  Meaning  of  Love)  and  also  Zhiznennaya  drama  Platona  ( The
Drama  of  Plato's  Life).

2  I  am  not  speaking  here  of  the  marriage  union  in  its  highest  spiritual  sense,  which
has  nothing  to  do  either  with  the  sin  of  the  flesh  or  with  child-bearing,  but  is  the
pattern  of  the  most  perfect  union  between  beings  :  “  This  is  a  great  mystery  ;  but  I
speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church.”  Concerning  this  mystical  meaning  of
marriage  see  The  Meaning  of  Love.


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  55

same  relation  to  the  psychological  side  of  the  carnal  life.  The
first  and  partly  the  second  rule  (with  regard  to  breathing  and
sleep)  have  for  their  object  purely  physiological  functions  which
are  not,  as  such,  hostile  to  the  spirit,  nor  a  source  of  danger  to  it.
The  spirit  simply  wants  to  control  them  for  the  sake  of  increas¬
ing  its  own  power  for  the  more  important  struggle  before  it.
Nutrition  and  reproduction — and  consequently  the  ascetic  rules
with  regard  to  them — have  a  different  character.  The  positive
feeling  of  pleasure  which  accompanies  these  functions  may
become  an  end  for  the  will,  bind  the  spiritual  forces  and  draw
them  into  the  stream  of  the  carnal  life.  The  latter  of  the  two
functions  is  particularly  incompatible  (under  ordinary  conditions)
with  the  preservation  of  spiritual  self-control.  On  the  other
hand,  breathing  and  sleep  are  merely  processes  in  our  own
organism,  while  nutrition  and  reproduction  are  connected  with
external  objects  which,  apart  from  their  actual  existence  and
relation  to  us,  may,  as  subjective  presentations ,  dominate  the
imagination  and  the  will  and  encroach  on  the  domain  of  the
spirit ;  hence  the  necessity  of  ascetic  struggle  with  the  inward
sins  of  the  flesh,  still  more  shameful  than  the  outward.  An
epicure  whose  mouth  waters  at  the  very  idea  of  recherche  dishes,
no  doubt  falls  away  from  human  dignity  more  than  a  person
who  indulges  himself  at  the  table  without  particularly  thinking
about  the  matter.

In  this  sense  the  ascetic  attitude  to  the  nutritive  and  the
sexual  functions  belongs  to  the  psychological  and  not  to  the
physiological  side  of  the  struggle  between  the  flesh  and  the
spirit.  The  struggle  in  this  case  is  not  against  the  functions  of
the  organism  as  such,  but  against  the  states  of  the  soul — gluttony,
drunkenness,  sensuality.  These  sinful  propensities,  which  may
become  passions  and  vices,  are  on  a  level  with  evil  emotions  such
as  anger,  envy,  cupidity,  etc.  The  latter  passions,  which  are  evil
and  not  merely  shameful fall  within  the  province  of  altruistic
and  not  of  ascetic  morality,  for  they  involve  a  certain  relation
to  one’s  neighbours.  But  there  are  some  general  rules  for  the
inner,  morally-psychological  struggle  with  sinful  inclinations  as
such,  whether  they  refer  to  other  men  or  to  our  own  material
nature.

The  inner  process  in  and  through  which  an  evil  desire  takes


56  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

possession  of  the  self  has  three  main  stages.  To  begin  with,
there  arises  in  the  mind  the  idea  of  some  object  or  some  action
which  corresponds  to  one  of  the  bad  propensities  of  our  nature.
This  idea  causes  the  spirit  to  reflect  upon  it.  At  that  first  stage
a  simple  act  of  will  rejecting  such  reflection  is  sufficient.  The
spirit  must  simply  show  its  firmness  or  impermeability  to  foreign
elements.1  If  this  is  not  done,  the  reflection  develops  into  an
imaginary  picture  of  this  or  that  nature  —  sensual,  vindictive,
vain,  and  so  on.2  This  picture  forces  the  mind  to  attend  to  it,
and  cannot  be  got  rid  of  by  a  mere  negative  act  of  will  ;  it  is
necessary  to  draw  the  mind  away  by  thinking  in  the  opposite
direction  (for  instance,  by  thinking  about  death).  But  if  at  this
second  stage  the  mind,  instead  of  being  drawn  away  from  the
picture  of  sin,  dwells  upon  it  and  identifies  itself  with  it,
then  the  third  moment  inevitably  comes  when  not  only  the
mind,  secretly  impelled  by  the  evil  desire,  but  the  whole  spirit
gives  itself  up  to  the  sinful  thought  and  enjoys  it.  Neither  a
rejecting  act  of  will  nor  a  distracting  reflection  of  the  mind
can  then  save  the  spirit  from  bondage — practical  moral  work
is  necessary  to  re-establish  the  inner  equilibrium  in  the  whole
man.  Otherwise  the  victory  of  the  sinful  emotion  over  the
spirit  will  become  a  passion  and  a  vice.  Man  will  lose  his
rational  freedom,  and  moral  rules  will  lose  their  power  over
him.

1  Ecclesiastical  writers  describe  this  rule  as  “dashing  the  babes  of  Babylon  against
the  stones,”  following  the  allegorical  line  in  the  Psalms  :  “  О  daughter  of  Babylon  who
art  to  be  destroyed  ;  happy  shall  he  be  that  taketh  and  dashes  thy  little  ones  against
the  stones”  (Babylon  =  the  kingdom  of  sin;  a  babe  of  Babylonia  sin  conceived  in
thought  and  as  yet  undeveloped  ;  stones  the  firmness  of  faith).

2  When  one  is  young  and  has  a  lively  imagination  and  little  spiritual  experience,
the  evil  thought  develops  very  rapidly,  and,  reaching  absurd  proportions,  calls  forth  a
strong  moral  reaction.  Thus  you  think  of  a  person  you  dislike,  and  experience  a
slight  emotion  of  injury,  indignation,  and  anger.  If  you  do  not  immediately  dash  this
‘babe  of  Babylon’  against  the  stones,  your  imagination,  obedient  to  the  evil  passion,  will
immediately  draw  a  vivid  picture  before  you.  You  meet  your  enemy  and  put  him  into
an  awkward  position.  All  his  worthlessness  is  exposed.  You  experience  the  uelleitas  of
magnanimity,  but  the  passion  is  roused  and  overwhelms  you.  At  first  you  keep  within
the  limits  of  good  breeding.  You  make  subtly  stinging  remarks  which,  however,  soon
become  more  stinging  than  subtle  ;  then  you  ‘  insult  him  verbally,’  and  then  you  ‘assault
him.’  Your  devilishly  strong  fist  deals  victorious  blows.  The  scoundrel  is  felled  to  the
ground,  the  scoundrel  is  killed,  and  you  dance  on  his  corpse  like  a  cannibal.  One  can
go  no  further— nothing  is  left  but  to  cross  oneself  and  renounce  it  all  in  disgust.


THE  ASCETIC  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  57

Ethics  is  the  hygiene  and  not  the  therapeutics  of  the
spiritual  life.


VIII

The  supremacy  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh  is  necessary  in
order  to  preserve  the  moral  dignity  of  man.  The  principle  of
true  asceticism  is  the  principle  of  spiritual  self-preservation.
But  the  inner  self-preservation  of  a  separate  man,  of  a  being  who,
though  spiritual  {i.e.  possessing  reason  and  will),  is  nevertheless
limited  or  relative  in  his  separateness,  cannot  be  the  absolute  good  or
the  supreme  and  final  end  of  life.  The  slavery  of  man  to  fleshly
desires  in  the  wide  sense  of  the  term,  i.e.  to  all  that  is  senseless
and  contrary  to  reason,  transforms  him  into  the  worst  species
of  animal,  and  is,  no  doubt,  evil.  In  this  sense  no  one  can
honestly  argue  against  asceticism,  that  is,  against  self-restraint  as
a  principle.  Every  one  agrees  that  incapacity  to  resist  animal
instincts  is  a  weakness  of  the  spirit,  shameful  for  a  human  being,
and  therefore  bad.  The  capacity  for  such  resistance  or  self-
restraint  is  then  a  good,  and  must  be  accepted  as  a  norm  from
which  definite  rules  of  conduct  may  be  deduced.  On  this  point,
as  on  others,  moral  philosophy  merely  explains  and  elaborates  the
testimony  of  ordinary  human  consciousness.  Apart  from  any
principles,  gluttony,  drunkenness,  lewdness  immediately  call  forth
disgust  and  contempt,  and  abstinence  from  these  vices  meets  with
instinctive  respect,  i.e.  is  acknowledged  as  a  good.  This  good,
however,  taken  by  itself,  is  not  absolute.  The  power  of  the  spirit
over  the  flesh,  or  the  strength  of  will  acquired  by  rightful  abstin¬
ence,  may  be  used  for  immoral  purposes.  A  strong  will  may  be  evil.
A  man  may  suppress  his  lower  nature  in  order  to  boast  or  to  pride
himself  on  his  superior  power  ;  such  a  victory  of  the  spirit  is  not
a  good.  It  is  still  worse  if  the  self-control  of  the  spirit  and  the
concentration  of  the  will  are  used  to  the  detriment  of  other  people,
even  apart  from  the  purposes  of  low  gain.  Asceticism  has  been,
and  is,  successfully  practised  by  men  given  to  spiritual  pride,
hypocrisy,  and  vanity,  and  even  by  vindictive,  cruel,  and  selfish
men.  According  to  the  general  verdict,  such  an  ascetic  is  in  the
moral  sense  far  inferior  to  a  simple-hearted  drunkard  or  glutton  or
to  a  kind  profligate.  Asceticism  in  itself  is  not  necessarily  a  good,


/


58  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  cannot  therefore  be  the  supreme  or  the  absolute  principle  of
morality.  The  true  (the  moral)  ascetic  acquires  control  over  the
flesh,  not  simply  for  the  sake  of  increasing  the  powers  of  the  spirit,
but  for  furthering  the  realisation  of  the  Good.  Asceticism  which
liberates  the  spirit  from  shameful  (carnal)  passions  only  to  attach
it  more  closely  to  evil  (spiritual)  passions  is  obviously  a  false  or
immoral  asceticism.1  I  ts  true  prototype,  according  to  the  Christian
idea,  is  the  devil,  who  does  not  eat  or  drink  and  remains  in  celibacy.
If,  then,  from  the  moral  point  of  view  we  cannot  approve  of  a
wicked  or  a  pitiless  ascetic,  it  follows  that  the  principle  of  asceticism
has  only  a  relative  moral  significance,  namely,  that  it  is  conditioned
by  its  connection  with  the  principle  of  altruism,  the  root  of  which
is  pity.  I  now  pass  to  consider  this  second  moral  principle.

1  If  the  suppression  of  the  flesh  is  taken  not  as  a  means  for  good  or  evil  but  as  an
end  in  itself,  we  get  a  peculiar  kind  of  false  asceticism  which  identifies  flesh  with  the
physical  body,  and  considers  every  bodily  torment  a  virtue.  Although  this  false  asceticism
of  self-laceration  has  no  evil  purpose  to  begin  with,  in  its  further  development  it  easily
becomes  an  evil  :  it  either  proves  to  be  a  slow  suicide  or  becomes  a  peculiar  kind  of
sensuality.  It  would  be  unwise,  however,  thus  to  condemn  all  cases  of  self- laceration.
Natures  that  have  a  particularly  strong  material  life  may  require  heroic  means  for  its
suppression.  One  mustnot  therefore  indiscriminately  condemn  Stylitism,  fetters,  and  other
similar  means  of  mortifying  the  flesh  that  were  in  use  in  the  heroic  times  of  asceticism.


CHAPTER  III


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM

I

It  has  for  a  long  time  been  thought — and  many  are  beginning  to
think  so  again — that  the  highest  virtue  or  holiness  is  to  be  found
in  asceticism  and  c  mortification  of  the  flesh,’  in  suppressing  natural
inclinations  and  affections,  in  abstinence  and  freedom  from
passions.  We  have  seen  that  this  ideal  undoubtedly  contains  some
truth,  for  it  is  clear  that  the  higher  or  the  spiritual  side  of
man  must  dominate  the  lower  or  the  material.  The  efforts  of
will  in  this  direction  are  acts  of  spiritual  self-preservation  and  are
the  first  condition  of  all  morality.  The  first  condition ,  however,
cannot  be  taken  to  be  the  ultimate  end.  Man  must  strengthen  his
spirit  and  subordinate  his  flesh,  not  because  this  is  the  purpose  of
his  life,  but  because  it  is  only  when  he  is  free  from  the  bondage  to
blind  and  evil  material  desires  that  he  can  serve  truth  and  goodness
in  the  right  way  and  attain  real  perfection.

The  rules  of  abstinence  strengthen  the  spiritual  power  of  the
man  who  practises  them.  But  in  order  that  the  strong  spirit
may  have  moral  worth — i.e.  that  it  may  be  good  and  not  evil— it
must  unite  the  power  over  its  own  flesh  with  a  rightful  and
charitable  attitude  to  other  beings.  History  has  shown  that,  apart
from  this  condition,  the  supremacy  of  the  ascetic  principle,  even
when  combined  with  a  true  religion,  leads  to  terrible  conse¬
quences.  The  ministers  of  the  Mediaeval  Church,  who  used  to
torture  and  burn  heretics,  Jews,  sorcerers  and  witches,  were  for  the
most  part  men  irreproachable  from  the  ascetic  point  of  view.  But
the  one-sided  force  of  the  spirit  and  the  absence  of  pity  made
them  devils  incarnate.  The  bitter  fruits  of  mediaeval  asceticism


59


6o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

sufficiently  justify  the  reaction  against  it,  which,  in  the  sphere  of
moral  philosophy,  has  led  to  the  supremacy  of  the  altruistic  principle
in  morality.

This  principle  is  deeply  rooted  in  our  being  in  the  form  of
the  feeling  of  pity  which  man  has  in  common  with  other  living
creatures.  If  the  feeling  of  shame  differentiates  man  from  the
rest  of  nature  and  distinguishes  him  from  other  animals,  the  feel¬
ing  of  pity,  on  the  contrary,  unites  him  with  the  whole  world  of
the  living.  It  does  so  in  a  double  sense :  in  the  first  place
because  man  shares  it  with  all  other  living  creatures,  and  secondly
because  all  living  creatures  can  and  must  be  the  objects  of  that
feeling  to  man.


II

That  the  natural  basis  of  our  moral  relation  to  others  is  the
feeling  of  pity  or  compassion,  and  not  the  feeling  of  unity  or
solidarity  in  general,  is  a  truth  which  is  independent  of  any
system  of  metaphysics 1  and  in  no  way  involves  a  pessimistic  view
of  the  world  and  of  life.  As  is  well  known,  Schopenhauer  main¬
tains  that  the  ultimate  nature  of  the  universe  is  Will,  and  will  is
essentially  a  state  of  dissatisfaction  (for  satisfaction  implies  that
there  is  nothing  to  wish  for).  Hence  dissatisfaction  or  suffering
is  the  fundamental  and  positive  determination  of  all  existence  in
its  inward  aspect,  and  the  inner  moral  bond  between  beings  is
compassion.  But  altogether  apart  from  this  doubtful  theory
— and  the  equally  doubtful  calculations  of  Hartmann,  who  tries
to  prove  that  the  amount  of  pain  in  humanity  is  incomparably
greater  than  the  amount  of  pleasure — we  find  that  from  the  nature
of  the  case  the  only  basis  of  the  moral  relation  to  other  beings  is,
as  a  matter  of  principle ,  to  be  found  in  pity  or  compassion,  and
certainly  not  in  co-rejoicing  or  co-pleasure.

Human  delight,  pleasure,  and  joy  may  of  course  be  innocent
and  even  positively  good — and  in  that  case  sharing  in  them  has
a  positive  moral  character.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  human
pleasures  may  be,  and  often  are,  immoral.  A  wicked  and  vindictive
man  finds  pleasure  in  insulting  and  tormenting  those  near  him,
rejoices  in  their  humiliation,  delights  in  the  harm  he  has  done.

1  Such  as  the  doctrine  of  Buddhism  or  Schopenhauer’s  ‘  Philosophy  of  the  Will.’


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


61

A  sensual  man  finds  the  chief  joy  of  life  in  profligacy  ;  a  cruel  man
in  killing  animals  or  even  human  beings  ;  a  drunkard  is  happy
when  he  is  stupefying  himself  with  drink,  etc.  In  all  these  cases  the
feeling  of  pleasure  cannot  be  separated  from  the  bad  actions  which
produce  it,  and  sometimes,  indeed,  the  pleasure  gives  an  immoral
character  to  actions  which  would  in  themselves  be  indifferent.
Thus  when  a  soldier  in  war  kills  an  enemy  at  the  word  of  command
from  no  other  motive  than  ‘  his  duty  as  a  soldier,’  no  one  would
accuse  him  of  immoral  cruelty,  whatever  our  attitude  to  war  might
be.  But  it  is  a  different  thing  if  he  finds  pleasure  in  killing  and
bayonets  a  man  with  relish.  In  more  simple  cases  the  thing  is
clearer  still ;  thus  it  is  obvious  that  the  immorality  of  drunkenness
consists  not  in  the  external  action  of  swallowing  certain  drinks  but
in  the  inner  pleasure  which  a  man  finds  in  artificially  stupefying
himself.

But  if  a  certain  pleasure  is  in  itself  immoral,  the  participation
in  it  by  another  person  (co-rejoicing,  co-pleasure)  also  receives  an
immoral  character.  The  fact  is  that  positive  participation  in  a
pleasure  implies  the  approval  of  that  pleasure.  Thus  in  sharing
the  drunkard’s  delight  in  his  favourite  pleasure  I  approve  of
drunkenness  ;  in  sharing  somebody’s  joy  at  successful  revenge
I  approve  of  vindictiveness.  And  since  these  pleasures  are  bad
pleasures,  those  who  sympathise  with  them  approve  of  what  is
evil,  and  consequently  are  themselves  guilty  of  immorality.  Just
as  participation  in  a  crime  is  itself  regarded  as  a  crime,  so
sympathy  with  vicious  pleasure  or  delight  must  itself  be  pro¬
nounced  vicious.  And  indeed  sympathy  with  an  evil  pleasure
not  only  involves  an  approval  of  it,  but  also  presupposes  the  same
bad  propensity  in  the  sympathiser.  Only  a  drunkard  delights  in
another  person’s  drunkenness,  only  a  vindictive  man  rejoices  in
another’s  revenge.  Participation  in  the  pleasures  or  joys  of  others
may  then  be  good  or  bad  according  to  their  object ;  and  if  it  may
be  immoral,  it  cannot  as  such  be  the  basis  of  the  moral  relation.

The  same  thing  cannot  be  said  about  suffering  and  compas¬
sion.  According  to  the  very  idea  of  it,  suffering  is  a  state  in
which  the  will  of  the  one  who  suffers  has  no  direct  and  positive
part.  When  we  speak  of ‘voluntary  suffering,’  we  mean,  not
that  suffering  is  desired  as  such,  but  that  the  object  of  will  is
that  which  makes  suffering  necessary,  in  other  words,  that  the


62  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

object  of  will  is  the  good  which  is  attained  by  suffering.  A
martyr  undergoes  torments,  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  because
in  the  circumstances  they  are  a  necessary  consequence  of  his
faith  and  a  means  to  higher  glory  and  to  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  On  the  other  hand,  suffering  may  be  deserved,  i.e.
its  cause  may  lie  in  bad  actions  ;  but  the  suffering  as  such  is
distinct  from  its  cause  and  contains  no  moral  guilt  ;  on  the
contrary,  it  is  regarded  as  its  expiation  and  redemption.  Though
drunkenness  is  a  sin,  no  moralist,  however  stern,  would  pronounce
the  headache  that  results  from  drinking  to  be  a  sin  also.  For
this  reason  participation  in  the  suffering  of  others  (even  when
they  deserve  it) — i.e.  pity  or  compassion — can  never  be  immoral.
In  commiserating  with  one  who  suffers  I  do  not  in  the  least
approve  of  the  evil  cause  of  his  suffering.1  Pity  for  the  criminal’s
suffering  does  not  mean  approval  or  justification  of  his  crime.
On  the  contrary,  the  greater  my  pity  for  the  sad  consequences  of
a  man’s  sin,  the  greater  my  condemnation  of  the  sin.

Participation  in  the  pleasures  of  others  may  always  have  an
element  of  self-interest.  Even  in  the  case  of  an  old  man  sharing
the  joy  of  a  child  doubt  may  be  felt  with  regard  to  the  altruistic
nature  of  his  sentiment  ;  for  in  any  case  it  is  pleasant  for  the  old
man  to  refresh  the  memory  of  his  own  happy  childhood.  On
the  contrary,  all  genuine  feeling  of  regret  at  the  suffering  of
others,  whether  moral  or  physical,  is  painful  for  the  person  who
experiences  that  feeling,  and  is  therefore  opposed  to  his  egoism.
This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  sincere  grief  about  others  disturbs
our  personal  joy,  damps  our  mirth,  that  is,  proves  to  be  in¬
compatible  with  the  state  of  selfish  satisfaction.  Genuine  com¬
passion  or  pity  can  have  no  selfish  motives  and  is  purely
altruistic ,  while  the  feeling  of  co-rejoicing  or  co-pleasure  is,  from
the  moral  point  of  view,  a  mixed  and  indefinite  feeling.

1  An  apparent  instance  to  the  contrary  is  the  case  of  a  person  sympathising  with
another  who  is  grieved  at  the  failure  of  his  crime.  But,  in  truth,  even  in  this  case  in  so
far  as  sympathy  arises  solely  out  of  pity  it  does  not  in  the  least  refer  to  the  bad  cause
of  the  grief,  in  no  way  presupposes  an  approval  of  it,  and  therefore  is  good  and  innocent.
But  if,  in  being  sorry  for  the  murderer  who  missed  his  aim,  I  also  deplore  his  failure,
the  immorality  will  lie  not  in  my  pity  for  the  criminal,  but  in  my  lack  of  pity  for
his  victim.  Speaking  generally,  when  several  persons  prove  to  be  at  one  in  some
wrong,  the  moral  condemnation  refers  not  to  the  fact  of  their  solidarity,  but  only  to
the  bad  object  of  it.


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


63


III

There  is  another  reason  why  participation  in  the  joys  or
pleasures  of  others  cannot  in  itself  have  the  same  fundamental
importance  for  ethics  as  the  feeling  of  pity  or  compassion.
The  demand  of  reason  is  that  morality  should  only  be  based
upon  such  feelings  as  always  contain  an  impulse  for  definite
action  and,  being  generalised,  give  rise  to  a  definite  moral
principle  or  principles.  But  pleasure  or  joy  is  the  end  of  action  ;
in  it  the  purpose  of  the  activity  is  reached,  and  participation  in
the  pleasure  of  others  as  well  as  the  experience  of  one’s  own
pleasure  contains  no  impulse  and  no  ground  for  further  action.
Pity,  on  the  contrary,  directly  urges  us  to  act  in  order  to  help  a
fellow-being  and  to  save  him  from  suffering.  The  action  may
be  purely  inward — thus  pity  for  my  enemy  may  prevent  me
from  insulting  or  injuring  him— but  in  any  case  it  is  an  action,
and  not  a  passive  state  like  joy  or  pleasure.  Of  course,  I  may  find
inward  satisfaction  in  the  fact  that  I  did  not  hurt  my  neighbour,
but  this  can  only  happen  after  the  act  of  will  has  taken  place.
Similarly  in  the  case  of  rendering  help  to  a  fellow-being  who  is
in  pain  or  in  need,  the  pleasure  or  joy  resulting  therefrom,  both
for  him  and  for  the  person  who  helps  him,  is  only  the  final
consequence  and  the  culmination  of  the  altruistic  act,  and  not
its  source  or  its  ground.  If  I  see  or  hear  that  some  one  is
suffering,  one  of  two  things  happens.  Either  that  other  person’s
suffering  calls  forth  in  me  also  a  certain  degree  of  pain  and  I
experience  pity — in  which  case  that  feeling  is  a  direct  and
sufficient  reason  for  me  to  render  active  help.  Or,  if  another’s
suffering  does  not  rouse  pity  in  me,  or  does  not  rouse  it
sufficiently  to  incite  me  to  act,  the  idea  of  the  pleasure  which
would  ensue  from  my  action  would  obviously  be  still  less  likely
to  do  so.  It  is  clear  that  an  abstract  and  conditioned  thought
of  a  future  mental  state  cannot  possibly  have  more  effect  than
the  immediate  contemplation  or  concrete  representation  of  actual
physical  and  mental  states  which  call  for  direct  action.  There¬
fore  the  true  ground  or  the  producing  cause  {causa  efficiens )  of
every  altruistic  action  is  the  perception  or  the  idea  of  another
person’s  suffering  as  it  actually  exists  at  the  moment,  and  not


64  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  thought  of  the  pleasure  which  may  arise  in  the  future  as
the  result  of  the  benevolent  act.  Of  course,  if  a  person  decides
out  of  pity  to  help  a  fellow- being  in  distress,  he  may,  if  he
have  time  to  do  so,  imagine — especially  on  the  ground  of  the
remembered  experiences  in  the  past — the  joy  he  will  thereby  give
to  himself  and  to  that  other  person.  But  to  take  this  con¬
comitant  and  accidental  thought  for  the  true  motive  of  action  is
contrary  both  to  logic  and  to  psychological  experience.

On  the  one  hand,  then,  participation  in  the  actual  joys  and
pleasures  of  others  cannot  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case  contain
either  a  stimulus  for  action  or  a  rule  of  conduct,  for  in  these
states  satisfaction  is  already  attained.  On  the  other  hand,  a  con¬
ditional  representation  of  future  pleasures,  which  are  supposed  to
follow  upon  the  removal  of  the  suffering,  can  only  be  a  secondary
and  an  indirect  addition  to  the  actual  feeling  of  compassion  or
pity  which  moves  us  to  do  active  good.  Consequently  it  is  this
feeling  alone  which  must  be  pronounced  to  be  the  true  ground
of  altruistic  conduct.

Those  who  pity  the  sufferings  of  others  will  certainly  partici¬
pate  in  their  joys  and  pleasures  when  the  latter  are  harmless  and
innocent.  But  this  natural  consequence  of  the  moral  relation  to
others  cannot  be  taken  as  the  basis  of  morality.  That  alone  is
truly  good  which  is  good  in  itself,  and  therefore  always  preserves
its  good  character,  never  becoming  evil.  Therefore  the  morality
(or  the  good)  in  any  given  sphere  of  relations  can  only  be  based
upon  such  data  from  which  a  general  and  absolute  rule  of
conduct  may  be  deduced.  Such  precisely  is  the  nature  of  pity
towards  our  fellow-beings.  To  pity  all  that  suffers  is  always  and
unconditionally  good ;  it  is  a  rule  that  requires  no  reservations.
But  participation  in  the  joys  and  pleasures  of  others  may  be
approved  conditionally  only,  and  even  when  it  is  laudable  it
contains,  as  we  have  seen,  no  rule  of  conduct.

IV

The  unquestionable  and  familiar  fact  that  a  distinct  individual
being  may,  as  it  were,  transcend  in  feeling  the  limits  of  his
individuality,  and  respond  painfully  to  the  suffering  of  others,
experiencing  it  as  if  it  were  his  own  pain,  may  appear  to  some


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


65

minds  mysterious  and  enigmatic.  It  was  regarded  as  such  by  the
philosopher  who  found  in  compassion  the  sole  foundation  of
morality.

“  How  is  it  possible,”  he  asks,  “  that  suffering  which  is  not
mine  should  become  an  immediate  motive  of  my  action  in  the
same  way  as  my  own  suffering  does  ?  ”  “  This  presupposes,”

he  goes  on,  “that  I  have  to  a  certain  extent  identified  myself
with  another,  and  that  the  barrier  between  the  self  and  the  not
self  has  been  for  the  moment  removed.  It  is  then  only  that
the  position  of  another,  his  want,  his  need,  his  suffering,
immediately  (?)  becomes  mine.  I  no  longer  see  him  then  as  he  is
given  me  in  empirical  perception — as  something  foreign  and
indifferent  (?)  to  me,  as  something  absolutely  (?)  separate  from
me.  On  the  contrary,  in  compassion  it  is  I  who  suffer  in  him,
although  his  skin  does  not  cover  my  nerves.  Only  through
such  identification  can  his  suffering,  his  need,  become  a  motive
for  me  in  a  way  in  which  ordinarily  only  my  own  suffering  can.
This  is  a  highly  mysterious  phenomenon — it  is  a  real  mystery
of  Ethics,  for  it  is  something  for  which  reason  cannot  directly
account  (? !)  and  the  grounds  of  which  cannot  be  discovered
empirically.  And  yet  it  is  of  everyday  occurrence.  Each  has
experienced  it  himself  and  seen  it  in  other  people.  It  happens
every  day  before  our  eyes  on  a  small  scale  in  individual  cases
every  time  that,  moved  by  an  immediate  impulse,  without
any  further  reflection,  a  man  helps  another  and  defends  him,
sometimes  risking  his  own  life  for  the  sake  of  a  person  whom
he  sees  for  the  first  time,  thinking  of  nothing  but  the  obvious
distress  and  need  of  that  person.  It  happens  on  a  large  scale  when
a  whole  nation  sacrifices  its  blood  and  its  property  for  the  sake  of
defending  or  setting  free  another,  oppressed,  nation.  For  such
actions  to  deserve  unconditional  moral  approval,  it  is  necessary
that  there  should  be  present  that  mysterious  act  of  compassion
or  of  inner  identification  of  oneself  with  another,  without  any
ulterior  motives.”  1

This  discussion  of  the  mysterious  character  of  compassion  is
distinguished  by  literary  eloquence  more  than  by  philosophic
truth.  The  mystery  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  fact  itself,  but

1  Schopenhauer,  Die  beiden  Grundprobleme  der  Ethik,  2nd  ed.,  Leipzig,  i860,
P-  230.


F


66  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  due  to  a  false  description,  which  lays  exaggerated  emphasis
on  the  extreme  terms  of  the  relation,  and  leaves  the  connecting
links  between  them  entirely  out  of  account.  In  his  sphere
Schopenhauer  abused  the  rhetorical  method  of  contrast  or
antithesis  quite  as  much  as  Victor  Hugo  did  in  his.  The
matter  is  described  in  such  a  way  as  if  a  given  being,  absolutely
separate  from  another,  all  of  a  sudden  immediately  identified
itself  with  that  other  in  the  feeling  of  compassion.  This
would,  indeed,  be  highly  mysterious.  But,  in  truth,  neither
the  absolute  separateness  nor  the  immediate  identification  of
which  Schopenhauer  speaks  exists  at  all.  To  understand  any
relation  one  must  take  first  the  earliest  and  most  elementary
instance  of  it.  Take  the  maternal  instinct  of  animals.  When  a
dog  defends  her  puppies  or  suffers  at  losing  them,  where  does
all  the  mystery  of  which  Schopenhauer  speaks  come  in  ?  Are
these  puppies  something  ‘  foreign  and  indifferent’  to  their  mother,
and  ‘absolutely  separate’  from  her?  Between  her  and  them
there  was  from  the  first  a  real  physical  and  organic  connection,
clear  and  obvious  to  the  simplest  observation  and  independent
of  all  metaphysics.  These  creatures  were  for  a  time  actually  a
part  of  her  own  body,  her  nerves  and  theirs  had  been  covered  by
one  and  the  same  skin,  and  the  very  beginning  of  their  existence
involved  a  change  in  her  organism,  and  was  painfully  reflected
in  her  sensations.1  At  birth  this  real  organic  connection  is
weakened,  becomes  looser,  so  to  speak,  but  it  is  not  completely
severed  or  replaced  by  ‘absolute  separateness.’  Therefore  the
participation  of  a  mother  in  the  sufferings  of  her  children  is  as
much  a  natural  fact  as  the  pain  we  feel  when  we  cut  a  finger
or  dislocate  a  leg.  In  a  sense,  of  course,  this,  too,  is  mysterious —
but  not  in  the  sense  in  which  the  philosopher  of  compassion
takes  it  to  be.  Now  all  the  other  and  more  complex  manifesta¬
tions  of  the  feeling  of  pity  have  a  similar  ground.  All  that
exists,  and,  in  particular,  all  living  beings  are  connected  by  the
fact  of  their  compresence  in  one  and  the  same  world,  and  by  the
unity  of  origin  ;  all  spring  from  one  common  mother — nature,


1  Certain  animals,  like  human  mothers,  have  been  observed  to  suffer  from  nausea
a  conceptu.  The  maternal  feeling  established  on  the  physical  basis  may  afterwards,  like
all  feelings,  be  diverted  from  its  natural  object  and  transferred  to  the  young  of  another
animal  that  have  been  substituted  for  her  own.


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


67

of  which  they  are  a  part ;  nowhere  do  we  find  the  ‘  absolute
separateness  ’  of  which  Schopenhauer  speaks.  The  natural  organic
connection  of  all  beings  as  parts  of  one  whole  is  given  in
experience,  and  is  not  merely  a  speculative  idea.  Hence  the
psychological  expression  of  that  connection — the  inner  partici¬
pation  of  one  being  in  the  suffering  of  others,  compassion  or
pity — can  be  understood  even  from  the  empirical  point  of  view
as  the  expression  of  the  natural  and  obvious  solidarity  of  all
that  exists.  This  participation  of  beings  in  one  another  is  in
keeping  with  the  general  plan  of  the  universe,  is  in  harmony
with  reason  or  perfectly  rational.  What  is  senseless  or  irrational
is  the  mutual  estrangement  of  beings,  their  subjective  separate¬
ness,  contradictory  of  their  objective  unity.  It  is  this  inner
egoism  and  not  the  mutual  sympathy  between  the  different  parts
of  one  nature  that  really  is  mysterious  and  enigmatic.  Reason
can  give  no  direct  account  of  it,  and  its  grounds  are  not  to
be  found  empirically.

Absolute  separateness  is  merely  affirmed  but  is  not  established
by  egoism  ;  it  neither  does  nor  can  exist  as  a  fact.  On  the  other
hand,  the  mutual  connection  between  beings  which  finds  its
psychological  expression  in  sympathy  or  pity  is  certainly  not  of
the  nature  of  immediate  identification  as  Schopenhauer  takes  it
to  be.  When  I  am  sorry  for  my  friend  who  has  a  headache  the
feeling  of  sympathy  does  not  as  a  rule  become  a  headache.  So  far
from  my  being  identified  with  him  even  our  states  remain  distinct,
and  I  clearly  distinguish  my  head,  which  does  not  ache,  from  his,
which  does.  Also,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  it  has  never  happened  that  a
compassionate  man,  who  jumps  into  the  water  to  save  another  from
drowning,  should  take  that  other  person  for  himself  or  himself  for
that  other.  Even  a  hen — a  creature  more  noted  for  her  maternal
instinct  than  for  intelligence — clearly  understands  the  distinction
between  herself  and  her  chicks,  and,  therefore,  behaves  in  relation
to  them  in  a  certain  way,  which  would  be  impossible  if  in  her
maternal  compassion  ‘  the  barrier  between  the  self  and  the  not  self
were  removed.’  If  this  were  the  case,  the  hen  might  confuse  herself
with  her  chickens,  and,  when  hungry,  might  ascribe  that  sensation
to  them  and  start  feeding  them,  although  in  reality  they  were
satisfied  and  she  almost  starving  ;  or,  another  time,  she  might  feed
herself  at  their  expense.  In  truth,  in  all  these  real  cases  of  pity,


68  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  barriers  between  the  being  who  pities  and  those  whom  it  pities
are  not  removed  at  all  ;  they  simply  prove  not  to  be  so  absolute
and  impermeable  as  the  abstract  reflection  of  scholastic  philosophers
would  make  them.

The  removal  of  barriers  between  the  self  and  the  not  self  or
immediate  identification  is  merely  a  figure  of  speech  and  not  an
expression  of  real  fact.  Fike  the  vibration  of  chords  that  sound
in  unison,  so  the  bond  of  compassion  between  living  beings  is  not
simply  identity  but  harmony  of  the  similar.  From  this  point  of
view,  too,  the  fundamental  moral  fact  of  pity  or  compassion  com¬
pletely  corresponds  to  the  real  nature  of  things  or  to  the  meaning
of  the  universe.  For  the  indissoluble  oneness  of  the  world  is  not
a  mere  empty  unity,  but  embraces  the  whole  range  of  determinate
variations.


V

As  befits  an  ultimate  moral  principle,  the  feeling  of  pity  has  no
external  limits  for  its  application.  Starting  with  the  narrow  sphere
of  maternal  love,  strongly  developed  even  in  the  higher  animals,
it  may,  in  the  case  of  man,  as  it  gradually  becomes  wider,  pass
from  the  family  to  the  clan  and  the  tribe,  to  the  civic  com¬
munity,  the  entire  nation,  to  all  humanity,  and  finally  embrace  all
that  lives.  In  individual  cases,  when  confronted  with  actual  pain
or  need,  we  may  actively  pity  not  only  every  man — though  belong¬
ing  to  a  different  race  or  religion — but  even  every  animal  ;  this  is
beyond  dispute  and  is,  indeed,  quite  usual.  Fess  usual  is  such  a
breadth  of  compassion  which,  without  any  obvious  reason,  at  once
embraces  in  a  keen  feeling  of  pity  all  the  multitude  of  living  beings
in  the  universe.  It  is  difficult  to  suspect  of  artificial  rhetoric  or
exaggerated  pathos  the  following  description  of  universal  pity  as  an
actual  mental  state — very  unlike  the  state  of  the  so-called  4  world-
woe’  ( Weltschmer% ).  “  And  I  was  asked  what  is  a  pitying  heart  ?

And  I  answered  :  the  glow  in  a  man’s  heart  for  all  creation,  for
men,  for  birds,  for  animals,  for  demons ,  and  for  creatures  of  all
kinds.  When  he  thinks  of  them  or  looks  upon  them,  his  eyes
gush  with  tears.  Great  and  poignant  pity  possesses  him  and  his
heart  is  wrung  with  suffering,  and  he  cannot  bear  either  to  hear
or  to  see  any  harm  or  grief  endured  by  any  creature.  And  hence
every  hour  he  prays  with  tears  even  for  the  dumb  beasts,  and  for


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


69

the  enemies  of  truth  and  those  who  do  him  wrong,  that  God  may-
preserve  them  and  have  mercy  on  them  ;  and  for  all  of  the
crawling  kind  he  prays  with  great  pity  which  rises  up  in  his  heart
beyond  measure  so  that  in  that  he  is  made  like  to  God.”  1

In  this  description  of  the  fundamental  altruistic  motive  in  its
highest  form  we  find  neither  ‘  immediate  identification  ’  nor
c  removing  the  barriers  between  the  self  and  the  not  self  It
differs  from  Schopenhauer’s  account  like  living  truth  from  literary
eloquence.  These  words  of  the  Christian  writer  also  prove  that
there  is  no  need,  as  Schopenhauer  mistakenly  thought,  to  turn  to
Indian  dramas  or  to  Buddhism  in  order  to  learn  the  prayer  ‘May
all  that  lives  be  free  from  suffering.’

VI

The  universal  consciousness  of  humanity  decidedly  pronounces
pity  to  be  a  good  thing.  A  person  who  manifests  this  feeling  is  called
good ;  the  more  deeply  he  experiences  and  the  more  he  acts  upon
it,  the  more  good  he  is  considered  to  be.  A  pitiless  man  more  than
any  other  is  called  wicked.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the
whole  of  morality  or  the  essence  of  all  good  can  be  reduced,  as  it
often  is,  to  compassion  or  ‘  sympathetic  feeling.’

“  Boundless  compassion  to  all  living  beings,”  observes
Schopenhauer,  “is  the  surest  guarantee  of  moral  conduct  and
requires  no  casuistry.  The  man  who  is  full  of  that  feeling  will  be
certain  not  to  injure  any  one,  not  to  cause  suffering  to  any  one  ;  all
his  actions  will  be  sure  to  bear  the  stamp  of  truth  and  mercy.  Let
any  one  say, ‘This  man  is  virtuous,  but  he  knows  no  compassion,’  or
‘He  is  an  unrighteous  and  wicked  man,  but  he  is  very  compassionate,’
and  the  contradiction  will  be  at  once  apparent,”2  These  words
are  only  true  with  considerable  reservations.  There  is  no  doubt
that  pity  or  compassion  is  a  real  basis  of  morality,  but  Schopenhauer’s
obvious  mistake  is  in  regarding  that  feeling  as  the  only  foundation
of  all  morality.3

1  The  Sayings  of  the  Holy  Father  Isaac  the  Syrian,  Hermit  and  Ascetic,  Bishop  of  the
City  of  Ninety,  p.  277.

2  Die  beiden  Grundprobleme  der  Ethik ,  2nd  ed.,  p.  23.

3  It  is  all  the  more  necessary  for  me  to  indicate  this  important  error  of  the  fashionable
philosopher  as  I  myself  was  guilty  of  it  when  I  wrote  my  dissertation  Kritika  ot-vletchonnih
natchal  (The  Critique  of  Abstract  Principles).


70  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

In  truth  it  is  only  one  of  the  three  ultimate  principles  of
morality  and  it  has  a  definite  sphere  of  application,  namely,  it
determines  our  rightful  relation  to  other  beings  in  our  world.  Pity
is  the  only  true  foundation  of  altruism ,  but  altruism  and  morality
are  not  identical  :  the  former  is  only  a  part  of  the  latter.  It  is
true  that  c  boundless  compassion  for  all  living  beings  is  the  surest
and  most  secure  foundation,’  not  of  moral  action  in  general,  as
Schopenhauer  mistakenly  affirms,  but  of  moral  action  in  relation
to  other  beings  who  are  the  object  of  compassion.  This  relation
however,  important  as  it  is,  does  not  exhaust  the  whole  of  morality.
Besides  the  relation  to  his  fellow-men,  man  stands  also  in  a  certain
relation  to  his  own  material  nature  and  to  the  higher  principles
of  all  existence,  and  these  relations,  too,  require  to  be  morally
determined  so  that  the  good  in  them  may  be  distinguished  from
the  evil.  A  man  who  is  full  of  pity  will  certainly  not  injure  or
cause  suffering  to  any  one — that  is,  he  will  not  injure  any  one  else ,
but  he  may  very  well  injure  himself  by  indulging  in  carnal  passions
which  lower  his  human  dignity.  In  spite  of  a  most  compassionate
heart  one  may  be  inclined  to  profligacy  and  other  low  vices,  which,
though  not  opposed  to  compassion,  are  opposed  to  morality — and
this  fact  shows  that  the  two  ideas  do  not  coincide.  Schopenhauer
rightly  insists  that  one  cannot  say,  ‘  This  man  is  malicious  and  un¬
just,  but  he  is  very  compassionate  ’  ;  curiously  enough,  however,  he
forgets  that  one  may,  and  often  has  to  say,  ‘  So  and  so  is  a  sensual
and  dissolute  man — a  profligate,  a  glutton,  a  drunkard — but  he  is
very  kind-hearted’;  equally  familiar  is  the  phrase,  ‘Although  so
and  so  lives  an  exemplary  ascetic  life,  he  is  pitiless  to  his  neighbours.’
1  his  means  that  on  the  one  hand  the  virtue  of  abstinence  is  possible
apart  from  pity,  and  on  the  other  that  although  strongly  developed
sympathetic  feelings — pity,  kindness- — exclude  the  possibility  of
evil  actions  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  term,  i.e.  cruel  actions
directly  hurtful  to  others,  they  do  not  by  any  means  prevent
shameful  actions.  And  yet  such  actions  are  not  morally  indifferent
even  from  the  altruistic  point  of  view.  A  kind  drunkard  and
profligate  may  be  sorry  for  other  people  and  never  wish  to  hurt  them,
yet  by  his  vice  he  certainly  injures  not  only  himself  but  his  family,
which  he  may  finally  ruin  without  the  least  intention  of  doing  them
harm.  If  then  pity  does  not  prevent  such  conduct,  our  inward
opposition  to  it  must  be  founded  upon  another  aspect  of  our  moral


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


71

nature,  namely,  upon  the  feeling  of  shame.  The  rules  of
asceticism  1  spring  from  it  in  rhe  same  way  as  the  rules  of  altruism
develop  out  of  the  feeling  of  pity.

VII

The  true  essence  of  pity  or  compassion  is  certainly  not  the
immediate  identification  of  oneself  with  another,  but  the  re¬
cognition  of  the  inherent  worth  of  that  other — the  recognition  of
his  right  to  existence  and  to  possible  welfare.  When  I  pity
another  man  or  animal,  I  do  not  confuse  myself  with  him  or  take
him  for  myself  and  myself  for  him.  I  merely  see  in  him  a
creature  that  is  akin  and  similar  to  me,  with  a  consciousness  like
mine,  and  wishing,  like  I  do,  to  live  and  to  enjoy  the  good  things
of  life.  In  admitting  my  own  right  to  the  fulfilment  of  such
a  desire,  I  admit  it  in  the  case  of  others  ;  being  painfully  con¬
scious  of  every  violation  of  this  right  in  relation  to  me,  of  every
injury  to  myself,  I  respond  in  like  manner  to  the  violation  of  the
rights  of  others,  to  the  injury  of  others.  Pitying  myself,  I  pity
others.  When  I  see  a  suffering  creature  I  do  not  identify  or
confuse  it  with  myself,  I  merely  imagine  myself  in  its  place  and,
admitting  its  likeness  to  myself,  compare  its  states  to  my  own,
and,  as  the  phrase  is,  ‘enter  into  its  position.’  This  equalisation
(but  not  identification)  between  myself  and  another  which  im¬
mediately  and  unconsciously  takes  place  in  the  feeling  of  pity,  is
raised  by  reason  to  the  level  of  a  clear  and  distinct  idea.

The  intellectual  content  (the  idea)  of  pity  or  compassion,  taken
in  its  universality,  independently  of  the  subjective  mental  states
in  which  it  is  manifested — i.e.  taken  logically  and  not  psychologic¬
ally, — is  truth  and  justice.  It  is  true  that  other  creatures  are
similar  to  me,  and  it  is  just  that  I  should  feel  about  them  as  I  do
about  myself.  This  position,  clear  in  itself,  becomes  still  more
clear  when  tested  negatively.  When  I  am  pitiless  or  indifferent
to  others,  consider  myself  at  liberty  to  injure  them  and  do
not  think  it  my  duty  to  help  them,  they  appear  to  me  not  what
they  really  are.  A  being  appears  as  merely  a  thing,  something

1  It  is  curious  that  Schopenhauer  admitted  and  even  greatly  exaggerated  the  im¬
portance  of  asceticism,  but  for  some  reason  he  completely  excluded  it  from  his  moral
teaching.  It  is  one  of  the  instances  of  the  incoherent  thinking  of  the  famous  writer.


72  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

living  appears  as  dead,  conscious — as  unconscious,  what  is  akin  to
me  appears  as  foreign,  and  what  is  like  me  as  absolutely  differ¬
ent.  The  relation  in  which  an  object  is  taken  to  be  not  what
it  really  is  is  a  direct  denial  of  truth  ;  and  actions  that  follow
from  it  will  be  unjust.  Therefore  the  opposite  relation  which  is
subjectively  expressed  as  the  inner  feeling  of  sympathy,  pity,  or
compassion  is,  from  the  objective  point  of  view,  expressive  of
truth ,  and  actions  following  from  it  will  b t  just.  To  measure  by  a
different  measure  is  acknowledged  by  all  to  be  an  elementary  in¬
stance  of  injustice  ;  but  when  I  am  pitiless  to  others,  i.e.  treat
them  as  soulless  and  rightless  things,  and  affirm  myself  as  a
conscious  being  fully  possessed  of  rights,  I  evidently  measure
with  different  measures  and  crudely  contradict  truth  and  justice.
On  the  contrary,  when  I  pity  others  as  I  do  myself,  I  measure
with  one  measure  and  consequently  act  in  accordance  with  truth
and  justice.

In  so  far  as  it  is  a  constant  quality  and  a  practical  principle,
pitilessness  is  called  egoism.  In  its  pure  and  unmixed  form  consist¬
ent  egoism  does  not  exist,  at  any  rate  not  among  human  beings.
But  in  order  to  understand  the  general  nature  of  egoism  as  such,
it  is  necessary  to  characterise  it  as  a  pure  and  unconditional
principle.  Its  essence  consists  in  this  :  an  absolute  opposition,
an  impassable  gulf  is  fixed  between  one’s  own  self  and  other
beings.  I  am  everything  to  myself  and  must  be  everything  to
others,  but  others  are  nothing  in  themselves  and  become  some¬
thing  only  as  a  means  for  me.  My  life  and  welfare  is  an  end  in
itself,  the  life  and  welfare  of  others  are  only  a  means  for  my
ends,  the  necessary  environment  for  my  self-assertion.  I  am  the
centre  and  the  world  only  a  circumference.  Such  a  point  of
view  is  seldom  put  forward,  but  with  some  reservations  it  un¬
doubtedly  lies  at  the  root  of  our  natural  life.  Absolute  egoists
are  not  to  be  found  on  earth  :  every  human  being  appears  to  feel
pity  at  least  for  some  one,  every  human  being  sees  a  fellow-creature
in  some  one  person  at  least.  But  restricted  within  certain
limits  —  usually  very  narrow  ones — egoism  manifests  itself  all
the  more  clearly  in  other,  wider  spheres.  A  person  who  does
not  take  up  the  egoistic  attitude  towards  his  own  relatives,  i.e.
who  includes  his  family  within  his  self,  all  the  more  mercilessly
opposes  this  widened  self  to  all  that  is  external  to  it.  A  person


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


73


who  extends  his  self — quite  superficially  as  a  rule — to  include
his  whole  nation,  adopts  the  egoistic  point  of  view,  with  all  the
greater  fierceness,  both  for  himself  and  for  his  nation,  in  relation
to  other  nations  and  races,  etc.  The  fact  that  the  circle  of  inner
solidarity  is  widened  and  the  egoism  is  transferred  from  the  in¬
dividual  to  the  family,  the  nation,  and  the  state  is  unquestionably
of  great  moral  significance  to  the  life  of  humanity,  for  within  a
given  circle  selfishness  is  restricted,  outweighed,  or  even  com¬
pletely  replaced  by  humane  and  moral  relations.  But  this  does
not  destroy  the  principle  of  egoism  in  humanity,  which  consists  in
the  absolute  inner  opposition  of  oneself  and  one’s  own  to  what  is
other  than  it — in  fixing  a  gulf  between  the  two.  This  principle
is  essentially  false,  for  in  reality  there  is  not,  and  there  cannot  be,
any  such  gulf,  any  absolute  opposition.  It  is  clear  that  exclusive¬
ness,  egoism,  pitilessness  is  essentially  the  same  thing  as  untruth.
Egoism  is  in  the  first  place  fantastic  and  unreal ,  it  affirms  what
does  not  and  cannot  exist.  To  consider  oneself  (in  the  narrow
or  in  the  wide  sense)  as  the  exclusive  centre  of  the  universe  is  at
bottom  as  absurd  as  to  believe  oneself  to  be  a  glass  seat  or  the
constellation  of  Ursa  Major.1

If,  then,  egoism  is  condemned  by  reason  as  a  senseless  affirma¬
tion  of  what  is  non-existent  and  impossible,  the  opposite  principle
of  altruism,  psychologically  based  upon  the  feeling  of  pity,  is
entirely  justified  both  by  reason  and  by  conscience.  In  virtue  of
this  principle  the  individual  person  admits  that  other  beings  are,
just  like  himself,  relative  centres  of  being  and  of  living  force.
This  is  an  affirmation  of  truth,  an  admission  of  what  truly  is.
From  this  truth,  to  which  the  feeling  of  pity,  roused  by  other
beings  akin  and  alike  to  us,  inwardly  bears  witness  in  every  soul,
reason  deduces  a  principle  or  a  law  with  regard  to  all  other  beings  :
Do  unto  others  as  you  would  they  should  do  unto  you.


1  Theoretical  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  external  world  and  of  the  inner  conscious
life  of  beings  is  offered  in  metaphysics.  Moral  philosophy  is  concerned  only  with  a
general  consciousness  of  this  truth,  which  even  the  extreme  egoist  involuntarily  accepts.
When  for  his  selfish  purposes  he  wants  the  help  of  other  people  not  dependent  on  him,
he  treats  them,  contrary  to  his  fundamental  principle,  as  actual,  independent  persons
fully  possessed  of  rights  ;  he  tries  to  persuade  them  to  side  with  him,  takes  their  own
interests  into  consideration.  Thus  egoism  contradicts  itself,  and  is  in  any  case  a  false
point  of  view.


74  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


VIII

The  general  rule  or  principle  of  altruism  1  naturally  falls  into
two  more  particular  ones.  The  beginning  of  this  division  may
be  seen  already  in  the  fundamental  altruistic  feeling  of  pity.  If
I  am  genuinely  sorry  for  a  person,  in  the  first  place  I  would  not
myself  cause  him  harm  or  suffering,  would  not  injure  him,  and
secondly,  when,  independently  of  me,  he  suffers  pain  or  injury,

I  would  help  him.  Hence  follow  two  rules  of  altruism,  the
negative  and  the  positive  :  (i)  Do  not  to  others  what  you  do  not
wish  others  to  do  to  you.  (2)  Do  to  others  what  you  would  wish
others  to  do  to  you.  More  briefly  and  simply,  these  two  rules,  which
are  usually  joined  together,  are  expressed  as  follows :  Do  not  injure
any  one ,  and  help  every  one  so  far  as  you  are  able  {Neminem  laedey
imo  omnes ,  quantum  potes ,  juva).

The  first,  negative,  rule  is,  more  particularly,  called  the  rule  of
justice,  and  the  second  the  rule  of  mercy.  But  this  distinction  is
not  quite  correct,  for  the  second  rule,  too,  is  founded  upon  justice  :
if  I  want  others  to  help  me  when  in  need,  it  is  just  that  I,  too,
should  help  them.  On  the  other  hand,  if  I  do  not  wish  to  injure
any  one,  it  is  because  I  recognise  others  to  be  living  and  sentient
beings  like  myself ;  and  in  that  case  I  will,  of  course,  as  much  as
in  me  lies,  save  them  from  suffering.  I  do  not  injure  them  because
I  pity  them,  and  if  I  pity  them,  I  will  also  help  them.  Mercy
presupposes  justice,  and  justice  demands  mercy — they  are  merely
different  aspects  or  different  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same
thing.2

1  This  term,  introduced  by  the  founder  of  Positivism,  Auguste  Comte,  is  the  exact
expression  of  the  logical  antithesis  to  egoism  and  therefore  answers  to  a  real  need  of
philosophical  language  (altruism,  from  alter,  other,  like  egoism,  from  ego,  self).  Our
violent  opponents  of  foreign  words  ought  to  be  consistent,  and  if  they  object  to  altruism,
they  should  also  renounce  the  word  egoism.  Instead  of  these  terms  they  may  use  the
words  ‘ yatchestvo  ’  (‘  selfness  ’)  and  ‘  druzhatchestvo  ’  (‘  otherism  ’)  $  the  former  term,  I
believe,  has  already  been  used.  If  it  were  a  question  of  merely  psychological  definitions,
the  words  self-love  and  love  of  others  could  be  substituted,  but  including  as  they  do  the
idea  of  love,  they  are  unsuitable  for  the  designation  of  ethical  principles  which  are
concerned  not  with  feelings  but  with  rules  of  action.  One  may  love  oneself  far  more
than  others,  and  yet,  on  principle,  work  for  the  good  of  others  as  much  as  for  one’s
own.  Such  a  person  would  undoubtedly  be  an  altruist,  but  it  would  be  equally  absurd
to  speak  of  him  as  ‘a  lover  of  self’  or  ‘a  lover  of  others.’

2  In  Hebrew  sedek  means  ‘just,’  and  the  noun  derived  from  it,  sedeka,  means
‘  benevolence.’


PITY  AND  ALTRUISM


75


There  is  a  real  distinction  between  these  two  sides  or  degrees
of  altruism,  but  there  is  not,  and  there  cannot  be,  any  opposition
or  contradiction.  Not  to  help  others  means  to  injure  them  ;  a
consistently  just  man  will  inevitably  do  works  of  mercy,  and  the
truly  merciful  man  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  unjust.  The
fact  that  the  two  altruistic  rules,  in  spite  of  all  the  difference
between  them,  are  inseparable ,  is  very  important  as  providing
the  foundation  for  the  inner  connection  between  legal  justice
and  morality,  and  between  the  political  and  the  spiritual  life  of
the  community.

The  general  rule  of  altruism — cdo  unto  others  as  you  would  they
should  do  unto  you  ’ — by  no  means  presupposes  the  material  or  the
qualitative  equality  of  all  the  individuals.  There  exists  no  such
equality  in  nature,  and  it  would  be  meaningless  to  demand  it.  It
is  not  a  question  of  equality,  but  simply  of  the  equal  right  to  exist
and  to  develop  the  good  potentialities  of  one’s  nature.  A  wild
man  of  the  Bush  has  as  much  right  to  exist  and  to  develop  in  his
way,  as  St.  Francis  of  Assisi  or  Goethe  had  in  theirs.  And  we
must  respect  this  right  equally  in  all  cases.  The  murder  of  a
savage  is  as  much  a  sin  as  the  murder  of  a  genius  or  a  saint.  But
this  does  not  imply  that  they  are,  therefore,  of  the  same  value  in
other  respects,  and  must  be  treated  equally  outside  the  scope  of
this  universal  human  right.  Material  equality,  and  therefore
equality  of  rights,  does  not  exist  either  between  different  beings
or  in  one  and  the  same  being  whose  particular  and  definite  rights
and  duties  change  with  the  changes  in  age  and  position  ;  they
are  not  the  same  in  children  and  in  adults,  in  mental  disease  or  in
health.  And  yet  a  person’s  fundamental  or  universally  human  rights
and  his  moral  value  as  an  individual  remain  the  same.  Nor  is
it  destroyed  by  the  infinite  variety  and  inequality  of  separate
persons,  tribes,  and  classes.  In  all  these  differences  there  must
be  preserved  something  identical  and  absolute,  namely,  the
significance  of  each  person  as  an  end  in  himself  that  is  to  say,
his  significance  as  something  that  cannot  be  merely  a  means  for
the  ends  of  others.

The  logical  demands  of  altruism  are  all-embracing,  reason
shows  no  favours,  knows  no  barriers  ;  in  this  respect  it  coincides
with  the  feeling  upon  which  altruism  is  psychologically  based.
Pity,  as  we  have  seen,  is  also  universal  and  impartial,  and  through


76  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

it  man  may  be  ‘made  like  to  God,’  for  his  compassion  equally
embraces  all,  without  distinction — the  good  and  ‘  the  enemies
of  truth,’  men  and  demons,  and  even  ‘all  of  the  crawling
kind.’ 1

1  The  question  as  to  our  moral  duties  to  animals  will  be  considered  in  a  special
appendix  at  the  end  of  the  book,  in  addition  to  special  references  to  it  in  Part  II.  and
Part  III.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY

I

Although  the  moral  rules  of  justice  and  mercy,  psychologically
based  upon  the  feeling  of  pity,  include  in  their  extension  the  whole
realm  of  living  creatures,  their  intension  does  not  exhaust  the  moral
relations  that  hold  even  between  human  beings.  Take,  in  the
first  place,  the  moral  relation  of  children — young,  but  already  able
to  understand  the  demands  of  morality — to  their  parents.  It
undoubtedly  contains  a  peculiar,  specific  element,  irreducible  either
to  justice  or  to  kindness  and  underivable  from  pity.  A  child
immediately  recognises  his  parents’  superiority  over  himself,  his
dependence  upon  them  ;  he  feels  reverence  for  them,  and  there
follows  from  it  the  practical  duty  of  obedience.  All  this  lies
outside  the  boundaries  of  simple  altruism,  the  logical  essence  of
which  consists  in  my  recognising  another  as  my  equal,  as  a  being
like  myself  and  in  attaching  the  same  significance  to  him  as  I  do
to  myself.  The  moral  relation  of  children  to  their  parents,  so
far  from  being  determined  by  equality,  has  quite  the  opposite
character — it  is  based  upon  the  recognition  of  that  in  which  the
two  are  unequal.  And  the  ultimate  psychological  basis  of  the
moral  relation  in  this  case  cannot  be  the  participation  in  the
sufferings  of  others  (pity),  for  the  parents  immediately  appear  to
the  child  not  as  needing  the  help  of  others,  but  as  being  able  to
help  it  in  its  needs.

This  relation  is  not,  of  course,  opposed  to  justice,  but  it
contains  something  in  addition  to  it.  The  general  principle  of
justice  requires  that  our  relation  to  others  should  be  what  we  wish
their  relation  to  be  to  us.  It  may  logically  include  the  moral

77


78  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

relation  of  children  to  parents  :  in  loving  its  mother  or  father,  the
child,  of  course,  wants  them  to  love  it.  But  there  is  an  essential
difference  between  these  two  forms  of  love — that  which  the  child
feels  for  its  parents,  and  that  which  it  wants  them  to  feel  for  it — and
the  difference  does  not  spring  from  the  general  principle  itself.
The  first  relation  is  characterised  by  the  feeling  of  admiration  for
the  higher  and  by  the  duty  of  obedience  to  it,  while  no  such
reverence  and  submission  is  required  by  the  child  from  the  parents.
Of  course,  formal  reflection  may  be  pursued  further,  and  it  may
be  affirmed  that  the  children  (when  they  reach  the  years  of  discre¬
tion,  of  course),  in  revering  their  parents  and  obeying  them,  wish
to  be  treated  in  the  same  way  by  their  own  children  in  the  future.
This  circumstance,  however,  merely  establishes  the  abstract
relation  between  the  general  idea  of  justice  and  filial  love  ;  it
certainly  does  not  account  for  the  peculiar  nature  of  that  love.
Apart  from  all  problematic  thought  of  future  children,  the  moral
feeling  of  a  real  child  to  its  parents  has  a  sufficient  basis  in  the
actual  relationship  between  this  child  and  its  parents — namely,  in
its  entire  dependence  upon  them  as  its  Providence.  This  fact
inevitably  involves  the  admission  of  their  essential  superiority,  and
from  it  logically  follows  the  duty  of  obedience.  Thus  filial  love
acquires  quite  a  peculiar  character  of  respect  or  reverence  {pietas
erga  parentes\  which  carries  it  beyond  the  general  limits  of  simple
altruism.

It  may  be  observed  that  parental  (especially  maternal)  love,  or
pity,  which  is  the  first  and  the  most  fundamental  expression  of  the
altruistic  attitude,  presupposes  the  same  inequality,  but  in  the
opposite  direction.  Here,  however,  the  inequality  is  not  essential.
When  parents  pity  their  helpless  children  and  take  care  of  them,
they  know  from  their  own  experience  the  pain  of  hunger,  cold,  etc.,
which  rouse  their  pity,  so  that  this  is  really  a  case  of  comparing
or  equalising  the  states  of  another  person  with  one’s  own  states  of
the  same  kind.  A  child,  on  the  contrary,  has  never  experienced
for  itself  the  advantages  of  mature  age,  which  call  forth  in  it  a
feeling  of  respect  or  reverence  for  its  parents,  and  make  it  see
higher  beings  in  them.  Parents  pity  their  children  because  of  their
likeness  to  themselves,  because  of  their  being  the  same,  though,  as
a  matter  of  fact,  unequal.  Inequality,  in  this  case,  is  purely
accidental.  But  the  specific  feeling  of  children  to  their  parents


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  79

is  essentially  determined  by  the  superiority  of  the  latter,  and  is
therefore  directly  based  upon  inequality.

If  one  carefully  observes  a  child  who  tries  to  defend  its  mother
from  an  actual  or  imaginary  insult,  it  will  be  easily  seen  that  its
dominant  feelings  are  anger  and  indignation  at  the  blasphemer.
It  is  not  so  much  sorry  for  the  offended  as  angry  with  the  offender.
The  child’s  feelings  are  essentially  similar  to  those  that  animate
the  crowd  defending  its  idol.  “  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  !
death  to  the  ungodly  !  ”

All  manifestations  of  pity  and  of  altruism  that  follow  from  it
are  essentially  conditioned  by  equality.  Inequality  is  merely  an
accidental  and  transitory  element  in  them.  In  pitying  another,
I  assimilate  myself  to  him,  imagine  myself  in  his  place,  get,  so  to
speak,  into  his  skin — and  this  in  itself  presupposes  my  equality
with  him  as  a  fellow-creature.  In  recognising  another  as  equal
to  himself,  the  person  who  experiences  pity,  compares  the  state  of
that  other  to  similar  states  of  himself,  and  from  the  likeness  between
them  deduces  the  moral  duty  of  sympathy  and  help.

Non  ignara  mail  miseris  succurrere  discor.1  To  pity  another,
I  must  compare  myself  to  him  or  him  to  me.  The  assumption
of  essential  inequality  or  heterogeneity,  excluding  as  it  does  the
thought  of  similar  states,  destroys  the  very  root  of  pity  and  of  all
altruistic  relation.  ‘The  twice  born’  Hindu  is  pitiless  to  the
Sfidras  and  Pariahs.  His  relation  to  them  is  based  on  inequality,
i.e.  precisely  on  the  impossibility  of  comparing  himself  with  them.
He  cannot  put  himself  in  their  place,  assimilate  their  states  to  his,
and  cannot,  therefore,  sympathise  with  them.  In  this  case,  just
as  in  the  case  of  the  white  planters’  attitude  to  the  negroes,  or  of
our  old  serf-owners  to  ‘the  brood  of  Ham,’  it  was  sought  to
justify  the  cruel  relation  which  existed  as  a  fact  by  the  conception
of  a  fundamental  inequality  or  heterogeneity.

Such  recognition  of  inequality  is  purely  negative  ;  it  severs  the
bond  of  union  between  beings  and  generates  or  justifies  all  kinds
of  immoral  relations.  A  different  character  attaches  to  that
positive  inequality  which  we  find  in  filial  love  or  piety.  The
inequality  between  a  Brahmin  and  a  Pariah,  or  between  a  planter
and  a  negro,  destroys  the  unity  of  feeling  and  of  interests  between

1  ‘Having  known  trouble  myself,  I  learn  to  help  those  who  suffer’  (the  words  of
Dido  in  Virgil’s  Aeneid).


8o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

them  ;  but  the  superiority  of  the  parents  over  the  children  is,  on
the  contrary,  the  condition  of  their  unity  and  the  basis  of  a
particular  kind  of  moral  relation.  This  is  the  natural  root  of
religious  morality ,  which  forms  a  distinct  and  important  part  in  the
spiritual  life  of  man,  independently  of  all  particular  religions  and
systems  of  metaphysics.


II

Since  the  appearance  of  De  Brosses’s  book  in  the  last  century
the  theory  of  the  ‘  gods-fetishes  ’  began  to  gain  ground,  and  of
late  has  become  extremely  popular  under  the  influence  of  Auguste
Comte’s  positive  philosophy.  According  to  this  view,  the  primitive
form  of  religion  is  fetishism ,  i.e.  the  deification  of  material  objects,
partly  natural  (stones,  trees)  and  partly  artificial,  which  have
accidentally  drawn  attention  to  themselves  or  have  been  arbitrarily
chosen.  The  beginnings  or  the  remains  of  such  a  material  cult
are  undoubtedly  found  in  all  religions  ;  but  to  regard  fetishism  as
the  fundamental  and  primitive  religion  of  humanity  is  contrary
both  to  the  evidence  of  history  and  sociology  and  to  the  demands
of  logic.  (Fetishism  may,  however,  have  a  deeper  meaning,  as  the
founder  of  positivism  himself  began  to  suspect  in  the  second  half
of  his  career.)

In  order  to  recognise  a  stone,  a  bit  of  tree,  or  a  shell  as  a  god,
i.e.  as  a  being  of  superior  power  and  importance,  one  must  already
possess  the  idea  of  a  higher  being.  I  could  not  mistake  a  rope  for
a  snake  did  I  not  already  possess  the  idea  of  the  snake.  But  what
could  the  idea  of  the  deity  be  derived  from  ?  The  material  objects
which  are  made  into  fetishes  and  idols  have  in  themselves,  in  their
actual  sensuous  reality,  no  attributes  of  a  higher  being.  The  idea,
therefore,  cannot  be  derived  from  them.  To  call  it  innate  is  not
to  give  an  answer  to  the  question.  All  that  takes  place  in  man  is
in  a  sense  innate  in  him.  There  is  no  doubt  that  man  is  by  nature
capable  of  forming  an  idea  of  a  higher  being,  for  otherwise  he
would  not  have  formed  it.  The  question  is  asked  not  about  the
existence  of  this  capacity  but  about  its  original  application ,  which
must  have  some  immediate  sufficient  reason.  In  order  to  pass  into
actual  consciousness  every  idea,  even  when  potentially  present  in
the  human  intellect,  and  in  this  sense  innate,  requires  that  certain


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  81


sensuous  impressions  or  perceptions  should  call  it  forth  and  give
it  a  living  concrete  form,  which  subsequently  undergoes  a  further
process  of  intellectual  modification,  and  is  made  wider  and  deeper,
more  complex  and  more  exact.  But  the  actual  impressions  from
a  chunk  of  wood  or  a  rudely  fashioned  figure  are  not  a  sufficient
ground  for  calling  forth  for  the  first  time  in  the  mind  the  idea  of
a  higher  being,  or  for  helping  to  fashion  that  idea.  More  suitable
in  this  respect  are  the  impressions  from  the  sun  and  the  moon,
the  starry  heaven,  thunderstorm,  sea,  rivers,  etc.  But  long  before
the  mind  becomes  capable  of  dwelling  on  these  events  and  of
judging  their  significance,  it  has  been  given  impressions  of  another
kind — more  familiar  and  more  powerful — for  generating  in  it  the
idea  of  a  higher  being.  When  dealing  with  the  origin  of  some
fundamental  idea  in  human  consciousness,  we  must  think  of  the
child  and  not  of  the  adult.  Now  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  the
child  is  far  more  conscious  of  its  dependence  upon  its  mother,  who
feeds  and  takes  care  of  it  (and  later  on,  on  its  father),  than  of  its  de¬
pendence  upon  the  sun,  the  thunderstorm,  or  the  river  that  irrigates
the  fields  of  its  native  land.  The  impressions  it  has  from  the  first
of  its  parents  contain  sufficient  ground  for  evoking  in  it  the  idea
of  a  higher  being  as  well  as  the  feelings  of  reverential  love  and
fear  of  an  immeasurable  power.  These  feelings  are  associated
with  the  idea  of  a  higher  being  and  form  the  basis  of  the  religious
attitude.  It  is  an  unquestionable  fact,  and  a  perfectly  natural  one,
that  until  they  reach  a  certain  age  children  pay  no  attention  at  all
to  the  most  important  natural  phenomena.  The  sun  appears  no
more  remarkable  to  them  than  a  simple  lamp,  and  the  thunder
produces  no  more  impression  upon  them  than  the  rattle  of  crockery.
In  my  own  case  the  first  impression  of  the  starry  sky  that  I
remember  refers  to  my  sixth  year,  and  even  then  it  was  due  to  a
special  reason  (the  comet  of  1859),  while  the  series  of  clear  and
connected  family  memories  begins  in  my  fourth  year.  Neither  in
life  nor  in  literature  have  I  seen  any  indications  to  the  reverse
order  of  development  in  children  ;  and  if  we  saw  a  baby  of  three
years  old  suddenly  develop  an  interest  in  astronomical  phenomena,
I  think  we  should  feel  distinctly  alarmed.

Not  in  accidental  fetishes  and  hand-made  idols,  not  in  majestic
or  terrible  phenomena  of  nature,  but  in  the  living  image  of  parents
is  the  idea  of  Godhead  for  the  first  time  embodied  for  humanity

G


82  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

in  its  childhood.  For  this  reason  the  moral  element — contrary  to
current  opinion— has  from  the  first  an  important  though  not  an
exclusive  significance  for  religion.  According  to  the  elementary
conception  of  it  the  deity  has  pre-eminently  the  character  of

Providence.

At  first  Providence  is  embodied  in  the  mother.  At  the  lower
stages  of  social  development,  so  long  as  the  marriage  relation  is
not  yet  organised,  the  importance  of  the  mother  and  the  cult  of
motherhood  predominate.  Different  peoples,  like  individual  men,
have  lived  through  an  epoch  of  matriarchy  or  mother-right,  the  traces
of  which  are  still  preserved  in  history,  in  ancient  customs,  and  also
in  the  present  life  of  certain  savages.1  But  when  the  patriarchal
type  of  family  comes  to  be  established,  the  mother  retains  the  part
of  Providence  only  while  the  children  are  materially  dependent
upon  her  for  food  and  their  first  education.  At  that  period  the
mother  is  the  only  higher  being  for  the  child  ;  but  as  he  reaches
the  age  of  reflection  he  sees  that  his  mother  is  herself  dependent
upon  another  higher  being — his  father,  who  provides  food  for  and
protects  all  his  family  ;  he  is  the  true  Providence,  and  the  religious
worship  is  naturally  transferred  to  him.

Ill

The  religious  attitude  of  children  to  their  parents  as  to  their
living  Providence,  arising  naturally  in  primitive  humanity,  ex¬
presses  itself  most  clearly  and  fully  when  the  children  are  grown
up  and  the  parents  are  dead.  Worship  of  dead  fathers  and  ancestors
unquestionably  occupies  the  foremost  place  in  the  development  of
the  religious,  moral,  and  social  relations  of  humanity.  The  immense
population  of  China  still  lives  by  the  religion  of  ancestor-worship,
upon  which  all  the  social,  political,  and  family  structure  of  the
Middle  Kingdom  is  founded.  And  among  other  peoples  of  the
globe — savage,  barbarous,  or  civilised,  including  modern  Parisians —
there  is  not  one  which  does  not  do  homage  to  the  memory  of  the  dead
in  one  form  or  another.  The  relation  to  living  parents,  although  it
is  the  first  basis  of  religion,  cannot  have  a  purely  religious  character

1  There  is  a  special  literature  on  the  subject  which  first  arose  in  connection  with
classical  archeology  (Bahofen,  Das  Mutterrecht),  and  subsequently  passed  into  the
domain  of  comparative  ethnography  and  sociology.


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  83

owing  to  the  intimacy  and  constant  interaction  in  everyday  life.
As  a  child  grows  up  he  hears  from  his  father  about  his  ancestors
who  died  and  are  the  object  of  an  already  established  religious
cult ;  thus  the  religion  of  parents  who  are  still  living  is  naturally
merged  into  the  religion  of  parents  who  have  gone,  and  who,  clothed
in  mysterious  majesty,  are  raised  above  all  that  surrounds  us.  The
father  in  his  lifetime  is  merely  a  candidate  for  deity,  and  is  only
the  mediator  and  the  priest  of  the  real  god — the  dead  ancestor.
It  is  not  fear  but  death  that  gives  humanity  its  first  gods.  The
feeling  of  dependence  and  the  conception  of  Providence,  trans¬
ferred  from  the  mother  to  the  father,  become  associated  with  the
idea  of  the  forefathers  when  the  child  learns  that  the  parents  upon
whom  he  depends  are  in  a  far  greater  dependence  upon  the  dead,
whose  power  is  not  limited  by  any  conditions  of  the  material
and  corporeal  existence.  The  idea  of  Providence  and  the  moral
duties  of  respect,  service,  and  obedience  that  follow  from  it  for
man  are  thus  transferred  to  them.  To  obey  the  will  of  the
dead,  one  must  know  it.  Sometimes  they  announce  it  directly,
appearing  in  a  vision  or  a  dream  ;  in  other  cases  it  must  be  learnt
through  divination.  The  mediators  between  this  higher  divine
power  and  ordinary  men  are,  first,  the  living  fathers  or  the  elders
of  the  tribe,  but  afterwards,  as  the  social  relations  become  more
complex,  there  arises  a  separate  class  of  priests,  diviners,  sorcerers,
and  prophets.

It  is  only  a  subjective  misanthropic  mood  that  can  reduce
filial  sentiments  even  in  the  primitive  races  to  fear  alone,  to  the
exclusion  of  gratitude  and  of  a  disinterested  recognition  of
superiority.  If  these  moral  elements  are  unquestionably  present
in  the  relation  of  a  dog  to  its  master  in  whom  it  sees  its  living
Providence,  they  must  a  fortiori  form  part  of  the  feelings  of  man
to  his  Providence,  originally  embodied  for  him  in  his  parents.
When  this  interpretation  is  transferred  to  the  dead  ancestors,  their
cult  also  carries  with  it  the  moral  element  of  filial  love,  which
is  in  this  case  clearly  differentiated  from  simple  altruism  and
acquires  a  predominantly  religious  character.

According  to  a  well-known  theory,  whose  chief  representative
is  Herbert  Spencer,  the  whole  of  religion  can  be  traced  to  ancestor-
worship.  Although  this  view  does  not  express  the  complete  truth,
it  is  far  more  correct  and  suggestive  than  the  theory  of  primitive


84  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

fetishism  or  the  theories  which  reduce  all  religion  to  the  deification
of  the  sun,  the  thunder,  and  other  natural  phenomena.  The
objects  of  religious  worship  were  always  active  beings  or  spirits  in
the  likeness  of  man.  There  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  that  the
prototype  of  spirits  were  the  souls  of  the  departed  ancestors.  In
Lithuania  and  Poland  the  general  name  for  all  spirits  is  forefathers

_ dziady ;  with  us  the  elementary  spirits  are  spoken  of  as

grandfather  water  -  sprite,  grandfather  of  the  forest,  the  master
house-spirit.  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses ,  chiefly  borrowed  from  the
popular  beliefs  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  are  full  of  stories
of  the  dead  or  dying  men  passing  into  the  elementary,  the
zoomorphic,  and  the  phytomorphic  (vegetative)  deities  and  spiiits.
The  most  widespread  form  of  fetishism — the  stone  worship  is
undoubtedly  connected  with  the  cult  of  the  dead.  Among  the
Laps,  Buriates,  and  other  peoples,  the  names  of  the  ancestors  or  the
sorcerers  who  were  transformed  into  the  sacred  stones  are  re¬
membered  after  death.1  This  transformation  cannot  be  understood
in  the  sense  that  the  spirit  of  the  dead  becomes  a  stone,  i.e.  a  soulless
thing  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  retains  the  power  that  it  had  in  its  life¬
time,  and  is  indeed  more  powerful  than  it  was  then.  Thus  among
the  Laps  the  petrified  sorcerers  foretell  and  cause  storms  and  bad
weather  in  all  the  neighbourhood.  The  stone  in  this  case  is  merely
the  visible  abode  of  the  spirit,  the  instrument  of  its  action.  Among
the  Semites  sacred  stones  were  called  beth-el ,  that  is,  ‘  house  of  god.’
The  same  thing  must  be  said  about  sacred  trees.

It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  among  the  Africans  and  other
peoples  the  sorcerers  are  supposed  to  have  for  their  chief  character¬
istic  the  power  of  controlling  atmospheric  events,  of  producing
good  and  bad  weather.  This  power  is  ascribed  in  a  still  greater
degree  and  more  directly  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead  sorcerers,  whose
living  successors  serve  merely  as  their  mediators  and  messengers.
Now  such  a  powerful  spirit  of  a  dead  sorcerer,  who  produces
at  his  will  thunder  and  storm,  differs  in  no  way  from  a  thunder
god.  There  is  no  rational  necessity  to  seek  for  a  different
explanation  of  father  Zeus  or  of  grandfather  Percunas.

It  is  not  my  object  here  to  expound  and  explain  the  history
of  religious  development,  and  I  will  not  attempt  to  solve  the

1  See,  among  other  things,  Harusin’s  book  on  Laplanders,  and  my  article  Ostatki
pervobitnago  yaxitchestva  ( The  Remains  of  Primitive  Paganism ).


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  85

question  as  to  how  far  a  genetic  tie  may  be  established  between
the  cult  of  the  dead  and  the  solar,  lunar,  and  stellar  mythology.  I
will  only  mention  some  suggestive  facts.  In  Egypt  the  solar  deity
Osiris  reigned  over  the  unseen  world  of  the  dead.  In  classical
mythology  Hecate  was  one  of  the  deities  of  Hades.  According  to
an  ancient  belief  preserved  in  Manicheism  the  moon  is  an  inter¬
mediate  resting-place  for  the  souls  of  the  departed.  I  would  also
like  to  observe  that  the  end  of  the  theogonic  process  is  true  to  its
beginning  —  that  the  religious  consciousness  at  its  highest  stage
merely  deepens  and  widens  the  content  we  find  at  the  primitive
stages.  The  religion  of  a  primitive  human  family  centres  round
the  idea  of  the  father  or  the  nearest  ancestor,  first  as  living,  then
as  dead.  Their  own  particular  parent  is  the  highest  principle  for
the  family,  the  source  of  its  life  and  welfare,  the  object  of  respect,
gratitude,  and  obedience — in  a  word,  its  Providence.  Through  a
natural  historical  process  there  arise  the  communal  and  the  tribal
gods,  until  at  last  the  religious  consciousness  of  humanity,  united
in  thought  if  not  in  fact,  rises  to  the  idea  of  the  universal
Heavenly  Father  with  His  all-embracing  Providence.

IV

The  development  of  a  religious  idea  involves  a  change  in  its
extension,  and  also  in  the  nature  of  the  intellectual  concepts  and
practical  rules  contained  in  it.  But  it  does  not  affect  the  moral
content  of  religion,  i.e.  man’s  fundamental  relation  to  what  he
admits  as  higher  than  himself — to  what  he  recognises  as  his
Providence.  That  relation  remains  unchanged  in  all  the  forms  and
at  all  the  stages  of  religious  development.  The  ideas  of  the  child
about  its  parents,  of  the  members  of  a  tribe  about  the  spirit  of  their
first  ancestor,  the  ideas  of  entire  peoples  about  their  national
gods,  and  finally,  the  general  human  idea  of  the  one  all-good
Father  of  all  that  is,  differ  essentially  from  one  another,  and
there  is  also  great  difference  in  the  forms  of  worship.  The  real
tie  between  father  and  children  needs  no  special  institutions  and
no  mediation  ;  but  the  relation  with  the  invisible  spirit  of  the
ancestor  must  be  maintained  by  special  means.  The  spirit  cannot
partake  of  ordinary  human  food.  It  feeds  on  the  evaporation  of
blood,  and  has  therefore  to  be  fed  by  sacrifices.  Family  sacrifices


86  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

to  the  spirit  of  the  tribe  naturally  differ  from  communal  sacrifices
to  the  national  gods  ;  the  c  god  of  war  ’  has  greater  and  different
requirements  than  the  patron-spirit  of  the  home,  and  the  all-
embracing  and  all- pervading  Father  of  the  universe  requires  no
material  sacrifices  at  all,  but  only  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.
But  in  spite  of  all  these  differences,  the  filial  relation  to  the  higher
being  remains  essentially  the  same  at  all  these  different  stages.
The  crudest  cannibal  and  the  most  perfect  saint  in  so  far  as  they  are
religious  agree  in  that  they  both  equally  desire  to  do  not  their  own
will  but  the  will  of  the  Father.  This  permanent  and  self-identical
filial  relation  to  the  higher  (whatever  this  higher  may  be  supposed
to  be)  forms  that  principle  of  true  pietism  which  connects  religion
with  morality,  and  may  equally  well  be  described  as  the  religious
element  in  morality  or  the  moral  element  in  religion.1

Can  this  principle  be  affirmed  as  a  generally  binding  moral
rule,  side  by  side  with  the  principles  of  asceticism  and  altruism  ?
Apparently  the  filial  relation  to  the  supreme  will  depends  upon
the  faith  in  that  will,  and  one  cannot  require  such  faith  from  those
who  have  not  got  it  ;  when  there  is  nothing  to  be  had,  it  is  no
use  making  demands.  But  there  is  a  misunderstanding  here.
The  recognition  of  what  is  higher  than  us  is  independent  of  any
definite  intellectual  ideas,  and  therefore  of  any  positive  beliefs,
and  in  its  general  character  it  is  undoubtedly  binding  upon  every
moral  and  rational  being.  Every  such  being,  in  trying  to
attain  the  purpose  of  its  life,  is  necessarily  convinced  that  the
attainment  of  it,  or  the  final  satisfaction  of  will,  is  beyond  the
power  of  man — that  is,  every  rational  being  comes  to  recognise
its  dependence  upon  something  invisible  and  unknown.  Such
dependence  cannot  be  denied.  The  only  question  is  whether
that  upon  which  I  am  dependent  has  a  meaning.  If  it  has  not,
my  existence,  dependent  upon  what  is  meaningless,  is  meaningless
also.  In  that  case  there  is  no  point  in  speaking  of  any  rational
and  moral  principles  and  purposes.  They  can  only  have
significance  on  condition  that  there  is  a  meaning  in  my  exist¬
ence,  that  the  world  is  a  rational  system,  that  meaning

1  I  am  speaking  here  of  pietism  in  the  direct  and  general  sense  of  the  term  as
designating  the  feeling  of  piety  ( pietas )  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  moral  principle.  Usually
the  term  ‘  pietism  ’  in  a  special  historical  sense  is  applied  to  a  certain  religious  movement
among  the  Protestants.


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  87

predominates  over  what  is  meaningless  in  the  universe.  If  there
is  no  rational  purpose  in  the  world  as  a  whole,  there  cannot  be
any  in  that  part  of  it  which  is  composed  of  human  actions
determined  by  moral  rules.  But  in  that  case  these  rules  too
fall  to  the  ground,  for  they  do  not  lead  to  anything  and  cannot
in  any  way  be  justified.  If  my  higher  spiritual  nature  is  merely
an  accident,  ascetic  struggle  with  the  flesh  may  destroy  my
spiritual  being  instead  of  strengthening  it ;  and  in  that  case
why  should  I  observe  the  rules  of  abstinence  and  deprive  myself
of  real  pleasures  for  the  sake  of  an  empty  dream  ?  In  the  same
way,  if  there  is  no  rational  and  moral  order  in  the  universe,  and
our  work  for  the  benefit  of  our  neighbours  may  bring  them
harm  instead  of  the  intended  help,  the  moral  principle  of
altruism  is  destroyed  by  inner  self-contradiction.  If,  for  instance,
I  suppose,  with  Schopenhauer,  that  the  ultimate  reality  is  blind
and  senseless  Will,  and  that  all  existence  is  essentially  pain,  why
should  I  try  and  help  others  to  support  their  existence  ?  On
such  a  supposition  it  would  be  far  more  logical  to  use  every
effort  to  put  to  death  the  largest  possible  number  of  living
creatures.

I  can  do  good  consciously  and  rationally  only  if  I  believe
in  the  good  and  in  its  objective  independent  significance  in  the
world,  i.e.  in  other  words,  if  I  believe  in  the  moral  order,  in
Providence,  in  God.  This  faith  is  logically  prior  to  all  particular
religious  beliefs  and  institutions,  as  well  as  to  all  systems  of
metaphysics,  and  in  this  sense  it  forms  the  so-called  natural
religion.

V

The  natural  religion  gives  rational  sanction  to  all  the
demands  of  morality.  Suppose  reason  directly  tells  us  that  it  is
good  to  subordinate  the  flesh  to  the  spirit,  that  it  is  good  to  help
others  and  to  recognise  the  rights  of  other  people  like  our  own.
Now  in  order  to  obey  these  demands  of  reason,  one  must  believe
in  reason — believe  that  the  good  it  requires  from  us  is  not  a
subjective  illusion,  but  has  real  grounds  and  expresses  the
truth,  and  that  that  truth  ‘is  great  and  overcomes.’  Not  to
have  this  faith  is  to  disbelieve  that  one’s  own  existence  has  a
meaning — is  to  renounce  the  dignity  of  a  rational  being.


88  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

The  absence  of  a  natural  religion  is  often  fictitious.  A
negative  relation  to  this  or  that  form  or  degree  of  religious
consciousness,  predominant  at  a  given  time  and  at  a  given  place,
is  easily  taken  for  denial  of  religion  as  such.  Thus  the  Pagans
of  the  Roman  Empire  thought  the  Christians  godless  (a0eoi),
and  from  their  point  of  view  they  were  right,  for  the  Christians
did  reject  all  their  gods.  Apart  from  this,  however,  there  exist
cases  of  real  godlessness  or  unbelief,  i.e.  of  denying  on  principle
anything  higher  than  oneself — of  denying  good,  reason,  truth.
But  the  fact  of  such  denial,  which  coincides  with  the  denial  of
morality  in  general,  can  be  no  more  an  argument  against  the
generally  binding  character  of  the  religiously-moral  principle
than  the  existence  of  shameless  and  carnal,  or  of  pitiless  and  cruel
men  is  an  argument  against  the  moral  duty  of  abstinence  and
charity.

Religious  morality,  as  all  morality  in  general,  is  not  a
confirmation  of  everything  that  is,  but  an  affirmation  of  the  one
thing  that  ought  to  be.  Independently  of  all  positive  beliefs  or
of  any  unbelief,  every  man  as  a  rational  being  must  admit  that
the  life  of  the  world  as  a  whole  and  his  own  life  in  particular  has
a  meaning ,  and  that  therefore  everything  depends  upon  a  supreme
rational  principle,  in  virtue  of  which  this  meaning  is  preserved
and  realised.  And  in  admitting  this,  he  must  put  himself  into
a  filial  position  in  relation  to  the  supreme  principle  of  life,  that
is,  gratefully  surrender  himself  to  its  providence,  and  submit  all
his  actions  to  the  ‘will  of  the  Father,’  which  speaks  through
reason  and  conscience.

Just  as  the  intellectual  ideas  about  the  parents  and  the
external  practical  relations  to  them  alter  according  to  the  age  of
the  children,  while  the  filial  love  must  remain  unchanged,  so
the  theological  conceptions  and  the  forms  of  worship  of  the
Heavenly  Father  assume  many  forms  and  undergo  many  changes
with  the  spiritual  growth  of  humanity  ;  but  the  religiously-moral
attitude  of  free  subordination  of  one’s  will  to  the  demands  of
a  higher  principle  must  always  and  everywhere  remain  the
same.


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  89


VI

Speaking  generally,  in  morality  the  higher  demands  do  not
cancel  the  lower,  but  presuppose  and  include  them.  This  might
seem  to  be  a  matter  of  course  ;  and  yet  many  have  failed,  and
still  fail,  to  understand  this  simple  and  obvious  truth.  Thus,
according  to  the  teaching  of  some  Christian  sects,  both  ancient
and  modern,  the  higher  rule  of  celibacy  cancels  the  seventh
commandment  as  inferior,  and  therefore,  in  rejecting  marriage,
these  sectarians  readily  allow  all  kinds  of  fornication.  It  is
obvious  that  they  are  in  error.  Similarly,  it  is  thought  by
many  that  the  higher  rule  of  pitying  all  living  creatures  absolves
them  from  the  lower  duty  of  pitying  their  family  and  relatives,
although,  one  would  think,  there  could  be  no  doubt  about  the
latter  also  belonging  to  the  class  of  living  creatures.

Still  more  often  such  mistakes  are  made  in  the  domain  of
religious  morality.  The  higher  stages  of  spiritual  consciousness
once  reached,  subordinate  to  themselves  and  consequently  change,
but  by  no  means  cancel,  the  demands  which  had  force  on  the
lower  stages.  A  man  who  has  a  conception  of  the  Heavenly
Father  cannot,  of  course,  regard  his  earthly  father  in  the  same
way  as  does  a  babe  for  whom  the  latter  is  the  only  higher  being  ;
but  it  does  not  follow  that  the  first  and  the  second  command¬
ments  cancel  the  fifth.  We  cannot  now  render  our  dead
ancestors  the  religious  worship  which  they  had  in  the  patriarchal
times  ;  but  this  does  not  mean  that  we  have  no  duties  to  the
departed.  We  may  well  be  conscious  of  our  dependence  upon
the  One  Father  of  the  universe,  but  this  dependence  is  not
immediate  ;  our  existence  is,  without  a  doubt,  closely  determined
by  heredity  and  environment.  Heredity  means  the  forefathers,
and  it  is  by  them  that  our  environment  has  been  made.  The
supreme  Will  has  determined  our  existence  through  our  ancestors,
and,  bowing  down  before  Its  action,  we  cannot  be  indifferent  to
Its  instruments.  I  know  that  if  I  were  born  among  cannibals
I  should  be  a  cannibal  myself,  and  I  cannot  help  feeling  gratitude
and  reverence  to  men  who  by  their  labour  and  exploits  have
raised  my  people  from  the  savage  state  and  brought  them  to  the
level  of  culture  upon  which  they  are  standing  now.  This  has  been


90  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

done  by  Providence  through  men  who  have  been  specially  called
and  who  cannot  be  separated  from  their  providential  work.  If
I  praise  and  value  the  fact  that  it  has  been  given  to  my  native
land,  with  which  my  existence  is  so  closely  interwoven,  to  be  a
Christian  and  a  European  country,  I  am  bound  to  hold  in  pious
remembrance  the  Kiev  prince  who  christened  Russia,  and  that
northern  giant  who  with  powerful  blows  shattered  the  Muscovo-
Mongolian  exclusiveness  and  brought  Russia  within  the  circle
of  educated  nations,  as  well  as  all  those  men  who  in  the  different
spheres  of  life  moved  us  forward  along  the  path  opened  by
those  two  historical  forefathers  of  Russia.  It  is  sometimes
maintained  that  individuals  count  for  nothing  in  history,  and
that  what  has  been  done  by  certain  men  would  have  been  done
just  as  well  by  others.  Speaking  in  the  abstract,  we  might
of  course  have  been  born  of  other  parents  and  not  of  our  actual
father  and  mother  ;  but  this  idle  thought  about  possible  parents
does  not  cancel  our  duties  to  the  actual  ones.

The  providential  men  who  gave  us  a  share  in  the  higher
religion  and  in  human  enlightenment  did  not  themselves  create
these  in  the  first  instance.  What  they  gave  us  they  had  them¬
selves  received  from  the  geniuses,  heroes,  and  saints  of  the
former  ages,  and  our  grateful  memory  must  include  them  too.
We  must  reconstruct  as  completely  as  possible  the  whole  line
of  our  spiritual  ancestors — men  through  whom  Providence  has
led  humanity  on  the  path  to  perfection.  The  pious  memory  of  our
ancestors  compels  us  to  do  service  to  them  actively.  The  nature
of  that  service  is  conditioned  by  the  ultimate  character  of  the
world  as  a  whole,  and  cannot  be  understood  apart  from  theoretical
philosophy  and  aesthetics.  Here  one  can  only  point  to  the
moral  principle  involved,  namely,  the  pious  and  grateful  reverence
due  to  the  forefathers.

Such  a  cult  of  human  ancestors  in  spirit  and  in  truth  does  not
belittle  the  religion  of  the  one  Heavenly  Father.  On  the
contrary,  it  makes  it  definite  and  real.  It  is  what  He  put  into
these  ‘chosen  vessels’  that  we  revere  in  them  ;  in  these  visible
images  of  the  unseen,  the  Deity  Itself  is  revealed  and  glorified.
A  person  in  whose  mind  the  concrete  images  of  providential
action  incarnate  in  history  fail  to  evoke  gratitude,  reverence,
and  homage  will  be  still  less  likely  to  respond  to  the  pure  idea  of


THE  RELIGIOUS  PRINCIPLE  IN  MORALITY  91

Providence.  A  truly  religious  attitude  to  the  higher  is  impossible
for  one  who  has  never  experienced  the  feelings  to  which  the
poet  gives  expression  :

When,  in  the  drunkenness  of  crime,

The  crowd  goes  forth  in  violent  rage,

And  evil  genius  through  the  mire
Drags  name  of  prophet  and  of  sage,

My  knees  are  bent  in  one  desire,

My  head  is  bowed  towards  the  page
Where  clear  and  open  for  all  time
They  wrote  the  message  for  their  age.

I  call  up  their  majestic  shades

In  the  dim  church  where  tumult  fades,

In  clouds  of  incense  learn  and  glean,

And  forgetting  the  mob  and  its  vulgar  noise,

I  give  my  ears  to  the  noble  voice
And  take  full  breath  of  all  they  mean.


CHAPTER  V


VIRTUES

I

Each  of  the  moral  foundations  I  have  laid  down — shame,  pity,  and
the  religious  feeling — may  be  considered  from  three  points  of
view  :  as  a  virtue ,  as  a  rule  of  action,  and  as  the  condition  of  a
certain  good.

Thus,  in  relation  to  shame,  we  distinguish,  first  of  all,  persons
modest  or  shameless  by  nature,  approving  of  the  former  and  con¬
demning  the  latter  ;  modesty ,  therefore,  is  recognised  as  a  good
natural  quality  or  as  a  virtue.  But  by  that  very  fact  it  is
abstracted  from  particular  cases  and  is  made  the  norm  or  the
general  rule  of  action  (and,  through  this,  a  basis  for  passing
judgment  on  actions)  independently  of  the  presence  or  absence
of  this  virtue  in  this  or  in  that  individual.  If  modesty  is  not
sometimes  good  and  sometimes  bad  (in  the  way  in  which  a  loud
voice  is  good  at  a  public  meeting  and  bad  in  the  room  of  a
sleeping  invalid)  ;  if  modesty  is  a  good  in  itself,  reason  requires
us  in  all  cases  to  act  in  accordance  with  it,  namely,  to  abstain
from  actions  that  are  shameful — i.e.  that  express  the  predominance
of  the  lower  nature  over  the  higher— and  to  practise  actions  of
the  opposite  character.  Behaviour  in  conformity  with  this  rule
leads  in  the  end  to  permanent  self-control,  to  freedom  of  the
spirit,  and  its  power  over  the  material  existence  ;  that  is,  it  leads
to  a  state  which  affords  us  a  certain  higher  satisfaction  and  is  a
moral  good.

In  the  same  way,  the  capacity  for  feeling  pity  or  compassion
(in  opposition  to  selfishness,  cruelty,  and  malice)  is,  in  the  first
place,  a  good  personal  quality  or  virtue.  In  so  far  as  it  is

92


VIRTUES


93


recognised  as  such,  or  is  approved,  it  provides  the  norm  for
altruistic  actions  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  justice  and
mercy.  And  such  activity  leads  to  the  moral  good  of  true  com¬
munity  or  oneness  with  other  men,  and,  finally,  with  all  living
creatures.

In  a  similar  manner,  a  grateful  recognition  of  that  which  is
higher  than  us,  and  upon  which  we  depend,  is  the  natural  founda¬
tion  of  the  virtue  of  piety,  and  at  the  same  time  provides  a
rational  rule  of  religious  conduct.  It  also  leads  to  the  moral
good  of  unity  with  the  first  causes  and  bearers  of  existence  :
with  our  forefathers,  with  the  departed  in  general,  and  with  the
whole  of  the  invisible  world  which  conditions  our  life  from  this
point  of  view.

Since  there  is  an  indissoluble  inner  connection  between  any
given  virtue,  the  rules  of  action  corresponding  to  it,  and  the
moral  good  ensuing  therefrom,  there  is  no  need,  in  inquiring
into  the  subject  more  closely,  to  adopt  every  time  all  the  three
points  of  view.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  take  one  only,  viz.  the
point  of  view  of  virtue,  for  it  logically  contains  the  other  two,
and  no  sharp  line  of  demarcation  can  be  drawn  between  them.
It  would  be  impossible  to  deny  that  the  man  who  invariably  acted
in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  virtue  was  virtuous,  even  though
he  happened  to  possess  but  a  small  degree  of  the  corresponding
natural  faculty,  or  was  noted,  indeed,  by  the  presence  of  the
opposite  characteristic.  On  the  other  hand,  that  which,  in
contradistinction  to  virtue,  I  call  a  moral  good,  is  also  a  virtue,
though  not  as  originally  given  but  as  acquired — it  is  the  norm  of
activity  which  has  become  second  nature.

II

A  virtuous  man  is  man  as  he  ought  to  be.  In  other  words,
virtue  is  man’s  normal  or  due  relation  to  everything  (for  unrelated
qualities  or  properties  are  unthinkable).  The  due  relation  does
not  mean  the  same  relation.  In  drawing  the  distinction  between
the  self  and  the  not  self,  we  necessarily  posit  or  determine  the
not  self  in  three  ways  :  either  as  the  lower  (by  nature),  or  as
similar  to  us  (of  the  same  kind),  or  as  higher  than  we.  It  is
obvious  that  there  cannot  be  a  fourth  alternative.  Hence  it


94  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

logically  follows  that  the  right  or  the  moral  relation  must  have  a
threefold  character.  It  is  clear  that  we  ought  not  to  regard  the
lower  (say,  an  inclination  of  the  material  nature)  as  if  it  were
the  higher  [e.g.  a  decree  of  the  divine  will)  ;  it  would  be
equally  opposed  to  what  is  right  to  regard  a  being  like
ourselves — say,  a  human  being — either  as  lower  than  we  (i.e.
regard  it  as  a  soulless  thing),  or  as  higher  (look  upon  it  as  a
deity).

Thus,  instead  of  one,  we  have  three  right  or  moral  relations,
or  three  kinds  of  virtue,  corresponding  to  the  three  divisions  into
which  the  totality  of  objects  correlated  with  us  necessarily  falls.
I  say  necessarily ,  because  man  finds  himself  to  be  neither  the
absolutely  supreme  or  highest  being,  nor  the  absolutely  sub¬
ordinate  or  lowest,  nor,  finally,  alone  of  his  kind.  He  is  conscious
of  himself  as  an  intermediate  being  and,  moreover,  one  of  the  many
intermediate.  The  direct  logical  consequence  of  this  fact  is  the
threefold  character  of  his  moral  relations.  In  virtue  of  it,  one
and  the  same  quality  or  action  may  have  quite  a  different  and
even  opposite  significance,  according  to  the  kind  of  object  to
which  it  refers.  Thus,  belittling  oneself  or  recognising  one’s
worthlessness  is  called  humility ,  and  is  a  virtue  when  it  refers  to
objects  of  superior  dignity  ;  but  in  relation  to  unworthy  objects
it  is  considered  base  and  is  immoral.1  In  the  same  way,  enthusiasm ,
when  roused  by  high  principles  and  ideals,  is  no  doubt  a  virtue  ;
in  relation  to  indifferent  objects  it  is  an  amusing  weakness  ;  and
directed  upon  objects  of  the  lower  order  it  becomes  a  shameful
mania.  Virtues  in  the  proper  sense  are  always  and  in  every  one
the  same,  for  they  express  a  quality  determined  in  the  right  way,
and  correspond  to  the  very  meaning  of  one  or  other  of  the  three
possible  spheres  of  relation.  But  from  these  definite  and  deter¬
mining  virtues  must  be  distinguished  qualities  of  will  and  ways  of
action  which  are  not  in  themselves  morally  determined,  and  do
not  permanently  correspond  to  a  definite  sphere  of  duty.  These
may  sometimes  be  virtues,  sometimes  indifferent  states,  and  some¬
times  even  vices  ;  but  the  change  in  the  moral  significance  is

1  In  English  the  word  humility  has  possibly  a  less  conditional  sense,  as  a  state  of
mind  or  an  attitude  towards  life.  From  a  Christian  point  of  view  one  can  never  be
too  humble.  Though  of  course  there  is  ‘the  pride  that  apes  humility’  and  the
condition  of  mind  of  Uriah  Heep  (Ed.).


VIRTUES


95

not  always  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  change  in  the  name
of  the  psychological  quality  in  question.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  even  if  we  did  not  find  in  our  psychical
experience  the  three  fundamental  moral  feelings  of  shame,  pity,
and  reverence,  it  would  be  necessary  on  logical  grounds  alone  to
divide  the  totality  of  moral  relations  into  three  parts,  or  to
accept  three  fundamental  types  of  virtue,  expressing  man’s  relation
to  what  is  lower  than  himself,  to  what  is  like  him,  and  to  what  is
above  him.


Ill

If  in  addition  to  the  foundations  of  morality  recognised  by  us
— shame,  pity,  and  reverence  for  the  higher — we  go  over  all
the  other  qualities  which  have,  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  been
considered  as  virtues,  not  a  single  one  of  them  will  be  found  to
deserve  that  name  of  itself.  Each  of  these  various  qualities  can
only  be  regarded  as  a  virtue  when  it  accords  with  the  objective
norms  of  right,  expressed  in  the  three  fundamental  moral  data
indicated  above.  Thus  abstinence  or  temperance  has  the  dignity
of  virtue  only  when  it  refers  to  shameful  states  or  actions.  Virtue
does  not  require  that  we  should  be  abstinent  or  temperate  in
general  or  in  everything,  but  only  that  we  should  abstain  from
that  which  is  below  our  human  dignity,  and  from  the  things  in
which  it  would  be  a  shame  to  indulge  ourselves  unchecked.
But  if  a  person  is  moderate  in  seeking  after  truth,  or  abstains
from  goodwill  to  his  neighbours,  no  one  would  consider  or
call  him  virtuous  on  that  account ;  he  would,  on  the  contrary,
be  condemned  as  lacking  in  generous  impulses.  It  follows  from
this  that  temperance  is  not  in  itself  or  essentially  a  virtue,
but  becomes  or  does  not  become  one  according  to  its  right  or
wrong  application  to  objects.  In  the  same  way,  courage  or
fortitude  is  only  a  virtue  in  so  far  as  it  expresses  the  right
relation  of  the  rational  human  being  to  his  lower  material
nature,  the  relation,  namely,  of  mastery  and  power,  the
supremacy  of  the  spirit  over  the  animal  instinct  of  self-
preservation.1  Praiseworthy  courage  is  shown  by  the  man  who
does  not  tremble  at  accidental  misfortunes,  who  keeps  his  self-


1  Concerning  this  virtue,  see  above,  Chap.  I.  p.  36.


96  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

control  in  the  midst  of  external  dangers,  and  bravely  risks  his  life
and  material  goods  for  the  sake  of  things  that  are  higher  and
more  worthy.  But  the  bravest  unruliness,  the  most  daring
aggressiveness,  and  the  most  fearless  blaspheming  are  not  praised
as  virtues  ;  nor  is  the  horror  of  sin  or  the  fear  of  God  reckoned
as  shameful  cowardice.  In  this  case  then,  again,  the  quality  of
being  virtuous  or  vicious  depends  upon  a  certain  relation  to  the
object  and  not  on  the  psychological  nature  of  the  emotional  and
volitional  states.

The  third  of  the  so-called  cardinal  virtues,1  wisdom ,  i.e.  the
knowledge  of  the  best  ways  and  means  for  attaining  the  purpose
before  us,  and  the  capacity  to  apply  these  means  aright,  owes  its
significance  as  a  virtue  not  to  this  formal  capacity  for  the  most
expedient  action  as  such,  but  necessarily  depends  upon  the  moral
worth  of  the  purpose  itself.  Wisdom  as  a  virtue  is  the  faculty  of
attaining  the  best  purposes  in  the  best  possible  way,  or  the  know¬
ledge  of  applying  in  the  most  expedient  way  one’s  intellectual
forces  to  objects  of  the  greatest  worth.  There  may  be  wisdom
apart  from  this  condition,  but  such  wisdom  would  not  be  a  virtue.
The  Biblical  ‘serpent’  had  certainly  justified  its  reputation  as  the
wisest  of  earthly  creatures  by  the  understanding  he  showed  of
human  nature,  and  the  skill  with  which  he  used  this  understand¬
ing  for  the  attainment  of  his  purpose.  Since  however  the  purpose
was  an  evil  one,  the  serpent’s  admirable  wisdom  was  not  recog¬
nised  as  a  virtue,  but  was  cursed  as  the  source  of  evil  ;  and  the
wisest  creature  has  remained  the  symbol  of  an  immoral  creeping
mind,  absorbed  in  what  is  low  and  unworthy.  Even  in  everyday
life  we  do  not  recognise  as  virtue  that  worldly  wisdom  which
goes  no  further  than  understanding  human  weaknesses  and  arrang¬
ing  its  own  affairs  in  accordance  with  selfish  ends.

The  conception  of  justice  (the  fourth  cardinal  virtue)  has  four
different  meanings.  In  the  widest  sense  ‘just’  is  synonymous
with  due,  correct,  normal,  or  generally  right — not  only  in  the
moral  sphere  (with  regard  to  will  and  action)  but  also  in  the  in¬
tellectual  (with  regard  to  knowledge  and  thinking)  ;  for  instance,

1  From  the  early  days  of  the  scholastics  the  name  of  cardinal  or  philosophic  virtues
(in  contradistinction  to  the  three  theological  virtues  of  faith,  hope,  and  charity)  has  been
reserved  to  the  four  virtues  which  Plato  defined  in  the  Republic,  namely,  temperance,
courage,  wisdom,  and  justice.  I  take  the  names  of  these  four  virtues  in  their  general
sense,  independently  of  the  meaning  they  may  bear  in  Plato’s  philosophy.


VIRTUES


97


*  you  reason  justly  ’  or  ‘  cette  solution  (d'un  probleme  mathSmatique  ou
metaphysique )  est  juste'  Taken  in  this  sense  the  conception  of
justice,  approaching  that  of  truth,  is  wider  than  the  conception  of
virtue  and  belongs  to  the  theoretical  rather  than  to  the  moral
philosophy.  In  the  second,  more  definite  sense,  justice  ( aequitas )
corresponds  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  altruism,  which
requires  that  we  should  recognise  everybody’s  equal  right  to  life
and  well-being  which  each  recognises  for  himself.  In  this
sense  justice  is  not  special  virtue,  but  merely  a  logical  objective
expression  of  the  moral  principle,  which  finds  its  subjective
psychological  expression  in  the  fundamental  feeling  of  pity  (com¬
passion  or  sympathy).  The  idea  of  justice  is  used  in  the  third
sense  when  a  distinction  is  made  between  degrees  of  altruism  (or
of  moral  relation  to  our  fellow-creatures)  and  when  the  first,
negative  stage  (‘not  to  injure  anyone’)  is  described  as  justice
proper  ( justitia\  while  the  second,  positive  stage  (‘to  help  every
one’)  is  designated  as  charity  ( caritas ,  charite).  As  already
pointed  out  (in  Chapter  III.)  this  distinction  is  purely  relative,
and  is  certainly  insufficient  for  making  justice  into  a  special
virtue.  No  one  would  call  just  a  man  who  decidedly  refused  to
help  any  one  or  to  alleviate  anybody’s  suffering,  even  though  he
did  not  injure  his  neighbours  by  direct  acts  of  violence.  The
moral  motive  both  for  abstaining  from  inflicting  injury  and  for
rendering  help,  is  one  and  the  same — namely,  a  recognition  of
the  right  of  others  to  live  and  to  enjoy  life.  No  moral  motive
could  be  found  to  make  any  one  halt  half-way  and  be  content  with
the  negative  side  of  the  moral  demand.  It  is  clear,  then,  that
such  pause  or  such  limitation  cannot  possibly  correspond  to  any
special  virtue,  and  merely  expresses  a  lesser  degree  of  the  general
altruistic  virtue — the  sympathetic  feeling.  And  there  is  no
universally  binding  or  constant  measure  for  the  lesser  and  the
greater,  so  that  each  case  must  be  judged  upon  its  own  merits.
When  moral  consciousness  in  the  community  reaches  a  certain
level  of  development,  the  refusal  to  help  even  a  stranger  or  an
enemy  is  condemned  by  the  conscience  as  a  direct  wrong.
This  is  perfectly  logical,  for  if,  speaking  generally,  I  ought  to  help
my  neighbour,  I  wrong  him  by  not  helping  him.  Even  on  the
lower  stages  of  moral  consciousness  a  refusal  to  help  is,  within
certain  limits,  regarded  as  a  wrong  and  a  crime — for  instance

H


98  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

within  the  limits  of  the  family,  the  tribe,  the  army.  Among
barbarous  people  everything  is  permissible  so  far  as  enemies  are
concerned,  so  that  the  idea  of  wrong  does  not  even  apply  with
respect  to  them;  but  a  peaceful  traveller  or  guest  has  a  right  to
the  most  active  help  and  generous  gifts.  If,  however,  justice
demands  charity  and  mercy  (among  the  barbarians  in  relation  to
some  men  only,  and  with  the  progress  of  morality,  in  relation  to
all)  it  clearly  cannot  be  a  virtue  by  itself,  distinct  from  charity.

It  is  simply  an  expression  of  the  general  moral  principle  of
altruism  which  has  different  degrees  and  forms  of  application,  but
always  contains  an  idea  of  justice.

Finally,  there  is  a  fourth  sense  in  which  the  term  may  be  used.
On  the  supposition  that  the  objective  expression  of  what  is  right  is
to  be  found  in  laws  (the  laws  of  the  state  or  of  the  Church),  it
may  be  maintained  that  an  unswerving  obedience  to  laws  is  an
absolute  moral  duty,  and  that  a  corresponding  disposition  to  be
strictly  law-abiding  is  a  virtue  identical  with  that  of  justice.
This  view  is  only  valid  within  the  limits  of  the  supposition  on
which  it  is  based— that  is,  it  is  wholly  applicable  to  laws  that
proceed  from  the  Divine  perfection,  and  therefore  express  the
supreme  truth,  but  is  applicable  to  other  laws  only  on  condition
that  they  agree  with  that  truth  ;  for  one  ought  to  obey  God  more
than  men.  Justice  in  this  sense,  then — that  is,  the  striving  to  be
law-abiding — is  not  in  itself  a  virtue  ;  it  may  or  may  not  be  that,
according  to  the  nature  and  the  origin  of  the  laws  that  claim
obedience.  For  the  source  of  human  laws  is  a  turbid  source.
The  limpid  stream  of  moral  truth  is  hardly  visible  in  it  under  the
layer  of  other,  purely  historical  elements,  which  express  merely  the
actual  correlation  of  forces  and  interests  at  this  or  that  moment  of
time.  Consequently  justice  as  a  virtue  by  no  means  always  coin¬
cides  with  legality  or  judicial  right,  and  is  sometimes  directly
opposed  to  it,  as  the  jurists  themselves  admit :  summum  jus —
summa  injuria.  But  while  fully  admitting  the  difference  and  the
possible  conflict  between  the  inner  truth  and  the  law,  many
people  think  that  such  conflicts  should  always  be  settled  in  favour
of  legality.  They  maintain,  that  is,  that  justice  requires  us  in  all
cases  to  obey  the  law,  even  if  the  law  be  unjust.  In  support  of
their  view  they  quote  the  authority  and  the  example  of  a  righteous
man  of  antiquity,  Socrates,  who  thought  it  wrong  to  run  away


VIRTUES


99


from  the  lawful,  though  unjust,  sentence  of  the  Athenian  judges
against  him.  But  in  truth  this  famous  example  teaches  something
very  different.

So  far  as  we  know  from  Xenophon  and  Plato,  Socrates  was
led  to  his  decision  by  two  different  motives.  In  the  first  place,  he
thought  that  to  save  by  flight  the  small  remainder  of  life  to  which
he,  an  old  man  of  seventy,  could  look  forward,  would  be  shameful
and  cowardly,  especially  for  him,  who  believed  in  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  taught  that  true  wisdom  was  continual  dying  (to
the  material  world).  Secondly,  Socrates  thought  that  a  citizen
ought  to  sacrifice  his  personal  welfare  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  even
if  they  were  unjust,  for  the  sake  of  filial  piety.  Socrates,  then,  was
guided  by  the  moral  motives  of  asceticism  and  piety,  and  certainly
not  by  the  conception  of  the  absolute  value  of  legality,  which  he
never  admitted.  Besides,  in  the  case  of  Socrates,  there  was  no
conflict  between  two  duties,  but  only  a  conflict  between  a
personal  right  and  a  civic  duty,  and  it  may  be  accepted  as  a  matter
of  general  principle  that  right  must  give  way  to  duty.  No  one
is  bound  to  defend  his  own  material  life  :  it  is  merely  his  right,
which  it  is  always  permissible,  and  sometimes  laudable,  to  sacrifice.
It  is  a  different  matter  when  the  civic  duty  of  obedience  to  laws
conflicts  not  with  a  personal  right,  but  with  a  moral  duty,  as  in
the  famous  classical  case  of  Antigone.  She  had  to  choose  between
the  moral  and  religious  duty  of  giving  honourable  burial  to  her
brother,  and  the  civic  duty  of  obeying  the  prohibition  to  do  so — a
prohibition  impious  and  inhuman,  though  legally  just,  for  it  pro¬
ceeded  from  the  lawful  ruler  of  her  native  town.  Here  comes
into  force  the  rule  that  one  ought  to  obey  God  more  than  men,
and  it  is  made  abundantly  clear  that  justice  in  the  sense  of  legality,
or  of  external  conformity  of  actions  to  established  laws,  is  not  in
itself  a  virtue,  but  may  or  may  not  be  such  according  to  circum¬
stances.  Therefore  the  heroism  of  Socrates,  who  submitted  to  an
unjust  law,  and  the  heroism  of  Antigone,  who  violated  such  a  law,
are  equally  laudable — and  not  only  because  in  both  cases  there  was
sacrifice  of  life,  but  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  Socrates  re¬
nounced  his  own  material  right  for  the  sake  of  the  higher  ideas  of
human  dignity  and  patriotic  duty.  Antigone  defended  the  right
of  another,  and  thereby  fulfilled  her  duty — for  the  burial  of  her
brother  was  his  right  and  her  duty,  while  it  was  in  no  sense


100  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Socrates’  duty  to  escape  from  prison.  Speaking  generally,  pietas
erga  patriam ,  like  pietas  erga  parentes ,  can  only  compel  us  to
sacrifice  our  own  right,  but  certainly  not  the  right  ,pf  others.
Suppose,  for  instance,  that  filial  piety  developed  to  the  point  of
heroism  induced  a  man  not  to  resist  his  father  who  intends  to  kill
him.  The  moral  worth  of  such  heroism  may  be  disputed,  but  it
would  certainly  never  even  occur  to  any  one  to  justify  or  to  call
heroic  that  same  man  if,  out  of  obedience  to  his  father,  he  thought
it  his  duty  to  kill  his  own  brother  or  sister.  The  same  is  appli¬
cable  to  unjust  and  inhuman  laws,  and  from  this  it  follows  that
justice,  in  the  sense  of  obedience  to  laws  as  such,  according  to  the
rule  ‘ fiat  justitia ,  per  eat  mundus  ’  is  not  in  itself  a  virtue.

IV

The  three  so-called  theological  virtues  recognised  in  the
patristic  and  the  scholastic  ethics — faith,  hope,  and  charity  1 — also
have  no  unconditional  moral  worth  in  themselves,  but  are
dependent  upon  other  circumstances.  Even  for  theologians,  not
every  kind  of  faith  is  a  virtue.  The  character  of  virtue  does  not
attach  to  faith  which  has  for  its  object  something  non-existent,  or
unworthy,  or  which  unworthily  regards  that  which  is  worthy.
Thus,  in  the  first  case,  if  a  person  firmly  believes  in  the  philo¬
sopher’s  stone,  i.e.  a  powder,  liquid,  or  gas  which  transforms  all  metals
to  gold,  such  faith  in  an  object  which  does  not  exist  in  the  nature
of  things,  is  not  regarded  as  a  virtue,  but  as  self-deceit.  In  the
second  case,  if  a  person  not  merely  admits — and  rightly  so — the
existence  of  the  power  of  evil  as  a  fact,  but  makes  that  power  an
object  of  faith  in  the  sense  of  confidence  in  and  devotion  to  it,
forms  a  compact  with  it,  sells  his  soul  to  the  devil,  and  so  on,
such  faith  is  justly  regarded  as  a  terrible  moral  fall,  for  its  object,
though  actual,  is  evil  and  unworthy.  Finally,  in  the  third
case,  the  faith  of  the  devils  themselves,  of  whom  the  apostle  writes
that  they  believe  (in  God)  and  tremble,2  is  not  recognised  as  a
virtue,  for  although  it  refers  to  an  object  that  exists,  and  is  of
absolute  worth,  it  regards  that  object  in  an  unworthy  way  (with
horror  instead  of  joy,  with  repulsion  instead  of  attraction).  Only

1  According  to  the  well-known  text  of  St.  Paul,  in  which,  however,  the  term
‘virtue’  is  not  used.  2  St  james  ,3


VIRTUES


IOI


that  faith  in  the  higher  being  may  be  regarded  as  a  virtue,  which
regards  it  in  a  worthy  manner ,  namely,  with  free  filial  piety.  And
such  faith  entirely  coincides  with  the  religious  feeling  which  we
found  to  be  one  of  the  three  ultimate  foundations  of  morality.

The  second  theological  virtue — hope — comes  really  to  the  same
thing.  There  can  be  no  question  of  virtue  when  some  one  trusts
in  his  own  strength  or  wisdom,  or  indeed  in  God,  if  in  the  sole
expectation  of  material  gain  from  Him.  That  hope  alone  is  a
virtue  which  looks  to  God  as  the  source  of  true  blessings  to  come  ;
and  this  is,  again,  the  same  fundamental  religious  relation,  to  which
is  added  an  idea  of  the  future  and  a  feeling  of  expectation.

Finally,  the  moral  significance  of  the  third  and  greatest  theo¬
logical  virtue — love — entirely  depends  upon  the  given  objective
determinations.  Love  in  itself,  or  love  in  general,  is  not  a  virtue —
if  it  were,  all  beings  would  alike  be  virtuous,  for  they  all  without
exception  love  something  and  live  by  their  love.  But  selfish  love
for  oneself  and  one’s  property,  passionate  love  of  drink  or  of
horse-racing,  is  not  reckoned  as  a  virtue.

‘  II  faut  en  ce  bas  monde  aimer  beaucoup  de  choses ,’  teaches  a  neo¬
pagan  poet.  Such  ‘love’  had  been  expressly  rejected  by  the
apostle  of  love  :

'■Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world!  1

This  is  the  first,  negative  part  of  the  commandment  of  love,
and  it  should  not  be  overlooked  as  it  usually  is.  It  is  simply  the
expression  of  the  fundamental  principle  of  asceticism  :  to  guard
ourselves  from  the  lower  nature  and  to  struggle  against  its
dominion.  For  it  is  clear  from  the  context  that  by  ‘  the  world  ’
which  we  must  not  love,  the  apostle  means  neither  mankind  as  a
whole,  nor  the  totality  of  the  creation  which  proclaims  the  glory
of  God,  but  precisely  the  dark  and  irrational  basis  of  the  material
nature  which  ceases  to  be  passive  and  potential,  as  it  ought  to  be,
and  unlawfully  invades  the  domain  of  the  human  spirit.  Further
on  it  is  directly  said  that  in  the  world  there  is  the  lust  of  the  flesh ,  i.e.
the  desire  of  immoderate  sensuality,  the  lust  of  the  eyes ,  i.e.  greed
or  love  of  money,  and  the  pride  of  life ,  i.e.  vainglory  and  ambition.

Biblical  ethics  adds  to  the  negative  ‘  love  not  the  world  ’  two
positive  commands  :  love  God  with  all  thy  heart ,  and  love  thy
neighbour  as  thyself  These  two  kinds  of  love  are  rightly  dis-

1  i  John  ii.  15.


i02  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

tinguished,  for  the  particular  nature  of  the  object  necessarily  con¬
ditions  the  particular  moral  relation  to  be  adopted  towards  them.
Love  to  our  neighbours  has  its  source  in  pity,  and  love  towards
God  in  reverence.  To  love  one’s  neighbour  as  oneself  really
means  to  feel  for  him  as  one  does  for  oneself.  Whole-hearted
love  of  God  means  entire  devotion  to  Him,  full  surrender  of  one  s
own  will  to  His — i.e.  the  perfection  of  the  filial  or  the  religious
feeling  and  relation.

Thus  the  commandment  of  love  is  not  connected  with  any
particular  virtue,  but  is  the  culmination  of  all  the  fundamental
demands  of  morality  in  the  three  necessary  respects :  in  relation  to
the  lower,  to  the  higher,  and  to  that  which  is  on  a  level  with  us.

V

I  have  shown  that  the  four  ‘  cardinal  ’  as  well  as  the  three
c  theological  ’  virtues  can  be  reduced,  in  one  way  or  another,  to  the
three  ultimate  foundations  of  morality,  indicated  above.  It  can
now  be  left  to  the  goodwill  and  the  intelligence  of  the  reader  to
continue  the  analysis  of  the  other  so-called  virtues.  There  exists
no  generally  recognised  list  of  them,  and,  by  means  of  scholastic
distinctions,  their  number  can  be  increased  indefinitely.  But  for
the  sake  of  completing  what  has  gone  before,  I  should  like  to  say
a  few  words  about  five  virtues  which  present  a  certain  interest
in  one  respect  or  another,  namely,  concerning  magnanimity,
disinterestedness ,  generosity ,  patience ,  and  truthfulness.

We  call  magnanimous  a  man  who  is  ashamed,  or  finds  it
beneath  his  dignity ,  to  insist  on  his  material  rights  to  the  detriment
of  other  people,  or  to  bind  his  will  by  lower  worldly  interests
(such  as  vanity),  which  he  therefore  readily  sacrifices  for  the  sake
of  higher  considerations.  We  also  call  magnanimous  the  man
who  is  undisturbed  by  adversities  and  changes  of  fortune,  because,
again,  he  is  ashamed  of  allowing  his  peace  of  mind  to  be  dependent
upon  material  and  accidental  things.  The  words  italicised  are
sufficient  to  indicate  that  this  virtue  is  simply  a  special  expression
or  form  of  the  first  root  of  morality — viz.  of  the  self-assertion  of  the
human  spirit  against  the  lower,  material  side  of  our  being.  The
essential  thing  here  is  the  feeling  of  human  dignity,  which,  in  the
first  instance,  manifests  itself  in  the  feeling  of  shame.


VIRTUES


103


Disinterestedness  is  the  freedom  of  the  spirit  from  attachment
to  a  certain  kind  of  material  goods,  namely,  to  possessions.  It  is
clearly  a  particular  expression  of  that  same  feeling  of  human
dignity.  In  a  corresponding  manner,  vices  opposed  to  this  viitue
—miserliness  and  cupidity — are  felt  to  be  shameful.

Generosity  in  its  external  manifestations  coincides  with
magnanimity  and  disinterestedness,  but  it  has  a  different  inner
basis,  namely,  an  altruistic  one.  A  virtuously  generous  man
is  one  who  shares  his  property  with  others  out  of  justice  or  bene¬
volence  (for  in  so  far  as  he  does  it  out  of  vanity  or  pride,  he  is  not
virtuous).  But  at  the  same  time  such  a  man  may  be  attached
to  the  property  he  gives  away  to  the  degree  of  miserliness,  and  in
that  case  he  cannot,  in  strictness,  be  called  disinterested.  It  must
only  be  said  that  the  altruistic  virtue  of  generosity  overcomes  in
him  the  vice  of  cupidity.

Patience  (as  a  virtue)  is  only  the  passive  aspect  of  that  quality
of  the  soul  which,  in  its  active  manifestation,  is  called  magna¬
nimity  or  spiritual  fortitude.  The  difference  is  almost  entirely
subjective,  and  no  hard  and  fast  line  can  be  drawn  between  the
two.  A  man  who  calmly  endures  torment  or  misfortune  will
be  called  magnanimous  by  some,  patient  by  others,  courageous
by  the  third,  while  the  fourth  will  see  in  him  an  example  of
a  special  virtue — serenity  (arapagla)  and  so  on.  The  discussion
of  the  comparative  appropriateness  of  these  definitions  can  have
only  a  linguistic  and  not  an  ethical  interest.  On  the  other
hand,  the  identity  of  the  external  expression  may  (as  in  the  case
of  generosity)  conceal  important  differences  in  the  moral  content.
A  man  may  patiently  endure  physical  or  mental  suffering  owing
to  a  low  degree  of  nervous  sensitiveness,  dullness  of  mind  and
an  apathetic  temperament,  and  in  that  case  patience  is  not  a
virtue  at  all.  Or  patience  may  be  due  to  the  inner  force  of  the
spirit,  which  does  not  give  way  to  external  influences — and  then  it
is  an  ascetic  virtue  (reducible  to  our  first  basis  of  morality) ;
or  it  may  arise  from  meekness  and  love  of  one’s  neighbours
( caritas ),  which  does  not  wish  to  pay  back  evil  for  evil  and
injury  for  injury — and  in  that  case  it  is  an  altruistic  virtue  (re¬
ducible  to  the  second  principle — pity,  which  here  extends  even
to  enemies  who  inflict  the  injury).  Finally,  patience  may
spring  from  obedience  to  the  higher  will  upon  which  all  that


i04  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


happens  depends — and  then  it  is  a  religious  virtue  (reducible  to
the  third  principle).

A  particuliar  variety  of  patience  is  the  quality  which  is
designated  in  the  Russian  language  by  the  grammatically  incorrect
term  ‘ terpimost’’ — tolerance  ( passlvum  pro  activo).  It  means  the
admission  of  other  people’s  freedom  even  when  it  seems  to  lead
to  error.  This  attitude  is  in  itself  neither  a  vice  nor  a  virtue,
but  may,  in  different  circumstances,  become  either.  It  depends
on  the  object  to  which  it  refers  (thus  injury  of  the  weak  by  the
strong  must  not  be  tolerated,  and  ‘  tolerance  ’  of  it  is  immoral
and  not  virtuous),  and  still  more,  on  the  inner  motives  from
which  it  arises.  It  may  spring  from  magnanimity  or  from
cowardice,  from  respect  for  the  rights  of  others  and  from  contempt
of  the  good  of  others,  from  profound  faith  in  the  conquering
power  of  the  higher  truth  and  from  indifference  to  that  truth.1

VI

Among  the  derivative  or  secondary  virtues  truthfulness  must  be
recognised  as  the  most  important,  both  owing  to  its  specifically
human  character  (for  in  the  strict  sense  it  is  only  possible  for  a
being  endowed  with  the  power  of  speech2)  and  to  its  significance
for  social  morality.  At  the  same  time  this  virtue  has  been  and
still  is  the  subject  of  much  disagreement  between  different  schools
of  moralists.

The  word  is  the  instrument  of  reason  for  expressing  that
which  is,  that  which  may  be,  and  that  which  ought  to  be,  i.e.
for  expressing  the  actual,  the  formal,  and  the  ideal  truth.  The
possession  of  such  an  instrument  is  part  of  the  higher  nature  of
man,  and  therefore  when  he  misuses  it,  giving  expression  to  un¬
truth  for  the  sake  of  lower  material  ends,  he  does  something
contrary  to  human  dignity,  something  shameful.  At  the  same
time  the  word  is  the  expression  of  human  solidarity,  the  most
important  means  of  communication  between  men.  But  this
applies  only  to  true  words.  Therefore  when  an  individual  person
uses  speech  to  express  untruth  for  his  own  selfish  ends  (not  only

1  A  more  detailed  discussion  of  it  will  be  found  at  the  beginning  of  my  article
Spor  о  spra-vedlivosti  (The  Dispute  about  Justice).

2  Animals  may  be  naYve  or  cunning,  but  only  man  can  be  truthful  or  deceitful.


VIRTUES


105


individually  selfish,  but  collectively  selfish  also,  e.g.  in  the  interests
of  his  family,  his  class,  his  party,  etc.)  he  violates  the  rights  of
others  and  injures  the  community.  A  lie  is  thus  both  shameful
for  the  liar,  and  damaging  and  insulting  to  the  deceived.  The
demand  for  truthfulness  has  then  a  twofold  moral  foundation.
It  is  based,  first,  on  the  human  dignity  of  the  subject  himself,
and  secondly  upon  justice ,  i.e.  upon  a  recognition  of  the  right  of
others  not  to  be  deceived  by  me,  in  as  much  as  I  myself  cannot
wish  to  be  deceived  by  them.

All  this  is  in  direct  conformity  with  the  demands  of  reason
and  contains  nothing  dubious.  But  by  abstracting  the  demand  for
truthfulness  from  its  moral  basis,  and  turning  it  into  a  special
virtue  possessed  of  absolute  worth  in  itself,  the  scholastic  philo¬
sophy  has  created  difficulties  and  contradictions  which  do  not
follow  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  If  by  a  lie  is  meant  the
contrary  of  truth  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  i.e.  not  only  of  the
real  and  formal,  but  also  and  chiefly  of  the  ideal  or  purely  moral
truth  (of  that  which  ought  to  be),  it  would  be  perfectly  correct
and  indisputable  to  ascribe  absolute  significance  to  the  rule  cdo
not  lie,’  and  to  admit  of  no  exception  to  it  under  any  circum¬
stances  ;  for,  clearly,  truth  ceases  to  be  truth  if  there  may  be  a
single  case  in  which  it  is  permissible  to  depart  from  it.  There
could  be  no  question  of  it,  at  any  rate  not  between  people  who
understand  that  A  =  A  and  that  2x2  =  4.  But  the  trouble  is
that  the  philosophers  who  particularly  insist  on  the  rule  ‘  do  not
lie,’  as  allowing  of  no  exception,  are  themselves  guilty  of  a  falsity
by  arbitrarily  limiting  the  meaning  of  truth  (in  each  given  case)
to  the  real,  or  more  exactly,  to  the  matter  of  fact  aspect  of  it,  taken
separately.  Adopting  this  point  of  view,  they  come  to  the  following
absurd  dilemma  (I  give  the  usual  instance  as  the  clearest  and
simplest).  When  a  person,  having  no  other  means  at  his  com¬
mand  for  frustrating  a  would-be  murderer  in  pursuit  of  his
innocent  victim,  hides  the  latter  in  his  house,  and  to  the  pursuer’s
question  whether  that  person  is  there,  answers  in  the  negative,
or,  for  greater  plausibility,  ‘puts  him  off  the  track’  by  mention¬
ing  quite  a  different  place, — in  lying  thus  he  acts  either  in  con¬
formity  with  the  moral  law  or  in  opposition  to  it.  If  the  first,  it
is  permissible  to  violate  the  moral  command  ‘  do  not  lie  ’  ;  morality
is  thus  deprived  of  its  absolute  value,  and  the  way  is  open  to  justify


I Об  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

every  kind  of  evil.  If  the  second — if  the  man  has  sinned  by
telling  a  lie — it  appears  that  the  moral  duty  of  truthfulness  actu¬
ally  compelled  him  to  become  a  real  accomplice  of  the  murderer
in  his  crime — which  is  equally  opposed  to  reason  and  to  the  moral
sense.  There  can  be  no  middle  course,  for  it  is  obvious  that  a
refusal  to  answer  or  an  evasive  answer  would  simply  confirm  the
pursuer’s  suspicion  and  would  finally  give  away  the  victim.

It  will  be  remembered  that  great  moralists  like  Nant  and
Fichte,  who  insist  on  the  absolute  and  formal  character  of  the  moral
law,  maintain  that  even  in  such  circumstances  a  lie  would  be
unjustifiable,  and  that,  therefore,  the  person  questioned  ought  to
fulfil  the  duty  of  truthfulness  without  thinking  of  the  con¬
sequences,  for  which  (it  is  urged)  he  is  not  responsible.  Other
moralists,  who  reduce  all  morality  to  the  feeling  of  pity  or  the
principle  of  altruism,  believe  that  lying  is  permissible  and  even
obligatory  when  it  can  save  the  life  or  promote  the  welfare  of
others.  This  assertion,  however,  is  too  wide  and  indefinite  and
easily  leads  to  all  kinds  of  abuse.

How  then  are  we  to  decide  the  question  whether  that  un¬
fortunate  man  ought  to  have  told  a  lie  or  not  ?  When  both
horns  of  a  dilemma  equally  lead  to  an  absurdity,  there  must  be
something  wrong  in  the  formulation  of  the  dilemma  itself.
In  the  present  case  the  ‘something  wrong’  is  to  be  found  in  the
ambiguity  of  the  words  ‘lie,’  ‘false,’  and  ‘lying,’  which  are
here  taken  to  have  one  meaning  only,  or  to  combine  both  meanings
in  one,  which  is  not  really  the  case.  Thus  the  main  term  is
falsely  understood  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  argument,  and  this
can  lead  to  nothing  but  false  conclusions.

I  propose  to  consider  it  in  detail,  and  let  not  the  reader  grudge
a  certain  pedanticism  of  this  examination.  The  question  itself
has  arisen  solely  owing  to  the  scholastic  pedantry  of  the  abstract
moralists.

According  to  the  formal  definition  of  it  a  lie  is  a  contradiction
between  somebody’s  assertion 1  concerning  a  given  fact  and  the
actual  existence,  or  manner  of  existence,  of  that  fact.  But  this
formal  conception  of  a  lie  has  no  direct  bearing  on  morality.  An

1  The  general  definition  must  include  both  affirmations  and  denials,  and  I  therefore
use  the  term  assertion  to  cover  both.  The  words  ‘judgment  ’  and  ‘  proposition  ’  involve
a  shade  of  meaning  unsuitable  in  the  present  case.


VIRTUES


107


assertion  that  contradicts  reality  may  sometimes  be  simply  mistaken ,
and  in  that  case  its  actual  falsity  will  be  limited  to  the  objective
(or  more  exactly,  to  the  phenomenal)  sphere,  without  in  the
least  touching  upon  the  moral  aspect  of  the  subject ;  that  is,  it
will  contain  no  lie  in  the  moral  sense  at  all :  a  mistake  is  not  a
falsehood.  Take  an  extreme  case.  It  is  no  sin  against  truthful¬
ness  to  talk  nonsense  through  absent-mindedness,  or  through
ignorance  of  language,  like  the  German  in  the  well-known
anecdote  who  mixed  up  English  and  German  words  and  affirmed
that  he  c  became  a  cup  of  tea.’  But  apart  from  mistakes  of  speech,
the  same  thing  must  be  said  of  the  mistakes  of  thought  or  errors.
Many  people  have  affirmed,  and  are  still  affirming,  both  in  speech
and  in  writing,  things  as  false  (in  the  objective  sense)  as  the
assertion  that  a  man  became  a  cup  of  tea,  but  do  so  consciously,
intending  to  say  precisely  what  they  do  say.  If,  however,  they
sincerely  take  falsity  for  truth,  no  one  will  call  them  liars  or  see
anything  immoral  in  their  error.  Thus  neither  the  contradiction
between  speech  and  reality,  nor  the  contradiction  between
thought  and  reality  is  a  lie  in  the  moral  sense.  Is  it  to  be
found  in  the  contradiction  between  the  will  and  reality  as
such,  i.e.  in  the  simple  intention  to  lie  ?  But  there  never
is  such  simple  intention.  People  —  at  any  rate  those  who
can  be  held  morally  responsible — lie  for  the  sake  of  something,
with  some  object.  Some  lie  to  satisfy  their  vanity,  to  make  a
show,  to  draw  attention  to  themselves,  to  be  noted  ;  others  for
the  sake  of  material  gain,  in  order  to  deceive  some  one  with  profit
to  themselves.  Both  these  kinds  of  lie,  of  which  the  first  is  called
bragging,  and  the  second  cheating,  fall  within  the  moral  sphere,
and  are  to  be  condemned  as  shameful  to  the  person  who  tells
them,  and  as  insulting  and  injurious  to  others.  But  in  addition
to  the  vainglorious  lie  or  bragging,  and  the  lie  for  the  sake  of  gain
or  cheating,  there  exists  a  more  subtle  kind  of  lie,  which  has  no
immediately  low  purpose,  but  must  nevertheless  be  condemned  as
insulting  to  one’s  neighbours.  I  mean  the  lie  out  of  contempt
for  humanity,  beginning  with  the  usual  c  I  am  not  at  home  ’  and
down  to  the  most  complex  political,  religious,  and  literary
humbug.  There  is  nothing  shameful  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the
word  in  this  kind  of  lie  (unless  of  course  it  is  made  for  purposes
of  gain),  but  it  is  immoral  from  the  altruistic  point  of  view,  as


io8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

violating  the  rights  of  the  deceived.  The  person  who  hoaxes
others  would  obviously  dislike  to  be  deceived  himself,  and  would
regard  an  attempt  to  hoax  him  as  a  violation  of  his  human  rights.
Consequently  he  ought  to  respect  the  same  right  in  other  people.

The  case  of  a  man  who  deceives  the  evil-doer  for  the  sake  of
preventing  murder  obviously  does  not  fall  within  the  first  two
kinds  of  immoral  lie,  i.e.  it  is  neither  bragging  nor  cheating  ;
could  it  possibly  be  classed  with  the  last  kind,  that  is,  with
hoaxing,  which  is  immoral  in  the  sense.’  of  being  insulting  to
another  person  ?  Is  it  not  a  case  of  despising  humanity  in  the
person  of  the  would-be  murderer,  who  is,  after  all,  a  human
being,  and  must  not  be  deprived  of  any  of  his  human  rights  ?
But  the  right  of  the  criminal  to  have  me  for  his  accomplice  in
the  perpetration  of  the  murder  can  certainly  not  be  reckoned
among  his  human  rights;  and  it  is. precisely  the  demand  for  an
accomplice  and  it  alone  that  is  contained  in  his  question  as  to  the
whereabouts  of  his  victim.  Is  it  permissible  for  a  moralist  to
have  recourse  to  what  he  knows  to  be  fiction,  especially  when
it  is  a  question  of  a  man’s  life  ?  For  it  is  sheer  fiction  to  suppose
that  in  asking  his  question  the  would-be  murderer  is  thinking
about  the  truth,  wants  to  know  the  truth,  and  is,  therefore,  like
any  other  human  being,  entitled  to  have  a  correct  answer  from
those  who  know  it.  In  reality  there  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  The
man’s  question  does  not  exist  as  a  separate  and  independent  fact
expressing  his  interest  as  to  the  place  where  his  victim  really  is  ;
the  question  is  only  an  inseparable  moment  in  a  whole  series  of
actions  which,  in  their  totality,  form  an  attempt  at  murder.  An
affirmative  answer  would  not  be  a  fulfilment  of  the  universal  duty
to  speak  the  truth  at  all ;  it  would  simply  be  criminal  connivance
which  would  convert  the  attempt  into  actual  murder.

If  we  are  to  talk  of  truthfulness,  truthfulness  demands,  in  the
first  place,  that  we  should  take  a  case  as  it  really  is ,  in  its  actual
completeness  and  its  proper  inner  significance.  Now  the  words
and  actions  of  the  would-be  murderer  in  the  instance  we  are
considering  are  held  together  by,  and  derive  their  actual  meaning
solely  from,  his  intention  to  kill  his  victim  ;  therefore  it  is  only  in
connection  with  this  intention  that  one  can  truly  judge  of  his
words  and  actions,  and  of  the  relation  to  them  on  the  part  of
another  person.  Since  we  know  the  criminal  intention,  we


VIRTUES


109


have  neither  a  theoretical  ground  nor  a  moral  right  to  separate  the
man’s  question  (and  consequently  our  answer  to  it)  from  the
object  to  which  it  actually  refers.  From  this  point  of  view,  which
is  the  only  true  one ,  the  man’s  question  means  nothing  but  c  help
me  to  accomplish  the  murder .’  A  correct  answer  to  it,  overlooking
the  real  meaning  of  the  question,  and,  contrary  to  obvious  fact,
taking  it  to  have  some  relation  to  truth — would  be  false  from  the
theoretical  point  of  view,  and  from  the  practical  would  simply
mean  compliance  with  the  criminal  request.  The  only  possible
means  of  refusing  that  request  would  be  to  put  the  would-be
murderer  off  the  track  :  such  refusal  is  morally  binding  both  in
relation  to  the  victim  whose  life  it  saves,  and  in  relation  to
the  criminal  whom  it  gives  time  to  think  and  to  give  up
his  criminal  intention.  Still  less  can  there  be  question  here  of
the  violation  of  the  man’s  right ;  it  would  be  too  crude  an  error
to  confuse  a  request  for  criminal  assistance  with  the  right  of
learning  the  truth  from  the  person  who  knows  it.  It  would  be
equally  mistaken  to  insist  that  the  man  who,  for  motives  of
moral  duty,  prevented  the  murder  by  the  only  possible  means,
had  nevertheless  told  a  lie  and  therefore  acted  badly.  This  would
mean  a  confusion  between  the  two  senses  of  the  word  ‘  lie  ’—
the  formal  and  the  moral — the  essential  difference  between  which
has  been  indicated  above.

The  upholders  of  the  pseudo-moral  rigorism  may  still  seek
refuge  on  religious  ground.  Although  no  human  right  is
violated  by  putting  the  murderer  on  the  false  track,  perhaps  the
divine  right  is  violated  by  it.  If  there  existed  a  commandment
from  above  ‘do  not  lie,’  we  should  be  bound  to  obey  it  un¬
conditionally,  leaving  the  consequences  to  God.  But  the  fact  is
that  there  exists  in  the  word  of  God  no  abstract  commandment 1
forbidding  lying  in  general  or  lying  in  the  formal  sense,  while
the  command  to  sacrifice  our  very  souls — and  not  merely  the
formal  correctness  of  our  words — for  our  neighbours  undoubtedly
exists  and  must  be  fulfilled.  It  might  however  be  thought  that
from  the  mystical  point  of  view  a  means  might  be  found  to
carry  out  the  chief  commandment  with  regard  to  love,  and  yet

1  The  commandment  ‘  do  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour,’  i.e.  do  not
slander,  has  no  bearing  on  this  question,  for  it  forbids  not  lying  in  general  but  only  one
definite  kind  of  lie,  which  is  always  immoral.


no  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

to  avoid  the  formal  lie.  Thus  we  could,  after  surrendering  the
victim  to  his  murderer,  turn  to  God  with  a  prayer  to  prevent
the  murder  by  some  miracle.  There  certainly  are  cases  on
record  of  prayers  producing  the  desired  effect  against  all  human
probability.  This  however  only  happened  in  hopeless  extremity,
when  there  were  no  natural  means  left.  But  to  require  from
God  a  miracle  when  you  can  yourself,  by  a  simple  and  harmless
means,  prevent  the  disaster,  would  be  extremely  impious.  It
would  be  a  different  matter  if  the  last  human  means  available
were  immoral ;  but  to  fall  back  upon  the  immorality  of  the
formal  lie  as  such  would  mean  to  beg  precisely  that  which  is  in
question  and  which  cannot  be  logically  proved,  for  it  is  based  on
the  confusion  between  two  utterly  distinct  ideas  of  falsity  and
falsehood.  In  the  instance  we  are  considering,  the  answer  to  the
murderer’s  question  is  undoubtedly  false ,  but  it  is  not  to  be  con¬
demned  as  a  lie.  The  formal  falsity  of  a  person’s  words  has  as
such  no  relation  to  morality,  and  cannot  be  condemned  from  the
moral  point  of  view.  Falsehood ,  on  the  other  hand,  is  subject  to
such  condemnation  as  the  expression  of  an  intention  which  is  in
some  way  immoral ,  and  it  is  in  this  alone  that  it  differs  from
simple  falsity.  But  in  the  present  case  it  is  impossible  to  find
any  such  immoral  intention,  and  consequently  any  falsehood.

Put  briefly,  our  long  argument  may  be  expressed  as  follows.
An  assertion  which  is  formally  false,  that  is,  which  contradicts
the  fact  to  which  it  refers,  is  not  always  a  lie  in  the  moral  sense.
It  becomes  such  only  when  it  proceeds  from  the  evil  will  which
intentionally  misuses  words  for  its  own  ends  ;  and  the  evil
character  of  the  will  consists  not  in  its  contradicting  any  fact
but  in  its  contradicting  that  which  ought  to  be.  Now  that  which
ought  to  be  is  of  necessity  determined  in  three  ways — in  relation,
namely,  to  that  which  is  below  us,  on  a  level  with  us,  and  above  us
—and  amounts  to  three  demands  :  to  submit  the  lower  nature  to
the  spirit,  to  respect  the  rights  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  to  be
wholly  devoted  to  the  higher  principle  of  the  world.  An  expres¬
sion  of  our  will  can  be  bad  or  immoral  only  if  it  violates  one  of
these  three  duties,  that  is,  when  the  will  affirms  or  sanctions
something  shameful,  or  injurious,  or  impious.  But  the  will  of  the
man  who  puts  the  would-be  murderer  off  his  victim’s  track  does
not  violate  any  of  the  three  duties — there  is  nothing  either


VIRTUES


in


shameful  or  injurious  or  impious  about  his  will.  Thus  it  is  not  a
case  of  a  lie  in  the  moral  sense  at  all,  or  of  a  breach  of  any  com¬
mandment,  and,  in  allowing  such  a  means  of  preventing  evil,  we
do  not  allow  any  exceptions  to  the  moral  law.  For  reasons
indicated,  the  given  case  cannot  be  said  to  fall  under  the  moral
rule  within  which  it  is  sought,  in  contradiction  to  fact,  to
include  it.

One  of  the  disputants  maintains  :  since  this  is  a  lie,  this
bad  means  ought  not  to  have  been  used  even  to  save  another
person’s  life.  The  other  side  answers  :  although  it  is  a  lie,  it  is
permissible  to  use  this  bad  means  to  save  the  life  of  another,  for
the  duty  to  save  another  person’s  life  is  more  important  than  the
duty  to  speak  the  truth.  Both  these  false  assertions  are  cancelled
by  the  third,  true  one.  Since  this  is  not  a  lie  (in  the  moral  sense),
the  recourse  to  this  innocent  means,  necessary  for  the  prevention
of  murder,  is  morally  binding  on  the  person.1

VII

To  make  truthfulness  into  a  separate  formal  virtue  involves,
then,  an  inner  contradiction  and  is  contrary  to  reason.  Truth¬
fulness,  like  all  other  ‘virtues,’  does  not  contain  its  moral
quality  in  itself,  but  derives  it  from  its  conformity  to  the
fundamental  norms  of  morality.  A  pseudo-truthfulness  divorced
from  them  may  be  a  source  of  falsehood,  that  is,  of  false  valuations.
It  may  stop  at  the  request  that  our  words  should  merely  be  an
exact  reflection  of  the  external  reality  of  isolated  facts,  and  thus
lead  to  obvious  absurdities.  From  this  point  of  view  a  priest  who
repeated  exactly  what  he  was  told  at  a  confession  would  satisfy  the
demands  of  truthfulness.  Real  truthfulness,  however,  requires
that  our  words  should  correspond  to  the  inner  truth  or  meaning
of  a  given  situation,  to  which  our  will  applies  the  moral  norms.

The  analysis  of  the  so-called  virtues  shows  that  they  have

1  Although  in  this  question  Kant  sides  with  the  rigorists,  in  doing  so  he  is  really
inconsistent  with  his  own  principle  that  an  action,  to  be  moral,  must  be  capable  of
being  made  into  a  universal  rule.  It  is  clear  that  in  putting  the  would-be  murderer  off
the  place  where  his  victim  is,  I  can,  in  reason  and  conscience,  affirm  my  way  of  action
as  a  universal  rule  :  every  one  ought  always  thus  to  conceal  the  victim  from  the  intending
murderer ;  and  if  I  put  myself  into  the  latter’s  place,  I  should  wish  that  I  might,  in  the
same  way,  be  prevented  from  committing  the  murder.


1 12  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

moral  significance  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  determined  by  the
three  norms  of  morality.  And  although  these  norms  are  psycho¬
logically  based  upon  the  corresponding  primitive  feelings  of  shame,
pity,  and  reverence,  they  do  not  entirely  rest  upon  this  empirical
basis,  but  are  logically  developed  out  of  the  idea  of  right  or  truth
(in  the  wide  sense).  Truth  demands  that  we  should  regard  our
lower  nature  as  lower,  that  is,  should  subordinate  it  to  rational  ends  ;
if,  on  the  contrary,  we  surrender  to  it,  we  recognise  it  not  for
what  it  really  is,  but  for  something  higher — and  thus  pervert  the
true  order  of  things,  violate  the  truth,  regard  that  lower  sphere  in
a  wrong  or  immoral  way.  Likewise,  truth  demands  that  we
should  regard  our  fellow-creatures  as  such,  should  admit  their
rights  as  equal  to  ours,  should  put  ourselves  into  their  place  ;  but
if,  whilst  recognising  ourselves  as  individuals  possessed  of  full
rights,  we  regard  others  as  empty  masks,  we  obviously  depart  from
truth,  and  our  relation  to  them  is  wrong.  Finally,  if  we  are
conscious  of  a  higher  universal  principle  above  us,  truth  demands
that  we  should  regard  it  as  higher,  that  is,  with  religious  devotion.

This  moral  conception  of  right  or  truth  could  certainly  not
have  arisen  were  not  the  feelings  of  shame,  pity,  and  reverence,
which  immediately  determine  man’s  rightful  attitude  to  the  three
fundamental  conditions  of  his  life,  present  in  his  nature  from  the
first.  But  once  reason  has  deduced  from  these  natural  data  their
inner  ethical  content  and  affirmed  it  as  a  duty,  it  becomes  an  in¬
dependent  principle  of  moral  activity,  apart  from  its  psychological
basis.1  One  may  imagine  a  man  whose  feeling  of  modesty  is  by
nature  little  developed,  but  who  is  rationally  convinced  that  it
is  his  duty  to  oppose  the  encroachments  of  the  lower  nature,  and
conscientiously  fulfils  this  duty.  Such  a  man  will  prove  in  fact
to  be  more  moral  in  this  particular  respect  than  a  man  who  is
modest  by  nature,  but  whose  reason  is  defenceless  against  the
temptations  of  sense  that  overcome  his  modesty.  The  same  is
true  of  natural  kindness  (the  point  dwelt  upon  by  Kant)  and
natural  religious  feeling.  Without  a  consciousness  of  duty  all
these  natural  impulses  to  moral  conduct  are  unstable,  and  can  have
no  decisive  significance  in  the  conflict  of  opposing  motives.

But  does  the  consciousness  of  duty  or  of  right  possess  such  a
decisive  power  ?  If  righteousness  from  natural  inclination  is  an

1  See  Kritika  otuletchonnih  natchal  ( The  Critique  of  Abstract  Principles ).


VIRTUES


“3


unstable  thing,  righteousness  from  a  sense  of  duty  is  an  extremely
rare  thing.  The  idea  of  right  as  actually  realised  thus  proves  to
be  lacking  in  the  characteristics  of  universality  and  necessity.  The
vital  interests  of  moral  philosophy  and  the  formal  demands  of  reason
cannot  acquiesce  in  this  and  consequently  there  arises  a  new
problem  for  reason  :  to  find  a  practical  principle  which  would  not
only  be  morally  right,  but  also  highly  desirable  in  itself  and  for
every  one,  possessing  as  such  the  power  to  determine  human
conduct  with  necessity,  independently  of  the  natural  inclinations
of  the  soul  or  of  the  degree  of  spiritual  development — a  principle
equally  inherent  in,  understandable  to,  and  actual  for  all  human
beings.

When  reason  dwells  exclusively  or  mainly  on  this  aspect  of
the  case,  the  moral  end  is  understood  as  the  highest  good  ( summum
bonum\  and  the  question  assumes  the  following  form  :  Does  there
exist,  and  what  is  the  nature  of,  the  highest  good,  to  which  all
other  goods  are  necessarily  subordinate  as  to  the  absolute  criterion
of  the  desirable  in  general  ?


I


CHAPTER  VI


THE  SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY
{A  Critique  of  Abstract  Hedonism  in  its  Different  Forms')

I

The  moral  good  is  determined  by  reason  as  truth  (in  the  wide
sense),  or  as  the  right  relation  to  everything.  This  idea  of  the
good,  inwardly  all-embracing  and  logically  necessary,  proves  in  fact
to  be  lacking  in  universality  and  necessity.  The  good  as  the  ideal
norm  of  will  does  not,  in  point  of  fact,  coincide  with  the  good  as
the  actual  object  of  desire.  The  good  is  that  which  ought  to
be,  but  (i)  not  every  one  desires  what  he  ought  to  desire  ;
(2)  not  every  one  who  desires  the  good  is  able  to  overcome,  for
its  sake,  the  bad  propensities  of  his  nature  ;  and  finally  (3)  the
few  who  have  attained  the  victory  of  the  good  over  the  evil  in
themselves — the  virtuous,  righteous  men  or  saints — are  powerless
to  overcome  by  their  good  “  the  wickedness  in  which  the  whole
world  lieth.”  But  in  so  far  as  the  good  is  not  desired  by  a  person
at  all,  it  is  not  a  good  for  him  ;  in  so  far  as  it  fails  to  affect  the
will,  even  though  it  may  be  affirmed  as  desirable  by  the  rational
consciousness,  it  is  only  an  ideal  and  not  a  real  good  ;  finally,  in
so  far  as  it  fails  to  empower  a  given  person  to  realise  the  moral
order  in  the  world  as  a  whole,  even  though  it  may  affect  the  will
of  that  person  by  making  him  inwardly  better,  it  is  not  a
sufficient  good.

This  threefold  discrepancy  between  the  moral  and  the  real
good  seems  to  render  the  idea  of  the  good  self-contradictory.
The  definition  of  the  good  as  that  which  ought  to  be  involves,
in  addition  to  its  ideal  content,  a  real  demand  that  the  moral


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  115

content  should  not  remain  merely  theoretical,  but  that  it  should
be  realised  in  practice.  The  very  conception  of  that  which  ought
to  be  implies  that  it  ought  to  be  realised.  The  powerlessness  of
the  good  is  not  a  good.  It  cannot  be  right  that  only  a  part  of
humanity  should  desire  what  they  ought  to  desire,  that  only  a  few
should  live  as  they  ought,  and  that  none  should  be  able  to  make  the
world  what  it  ought  to  be.  All  agree  that  the  moral  good  and
happiness  ought  to  coincide  ;  the  latter  ought  to  be  the  direct,
universal,  and  necessary  consequence  of  the  former,  and  express
the  absolute  desirability  and  actuality  of  the  moral  good.  But
in  fact  they  do  not  coincide ;  the  real  good  is  distinct  from
the  moral  good,  and,  taken  separately,  is  understood  as  welfare.
The  actual  insufficiency  of  the  idea  of  the  good  leads  us
to  this  conception  of  welfare,  which,  as  a  motive  for  action,
apparently  possesses  the  concrete  universality  and  necessity  which
are  lacking  to  the  purely  moral  demands.  For  every  end  of
action  without  exception  is  directly  or  indirectly  characterised
by  the  fact  that  the  attainment  of  that  end  satisfies  the  agent  or
tends  to  his  welfare,  while  by  no  means  every  end  of  action  can
be  directly  or  even  indirectly  characterised  as  morally  good.
Every  desire  as  such  is  apparently  simply  a  desire  for  its
satisfaction,  i.e.  for  welfare  ;  to  desire  calamity  or  dissatisfaction
would  be  the  same  as  to  desire  that  which  is  known  to  be
undesirable,  and  would,  therefore,  be  manifestly  absurd.  And
if,  in  order  to  be  realised  in  practice,  the  moral  good  must
become  the  object  of  desire,  the  ethical  principle  will  be  seen  to
depend  upon  the  practical  idea  (practical  in  the  narrow  sense)  of
the  real  good  or  welfare,  which  is  thus  raised  to  the  rank  of  the
supreme  principle  of  human  action.

This  eudaemonic  principle  (from  the  Greek  evScu/iovia —
the  condition  of  blessedness,  well-being)  has  the  obvious  advantage
of  not  raising  the  question  IVhy  ?  One  may  ask  why  I  should
strive  for  the  moral  good  when  this  striving  is  opposed  to  my
natural  inclinations  and  causes  me  nothing  except  suffering  ;  but
one  cannot  ask  why  I  should  desire  my  welfare,  since  I  desire  it
naturally  and  necessarily.  This  desire  is  inseparably  connected
with  my  existence,  and  is  a  direct  expression  of  it.  I  exist  as
desiring,  and  I  desire  only  that,  of  course,  which  satisfies  me
or  what  is  pleasant  to  me.  Every  one  finds  his  welfare  either  in


ііб  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

what  immediately  gives  him  pleasure  or  in  what  leads  to  it —
that  is,  in  what  serves  as  a  means  for  bringing  about  pleasurable
states.  Thus  welfare  is  defined  more  closely  through  the  idea  of
pleasure  (Greek  ijSov?),  hence  the  theory  of  Hedonism).

II

When  that  which  ought  to  be  is  replaced  by  that  which  is
desired,  the  end  of  life  or  the  highest  good  is  reduced  to  pleasure.
This  idea,  clear,  simple,  and  concrete  as  it  appears  to  be,  involves
insuperable  difficulties  when  applied  in  the  concrete.  It  is  im¬
possible  to  deduce  any  general  principle  or  rule  of  action  from
the  general  fact  that  every  one  desires  that  which  is  pleasing  to
him.  The  assertion  that  the  final  end  of  action  is  directly  or
indirectly  pleasure,  i.e.  satisfaction  of  the  subject  desiring,  is  as
indisputable  and  as  pointless  as  the  assertion,  e.g.,  that  all  actions
end  in  something  or  lead  to  something.  In  concrete  reality  we
do  not  find  one  universal  pleasure,  but  an  indefinite  multitude
of  all  kinds  of  pleasures,  having  nothing  in  common  between  them.
One  person  finds  the  highest  bliss  in  drinking  vodka,  and  another
seeks  “  a  bliss  for  which  there  is  no  measure  and  no  name  ”  ;
but  even  the  latter  person,  when  extremely  hungry  or  thirsty,
forgets  all  transcendental  joys,  and  desires  above  all  things  food
and  drink.  On  the  other  hand,  under  certain  conditions,  things
which  had  given  enjoyment  or  seemed  pleasant  in  the  past  cease
to  be  attractive,  and,  indeed,  life  itself  loses  all  value.

In  truth  the  idea  of  pleasure  refers  to  a  variety  of  accidental
desires  which  differ  according  to  the  individual  taste  and
character,  the  degree  of  mental  development,  age,  external
position,  and  momentary  mood.  No  definite  expression  can  be
given  to  pleasure  as  a  universal  practical  principle,  unless  it  is  to
be  ‘Let  every  one  act  so  as  to  get  for  himself,  as  far  as  possible,
what  is  pleasing  to  him  at  the  given  moment.’  This  rule,  on
the  whole  firmly  established  and  more  or  less  successfully  applied
in  the  animal  kingdom,  is  inconvenient  in  the  human  world  for
two  reasons  :  (i)  the  presence  in  man  of  unnatural  inclinations,
the  satisfaction  of  which,  though  yielding  the  desired  pleasure,
leads  at  the  same  time  to  clear  and  certain  destruction,  i.e.  to
what  is  highly  undesirable  for  every  one  ;  (2)  the  presence  in


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  117

man  of  reason,  which  compares  the  various  natural  impulses  and
pleasures  with  one  another,  and  passes  judgment  on  them  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  consequences  they  involve.  In  a
rudimentary  form  we  find  such  judgment  even  among  the
animals  who  act  or  refrain  from  action,  not  from  motives  of
immediate  pleasant  or  unpleasant  feeling  only,  but  also  from
considerations  of  further,  pleasant  or  unpleasant,  consequences
following  upon  certain  behaviour.  But  with  animals  these
considerations  do  not  extend  beyond  simple  associations  of  ideas.
Thus,  the  idea  of  the  piece  of  meat  seized  without  permission  is
accompanied  by  the  idea  of  the  blows  of  the  whip,  etc.  The
more  abstract  character  of  the  human  reason  allows  us,  in  addition
to  such  elementary  considerations,  to  make  a  general  comparison
of  the  immediate  motives  of  pleasure  with  their  remote  conse¬
quences.  And  it  is  in  following  this  line  of  reflection  that  the
most  thorough-going  hedonist  of  the  ancient  philosophy,  Hegesias
of  Cyrenae,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  from  the  point  of  view  of
pleasure  life  is  not  worth  living.  The  desire  for  pleasure  is
either  fruitless  and  in  this  sense  painful,  or,  in  achieving  its
object,  it  proves  to  be  deceptive,  for  a  momentary  feeling  of
pleasure  is  inevitably  followed  by  tedium  and  a  new  painful
search  after  illusion.  Since  it  is  impossible  to  reach  true  pleasure,
we  must  strive  to  free  ourselves  from  pain,  and  the  surest  means
to  do  so  is  to  die.  Such  was  the  outcome  of  Hegesias’s
philosophy,  for  which  he  was  nicknamed  1  the  advocate  of  death  ’
(тгеитіѲаѵаточ).  But  even  apart  from  such  extreme  conclusions,
the  analysis  of  the  idea  of  pleasure  makes  it  abundantly  clear  that
‘  pleasure  ’  cannot  furnish  us  with  a  satisfactory  principle  of
conduct.


Ill

A  simple  striving  for  pleasure  cannot  be  a  principle  of  action
because  in  itself  it  is  indefinite  and  devoid  of  content.  Its
actual  content  is  wholly  unstable  and  is  to  be  found  solely  in  the
accidental  objects  which  call  it  forth.  The  only  universal  and
necessary  element  in  the  infinite  variety  of  pleasurable  states  is
the  fact  that  the  moment  of  the  attainment  of  any  purpose  or
object  of  desire  whatsoever  is  necessarily  experienced  and  is


1 1 8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

imagined  beforehand  as  a  pleasure,  i.e.  as  satisfied  or  realised
desire.  But  this  elementary  psychological  truth  does  not  contain
the  slightest  indication  either  as  to  the  nature  of  the  object  of
desire  or  as  to  the  means  of  obtaining  it.  Both  remain  empiric¬
ally  variable  and  accidental.  The  point  of  view  of  pleasure  does
not  in  itself  give  us  any  actual  definition  of  the  highest  good  to
which  all  other  goods  must  be  subordinate,  and  consequently
gives  us  no  rule  or  principle  of  conduct.  This  becomes  still
more  clear  if,  instead  of  taking  pleasure  in  the  general  sense  of
satisfied  desire,  we  take  concrete  instances  of  it — i.e.  particular
pleasurable  states.  These  states  are  never  desired  as  such,
for  they  are  simply  the  consequence  of  satisfied  volition  and  not
the  object  of  desire.  What  is  desired  are  certain  definite  realities
and  not  the  pleasant  sensations  that  follow  from  them.  For  a
person  who  is  hungry  and  thirsty,  bread  and  water  are  im¬
mediate  objects  of  desire  and  not  a  means  for  obtaining  pleasure
of  the  sense  of  taste.  We  know,  of  course,  from  experience  that
it  is  very  pleasant  to  eat  when  one  is  hungry  ;  but  a  baby  wants
to  suck  previously  to  any  experience  whatever.  And  later,  on
reaching  a  certain  age,  the  child  has  a  very'  strong  desire  for
objects,  about  the  actual  pleasurableness  of  which  it  knows,  as  yet,
nothing  at  all.  It  is  useless  to  have  recourse  to  ‘heredity’  in
this  case,  for  then  we  should  have  to  go  as  far  back  as  the  chemical
molecules,  of  which  probably  no  one  would  say  that  they  seek  to
enter  into  definite  combinations  simply  because  they  remember
the  pleasure  they  had  derived  from  it  in  the  past.

There  is  another  circumstance  which  does  not  permit  of
identifying  the  good  with  the  fact  of  pleasure.  Every  one  knows
from  experience  that  the  degree  of  the  desirability  of  an  object  or
a  state  does  not  always  correspond  to  the  actual  degree  of  pleasure
to  be  derived  from  the  attainment  of  it.  Thus,  in  the  case  of
strong  erotic  attraction  to  a  person  of  the  opposite  sex,  the  fact
of  possessing  this  particular  person  is  desired  as  the  highest  bliss,
in  comparison  with  which  the  possession  of  any  other  person  is
not  desired  at  all  ;  but  the  actual  pleasure  to  be  derived  from  this
infinitely  desirable  fact  has  certainly  nothing  to  do  with  infinity,
and  is  approximately  equal  to  the  pleasure  of  any  other  satisfaction
of  the  instinct  in  question.  Speaking  generally,  the  desirability
of  particular  objects  or  their  significance  as  goods  is  determined


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY


"9

not  by  the  subjective  states  of  pleasure  that  follow  the  attainment
of  them,  but  by  the  objective  relation  of  these  objects  to  our
bodily  or  mental  nature.  The  source  and  the  character  of  that
relation  is  not  as  a  rule  sufficiently  clear  to  us  ;  it  manifests  itself
simply  as  a  blind  impulse.

But  although  pleasure  is  not  the  essence  of  the  good  or  the
desirable  as  such,  it  is  certainly  its  constant  attribute.  Whatever
the  ultimate  reasons  of  the  desirability  of  the  objects  or  states
that  appear  to  us  as  good  may  be,  at  any  rate  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  achieved  good  or  the  fulfilled  desire  is  always
accompanied  by  a  sensation  of  pleasure.  This  sensation,  in¬
separably  connected  with  the  good  as  the  necessary  consequence
of  it,  may  then  serve  to  determine  the  highest  good  as  a  practical
principle.

The  highest  good  is  from  this  point  of  view  a  state  which
affords  the  greatest  amount  of  satisfaction.  This  amount  is
determined  both  directly  through  the  addition  of  pleasant  states
to  one  another,  and  indirectly  through  the  subtraction  of  the  un¬
pleasant  states.  In  other  words,  the  highest  good  consists  in  the
possession  of  goods  which,  in  their  totality,  or  as  the  final  result,
afford  the  maximum  of  pleasure  and  the  minimum  of  pain.1
The  actions  of  the  individual  are  no  longer  prompted  by  a  mere
desire  for  immediate  pleasure,  but  by  prudence  which  judges  of
the  value  of  the  different  pleasures  and  selects  those  among  them
which  are  the  most  lasting  and  free  from  pain.  The  man  who
from  this  point  of  view  is  regarded  as  happy  is  not  one  who  at
the  given  moment  is  experiencing  the  most  intense  pleasure,  but
one  in  whose  life  as  a  whole  pleasant  sensations  predominate  over
the  painful — who  in  the  long-run  enjoys  more  than  he  suffers.
“  The  wise  man,”  writes  Aristotle,  “  seeks  freedom  from  pain,  and
not  pleasure  ”  (6  фроѵі/tos  т Ь  аХѵтѵоѵ  8и!же.ь,  оѵ  тЬ  rj8v).  Т.  his  is
the  point  of  view  of  eudaemonism  proper  or  of  prudent  hedonism.
A  follower  of  this  doctrine  will  not  ‘  wallow  in  the  mire  of  sensuous
pleasures,’  which  destroy  both  body  and  soul.  He  will  find  his

1  Apart  from  any  pessimistic  theories,  freedom  from  pain  is  from  the  hedonistic
point  of  view  of  more  importance  than  the  positive  fact  of  pleasure.  The  pain  of  an
unsatisfied  and  strongly  individualised  sexual  passion,  which  not  unfrequently  drives
people  to  suicide,  is  incomparably  greater  than  the  pleasure  of  the  satisfaction.  The
latter  can  be  pronounced  to  be  a  great  good  only  in  so  far  as  it  gives  relief  from  the
great  pain  of  the  unsatisfied  desire.


120  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

greatest  satisfaction  in  the  higher  intellectual  and  aesthetic  pleasures,
which,  being  the  most  durable,  involve  the  least  degree  of  pain.

IV

In  spite  of  its  apparent  plausibility,  prudent  hedonism  shares
the  fate  of  hedonism  in  general :  it  too  proves  to  be  an  illusory
principle.  When  the  good  is  determined  as  happiness,  the
essential  thing  is  the  attainment  and  the  secure  possession  of  it.
But  neither  can  be  secured  by  any  amount  of  prudence.

Our  life  and  destiny  depend  upon  causes  and  factors  beyond
the  control  of  our  worldly  wisdom  ;  and  in  most  cases  the  wise
egoist  simply  loses  the  opportunities  of  actual,  though  fleeting
pleasure,  without  thereby  acquiring  any  lasting  happiness.  The
insecurity  of  all  pleasures  is  all  the  more  fatal  because  man,
in  contradistinction  to  animals,  knows  it  beforehand  :  the  inevit¬
able  failure  of  all  happiness  in  the  future  throws  its  shadow  even
over  moments  of  actual  enjoyment.  But  even  in  the  rare  cases  in
which  a  wise  enjoyment  of  life  does  actually  lead  to  a  quantitative
surplus  of  the  painless  over  the  painful  states,  the  triumph  of
hedonism  is  merely  illusory.  It  is  based  upon  an  arbitrary  ex¬
clusion  of  the  qualitative  character  of  our  mental  states  (taking
quality  not  in  the  moral  sense,  which  may  be  disputed,  but  simply  in
the  psychological  or,  rather,  in  the  psychophysical  sense  of  the  inten¬
sity  of  the  pleasurable  states).  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  strongest,
the  most  overwhelming  delights  are  not  those  recommended  by
prudence  but  those  to  be  found  in  wild  passions.  Granted  that
in  the  case  of  passions  also  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  is  out  of
proportion  to  the  strength  of  desire,  it  is  at  any  rate  incom¬
parably  more  intense  than  the  sensations  which  a  well-regulated
and  carefully  ordered  life  can  yield.  When  prudence  tells  us  that
passions  lead  to  ruin,  we  need  not  in  the  least  dispute  this
truth,  but  may  recall  another  :

All,  all  that  holds  the  threat  of  fate
Is  for  the  heart  of  mortal  wight
Full  of  inscrutable  delight.

No  objection  can  be  brought  against  this  from  the  hedonistic
point  of  view.  Why  should  I  renounce  the  ‘  inscrutable  delight  ’
for  the  sake  of  dull  well-being  ?  Passions  lead  to  destruction,


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY


I  21


but  prudence  does  not  save  from  destruction.  No  one  by  means
of  prudent  behaviour  alone  has  ever  conquered  death.

It  is  only  in  the  presence  of  something  higher  that  the  voice
of  passions  may  prove  to  be  wrong.  It  is  silenced  by  the  thunder
of  heaven,  but  the  tame  speeches  of  good  sense  are  powerless  to
drown  it.

The  satisfaction  of  passions  which  lead  to  destruction  cannot
of  course  be  the  highest  good  ;  but  from  the  hedonistic  point  of
view  it  may  have  distinct  advantage  over  the  innocent  pleasures  of
good  behaviour  which  do  not  save  from  destruction.  It  is  true  that
intellectual  and  aesthetic  pleasures  are  not  only  innocent  but  noble  ;
they  involve  limitations,  however,  which  preclude  them  from
being  the  highest  good.

(1)  These  ‘spiritual’  pleasures  are  from  the  nature  of  the  case
accessible  only  to  persons  of  a  high  degree  of  aesthetic  and  intel¬
lectual  development,  that  is,  only  to  a  few,  while  the  highest
good  must  necessarily  be  universal.  No  progress  of  democratic
institutions  would  give  an  ass  the  capacity  of  enjoying  Beethoven’s
symphonies,  or  enable  a  pig,  which  cannot  appreciate  even  the
taste  of  oranges,  to  enjoy  the  sonnets  of  Dante  or  Petrarch  or
the  poems  of  Shelley.

(2)  Even  for  those  to  whom  aesthetic  and  intellectual  pleasures
are  accessible,  they  are  insufficient.  They  cannot  fill  the  whole
of  one’s  life,  for  they  only  have  relation  to  some  of  our  mental
faculties,  without  affecting  the  others.  It  is  the  theoretic,  con¬
templative  side  of  human  nature  that  is  alone  more  or  less  satisfied
by  them,  while  the  active,  practical  life  is  left  without  any  definite
guidance.  The  intellectual  and  aesthetic  goods,  as  objects  of
pure  contemplation,  do  not  affect  the  practical  will.

Whilst  we  admire  the  heavenly  stars
We  do  not  want  them  for  our  own.

When  a  person  puts  the  pleasures  of  science  and  of  art  above
everything  from  the  hedonistic  point  of  view,  his  practical  will
remains  without  any  definite  determination,  and  falls  easy  prey
to  blind  passions.  And  this  shows  that  prudent  hedonism  is
unsatisfactory  as  a  guiding  principle  of  life.

( 3)  Its  unsatisfactoriness  is  also  proved  by  the  fact  that  hedonism
is  powerless  against  theoretical  scepticism,  which  undermines  the


122  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


value  of  the  actual  objects  of  intellectual  and  aesthetic  activity.
Suppose  I  find  a  real  enjoyment  in  the  contemplation  of  beauty  and
in  the  pursuit  of  truth.  But  my  reason — the  highest  authority
for  ‘prudent’  hedonism — tells  me  that  beauty  is  a  subjective
mirage  and  that  truth  is  unattainable  by  the  human  mind.  My
pleasure  is  thus  poisoned,  and,  in  the  case  of  a  logical  mind,  is
altogether  destroyed.  Even  apart  from  real  consistency,  how¬
ever,  it  is  clear  that  the  delight  in  what  is  known  to  be  a
deception  cannot  be  the  highest  good.

(4)  Now,  suppose  that  our  epicurean  is  free  from  such
scepticism,  and  unreflectively  gives  himself  up  to  the  delights  of
thought  and  of  creative  art,  without  questioning  the  ultimate
significance  of  these  objects.  To  him  these  ‘spiritual  goods  ’  may
appear  eternal ;  but  his  own  capacity  for  enjoying  them  is
certainly  far  from  being  so  ;  it  can  at  best  survive  for  a  brief
period  his  capacity  for  sensuous  pleasures.

And  yet  it  is  precisely  the  security  or  the  continuity  of  pleasures
that  is  the  chief  claim  of  prudent  hedonism  and  the  main  advantage
it  is  supposed  to  possess  over  the  simple  striving  for  immediate
pleasure.  Of  course  if  our  pleasures  were  abiding  realities  that
could  be  hoarded  like  property,  a  prudent  hedonist  in  his  decrepit
old  age  might  still  consider  himself  richer  than  a  reckless
profligate  who  had  come  to  premature  death.  But  since,  in  truth,
past  pleasures  are  mere  memories,  the  wise  epicurean — if  he
remains  till  his  death  true  to  the  hedonistic  point  of  view — will
be  sure  to  regret  that  for  the  sake  of  faint  memories  of  the
innocent  intellectual  and  aesthetic  pleasures  he  sacrificed  oppor¬
tunities  of  pleasures  far  more  intense.  Just  because  he  never
experienced  them,  they  will  now  evoke  in  him  painful  and  fruitless
desire.  The  supposed  superiority  of  prudent  hedonism  to  a
reckless  pursuit  of  pleasure  is  based  upon  an  illegitimate  confusion
between  two  points  of  view.  It  must  be  one  or  the  other.
Either  we  mean  the  present  moment  of  enjoyment,  and  in  that
case  we  must  give  up  prudence  which  is  exhibited  even  in  animal
behaviour,  or  we  are  thinking  of  the  future  consequences  of  our
actions,  and  in  that  case  the  question  must  be  asked  :  What
precise  moment  of  the  future  is  to  be  put  at  the  basis  of  our
reckoning  ?  It  would  be  obviously  irrational  to  take  any
moment  except  the  last ,  which  expresses  the  total  result  of  the  whole


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  123

life.  But  at  that  last  moment  before  death  all  hedonistic  calculus
is  reduced  to  naught,  and  every  possible  advantage  of  the  prudent
over  the  reckless  pleasures  disappears  completely.  All  pleasures
when  they  are  over  cease  to  be  pleasures,  and  we  know  this  before¬
hand.  Hence  the  idea  of  the  sum  of  pleasures  is  meaningless  :  the
sum  of  zeros  is  not  any  larger  than  a  simple  zero.

V

The  possession  of  external  goods — whether  they  be  pleasures
of  the  moment  or  the  more  lasting  happiness  supposed  to  be
secured  by  prudence — proves  to  be  deceptive  and  impossible.  Is,
then,  true  welfare  or  the  highest  good  to  be  found  in  freedom
from  external  desires  and  affections  which  deceive  and  enslave
man  and  thus  make  him  miserable  ?  All  external  goods  either
prove  to  be  not  worth  seeking,  or,  depending  as  they  do  upon
external  causes  beyond  the  control  of  man,  they  are  taken  away
from  him  before  their  essential  unsatisfactoriness  has  even  been
discovered  ;  and  man  is  thus  made  doubly  miserable.  No  one
can  escape  misfortune,  and  therefore  no  one  can  be  happy  so  long
as  his  will  is  attracted  to  objects  the  possession  of  which  is  acci¬
dental.  If  true  welfare  is  the  state  of  abiding  satisfaction,  then
that  man  alone  can  be  truly  blessed  who  finds  satisfaction  in  that
of  which  he  cannot  be  deprived,  namely,  in  himself.

Let  man  be  inwardly  free  from  attachment  to  external  and
accidental  objects,  and  he  will  be  permanently  satisfied  and  happy.
Not  submitting  to  anything  foreign  to  him,  fully  possessing  him¬
self,  he  will  possess  all  things  and  even  more  than  all  things.  If
I  am  free  from  the  desire  for  a  certain  thing,  I  am  more  master  of
it  than  the  person  who  possesses  it  and  desires  it  ;  if  I  am  in¬
different  to  power,  I  am  more  than  the  ruler  who  cares  for  it  ;  if
I  am  indifferent  to  everything  in  the  world,  I  am  higher  than  the
lord  of  all  the  world.

This  principle  of  self-sufficiency  ( аѵтаркеіа),  though  expressing
an  unconditional  demand,  is  in  truth  purely  negative  and  con¬
ditional.  In  the  first  place,  its  force  depends  upon  those  very
external  goods  which  it  rejects.  So  long  as  man  is  attached  to
them,  freedom  from  such  attachment  is  desirable  for  his  higher
consciousness  and  gives  a  meaning  to  his  activity.  Similarly,  so


124  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

long  as  man  is  sensitive  to  the  accidental  pains  of  the  external
life,  triumph  over  them,  steadfastness  in  adversity,  can  give  him
supreme  satisfaction.  But  once  he  has  risen  above  the  attachment
to  external  goods  and  the  fear  of  external  misfortune,  what
is  to  be  the  positive  content  of  his  life  ?  Can  it  consist  simply
in  the  enjoyment  of  that  victory  ?  In  that  case  the  principle
of  self-sufficiency  becomes  vain  self-satisfaction  and  acquires  a
comical  instead  of  a  majestic  character.  The  unsatisfactoriness  of
the  final  result  renders  it  superfluous  to  insist  upon  the  fact  that
the  force  of  spirit  necessary  for  the  attainment  of  it  is  not  given
to  every  one,  and  even  when  it  is,  is  not  always  preserved  to  the
end.  The  principle  of  self-sufficiency  thus  proves  to  be  lacking
in  power  of  realisation,  and  shows  itself  in  this  respect  also  to  be
only  a  pseudo- principle.  Freedom  from  slavery  to  the  lower
accidental  goods  can  only  be  a  condition  of  attaining  the  highest
good,  but  not  itself  be  that  good.  A  temple  cleared  of  idols
which  had  once  filled  it,  does  not  thereby  become  God’s  holy
tabernacle.  It  simply  remains  an  empty  place.1

VI

The  individual  finds  no  final  satisfaction  or  happiness  either
in  the  outer  worldly  goods  or  in  himself  [i.e.  in  the  empty  form  of
self-consciousness).  The  only  way  out  seems  to  be  afforded  by
the  consideration  that  man  is  not  merely  a  separate  individual
entity  but  also  part  of  a  collective  whole,  and  that  his  true
welfare,  the  positive  interest  of  his  life,  is  to  be  found  in  serving
the  common  good  or  universal  happiness.

This  is  the  principle  of  Utilitarianism ,  obviously  correspond¬
ing  to  the  moral  principle  of  altruism,  which  demands  that  we
should  live  for  others,  help  all  so  far  as  we  are  able,  and  serve
the  good  of  others  as  if  it  were  our  own.  In  the  opinion  of  the
utilitarian  thinkers  their  teaching  must  coincide  in  practice  with
the  altruistic  morality  or  with  the  commandments  of  justice  and

1  The  principle  of  self-sufficiency  in  its  practical  application  partly  coincides  with
the  moral  principle  of  asceticism  ;  but  the  essential  difference  between  the  two  is  in
their  starting-point  and  their  ultimate  motive.  Asceticism  seeks  to  attain  the  mastery
of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh,  or  the  right  attitude  of  man  to  what  is  lower  than  he.
The  demand  for  self-sufficiency  springs  from  a  desire  for  happiness,  so  that  the  principle
of  айтаркшх  may  be  rightly  described  as  hedonistic  asceticism.


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  125

mercy.  “  I  must  again  repeat,”  writes  J.  S.  Mill,  e.g.,  “what  the
assailants  of  utilitarianism  seldom  have  the  justice  to  acknowledge,
that  the  happiness  which  forms  the  utilitarian  standard  of  what  is
right  in  conduct,  is  not  the  agent’s  own  happiness,  but  that  of  all
concerned.  As  between  his  own  happiness  and  that  of  others,
utilitarianism  requires  him  to  be  as  strictly  impartial  as  a  dis¬
interested  and  benevolent  spectator.  In  the  golden  rule  of  Jesus
of  Nazareth  we  read  the  complete  spirit  of  the  ethics  of  utility.
To  do  as  one  would  be  done  by,  and  to  love  one’s  neighbour  as
oneself,  constitutes  the  ideal  perfection  of  utilitarian  morality.”  1
But  Mill  does  not  see  that  the  distinction  between  these  two
principles,  the  utilitarian  and  the  altruistic,  consists  in  the  fact
that  the  command  to  live  for  others  is  enjoined  by  altruism  as  the
expression  of  the  right  relation  of  man  to  his  fellow-creatures,  or
as  a  moral  duty  which  follows  from  the  pure  idea  of  the  good  ;
while,  according  to  the  utilitarian  doctrine,  man  ought  to  serve
the  common  good  and  to  decide  impartially  between  his  own
interest  and  those  of  others  simply  because,  in  the  last  resort,  this
course  of  action  (so  it  is  contended)  is  more  advantageous  or  useful
to  himself.  Moral  conduct  thus  appears  to  stand  in  no  need  of
any  special  independent  principle  opposed  to  egoism,  but  to  be  a
consequence  of  egoism  rightly  understood.  And  since  egoism  is
a  quality  possessed  by  every  one,  utilitarian  morality  is  suited  to  all
without  exception,  which,  in  the  opinion  of  its  followers,  is  an
advantage  over  the  morality  of  pure  altruism,  whether  based  upon
the  simple  feeling  of  sympathy  or  upon  the  abstract  conception  of
duty.  Another  advantage  of  utilitarianism  is,  it  is  contended,  to
be  found  in  the  fact  that  the  utilitarian  principle  is  the  expression
of  the  actual  historical  origin  of  the  moral  feelings  and  ideas.  All
of  these  are  supposed  to  be  the  result  of  the  gradual  extension
and  development  of  self-interested  motives,  so  that  the  highest
system  of  morality  is  simply  the  most  complex  modification  of
the  primitive  egoism.  Even  if  this  contention  were  true,  the
advantage  that  would  follow  therefrom  to  the  utilitarian  theory
would  be  illusory.  From  the  fact  that  the  oak  tree  grows  out  of  the
acorn  and  that  acorns  are  food  for  pigs,  it  does  not  follow  that  oak
trees  are  also  food  for  pigs.  In  a  similar  manner,  the  supposition
that  the  highest  moral  doctrine  is  genetically  related  to  selfishness,

1  J.  S.  Mill,  Utilitarianism,  2nd  ed.,  London,  1864,  pp.  24-25.


1 26  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

that  is,  has  developed  from  it  through  a  series  of  changes  in  the
past,  does  not  warrant  the  conclusion  that  therefore  this  highest
morality  in  its  present  perfect  form  can  also  be  based  upon  self-
interest  or  put  at  the  service  of  egoism.  Experience  obviously
contradicts  this  conclusion  :  the  majority  of  people — now  as
alwayS — hnd  it  more  profitable  to  separate  their  own  interests  from  the
common  good.  On  the  other  hand,  the  assumption  that  selfishness
is  the  only  and  the  ultimate  basis  of  conduct  is  contrary  to  truth.

The  view  that  morality  develops  out  of  individual  selfishness
is  sufficiently  disproved  by  the  simple  fact  that  at  the  early  stages
of  the  organic  life,  the  chief  part  is  played  not  by  the  individual
but  by  the  generic  self-assertion,  which,  for  separate  entities,  is
self-denial.  A  bird  giving  up  its  life  for  its  young,  or  a  working
bee  dying  for  the  queen  bee,  can  derive  no  personal  advantage
and  no  gratification  to  its  individual  egoism  from  its  act.1  A
decisive  predominance  of  the  personal  over  the  generic  motives,
and  at  the  same  time  the  possibility  of  theoretical  and  consistent
selfishness,  only  arises  in  humanity  when  a  certain  stage  in  the
development  of  the  individual  consciousness  has  been  reached.
In  so  far,  then,  as  utilitarianism  requires  that  the  individual
should  limit  and  sacrifice  himself,  not  for  the  sake  of  any  higher
principles,  but  for  the  sake  of  his  own  selfishness  rightly  under¬
stood,  it  can  have  practical  significance  only  as  addressed  to  human
individuals  at  a  definite  stage  of  development.  It  is  from  this
point  of  view  alone  that  utilitarianism  ought  to  be  considered
here,  especially  because  the  questions  as  to  the  empirical  origin  of
any  given  ideas  and  feelings  have  no  direct  bearing  upon  the  subject
of  moral  philosophy.


VII

“  Every  one  desires  his  own  good  ;  but  the  good  of  each  consists
in  serving  the  good  of  all  ;  therefore  every  one  ought  to  serve
the  common  good.”  The  only  thing  that  is  true  in  this  formula
of  pure  utilitarianism  is  its  conclusion.  But  its  real  grounds  are

1  Concerning  the  primitive  character  of  self-surrender  or  ‘  struggle  for  the  life  of
others,’  see,  in  particular,  Henry  Drummond,  Ascent  of  Man.  The  fact  that  self-
sacrifice  of  the  individual  for  the  species  is  based  upon  real  genetic  solidarity  does  not  in
the  least  prove  that  such  sacrifice  is  the  same  thing  as  self-interest.


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  127

not  in  the  least  contained  in  the  two  premisses  from  which  it  is
here  deduced.  The  premisses  are  false  in  themselves  and  placed
in  a  false  relation  with  one  another.

It  is  not  true  that  every  one  desires  his  own  good,  for  a  great
many  persons  desire  simply  what  affords  them  immediate  pleasure,
and  find  that  pleasure  in  things  which  are  not  in  the  least  good
for  them,  or,  indeed,  in  things  that  are  positively  harmful — in
drinking,  gambling,  pornography,  etc.  Of  course  the  doctrine
of  the  common  good  may  be  preached  to  such  people  also,  but  it
must  rest  upon  some  other  basis  than  their  own  desires.

Further,  even  persons  who  admit  the  advantages  of  happiness
or  of  lasting  satisfaction  over  momentary  pleasures,  find  their
good  in  something  very  different  from  what  utilitarianism
affirms  it  to  be.  A  miser  is  very  well  aware  that  all  fleeting
pleasures  are  dust  and  ashes  in  comparison  with  the  real  lasting
goods  which  he  locks  up  in  a  strong  safe  ;  and  utilitarians  have
no  arguments  at  their  command  whereby  they  could  induce  him
to  empty  his  safe  for  philanthropic  purposes.  They  may  say  to
him  that  it  is  in  his  own  interests  to  bring  his  advantage  into
harmony  with  the  advantage  of  others.  But  he  has  fulfilled  this
condition  already.  Suppose,  indeed,  that  he  obtained  his  riches  by
lending  money  at  interest ;  this  means  that  he  has  done  service  to
his  neighbours  and  helped  them,  when  they  were  in  need,  by  giving
them  loans  of  money.  He  risked  his  capital  and  received  a  certain
profit  for  it,  and  they  lost  that  profit  but  used  his  capital  when
they  had  none  of  their  own.  Everything  was  arranged  to  mutual
advantage,  and  both  sides  judged  impartially  between  their  own
and  the  other  person’s  interests.  But  why  is  it  that  neither  Mill
nor  any  of  his  followers  will  agree  to  pronounce  the  behaviour  of
this  sagacious  money-lender  to  be  a  true  pattern  of  utilitarian
morality  ?  Is  it  because  he  made  no  use  of  the  money  he
hoarded  ?  He  made  the  utmost  use  of  it,  finding  the  highest
satisfaction  in  the  possession  of  his  treasures  and  in  the  conscious¬
ness  of  his  power  Jsee  Pushkin’s  poem  The  Avaricious  Knight)  ;
besides,  the  greater  the  wealth  hoarded,  the  more  useful  it  will  be
to  other  people  afterwards,  so  that  on  this  side,  too,  self-interest
and  the  interest  of  others  are  well  balanced.

The  reason  that  utilitarians  will  not  admit  the  conduct  of  a
prudent  money-lender  to  be  the  normal  human  conduct  is  simply


128  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

that  they  really  demand  far  more  than  mere  harmony  between
self-interest  and  the  interest  of  others.  They  demand  that  man
should  sacrifice  his  personal  advantage  for  the  sake  of  the  common
good,  and  that  he  should  find  in  this  his  true  interest.  But  this
demand,  directly  contradicting  as  it  does  the  idea  of  ‘self-interest,
is  based  upon  metaphysical  assumptions  that  are  completely  foreign
to  the  doctrine  of  pure  utilitarianism,  and  is,  apart  from  them,
absolutely  arbitrary.

Actual  cases  of  self-sacrifice  are  due  either  (i)  to  an  immediate
impulse  of  sympathetic  feeling — when,  for  instance,  a  person  saves
another  from  death  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life  without  any  reflec¬
tions  on  the  subject ;  (2)  or  it  may  be  due  to  compassion  as  the
dominating  trait  of  character,  as  in  the  case  of  persons  who  from
personal  inclination  devote  their  life  to  serving  those  who  suffer  ;
(3)  or  to  a  highly  developed  consciousness  of  moral  duty  ;  (4)  or,
finally,  it  may  arise  from  inspiration  with  some  religious  idea.
All  these  motives  in  no  way  depend  upon  considerations  of  self-
interest.  Persons  whose  will  can  be  sufficiently  influenced  by
these  motives,  taken  separately  or  together,  will  sacrifice  them¬
selves  for  the  good  of  others,  without  feeling  the  slightest  neces¬
sity  for  motives  of  a  different  kind.1

But  a  number  of  people  are  unkind  by  nature,  incapable  of
being  carried  away  by  moral  or  religious  ideas,  lacking  in  a  clear
sense  of  duty,  and  not  sensitive  to  the  voice  of  conscience.  It  is
precisely  over  this  type  of  person  that  utilitarianism  ought  to
show  its  power,  by  persuading  them  that  their  true  advantage
consists  in  serving  the  common  good,  even  to  the  point  of  self-
sacrifice.  This,  however,  is  clearly  impossible,  for  the  chief
characteristic  of  these  people  is  that  they  find  their  good  not  in
the  good  of  others,  but  exclusively  in  their  own  selfish  well-being.

By  happiness  as  distinct  from  pleasure  is  meant  secure  or  lasting
satisfaction  ;  and  it  would  be  utterly  absurd  to  try  and  prove  to
a  practical  materialist  that  in  laying  down  his  life  for  others  or
for  an  idea  he  would  be  securing  for  himself  an  abiding  satisfaction
of  his  own ,  that  is,  of  his  material  interests.

1  A  fifth  possible  motive  is  the  thought  of  the  life  beyond  the  grave,  the  desire  to
obtain  the  eternal  blessings  of  paradise.  Although  this  motive  is  a  utilitarian  one  in
the  broad  sense,  it  is  connected  with  ideas  of  a  different  order,  which  the  modern  utili¬
tarian  doctrine  rejects  on  principle.


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  129

It  is  clear  that  the  supposed  connection  between  the  good
which  each  desires  for  himself  and  the  true  or  real  good,  as  the
utilitarians  understand  it,  is  simply  a  crude  sophism  based  upon
the  ambiguity  of  the  word  c  good.’  First  we  have  the  axiom  that
each  desires  that  which  satisfies  him  ;  then  all  the  actual  multi¬
plicity  of  the  objects  and  the  means  of  satisfaction  is  designated
by  one  and  the  same  term  ‘good.’  This  term  is  then  applied  to
quite  a  different  conception  of  general  happiness  or  of  the  common
good.  Upon  this  identity  of  the  term  which  covers  two  distinct
and  even  opposed  conceptions  the  argument  is  based  that  since
each  person  desires  his  own  good  and  the  good  consists  in  general
happiness,  each  person  ought  to  desire  and  to  work  for  the  happi¬
ness  of  all.  But  in  truth  the  good  which  each  desires  for  himself  is
not  necessarily  related  to  general  happiness,  and  the  good  which
consists  in  general  happiness  is  not  that  which  each  desires  for
himself.  A  simple  substitution  of  one  term  for  another  is  not
enough  to  make  a  person  desire  something  different  from  what
he  really  does  desire  or  to  find  his  good  not  in  what  he  actually
finds  it.

The  various  modifications  of  the  utilitarian  formula  do  not
make  it  more  convincing.  Thus,  starting  with  the  idea  of
happiness  as  abiding  satisfaction,  it  might  be  argued  that  personal
happiness  gives  no  abiding  satisfaction,  for  it  is  connected  with
objects  that  are  transitory  and  accidental,  while  the  general
happiness  of  humanity,  in  so  far  as  it  includes  future  generations,
is  lasting  and  permanent,  and  may,  therefore,  give  permanent
satisfaction.  If  this  argument  is  addressed  to  ‘each  person,’  each
can  reply  to  it  as  follows  :  “To  work  for  my  personal  happiness
may  give  me  no  abiding  satisfaction  ;  but  to  work  for  the  future
happiness  of  humanity  gives  me  no  satisfaction  whatever.  I  cannot
possibly  be  satisfied  with  a  good  which,  if  realised  at  all,  would
certainly  not  be  my  good,  for  in  any  case  I  should  not  then  exist.
Therefore,  if  personal  happiness  does  not  profit  me,  general
happiness  does  so  still  less.  For  how  can  I  find  my  good  in
that  which  will  never  be  of  any  good  to  me  ?  ”

The  true  thought  involved  in  utilitarianism  as  worked  out  by
its  best  representatives  is  the  idea  of  human  solidarity ,  in  virtue  of
which  the  happiness  of  each  is  connected  with  the  happiness  of
all.  This  idea,  however,  has  no  organic  connection  with  utili-

K


1 3o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

tarianism,  and,  as  a  practical  principle,  is  incompatible  with  the
utilitarian,  or,  speaking  generally,  with  the  hedonistic  range  of
ideas.  One  may  quite  well  admit  the  fact  of  the  oneness  of  the
human  race,  the  universal  solidarity  and  the  consequences  that  follow
from  it  in  the  natural  order  of  things,  and  yet  not  deduce  from
it  any  moral  rule  of  conduct.  Thus,  for  instance,  a  rich  profligate,
who  lives  solely  for  his  own  pleasure  and  never  makes  the  good
of  others  the  purpose  of  his  actions,  may  nevertheless  justly  point
out  that,  owing  to  the  natural  connection  between  things,  his
refined  luxury  furthers  the  development  of  commerce  and  industry,
of  science  and  arts,  and  gives  employment  to  numbers  of  poor
people.

Universal  solidarity  is  a  natural  law,  which  exists  and  acts
through  separate  individuals  independently  of  their  will  and
conduct  ;  and  if,  in  thinking  of  my  own  good  only,  I  unwillingly
contribute  to  the  good  of  all,  nothing  further  can  be  required
from  me  from  the  utilitarian  point  of  view.  On  the  other  hand,
universal  solidarity  is  a  very  different  thing  from  universal
happiness.  From  the  fact  that  humanity  is  essentially  one,  it  by
no  means  follows  that  it  must  necessarily  be  happy  :  it  may  be
one  in  misery  and  destruction.  Suppose  I  make  the  idea  of  uni¬
versal  solidarity  the  practical  rule  of  my  own  conduct,  and,  in
accordance  with  it,  sacrifice  my  personal  advantage  to  the  common
good.  But  if  humanity  is  doomed  to  perdition  and  its  c  good  ’  is  a
deception,  of  what  use  will  my  self-sacrifice  be  either  to  me  or  to
humanity  ?  Thus,  even  if  the  idea  of  universal  solidarity  could,
as  a  practical  rule  of  conduct,  be  connected  with  the  principle
of  utilitarianism,  this  would  be  of  no  use  at  all  for  the  latter.

In  utilitarianism  the  hedonistic  view  finds  its  highest  ex¬
pression  ;  if,  therefore,  utilitarianism  be  invalid  the  whole  of  the
practical  philosophy  which  finds  the  highest  good  in  happiness  or
self-interested  satisfaction  stands  condemned  also.  The  apparent
universality  and  necessity  of  the  hedonistic  principle,  consisting
in  the  fact  that  all  necessarily  desire  happiness,  proves  to  be
purely  illusory.  For,  in  the  first  place,  the  general  term
‘  happiness  ’  covers  an  infinite  multiplicity  of  different  objects,
irreducible  to  any  inner  unity,  and  secondly,  the  universal
desire  for  one’s  own  happiness  (whatever  meaning  might  be
ascribed  to  this  word)  certainly  contains  no  guarantee  that  the


SPURIOUS  BASIS  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  131

object  desired  can  be  attained,  nor  indicates  the  means  for  its
attainment.  T  hus  the  principle  of  happiness  remains  simply  a
demand ',  and  therefore  has  no  advantage  whatever  over  the  principle
of  duty  or  of  the  moral  good,  the  only  defect  of  which  is  precisely
that  it  may  remain  a  demand,  not  having  in  itself  the  power
necessary  for  its  realisation.  This  defect  is  common  to  both  prin¬
ciples,  but  the  moral  principle  as  compared  with  the  hedonistic  has
the  enormous  advantage  of  inner  dignity  and  of  ideal  universality
and  necessity.  The  moral  good  is  determined  by  the  universal
reason  and  conscience  and  not  by  arbitrary  personal  choice,  and  is
therefore  necessarily  one  and  the  same  for  all.  By  happiness,  on
the  other  hand,  every  one  has  a  right  to  understand  what  he  likes.

So  far  then  we  are  left  with  two  demands — the  rational  demand
of  duty  and  the  natural  demand  for  happiness — (1)  all  men  must
be  virtuous  and  (2)  all  men  want  to  be  happy.  Both  these  demands
have  a  natural  basis  in  human  nature,  but  neither  contains  in
itself  sufficient  grounds  or  conditions  for  its  realisation.  More¬
over,  in  point  of  fact  the  two  demands  are  disconnected  ;  very
often  they  are  opposed  to  one  another,  and  the  attempt  to  establish
a  harmony  of  principle  between  them  (utilitarianism)  does  not
stand  the  test  of  criticism.

These  demands  are  not  of  equal  value,  and  if  moral  philosophy
compelled  us  to  choose  between  the  clear,  definite,  and  lofty —
though  not  sufficiently  powerful — idea  of  the  moral  good  and  the
equally  powerless  but  also  confused,  indefinite,  and  low  idea  of
welfare,  certainly  all  rational  arguments  would  be  in  favour  of  the
first.

Before  insisting,  however,  upon  the  sad  necessity  of  such  a
choice,  we  must  consider  more  closely  the  moral  basis  of
human  nature  as  a  whole.  So  far  we  have  only  considered  it
with  reference  to  the  particular  development  of  its  three  partial
manifestations.


PART  II

THE  GOOD  IS  FROM  GOD


133


f


CHAPTER  I


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES

I

When  a  man  does  wrong  by  injuring  his  neighbour  actively  or  by
refusing  to  assist  him,  he  afterwards  feels  ashamed.  This  is  the
true  spiritual  root  of  all  human  good  and  the  distinctive  character¬
istic  of  man  as  a  moral  being.

What  precisely  is  here  experienced  ?  To  begin  with,  there  is
a  feeling  of  pity  for  the  injured  person  which  was  absent  at  the
actual  moment  of  injury.  This  proves  among  other  things  that
our  mental  nature  may  be  stirred  by  impulses  more  profound  and
more  powerful  than  the  presence  of  sensuous  motives.  A  purely
ideal  train  of  reflection  is  able  to  arouse  a  feeling  which  external
impressions  could  not  awake  ;  the  invisible  distress  of  another
proves  to  be  more  effective  than  the  visible.

Secondly,  to  this  simple  feeling  of  pity,  already  refined  by  the
absence  of  the  visible  object,  there  is  added  a  new  and  still  more
spiritualised  variation  of  it.  We  both  pity  those  whom  we  did
not  pity  before,  and  regret  that  we  did  not  pity  them  at  the
time.  We  are  sorry  for  having  been  pitiless — to  the  regret  for
the  person  injured  there  is  added  regret  for  oneself  as  the  injurer.

But  the  experience  is  not  by  any  means  exhausted  by  these
two  psychological  moments.  The  feeling  in  question  derives  all
its  spiritual  poignancy  and  moral  significance  from  the  third  factor.
The  thought  of  our  pitiless  action  awakens  in  us,  in  addition  to
the  reaction  of  the  corresponding  feeling  of  pity,  a  still  more
powerful  reaction  of  a  feeling  which  apparently  has  nothing  to  do
with  the  case — namely,  the  feeling  of  shame.  We  not  only  regret
our  cruel  action,  but  are  ashamed  of  it,  though  there  might  be

135


ізб  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

nothing  specifically  shameful  in  it.  This  third  moment  is  so
important  that  it  colours  the  whole  mental  state  in  question.  In¬
stead  of  saying, ‘  My  conscience  reproaches  me,’  we  simply  say,  ‘  I
am  ashamed,’  fai  honte ,  ich  schdme.  In  the  classical  languages
the  words  corresponding  to  our  term  ‘  conscience  ’  were  not  used
in  common  parlance,  and  were  replaced  by  words  corresponding  to
‘shame’ — a  clear  indication  that  the  ultimate  root  of  conscience  is
to  be  found  in  the  feeling  of  shame.  We  must  now  consider
what  this  implies.


II

The  thought  of  having  violated  any  moral  demand  arouses
shame,  in  addition  to  the  reaction  of  the  particular  moral  element
concerned.  This  happens  even  when  the  demands  of  shame  in  its
own  specific  sphere  (man’s  relation  to  his  lower  or  carnal  nature)
have  not  been  violated.  The  action  in  question  may  not  in  any
way  have  been  opposed  to  modesty  or  to  the  feeling  of  human
superiority  over  material  nature.  Now  this  fact  clearly  shows
that,  although  we  may  distinguish  the  three  roots  of  human  morality,
we  must  not  separate  them.  If  we  go  deep  enough  they  will  be
seen  to  spring  from  one  common  root ;  the  moral  order  in  the
totality  of  its  norms  is  essentially  a  development  of  one  and  the
same  principle  which  assumes  now  this  and  now  that  form.  The
feeling  of  shame  most  vitally  connected  with  the  facts  of  the  sexual
life  transcends  the  boundaries  of  material  existence,  and,  as  the
expression  of  moral  disapproval,  accompanies  the  violation  of  every
moral  norm  to  whatever  sphere  of  relations  it  might  belong.  In  all
languages,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  the  words  corresponding  to  our
‘  stid  ’  (shame)  are  invariably  characterised  by  two  peculiarities  :  ( i )
by  their  connection  with  the  sexual  life  (o»S cos — atSota,  pudor —
pudenda ,  honte — parties  honteuses ,  Sc  ham — Schamteile),  and  (2)  by  the
fact  that  these  words  are  used  to  express  disapproval  of  the  violation
of  any  moral  demands  whatsoever.  To  deny  the  specific  sexual
meaning  of  shame  (that  is,  the  special  shamefulness  of  the  carnal
relation  between  the  sexes),  or  to  limit  shame  to  this  significance
alone ^  one  must  reject  human  language  and  acknowledge  it  to  be
senseless  and  accidental.

The  general  moral  significance  of  shame  is  simply  a  further


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES


m

development  of  what  is  already  contained  in  its  specific  and
original  manifestation  with  regard  to  the  facts  of  the  sexual  life.

Ill

The  essence  and  the  chief  purpose  of  the  animal  'life  un¬
doubtedly  consists  in  perpetuating,  through  reproduction,  the
particular  form  of  organic  being  represented  by  this  or  by  that
animal.  It  is  the  essence  of  life  for  the  animal  and  not  merely  in
him,  for  the  primal  and  unique  importance  of  the  genital  instinct
is  inwardly  experienced  and  sensed  by  him,  though,  of  course,
involuntarily  and  unconsciously.  When  a  dog  is  waiting  for  a
savoury  piece,  its  attitude,  the  expression  of  its  eyes,  and  its  whole
being  seem  to  indicate  that  the  chief  nerve  of  its  subjective
existence  is  in  the  stomach.  But  the  greediest  dog  will  altogether
forget  about  food  when  its  sexual  instinct  is  aroused — and  a  bitch
will  readily  give  up  its  food  and  even  its  life  for  its  young.  The
individual  animal  seems  in  this  case  to  recognise,  as  it  were,
conscientiously  that  what  matters  is  not  its  own  particular  life  as
such,  but  the  preservation  of  the  given  type  of  the  organic  life
transmitted  through  an  infinite  series  of  fleeting  entities.  It
is  the  only  image  of  infinity  that  can  be  grasped  by  the
animal.  We  can  understand,  then,  the  enormous,  the  fundamental
significance  of  the  sexual  impulse  in  the  life  of  man.  If  man  is
essentially  more  than  an  animal,  his  differentiation  out  of  the
animal  kingdom,  his  inner  self-determination  as  a  human  being
must  begin  precisely  in  this  centre  and  source  of  organic  life.
Every  other  point  would  be  comparatively  superficial.  It  is
only  in  tixis  that  the  individual  animal  becomes  conscious  of  the
infinity  of  the  generic  life,  and,  recognising  itself  as  merely  a  final
event ,  as  merely  a  means  or  an  instrument  of  the  generic  process,
surrenders  itself  without  any  struggle  or  holding  back  to  the
infinity  of  the  genus  which  absorbs  its  separate  existence.  And
it  is  here ,  in  this  vital  sphere,  that  man  recognises  the  insufficiency
of  the  generic  infinity  in  which  the  animal  finds  its  supreme  goal.
Man,  too,  is  claimed  by  his  generic  essence,  through  him,  too,  it
seeks  to  perpetuate  itself — but  his  inner  being  resists  this  demand.
It  protests  1 1  am  not  what  thou  art,  I  am  above  thee,  I  am  not
the  genus,  though  I  am  of  it — I  am  not  ‘ genus ’  but  ‘ genius'  I


138  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

want  to  be  and  I  can  be  immortal  and  infinite,  not  in  thee  only,
but  in  myself.  Thou  wouldst  entice  me  into  the  abyss  of  thy
bad,  empty  infinity  in  order  to  absorb  and  destroy  me  but  I
seek  for  myself  the  true  and  perfect  infinity  which  I  could  share
with  thee  also.  That  which  I  have  from  thee  wants  to  be  mingled
with  thee  and  to  drag  me  down  into  the  abyss  above  which  I  have
risen.  But  my  own  being,  which  is  not  of  thee,  is  ashamed  of
this  mingling  and  opposed  to  it ;  it  desires  the  union  which  alone
is  worthy  of  it — the  true  union  which  is  for  all  eternity.’

The  enormous  significance  of  sexual  shame  as  the  foundation
both  of  the  material  and  the  formal  morality  is  due  to  the  fact
that  in  that  feeling  man  acknowledges  as  shameful,  and  therefore
bad  and  wrong,  not  any  particular  or  accidental  deviation  horn
some  moral  norm  but  the  very  essence  of  that  law  of  nature  which
the  whole  of  the  organic  world  obeys.  That  which  man  is  ashamed
of  is  more  important  than  the  general  fact  of  his  being  ashamed.
Since  man  possesses  the  faculty  of  shame,  which  other  animals  do
not  possess,  he  might  be  defined  as  the  animal  capable  of  shame.
This  definition,  though  better  than  many  others,  would  not  make
it  clear,  however,  that  man  is  the  citizen  of  a  different  world,  the
bearer  of  a  new  order  of  being.  But  the  fact  ot  his  being
ashamed  above  all  and  first  of  all  of  the  very  essence  of  animal
life,  of  the  main  and  the  supreme  expression  of  natural  existence,
directly  proves  him  to  be  a  super-natural  and  super-animal  being.
It  is  in  this  shame  that  man  becomes  in  the  full  sense  human.


IV

The  sexual  act  expresses  the  infinity  of  the  natural  process,
and  in  being  ashamed  of  the  act  man  rejects  that  infinity  as
unworthy  of  himself.  It  is  unworthy  of  man  to  be  merely  a
means  or  an  instrument  of  the  natural  process  by  which  the  blind
life-force  perpetuates  itself  at  the  expense  of  separate  entities
that  are  born  and  perish  and  replace  one  another  in  turn.  Man
as  a  moral  being  does  not  want  to  obey  this  natural  law  of
replacement  of  generations,  the  law  of  eternal  death.  He  does
not  want  to  be  that  which  replaces  and  is  replaced.  He  is
conscious — dimly  at  first — both  of  the  desire  and  the  power  to
include  in  himself  all  the  fulness  of  the  infinite  life.  Ideally  he


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES


49


possesses  it  already  in  that  very  act  of  human  consciousness,  but
this  is  not  enough  ;  he  wants  to  express  the  ideal  in  the  real —

for  otherwise  the  idea  is  only  a  fancy  and  the  highest  self-

consciousness  is  but  self-conceit.  The  power  of  eternal  life
exists  as  a  fact ;  nature  lives  eternally  and  is  resplendent  with
eternal  beauty;  but  it  is  ‘an  indifferent  nature’ — indifferent  to
the  individual  entities  which  by  their  change  preserve  its
eternity.  Among  these  beings,  however,  there  is  one  who
refuses  to  play  this  passive  part.  He  finds  that  his  involuntary
service  to  nature  is  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of,  and  that  the

reward  for  it,  in  the  form  of  personal  death  and  generic

immortality,  is  not  enough.  He  wants  to  be  not  the  instrument
but  the  bearer  of  eternal  life.  To  achieve  this  he  need  not
create  any  new  vital  force  out  of  nothing  ;  he  has  only  to  gain
possession  of  the  force  which  exists  in  nature  and  to  make  better
use  of  it.

We  call  man  a  genius  when  his  vital  creative  force  is  not
wholly  spent  on  the  external  activity  of  physical  reproduction,
but  is  also  utilised  in  the  service  of  his  inner  creative  activity  in
this  or  that  sphere.  A  man  of  genius  is  one  who  perpetuates
himself  apart  from  the  life  of  the  genus  and  lives  in  the  general
posterity,  even  though  he  has  none  of  his  own.  But  if  such
perpetuation  be  taken  as  final,  it  obviously  proves  to  be
illusory.  It  is  built  upon  the  same  basis  of  changing  generations
which  replace  one  another  and  disappear,  so  that  neither  he  who
is  remembered  nor  those  who  remember  him  have  the  true  life.
The  popular  meaning  of  the  word  genius  gives  only  a  hint  of
the  truth.  The  true  ‘genius’  inherent  in  us  and  speaking  most
clearly  in  sexual  shame  does  not  require  that  we  should  have  a
gift  for  art  or  science  and  win  a  glorious  name  in  posterity.  It
demands  far  more  than  this.  Like  the  true  ‘ genius ,’  i.e.  as
connected  with  the  entire  genus  though  standing  above  it,  it
speaks  not  to  the  elect  only  but  to  all  and  each,  warning  them
against  the  process  of  bad  infinity  by  means  of  which  earthly
nature  builds  up  life  upon  dead  bones — for  ever,  but  in  vain.


1 40  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


V

The  object  of  sexual  shame  is  not  the  external  fact  of  the
animal  union  of  two  human  beings,  but  the  profound  and
universal  significance  of  this  fact.  This  significance  lies
primarily,  though  not  entirely,  in  the  circumstance  that  in  such
union  man  surrenders  himself  to  the  blind  impetus  of  an
elementary  force.  If  the  path  on  to  which  it  draws  him  were
good  in  itself,  one  ought  to  accept  the  blind  character  of  the
desire  in  the  hope  of  grasping,  in  time,  its  rational  meaning
and  of  following  freely  that  which  at  first  commanded  our
involuntary  submission.  But  the  true  force  of  sexual  shame  lies
in  the  fact  that  in  it  we  are  not  ashamed  simply  of  submitting
to  nature  but  of  submitting  to  it  in  a  bad  thing,  wholly  bad.
For  the  path  to  which  the  carnal  instinct  calls  us,  and  against
which  we  are  warned  by  the  feeling  of  shame,  is  a  path  which  is
to  begin  with  shameful,  and  proves  in  the  end  to  be  both  pitiless
and  impious.  This  clearly  shows  the  inner  connection  between
the  three  roots  of  morality,  all  of  which  are  thus  seen  to  be
involved  in  the  first.  Sexual  continence  is  not  only  an  ascetic,
but  also  an  altruistic  and  a  religious  demand.

The  law  of  animal  reproduction  of  which  we  are  ashamed
is  the  law  of  the  replacement  or  the  driving  out  of  one  generation
by  another — a  law  directly  opposed  to  the  principle  of  human
solidarity.  In  turning  our  life -force  to  the  procreation  of
children  we  turn  away  from  the  fathers,  to  whom  nothing  is
left  but  to  die.  We  cannot  create  anything  out  of  ourselves —
that  which  we  give  to  the  future  we  take  away  from  the  past,
and  through  us  our  descendants  live  at  the  expense  of  our
ancestors,  live  by  their  death.  This  is  the  way  of  nature  ;  she
is  indifferent  and  pitiless,  and  for  that  we  are  not  responsible.
But  our  participation  in  the  indifferent  and  pitiless  work  of
nature  is  our  own  fault,  though  an  involuntary  one — and  we
are  dimly  aware  of  that  fault  beforehand,  in  the  feeling  of  sexual
shame.  And  we  are  all  the  more  guilty  because  our  participation
in  the  pitiless  work  of  nature,  which  replaces  the  old  generations
by  the  new,  immediately  affects  those  to  whom  we  owe  the
greatest  and  special  duty  —  our  own  fathers  and  forefathers.
Thus  our  conduct  proves  to  be  impious  as  well  as  pitiless.


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES


141


VI

There  is  a  great  contradiction  here,  a  fatal  antinomy,  which
must  be  recognised  even  if  there  is  no  hope  of  solving  it.
Child-bearing  is  a  good  thing  ;  it  is  good  for  the  mother,  who,  in
the  words  of  the  Apostle,  is  saved  by  child-bearing,  and  is  of  course
also  good  for  those  who  receive  the  gift  of  life.  But  at  the
same  time  it  is  equally  certain  that  there  is  evil  in  physical
reproduction  —  not  the  external  and  accidental  evil  of  any  par¬
ticular  calamities  which  the  newly  born  inherit  with  their  very
life,  but  the  essential  and  moral  evil  of  the  carnal  physical  act
itself,  in  and  through  which  we  sanction  the  blind  way  of  nature
shameful  to  us  because  of  its  blindness,  pitiless  to  the  last
generation,  and  impious  because  it  is  to  our  own  fathers  that  we  are
pitiless.  But  the  evil  of  the  natural  way  for  man  can  only  be  put
right  by  man  himself,  and  what  has  not  been  done  by  the  man  of
the  present  may  be  done  by  the  man  of  the  future,  who,  being
born  in  the  same  way  of  animal  nature,  may  renounce  it  and  change
the  law  of  life.  This  is  the  solution  of  the  fatal  antinomy  :  the
evil  of  child-bearing  may  be  abolished  by  child-bearing  itself,
which  through  this  becomes  a  good.  This  saving  character  of
child-bearing  will,  however,  prove  illusory  if  those  who  are  born
will  do  the  same  thing  as  those  who  bore  them,  if  they  sin  and
die  in  the  same  way.  The  whole  charm  of  children,  their
peculiar  human  charm,  is  inevitably  connected  with  the  thought
and  the  hope  that  they  will  not  be  what  we  are,  that  they  will
be  better  than  we — not  quantitatively  better  by  one  or  two
degrees,  but  essentially, — that  they  will  be  men  of  a  different  life,
that  in  them  indeed  is  our  salvation — for  us  and  for  our  fore¬
fathers.  The  human  love  for  children  must  contain  something
over  and  above  the  hen’s  love ;  it  must  have  a  rational  meaning.
But  what  rational  meaning  can  there  be  in  regarding  a  future
scoundrel  as  the  purpose  of  one’s  life,  and  in  feeling  delight  and
tenderness  for  him,  while  condemning  the  present  scoundrels  ?
If  the  future  for  which  children  stand  differs  from  the  present
only  in  the  order  of  time,  in  what  does  the  special  charm  of
children  lie  ?  If  a  poisonous  plant  or  a  weed  will  grow  out  of
the  seed,  what  is  there  in  the  seed  to  admire  ?  But  the  fact  is
that  the  possibility  of  a  better,  a  different  way  of  life,  of  a


142  the  justification  of  the  good

different  and  higher  law  which  would  lift  us  above  nature  with  its
vague  and  impotent  striving  for  the  fulness  of  light  and  power —
this  possibility ,  present  both  in  us  and  in  the  children,  is  greater
in  them  than  in  us,  for  in  them  it  is  still  complete  and  has  not  yet
been  wasted,  as  in  our  case,  in  the  stream  of  bad  and  empty  reality.
These  beings  have  not  yet  sold  their  soul  and  their  spiritual  birth¬
right  to  the  evil  powers.  Every  one  is  agreed  that  the  special
charm  of  children  is  in  their  innocence.  But  this  actual  inno¬
cence  could  not  be  a  source  of  joy  and  delight  to  us  were  we
certain  that  it  is  bound  to  be  lost.  There  would  be  nothing  com¬
forting  or  instructive  in  the  thought  that  their  angels  behold  the
face  of  the  heavenly  Father  were  it  accompanied  by  the  con¬
viction  that  these  angels  will  be  sure  to  become  immediately  blind.

If  the  special  moral  charm  of  children  upon  which  their
aesthetic  attractiveness  is  based  depends  upon  a  greater  possibility
open  to  them  of  a  different  way  of  life,  ought  we  not,  before
bearing  children  for  the  sake  of  that  possibility ,  actually  to  alter  our
own  bad  way  ?  In  so  far  as  we  are  unable  to  do  this  child-bearing
may  be  a  good  and  a  salvation  for  us  ;  but  what  ground  have  we
for  deciding  beforehand  that  we  are  unable  ?  And  is  the  certitude
of  our  own  impotence  a  guarantee  for  the  future  strength  of  those
to  whom  we  shall  pass  on  our  life  ?

VII

Sexual  shame  refers  not  to  the  physiological  fact  taken  in  itself
and  as  such  morally  indifferent,  nor  to  the  sexual  love  as  such  which
may  be  unashamed  and  be  the  greatest  good.  The  warning  and,
later,  the  condemning  voice  of  sexual  shame  refers  solely  to  the
way  of  the  animal  nature,  which  is  essentially  bad  for  man,  though
it  may,  at  the  present  stage  of  human  development,  be  a  lesser
and  a  necessary  evil — that  is,  a  relative  good.

But  the  true,  the  absolute  good  is  not  to  be  found  on  this
path,  which  begins,  for  human  beings  at  any  rate,  with  abuse.
Sexual  human  love  has  a  positive  side,  which,  for  the  sake  of  brevity
and  clearness,  I  will  describe  as  c being  in  love'  This  fact  is  ot
course  analogous  to  the  sexual  desire  of  animals  and  develops  on
the  basis  of  it,  but  clearly  it  cannot  be  reduced  to  such  desire; —
unless  man  is  to  be  altogether  reduced  to  animal.  Being  in  love


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES


43


essentially  differs  from  the  sexual  passion  of  animals  by  its  in¬
dividual,  super-generic  character  :  the  object  for  the  lover  is  this
definite  person,  and  he  strives  to  preserve  for  all  eternity  not  the
genus  but  that  person  and  himself  with  it.  Being  in  love  differs
from  other  kinds  of  individual  human  love — parental,  filial,
brotherly,  etc. — chiefly  by  the  indissoluble  unity  there  is  in  it
between  the  spiritual  and  the  physical  side.  More  than  any  other
love  it  embraces  the  whole  being  of  man.  To  the  lover  both
the  mental  and  the  physical  nature  of  the  beloved  are  equally
interesting,  significant,  and  dear  ;  he  is  attached  to  them  with  an
equal  intensity  of  feeling,  though  in  a  different  way.1  What  is
the  meaning  of  this  from  the  moral  point  of  view  ?  At  the  time
when  all  the  faculties  of  man  are  in  their  first  blossom  there  springs
in  him  a  new,  spiritually- physical  force  which  fills  him  with
enthusiasm  and  heroic  aspirations.  A  higher  voice  tells  him  that
this  force  has  not  been  given  him  in  vain,  that  he  may  use  it  for
great  things ;  that  the  true  and  eternal  union  with  another  being,
which  the  ecstasy  of  his  love  demands,  may  restore  in  them  both
the  image  of  the  perfect  man  and  be  the  beginning  of  the  same
process  in  all  humanity.  The  ecstasy  of  love  does  not  of  course
say  the  same  words  to  all  lovers,  but  the  meaning  is  the  same.  It
represents  the  other,  or  the  positive,  side  of  what  is  meant  by
sexual  shame.  Shame  restrains  man  from  the  wrong,  animal,  way  ;
the  exultation  of  love  points  to  the  right  way  and  the  supreme
goal  for  the  positive  overflowing  force  contained  in  love.  But
when  man  turns  this  higher  force  to  the  same  old  purpose — to  the
animal  work  of  reproduction — he  wastes  it.  It  is  not  in  the  least
necessary  for  the  procreation  of  children  whether  in  the  human  or
in  the  animal  kingdom.  Procreation  is  carried  on  quite  successfully
by  means  of  the  ordinary  organic  functions,  without  any  lofty
ecstasy  of  personal  love.  If  a  simple  action  b  is  sufficient  to
produce  result  r,  and  a  complex  action  a  +  b  is  used  instead,  it  is
clear  that  the  whole  force  of  a  is  wasted.

VIII

The  feeling  of  shame  is  the  natural  basis  of  the  principle  of
asceticism,  but  the  content  of  that  feeling  is  not  exhausted  by  the

1  See  my  article  Smysl  liubvi  [The  Meaning  of  Love).


i44  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

negative  rules  of  abstinence.  In  addition  to  the  formal  principle
of  duty,  which  forbids  shameful  and  unworthy  actions  and  con¬
demns  us  for  committing  them,  shame  contains  a  positive  side
(in  the  sexual  sphere  connected  with  ‘being  in  love’),  which
points  to  the  vital  good  that  is  preserved  through  our  con¬
tinence  and  is  endangered  or  even  lost  through  yielding  to  the
‘  works  of  the  flesh.’  In  the  fact  of  shame  it  is  not  the  formal
element  of  human  dignity  or  of  the  rational  super-animal  power
of  infinite  understanding  and  aspiration  which  alone  resists  the
lure  of  the  animal  way  of  the  flesh.  The  essential  vital  wholeness
of  man,  concealed  but  not  destroyed  by  his  present  condition,
resists  it, also.

We  are  touching  here  upon  the  domain  of  metaphysics  ;  but
without  entering  it  or  forsaking  the  ground  of  moral  philosophy,
we  can  and  must  indicate  this  positive  aspect  of  the  fundamental
moral  feeling  of  shame,  indubitable  both  from  the  logical  and  from
the  real  point  of  view.

Shame  in  its  primary  manifestation  would  not  have  its  peculiar
vital  character,  would  not  be  a  localised,  spiritually  -  organic
feeling,  if  it  expressed  merely  the  formal  superiority  of  human
reason  over  the  irrational  desires  of  the  animal  nature.  This
superiority  of  intellectual  faculties  is  not  lost  by  man  on  the  path
against  which  shame  warns  him.  It  is  something  else  that  is  lost
— something  really  and  essentially  connected  with  the  direct  object
of  shame  ;  and  it  is  not  for  nothing  that  sexual  modesty  is  also
called  continence d

Man  has  lost  the  wholeness  of  his  being  and  his  life,  and  in  the
true,  continent  love  to  the  other  sex  he  seeks,  hopes,  and  dreams
to  re-establish  this  wholeness.  These  aspirations,  hopes,  and  dreams
are  destroyed  by  the  act  of  the  momentary,  external,  and  illusory
union  which  nature,  stifling  the  voice  of  shame,  substitutes  for  the
wholeness  that  we  seek.  Instead  of  the  spiritually-corporeal  inter¬
penetration  and  communion  of  two  human  beings  there  is
simply  a  contact  of  organic  tissues  and  a  mingling^  of  organic
secretions  ;  and  this  superficial,  though  secret,  union  confirms,
strengthens,  and  perpetuates  the  profound  actual  division  of  the

1  The  word  translated  by  ‘  continence  ’  is  in  the  Russian  tselomudric,  which,  by
derivation,  means  ‘  the  wisdom  of  wholeness  ’  (from  tselost — wholeness,  and  mudrost —
wisdom). —  Translator’s  Note.


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  145

human  being.  The  fundamental  division  into  two  sexes  or  in
half  is  followed  by  the  division,  conditioned  by  the  external
union  of  the  sexes,  into  successive  series  of  generations  that
replace  and  expel  one  another,  and  into  a  multitude  of  co¬
existing  entities  which  are  external,  foreign,  and  hostile  to'  one
another.  The  wholeness  or  unity  of  man  is  broken  in  depth,
in  breadth,  and  in  length.  But  this  striving  for  division,  this
centrifugal  force  of  life,  though  everywhere  realised  to  some  extent,
can  never  be  realised  wholly.  In  man  it  assumes  the  inward
character  of  wrong  or  sin,  and  is  opposed  to  and  in  conflict  with
the  wholeness  of  the  human  being,  which  is  also  an  inward  con¬
dition.  The  opposition  expresses  itself,  to  begin  with,  in  the
fundamental  feeling  of  shame  or  modesty,  which,  in  the  sphere  of
sensuous  life,  resists  nature’s  striving  for  mingling  and  division.  It
expresses  itself  also  in  the  positive  manifestation  of  shame — in  the
exultation  of  chaste  love,  which  cannot  reconcile  itself  either  to
the  division  of  the  sexes  or  to  the  external  and  illusory  union.
In  the  social  life  of  man  as  already  broken  up  into  many,  the
centrifugal  force  of  nature  manifests  itself  as  the  egoism  of  each
and  the  antagonism  of  all ,  and  it  is  once  more  opposed  by  the
wholeness  which  now  expresses  itself  as  the  inner  unity  of
externally  separated  entities,  psychologically  experienced  in  the
feeling  of  pity.


IX

The  centrifugal  and  the  disruptive  force  of  nature  which
strives  to  break  up  the  unity  of  man  both  in  his  psychophysical
and  in  his  social  life,  is  also  directed  against  the  bond  which  unites
him  to  the  absolute  source  of  his  being.  Just  as  there  exists  in
man  a  natural  materialism — the  desire  to  surrender  slavishly,  with
grovelling  delight,  to  the  blind  forces  of  animality  ;  as  there  exists
in  him  a  natural  egoism — the  desire  inwardly  to  separate  himself
from  everything  else  and  to  put  all  that  is  his  own  unconditionally
above  all  that  appertains  to  others — so  there  exists  in  man  a  natural
atheism  or  a  proud  desire  to  renounce  the  absolute  perfection,
to  make  himself  the  unconditional  and  independent  principle  of
his  life.  (I  am  referring  to  practical  atheism,  for  the  theoretical
often  has  a  purely  intellectual  character  and  is  merely  an  error  of

L


i46  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  mind,  innocent  in  the  moral  sense.)  This  is  the  most  im¬
portant  and  far-reaching  aspect  of  the  centrifugal  force,  for  it
brings  about  a  separation  from  the  absolute  centre  of  the  universe,
and  deprives  man  not  only  of  the  possibility,  but  even  of  the  desire
for  the  all-complete  existence.  For  man  can  only  become  all
through  being  inwardly  united  to  that  which  is  the  essence  of  all
things.  This  atheistic  impulse  calls  forth  a  powerful  opposition
.frorn  the  inmost  wholeness  of  man  which  in  this  case,  finds
expression  in  the  religious  feeling  of  piety.  This  feeling  directly
and  undoubtedly  testifies  to  our  dependence,  both  individual  and
collective,  upon  the  supreme  principle  in  its  different  manifesta¬
tions,  beginning  with  our  own  parents  and  ending  with  the
universal  Providence  of  the  heavenly  Father.  To  the  exceptional
importance  of  this  relation  (the  religiously  moral  one)  corresponds
the  peculiar  form  which  the  consciousness  of  wrong  assumes  when
it  is  due  to  the  violation  of  a  specifically  religious  duty.  We  are
no  longer  ‘ashamed’  or  ‘conscience-stricken,’  but  ‘afraid.’  The
spiritual  being  of  man  reacts  with  special  concentration  and
intensity  in  the  feeling  of  the  ‘  fear  of  God,’  which  may,  when
the  divine  law  has  been  even  involuntarily  violated,  become  panic
terror  ( horror  sacrilegii ),  familiar  to  the  ancients.

Horror  sacrilegii  (in  the  classical  sense)  disappears  as  man
grows  up  spiritually,  but  the  fear  of  God  remains  as  the  necessary
negative  aspect  of  piety— as  ‘religious  shame.’  To  have  fear  of
God,  or  to  be  God-fearing,  does  not  of  course  mean  to  be  afraid
of  the  Deity,  but  to  be  afraid  of  one’s  opposition  to  the  Deity,  or
of  one’s  wrong  relation  to  Him.  It  is  the  feeling  of  being  out  of
harmony  with  the  absolute  good  or  perfection,  and  it  is  the
counterpart  of  the  feeling  of  reverence  or  piety  in  and  through
which  man  affirms  his  right  or  due  relation  to  the  higher  principle

_ namely,  his  striving  to  participate  in  its  perfection,  and  to

realise  the  wholeness  of  his  own  being.

X

If  we  understand  shame  rooted  in  the  sexual  life  as  the  mani¬
festation  of  the  wholeness  of  the  human  being,  we  shall  not  be
surprised  to  find  that  feeling  overflowing  into  other  moral  spheres.

Speaking  generally,  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  inner


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES


47

essence  of  morality  both  from  its  formal  principle,  or  the  moral
law,  and  from  its  concrete  expressions.  The  essence  of  morality
is  in  itself  one — the  wholeness  of  man,  inherent  in  his  nature  as  an
abiding  norm ,  and  realised  in  life  and  history  as  moral  doing,  as  the
struggle  with  the  centrifugal  and  the  disruptive  forces  of  existence.
The  formal  principle,  or  the  law  of  that  doing,  is  in  its  purely
rational  expression  as  duty  also  one  :  thou  oughtest  in  all  things  to
preserve  the  norm  of  human  existence,  to  guard  the  wholeness  of
the  human  being,  or,  negatively,  thou  oughtest  not  to  allow
anything  that  is  opposed  to  the  norm,  any  violation  of  the
wholeness.  But  the  one  essence  and  the  one  law  of  morality
are  manifested  in  various  ways,  according  to  the  concrete
actual  relations  of  human  life.  Such  relations  are  indefinitely
numerous,  though  both  logical  necessity  and  facts  of  experience
equally  compel  us,  as  we  have  seen,  to  distinguish  three  main
kinds  of  relation  that  fall  within  the  range  of  morality  —  the
relations  to  the  world  below  us,  to  fhe  world  of  beings  like  us,  and
to  the  higher.

The  roots  of  all  that  is  real  are  hidden  in  darkest  earth,  and
morality  is  no  exception.  It  does  not  belong  to  a  kingdom  where
trees  grow  with  their  roots  uppermost.  Its  roots  too  are  hidden
in  the  lower  sphere.  The  whole  of  morality  grows  out  of  the
feeling  of  shame.  The  inner  essence,  the  concrete  expression,
and  the  formal  principle  or  law  of  morality  are  contained  in  that
feeling  like  a  plant  in  a  seed,  and  are  distinguished  only  by  reflec¬
tive  thought.  The  feeling  of  shame  involves  at  one  and  the  same
time  a  consciousness  of  the  moral  nature  of  man  which  strives
to  maintain  its  wholeness,  a  special  expression  of  that  wholeness —
continence, — and  a  moral  imperative  which  forbids  man  to  yield
to  the  powerful  call  of  the  lower  nature,  and  reproaches  him  for
yielding  to  it.  The  commands  and  the  reproaches  of  shame  are
not  merely  negative  and  preventive  in  meaning.  They  have  a
positive  end  in  view.  We  must  preserve  our  inner  potential
wholeness  in  order  to  be  able  to  realise  it  as  a  fact,  and  actually
to  create  the  whole  man  in  a  better  and  more  lasting  way  than  the
one  which  nature  offers  us.  ‘  That’s  not  it,  that’s  not  it  !  ’  says  the
feeling  of  shame,  thus  promising  us  the  true ,  the  right  thing ,  for
the  sake  of  which  it  is  worth  while  to  renounce  the  way  of  the  flesh.
This  way,  condemned  by  shame,  is  the  way  of  psychophysical


I48  the  justification  of  the  good

disruption — spiritual  as  well  as  corporeal, — and  to  such  disruption
is  opposed  not  only  the  spiritual,  but  also  the  physical  wholeness

of  man.

But  realisation  of  complete  wholeness,  of  which  continence  is
merely  the  beginning,  requires  the  fulness  of  conditions  embracing
the  whole  of  human  life.  This  realisation  is  complicated  and
delayed,  though  not  prevented  by  the  fact  that  man  has  already
multiplied,  and  that  his  single  being  has  been  divided  into  a
number  of  separate  entities.  Owing  to  this  new  condition
which  creates  man  as  a  social  being ,  the  abiding  wholeness  of  his
nature  expresses  itself  no  longer  in  continence  alone  that  safe¬
guards  him  from  natural  disruption  but  also  in  social  solidarity
which,  through  the  feeling  of  pity,  re-establishes  the  moral  unity
of  the  physically  divided  man.  At  this  stage  the  difference
between  the  moral  elements,  merged  into  one  in  the  primary
feeling  of  shame,  becomes  more  clear.  The  feeling  of  pity
expresses  the  inner  solidarity  of  living  beings,  but  is  not  identical
with  it,  and  it  preserves  its  own  psychological  distinctness  as
compared  with  the  instinctive  shame.  The  formally- moral
element  of  shame  which  at  first  was  indistinguishable  from  its
psychophysical  basis,  now  develops  into  the  more  subtle  and
abstract  feeling  of  conscience  (in  the  narrow  sense).  Correspond¬
ing  to  the  transformation  of  the  carnal  instinct  into  egoism,
we  have  the  transformation  of  shame  into  conscience.  But  the
ultimate  and  fundamental  significance  of  shame  shows  itself  here
also,  for,  as  already  pointed  out,  the  words  ‘conscience’  and
‘shame’  are  interchangeable  even  in  the  case  of  actions  that  are
purely  egoistic  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  sex.  Morality  is
one,  and  being  fully  expressed  in  shame,  it  reacts  both  against
the  works  of  the  flesh  and  ( implicite )  against  the  bad  con¬
sequences  of  these  works— among  them,  against  the  egoism  of  the
man  already  made  multiple.  The  specific  moral  reaction  against
this  new  evil  finds  its  psychological  expression  in  pity,  and  its
formally-moral  expression  in  conscience — this  ‘social  shame.’

But  neither  the  moral  purity  of  continence  preserved  by
shame,  nor  the  perfect  moral  solidarity  which  inspires  our  heart
with  equal  pity  for  all  living  beings,  empowers  us  to  realise  that
which  chaste  love  and  all-embracing  pity  demand.  And  yet
conscience  clearly  tells  us  ‘  you  must,  therefore  you  can.’


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  149

Man  is  ashamed  of  the  carnal  way  because  it  is  the  way  of  the
breaking  up  and  scattering  of  the  life-force,  and  the  end  of  it  is
death  and  corruption.  If  he  is  really  ashamed  of  it  and  feels  it  to
be  wrong,  he  must  follow  the  opposite  path  of  wholeness  and
concentration  leading  to  eternal  life  and  incorruptibility.  If,
further,  he  really  pities  all  his  fellow-creatures,  his  aim  must  be
to  make  all  immortal  and  incorruptible.  His  conscience  tells  him
that  he  must  do  it,  and  that  therefore  he  can.

And  yet  it  is  obvious  that  the  task  of  gaining  immortal  and
incorruptible  life  for  all  is  above  man.  But  he  is  not  divided  by
any  impermeable  barrier  from  that  which  is  above  him.  In  the
religious  feeling  the  hidden  normal  being  of  man  reacts  against
human  impotence  as  clearly  as  in  the  feeling  of  shame  it  reacts
against  carnal  desires,  and  in  pity  against  egoism.  And  conscience,
assuming  the  new  form  of  the  fear  of  God,  tells  him  :  all  that
you  ought  to  be  and  have  the  power  to  be  is  in  God  ;  you  ought
and  therefore  you  can  surrender  yourself  to  Him  completely,
and  through  Him  fulfil  your  wholeness  —  gaining  the  abiding
satisfaction  of  your  chaste  love  and  your  pity,  and  obtaining
for  yourself  and  for  all  immortal  and  incorruptible  life.  Your
impotence  is  really  as  anomalous  as  shamelessness  and  pitilessness  ;
this  anomaly  is  due  to  your  separation  from  the  absolute  principle
of  right  and  power.  Through  your  reunion  with  Him,  you  must
and  can  correct  it.1

The  supreme  principle  to  which  we  are  united  through  the
religious  feeling  is  not  merely  an  ideal  perfection.  Perfectipn  as
an  idea  is  possible  for  man.  But  man  is  powerless  to  make  his
perfection  actual,  to  make  his  good  the  concrete  good.  Herein
is  the  deepest  foundation  of  his  dependence  upon  the  Being  in
whom  perfection  is  given  as  an  eternal  reality,  and  who  is  the
indivisible  and  unchangeable  identity  of  Good,  Happiness,  and
Bliss.  In.  so  far  as  we  are  united  to  It  by  the  purity  and  the
whole-heartedness  of  our  aspirations,  we  receive  the  corresponding
power  to  fulfil  them,  the  force  to  render  actual  the  potential
wholeness  of  all  humanity.

This  is  the  reason  why  we  are  so  ashamed  or  conscience-

1  In  the  Church  prayer  human  impotence  is  put  side  by  side  with  sins  and  trans¬
gressions  :  “  Lord,  cleanse  our  sins  ;  God,  forgive  our  transgressions  ;  Holy  One,  Visit
and  heal  our  frailties.”  Frailties  is  here  used  especially  in  opposition  to  holiness.


i5o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

stricken  at  every  bad  action  or  even  a  bad  thought.  It  is  not  an
abstract  principle  or  any  arbitrary  rule  that  is  violated  thereby.
But  a  false  step  is  taken,  a  delay  is  caused  on  the  only  true  path
to  the  one  goal  that  is  worth  reaching — the  restoration  of  immortal
and  incorruptible  life  for  all.

Shame  and  conscience  and  fear  of  God  are  merely  the
negative  expressions  of  the  conditions  that  are  indispensable  to
the  real  and  great  work  of  manifesting  God  in  man.

XI

The  moral  good  then  is  from  its  very  nature  a  way  of
actually  attaining  true  blessedness  or  happiness — such  happiness,
that  is,  as  can  give  man  complete  and  abiding  satisfaction.
Happiness  (and  blessedness)  in  this  sense  is  simply  another
aspect  of  the  good,  or  another  way  of  looking  at  it — there  is  as
much  inner  connection  and  as  little  possibility  of  contradiction
between  these  two  ideas  as  between  cause  and  effect,  purpose  and
means,  etc.  One  ought  to  desire  the  good  for  its  own  sake ,  but
the  purity  of  the  will  is  not  in  the  least  marred  by  the  conscious¬
ness  that  the  good  must  itself  necessarily  mean  happiness  for  the
one  who  fulfils  its  demands.  On  the  other  hand,  the  circum¬
stance  that  it  is  natural  to  desire  happiness  does  not  in  any  way
prevent  us  from  understanding  and  bearing  in  mind  the  empirical
fact  that  all  happiness  which  is  not  fictitious  or  illusory  must  be  con¬
ditioned  by  the  good,  i.e.  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  moral  demands.

If  the  law  of  blessedness  or  of  true  evSou/xcma  is  determined
by  the  moral  good,  there  can  be  no  opposition  between  the
morality  of  pure  duty  and  eudaemonism  in  general.  The  good
will  must  be  autonomous  ;  but  the  admission  that  right  conduct
leads  to  true  happiness  does  not  involve  the  heteronomy  of  the
will.  Such  an  admission  bases  happiness  upon  the  moral  good,
subordinates  it  to  the  latter,  and  is  therefore  in  perfect  agreement
with  the  autonomy  of  the  will.  Heteronomy  consists,  on  the
contrary,  in  separating  happiness  from  what  is  morally  right,  in
subordinating  the  desirable  not  to  the  moral  law,  but  to  a  law
foreign  to  morality.  Thus  the  fundamental  opposition  is  not
between  morality  and  eudaemonism  as  such,  but  between  morality
and  eudaemonism  which  is  abstract  or,  more  exactly,  which


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  151

abstracts  happiness  from  its  true  and  purely  moral  conditions,
thus  rendering  it  fictitious  and  illusory.

Why  then  does  the  fulfilment  of  duty  so  often  fail  to  give
complete  satisfaction  ?  I  so  little  wish  to  avoid  this  objection  that
I  would  make  it  stronger,  and  urge  that  human  virtue  never  gives
complete  satisfaction.  But  is  this  virtue  itself  ever  complete ,
and  is  there  any  one  born  c  кк  веХгцштоъ  сгаркб s’  1  ек  ѲеХрраточ
avSpoi  ’  who  has  ever  perfectly  fulfilled  his  duty  ?  It  is  clear  that
the  perfect  good  has  never  been  realised  by  any  individual  human
being  ;  and  it  is  just  as  clear  that  a  superhuman  being,  capable  of  real¬
ising  the  perfect  good,  will  find  complete  or  perfect  satisfaction  in
doing  so.  It  follows  also  that  the  autonomy  of  the  will,  that  is,  the
power  to  desire  the  pure  good  for  its  own  sake  alone,  apart  from
any  extraneous  considerations,  and  to  desire  the  complete  good — is
merely  a  formal  and  subjective  characteristic  of  man.  Before  it  can
become  real  and  objective,  man  must  acquire  the  power  actually
to  fulfil  the  whole  good,  and  thus  obtain  perfect  satisfaction.
Apart  from  this  condition,  virtue  has  a  negative  and  insufficient
character,  which  is  not  due  to  the  nature  of  the  moral  principle
itself.  Thus  when,  in  the  first  place,  the  moral  principle  demands
that  the  spirit  should  have  power  over  the  flesh,  this  demand
involves  no  external  limitations.  The  norm  is  the  perfect  and
absolute  power  of  the  spirit  over  the  flesh,  its  complete  and  actual
autonomy,  in  virtue  of  which  it  must  not  submit  to  the  extrane¬
ous  law  of  carnal  existence — the  law  of  death  and  corruption.  In
this  respect,  then,  immortal  and  incorruptible  life  is  alone  a  perfect
good,  and  it  also  is  perfect  happiness.  Morality  which  does  not
lead  to  a  really  immortal  and  incorruptible  life,  cannot  in
strictness  be  called  autonomous,  for  it  obviously  submits  to  the  law
of  material  life  that  is  foreign  to  it.  Similarly,  with  reference  to
altruism  the  moral  demand  to  help  every  one  puts  no  limit  to  that
help,  and  obviously  the  complete  good  here  requires  that  we  should
obtain  for  all  our  fellow-beings  perfect  blessedness  or  absolute
happiness.  Our  altruism  does  not  fulfil  this  demand  ;  but  the
insufficiency  of  our  good  is  due  not  to  the  moral  law,  whose
requirements  are  unlimited,  but  to  the  law  of  limited  material
being  that  is  alien  to  it.  Consequently,  altruism  which  obeys  this
foreign  law  cannot  in  the  strict  sense  be  called  an  expression  of
autonomous  morality,  but  proves  to  be  heteronomous.


152  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


XII

The  good  then  is  accompanied  by  dissatisfaction  or  absence  of
happiness  only  when  and  in  so  far  as  it  is  incomplete  and  imperfect,
only  in  so  far  as  the  moral  law  is  not  fulfilled  to  the  end  and  still
gives  way  before  another  law,  extraneous  to  it.  But  the  perfect
or  the  purely  autonomous  good  gives  also  perfect  satisfaction.
In  other  words,  the  good  is  separated  from  happiness  not  by  the
nature  of  its  demands,  but  by  the  external  obstacles  in  the  way  of
their  realisation.  Moral  principle  consistently  carried  out  to  the
end,  duty  perfectly  fulfilled  inevitably  leads  to  the  highest  good
or  happiness.  The  opposition,  therefore,  between  the  theory  of
general  happiness  and  pure  morality  is  merely  accidental,  due  to
the  empirical  imperfection  of  the  human  good  or  to  a  wrong
conception  both  of  good  and  of  happiness.  In  the  first  case,  the
discrepancy  between  good  and  happiness  (sufferings  of  the  right¬
eous)  proves  merely  the  insufficiency  or  the  incompleteness — the
unfinished  character  of  the  given  moral  condition.  In  the  second
case,  that  of  a  wrong  conception,  the  moral  interest  is  absent
altogether,  both  when  the  wrongly  conceived  good  coincides  or
when  it  does  not  coincide  with  the  wrongly  conceived  happiness.
Thus,  for  instance,  if  a  person  zealously  prays  that  he  might  pick
up  in  the  street  a  purse  full  of  money,  or  win  in  a  lottery,  the
failure  of  such  prayer  has  no  bearing  whatever  upon  the  question
as  to  the  disharmony  between  virtue  (in  this  case  religious  virtue)
and  well-being,  or  good  and  happiness.  For  in  this  case  both  are
wrongly  understood.  Prayer  as  a  means  to  a  low  and  selfish  end  is
opposed  to  the  Divine  and  the  human  dignity,  and  is  not  a  real  good  ;
nor  is  the  acquisition  of  money  which  one  has  not  deserved  a  blessing
or  real  happiness.  On  the  other  hand,  when  a  man  does  philan¬
thropic  work  not  out  of  pity  or  altruistic  motives,  but  only  for  the
sake  of  obtaining  an  order  of  merit,  and  actually  receives  such  an
order,  such  coincidence  between  the  wrongly  conceived  good  and
the  wrongly  conceived  happiness  is  of  as  little  interest  to  ethics
as  the  discrepancy  between  the  two  in  the  first  case.  There  is
no  need  to  prove  that  although  such  philanthropy  may  be  useful
from  the  social  and  practical  point  of  view,  it  is  not  a  virtue,  nor
that  an  order  of  merit  is  but  an  illusory  blessing.  It  is  clear


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  153

that  true  welfare  can  only  be  born  of  feelings  and  actions
that  are  themselves  well  conceived,  i.e.  that  possess  moral
dignity  and  are  in  harmony  with  the  good  ;  and  that  real  good  in
its  turn  cannot  in  the  long  run  lead  to  misfortune,  i.e.  to  evil.
It  is  very  significant  indeed  that  the  same  conception  of  ‘evil’
equally  expresses  the  opposition  both  to  virtue  and  to  happiness.
Evil  actions  and  evil  fortune  are  equally  called  evil,  which  clearly
indicates  the  inner  kinship  between  the  good  and  blessedness  ;
and  indeed  these  two  ideas  are  often  identified  in  ordinary  speech,
one  term  being  substituted  for  the  other.  The  separation  between
moral  good  and  happiness  is  then  merely  conditional  :  the  absolute
good  involves  also  the  fulness  of  happiness.

The  ultimate  question  as  to  the  meaning  of  life  is  not  then
finally  solved  either  by  the  existence  of  good  feelings  inherent  in
human  nature,  or  by  the  principles  of  right  conduct  which  reason
deduces  from  the  moral  consciousness  of  these  feelings.  Moral
sentiments  and  principles  are  a  relative  good,  and  they  fail  to  give
complete  satisfaction.  We  are  compelled  both  by  reason  and  by
feeling  to  pass  from  them  to  the  good  in  its  absolute  essence,  un¬
conditioned  by  anything  accidental  or  by  any  external  limitations,
and  consequently  giving  real  satisfaction,  and  true  and  complete
meaning  to  life  as  a  whole.


XIII

That  the  pure  moral  good  must  finally  be  experienced  as
blessedness,  that  is,  as  perfect  satisfaction  or  bliss,  was  admitted
by  the  stern  preacher  of  the  categoric  imperative  himself.  But
the  method  whereby  he  sought  to  reconcile  these  two  ultimate
conceptions  can  certainly  not  be  pronounced  satisfactory.

The  great  German  philosopher  admirably  defined  the  formal
essence  of  morality  as  the  absolutely  free  or  autonomous  activity
of  pure  will.  But  he  was  unable  to  avoid  in  the  domain  of
ethics  the  one-sided  subjective  idealism  which  is  characteristic  of
his  philosophy  as  a  whole.  On  this  basis  there  can  only  be  a
fictitious  synthesis  of  good  and  happiness,  only  an  illusory  realisa¬
tion  of  the  perfect  moral  order.

Subjectivism,  in  the  crude  and  elementary  sense,  is  of  course
excluded  by  the  very  conception  of  the  pure  will ,  of  a  will,  that  is,


154  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

free  from  any  empirical  and  accidental  motives,  and  determined
only  by  the  idea  of  absolute  duty  ( das  Sollen\  i.e.  by  the  universal
and  necessary  norm  of  practical  reason.  In  virtue  of  this  norm
the  moral  principle  of  our  conduct  (and  of  our  every  action)
must,  without  inner  contradiction,  be  capable  of  being  affirmed
as  a  universal  and  necessary  law,  applicable  to  ourselves  in  exactly
the  same  way  as  to  everybody  else.

This  formula  is  in  itself  (i.e.  logically)  perfectly  objective  ;  but
wherein  does  its  real  power  lie  ?  Insisting  upon  the  unconditional
character  of  the  moral  demand,  Kant  answers  only  for  the
possibility  of  fulfilling  it  :  you  must,  therefore  you  can.  But  the
possibility  by  no  means  warrants  the  actuality,  and  the  perfect
moral  order  may  remain  altogether  unrealised.  Nor  is  it  clear
from  the  Kantian  point  of  view  what  is  the  ultimate  inner  founda¬
tion  of  the  moral  demand  itself.  In  order  that  our  will  should  be
pure  or  (formally)  autonomous  it  must  be  determined  solely  by
respect  for  the  moral  law — this  is  as  clear  as  A  =  A.  But  why
should  this  A  be  necessary  at  all  ?  Why  demand  a  ‘  pure  ’  will  ?
If  I  want  to  get  pure  hydrogen  out  of  water,  I  must  of  course
take  away  the  oxygen.  If,  however,  I  want  to  wash  or  to  drink
I  do  not  need  pure  hydrogen,  but  require  a  definite  combination
of  it  with  oxygen,  H20,  called  water.

Kant  must  undoubtedly  be  recognised  as  the  Lavoisier  of  moral
philosophy.  His  analysis  of  morality  into  the  autonomous  and  the
heteronomous  elements,  and  his  formulation  of  the  moral  law,  is
one  of  the  greatest  achievements  of  the  human  mind.  But  we
cannot  rest  satisfied  with  the  theoretical  intellectual  interest  alone.
Kant  speaks  of  practical  reason  as  the  unconditional  principle  of
actual  human  conduct,  and  in  doing  so  he  resembles  a  scientist
who  would  demand  or  think  it  possible  that  men  should  use  pure
hydrogen  instead  of  water.

Kant  finds  in  conscience  the  actual  foundation  of  his  moral
point  of  view.  Conscience  is  certainly  more  than  a  demand — it
is  a  fact.  But  in  spite  of  the  philosopher’s  sincere  reverence  for
this  testimony  of  our  higher  nature,  it  lends  him  no  help.  In  the
first  place,  the  voice  of  conscience  says  not  exactly  what  according
to  Kant  it  ought  to  say,  and  secondly,  the  objective  significance
of  that  voice  remains,  in  spite  of  all,  problematic  from  the  point
of  view  of  our  philosopher.


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  155

Kant,  it  will  be  remembered,  pronounces  all  motives  other  than
pure  reverence  for  the  moral  law  to  be  foreign  to  true  morality.  This
is  unquestionably  true  of  motives  of  selfish  gain,  which  induce  us
to  do  good  for  our  own  advantage.  According  to  Kant,  however,
a  man  who  helps  his  neighbour  in  distress  out  of  a  simple  feeling
of  pity  does  not  manifest  a  c  pure  ’  will  either,  and  his  action,  too,
is  devoid  of  moral  worth.  In  this  case  Kant  is  again  right  from
the  point  of  view  of  his  moral  chemistry  ;  but  the  supreme  court
of  appeal  to  which  he  himself  refers — conscience — does  not  adopt
this  point  of  view.  It  is  only  as  a  joke  that  one  can  imagine —
as  Schiller  does  in  his  well  -  known  epigram  —  a  man  whose
conscience  reproaches  him  for  pitying  his  neighbours  and  helping
them  with  heartfelt  compassion  :

“  Willingly  serve  I  my  friends,  but  I  do  it,  alas,  with  affection,

Hence  I  am  plagued  with  the  doubt,  virtue  I  have  not  attained.”

“  This  is  your  only  resource,  you  must  stubbornly  seek  to  abhor  them,
Then  you  can  do  with  disgust  that  which  the  law  may  enjoin.”

In  truth,  conscience  simply  demands  that  we  should  stand  in
the  right  relation  to  everything,  but  it  says  nothing  as  to  whether
this  right  relation  should  take  the  form  of  an  abstract  conscious¬
ness  of  general  principles,  or  directly  express  itself  as  an  immediate
feeling,  or — what  is  best — should  unite  both  these  aspects.  This
is  the  question  as  to  the  degrees  and  forms  of  moral  development
and,  though  very  important  in  itself,  it  has  no  decisive  significance
for  the  general  valuation  of  the  moral  character  of  human  conduct.

Apart,  however,  from  the  circumstance  that  Kant’s  ethical
demands  are  at  variance  with  the  deliverances  of  conscience
to  which  he  appeals,  it  may  well  be  asked  what  significance  can
attach  to  the  very  fact  of  conscience  from  the  point  of  view  of
c  transcendental  idealism.’  The  voice  of  conscience  bearing  witness
to  the  moral  order  of  the  universe  filled  Kant’s  soul  with  awe.
He  was  inspired  with  the  same  awe,  he  tells  us,  at  the  sight  of  the
starry  heaven.  But  what  is  the  starry  heaven  from  Kant’s  point  of
view  ?  It  may  have  had  some  reality  for  the  author  of  The  Natural
History  and  Theory  of  the  Heavens ,x  but  the  author  of  the  Critique  of
Pure  Reason  has  dispelled  the  delusions  of  simple-hearted  realism.
The  starry  heaven,  like  the  rest  of  the  universe,  is  merelya  presenta-

1  The  chief  work  of  Kant’s  pre-critical  period.


1 56  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

tion,  an  appearance  in  our  consciousness.  Though  due  to  an
unknown  action  upon  us  of  something  independent  of  us,  the
phenomenon  as  actually  presented  has  nothing  to  do  with  those
utterly  mysterious  entities,  and  does  not  in  any  way  express  the  true
nature  of  things  :  it  entirely  depends  upon  the  forms  of  our  sensuous
intuition  and  the  power  of  our  imagination  acting  in  accordance
with  the  categories  of  our  understanding.  And  if  Kant  felt  awe¬
struck  at  the  grandeur  of  the  starry  heaven,  the  true  object  of
that  feeling  could  only  be  the  grandeur  of  human  intellect,  or,
rather,  of  intellectual  activity,  which  creates  the  order  of  the
universe  in  order  to  cognise  it.

Kant’s  ‘  idealism  ’  deprives  the  mental  as  well  as  the  visible
world  of  its  reality.  In  his  criticism  of  Rational  Psychology  he
proves  that  the  soul  has  no  existence  on  its  own  account,  that  in
truth  all  that  exists  is  the  complex  totality  of  the  phenomena  of  the
inner  -sense,  which  are  no  more  real  than  the  events  of  the  so-called
external  world.  The  connection  between  the  inner  (as  between
the  ‘outer’)  phenomena  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  ex¬
perienced  by  one  and  the  same  being,  who  suffers  and  acts  in  and
through  them.  The  connectedness  or  the  unity  of  the  mental  life
depends  entirely  upon  certain  laws  or  general  correlations  which  form
the  definite  order  or  the  working  mechanism  of  psychical  events.

If  we  do  happen  to  find  in  this  mechanism  an  important  spring
called  conscience,  this  phenomenon,  however  peculiar  it  may  be,
takes  us  as  little  beyond  the  range  of  subjective  ideas  as  does  the  ring
of  Saturn,  unique  of  its  kind,  which  we  observe  through  the
telescope.


XIV

Kant  suffered  from  his  subjectivism  in  moral  philosophy  quite
as  much  as  he  prided  himself  on  it  in  theoretical  philosophy  ;  and
he  was  well  aware  that  the  fact  of  conscience  is  not  in  itself  a  way
of  escape.  If  conscience  is  merely  a  psychological  phenomenon,
it  can  have  no  compelling  force.  And  if  it  is  something  more,
then  the  moral  law  has  its  foundation  not  in  us  only,  but  also
independently  of  us.  In  other  words,  this  unconditional  law
presupposes  an  absolute  lawgiver.

At  the  same  time  Kant,  who  in  spite  of  the  influence  of


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  157

Rousseau  had  none  of  the  moral  optimism  of  the  latter,  clearly  saw
the  gulf  between  what  ought  to  be  according  to  the  unconditional
moral  law  and  what  is  in  reality.  He  well  understood  that  the
gulf  cannot  be  bridged,  the  good  cannot  completely  triumph,  the
ideal  cannot  be  perfectly  realised  in  the  conditions  of  the  given
empirical  existence  or  of  the  mortal  life.  And  so  he  ‘  postulated  ’
the  immortality  of  the  soul — of  that  very  soul  the  existence  of
which  he  disproved  in  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.

Thus,  notwithstanding  his  critical  philosophy,  Kant  wanted  to
find  God  behind  the  starry  heaven  above  us, — and  behind  the
voice  of  conscience  in  us  an  immortal  soul  in  the  image  and
likeness  of  God.

He  called  these  ideas  postulates  of  practical  reason  and  objects  of
rational  faith P  But  there  is  no  faith  about  it,  for  faith  cannot  be
a  deduction,  and  there  is  not  much  rationality  either,  for  the
whole  argument  moves  in  a  vicious  circle  :  God  and  immortality
of  the  soul  are  deduced  from  morality,  while  morality  itself
depends  upon  God  and  the  immortal  soul.

No  certainty  can  attach,  from  Kant’s  point  of  view,  to  these
two  metaphysical  ideas  themselves,  but  they  must  be  admitted  as
valid  truths,  since  the  reality  of  the  moral  law  demands  the  reality
of  God  and  immortality.  Every  sceptic  or  ‘critical  philosopher’
has,  however,  a  perfect  right  to  turn  this  argument  against  Kant.
Since  pure  morality  can  only  be  based  upon  the  existence  of  God
and  of  an  immortal  soul,  and  the  certainty  of  these  ideas  cannot  be
proved,  pure  morality  dependent  upon  these  ideas  cannot  be
proved  either,  and  must  remain  a  mere  supposition.

If  the  moral  law  has  absolute  significance,  it  must  rest  upon
itself  and  stand  in  no  need  of  ‘  postulates,’  the  object  of  which
has  been  so  systematically  put  to  shame  in  the  Critique  of  Pure
Reason.  But  if,  in  order  to  have  real  force,  the  moral  law  must
be  based  upon  something  other  than  itself,  its  foundations  must  be
independent  of  it  and  possess  certainty  on  their  own  account.
The  moral  law  cannot  possibly  be  based  upon  things  which  have
their  ground  in  it.

Kant  rightly  insisted  that  morality  is  autonomous.  This
great  discovery,  connected  with  his  name,  will  not  be  lost  for

1  I  confine  myself  here  to  these  two  postulates  only,  for  the  question  of  the  freedom
of  will  belongs  to  a  different  order  of  ideas.


158  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

humanity.  Morality  is  autonomous  precisely  because  its  essence
is  not  an  abstract  formula  hanging  in  the  air,  but  contains  in
itself  all  the  conditions  of  its  realisation.  The  necessary  presup¬
position  of  morality,  namely,  the  existence  of  God  and  of  an
immortal  soul,  is  not  a  demand  for  something  extraneous  to
morality  and  additional  to  it,  but  is  its  own  inner  basis.  God
and  the  soul  are  not  the  postulates  of  the  moral  law,  but  the  direct
creative  forces  of  the  moral  reality.

The  fact  that  the  good  is  not  finally  and  universally  realised
for  us,  that  virtue  is  not  always  effective  and  never ,  in  our
empirical  life,  wholly  effective,  does  not  disprove  the  fact  that  the
good  exists  and  that  the  measure  of  good  in  humanity  is,  on  the
whole,  on  the  increase.  It  is  not  increasing  in  the  sense  that
individual  persons  are  becoming  more  virtuous  or  that  there  is  a
greater  number  of  virtuous  people,  but  in  the  sense  that  the
average  level  of  the  universally  binding  moral  demands  that  are
fulfilled  is  gradually  raised.  This  is  a  historical  fact,  against  which
one  cannot  honestly  argue.  What  then  is  the  source  of  this  in¬
crease  of  good  in  humanity  as  a  collective  whole,  independently  of
the  moral  state  of  human  units  taken  separately  ?  We  know  that
the  growth  of  a  physical  organism  is  due  to  the  superabundance
of  nourishment  which  it  receives  from  its  actual  physico-organic
environment,  the  existence  of  which  precedes  its  own.  In  a
similar  way,  moral  growth,  which  cannot  logically  be  explained  by
the  physical  (for  such  explanation  would  in  the  long  run  mean
deducing  the  greater  from  the  lesser,  or  something  from  nothing,
which  is  absurd),  can  also  only  be  explained  by  a  superabundance
of  nourishment,  that  is,  by  the  general  positive  effect  of  the  actual
moral  or  spiritual  environment.  In  addition  to  the  inconstant
and,  for  the  most  part,  doubtful  growth  of  separate  human  beings,
traceable  to  the  educative  effect  of  the  social  environment,  there
is  a  constant  and  undoubtful  spiritual  growth  of  humanity,  or  of
the  social  environment  itself — and  this  is  the  whole  meaning  ot
history.  To  account  for  this  fact  we  must  recognise  the  reality
of  a  superhuman  environment  which  spiritually  nourishes  the
collective  life  of  humanity  and,  by  the  superabundance  of  this
nourishment,  conditions  its  moral  progress.  And  if  the  reality
of  the  superhuman  good  must  be  admitted,  there  is  no  reason  to
deny  its  effect  upon  the  individual  moral  life  of  man.  It  is  clear


THE  UNITY  OF  MORAL  PRINCIPLES  159

that  this  higher  influence  extends  to  everything  capable  of  receiv¬
ing  it.  The  effect  of  the  social  environment  must  not,  however,
be  regarded  as  the  source,  but  only  as  one  of  the  necessary  con¬
ditions  of  the  moral  life  of  the  individual.  If  moral  life,  both
collective  and  personal,  be  understood  as  the  interaction  between
man  (and  humanity)  and  the  perfect,  superhuman  good,  it  cannot
belong  to  the  sphere  of  the  transitory  material  events.  In  other
words,  both  the  individual  and  the  collective  soul  must  be  im¬
mortal.  Immortality  does  not  necessarily  presuppose  the  soul  as
an  independent  substance.  Each  soul  can  be  conceived  as  one
of  a  number  of  inseparably  connected,  constant  and  therefore
immortal  relations  of  the  Deity  to  some  universal  substratum  of
the  life  of  the  world,  a  closer  definition  of  which  does  not  directly
belong  to  the  scope  of  moral  philosophy.  We  know  nothing  as
yet — i.e.  before  a  theoretical  inquiry  into  metaphysical  questions —
about  the  substantiality  of  the  soul  or  the  substantiality  of  God  ;
but  one  thing  we  know  with  certainty :  c  As  the  Lord  liveth,  my
soul  liveth.’  If  we  give  up  this  fundamental  truth  we  cease  to
understand  and  to  affirm  ourselves  as  moral  beings,  that  is,  we
give  up  the  very  meaning  of  our  life.


CHAPTER  II


THE  UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY

I

Neither  the  natural  inclination  to  the  good  in  individual  men,
nor  the  rational  consciousness  of  duty,  are  in  themselves  sufficient
for  the  realisation  of  the  good.  But  our  moral  nature  contains
an  element  of  something  greater  than  itself.

Even  the  first  two  foundations  of  morality — shame  and  pity —
cannot  be  reduced  either  to  a  certain  mental  condition  of  this  or  that
person,  or  to  a  universal  rational  demand  of  duty.  When  a  man
is  ashamed  of  desires  and  actions  that  spring  from  his  material
nature,  he  does  more  than  express  thereby  his  personal  opinion  or
the  state  of  his  mind  at  the  given  moment.  He  actually  apprehends
a  certain  reality  independent  of  his  opinions  or  accidental  moods —
the  reality,  namely,  of  the  spiritual,  supermaterial  essence  of  man.
In  the  feeling  of  shame  the  fundamental  material  inclinations  are
rejected  by  us  as  foreign  and  hostile  to  us.  It  is  clear  that  the
person  who  rejects  and  the  thing  which  is  rejected  cannot  be
identical.  The  man  who  is  ashamed  of  a  material  fact  cannot
himself  be  a  mere  material  fact.  A  material  fact  that  is  ashamed
of  and  rejects  itself,  that  judges  itself  and  acknowledges  itself  un¬
worthy,  is  an  absurdity  and  is  logically  impossible.

The  feeling  of  shame  which  is  the  basis  of  our  right  relation
to  the  material  nature  is  something  more  than  a  simple  psychical
fact.  It  is  a  self-evident  revelation  of  a  certain  universal  truth, —
of  the  truth,  namely,  that  man  has  a  spiritual  supermaterial  nature.
In  shame,  and  in  ascetic  morality  founded  upon  it,  this  spiritual
essence  of  man  manifests  itself  not  only  as  a  possibility  but  also  as
an  actuality ,  not  as  a  demand  only  but  also  as  a  certain  reality.

160


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  161

Men  whose  spirit  dominates  their  material  nature  have  actually
existed  in  the  past  and  exist  now.  The  fact  that  they  are  com¬
paratively  few  in  number  simply  proves  that  the  moral  demand  has
not  yet  been  fully  and  finally  realised  ;  it  does  not  prove  that  it
is  not  realised  at  all  and  remains  a  mere  demand.  It  cannot  be
said  that  the  moral  principle  of  shame  is  lacking  in  actuality,  or,
what  is  the  same  thing,  in  actual  perfection.

In  a  similar  manner,  the  feeling  of  pity  or  compassion  which  is
the  basis  of  man’s  right  relation  to  his  fellow-beings  expresses  not
merely  the  mental  condition  of  a  given  person,  but  also  a  certain
universal  objective  truth,  namely,  the  unity  of  nature  or  the  real
solidarity  of  all  beings.  If  they  were  alien  and  external  to  one
another,  one  being  could  not  put  himself  into  the  place  of  another,
could  not  transfer  the  sufferings  of  others  to  himself  or  feel
together  with  others  ;  for  compassion  is  an  actual  and  not  an
imagined  state,  not  an  abstract  idea.  The  bond  of  sympathy
between  separate  beings,  which  finds  expression  in  the  funda¬
mental  feeling  of  pity  and  is  developed  in  the  morality  of  altruism,
is  not  merely  a  demand,  but  a  beginning  of  realisation.  This  is
proved  by  the  solidarity  of  human  beings,  which  exists  as  a  fact,  and
increases  throughout  the  historical  development  of  society.  The
defect  of  the  social  morality  is  not  that  it  is  not  realised  at  all,  but
that  it  is  not  fully  and  perfectly  realised.  The  feeling  of  shame
gives  us  no  theoretical  conception  of  the  spiritual  principle  in  man,
but  indubitably  proves  the  existence  of  that  principle.  The  feeling
of  pity  tells  us  nothing  definite  about  the  metaphysical  nature  of
the  universal  unity,  but  concretely  indicates  the  existence  of  a  certain
fundamental  connection  between  distinct  entities,  prior  to  all  ex¬
perience.  And  although  these  entities  are  empirically  separate  from
one  another,  they  become  more  and  more  united  in  the  empirical
reality  itself.


II

In  the  two  moral  spheres  indicated  by  shame  and  pity,  the  good
is  already  known  as  truth,  and  is  realised  in  fact,  but  as  yet  im¬
perfectly.  In  the  third  sphere  of  moral  relations,  determined  by
the  religious  feeling  or  reverence,  the  true  object  of  that  feeling
reveals  itself  as  the  highest  or  perfect  good,  wholly  and  absolutely

M


1 62  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

realised  from  all  eternity.  The  inner  basis  of  religion  involves
more  than  a  mere  recognition  of  our  dependence  upon  a  power
immeasurably  greater  than  we.  Religious  consciousness  in  its  pure
form  is  a  joyous  feeling  that  there  is  a  Being  infinitely  better  than
ourselves,  and  that  our  life  and  destiny,  like  everything  that  exists,
is  dependent  upon  It — not  upon  an  irrational  fate,  but  upon  the
actual  and  perfect  Good,  the  One  which  embraces  all.

In  true  religious  experience  the  reality  of  that  which  is  ex¬
perienced  is  immediately  given  ;  we  are  directly  conscious  of  the
real  presence  of  the  Deity,  and  feel  Its  effect  upon  us.  Abstract
arguments  can  have  no  force  against  actual  experience.  When
a  man  is  ashamed  of  his  animal  desires,  it  is  impossible  to  prove
to  him  that  he  is  a  mere  animal.  In  the  very  fact  of  shame  he  is
aware  of  himself  as  being,  and  proves  himself  to  be,  more  and
higher  than  an  animal.  When  in  the  feeling  of  pity  we  are
affected  by  the  sufferings  of  another  person,  and  are  conscious  of
him  as  of  a  fellow-being,  no  force  can  attach  to  the  theoretical
argument  that  perhaps  that  other,  for  whom  my  heart  aches,  is
only  my  presentation,  devoid  of  all  independent  reality.  If  I  am
conscious  of  the  inner  connection  between  myself  and  another,
that  consciousness  testifies  to  the  actual  existence  of  the  other  no
less  than  to  my  own.  This  conclusion  holds  good  of  the  religious
feeling  as  well  as  of  pity  and  compassion.  The  only  difference  is
that  the  object  of  the  former  is  experienced  not  as  equal  to  us  but
as  absolutely  superior,  all-embracing,  and  perfect.  It  is  impossible
that  a  creature  which  excites  in  me  a  living  feeling  of  compassion
should  not  actually  live  and  suffer.  It  is  still  more  impossible
that  the  highest,  that  which  inspires  us  with  reverence  and  fills
our  soul  with  unutterable  bliss,  should  not  exist  at  all.  We
cannot  doubt  the  reality  of  that  which  perceptibly  affects  us,  and
whose  effect  upon  us  is  given  in  the  very  fact  of  the  experience.
The  circumstance  that  I  do  not  always  have  the  experience,  and
that  other  people  do  not  have  it  at  all,  no  more  disproves  its
reality  and  the  reality  of  its  object  than  the  fact  of  my  not  seeing
the  sun  at  night,  and  of  persons  born  blind  never  seeing  it  at  all,
disproves  the  existence  of  the  sun  and  of  vision.  Moreover,
many  people  have  a  wrong  conception  of  the  sun,  taking  it  to  be
small  and  to  move  round  the  earth,  and  this,  indeed,  was  the
universal  belief  in  former  days.  But  neither  the  existence  of  the


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  163

sun  nor  my  certainty  of  its  existence  are  in  the  least  affected
by  this  fact.  In  the  same  way,  theological  errors  and  con¬
tradictions  do  not  in  any  way  touch  upon  the  real  object  of
religion.  Theological  systems,  like  the  astronomical  ones,  are
the  work  of  human  intellect,  and  depend  upon  the  degree  of
its  development  and  the  amount  of  positive  knowledge.  Correct
theology,  like  correct  astronomy,  is  important  and  necessary  ;  but
it  is  not  a  thing  of  the  first  importance.  The  epicycles  of  the
Alexandrian  astronomers  and  the  division  of  the  solar  system  accord¬
ing  to  the  theory  of  Tycho  Brahe  did  not  prevent  any  one  from
enjoying  the  light  and  the  warmth  of  the  sun  ;  and  when  these
astronomers  were  proved  to  be  in  error,  no  one  was  led  thereby  to
doubt  the  actual  existence  of  the  sun  and  the  planets.  In  the
same  way  the  most  false  and  absurd  theological  doctrine  cannot
prevent  any  one  from  experiencing  the  Deity,  nor  cause  any
doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  what  is  given  in  experience.

Abstract  theoretical  doubts  had  arisen  in  the  past  and  still
arise,  not  only  with  regard  to  the  existence  of  God,  but  to  all
other  existence.  No  one  at  all  familiar  with  philosophical  specula¬
tion  can  imagine  that  the  existence  of  the  physical  world,  or  even
of  our  neighbours,  is  self-evident  to  the  intellect.  A  doubt  of  that
existence  is  the  first  foundation  of  all  speculative  philosophy
worthy  of  the  name.  These  theoretical  doubts  are  disposed  of  in
one  way  or  another  by  means  of  various  epistemological  and  meta¬
physical  theories.  But  however  interesting  and  important  these
theories  may  be,  they  have  no  direct  bearing  upon  life  and
practice.  Such  direct  significance  attaches  to  moral  philosophy,
which  is  concerned  with  the  actual  data  of  our  spiritual  nature  and
the  guiding  practical  truths  which  logically  follow  from  them.

The  parallelism  between  spiritual  and  physical  blindness  is
also  borne  out  by  the  following  consideration.  It  is  well  known
that  people  blind  from  birth  are  perfectly  sound  in  other  respects,
and  have  indeed  an  advantage  over  the  persons  with  normal  sight
in  that  their  other  senses — hearing,  touch — are  better  developed.
In  a  similar  way  persons  lacking  in  receptivity  to  the  divine
light  are  perfectly  normal  in  all  other  respects,  both  practical
and  theoretical,  and,  indeed,  they  generally  prove  superior  to
others  in  their  capacity  for  business  and  for  learning.  It  is
natural  that  a  person  who  is  particularly  drawn  to  the  absolute


іб4  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

centre  of  the  universe  cannot  pay  equal  attention  to  objects  that
are  relative.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  therefore,  that  in  the
special,  worldly  tasks  of  humanity,  a  great  share  of  work  and  of
success  falls  to  the  men  for  whom  the  higher  world  is  closed.
Such  ‘division  of  labour’  is  natural,  and  it  provides  a  certain
teleological  explanation  of  atheism  which  must  serve  some
positive  good  purpose  on  the  whole,  whatever  its  negative  causes
in  each  particular  case  may  be.  If  the  work  of  history  is
necessary,  if  the  union  of  mankind  is  to  become  a  fact,
if  it  is  necessary  that  at  a  given  epoch  men  should  invent
and  make  all  sorts  of  machines,  dig  the  Suez  Canal,  discover
unknown  lands,  etc.,  then  it  is  also  necessary  for  the  successful
performance  of  all  these  tasks  that  some  men  should  not  be
mystics,  or  even  earnest  believers.  It  is  clear,  of  course,  that  the
supreme  will  does  not  make  any  one  an  atheist  for  the  sake  of  its
historical  purposes ;  but  once  the  complex  chain  of  causes,
finally  confirmed  by  this  or  that  voluntary  decision  of  the  man
himself,  has  produced  in  a  given  case  spiritual  blindness,  it  is  the
business  of  Providence  to  give  such  a  direction  to  this  ‘ill’  that
it  too  should  be  not  wholly  devoid  of  ‘  good  ’ — that  a  subjective
wrong  should  have  an  objective  justification.

Ill

The  reality  of  the  Deity  is  not  a  deduction  from  religious
experience  but  the  content  of  it — that  which  is  experienced.  If
this  immediate  reality  of  the  higher  principle  be  taken  away,
there  would  be  nothing  left  of  religious  experience.  It  would
no  longer  exist.  But  it  does  exist,  and  therefore  that  which  is
given  and  experienced  in  it  exists  also.  God  is  in  us ,  therefore
He  is.

However  complete  the  feeling  of  our  inner  unity  with  God
may  be,  it  never  becomes  a  consciousness  of  mere  identity,  of
simple  merging  into  one.  The  feeling  of  unity  is  inseparably
connected  with  the  consciousness  that  the  Deity  with  which  we
are  united,  and  which  acts  and  reveals  itself  in  us,  is  something
distinct  and  independent  of  us — that  it  is  prior  to  us,  higher  and
greater  than  we.  God  exists  on  His  own  account.  That  which
is  experienced  is  logically  prior  to  any  given  experience.  The


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  165

actuality  of  an  object  does  not  depend  upon  the  particular  way
in  which  it  acts.  When  one  has  to  say  to  a  person  ‘  there  is  no
God  in  you’  every  one  understands  that  this  is  not  a  denial  of  the
Deity,  but  merely  a  recognition  of  the  moral  worthlessness  of  the
person  in  whom  there  is  no  room  for  God,  i.e.  no  inner
receptivity  to  the  action  of  God.  And  this  conclusion  would
stand  even  if  we  had  to  admit  that  all  men  were  thus
impenetrable  to  the  Deity.

My  compassion  for  another  person  does  not  in  the  least
imply  that  I  am  identical  with  that  other.  It  simply  means  that
I  am  of  the  same  nature  as  he  is  and  that  there  is  a  bond  of
union  between  us.  In  the  same  way,  the  religious  experience
of  God  in  us  or  of  ourselves  in  God  by  no  means  implies  that
He  is  identical  with  us,  but  simply  proves  our  inner  relationship
to  Him — ‘for  we  are  also  His  offspring.’  The  relation  is  not
brotherly,  as  with  our  fellow-beings,  but  filial — it  is  not  the  bond
of  equality,  but  the  bond  of  dependence.  The  dependence  is  not
external  or  accidental,  but  inward  and  essential.  True  religious
feeling  regards  the  Deity  as  the  fulness  of  all  the  conditions  of
our  life  —  as  that  without  which  life  would  be  senseless  and
impossible  for  us,  as  the  first  beginning ,  as  the  true  medium ,  and  as
the  final  end  of  existence.  Since  everything  is  already  contained
in  God  we  can  add  nothing  to  Him  from  ourselves,  no  new
content  ;  we  cannot  make  the  absolute  perfection  more  perfect.
But  we  can  partake  of  it  more  and  more,  be  united  with  it  more
and  more  closely.  Thus  our  relation  to  the  Deity  is  that  of
form  to  content.

A  further  analysis  of  what  in  religious  feeling  is  given  as  a
living  experience  of  the  reality  of  Godhead  shows  that  we  stand
in  a  threefold  relation  to  this  perfect  reality,  this  absolute  or
supreme  good.  (1)  We  are  conscious  of  our  difference  from  it  ;
and  since  it  contains  the  fulness  of  perfection,  we  can  only  differ
from  it  by  negative  qualities  or  determinations — by  our  im¬
perfection,  impotence,  wickedness,  suffering.  In  this  respect
we  are  the  opposite  of  the  Deity,  its  negative  other  ;  this  is  the
lower  earthly  principle  out  of  which  man  is  created  (his  v\r]  or
causa  materialis ),  that  which  is  called  in  the  Bible  ‘the  dust  of
the  ground  ’  ( gaphar  haadam).  (2)  But  although  we  are  nothing
but  a  complex  of  all  possible  imperfections,  we  are  conscious  of


1 66  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  absolute  perfection  as  of  that  which  truly  is,  and  in  this
consciousness  are  ideally  united  to  it,  reflect  it  in  ourselves.
This  idea  of  the  all-embracing  perfection  as  the  informing
principle  of  our  life  ( elSos ,  causa  formalis )  is,  in  the  words  of  the
Bible,  ‘  the  image  of  God  ’  in  us  (or,  more  exactly,  ‘  the  reflection’ :
zclem  from  zel ,  ‘shadow’).  (3)  In  God  the  ideal  perfection  is
fully  realised  ;  hence  we  are  not  content  with  being  conscious
of  Him  as  an  idea,  or  in  reflecting  Him  in  ourselves,  but  want,
like  God,  to  be  actually  perfect.  And  since  our  empirical
existence  is  opposed  to  this,  we  seek  to  transform,  to  perfect
our  bad  reality,  and  to  assimilate  it  to  the  absolute  ideal.
Thus  although  in  our  given  (or  inherited)  condition  we  are
opposed  to  the  Deity,  we  approximate  to  It  in  that  towards
which  we  aspire.  The  end  of  our  life,  that  for  the  sake  of
which  we  exist  (oS  4Wa,  causa  finalis ),  is  the  ‘likeness  of  God’
[d'mut).

The  religious  attitude  necessarily  involves  discriminating  and
comparing.  We  can  stand  in  a  religious  relation  to  the  higher
only  if  we  are  aware  of  it  as  such,  only  if  we  are  conscious  of  its
superiority  to  us,  and  consequently  of  our  own  unworthiness.
But  we  cannot  be  conscious  of  our  unworthiness  or  imperfection
unless  we  have  an  idea  of  its  opposite— i.e.  an  idea  of  perfection.
Further,  the  consciousness  of  our  own  imperfection  and  of  the
divine  perfection  cannot,  if  it  be  genuine,  stop  at  this  opposition.
It  necessarily  results  in  a  desire  to  banish  it  by  making  our
reality  conform  to  the  highest  ideal,  that  is,  to  the  image  and
likeness  of  God.  Thus  the  religious  attitude  as  a  whole  logically
involves  three  moral  categories  :  (1)  imperfection  (in  us)  ;  (2)
perfection  (in  God)  ;  and  (3)  the  process  of  becoming  perfect  or
of  establishing  a  harmony  between  the  first  and  the  second  as  the
task  of  our  life.


IV

The  logical  analysis  of  the  religious  attitude  into  its  three
component  elements  finds  confirmation  both  from  the  psycho¬
logical  and  the  formally  moral  point  of  view.

Psychologically,  i.e.  as  a  subjective  state,  the  typical  religious
attitude  finds  expression  in  the  feeling  of  reverence,  or,  more


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  167

exactly,  of  reverent  love.1  This  feeling  necessarily  involves  (1)  self¬
depreciation  on  the  part  of  the  person  who  experiences  it,  or  his
disapproval  of  himself  as  he  actually  is  at  the  present  moment ;  (2)
positive  awareness  of  the  higher  ideal  as  of  a  reality  of  a  different
order,  as  of  that  which  truly  is — since  to  feel  reverence  for  what
one  knows  to  be  an  invention  or  an  image  of  fancy  is  psychologic¬
ally  impossible ;  (3)  a  striving  to  work  a  real  change  in  oneself,  and
to  draw  nearer  to  the  highest  perfection.  Apart  from  this  striving
the  religious  feeling  becomes  an  abstract  idea.  On  the  contrary,
real  striving  towards  God  is  the  beginning  of  union  with  Him.
By  experiencing  His  reality  in  ourselves  we  become  united  to  this
supreme  reality,  and  make  a  beginning — an  inner  and  subjective
one — of  the  future  complete  union  of  all  the  world  with  God.
This  is  the  reason  why  the  true  religious  attitude  is  characterised
by  the  feeling  of  bliss  and  enthusiasm,  which  the  Apostle  calls
“the  earnest  of  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts”  and  “joy  of  the  Holy
Ghost.”  It  is  the  prophetic  spirit  anticipating  our  complete  and
final  union  with  the  Deity  :  the  union  is  not  yet  attained  but  it
has  begun,  and  we  have  a  foretaste  of  the  joy  of  fulfilment.

From  the  formally  moral  point  of  view,  the  consciousness
(involved  in  the  religious  feeling)  that  the  supreme  ideal  actually
exists  and  that  we  are  out  of  harmony  with  it  compels  us  to  become
more  perfect.  That  which  excites  our  reverence,  affirms  thereby
its  right  to  our  devotion.  And  if  we  are  conscious  of  the  actual
and  absolute  superiority  of  the  Deity  over  ourselves,  our  devotion
to  it  must  be  real  and  unlimited,  i.e.  it  must  be  the  unconditional
rule  of  our  life.

The  religious  feeling  expressed  in  the  form  of  the  categorical
imperative  commands  us  not  merely  to  desire  perfection  but  to  be
perfect.  And  this  means  that,  in  addition  to  having  a  good  will,
being  honest,  well-behaved  and  virtuous,  we  must  be  free  from
pain,  immortal  and  incorruptible,  and  must,  moreover,  make  all
our  fellow-beings  morally  perfect  and  free  from  pain,  deathless,
and  incorruptible  in  their  bodies.  For,  indeed,  true  perfection
must  embrace  the  whole  of  man,  must  include  all  his  reality — and
of  that  reality  other  beings,  too,  form  part.  If  we  do  not  want

1  This  subjective  basis  of  religion  is  best  rendered  by  the  German  Ehrfurcht ,
ehrfurchtsvollc  Liebe.  It  may  also  be  called  an  ascending  love,  amor  ascetidens.  See
the  conclusion  of  this  book.


1 68  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

that,  in  addition  to  moral  perfection,  they  should  be  free  from  pain,
immortal  and  incorruptible,  we  have  no  pity  for  them,  that  is,  we
are  inwardly  imperfect.  And  if  we  want  it,  but  cannot  do  it,  we
are  impotent,  that  is,  our  inner  perfection  is  not  sufficient  to
manifest  itself  objectively  ;  it  is  merely  a  subjective,  incomplete
perfection,  or,  in  other  words,  it  is  imperfection.  In  either  case
we  have  not  fulfilled  the  demand,  “  Be  ye  perfect.”

But  what  can  the  demand  mean  ?  It  is  clear  that  by  willing
alone,  however  pure  and  intense  the  will  may  be,  we  cannot  even
contrary  to  the  claim  of  ‘mental  healing’ — save  ourselves  or  our
neighbours  from  toothache  or  gout,  let  alone  raise  the  dead.

The  imperative  ‘  be  ye  perfect  ’  does  not  refer,  then,  to  separate
acts  of  will,  but  puts  before  us  a  life-long  task.  A  simple  act  of
pure  will  is  necessary  for  accepting  the  task,  but  is  not  in  itself
sufficient  for  fulfilling  it.  The  process  of  becoming  perfect  is  a
necessary  means  to  perfection.  Thus  the  unconditional  demand
‘  be  perfect  ’  means,  in  fact,  c  become  perfect.''

V

Perfection,  i.e.  the  completeness  of  good,  or  the  unity  of
good  and  happiness,  expresses  itself  in  three  ways:  (i)  as  the
absolutely  real,  eternally  actual  perfection  in  God  ;  (2)  as

potential  perfection  in  human  consciousness  which  contains  the
absolute  fulness  of  being  in  the  form  of  an  idea,  and  in  human
will  which  makes  that  fulness  of  being  its  ideal  and  its  norm  ;
(3)  as  the  actual  realisation  of  perfection  or  as  the  historical  pro¬
cess  of  becoming  perfect.

The  adherents  of  abstract  morality  put  at  this  point  a  question,
the  answer  to  which  they  prejudge  from  the  first.  They  ask
what  need  is  there  for  this  third  aspect — for  perfection  as  con¬
cretely  realised,  for  historical  doing  with  its  political  problems  and
its  work  of  civilisation.  If  the  light  of  truth  and  a  pure  will  is
within  us,  why  trouble  about  anything  further  ?

But  the  purpose  of  historical  doing  is  precisely  the  final  justifi¬
cation  of  the  good  given  in  our  true  consciousness  and  our  good
will.  The  historical  process  as  a  whole  creates  the  concrete
conditions  under  which  the  good  may  really  become  common
property,  and  apart  from  which  it  cannot  be  realised.  The  whole


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  169

of  historical  development,  both  of  the  human  and  of  the  physical
world,  is  the  necessary  means  to  perfection.  No  one  will  argue
that  a  mollusc  or  a  sponge  can  know  the  truth,  or  bring  their
will  into  harmony  with  the  absolute  good.  It  was  necessary
for  more  and  more  complex  and  refined  organic  forms  to  be
evolved  until  a  form  was  produced  in  which  the  consciousness  of
perfection  and  the  desire  for  it  could  be  manifested.  This  con¬
sciousness  and  desire  contain,  however,  only  the  possibility  of
perfection  ;  and  if  man  is  conscious  of  and  desires  that  which  he
does  not  possess,  it  is  clear  that  the  consciousness  and  the  will
cannot  be  the  completion ,  but  are  only  the  beginning  of  his  life
and  activity.  A  speck  of  living  protoplasm,  the  production  of
which  also  demanded  much  creative  energy,  contains  the  possi¬
bility  of  the  human  organism.  But  that  possibility  could  only
be  realised  through  a  long  and  complex  biological  process.  A
formless  bit  of  organic  matter,  or  an  insufficiently  formed  living
being  like  a  sponge,  a  polypus,  a  cuttle-fish,  cannot  of  themselves
produce  man,  though  they  contain  him  potentially.  In  the  same
way  a  formless  horde  of  savages,  or  an  insufficiently  formed
barbarian  state,  cannot  directly  give  birth  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,
that  is,  to  the  image  of  the  perfect  unity  of  the  human  and  the
universal  life — even  though  the  remote  possibility  of  such  unity
may  be  contained  in  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  savages  and
barbarians.

Just  as  the  spirit  of  man  in  nature  requires  for  its  concrete
expression  the  most  perfect  of  physical  organisms,  so  the  spirit  of
God  in  humanity  or  the  Kingdom  of  God  requires  for  its  actual
manifestation  the  most  perfect  social  body  which  is  being  slowly
evolved  through  history.  In  so  far  as  the  ultimate  constituents  of
this  historical  process — human  individuals— are  more  capable  of
conscious  and  free  action  than  the  ultimate  constituents  of  the
biological  process — the  organic  cells — the  process  of  evolving  the
collective  universal  body  is  more  conscious  and  voluntary  in
character  than  the  organic  processes  which  determine  the  evolu¬
tion  of  our  corporeal  being.  But  there  is  no  absolute  opposition
between  the  two.  On  the  one  hand,  rudiments  of  consciousness
and  will  are  undoubtedly  present  in  all  living  beings,  though
they  are  not  a  decisive  factor  in  the  general  process  of  perfecting
the  organic  forms.  On  the  other  hand,  the  course  and  the  final


170  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

outcome  of  universal  history  are  not  exhausted  by  the  conscious
and  purposive  activity  of  historical  persons.  But  in  any  case,  at
a  certain  level  of  intellectual  and  moral  development  the  human
individual  must  inevitably  determine  his  own  attitude  with
regard  to  the  problems  of  history.

The  significance  of  the  historical,  as  distinct  from  the
cosmical,  process  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  part  played  in  it  by
individual  agents  is  always  increasing  in  importance.  And  it  is
strange  that  at  the  present  day,  when  this  characteristic  fact  of
history  has  become  sufficiently  clear,  the  assertion  should  be
made  that  man  must  renounce  all  historical  doing,  and  that  the
state  of  perfection  for  humanity  and  for  all  the  universe  will
be  attained  of  itself.  ‘Of  itself’  does  not,  of  course,  in  this
connection  mean  through  the  play  of  blind  physical  forces
which  have  neither  the  desire  nor  the  power  to  create  the
Kingdom  of  God  out  of  themselves.  ‘Of  itself’  here  means  by
the  immediate  action  of  God.  But  how  are  we  to  explain  from
this  point  of  view  the  fact  that  hitherto  God  has  never  acted
immediately  ?  If  for  the  realisation  of  the  perfect  life  two
principles  only  are  necessary — God  and  the  human  soul,  poten¬
tially  receptive  of  Him — then  the  Kingdom  of  God  might  have
been  established  with  the  advent  of  the  first  man.  What  was  the
need  for  all  these  centuries  and  millenniums  of  human  history  ?
And  if  this  process  was  necessary  because  the  Kingdom  of  God
can  as  little  be  revealed  among  wild  cannibals  as  among  wild
beasts,  if  it  was  necessary  for  humanity  to  work  up  from  the
brutal  and  formless  condition  of  separateness  to  definite  organisa¬
tion  and  unity,  it  is  as  clear  as  day  that  this  process  is  not  yet
completed.  Historical  doing  is  as  necessary  to-day  as  it  was
yesterday,  and  will  be  as  necessary  to-morrow,  until  the  conditions
are  ripe  for  the  actual  and  perfect  realisation  of  the  Kingdom  of
God.


VI


The  historical  process  is  a  long  and  difficult  transition  from
the  bestial  man  to  the  divine  man.  No  one  can  seriously
maintain  that  the  last  step  has  already  been  taken,  that  the
image  and  likeness  of  the  beast  has  been  inwardly  abolished  in
humanity  and  replaced  by  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,  that


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  171

there  is  no  longer  any  historical  task  left  demanding  the
organised  activity  of  social  groups,  and  that  all  we  have  to  do  is
to  bear  witness  to  this  fact  and  trouble  no  further.  This  view
when  expressed  simply  and  directly  is  absurd,  and  yet  it  sums  up
the  doctrine  so  often  preached  nowadays  of  social  disruption  and
individual  quietism — a  doctrine  which  claims  to  be  the  expression
of  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality.

The  unconditional  principle  of  morality  cannot  be  a  deception.
But  it  is  obvious  deception  for  a  separate  individual  to  pretend
that  his  own  impotence  to  realise  the  ideal  of  universal  perfection
proves  such  realisation  to  be  unnecessary.  The  truth  which,  on
the  basis  of  genuine  religious  feeling,  our  reason  and  our  con¬
science  tell  us  is  this  :  —

I  cannot  alone  carry  out  in  practice  all  that  ought  to  be  ;
I  cannot  do  anything  alone.  But,  thank  God,  there  is  no  such
thing  as  c  I  alone  ’  ;  my  impotence  and  isolation  is  only  a
subjective  state  which  depends  upon  myself.  Although  in  my
thoughts  and  my  will  I  can  separate  myself  from  everything,  it  is
mere  self-deception.  Apart  from  these  false  thoughts  and  this
bad  will  nothing  exists  separately,  everything  is  inwardly  and
externally  connected.

I  am  not  alone.  With  me  is  God  Almighty  and  the  world —
that  is,  all  that  is  contained  in  God.  And  if  both  these  exist,  there
is  positive  interaction  between  them.  The  very  idea  of  Godhead
implies  that  things  to  which  God  stands  in  a  purely  negative
relation,  or  things  to  which  He  is  unconditionally  opposed,
cannot  exist  at  all.  But  the  world  does  exist,  therefore  there
must  be  the  positive  activity  of  God  in  it.  The  world  cannot,
however,  be  the  end  of  that  activity,  for  it  is  imperfect.  And  if
it  cannot  be  the  end,  it  must  be  the  means.  It  is  the  system  of
conditions  for  realising  the  kingdom  of  ends.  That  in  it  which
is  capable  of  perfection  will  enter  that  kingdom  with  full  rights  ;
all  the  rest  is  the  material  and  the  means  for  bringing  it  about.
All  that  exists,  exists  only  in  virtue  of  being  approved  by  God.
But  God  approves  in  two  ways  :  some  things  are  good  as  a
means  and  others  as  a  purpose  and  an  end  ( shabbath ).  Each
stage  in  the  world  creation  is  approved  of  from  above,  but  the
Scriptures  distinguish  between  simple  and  enhanced  praise.  Of
all  things  created  in  the  first  six  days  of  the  world  it  says  that


1 72  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

they  are  good  { tob ,  каЛа),  but  only  the  last  creature  man  is
said  to  be  very  good  ( tob  meod ,  каХ a  Xiav).  In  another  holy
book  it  is  said  that  the  Divine  Wisdom  looks  after  all  creatures,
but  that  her  joy  is  in  the  sons  of  man.  In  man  s  consciousness
and  his  freedom  lies  the  inner  possibility  for  each  human  being
to  stand  in  an  independent  relation  to  God,  and  therefore  to
be  His  direct  purpose,  to  be  a  citizen  possessed  of  full  rights  in
the  kingdom  of  ends.  Universal  history  is  the  realisation  of  this
possibility  for  every  one.  Man  who  takes  part  in  it  attains  to
actual  perfection  through  his  own  experience,  through  his  inter¬
action  with  other  men.  This  perfection  attained  by  himself,
this  full,  conscious,  and  free  union  with  Godhead,  is  what  God
wills  for  its  own  sake  —  is  an  unconditional  good.  Inner
freedom,  i.e.  voluntary  and  conscious  preference  of  good  to  evil  in
everything,  is,  from  the  point  of  view  of  principle,  the  chief
condition  of  this  perfection  or  of  the  absolute  good  ( tob  meod).

Man  is  dear  to  God,  not  as  a  passive  instrument  of  His  will —
there  are  enough  of  such  instruments  to  be  found  in  the  physical
world — but  as  a  voluntary  ally  and  participator  in  His  work  in
the  universe.  This  participation  of  man  must  necessarily  be
included  in  the  very  purpose  of  God’s  activity  in  the  world.
Were  this  purpose  thinkable  apart  from  human  activity,  it  would
have  been  attained  from  all  eternity,  for  in  God  Himself  there  can
be  no  process  of  becoming  perfect,  but  only  an  eternal  and  un¬
changeable  fulness  of  all  that  is  good.  Just  as  it  is  unthinkable
for  an  absolute  being  to  increase  in  goodness  or  perfection,  so  it
is  unthinkable  for  man  to  attain  perfection  at  once,  apart  from
the  process  of  becoming  perfect.  Perfection  is  not  a  thing  which
one  person  Can  make  a  gift  of  to  another  ;  it  is  an  inner  condition
attainable  through  one’s  own  experience  alone.  No  doubt  perfec¬
tion,  like  every  positive  content  of  life,  is  received  by  man  from
God.  But  in  order  to  be  capable  of  receiving  it,  in  order  to
become  a  receptive  form  for  the  divine  content  (and  it  is  in  this
alone  that  human  perfection  consists),  it  is  necessary  that  man
should  through  actual  experience  get  rid  of  and  be  purged  of  all
that  is  incompatible  with  this  perfect  state.  For  mankind  as  a
whole  this  is  attained  through  the  historical  process,  by  means  of
which  God’s  will  is  realised  in  the  world.

This  will  reveals  itself  to  the  individual — not  of  course  as  he


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY


173

is  in  his  false  separateness,  but  as  he  truly  is.  And  man’s  true
nature  consists  not  in  separating  himself  from  all  else,  but  in
being  together  with  all  that  is.


VII

The  moral  duty  of  religion  demands  that  we  should  unite  our
will  with  the  will  of  God.  The  will  of  God  is  all-embracing,  and
in  being  united  to  it,  or  in  entering  into  true  harmony  with  it,
we  obtain  an  absolute  and  universal  rule  of  action.  The  idea  of
God  that  reason  deduces  from  what  is  given  in  true  religious
experience  is  so  clear  and  definite  that  we  always  can  know,  if
we  want  to,  what  God  demands  of  us.  In  the  first  place,  God
wants  us  to  be  conformable  to  and  like  Him.  We  must  manifest
our  inner  kinship  with  the  Deity,  our  power  and  determination
to  attain  free  perfection.  This  idea  can  be  expressed  in  the  form
of  the  following  rule  :  Have  God  in  you.

A  man  who  has  God  in  him  regards  everything  in  accordance
with  God’s  thought  or  £  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  absolute.’
The  second  rule,  then,  is  Regard  everything  in  God's  way.

God’s  relation  to  everything  is  not  indifference.  Inanimate
objects  are  indifferent  to  good  and  evil,  but  this  lower  state  cannot
be  attributed  to  the  Deity.  Although,  according  to  the  words  of
the  Gospel,  God  lets  the  sun  shine  on  the  just  and  the  unjust,  it
is  precisely  this  single  light  which,  in  illuminating  different  persons
and  actions,  shows  the  difference  between  them.  Although,
according  to  the  same  words,  God  sends  His  rain  to  the  righteous
and  to  the  sinners,  yet  this  one  and  the  same  moisture  of  God’s
grace  brings  forth  from  the  different  soil  and  different  seed  fruits
that  are  not  identical.  God  cannot  be  said  either  to  affirm  evil  or
to  deny  it  unconditionally.  The  first  is  impossible,  because  in
that  case  evil  would  be  good,  and  the  second  is  impossible,  because
in  that  case  evil  could  not  exist  at  all — and  yet  it  does  exist.
God  denies  evil  as  final  or  abiding,  and  in  virtue  of  this  denial  it
perishes.  But  He  permits  it  as  a  transitory  condition  of  freedom ,  i.e.
of  a  greater  good.  On  the  one  hand,  God  permits  evil  inasmuch  as  a
direct  denial  or  annihilation  of  it  would  violate  human  freedom  and
be  a  greater  evil,  for  it  would  render  perfect  (i.e.  free)  good  impossible
in  the  world  ;  on  the  other  hand,  God  permits  evil  inasmuch  as  it


1 74  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  possible  for  His  Wisdom  to  extract  from  evil  a  greater  good  or
the  greatest  possible  perfection,  and  this  is  the  cause  of  the  existence
of  evil.1  Evil,  then,  is  something  subservient,  and  an  unconditional
rejection  of  it  would  be  wrong.  We  must  regard  evil  also  in  God’s
way,  i.e.  without  being  indifferent  to  it,  we  must  rise  above  absolute
opposition  to  it  and  allow  it — when  it  does  not  proceed  from  us
— as  a  means  of  perfection,  in  so  far  as  a  greater  good  can  be
derived  from  it.  We  must  recognise  the  possibility ,  i.e.  the
potentiality,  of  good  in  all  that  is,  and  must  work  for  that
possibility  to  become  an  actuality.  The  direct  possibility  of
perfect  good  is  given  in  rational  and  free  beings  like  ourselves.
Recognising  our  own  unconditional  significance  as  bearers  of  the
consciousness  of  the  absolute  ideal  (the  image  of  God),  and  of  the
striving  to  realise  it  completely  (the  likeness  of  God),  we  must  in
justice  recognise  the  same  thing  of  all  other  persons.  Our  duty
of  attaining  perfection  we  must  regard  not  merely  as  the  task  of
the  individual  life,  but  as  an  inseparable  part  of  the  world-wide
work  of  history.

The  unconditional  principle  of  morality  can  therefore  be
expressed  as  follows  : —

In  complete  inner  harmony  with  the  higher  will  and  recognising
the  absolute  worth  or  significance  of  all  other  persons,  since  they  too  are
in  the  image  and  likeness  of  God ,  participate ,  as  fully  as  in  thee  lies ,
in  the  work  of  making  thyself  and  every  one  more  perfect ,  so  that  the
Kingdom  of  God  may  be  finally  revealed  in  the  world.

VIII

It  will  be  easily  seen  that  the  unconditional  principle  of
morality  includes  and  gives  expression  to  all  positive  moral
principles,  and  that  at  the  same  time  it  completely  satisfies  the
natural  demand  for  happiness  in  the  sense  of  possessing  the
highest  good.

In  demanding  that  man  should  be  a  friend  and  helper  of  God,
the  unconditional  principle  of  morality  does  not  cancel  the
particular  moral  demands.  On  the  contrary,  it  confirms  them  ;

1  I  must  content  myself  here  with  a  general  logical  reflection.  A  real  solution  of
the  question  must  be  based  upon  a  metaphysical  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  God  and  the
origin  of  evil  in  the  world.


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  175

it  puts  them  in  a  higher  light  and  gives  them  a  supreme
sanction.

In  the  first  place,  it  refers  to  the  religious  basis  of  morality,  of
which  it  is  the  direct  development  and  the  final  expression.  The
higher  demand  presupposes  the  lower.  A  babe  at  the  breast
naturally  cannot  be  his  father’s  friend  and  helper.  In  the  same
way,  a  man  spiritually  under  age  is  inwardly  precluded  from
standing  in  the  relation  of  free  and  immediate  harmony  with
God.  In  both  cases  authoritative  guidance  and  education  is
necessary.  This  is  the  justification  of  external  religious  institu¬
tions — of  sacrifices,  hierarchy,  etc.  Apart  from  their  profound
mystical  significance,  which  makes  them  an  abiding  link  between
heaven  and  earth,  they  are  undoubtedly  of  the  first  importance
to  humanity  from  the  pedagogical  point  of  view.  There  never
was,  and  never  could  be,  a  time  when  all  men  would  be  spiritually
equal  to  one  another.  Making  use  of  this  inevitable  inequality,
Providence  has  from  the  first  elected  the  best  to  be  the  spiritual
teachers  of  the  crowd.  Of  course  the  inequality  was  merely
relative — the  teachers  of  savages  were  half-savage  themselves.
Therefore  the  character  of  religious  institutions  changes  and
becomes  more  perfect  in  conformity  with  the  general  course  of
history.  But  so  long  as  the  historical  process  is  not  yet  com¬
pleted,  no  one  could  in  all  conscience  consider  unnecessary  for
himself  and  for  others  the  mediation  of  religious  institutions
which  connect  us  with  the  work  of  God  that  has  already  found
concrete  embodiment  in  history.  And  even  if  such  a  man  could
be  found,  he  would  certainly  not  reject  the  ‘  external  ’  side  of
religion.  Indeed  for  him  it  would  not  be  merely  external ,  for  he
would  understand  the  fulness  of  the  inner  meaning  inherent  in  it
and  its  connection  with  the  future  realisation  of  that  meaning.
A  person  who  is  above  school  age  and  has  reached  the  heights  of
learning  has  certainly  no  reason  to  go  to  school.  But  he  has  still
less  reason  to  reject  schools  and  to  persuade  the  schoolboys  that
their  teachers  are  a  pack  of  idle  swindlers,  and  that  they  themselves
are  perfect  men  or  that  educational  institutions  are  the  root  of  all
evil  and  ought  to  be  wiped  off  the  face  of  the  earth.

The  true  ‘friend  of  God’  understands  and  cares  for  all  mani¬
festations  of  the  divine  both  in  the  physical  world  and,  still  more
so,  in  human  history.  And  if  he  stands  on  one  of  the  upper


i76  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

rungs  of  the  ladder  that  leads  from  man  to  God,  he  will  certainly
not  cut  down  the  lower  rungs  on  which  his  brethren  are  standing

and  which  are  still  supporting  him  too.

Religious  feeling  raised  to  the  level  of  an  absolute  and  all-
embracing  principle  of  life  lifts  to  the  same  height  the  other  two
fundamental  moral  feelings,  as  well  as  the  duties  that  follow  from
them— namely,  the  feeling  of  pity  which  determines  our  right
relation  to  our  fellow-creatures,  and  the  feeling  of  shame  upon
which  our  right  attitude  to  the  lower  material  nature  is  based.


IX

Pity  which  we  feel  towards  a  fellow-being  acquires  another
significance  when  we  see  in  that  being  the  image  and  likeness  of
God.  We  then  recognise  the  unconditional  worth  of  that  person  ;
we  recognise  that  he  is  an  end  in  himself  for  God,  and  still  more
must  be  so  for  us.  We  realise  that  God  Himself  does  not  treat
him  merely  as  a  means.  We  respect  that  being  since  God  respects
him,  or,  more  exactly,  we  consider  him  since  God  considers  him.
This  higher  point  of  view  does  not  exclude  pity  in  cases  when  it
would  naturally  be  felt — on  the  contrary,  pity  becomes  more
poignant  and  profound.  I  pity  in  that  being  not  merely  his
sufferings  but  also  the  cause  of  them — I  regret  that  his  actual
reality  falls  so  short  of  his  true  dignity  and  possible  perfection.
The  duty  that  follows  from  the  altruistic  sentiment  also  acquires
a  higher  meaning.  We  can  no  longer  be  content  with  refraining
from  injuries  to  our  neighbour  or  even  with  assisting  him  in  his
troubles.  We  must  help  him  to  become  more  perfect,  so  that
the  image  and  likeness  of  God  which  we  recognise' in  him  might
be  actually  realised.  But  no  human  being  can  alone  realise  either
in  himself  or  in  any  one  else  that  absolute  fulness  of  perfec¬
tion  in  seeking  which  we  are  likened  to  God.  Altruism  at  its
highest  religious  stage  compels  us,  therefore,  actively  to  participate
in  the  universal  historical  process  which  brings  about  the  con¬
ditions  necessary  for  the  revelation  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Con¬
sequently  it  demands  that  we  should  take  part  in  the  collective
organisations — especially  in  that  of  the  state  as  inclusive  of  all  the
others — by  means  of  which  the  historical  process  is,  by  the  will
of  Providence,  carried  on.  Not  every  one  is  called  to  political


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  177

activity  or  to  the  service  of  the  state  in  the  narrow  sense  of  the
term.  But  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  to  serve,  in  his  own  place,
that  same  purpose — the  common  good — which  the  state  ought
to  serve  also.

In  the  domain  of  religion  the  unconditional  principle  of
morality  leads  us  to  accept  ecclesiastical  institutions  and  traditions
as  educational  means  whereby  humanity  is  led  in  the  end  to
ultimate  perfection.  In  a  similar  way  in  the  domain  of  purely
human  relations  inspired  by  pity  and  altruism  the  unconditional
moral  principle  demands  that  we  should  give  active  service
to  the  collective  organisations,  such  as  the  state,  by  means  of
which  Providence  prevents  humanity  from  material  disruption,
holds  it  together,  and  enables  it  to  become  more  perfect.
We  know  that  only  in  virtue  of  that  which  has  been  and  is
being  given  to  humanity  by  the  historical  forms  of  religion
can  we  truly  attain  to  that  free  and  perfect  union  with  the
Divine,  the  possibility  and  the  promise  of  which  are  contained
in  our  inner  religious  feeling.  Similarly,  we  know  that  apart
from  the  concentrated  and  organised  social  force  which  is  found
in  the  state  we  cannot  give  all  our  neighbours  that  help  which
we  are  bidden  to  give  both  by  the  simple  moral  feeling  of
pity  for  their  sufferings  and  by  the  religious  principle  of  respect
for  their  unconditional  dignity  which  demands  to  be  realised.

In  both  cases  we  connect  our  allegiance  to  the  ecclesiastical
and  the  political  forms  of  social  life  with  the  unconditional
principle  of  morality,  and  in  doing  so  we  recognise  that  allegiance
as  conditional ,  as  determined  by  this  higher  truth  and  dependent
upon  it.  Institutions  which  ought  to  serve  the  good  in  humanity
may  more  or  less  deviate  from  their  purpose  or  even  be  wholly  false
to  it.  In  that  case  the  duty  of  man  true  to  the  good  consists  neither
in  entirely  rejecting  the  institutions  in  question  on  the  ground  of
the  abuses  connected  with  them — which  would  be  unjust — nor  in
blindly  submitting  to  them  both  in  good  and  in  evil,  which  would
be  impious  and  unworthy.  His  duty  would  be  to  try  and  actively
reform  the  institutions,  insisting  on  what  their  function  ought  to
be.  If  we  know  why  and  for  what  sake  we  ought  to  submit  to  a
certain  institution,  we  also  know  the  form  and  the  measure  ot
such  submission.  It  will  never  become  unlimited,  blind,  and
slavish.  We  shall  never  be  passive  and  senseless  instruments  of

N


i78  the  justification  of  the  good

external  forces  ;  we  shall  never  put  the  Church  in  the  place  of
God,  or  the  state  in  the  place  of  humanity.  We  shall  not  take
the  transitory  forms  and  instruments  of  the  providential  work  in
history  for  the  essence  and  the  purpose  of  that  work.  We  sub¬
ordinate  our  personal  impotence  and  insufficiency  to  the  historica
forces,  but  in  our  higher  consciousness  we  regard  them  in  God’s
way,  using  them  as  the  means  or  the  conditions  of  the  perfect
good.  In  doing  so  we  do  not  renounce  our  human  dignity
rather  we  affirm  it  and  realise  it  as  unconditional.

When  I  make  use  of  physical  force  and  move  my  arms  in
order  to  save  a  drowning  man  or  to  give  food  to  the  hungiy,
I  do  not  in  any  way  detract  from  my  moral  dignity  ;  on  the
contrary,  I  increase  it.  Why  then  should  it  be  a  detriment,
rather  than  a  gain,  to  our  morality  to  take  advantage  of  the
spiritually-material  forces  of  the  state  and  use  them  for  the  good
of  nations  and  of  humanity  as  a  whole?  To  submit  to  material
powers  is  shameful,  but  to  deny  their  right  to  existence  is  perilous
and  unjust.  In  any  case  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality
extends  to  the  domain  of  matter  also.


X

The  natural  feeling  of  shame  bears  witness  to  the  autonomy
of  our  being,  and  safeguards  its  wholeness  from  the  destructive
intrusion  of  foreign  elements.  At  the  lower  stages  of  develop¬
ment,  when  sensuous  life  predominates,  special  significance
attaches  to  bodily  chastity,  and  the  feeling  of  shame  is  originally
connected  with  this  side  of  life.  But  as  moral  feelings  and
relations  are  developed  further,  man  begins  to  form  a  wider
conception  of  his  dignity.  He  is  ashamed  not  only  of  yielding  to
the  lower  material  nature,  but  also  of  all  violations  of  duty  in
relation  to  gods  and  men.  The  unconscious  instinct  of  shame
becomes  now,  as  we  have  seen,  the  clear  voice  of  conscience  which
reproaches  man  not  for  carnal  sins  alone  but  also  for  all  wrong¬
doing — for  all  unjust  and  pitiless  actions  and  feelings.  At  the
same  time  there  is  developed  a  special  feeling  of  the  fear  of  God,
which  restrains  us  from  coming  into  conflict  with  anything  that
expresses  for  us  the  holiness  of  God.  When  the  relation  between
man  and  God  is  raised  to  the  level  of  absolute  consciousness,  the


UNCONDITIONAL  PRINCIPLE  OF  MORALITY  179

feeling  which  protects  the  wholeness  of  man  is  also  raised  to  a  new
and  final  stage.  What  is  now  being  safeguarded  is  not  the  relative
but  the  absolute  dignity  of  man,  that  is,  his  ideal  perfection  which
is  to  be  realised.  The  negative  voice  of  shame,  conscience,  and  the
fear  of  God  becomes  at  this  stage  a  direct  and  positive  conscious¬
ness  in  man  of  his  own  divinity  or  a  consciousness  of  God  in  him.
This  consciousness  no  longer  reproaches  him  for  doing  what  is
bad  and  injurious,  but  for  feeling  and  acting  as  an  imperfect  being,
while  perfection  is  his  duty  and  his  goal.  Instead  of  the  demon
which  restrained  Socrates  from  wrong  actions,  we  hear  the  Divine
voice  :  “  Be  ye  perfect  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect.”

If  perfection  is  to  be  perfectly  realised  it  must  include  the
material  life.  The  unconditional  principle  gives  a  new  mean¬
ing  to  the  ascetic  morality.  We  refrain  from  carnal  sins  no
longer  out  of  the  instinct  of  spiritual  self-preservation  or  for  the
sake  of  increasing  our  inner  power,  but  for  the  sake  of  our  body
itself,  as  the  uttermost  limit  of  the  manifestation  of  God  in  man,
as  the  predestined  abode  of  the  Holy  Ghost.


CHAPTER  III


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER

I

The  unconditional  principle  of  morality,  logically  involved  in
religious  experience,  contains  the  complete  good  (or  the  right
relation  of  all  to  everything)  not  merely  as  a  demand  or  an  idea,
but  as  an  actual  power  that  can  fulfil  this  demand  and  create
the  perfect  moral  order  or  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  which  the
absolute  significance  of  every  being  is  realised.  It  is  by  virtue  of
this  supreme  principle  alone  that  the  moral  good  can  give  us  final
and  complete  satisfaction,  can  be  for  us  a  true  blessing  and  a
source  of  infinite  bliss.

We  experience  the  reality  of  God  not  as  something  in¬
definitely  divine — Sacfiov iov  rt,  but  we  are  conscious  of  Him  as  He
really  is,  all-perfect  or  absolute.  And  our  soul  too  is  revealed  to
us  in  our  inner  experience  not  merely  as  something  distinct  from
material  facts,  but  as  a  positive  force  which  struggles  with  the
material  processes  and  overcomes  them.  The  experience  of
physiological  asceticism  does  more  than  support  the  tiuth  that  the
soul  is  immortal — a  postulate  beyond  which  Kant  would  not  go  ;
it  also  justifies  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  hor  in
the  triumph  of  the  spirit  over  matter,  as  we  know  from  our  own
preliminary  and  rudimentary  experience,  matter  is  not  destroyed
but  is  made  eternal  as  the  image  of  a  spiritual  quality  and  an
instrument  of  the  activity  of  the  spirit.

We  do  not  know  from  experience  what  matter  is  in  itself ;
this  is  a* subject  for  metaphysical  investigation.  The  psychical
and  the  physical  phenomena  are  qualitatively  distinct  so  far  as
knowledge  is  concerned  :  the  first  are  known  by  direct  intro-

180


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  181


spection  and  the  second  by  means  of  the  outer  senses.  But
experience — both  the  immediate  individual  and  the  universal,
scientific,  and  historical  experience — undoubtedly  proves  that  in
spite  of  this  there  is  no  gulf  between  the  real  essence  of  the
spiritual  and  the  material  nature,  that  the  two  are  most  intimately
connected  and  constantly  interact.  Since  the  process  whereby
the  universe  attains  perfection  is  the  process  of  manifesting
God  in  man,  it  must  also  be  the  process  of  manifesting  God  in
matter.

The  chief  concrete  stages  of  this  process,  given  in  our
experience,  bear  the  traditional  and  significant  name  of  kingdoms.
It  is  significant  because  it  really  is  applicable  only  to  the  last  and
highest  stage,  which  is  usually  not  taken  into  account  at  all.
Counting  this  highest  stage  there  are  five  kingdoms  altogether  :
the  tnineral  (or,  more  generally,  the  inorganic)  kingdom,  the
vegetable  kingdom,  the  animal  kingdom,  the  human  kingdom,  an$J
GotTs  kingdom.  Minerals,  plants,  animals,  natural  humanity  and
spiritual  humanity — such  are  the  typical  forms  of  existence  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  ascending  process  of  universal  perfection.
From  other  points  of  view  the  number  of  these  forms  and  stages
might  be  increased,  or,  on  the  contrary,  be  reduced  to  four,  three,
and  two.  Plants  and  animals  may  be  grouped  together  into  one
organic  world.  Or  the  whole  realm  of  physical  existence,  both
organic  and  inorganic,  may  be  united  in  the  one  conception  of
nature.  In  that  case  there  would  be  a  threefold  division  only,
into  the  Divine,  the  human,  and  the  natural  kingdoms.  Finally,
one  may  stop  at  the  simple  opposition  between  the  Kingdom  of
God  and  the  kingdom  of  this  world.

Without  in  the  least  rejecting  these  and  all  other  divisions,  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  five  kingdoms  indicated  above  represent
the  most  characteristic  and  clearly  defined  grades  of  existence  from
the  point  of  view  of  the  moral  meaning  realised  in  the  process
of  manifesting  God  in  matter.

Stones  and  metals  are  distinguished  from  all  else  by  their
extreme  self-sufficiency  and  conservatism  ;  had  it  rested  with
them,  nature  would  never  have  wakened  from  her  dreamless
slumber.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  without  them  her  further
growth  would  have  been  deprived  of  a  firm  basis  or  ground.
Plants  in  unconscious,  unbroken  dreams  draw  towards  warmth,


1 82  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

light,  and  moisture.  Animals  by  means  of  sensations  and  free
movements  seek  the  fulness  of  sensuous  being  :  repletion,  sexual
satisfaction,  and  the  joy  of  existence  (their  games  and  singing).
Natural  humanity,  in  addition  to  all  these  things,  rationally  strives
to  improve  its  life  by  means  of  sciences,  arts,  and  social  institu¬
tions,  actually  improves  it  in  various  respects,  and  finally  rises  to
the  idea  of  absolute  perfection.  Spiritual  humanity  or  humanity
born  of  God  not  only  understands  this  absolute  perfection  with
the  intellect  but  accepts  it  in  its  heart  and  its  conduct  as  the
true  beginning  of  that  which  must  be  fulfilled  in  all  things.  It
seeks  to  realise  it  to  the  end  and  to  embody  it  in  the  life  of  the
universe.

Each  preceding  kingdom  serves  as  the  immediate  basis  of  the
one  that  follows.  Plants  derive  their  nourishment  from  inorganic
substances,  animals  exist  at  the  expense  of  the  vegetable  kingdom,
men  live  at  the  expense  of  animals,  and  the  Kingdom  of  God  is
composed  of  men.  If  we  consider  an  organism  from  the  point
of  view  of  its  material  constituents  we  shall  find  in  it  nothing
but  elements  of  inorganic  substance.  That  substance,  however,
ceases  to  be  a  mere  substance  in  so  far  as  it  enters  into  the  plan  of
the  organic  life,  which  makes  use  of  the  chemical  and  physical
properties  of  substance  but  is  not  reducible  to  them.  In  a  similar
way,  human  life  on  its  material  side  consists  of  animal  processes,
which,  however,  have  in  it  no  significance  on  their  own  account
as  they  do  in  the  animal  world.  They  serve  as  a  means  or  an
instrument  for  new  purposes  and  new  objects  which  follow
from  the  new,  higher  plan  of  rational  or  human  life.  The  sole
purpose  of  the  typical  animal  is  satisfaction  of  hunger  and  of
the  sexual  instinct.  But  when  a  human  being  desires  nothing
further  he  is  rightly  called  bestial,  not  only  as  a  term  of  abuse,
but  precisely  in  the  sense  of  sinking  to  a  lower  level  of  existence.
Just  as  a  living  organism  consists  of  chemical  substances  which
cease  to  be  mere  substances,  so  humanity  consists  of  animals
which  cease  to  be  merely  animal.  Similarly,  the  Kingdom  of
God  consists  of  men  who  have  ceased  to  be  merely  human  and
form  part  of  a  new  and  higher  plan  of  existence  in  which  their
purely-human  ends  become  the  means  and  instruments  for  another
final  purpose.


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  183


II

The  stone  exists  ;  the  plant  exists  and  is  living  ;  the  animal
lives  and  is  conscious  of  its  life  in  its  concrete  states  ;  man  under¬
stands  the  meaning  of  life  according  to  ideas  ;  the  sons  of  God
actively  realise  this  meaning  or  the  perfect  moral  order  in  all
things  to  the  end.

The  stone  exists,  this  is  clear  from  its  sensible  effect  upon  us.
A  person  who  denies  it  can  easily  convince  himself  of  his  error,
as  has  been  observed  long  ago,  by  knocking  his  head  against
the  stone.1  Stone  is  the  most  typical  embodiment  of  the  category
of  being  as  such,  and,  in  contradistinction  to  Hegel’s  abstract  idea
of  being,  it  shows  no  inclination  whatever  to  pass  into  its
opposite  : 2  a  stone  is  what  it  is  and  has  always  been  the  symbol
of  changeless  being.  It  merely  exists — it  does  not  live  and  it  does
not  die,  for  the  parts  into  which  it  is  broken  up  do  not  qualitatively
differ  from  the  whole.3  The  plant  not  merely  exists  but  lives,
which  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it  dies.  Life  does  not  presuppose
death,  but  death  obviously  presupposes  life.  There  is  a  clear  and
essential  difference  between  a  growing  tree  and  logs  of  wood,
between  a  fresh  and  a  faded  flower — a  difference  to  which  there
is  nothing  corresponding  in  the  mineral  kingdom.

1  Kant  rightly  points  out  that  this  argument  is  insufficient  for  theoretical  philosophy  ;
and  when  dealing  with  the  theory  of  knowledge  I  propose  to  discuss  the  question  as  to
the  being  of  things.  But  in  moral  philosophy  the  above  argument  is  sufficient,  for  in  all
conscience  it  is  convincing.

2  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  Hegel’s  Dialectic  pure  being  passes  into  pure
nothing.  In  answer  to  a  learned  critic,  I  would  like  to  observe  that  although  I  regard
the  stone  as  the  most  typical  embodiment  and  symbol  of  unchanging  being,  I  do  not  in
the  least  identify  the  stone  with  the  category  of  being  and  do  not  deny  the  mechanical
and  physical  properties  of  the  concrete  stone.  Every  one,  for  instance,  takes  the  pig
to  be  the  most  typical  embodiment  and  symbol  of  the  moral  category  of  unrestrained
carnality,  which  is  on  that  account  called  ‘  piggishness.’  But  in  doing  so  no  one  denies
that  a  real  pig  has  in  addition  to  its  piggishness  four  legs,  two  eyes,  etc.

8  I  am  speaking  here  of  the  stone  as  the  most  characteristic  and  concrete  instance
of  inorganic  bodies  in  general.  Such  a  body  taken  in  isolation  has  no  real  life  of  its  own.
But  this  in  no  way  prejudges  the  metaphysical  question  as  to  the  life  of  nature  in
general  or  of  the  more  or  less  complex  natural  wholes  such  as  the  sea,  rivers,  mountains,
forests.  And  indeed,  separate  inorganic  bodies  too,  such  as  stones,  though  devoid  of
life  on  their  own  account,  may  serve  as  constant  mediums  for  the  localised  living
activity  of  spiritual  beings.  Of  this  nature  were  the  sacred  stones — the  so-called  bethels
or  bcthils  (houses  of  God)  which  were  associated  with  the  presence  and  activity  of  angels
or  Divine  powers  that  seemed  to  inhabit  these  stones.


184  the  justification  of  the  good

It  is  as  impossible  to  deny  life  to  plants  as  to  deny  consciousness
to  animals.  It  can  only  be  done  with  the  help  of  an  arbitrary
and  artificial  terminology,  which  is  not  binding  upon  any  one.
According  to  the  natural  meaning  of  the  word,  consciousness  in
general  is  a  definite  and  regular  correspondence  or  interrelation
between  the  inner  psychical  life  of  a  given  being  and  its
external  environment.  Such  correlation  is  undoubtedly  present  in
animals.  The  presence  of  life  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  is  clearly
seen  in  the  distinction  between  a  living  and  a  dead  plant  ;  the
presence  of  consciousness  in  animals  is,  at  any  rate  in  the  case  of
the  higher  and  typical  animals,  clearly  seen  in  the  distinction
between  a  sleeping  and  a  waking  animal.  For  the  distinction
consists  precisely  in  the  fact  that  a  waking  animal  consciously
takes  part  in  the  life  that  surrounds  it,  while  the  psychical  world
of  a  sleeping  animal  is  cut  off  from  direct  communication  with
that  life.1  An  animal  not  merely  has  sensations  and  images  ;  it
connects  them  by  means  of  correct  associations.  And  although
it  is  the  interests  and  the  impressions  of  the  present  moment  that
predominate  in  its  life,  it  remembers  its  past  states  and  foresees  the
future  ones.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  the  education  or  training
of  animals  would  be  impossible,  yet  such  training  is  a  fact.  No
one  will  deny  memory  to  a  horse  or  a  dog.  But  to  remember  a
thing  or  to  be  conscious  of  it  is  one  and  the  same.  To  deny
consciousness  to  animals  is  merely  an  aberration  of  the  human
consciousness  in  some  philosophers.

One  fact  of  comparative  anatomy  ought  alone  to  be  sufficient
to  disprove  this  crude  error.  To  deny  consciousness  to  animals
means  to  reduce  the  whole  of  their  life  to  the  blind  promptings  of
instinct.  But  how  are  we  to  explain  in  that  case  the  gradual
development  in  the  higher  animals  of  the  organ  of  conscious  mental
activity — the  brain  ?  How  could  this  organ  have  appeared  and
developed  if  the  animals  in  question  had  no  corresponding
functions  ?  Unconscious,  instinctive  life  does  not  need  the
bnain.  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  development  of  instinct

1  The  usual  ways  in  which  an  animal  becomes  conscious  of  his  environment  are
closed  in  sleep.  But  this  does  not  by  any  means  exclude  the  possibility  of  a  different
environment  and  of  other  means  of  mental  correlation,  i.e.  of  another  sphere  of  conscious¬
ness.  In  that  case,  however,  the  periodical  transition  of  a  given  mental  life  from  one
sphere  of  consciousness  into  another  would  prove  still  more  clearly  the  general  conscious
character  of  that  life.


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  185

is  prior  to  the  appearance  of  that  organ,  and  that  it  reaches  its
highest  development  in  creatures  that  have  no  brain.  The
excellence  of  ants’  and  bees’  social,  hunting,  and  constructive
instincts  depends  of  course  not  on  the  brain,  which,  strictly  speak¬
ing,  they  have  not  got,  but  upon  their  well-developed  sympathetic
nervous  system.

Man  differs  from  animals  not  by  being  conscious,  since  the
same  is  true  of  them  also,  but  by  possessing  reason  or  the
faculty  of  forming  general  concepts  and  ideas.  The  presence  of
consciousness  in  animals  is  proved  by  their  purposive  movements,
mimicry,  and  their  language  of  various  sounds.  The  fundamental
evidence  of  the  rationality  of  man  is  the  word ,  which  expresses  not
only  the  states  of  a  particular  consciousness,  but  the  general  mean¬
ing  of  all  things.  The  ancient  wisdom  rightly  defined  man  not
as  a  conscious  being — which  is  not  enough — but  as  a  being
endowed  with  language  or  a  rational  being.

The  power  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  reason  and  of
language  to  grasp  the  all-embracing  and  all-uniting  truth  has
acted  in  many  different  ways  in  various  and  separate  peoples,
gradually  building  up  the  human  kingdom  upon  the  basis  of  the
animal  life.  The  ultimate  essence  of  this  human  kingdom  is  the
ideal  demand  for  the  perfect  moral  order,  i.e.  a  demand  for  the
Kingdom  of  God.  By  two  paths — of  prophetic  inspiration  among
the  Jews,  and  of  philosophic  thought  among  the  Greeks — has  the
human  spirit  approached  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and
the  ideal  of  the  God-man.1  Parallel  to  this  double  inner  process,
but  naturally  more  slow  than  it,  was  the  external  process  of  bringing
about  political  unity  and  unity  of  culture  among  the  chief  historical
peoples  of  East  and  West,  completed  by  the  Roman  Empire.  In
Greece  and  Rome  natural  or  pagan  humanity  reached  its  limit.
In  the  beautiful  sensuous  form  and  speculative  idea  among  the
Greeks,  and  in  the  practical  reason,  will,  or  power  among  the
Romans,  it  has'  affirmed  its  absolute  divine  significance.  There
arose  the  idea  of  the  absolute  man  or  man-god.  This  idea  cannot,
from  its  very  nature,  remain  abstract  or  purely  speculative.  It
demands  embodiment.  But  it  is  as  impossible  for  man  to  make

1  Both  these  paths — the  Biblical  and  the  philosophical — coincided  in  the  mind  of  the
Alexandrian  Jew  Philo,  who  is,  from  this  point  of  view,  the  last  and  the  most  significant
thinker  of  antiquity.


1 86  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

himself  a  god  as  it  is  impossible  for  animals  by  their  own  efforts
to  attain  human  dignity,  rationality,  and  power  of  speech.  Re¬
maining  upon  its  own  level  of  development,  animal  nature  could
only  produce  the  ape,  and  human  nature — the  Roman  Caesar.  Just
as  the  ape  is  the  forerunner  of  man,  so  the  deified  Caesar  is  the
forerunner  of  the  God-man.


Ill

At  the  period  when  the  pagan  world  contemplated  its  spiritual
failure  in  the  person  of  the  supposed  man-god — the  Caesar  im-
potently  aping  the  deity,  individual  philosophers  and  earnest
believers  were  awaiting  the  incarnation  of  the  Divine  Word  or
the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God  and  the  King  of
Truth.  The  man-god,  even  if  he  were  lord  of  all  the  world,  is
but  an  empty  dream  ;  the  God-man  can  reveal  His  true  nature
even  in  the  guise  of  a  wandering  rabbi.

The  historical  existence  of  Christ,  as  well  as  the  reality  of
His  character  recorded  in  the  Gospels,  is  not  open  to  serious
doubt.  It  was  impossible  to  invent  Him,  and  no  one  could  have
done  it.  And  this  perfectly  historical  image  is  the  image  of  the
perfect  man — not  of  a  man,  however,  who  says,  ‘  I  have  become
god,’  but  of  one  who  says,  ‘  I  am  born  of  God  and  am  sent  by
Him,  I  was  one  with  God  before  the  world  was  made.’  We  are
compelled  by  reason  to  believe  this  testimony,  for  the  historical
coming  of  Christ  as  God  made  manifest  in  man  is  inseparably
connected  with  the  whole  of  the  world-process.  If  the  reality  of
this  event  is  denied,  there  can  be  no  meaning  or  purpose  in  the
universe.

When  the  first  vegetable  forms  appeared  in  the  inorganic
world,  developing  subsequently  into  the  luxurious  kingdom  of
trees  and  flowers,  they  could  not  have  appeared  of  themselves,  out
of  nothing.  It  would  be  equally  absurd  to  suppose  that  they  had
sprung  from  the  accidental  combinations  of  inorganic  elements.
Life  is  a  new  positive  content,  something  more  than  lifeless  matter  ;
and  to  reduce  the  greater  to  the  lesser  is  to  assert  that  something
can  come  out  of  nothing,  which  is  obviously  absurd.  The
phenomena  of  vegetable  life  are  continuous  with  the  phenomena
of  the  inorganic  world  ;  but  that  of  which  they  are  the  phenomena


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  187

is  essentially  distinct  in  the  two  kingdoms,  and  the  heterogeneity
becomes  more  and  more  apparent  as  the  new  kingdom  develops
further.  In  the  same  way,  the  world  of  plants  and  the  world  of
animals  spring,  as  it  were,  from  one  root ;  the  elementary  forms
of  both  are  so  similar  that  biology  recognises  a  whole  class  of
animal-plants  (the  Zoophites).  But  under  this  apparent  or
phenomenal  homogeneity  there  is  undoubtedly  concealed  a  funda¬
mental  and  essential  difference  of  type,  which  evinces  itself  later
in  the  two  divergent  directions  or  planes  of  being — the  vegetable
and  the  animal.  In  this  case,  again,  that  which  is  new  and  greater
in  the  animal,  as  compared  with  the  vegetable  type,  cannot,
without  obvious  absurdity,  be  reduced  to  the  lesser,  i.e.  to  the
qualities  they  have  in  common.  This  would  mean  identifying
a  +  b  with  a ,  or  recognising  something  as  equal  to  nothing.  In
exactly  the  same  way  there  is  close  proximity  and  intimate
material  connection,  in  the  phenomenal  order,  between  the  human
and  the  animal  world.  But  the  essential  peculiarity  of  the  latter —
which  is  certainly  more  apparent  in  a  Plato  or  a  Goethe  than  in  a
Papuan  or  an  Esquimo — is  a  new  positive  content,  a  certain  plus
of  existence,  which  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  old  animal  type.
A  cannibal  may  not  in  himself  be  much  above  the  ape  ;  but  then
he  is  not  a  final  type  of  humanity.  An  uninterrupted  series  of
more  perfect  generations  lead  from  the  cannibal  to  Plato  and
Goethe,  while  an  ape,  so  long  as  it  is  an  ape,  does  not  become
essentially  more  perfect.  We  are  connected  with  our  half-savage
ancestors  by  the  bond  of  historical  memory,  or  the  unity  of
collective  consciousness — which  animals  do  not  possess.  Their
memory  is  individual  only,  and  the  physiological  bond  between
generations  that  finds  expression  in  heredity  does  not  enter  their
consciousness.  Therefore,  though  animals  participate  to  a  certain
extent  in  the  process  of  making'  the  animal  form  more  perfect
(in  accordance  with  the  evolutionary  theory),  the  results  and  the
purpose  of  this  process  remain  external  and  foreign  to  them.  But
the  process  whereby  humanity  is  made  more  perfect  is  conditioned
by  the  faculties  of  reason  and  will  which  are  found  in  the  lowest
savage,  though  in  a  rudimentary  degree  only.  Just  as  these
higher  faculties  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  animal  nature  and
form  a  separate  human  kingdom,  so  the  qualities  of  the  spiritual
man  —  of  man  made  perfect  or  of  the  God -man  —  cannot  be


1 88  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

deduced  from  the  states  and  qualities  of  the  natural  man.  Conse¬
quently,  the  Kingdom  of  God  cannot  be  taken  to  be  the  result  of
the  unbroken  development  of  the  purely-human  world.  The  God-
man  is  not  the  same  as  the  man-god ,  even  though  distinct  individuals
among  natural  humanity  may  have  anticipated  the  higher  life
which  was  to  come.  As  the  c  water  lily  appears  at  first  sight  to
be  a  plant,  while  it  undoubtedly  is  an  animal,  so,  at  the  beginning,
the  bearers  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  apparently  do  not  seem  in
any  way  to  differ  from  men  of  this  world,  though  there  lives  and
acts  within  them  the  principle  of  a  new  order  of  being.

The  fact  that  the  higher  forms  or  types  of  being  appear,  or
are  revealed,  after  the  lower  does  not  by  any  means  prove  that
they  are  a  product  or  a  creation  of  the  lower.  The  order  of
reality  is  not  the  same  as  the  order  of  appearance.  The  higher,
the  richer,  and  the  more  positive  types  and  states  of  being  are
metaphysically  prior  to  the  lower,  although  they  are  revealed  or
manifested  subsequently  to  them.  This  is  not  a  denial  of  evolu¬
tion  ;  evolution  cannot  be  denied,  it  is  a  fact.  But  to  maintain  that
evolution  creates  the  higher  forms  out  of  the  lower,  or,  in  the  long-
run,  out  of  nothing,  is  to  substitute  a  logical  absurdity  for  the  fact.
Evolution  of  the  lower  types  of  being  cannot  of  itself  create  the
higher.  It  simply  produces  the  material  conditions  or  brings
about  the  environment  necessary  for  the  manifestation  or  the
revelation  of  the  higher  type.  Thus,  every  appearance  of  a  new
type  of  being  is  in  a  certain  sense  a  new  creation.  But  it  is  not
created  out  of  nothing.  The  material  basis  for  the  appearance  of
the  new  is  the  old  type.  The  special  positive  content  of  the
higher  type  does  not  arise  de  novo ,  but  exists  from  all  eternity.  It
simply  enters,  at  a  certain  moment  in  the  process,  into  a  different
order  of  being— the  phenomenal  world.  The  conditions  of  the
appearance  are  due  to  the  natural  evolution  of  the  material  world  ;
that  which  appears  comes  from  God.1

IV

The  interrelation  between  the  fundamental  types  of  being —
which  are  the  chief  stages  in  the  world-process — is  not  exhausted

1  The  primordial  relation  of  God  to  nature  lies  outside  the  boundaries  of  the  world-
process  and  is  a  subject  for  pure  metaphysics,  which  I  will  not  touch  upon  here.


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  189

by  the  negative  fact  that  these  types,  each  having  its  own  peculiar
nature,  are  not  reducible  to  one  another.  There  is  a  direct  con¬
nection  between  them  which  gives  positive  unity  to  the  process  as  a
whole.  This  unity,  into  the  essential  nature  of  which  we  cannot
here  inquire,  is  revealed  in  three  ways.  In  the  first  place,  each  new
type  is  a  new  condition  necessary  for  the  realisation  of  the  supreme
and  final  end,  namely,  for  the  actual  manifestation  in  the  world  of  the
perfect  moral  order,  the  Kingdom  of  God,  or  for  ‘  the  revelation  of
the  freedom  and  glory  of  the  sons  of  God.’  In  order  to  attain  its
highest  end  or  manifest  its  absolute  worth,  a  being  must  in  the  first
place  be ,  then  it  must  be  living ,  then  be  conscious ,  then  be  rational ,
and  finally  be  perfect.  The  defective  conceptions  of  not  being,
lifelessness,  unconsciousness,  and  irrationality  are  logically  incom¬
patible  with  the  idea  of  perfection.  The  concrete  embodiment
of  each  of  the  positive  states  of  existence  forms  the  actual  king¬
doms  of  the  world,  so  that  even  the  lower  enter  into  the  moral
order  as  the  necessary  conditions  of  its  realisation.  This  instru¬
mental  relation,  however,  does  not  exhaust  the  unity  of  the  world  as
given  in  experience.  The  lower  types  are  inwardly  drawn  to  the
higher,  strive  to  attain  to  them,  having  in  them,  as  it  were,  their
purpose  and  their  end.  This  fact  also  indicates  the  purposive
character  of  the  process  as  a  whole  (the  most  obvious  instance  of
the  striving  is  the  likeness,  already  indicated,  of  the  ape  to  man).
Finally,  the  positive  connection  of  the  graduated  kingdoms  shows
itself  in  the  fact  that  each  type  includes  or  embraces  the  lower
types  within  itself — and  the  higher  it  is,  the  more  fully  it  does  so.
The  world-process  may  thus  be  said  to  be  the  process  of  gathering
the  universe  together ,  as  well  as  of  developing  and  perfecting  it.
Plants  physiologically  absorb  their  environment  (the  inorganic  sub¬
stances  and  physical  phenomena  which  nourish  them  and  promote
their  growth).  Animals,  in  addition  to  feeding  on  plants,  psycho¬
logically  absorb,  i.e.  take  into  their  consciousness,  a  wider  circle
of  events  correlated  with  them  through  sensation.  Man,  in
addition  to  this,  grasps,  by  means  of  reason,  remote  spheres  of
being  which  are  not  immediately  sensed ;  at  a  high  stage  of
development  he  can  embrace  all  in  one  or  understand  the  meaning
of  all  things.  Finally  the  God-man  or  the  Living  Reason
(Logos)  not  only  abstractly  understands  but  actively  realises  the
meaning  of  everything,  or  the  perfect  moral  order,  as  he  embraces


1 9o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  connects  together  all  things  by  the  living  personal  power  of
love.  The  highest  end  of  man  as  such  (pure  man)  and  of  the
human  world  is  to  gather  the  universe  together  in  thought.  The
end  of  the  God-man  and  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  to  gather  the
universe  together  in  reality.

The  vegetable  world  does  not  abolish  the  inorganic  world,  but
merely  relegates  it  to  a  lower,  subordinate  place.  The  same  thing
happens  at  the  further  stages  of  the  world-process.  At  the  end  of
it,  the  Kingdom  of  God  does  not,  when  it  appears,  abolish  the  lower
types  of  existence,  but  puts  them  all  into  their  right  place,  no  longer
as  separate  spheres  of  existence  but  as  the  spiritually-physical  organs
of  a  collected  universe,  bound  together  by  an  absolute  inner  unity
and  interaction.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Kingdom  of  God  is
identical  with  the  reality  of  the  absolute  moral  order,  or,  what  is
the  same  thing,  with  universal  resurrection  and  атгокатаа-тасгц
twv  тгаѵтыѵ.


V

When  the  God- man  who  begins  the  Kingdom  of  God  is
described  as  ‘an  ideal,’  this  does  not  mean  that  he  is  thinkable  only
and  not  real.  He  can  only  be  called  ideal  in  the  sense  in  which
a  man  may  be  said  to  be  an  ideal  for  the  animal,  or  a  plant  an
ideal  for  the  earth  out  of  which  it  grows.  The  plant  is  more  ideal
in  the  sense  of  possessing  greater  worth,  but  it  has  a  greater  and
not  a  lesser  reality  or  fulness  of  existence  as  compared  with  a  clod
of  earth.  The  same  must  be  said  of  the  animal  as  compared  with
the  plant,  of  the  natural  man  as  compared  with  the  animal,  and  of
the  God-man  as  compared  with  the  natural  man.  On  the  whole,
the  greater  worth  of  the  ideal  content  is  in  direct  proportion  to  the
increase  in  real  power  :  the  plant  has  concrete  powers  (such  as  the
power  to  transmute  inorganic  substances  for  its  own  purposes)  which
the  clod  of  earth  has  not  ;  man  is  far  more  powerful  than  the  ape,
and  Christ  has  infinitely  more  power  than  the  Roman  Caesar.

The  natural  man  differs  from  the  spiritual  not  by  being  utterly
devoid  of  the  spiritual  element,  but  by  not  having  the  power  to
realise  that  element  completely.  To  obtain  this  power  the
spiritual  being  of  man  must  be  fertilised  by  a  new  creative  act  or
by  the  effect  of  what  in  theology  is  called  grace ,  which  gives  the


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  191

sons  of  men  c  the  power  to  become  the  children  of  God.’  Even
according  to  orthodox  theologians  grace  does  not  abolish  nature
in  general,  and  the  moral  nature  of  man  in  particular,  but  perfects  it.
The  moral  nature  of  man  is  the  necessary  condition  and  pre¬
supposition  of  the  manifestation  of  God  in  man.  Not  every
inorganic  substance  but  only  certain  chemical  combinations  can  be
affected  by  the  vital  force  and  form  part  of  vegetable  and  animal
organisms.  Similarly,  not  all  living  beings  but  only  those  endowed
with  a  moral  nature  can  receive  the  effects  of  grace  and  enter  into
the  Kingdom  of  God.  The  beginnings  of  spiritual  life  are
inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  man  and  are  to  be  found  in  the
feelings  of  shame,  pity,  and  reverence,  as  well  as  in  the  rules
of  conduct  that  follow  from  these  feelings  and  are  safeguarded
by  conscience  or  the  consciousness  of  duty.  This  natural
good  in  man  is  an  imperfect  good,  and  it  is  logically  inevitable
that  it  should,  as  such,  remain  for  ever  imperfect.  Otherwise
we  should  have  to  admit  that  the  infinite  can  be  the  result  of  the
addition  of  finite  magnitudes,  that  the  unconditional  can  arise  out
of  the  conditioned,  and,  finally,  that  something  can  come  out  of
nothing.  Human  nature  does  not  contain  and  therefore  cannot
of  itself  give  rise  to  the  real  infinity  or  fulness  of  perfection.  But
by  virtue  of  reason  or  universal  meaning  inherent  in  it,  it  contains
the  possibility  of  this  moral  infinity  and  a  striving  for  its  realisation,
i.e.  for  the  apprehension  of  the  Divine.  A  dumb  creature  striving
towards  reason  is  a  mere  animal,  but  a  being  actually  possessed  of
reason  ceases  to  be  an  animal  and  becomes  man,  forming  a  new
kingdom  not  to  be  deduced  by  a  simple  continuous  evolution  from
the  lower  types.  Similarly,  this  new  being,  rational,  though  not
wholly  rational,  imperfect  and  only  striving  towards  perfection,  is
a  mere  man,  while  a  being  possessing  perfection  cannot  be  merely
human.  He  is  a  revelation  of  a  new  and  final  Kingdom  of  God,
in  which  not  the  relative  but  the  absolute  Good  or  worth  is
realised,  not  to  be  deduced  from  the  relative  ;  for  the  distinction
is  one  of  quality  and  not  of  quantity  or  degree.

The  divine  man  differs  from  the  ordinary  man  not  by  being
a  represented  ideal  but  by  being  a  realised  ideal.  The  false  idealism
which  takes  the  ideal  to  be  non-existent,  and  thinks  its  realisation
unnecessary,  is  not  worth  criticising.  But  there  is  another  question
involved  here  which  must  be  reckoned  with.  While  admitting


1 92  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

that  the  divine  or  perfect  man  must  have  reality,  and  not  merely
significance  for  thought,  one  may  deny  the  historical  fact  of  His
appearance  in  the  past.  Such  denial,  however,  has  no  rational
grounds,  and,  moreover,  it  robs  the  process  of  universal  history  of
all  meaning.  If  the  historical  person  known  to  us  from  the  books
of  the  New  Testament  was  not  the  God-man  or,  in  Kant’s
terminology,  the  realised  c  ideal,’  He  could  only  be  the  natural
product  of  historical  evolution.  But  in  that  case  why  did  not  this
evolution  go  further  in  the  same  direction  and  produce  other  persons
still  more  perfect  ?  Why  is  it  that  after  Christ  there  is  progress
in  all  spheres  of  life  except  in  the  fundamental  sphere  of  personal
spiritual  power  ?  Every  one  who  does  not  deliberately  shut  his
eyes  must  admit  the  gulf  there  is  between  the  noblest  type  of
natural,  searching  wisdom  immortalised  by  Xenophanes  in  his
notes  and  by  Plato  in  his  dialogues,  and  the  radiant  manifestation
of  triumphant  spirituality  which  is  preserved  in  the  Gospels  and
had  blinded  Saul  in  order  to  regenerate  him.  And  yet,  less  than
four  centuries  elapsed  between  Socrates  and  Christ.  If  during
this  short  period  historical  evolution  could  produce  such  an  increase
of  spiritual  force  in  human  personality,  how  is  it  that  during  a
far  longer  time,  and  in  a  period  of  rapid  historical  progress,  evolution
has  proved  utterly  powerless  not  only  to  bring  about  a  corresponding
advance  in  personal  spiritual  perfection,  but  even  to  keep  it  on  the
same  level  ?  Spinoza  and  Kant,  who  lived  sixteen  and  seventeen
centuries  after  Christ,  and  were  very  noble  types  of  natural  wisdom,
may  well  be  compared  with  Socrates,  but  it  would  not  occur  to  any
one  to  compare  them  with  Christ.  It  is  not  because  they  had  a
different  sphere  of  activity.  Take  men  celebrated  in  the  religious
sphere — Mahomet,  Savonarola,  Luther,  Calvin,  Ignatius  Loyola,1
Fox,  Swedenborg.  All  these  were  men  of  powerful  personality  ;
but  try  honestly  to  compare  them  with  Christ  !  And  historical
characters,  such  as  St.  Francis,  who  come  nearest  to  the  moral
ideal,  definitely  acknowledge  their  direct  dependence  upon  Christ
as  a  higher  being.

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  Auguste  Comte,  in  some  letters  he  wrote  shortly
before  his  death,  declared  Ignatius  Loyola  to  be  higher  than  Christ.  But  this  judgment,
as  well  as  other  similar  opinions  and  actions  of  the  founder  of  the  Positivist  philosophy,
prove  to  all  unprejudiced  critics  that  the  thinker  in  question,  who  had  in  his  youth
suffered  for  two  years  with  brain  disease,  was  in  the  last  years  of  his  life  once  more  on
the  verge  of  insanity.  See  my  article  on  Comte  in  the  Brockhaus-Efron  Encyclopaedia.


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  193


VI

If  Christ  represents  only  a  relative  stage  of  moral  perfection,
the  absence  of  any  further  stages  during  almost  two  thousand
years  of  the  spiritual  growth  of  humanity  is  utterly  incompre¬
hensible.  If  He  is  the  absolutely  highest  type  produced  by  the
process  of  natural  evolution,  He  ought  to  have  appeared  at  the  end
and  not  in  the  middle  of  history.  But  indeed  He  could  not  in  any
case  be  a  simple  product  of  historical  evolution,  for  the  difference
between  absolute  and  relative  perfection  is  not  one  of  quantity  or
degree,  but  is  qualitative  and  essential,  and  it  is  logically  impossible
to  deduce  the  first  from  the  second.

The  meaning  of  history  in  its  concrete  development  compels
us  to  recognise  in  Jesus  Christ  not  the  last  word  of  the  human
kingdom,  but  the  first  and  all-embracing  Word  of  the  Kingdom
of  God — not  the  man-god,  but  the  God-man,  or  the  absolute
individual.  From  this  point  of  view  it  can  be  well  understood
why  He  first  appeared  in  the  middle  of  history  and  not  at  the  end
of  it.  The  purpose  of  the  world-process  is  the  revelation  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  or  of  the  perfect  moral  order  realised  by  a  new
humanity  which  spiritually  grows  out  of  the  God-man.  It  is  clear,
then,  that  this  universal  event  must  be  preceded  by  the  individual
appearance  of  the  God-man  Himself.  As  the  first  half  of  history
up  to  Christ  was  preparing  the  environment  or  the  external
conditions  for  His  individual  birth,  so  the  second  half  prepares  the
external  conditions  for  His  universal  revelation  or  for  the  coming
of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Here  once  more  the  general  and  logically
certain  law  of  the  universe  finds  application  :  the  higher  type  of
being  is  not  created  by  the  preceding  process  but  is  phenomenally
conditioned  by  it.  The  Kingdom  of  God  is  not  a  product  of
Christian  history  any  more  than  Christ  was  a  product  of  the  Jewish
and  the  Pagan  history.  History  merely  worked  out  in  the  past  and
is  working  out  now  the  necessary  natural  and  moral  conditions
for  the  revelation  of  the  God-man  and  the  divine  humanity.

VII

By  His  word  and  the  work  of  His  whole  life,  beginning  with
the  victory  over  all  the  temptations  of  the  moral  evil  and  ending

о


194  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

with  the  resurrection,  i.e.  the  victory  over  the  physical  evil  or  the
law  of  death  and  corruption,  the  true  God-man  has  revealed  to  men
the  Kingdom  of  God.  But,  according  to  the  very  meaning  and
law  of  this  new  Kingdom,  revelation  cannot  in  this  case  coincide
with  attainment.  In  making  real  the  absolute  significance  of  each
person  the  perfect  moral  order  presupposes  the  moral  freedom  of
each.  But  true  freedom  is  acquired  by  the  finite  spirit  through
experience  only.  Free  choice  is  only  possible  for  the  person  who
knows  or  has  experienced  that  which  he  is  choosing  as  well  as  its
opposite.  And  although  Christ  finally  conquered  evil  in  the  true
centre  of  the  universe,  i.e.  in  Himself,  the  victory  over  evil  on  the
circumference  of  the  world,  i.e.  in  the  collective  whole  of  humanity,
has  to  be  accomplished  through  humanity’s  own  experience.
This  necessitates  a  new  process  of  development  in  the  Christian
world  which  has  been  baptized  into  Christ  but  has  not  yet  put
on  Christ.1

The  true  foundation  of  the  perfect  moral  order  is  the  uni¬
versality  of  the  spirit  of  Christ  capable  of  embracing  and  іе-
generating  all  things.  The  essential  task  of  humanity,  then,  is
to  accept  Christ  and  regard  everything  in  His  spirit,  thus  enabling
His  spirit  to  become  incarnate  in  everything.  For  this  incarnation
cannot  be  a  physical  event  only.  The  individual  incarnation  of
the  Word  of  God  required  the  consent  of  a  personal  feminine  will  :
“Be  it  unto  Me  according  to  Thy  word.”  The  universal
incarnation  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  or  the  manifestation  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  requires  the  consent  of  the  collective  will  of
humanity,  that  all  things  should  be  united  to  God.  In  order  that
this  consent  should  be  fully  conscious,  Christ  must  be  understood
not  only  as  the  absolute  principle  of  the  good,  but  as  th t  fulness  of
good.  In  other  words,  there  must  be  established  a  Christian  (and
an  antichristian)  relation  to  all  aspects  and  spheres  of  human
life.  In  order  that  this  consent  should  be  perfectly  free,  that  it
should  be  a  true  moral  act  or  a  fulfilment  of  the  inner  truth  and
not  the  effect  of  an  overwhelming  superior  force,  it  was  necessary
for  Christ  to  withdraw  into  the  transcendental  sphere  of  the

1  The  least  attention  on  the  part  of  the  reader  will  convince  him  that  I  have  not
given  any  ground  for  serious  critics  to  reproach  me  with  the  absurd  identification  of  the
Kingdom  of  God  with  historical  Christianity  or  the  visible  Church  (which  one  ?).  I
reject  such  identification  both  implicitly  and  explicitly  ;  nor  do  I  recognise  every
scoundrel  who  has  been  baptized  as  a  spiritual’  man  or  ‘a  son  of  God.’


THE  REALITY  OF  THE  MORAL  ORDER  195

invisible  reality  and  to  withhold  His  active  influence  from  human
history.  It  will  become  manifest  when  human  society  as  a
whole,  and  not  merely  separate  individuals,  is  ready  for  a
conscious  and  free  choice  between  the  absolute  good  and  its
opposite.  The  unconditional  moral  demand,  “  Be  ye  perfect  even
as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,”  is  addressed  to  each  man,
not  as  a  separate  entity  but  as  together  with  others  (be  y<?,  not
be  thou).  And  if  this  demand  is  understood  and  accepted  as
an  actual  problem  of  life,  it  inevitably  introduces  us  into  the
realm  of  conditions  which  determine  the  concrete  historical
existence  of  society  or  the  collective  man.


*


PART  III

THE  GOOD  THROUGH  HUMAN  HISTORY


197


CHAPTER  I


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY

I

We  know  that  the  good  in  its  full  sense,  including  the  idea  of
happiness  or  satisfaction,  is  ultimately  defined  as  the  true  moral
order  which  expresses  the  absolutely  right  and  the  absolutely  desirable
relation  of  each  to  all  and  of  all  to  each.  It  is  called  the  Kingdom

О

of  God.  From  the  moral  point  of  view  it  is  quite  clear  that  the
realisation  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  the  only  final  end  of  life  and
activity,  being  the  supreme  good,  happiness,  and  bliss.  It  is
equally  clear,  if  one  thinks  of  the  subject  carefully  and  concretely,
that  the  true  moral  order  or  the  Kingdom  of  God  is  both  perfectly
universal  and  perfectly  individual.  Each  wants  it  for  himself  and
for  every  one,  and  is  only  able  to  attain  it  together  with  every  one.
Therefore  there  can  be  no  essential  opposition  between  the
individual  and  society  ;  the  question  which  of  the  two  is  an  end
and  which  is  merely  a  means  cannot  be  asked.  Such  a  question
would  presuppose  the  real  existence  of  the  individual  as  a  self-
sufficient  and  self-contained  entity.  In  truth,  however,  each
individual  is  only  the  meeting-point  of  an  infinite  number  of
relations  with  other  individuals.  To  abstract  him  from  these
relations  means  to  deprive  his  life  of  all  its  concrete  filling-in  and
to  transform  a  personality  into  an  empty  possibility  of  existence.  To
imagine  that  the  personal  centre  of  our  being  is  really  cut  off  from
our  environment  and  from  the  general  life  which  connects  us  with
other  minds  is  simply  a  morbid  illusion  of  self-consciousness.

When  a  line  is  chalked  before  the  eyes  of  a  cock,  he  takes
that  line  to  be  a  fatal  obstacle  which  he  cannot  possibly  over¬
step.  He  is  evidently  incapable  of  understanding  that  the  fatal,

199


200  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

overwhelming  significance  of  the  chalk  line  is  due  simply  to
the  fact  that  he  is  exclusively  occupied  with  this  unusual  and
unexpected  fact,  and  is  therefore  not  free  with  regard  to  it.  The
delusion  is  quite  natural  for  a  cock,  but  is  less  natural  for  a
rational  thinking  human  being.  Nevertheless  human  beings  fail
but  too  frequently  to  grasp  that  the  given  limitations  of  our
personality  are  insuperable  and  impermeable  solely  because  our
attention  is  exclusively  concentrated  on  them.  The  fatal  separate¬
ness  of  our  ‘self’  from  all  else  is  due  simply  to  the  fact  that  we
imagine  it  to  be  fatal.  We  too  are  victims  of  auto-suggestion,
which,  though  it  has  certain  objective  grounds,  is  as  fictitious  and
as  easily  got  over  as  the  chalked  line.

The  self-deception  in  virtue  of  which  a  human  individual
regards  himself  as  real  in  his  separateness  from  all  things,  and
presupposes  this  fictitious  isolation  to  be  the  true  ground  and  the
only  possible  starting-point  for  all  his  relations  — this  self-
deception  of  abstract  subjectivism  plays  terrible  havoc  not  only  in
the  domain  of  metaphysics — which,  indeed,  it  abolishes  altogether
— but  also  in  the  domain  of  the  moral  and  political  life.  It  is  the
source  of  many  involved  theories,  irreconcilable  contradictions,  and
insoluble  questions.  But  all  of  them  would  disappear  of  them¬
selves  if,  without  being  afraid  of  authoritative  names,  we  would
grasp  the  simple  fact  that  the  theories  and  the  insoluble  problems
in  question  could  only  have  arisen  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
hypnotised  cock.


II

Human  personality,  and  therefore  every  individual  human
being,  is  capable  of  realising  infinite  fulness  of  being ,  or,  in  other
words,  it  is  a  particular  form  ivith  infinite  content.  The  reason  of
man  contains  an  infinite  possibility  of  a  truer  and  truer  know¬
ledge  of  the  meaning  of  all  things.  The  will  of  man  contains  an
equally  infinite  possibility  of  a  more  and  more  perfect  realisation
of  this  universal  meaning  in  the  particular  life  and  environment.
Human  personality  is  infinite  :  this  is  an  axiom  of  moral  philo¬
sophy.  But  the  moment  that  abstract  subjectivism  draws  its  chalk
line  before  the  eyes  of  the  unwary  thinker  the  most  fruitful  of
axioms  becomes  a  hopeless  absurdity.  Human  personality  as


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


201


containing  infinite  possibilities  is  abstracted  from  all  the  concrete
conditions  and  results  of  its  realisation  in  and  through  society —
and  is  indeed  opposed  to  them.  There  ensues  insoluble  con¬
tradiction  between  the  individual  and  society,  and  the  ‘fatal
question  ’  arises  as  to  which  of  the  two  must  be  sacrificed  to  the
other.  Persons  hypnotised  by  the  individualistic  view  affirm  the
independence  of  separate  personality  which  determines  all  its
relations  from  within,  and  regard  social  ties  and  collective  order  as
merely  an  external  limit  and  an  arbitrary  restriction  which  must
at  any  cost  be  removed.  On  the  other  hand,  thinkers  who  are
under  the  spell  of  collectivism  take  the  life  of  humanity  to  be  simply
an  interplay  of  human  masses,  and  regard  the  individual  as  an
insignificant  and  transient  element  of  society,  who. has  no  rights
of  his  own,  and  may  be  left  out  of  account  for  the  sake  of  the  so-
called  common  good.  But  what  are  we  to  make  of  society
consisting  of  moral  zeros,  of  rightless  and  non-individual  creatures  ?
Would  it  be  human  society?  Where  would  its  dignity  and
the  inner  value  of  its  existence  spring  from,  and  wherein  would  it
lie  ?  And  how  could  such  a  society  hold  together  ?  It  is  clear
that  this  is  nothing  but  a  sad  and  empty  dream,  which  neither
could  nor  ought  to  be  realised.  The  opposite  ideal  of  self-
sufficient  personality  is  equally  chimeric.  Deprive  a  concrete
human  personality  of  all  that  is  in  any  way  due  to  its  relations
with  social  and  collective  wholes,  and  the  only  thing  left  will  be
an  animal  entity  containing  only  a  pure  possibility  or  an  empty
form  of  man — that  is,  something  that  does  not  really  exist  at  all.
Those  who  had  occasion  to  go  down  to  hell  or  to  rise  up  to
heaven,  as,  for  instance,  Dante  and  Swedenborg,  did  not  find
even  there  any  isolated  individuals,  but  saw  only  social  groups  and
circles.

Social  life  is  not  a  condition  superadded  to  the  individual  life,
but  is  contained  in  the  very  definition  of  personality  which  is
essentially  a  rationally-knowing  and  a  morally-active  force— both
knowing  and  acting  being  only  possible  in  the  life  of  a  com¬
munity.  Rational  knowledge  on  its  formal  side  is  conditioned  by
general  notions  which  express  a  unity  of  meaning  in  an  endless
multiplicity  of  events  ;  real  and  objective  universality  (the  general
meaning)  of  notions  manifests  itself  in  language  as  a  means  of
communication,  without  which  rational  activity  cannot  develop,


202  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and,  for  lack  of  realisation,  gradually  disappears  altogether  or
becomes  merely  potential.  Language — this  concrete  reason —
could  not  have  been  the  work  of  an  isolated  individual,  and  con¬
sequently  such  an  individual  could  not  be  rational,  could  not  be
human.  On  its  material  side  knowledge  of  truth  is  based  upon
experience — hereditary,  collective  experience  which  is  being
gradually  stored  up.  The  experience  of  an  absolutely  isolated
being,  even  if  such  a  being  could  exist,  would  obviously  be  quite
insufficient  for  the  knowledge  of  truth.  As  to  the  moral
determination  of  personality,  it  is  clear  that,  although  the  idea  of
the  good  or  of  moral  value  is  not  wholly  due  to  social  relations  as
is  often  maintained,  concrete  development  of  human  morality
or  the  realisation  of  the  idea  of  the  good  is  only  possible  for  the
individual  in  a  social  environment  and  through  interaction  with  it.
In  this  all-important  respect  society  is  nothing  but  the  objective
realisation  of  what  is  contained  in  the  individual.

Instead  of  an  insoluble  contradiction  between  two  mutually  ex¬
clusive  principles — between  two  abstract  isms,— we  really  find  two
correlative  terms  each  of  which  logically  and  historically  requires
and  presupposes  the  other.  In  its  essential  signification  society  is
not  the  external  limit  of  the  individual  but  his  inner  fulfilment.  It
is  not  an  arithmetical  sum  or  a  mechanical  aggregate  of  the  indi¬
viduals  that  compose  it,  but  the  indivisible  whole  of  the  communal
life.  This  life  has  been  partly  realised  in  the  past  and  is  preserved
in  the  abiding  social  tradition ,  is  being  partly  realised  in  the
present  by  means  of  social  service ,  and  finally,  it  anticipates  in
the  form  of  a  social  ideal ,  present  in  the  best  minds,  its  perfect
realisation  in  the  future.

Corresponding  to  these  three  fundamental  and  abiding
moments  of  the  individually-social  life — the  religious,  the  political,
and  the  prophetic — there  are  three  main  concrete  stages  through
which  human  life  and  consciousness  pass  in  the  course  of  the
historical  development,  namely,  (i)  the  stage  of  organisation  based
upon  kinship,  which  belongs  to  the  past  though  it  is  still  preserved
in  a  changed  form  in  the  family  ;  (2)  the  national  state ,  prevalent
at  the  present  time  ;  and  finally  (3)  the  universal  communion  of
life,  as  the  ideal  of  the  future.

At  all  these  stages  society  is  essentially  the  moral  fulfilment  or
the  realisation  of  the  individual  in  a  given  environment.  But  the


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


203


environment  is  not  always  the  same.  At  the  first  stage  it  is
limited  for  each  to  his  own  tribe  ;  at  the  second,  to  his  own  father-
land  ;  and  it  is  only  at  the  third  that  the  human  personality,  having
attained  a  clear  consciousness  of  its  inner  infinity,  endeavours  to
realise  it  in  a  perfect  society,  abolishing  all  limitations  both  in  the
nature  and  in  the  extent  of  concrete  interaction.


Ill

Each  single  individual  possesses  as  such  the  potentiality  of
perfection  or  of  positive  infinity,  namely,  the  capacity  to  under¬
stand  all  things  with  his  intellect  and  to  embrace  all  things  with
his  heart,  or  to  enter  into  a  living  communion  with  everything.
This  double  infinity — the  power  of  conception  and  the  power  of
striving  and  activity,  called  in  the  Bible,  according  to  the  inter¬
pretation  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  the  image  and  likeness  of
God — necessarily  belongs  to  every  person.  It  is  in  this  that  the
absolute  significance,  dignity,  and  worth  of  human  personality
consists,  and  this  is  the  basis  of  its  inalienable  rights.1  It  is  clear
that  the  realisation  of  this  infinity,  or  the  actuality  of  the
perfection,  demands  that  all  should  participate  in  it.  It  cannot
be  the  private  possession  of  each  taken  separately ,  but  becomes  his
through  his  relation  to  all.  In  other  words,  by  remaining  isolated
and  limited  an  individual  deprives  himself  of  the  real  fulness  of
life,  i.e.  deprives  himself  of  perfection  and  of  infinity.  A  con¬
sistent  affirmation  of  his  own  separateness  or  isolation  would
indeed  be  physically  impossible  for  the  individual  person.  All
that  the  life  of  the  community  contains  is  bound  in  one  way  or
another  to  affect  individual  persons  ;  it  becomes  a  part  of  them
and  in  and  through  them  alone  attains  its  final  actuality  or
completion.  Or  if  we  look  at  the  same  thing  from  another  point
of  view — all  the  real  content  of  the  personal  life  is  obtained  from
the  social  environment  and,  in  one  way  or  another,  is  conditioned
by  its  state  at  the  given  time.  In  this  sense  it  may  be  said  that

1  This  meaning  of  the  image  and  likeness  of  God  is  essentially  the  same  as  that
indicated  in  Part  II.  It  is  clear,  indeed,  that  an  infinite  power  of  conception  and
understanding  can  only  give  us  the  image  (‘  the  schema  ’)  of  perfection,  while  an  infinite
striving,  having  for  its  purpose  the  actual  realisation  of  perfection,  is  the  beginning  of
our  likeness  to  God,  who  is  the  real  and  not  only  the  ideal  perfection.


204  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

society  is  the  completed  or  magnified  individual ,  and  the  individual
is  compressed  or  concentrated  society.

The  world  purpose  is  not  to  create  a  solidarity  between  each
and  all,  for  it  already  exists  in  the  nature  of  things,  but  to  make
each  and  all  aware  of  this  solidarity  and  spiritually  alive  to  it  ;  to
transform  it  from  a  merely  metaphysical  and  physical  solidarity
into  a  morally-metaphysical  and  a  morally-physical  one.  The
life  of  man  already  is,  both  at  its  lower  and  its  upper  limit,  an  in¬
voluntary  participation  in  the  developing  life  of  humanity  and  of
the  whole  world.  But  the  dignity  of  human  life  and  the  meaning
of  the  universe  as  a  whole  demand  that  this  involuntary  partici¬
pation  of  each  in  everything  should  become  voluntary  and  be
more  and  more  conscious  and  free,  i.e.  really  personal — that  each
should  more  and  more  understand  and  fulfil  the  common  work  as
if  it  were  his  own.  It  is  clear  that  in  this  way  alone  can  the
infinite  significance  of  personality  be  realised  or,  in  other  words,
pass  from  possibility  to  actuality.

But  this  transition  itself — this  spiritualisation  or  moralisation
of  the  natural  fact  of  solidarity — is  also  an  inseparable  part  of  the
common  work.  The  fulfilment  of  this  supreme  task  depends  not
upon  personal  efforts  alone,  but  is  also  necessarily  conditioned  by
the  general  course  of  the  world’s  history,  or  by  the  actual  state  of
the  social  environment  at  a  given  moment  in  history.  Thus  the
individual  improvement  in  each  man  cannot  be  severed  from  the
universal,  nor  the  personal  morality  from  the  social.


IV

True  morality  is  the  rightful  interaction  between  the  indi¬
vidual  and  his  environment — taking  the  term  environment  in  the
wide  sense  to  embrace  all  spheres  of  reality — the  higher  as  well  as
the  lower — with  which  man  stands  in  the  practical  relation.  The
true  personal  dignity  of  each  undoubtedly  finds  expression  and
embodiment  in  his  relations  to  his  surroundings.  The  infinite
possibilities  inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  man  gradually  become
realised  in  this  individually-social  reality.  Historical  experience
finds  man  as  already  having  his  completion  in  a  certain  social
milieu,  and  the  subsequent  course  of  history  is  nothing  but  a


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


205


refinement  and  enlargement  of  this  double-sided  individually-social
life.  The  three  main  stages  or  strata  in  this  process  that  have
been  indicated  above — the  patriarchal,  the  national,  and  the
universal — are  of  course  connected  by  a  number  of  intermediate
links.  A  higher  form  does  not  replace  or  entirely  cancel  the
lower,  but,  absorbing  it  into  itself,  makes  it  a  subordinate  part
instead  of  an  independent  whole.  Thus  with  the  appearance  of
the  state  the  tribal  union  becomes  a  subordinate  part  of  it  in  the
form  of  the  family.  But  the  relation  of  kinship,  so  far  from  being
abolished,  acquires  a  greater  moral  depth.  It  merely  changes  its
sociological  and  judicial  significance,  ceasing  to  be  a  seat  of
independent  authority  or  of  jurisdiction  of  its  own.

As  the  lower  forms  of  the  collective  life  pass  into  the  higher,
the  individual,  in  virtue  of  the  infinite  potentiality  of  understanding
and  of  striving  for  the  better  latent  in  him,  appears  as  the  principle
of  progress  and  of  movement  (the  dynamic  element  in  history),
while  the  social  environment,  being  a  reality  already  achieved,
a  completed  objectification  of  the  moral  content  in  a  certain
sphere  and  at  a  certain  stage,  naturally  represents  the  stable,
conservative  principle  (the  static  element  of  history).  When  in¬
dividuals  who  are  more  gifted  or  more  developed  than  others
begin  to  be  conscious  that  their  social  environment  is  no  longer  a
realisation  or  a  completion  of  their  life,  but  is  simply  an  external
barrier  and  obstacle  to  their  positive  moral  aspirations,  they
become  the  bearers  of  a  higher  social  consciousness  which  seeks
embodiment  in  new  forms  and  in  a  new  order  of  life  that  would
correspond  to  it.

All  social  environment  is  the  objective  expression  or  embodi¬
ment  of  morality  (of  right  relations)  at  a  certain  stage  of  human
development.  But  the  moral  agent,  in  virtue  of  his  striving
towards  the  absolute  good,  outgrows  a  given  limited  form  of
morality  embodied  in  the  social  structure  and  takes  up  a  negative
attitude  towards  it — not  towards  it  as  such,  but  towards  the  given
lower  stage  of  its  embodiment.  It  is  obvious  that  such  a  conflict
is  not  an  opposition  of  principle  between  the  individual  and  the
social  element,  but  is  simply  an  opposition  between  the  earlier  and
the  later  stages  of  the  individually-social  development.


2o6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


V

The  moral  worth  and  dignity  of  man  finds  its  first  expression
in  social  life  as  determined  by  kinship d  We  find  in  it  a  rudimentary
embodiment  or  organisation  of  morality  as  a  whole — religious,
altruistic,  and  ascetic.  In  other  words,  a  group  held  together  by
the  tie  of  kinship  is  the  realisation  of  personal  human  dignity  in
the  narrowest  and  most  fundamental  sphere  of  society.  The  first
condition  of  the  true  dignity  of  man — reverence  for  that  which
is  higher  than  himself,  for  the  super-material  powers  that  rule
his  life — here  finds  expression  in  the  worship  of  the  ancestors  or
of  the  founders  of  the  clan.  The  second  condition  of  personal
dignity — the  recognition  of  the  dignity  of  others — is  found  in  the
solidarity  of  the  members  of  the  group,  their  mutual  affection  and
consideration.  The  third,  or,  from  another  point  of  view,  the
first  condition  of  human  dignity — freedom  from  the  predominance
of  carnal  desires — is  here  to  some  extent  attained  by  means  of
certain  compulsory  limitation  or  regulation  of  the  sexual  relations
through  the  different  forms  of  marriage  and  also  by  means  of
other  restraining  rules  of  the  communal  life,  all  of  which  de¬
mand  the  shame  to  which  the  ancient  chronicler  refers.

Thus  in  this  primitive  circle  of  human  life  the  moral  dignity
of  the  person  is  in  all  respects  realised  by  the  community  and  in
the  community.  How  can  there  be  any  contradiction  and  con¬
flict  here  between  the  individual  and  the  collective  principle  and
what  expression  can  it  assume  ?  The  relation  between  the  two
is  direct  and  positive.  The  social  law  is  not  extraneous  to  the
individual,  it  is  not  imposed  upon  him  from  without  contrary  to
his  nature  ;  it  merely  gives  a  definite,  objective,  and  constant  form
to  the  inward  motives  of  personal  morality.  Thus  the  person’s
inner  religious  feeling  (rudiments  of  which  are  already  found  in
certain  animals)  impels  him  to  hold  in  reverence  the  secret  causes
and  conditions  of  his  existence — and  the  cult  of  ancestor  worship
merely  gives  an  objective  expression  to  this  desire.  The  feeling
of  pity,  equally  inherent  in  man,  inclines  him  to  treat  his  relatives
with  fairness  —  the  social  law  merely  confirms  this  personal

1  I  am  speaking  of  kinship  in  the  wide  sense  and  have  in  mind  a  group  of  persons
forming  one  self-contained  community,  united  by  the  blood-tie  and  intermarriage,
whether  the  connection  between  them  takes  the  form  of  mother-right  or  of  father-right.


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


207


altruism  by  giving  it  a  fixed  and  definite  form  and  making  it
capable  of  realisation  ;  thus  the  defence  of  the  weak  members  of
the  social  group  from  injury  is  impossible  for  a  single  individual
to  undertake,  but  is  organised  by  the  clan  as  a  whole  or  by  a
union  of  clans.  Finally,  man’s  inherent  modesty  finds  realisation
in  definite  social  rules  of  abstinence.  Personal  morality  cannot
be  separated  from  the  social,  for  the  first  is  the  inner  beginning  of
the  second,  and  the  second  the  objective  realisation  of  the  first.
The  rules  of  social  life  at  the  patriarchal  stage — worship  of  common
ancestors,  mutual  help  between  the  individual  members  of  the
clan,  limitation  of  sensuality  by  marriage — have  a  moral  source
and  character,  and  it  is  clear  that  to  carry  out  these  social  rules  is
a  gain  and  not  a  loss  to  the  individual.  The  more  an  individual
member  of  a  clan  enters  into  the  spirit  of  its  social  structure,
which  demands  reverence  for  the  unseen,  solidarity  with  his
neighbours,  and  control  of  carnal  passions,  obviously  the  more
moral  he  becomes  ;  and  the  more  moral  he  is,  the  higher  is  his
inner  worth  or  personal  dignity  ;  thus  subordination  to  society  up¬
lifts  the  individual.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  free  this  sub¬
ordination,  the  more  independently  does  the  individual  follow  the
inner  promptings  of  his  own  moral  nature  which  accord  with  the
demands  of  social  morality,  the  greater  support  does  the  society
find  in  such  a  person  ;  therefore  the  independence  of  the  individual
lends  strength  to  the  social  order.  In  other  words,  the  relation
between  the  true  significance  of  the  individual  and  the  true  force
of  society  is  a  direct  and  not  an  inverse  one.

What  concrete  form,  then,  could  the  principle  of  the  opposition
of  the  individual  to  society  and  of  his  superiority  to  it  take  at
this  early  stage  ?  Perhaps  the  supposed  champion  of  the  rights
of  the  individual  would  desecrate  the  tombs  of  his  ancestors,
insult  his  father,  outrage  his  mother,  kill  his  brothers,  and  marry
his  own  sisters  ?  It  is  clear  that  such  actions  are  below  the  very
lowest  social  level,  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  true  realisation  of
absolute  human  dignity  cannot  be  based  upon  a  simple  rejection
of  a  given  social  structure.

VI

The  moral  content  of  social  life  as  determined  by  kinship  is
permanent ;  its  external  and  limited  form  is  inevitably  outgrown


2o8  the  justification  of  the  good

by  the  historical  process,  with  the  active  help  of  individuals.
The  first  expansion  of  the  primitive  life  is,  of  course,  due  to  the
natural  increase  of  population.  Within  the  limits  of  one  and
the  same  family  the  more  intimate  degrees  of  kinship  are  followed
by  the  more  remote,  although  the  moral  duties  extend  to  the
latter  also.  Similarly  to  the  progressive  division  of  a  living
organic  cell,  the  social  cell — the  group  united  by  kinship — divides
into  many  groups,  which  preserve,  however,  their  connection
and  the  memory  of  their  common  descent.  Thus  a  new  social
unit  is  formed  —  the  tribe  —  which  embraces  several  contiguous
clans.  For  instance,  the  North  American  Red  Indian  tribe
Seneca,  described  by  the  well-known  sociologist  Morgan,
consisted  of  eight  independent  clans,  evidently  formed  by  the
subdivision  of  one  original  clan,  and  standing  in  definite  relation
to  one  another.  Each  clan  was  based  on  kinship,  and  marriages
within  the  clan  were  strictly  forbidden  as  incestuous.  Each  clan
was  autonomous,  though  in  certain  respects  subordinate  to  the
common  authority  of  the  whole  tribe,  namely,  to  the  tribal
council,  which  consisted  of  the  representatives  of  all  the  eight
clans.  In  addition  to  this  political  and  military  institution,  the
unity  of  the  tribe  found  expression  in  a  common  language  and
common  religious  celebrations.  The  transition  stage  between
the  clan  and  the  tribe  were  the  groups  which  Morgan  designates
by  the  classical  name  of fratrias.  Thus  the  tribe  of  Seneca  was
divided  into  two  fratrias,  each  consisting  of  an  equal  number  of
clans.  The  first  contained  the  clans  of  Wolf,  Bear,  Tortoise,
Beaver;  the  second,  Deer,  Wood-cock,  Heron,  Falcon.  The
clans  in  each  group  were  regarded  as  brother  clans,  and  in  relation
to  the  clans  of  the  other  group  as  cousins.  It  is  clear  that  the
original  clan  from  which  the  Seneca  tribe  was  descended  was  first
divided  into  two  new  clans,  each  of  which  became  subdivided
into  four,  and  this  succession  has  been  preserved  in  the  common
memory.

There  is  no  reason  why  the  consciousness  of  social  solidarity,
extended  to  a  group  of  clans,  should  stop  at  the  limits  of  the
tribe.  The  widening  of  the  moral  outlook  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  recognised  advantages  of  common  action  on  the  other,
induce  many  tribes  to  form  first  temporary  and,  later,  permanent
alliances  with  one  another.  Thus  the  tribe  of  Seneca,  together


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


209


with  many  others,  entered  into  the  union  of  tribes  bearing  the

common  name  of  Iroquois.  The  tribes  forming  such  unions

are  generally,  though  not  necessarily,  supposed  to  have  a  common
ancestor.  It  often  happens  that  when  several  tribes  whose

ancestors  had  parted  in  times  immemorial,  and  which  had  grown

and  developed  independently  of  one  another,  come  together  again
under  new  conditions,  they  form  a  union  by  means  of  treaties  for
the  sake  of  mutual  defence  and  common  enterprise.  The  treaty
in  this  case  is  certainly  regarded  as  of  far  greater  significance
than  the  blood-tie,  which  need  not  be  presupposed  at  all.

The  union  of  tribes,  especially  of  those  that  have  reached
a  certain  degree  of  culture  and  occupy  a  definite  territory,  is  the
transition  to  a  state,  the  embryo  of  a  nation.  The  Iroquois,
like  most  Red  Indian  tribes  who  remained  in  the  wild  forests
and  prairies  of  North  America,  did  not  advance  further  than
such  an  embryo  of  a  nation  and  state.  But  other  representatives
of  the  same  race,  moving  southwards,  fairly  rapidly  passed  from
the  military  union  of  tribes  to  a  permanent  political  organisation.
The  Aztecs  of  Mexico,  the  Incas  of  Peru  founded  real  national
states  of  the  same  type  as  the  great  theocratical  monarchies  of
the  Old  World.  The  essential  inner  connection  between  the
original  social  cell — the  group  united  by  kinship — and  the  wide
political  organisation  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  word  fatherland ,
which  almost  in  all  languages  designates  the  national  state.
The  term  fatherland,  implying  as  it  does  a  relation  of  kinship
( patria ,  V aterland ,  etc.),  indicates  not  that  the  state  is  an  expansion
of  the  family— which  is  not  true — but  that  the  moral  principle  of
this  new  great  union  must  be  essentially  the  same  as  the  principle
of  the  narrower  union  based  upon  kinship.  In  truth,  states  have
arisen  out  of  wars  and  treaties,  but  this  does  not  alter  the  fact
that  the  purpose  or  meaning  for  which  they  came  into  being
was  to  establish  in  the  wide  circle  of  the  national,  and  even  the
international,  relations  the  same  solidarity  and  peaceable  life  as  had
existed  of  old  within  the  limits  of  the  family.

The  process  of  the  formation  of  states  and  the  external
changes  in  the  human  life  connected  with  it  do  not  concern  us
here.  What  is  of  interest  to  ethics  is  the  moral  position  of  the
individual  with  regard  to  his  new  social  environment.  So  long
as  the  only  higher  forms  of  social  life,  in  contradistinction  to

P


2io  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  clan,  were  found  in  the  tribe  and  the  union  of  tribes,  the
position  of  the  individual  was  not  essentially  altered.  It  only
changed,  so  to  speak,  quantitatively  :  moral  consciousness
received  greater  satisfaction  and  was  more  completely  realised
as  the  sphere  of  practical  interaction  became  wider  ;  and  that  was
all.  The  divine  ancestor  of  a  given  clan  found  brothers  in  the
ancestors  of  other  clans,  each  other  s  deities  were  mutually
recognised,  the  religions  of  separate  peoples  were  amalgamated
and  to  a  certain  extent  received  a  universal  meaning  (at  the
periods  of  tribal  festivities),  but  the  character  of  worship  remained
the  same.  The  expression  of  human  solidarity — the  defence  of
one’s  kinsmen  and  the  duty  of  avenging  their  wrongs — also
remained  intact  when  the  tribe  and  the  union  of  tribes  came
to  be  formed.  Essential  change  took  place  only  with  the
appearance  of  the  fatherland  and  the  state.  The  national
religion  may  have  developed  out  of  ancestor  worship,  but  the
people  have  themselves  forgotten  its  origin  ;  similarly,  the
dispassionate  justice  of  the  state  is  essentially  different  from
blood-vengeance.  Here  we  have  not  simply  an  expansion  of
the  old  order  based  upon  kinship,  but  the  appearance  of  a  new
one.  And  in  connection  with  this  new  order  of  the  national  state
there  may  have  arisen,  and  there  did  arise,  a  conflict  of  principle
between  the  constituent  forces  of  society — a  conflict  which
might,  to  a  superficial  observer,  appear  as  the  conflict  between
the  individual  and  the  society  as  such.

VII

Neither  the  tribe,  nor  the  union  of  tribes,  nor  the  national
state — the  fatherland — destroys  the  original  social  cell  ;  it  only
alters  its  signification.  The  change  may  be  expressed  in  the
following  short  but  perfectly  correct  formula  :  the  state  order  trans¬
forms  the  clan  into  the  family.  Indeed,  until  the  state  is  formed,
family  life,  strictly  speaking,  does  not  exist.  The  group  of
individuals  held  together  by  a  more  or  less  intimate  blood-tie,
which  in  primitive  times  forms  the  social  unit,  differs  from  the  real
family  in  one  essential  respect.  The  distinguishing  characteristic
of  the  family  is  that  it  is  a  form  of  private,  in  contradistinction  to
public,  life:  ‘a  public  family’  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  But


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


21  I


the  difference  between  public  and  private  could  only  have  arisen
with  the  formation  and  the  development  of  the  statewhichessentially
stands  for  the  public  aspect  of  common  life.  Until  then,  so  long
as  the  legal  and  political  functions  of  the  social  life  were  still
undifferentiated — when  judgment  and  execution,  war  and  peace
were  still  the  private  concerns  of  the  primitive  groups  connected  by
the  blood-tie — such  groups,  even  the  smallest  of  them,  obviously
could  not  possess  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  family
or  home.  They  acquired  this  new  character  only  when  the
functions  in  question  were  taken  over  by  the  state  as  a  public
or  national  organisation.

Now  this  transformation  of  the  clan,  i.e.  of  the  political
and  social  union,  into  the  family,  i.e.  into  an  exclusively  social,
private,  or  home  union,  could  be  looked  upon  in  two  ways.  It
might  be  regarded  as  involving  the  purification  of  the  tie  of
kinship  which  thus  acquires  greater  inward  dignity,  or  as
involving  its  external  lessening  and  degradation.1  Since  the
duties  of  the  individual  to  his  clan  were  for  a  long  time  the
sole  expression  of  individual  morality,  conservative  and  passive
natures  might  regard  the  submission  of  the  clan  to  a  new  and
higher  unity  of  the  state  or  fatherland  as  immoral.  The  personal
consciousness  was  for  the  first  time  confronted  with  the  question
as  to  which  of  the  two  social  unions  it  was  to  side  with — with
the  more  narrow  and  intimate,  or  with  the  wider  and  more  remote.
But  whichever  way  this  question  might  be  settled  by  this  or  that
individual,  it  is  in  any  case  clear  that  this  is  not  a  question  of  con¬
flict  between  the  individual  and  society,  nor  even  between  two
kinds  of  social  relation — the  relation  of  kinship  and  of  nationality.
It  is  simply  a  question  whether  human  life  should  stop  at  the  stage
of  kinship  or  be  further  developed  by  means  of  the  organisation
of  the  state.

In  the  social  group  determined  by  kinship  with  its  moral
conditions  and  institutions,  the  human  individual  can  realise  his
inner  dignity  better  than  in  the  state  of  brutal  isolation.  History

1  This  double  point  of  view  may  be  brought  out  by  an  analogous  example  from  quite
a  different  sphere  of  relations.  The  loss  by  the  Pope  of  his  political  power,  or
the  abolition  of  the  Church-state,  may  be  regarded  even  by  good  and  genuine  Roman
Catholics  in  two  different  and,  indeed,  opposite  ways.  It  may  be  taken  to  be  either  a
favourable  condition  for  the  increase  of  the  inward  moral  authority  of  the  Pope,  or  a
lamentable  detraction  and  decrease  in  the  scope  of  his  political  activity.


212  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

has  proved  that  the  further  development  or  improvement  of  the
individual  demands  the  more  complex  conditions  of  life  which  are
to  be  found  in  civilised  states  only.  The  immature  fancy  of  the
young  poet  may  glorify  the  half-savage  life  of  nomadic  gypsies  ;
the  unanswerable  criticism  of  his  view  is  contained  in  the  simple
fact  that  Pushkin,  a  member  of  a  civilised  community,  could  create
his  Gypsies,  while  the  gypsies,  in  spite  of  all  their  alleged  ad¬
vantages,  could  not  create  a  Pushkin.1

All  the  things  whereby  our  spiritual  nature  is  nurtured,  all
that  lends  beauty  and  dignity  to  our  life  in  the  sphere  of  religion,
science  and  art,  has  sprung  from  the  foundation  of  ordinary
civilised  life,  conditioned  by  the  order  of  the  state.  It  has  all  been
created  not  by  the  clan  but  by  the  fatherland.  When  the  clan  life
still  predominated,  the  men  who  took  their  stand  with  the
fatherland,  which  till  then  was  non-existent  or  only  just  dawning
on  their  own  inner  vision,  were  bearers  of  a  higher  consciousness,
of  a  better  individually-social  morality.  They  were  benefactors
of  humanity  and  saints  of  history,  and  it  is  not  for  nothing  that
the  grateful  city-states  of  Greece  and  other  countries  did  homage
to  them  as  their  heroes — the  eponyms.

Social  progress  is  not  an  impersonal  work.  The  conflict  of
individual  initiative  with  its  immediate  social  environment  led  to
the  foundation  of  a  wider  and  more  important  social  whole — the
fatherland.  The  bearers  of  the  super-tribal  consciousness,  or,  more
exactly,  of  the  half-conscious  striving  towards  a  wider  moral  and
social  life,  felt  cramped  in  the  narrow  sphere  of  the  clan  life,  broke
away  from  it,  gathered  a  band  of  free  followers  round  themselves,
and  founded  states  and  cities.  The  pseudo-scientific  criticism
has  arbitrarily  converted  into  a  myth  the  fugitive  Dido  who  founded
Carthage,  and  the  outlaw  brothers,  founders  of  Rome.  In  quite
historical  times,  however,  we  find  a  sufficient  number  of  instances
to  inspire  us  with  legitimate  confidence  in  those  legends  of
antiquity.  Personal  exploit  breaking  down  the  given  social  limits
for  the  sake  of  creating  new  and  higher  forms  of  political  and
social  life,  is  a  fact  so  fundamental  that  it  is  bound  to  be  met  with
at  all  periods  of  human  development.2

1  The  same  poet,  however,  ‘  with  reverence  ’  dedicates  one  of  his  more  mature  works
to  the  historian  of  the  Russian  Empire.

2  The  absurdity  of  the  point  of  view  generally  assumed  by  the  negative  historical


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


213

The  historical  as  well  as  the  naturally-scientific  experience
shows  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  given  organised  group  to  break  up
or  undergo  any  substantial  transformation  (for  instance,  to  enter
into  another  and  a  greater  whole)  apart  from  the  activity  of  the  finite
units  which  compose  it.  The  ultimate  unit  of  human  society  is
the  individual  who  has  always  been  the  active  principle  of  historical
progress,  i.e.  of  the  transition  from  the  narrow  and  limited  forms
of  life  to  social  organisations  that  are  wider  and  richer  in  content.

VIII

A  given  narrow  social  group  (say,  a  clan)  has  a  claim  upon  the
individual,  for  it  is  only  in  and  through  it  that  he  can  begin  to
realise  his  own  inner  dignity.  But  the  rights  of  the  community
over  the  individual  cannot  be  absolute ,  for  a  given  group  in  its
isolation  is  only  one  relative  stage  of  the  historical  development,
while  human  personality  may  pass  through  all  the  stages  in  its
striving  for  infinite  perfection,  which  is  obviously  not  exhausted
or  finally  satisfied  by  any  limited  social  organisation.  In  other
words,  in  virtue  of  his  inner  infinity  the  individual  can  be  absolutely
and  entirely  at  one  with  the  social  environment  not  in  its  given  limita¬
tion: r,  but  only  in  its  infinite  completeness ,  which  becomes  gradually
manifest  as  the  forms  of  social  life ,  in  their  interaction  with  individual
persons ,  become  wider ,  higher ,  and  more  perfect.  It  is  only  in  a  com¬
munity  that  personal  achievement  is  fruitful,  but  in  a  community
which  develops.  Unconditional  surrender  to  any  limited  and
immovable  form  of  social  life,  so  far  from  being  the  duty  of  the
individual,  is  positively  wrong,  for  it  could  only  be  to  the
detriment  of  his  human  dignity.

An  enterprising  member  of  the  clan  is,  then,  morally  right  in
rebelling  against  the  conservatismof  theclan,and  in  helping  to  create

criticism  escapes  general  ridicule  simply  owing  to  the  ‘  darkness  of  time,’  which  cpnceals
the  objects  upon  which  it  is  exercised.  If  its  favourite  methods  and  considerations  were
applied,  e.g.,  to  Mahomet  or  Peter  the  Great,  there  would  be  as  little  left  of  these
historical  heroes  as  of  Dido  or  Romulus.  Every  one  who  has  read  Whateley’s  admirable
pamphlet  on  Napoleon  will  agree  that  the  solar  significance  of  this  mythological  hero  is
proved  in  it,  in  accordance  with  the  strict  rules  of  the  critical  school,  and  is  worked  out
with  a  consistency,  clearness,  and  completeness  not  often  to  be  found  in  the  more  or  less
famous  works  of  the  negative  critics,  although  the  latter  wrote  without  the  least  irony
but  with  the  most  serious  intentions.


214  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  state  which  transforms  the  once  independent  social  groups
into  elementary  cells  of  a  new  and  greater  whole.  But  this  implies
that  the  new  social  organisation  has  no  absolute  rights  over  the
old,  tribal,  or,  henceforth,  family  relations.  The  order  of  the
state  is  a  relatively  higher  but  by  no  means  a  perfect  form  of
social  life,  and  it  therefore  has  only  a  relative  advantage  over  the
organisation  based  upon  kinship.  And  although  the  latter  is  merely
a  transitory  stage  in  the  social  development,  it  contains  a  moral
element  of  absolute  value,  which  retains  its  force  in  the  state  and
must  be  sacred  to  it.  Indeed,  two  aspects  are  clearly  apparent
in  primitive  morality.  In  the  first  place,  certain  moral  con¬
ceptions  are  connected  with  the  idea  of  the  clan  as  an  independent
or  autonomous  form  of  common  life — which,  in  fact,  it  had  been
once,  but  ceased  to  be  when  the  state  was  formed.  This  is
the  transitory  and  supersedable  element  of  the  clan  morality.  In
the  second  place,  certain  natural  duties  arise  from  the  intimate  tie
of  kinship  and  common  life,  and  these  obviously  retain  all  their
significance  in  the  transition  to  the  state,  or  in  the  transformation
of  the  clan  into  the  family.  The  hard  shell  of  the  clan  organisa¬
tion  has  burst  and  fallen  apart,  but  the  moral  kernel  of  the  family  has
remained,  and  will  remain  to  the  end  of  history.  Now  when  the
transition  from  one  organisation  to  another  has  just  been  effected,
the  representatives  of  the  newly-formed  state-power,  conscious  of
its  advantages  over  the  clan  structure,  might  easily  ascribe  to  the
new  order  an  absolute  significance  which  does  not  belong  to  it,
and  place  the  law  of  the  state  above  the  law  of  nature.  In  con¬
flicts  which  arise  on  this  ground,  moral  right  is  no  longer  on  the
side  of  these  representatives  of  the  relatively  higher  social  order,  but
on  the  side  of  the  champions  of  what  is  absolute  in  the  old,  and  of
what  must  remain  equally  sacred  under  any  social  order.  Con¬
servatism  now  ceases  to  be  a  blind  or  selfish  inertness,  and  becomes
a  pure  consciousness  of  supreme  duty.  Woman,  the  incarnation
of  the  conservative  principle,  the  bulwark  of  low  routine,  now
becomes  the  embodiment  of  moral  heroism.  Sophocles’s  Antigone
impersonates  the  element  of  absolute  value  contained  in  the  old
order  of  life — the  element  which  retains  its  permanent  significance
as  the  clan  becomes  the  family  within  the  new  organisation  of  the
state.  She  has  no  thought  of  the  political  autonomy  of  the  clan,
of  the  right  of  blood-vengeance,  etc.  ;  she  simply  stands  up  for


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


215


her  unconditional  right  to  fulfil  her  unconditional  duty  of  piety
and  sisterly  love — to  give  honourable  burial  to  her  nearest  kinsman
who  can  receive  it  from  no  one  but  her.  She  has  no  enmity
towards  the  moral  foundations  of  the  state;  she  simply  feels —
and  quite  rightly — that  apart  from  these  foundations  the  demands
of  the  positive  law  are  not  absolute  but  are  limited  by  the  natural
law  which  is  sanctified  by  religion  and  safeguards  family  duties
against  the  state  itself  if  need  be,  when  it  appropriates  what  does
not  belong  to  it.  The  conflict  between  Creon  and  Antigone
is  not  a  conflict  between  two  moral  forces — the  social  and  the
individual ;  it  is  a  conflict  of  the  moral  and  the  anti-moral  force.
It  is  impossible  to  agree  with  the  usual  view  of  Antigone  as  of
the  bearer  and  champion  of  personal  feeling  against  a  universal
law,  embodied  in  the  representative  of  the  state — Creon.  The
true  meaning  of  the  tragedy  is  entirely  different.  A  religious
attitude  to  the  dead  is  a  moral  duty,  the  fulfilment  of  which  lies
at  the  basis  of  all  social  life  ;  personal  feeling  expresses  merely  the
subjective  aspect  of  the  matter.  In  our  own  day,  the  burial  of
dead  relatives  and  the  homage  paid  to  them  is  not  due  to  personal
feeling  only  ;  and  this  was  still  more  the  case  in  ancient  times.
The  feeling  may  not  be  there,  but  the  duty  remains.  Antigone
had  heartfelt  affection  for  both  her  brothers,  but  sacred  duty
bound  her  to  the  one  who  needed  her  religious  help.  Being  the
pattern  of  a  moral  individual,  Antigone  at  the  same  time  is  the
representative  of  true  social  order,  which  is  only  preserved  by  the
fulfilment  of  duty.  She  does  not  in  the  least  conceal  her  feelings,
and  yet  as  the  motive  of  her  action  she  gives  not  her  feelings
but  a  sacred  obligation  which  has  to  be  fulfilled  to  the  end
( фі\г)  fie  t  аѵтоѵ  кеісго/ші,  фіХоѵ  /іета, — ост  их  7гаѵоѵруі'і<тшт<і).  This
obligation  is  not  of  course  an  abstract  duty,  but  an  expression  of
the  eternal  order  of  reality  :

“  I  owe  a  longer  allegiance  to  the  dead  than  to  the  living,  in
that  world  I  shall  abide  for  ever.  But  if  thou  wilt  be  guilty  of
dishonouring  laws  which  the  gods  have  stablished  in  honour  ”...

To  Creon’s  question,  “And  thou  didst  dare  to  transgress
the  law  ?  ”  she  answers  not  by  referring  to  her  personal  feeling
but  to  the  absolute  supremacy  of  the  eternal  moral  order  which
cannot  be  cancelled  by  civil  laws  :

« For  it  was  not  Zeus  that  had  published  me  that  edict  :


2i6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

n®t  such  are  the  laws  set  among  men  by  the  Justice  who  dwells
with  the  gods  below  ;  nor  deemed  I  that  thy  decrees  were  of
such  force,  that  a  mortal  could  override  the  unwritten  and  un¬
failing  statutes  of  heaven.”

As  for  Creon,  he  certainly  does  not  represent  the  principle  of
the  state,  the  moral  basis  of  which  is  the  same  as  that  of  the
family,  though  with  the  advantage  of  a  fuller  realisation.  He  is
the  representative  of  the  state  that  has  become  perverted  or  has
put  itself  into  a  false  position — of  the  state  that  has  forgotten  its
place.  But  since  such  perversion  does  not  form  part  of  the  essence
or  the  purpose  of  the  state,  it  can  only  arise  from  the  evil  passions
of  its  representatives — in  this  case,  of  Creon.  It  would  then  be
right  to  say,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  popular  view,  that
Antigone  stands  for  the  universal  and  Creon  for  the  individual
element.  Both  statements,  however,  would  be  incorrect  and
inexact.  It  is  clear  that  the  opposition  between  the  individual
and  society,  the  particular  and  the  general,  does  not  as  such  ever
correspond  to  reality.  The  true  opposition  and  conflict  is  not
sociological  but  purely  moral ;  it  is  the  conflict  between  good  and
evil,  each  of  which  finds  expression  both  in  the  individual  and
in  the  social  life.  Cain  killed  Abel  not  because  he  represented
the  principle  of  individuality  as  against  the  family  union — for  in
that  case  all  developed  ‘  personalities  ’  would  have  to  kill  their
brothers  ;  he  killed  him  because  he  stood  for  the  principle  of
evil ,  which  may  manifest  itself  both  individually  and  collectively^
privately  or  publicly.  Creon  in  his  turn  forbade  the  citizens  to
fulfil  certain  religiously-moral  duties,  not  because  he  was  the
head  of  the  state,  but  because  he  was  wicked  and  followed  the
same  principle  which  was  active  in  Cain  previously  to  any  state.
Every  law  is  of  course  a  state  enactment,  but  Creon’s  position  is
determined  not  by  the  fact  that  he  enacted  a  law,  but  that  he
enacted  an  impious  law.  This  is  not  the  fault  of  the  state-power
but  of  Creon’s  own  moral  worthlessness  ;  for  it  could  hardly  be
maintained  that  the  function  of  the  state  consists  precisely  in
enacting  impious  and  inhuman  laws.

Creon  then  does  not  stand  for  the  principle  of  the  state  but  for
the  principle  of  evil  which  is  rooted  in  the  personal  will,  though
it  also  finds  expression  and  embodiment  in  the  life  of  the  com¬
munity — in  the  present  case  in  the  form  of  a  bad  law  of  the  state.


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


217


On  the  other  hand,  Antigone,  who  lays  down  her  life  for  the  fulfil¬
ment  of  a  religious  and  moral  duty  that  lies  at  the  basis  of  social
life,  is  simply  the  representative  of  the  principle  of  good,  which  is
also  rooted  in  the  personal  will,  but  is  realised  in  the  true  communal
life.

All  human  conflict  is  in  the  last  resort  reducible  not  to  the
relative  sociological  oppositions  but  to  the  absolute  opposition  of
the  good  and  the  self-asserting  evil.  The  inmost  essence  of  the
question  is  always  one  and  the  same  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that
the  various  historical  situations  in  which  it  is  revealed  again  and
again  are  therefore  devoid  of  interest  and  importance  of  their  own
even  from  the  ethical  point  of  view.  The  inner  essence  of  good
and  evil  can  only  be  clearly  known  through  their  typical  mani¬
festations.  Thus,  the  evil  which  expresses  itself  as  the  perversion
of  the  idea  of  the  state,  or  as  putting  the  law  of  the  state  above
the  law  of  morality,  is  quite  a  specific  form  of  evil.  It  is  a  higher
grade  of  evil  than,  for  instance,  a  simple  murder  or  even  fratricide  ;
but  precisely  because  it  is  more  complex  and  subtle,  it  is  more
excusable  from  the  subjective  point  of  view  and  is  less  blame¬
worthy  than  the  cruder  crimes.  Therefore  Creon,  for  instance,
though  socially  he  is  more  pernicious,  is  personally  less  guilty
than  Cain.

There  is  another  important  shade  of  meaning  in  this  profound
tragedy.  Speaking  generally,  the  state  is  a  higher  stage  of
historical  development  than  the  clan.  This  higher  stage  had  just
been  attained  in  Greece.  The  memory  of  how  it  came  to  be
established,  of  the  struggle  and  the  triumph,  is  still  fresh  in  the
minds  of  its  representatives.  This  recent  victory  of  the  new  over
the  old,  of  the  higher  over  the  lower,  is  not  merely  accidental.  In
view  of  the  obvious  advantages  of  the  state  union  over  the  feuds
of  the  clans,  its  triumph  is  recognised  as  something  necessary,
rightful,  and  progressive.  Hence  Creon’s  self-confidence  at  the
beginning  of  the  play.  The  bad  law  proclaimed  by  him,  putting
as  it  does  the  loyalty  to  the  new  state  above  the  original  religious
duties,  is  not  merely  an  abuse  of  the  power  of  the  state,  but  an
abuse  of  victory — not  of  the  local  victory  of  the  Thebans  over  the
Argives,  but  of  the  general  victory  of  the  state  order — of  the
city  state — over  the  clan.  Creon  cannot  therefore  be  looked  upon
simply  as  a  tyrant,  or  a  representative  of  personal  arbitrariness  and


21 8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

material  power — and  this  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  ancients
regarded  him.1  The  law  he  enacted  was  supposed  to  be  the
expression  of  the  common  will  of  the  citizens.  The  short  preface
by  Aristophanes  the  grammarian,  usually  placed  at  the  beginning
of  the  tragedy,  begins  thus:  “Antigone  who  buried  Polinices
against  the  order  of  the  city  (or  the  state) — тгара  rrjv  тгрбсгта^ѵ  -rijs
TroAecos.”  In  the  play  itself,  Ismene  justifies  her  refusal  to  help
Antigone  by  saying  that  she  cannot  do  violence  to  the  will  of  her
fellow-citizens.  Creon,  too,  bases  his  argument  not  upon  the
principle  of  autocracy  but  upon  the  unconditional  significance  of
patriotism  :

“  If  any  makes  a  friend  of  more  account  than  his  fatherland,
that  man  has  no  place  in  my  regard.”

The  ethico-psychological  basis  of  the  bad  law  lies  of  course  in
Creon’s  bad  will.  This  will,  however,  is  not  merely  senseless  and
arbitrary  but  is  connected  with  a  general  although  a  false  idea
according  to  which  the  power  of  the  state  and  the  laws  of  the
state  are  higher  than  the  moral  law.  Creon  formulates  this  false
idea  with  perfect  clearness  :

“  Whomsoever  the  city  may  appoint,  that  man  must  be
obeyed,  in  little  things  and  great,  in  just  things  and  unjust .”

This  idea,  outrageously  false  as  it  is,  has  been  and  still  is  the
inspiration  of  men  who  have  not  even  Creon’s  excuse,  namely,
intoxication  with  the  recent  victory  of  the  state  order  over  the
tribal  anarchy.  In  those  half-historical  times  no  clear  protest —
such  as  Sophocles  puts  into  the  mouth  of  his  Antigone — may
have  been  raised  by  the  better  consciousness  against  this  idea,
but,  at  the  epoch  of  Sophocles  himself,  the  best  minds  were
well  aware  that  historical  progress  in  bringing  about  new
forms  of  society  cannot  possibly  supersede  the  essential  foundations
of  all  social  life.  They  understood  that  although  such  progress  is
both  important  and  necessary,  it  is  relative  and  subordinate  to  a
higher  purpose,  and  that  it  loses  all  justification  when  it  is  turned
against  the  unconditional  moral  good,  the  realisation  of  which  is  the
sole  object  of  the  historical  development.  And  however  highly  we


1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Greek  word  ripavvos  did  not  originally  have  a  bad
meaning,  but  designated  every  monarch.  In  the  same  trilogy  of  Sophocles,  the  first
play  is  called  OISIttovs  Tipavvos,  which  is  rightly  translated  Oedipus  rex  ;  and  the  word
ought  to  be  translated  in  the  same  way  in  the  Antigone  in  reference  to  Creon.


THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  SOCIETY


219


might  value  those  who  further  the  triumphant  march  of  progress,
the  highest  dignity  of  man,  worthy  of  whole-hearted  sympathy  and
approval,  consists  not  in  winning  temporal  victories,  but  in  observ¬
ing  eternal  limits  equally  sacred  both  for  the  past  and  for  the
future.


CHAPTER  II


THE  CHIEF  MOMENTS  IN  THE  HISTORICAL  DEVELOPMENT  OF
THE  INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS

I

With  the  establishment  of  the  national  state  the  moral  outlook
of  the  individual  is  no  doubt  considerably  widened  and  a  greater
field  is  opened  for  the  exercise  of  his  good  feelings  and  of  his  active
will  in  moral  conduct.  The  conception  of  the  deity  becomes
higher  and  more  general,  a  certain  religious  development  takes
place.  Altruism,  or  moral  solidarity  with  other  human  beings,
increases  quantitatively  or  in  extension  and  becomes  qualitatively
higher,  losing  its  dominant  character  of  natural  instinct  and  being
directed  upon  invisible  and  ideal  objects — the  state,  the  fatherland.
These  ideal  objects  are  sensuously  realised  in  the  unity  of  language,
customs,  in  the  actual  representatives  of  authority,  etc.,  but,  as  is
clear  to  every  one,  they  are  not  exhausted  by  these  concrete  facts.
The  nation  does  not  disappear  with  the  change  of  its  customs,  the
state  does  not  cease  to  exist  when  its  particular  rulers  pass  away.
The  spiritual  nature  and  the  ideal  significance  of  objects  such  as
the  nation  and  the  state  are  preserved  in  any  case,  and  the  in¬
dividual’s  moral  relation  to  them,  expressing  itself  as  true  patriotism
or  civic  virtue,  is  in  this  sense,  other  conditions  being  equal,  a  higher
stage  of  morality  than  the  simple  feeling  of  kinship  or  of  the  blood-
tie.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  is  often  pointed  out  that  as
the  range  of  moral  relations  or  the  social  environment  becomes
wider,  the  inner  personal  basis  of  morality  loses  its  living  force
and  reality.  It  is  urged  that  the  intensity  of  moral  motives  is  in
inverse  ratio  to  their  objective  extension  ;  that  it  is  impossible  to
love  one’s  country  as  sincerely  and  immediately  as  one’s  friends  or


INDI VI  DU  ALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  221


relatives,  and  that  the  living  interest  in  one’s  private  welfare  can
never  be  compared  with  the  abstract  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the
state,  not  to  speak  of  the  general  welfare  of  humanity.  The  interest
in  the  latter  is  indeed  often  denied  as  fictitious.

Leaving  aside  for  the  moment  the  question  of  humanity,  it
must  be  admitted  that  the  argument  concerning  the  inverse
relation  between  the  intensity  and  the  extension  of  moral  feelings
has  a  foundation  in  fact.  But  to  be  correctly  understood  it
requires  the  following  three  reservations  :

(1)  Independently  of  the  relation  of  individual  persons,  taken
separately,  to  the  more  or  less  wide  social  whole,  there  exists
collective  morality,  which  embraces  these  persons  in  their  totality
— as  a  crowd  or  as  a  people.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  the
criminal  crowd,  upon  which  the  criminologists  have  now  turned
their  attention  ;  still  more  prominent  is  the  senseless  crowd,  the
human  herd  ;  but  there  is  also  the  splendid,  the  heroic  crowd.
The  crowd  excited  by  brutal  or  bestial  instincts  lowers  the
spiritual  level  of  individuals  that  are  drawn  into  it.  But  the
human  mass  animated  by  collectively-moral  motives  lifts  up  to
its  level  individuals  in  whom  these  motives  are,  as  such,  devoid  of
genuine  force.  At  the  kinship-group  stage,  the  striving  of  the  best
men  for  a  wider  collective  morality  conditioned  the  appearance  of
the  state  or  the  nation,  but  once  this  new  social  whole,  real  and
powerful  in  spite  of  its  ideal  nature,  has  been  created,  it  begins
to  exert  direct  influence  not  only  upon  the  best ,  but  also  upon  the
average  and  even  the  bad  men  that  form  part  of  it.

(2)  Apart  from  collective  morality,  the  quantitative  fact  that
most  men  taken  separately  are  bad  patriots  and  poor  citizens,
is  qualitatively  counterbalanced  by  the  few  high  instances  of  true
patriotism  and  civic  virtue  which  could  not  have  arisen  in  the
primitive  conditions  of  life,  and  only  became  possible  when  the
state,  the  nation,  the  fatherland  had  come  into  being.

(3)  Finally,  whether  the  moral  gain  obtained  by  the  widening
of  the  social  environment  in  the  national  state  be  great  or  small,
it  is  in  any  case  a  gain.  The  good  contained  in  the  tribal
morality  is  not  annulled  by  this  extension  but  is  merely  modified
and  made  more  pure  as  it  assumes  the  form  of  family  ties  and
virtues,  which  are  supplemented  and  not  replaced  by  patriot¬
ism.  Thus,  even  from  the  individual  point  of  view,  our  love


222  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

for  millions  of  our  fellow-citizens,  even  though  it  cannot  be  as
great  as  our  love  for  some  dozens  of  our  friends,  is  a  direct  gain,
for  the  wider  love  that  is  less  intense  does  not  destroy  the  more
intense  one.  Consequently,  from  whatever  point  of  view  we  look
at  it,  the  extension  of  the  sphere  of  life  from  the  limits  of  the
clan  to  the  state  unquestionably  means  moral  progress.  This
progress  is  apparent  both  in  man’s  relation  to  the  gods  and  to  his
neighbours,  and  also,  as  will  be  presently  shown,  in  man’s  relation
to  his  lower  material  nature.


II

The  moral  principle  which  demands  from  man  subordination
to  the  higher  and  solidarity  with  his  neighbours,  requires  him  to
dominate  physical  nature  as  the  basis  upon  which  reason  works.
This  domination  has  for  its  immediate  object  the  body  of  the
individual  himself — hence  the  ascetic  morality  in  the  narrow  sense
of  the  term.  But  the  material  life  of  the  single  individual  is  only
a  portion  of  the  general  material  life  that  surrounds  him,  and  to
separate  this  portion  from  the  whole  is  neither  logically  legitimate
nor  practically  possible.  So  long  as  the  outer  nature  completely
overwhelms  man,  who,  helpless  and  lost  in  virginal  forests  among
wild  beasts,  is  compelled  to  think  of  nothing  but  the  preservation
and  maintenance  of  his  existence,  the  thought  of  the  mastery  of
the  spirit  over  the  flesh  can  hardly  even  arise,  let  alone  the  attempt
to  carry  it  out.  Man  who  starves  from  necessity  is  not  given  to
fasting  for  ascetic  purposes.  Suffering  all  kinds  of  privations  from
his  birth  onwards,  living  under  the  constant  menace  of  violent
death,  man  in  the  savage  state  is  an  unconscious  and  involuntary
ascetic,  and  his  marvellous  endurance  has  as  little  moral  worth  as
the  sufferings  of  small  fish  pursued  by  pikes  or  sharks.

The  manifestation  of  the  inner  moral  power  of  the  spirit  over
the  flesh  presupposes  that  man  is  to  a  certain  extent  secure  from
the  destructive  powers  of  external  nature.  Now  such  security
cannot  be  attained  by  a  single  individual — it  requires  social  union.
Although  ascetic  morality  in  some  of  its  aspects  seeks  to  sever  the
social  ties,  it  is  clear  that  such  a  striving  could  only  have  arisen  on
the  basis  of  an  already  existing  society.  Both  in  India  of  the
Brahmins  and  in  Christian  Egypt  ascetic  hermits  were  the


INDIVIDUALLY -SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  223

product  of  a  civilised  social  environment.  They  had  spiritually
outgrown  it,  but  without  it  they  themselves  would  have  been
historically  and  physically  impossible.  Solitary  hermits  who  had
voluntarily  forsaken  society  for  the  desert  by  their  very  presence
subdued  wild  beasts,  which  had  no  reason  whatever  for  being
subdued  by  the  enforced  solitude  of  vagrant  savages,  inferior  to
them  in  physical  strength,  but  inwardly  very  much  on  their  level.
For  the  victory  both  over  evil  beasts  without  and  over  evil
passions  within  a  certain  amount  of  civilisation  was  necessary,
which  could  only  be  attained  through  the  development  of  social  life.
Consequently  ascetic  morality  is  not  the  work  of  the  individual
taken  in  the  abstract ;  it  can  only  be  manifested  by  man  as  a
social  being.  The  inner  foundations  of  the  good  in  man  do  not
depend  upon  the  forms  of  social  life,  but  the  actual  realisation  of
them  does  presuppose  such  forms.

At  the  early  beginnings  of  social  life — at  the  kinship-group
stage  —  ascetic  morality  is  purely  negative  in  character.  In
addition  to  the  regulation  of  the  sexual  life  by  marriage,  we  find
prohibitions  of  certain  kinds  of  food  (e.g.  of  the  ‘totemic’  animals,
connected  with  a  given  social  group  as  its  protecting  spirits  or
as  the  incarnation  of  its  ancestors),  and  also  the  restriction  of
meat  foods  to  sacrificial  feasts  (thus,  among  the  Semitic  peoples
especially,  the  flesh  of  domestic  animals  was  originally  for  religious
uses  only.1)

But  in  the  conditions  of  the  tribal  life  asceticism  could  not
from  the  very  nature  of  the  case  go  beyond  such  elementary
restrictions.  So  long  as  personal  dignity  finds  its  realisation  in  a
social  organisation  determined  by  kinship,  or,  at  any  rate,  is
conditioned  by  it,  there  can  be  no  question  of  the  ideal  of  com¬
plete  continence  or  of  the  moral  duty  to  struggle  with  such
passions  upon  which  the  very  existence  of  the  tribe  depends.
The  virtuous  tribesman  must  be  distinguished  by  vindictiveness
and  acquisitiveness,  and  has  no  right  to  dream  of  perfect  purity.
The  ideal  representative  of  tribal  morality  is  the  Biblical  Jacob,
who  had  two  wives  and  several  concubines,  who  begat  twelve  sons,
and  increased  the  family  property  without  troubling  about  the
means  whereby  he  did  it.

The  formation  of  the  state  had  an  enormous,  though  indirect,

1  See  Robertson  Smith’s  The  Religion  of  the  Semites.


224  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

influence  upon  ascetic  morality  in  the  wide  sense  of  the  term,  i.e.
upon  that  aspect  of  morality  which  is  concerned  with  the  material
nature  of  man  and  of  the  world,  and  aims  at  the  complete  mastery
of  the  rational  spirit  over  the  blind  material  forces.  Power  over
nature  is  utterly  impossible  for  a  lonely  savage  or  for  the  bestial  man,
and  only  a  rudimentary  degree  of  it  is  acquired  at  the  baibarous
stage  of  the  tribal  life.  Under  the  conditions  of  civilised  existence
in  strong  and  extensive  political  unions  it  becomes  considerable
and  lasting,  and  is  continually  on  the  increase.  The  means  of
spiritual  development  for  the  individual,  the  school  of  practical
asceticism  for  the  masses  of  the  people,  and  the  beginning  of  sub¬
jugating  the  earth  for  humanity,  is  to  be  found  in  the  military
and  theocratic  empires  which  united  men  into  large  groups  for
carrying  on  the  work  of  civilisation  in  four  different  quarters  of
the  globe — between  the  Blue  and  the  Yellow  rivers,  between  the
Ind  and  the  Ganges,  between  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  and,
finally,  in  the  valley  of  the  Nile.  These  military  and  theocratic
monarchies  —  which  Araktcheev’s  ‘military  settlements’1  re¬
called  to  us  in  miniature — were,  of  course,  very  far  from  the  ideal
of  human  society.  But  their  great  historical  importance  as  a
necessary  moral  school  for  primitive  humanity  is  recognised  even
by  the  champions  of  absolute  anarchism.2

Speaking  generally,  in  order  to  rise  above  the  compulsory  form
of  social  morality ,  savage  humanity  had  to  pass  through  it  —  in
order  to  outgrow  despotism  it  had  to  experience  it.  More  particu¬
larly,  three  considerations  are  undoubtedly  involved  here,  (i)
The  harder  the  original  struggle  with  primitive  nature  was,  the
more  necessary  it  was  for  men  to  be  united  into  wide  but  closely-

1  The  so-called  ‘  military  settlements  ’  were  villages  in  which  every  peasant  was
compelled  to  be  a  soldier  and  to  live  under  military  discipline.  Minute  regulations
with  regard  to  the  home  life,  work,  dress,  etc.,  were  enforced  with  ruthless  severity
and  made  the  life  of  the  settlers  intolerable.  The  idea  of  establishing  military
settlements  belonged  to  Alexander  I,  and  was  carried  out  by  Araktcheev,  his  favourite,
who  founded  the  first  settlement  in  1810.  Military  settlements  were  finally  abolished
by  Alexander  II.  in  1857. — Translator's  Note.

2  I  would  like  especially  to  mention  the  interesting  work  by  Leon  Metchnikov,
La  Civilisation  et  les  grands  Jleuves.  See  my  article  about  it,  “  Iz  istorii  philosophii  ”
(Concerning  the  philosophy  of  history),  in  the  Voprosi  Philosophii  (1891),  and  also  Professor
Vinogradov’s  article  in  the  same  magazine.  One  worthy  critic  imagined  that  in  speaking
of  the  military  theocracy  as  the  historical  school  of  asceticism  I  was  referring  to  the
personal  intentions  of  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs  and  Chaldean  kings  !  1


INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  225

connected  communities.  And  the  wide  extension  of  a  social  group
could  only  be  combined  with  an  intimate  and  strong  tie  between
its  members  by  means  of  the  strictest  discipline ,  supported  by  the
most  powerful  of  all  sanctions,  namely,  the  religious  sanction.
Therefore  political  unions  which  had  for  the  first  time  subdued
wild  nature  and  laid  the  corner-stone  of  human  culture  were  bound
to  have  the  character  of  a  religious  and  military  monarchy,  or  of
compulsory  theocracy.  This  work  of  civilisation  done  under  the
pressure  of  the  moral  and  the  material  needs — this  £  Egyptian
labour  ’ — was  by  its  very  nature  a  school  of  human  solidarity  for
the  masses  and,  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  objective  purpose
and  result,  it  was  the  first  achievement  of  collective  asceticism
in  humanity,  the  first  historical  triumph  of  reason  over  the  blind
forces  of  matter.

(2)  The  compulsory  character  of  this  collective  achievement
prevents  us  from  ascribing  ideal  worth  to  it,  but  does  not  alto¬
gether  deprive  it  of  moral  significance.  For  compulsion  was  not
merely  material.  It  rested  in  the  last  resort  upon  the  faith  of
the  masses  themselves  in  the  divine  character  of  the  power  which
compelled  them  to  work.  However  imperfect  in  its  form  and
content  that  faith  might  be,  to  subordinate  one’s  life  to  it,  to
endure  at  its  behest  all  kinds  of  privation  and  hardship,  is  in  any
case  a  moral  course  of  action.  Both  its  general  historical  result
and  its  inner  psychological  effect  upon  each  individual  composing
the  mass  of  the  people  had  the  character  of  true,  though  imperfect,
asceticism — that  is,  of  victory  of  the  spiritual  principle  over  the
carnal.  If  the  innumerable  Chinese  genuinely  believe  that  their
Emperor  is  the  son  of  the  sky  ;  if  the  Hindus  were  seriously
convinced  that  the  priests  sprang  from  the  head  of  Brahma  and
the  kings  and  princes  from  his  arms  ;  if  the  Assyrian  king  really
was  in  the  eyes  of  his  people  the  incarnation  of  the  national  deity
Assur,  and  the  Pharaoh  truly  was  for  the  Egyptians  the  manifesta¬
tion  of  the  solar  deity — then  absolute  submission  to  such  rulers
was  for  these  peoples  a  religiously-moral  duty,  and  compulsory
work  at  their  command  an  ascetic  practice.  This,  however,
did  not  apply  to  slaves  in  the  strict  sense — prisoners  of  war  to
whom  their  masters’  gods  were  strange  gods.  And  even  apart
from  this  national  limitation  the  whole  structure  of  these  primitive
religiously-political  unions  was  essentially  imperfect  because  the

Q


226  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

gods  who  received  the  voluntary  and  involuntary  human  sacrifices
(both  in  the  literal  and  in  the  indirect  sense)  did  not  possess
absolute  inner  worth.  They  stood  merely  for  the  infinity  of  force,
not  for  the  infinity  of  goodness.  Man  is  morally  superior  to  such
gods  by  his  power  of  renunciation  ;  and  therefore  in  sacrificing
himself  for  these  gods  and  their  earthly  representatives  he  does  not
find  the  higher  for  the  sake  of  which  it  is  worth  while  to  sacrifice
the  lower.  If  the  meaning  of  the  sacrifice  is  to  be  found  in  the
progress  of  civilisation,  this  meaning  is  purely  relative,  for  progress
itself  is  obviously  only  a  means,  a  way,  a  direction,  and  not  the
absolute  and  final  goal.  But  human  personality  contains  an  element
of  intrinsic  value,  which  can  never  be  merely  a  means  the
possibility,  namely,  inherent  in  it,  of  infinite  perfection  through
the  contemplation  of  and  union  with  the  absolute  fulness  of  being.
A  society  in  which  this  significance  of  personality  is  not  recognised
and  in  which  the  individual  is  regarded  as  having  only  a  relative
value,  as  a  means  for  political  and  cultural  ends — even  the  most
lofty  ones, — cannot  be  the  ideal  human  society  but  is  merely  a
transient  stage  of  the  historical  development.  This  is  particu¬
larly  true  of  the  military  and  theocratic  monarchies  with  which
universal  history  begins.

(3)  The  primitive  forms  of  the  religiously-political  union
were  so  imperfect  that  they  made  further  progress  inevitable,  and
at  the  same  time  they  naturally  produced  the  external  conditions
necessary  for  that  progress.  Within  the  limits  of  the  tribal  life
each  member  of  a  given  social  group  was  both  physically  and  morally
compelled  to  prey,  plunder,  and  kill,  to  fight  wild  beasts,  breed  cattle,
and  produce  numerous  offspring.  Obviously  there  was  no  room
there  for  the  higher  spiritual  development  of  the  human  person¬
ality.  It  only  became  possible  when,  with  the  compulsory  division
of  labour  in  the  great  religiously-political  organisations  of  the  past,
there  arose,  in  addition  to  the  masses  doomed  to  hard  physical
work,  the  leisurely,  propertied  class  of  free  men.  By  the  side  of
warriors  there  appeared  professional  priests,  scribes,  diviners,  etc.,
among  whom  the  higher  consciousness  was  first  awakened.  This
great  historical  moment  is  recorded  in  the  Bible  in  the  significant
and  majestic  story  of  the  best  representative  of  the  patriarchal
order,  Abraham,  with  the  crowd  of  his  armed  dependants,  bowing
down  before  the  priest  of  the  Most  High,  Melchizedek,  who  was


INDIVIDU ALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  227

without  descent  and  came  before  him  with  the  gifts  of  the  new
higher  culture — bread  and  wine  and  the  spiritual  blessing  of  Truth
and  Peace.1

While  by  the  sword  of  the  great  conquerors  the  hard  collective
work  of  the  masses  was  gradually  made  to  extend  over  a  wider
and  wider  area,  securing  the  external  material  success  of  human
culture,  the  inner  work  of  thought  among  the  leisured  and  peace¬
ful  representatives  of  the  nationally-theocratic  states  was  leading
human  consciousness  to  a  more  perfect  ideal  of  individual  and
social  universalism.


Ill

In  the  course  of  the  world-history  the  first  awakening  of
human  self-consciousness  took  place  in  the  land  where  its  sleep
had  most  abounded  with  fantastic  and  wild  dreams — in  India.  To
the  overwhelming  variety  of  Indian  mythology  corresponded  a
confusing  variety  of  religious,  political,  and  customary  forms  and
conditions  of  life.  Nowhere  else  had  the  theocratic  order  been
so  complex  and  burdensome,  so  full  of  national  and  class  exclusive¬
ness.  Not  from  Egypt  or  China,  not  from  the  Chaldeans,
Phoenicians,  or  the  Greco-Roman  world,  but  from  India  have  we
borrowed  conceptions  expressive  of  the  extreme  degree  of  separa¬
tion  between  the  classes  of  men  2  and  of  the  denial  of  human
dignity.  The  ‘  pariahs  ’  were  deprived  of  human  dignity  as
standing  outside  the  law  ;  men  belonging  to  castes  within  the
law  and  even  to  the  highest  of  them  were  deprived  of  all  freedom
owing  to  a  most  complex  system  of  religious  and  customary  rites
and  regulations.  But  the  more  narrow  and  artificial  the  fetters
fashioned  by  the  spirit  for  itself  and  out  of  itself,  the  more  they
testify  to  its  inner  strength  and  to  the  fact  that  nothing  external
can  finally  bind  and  conquer  it.  The  spirit  awakes  from  the
nightmare  of  sacrificial  rites,  compulsory  actions,  and  ascetic
tortures,  and  says  to  itself :  All  this  is  my  own  invention  which  in
my  sleep  I  took  to  be  reality  ;  if  only  I  can  keep  awake,  the  fear
and  the  pain  will  vanish.  But  what  will  then  remain  ?  A  subtle

1  I  am  referring  here,  of  course,  simply  to  the  historical  meaning  of  the  fact,  and  not
to  its  mystical  significance.

2  Although  the  word  caste  is  Portuguese  and  not  Indian,  it  had  arisen  (in  the  sense
in  question)  precisely  for  the  designation  of  the  social  relations  of  India.


228  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  significant,  though  not  at  first  sight  a  clear,  answer  is  given
to  this  question  by  the  religion  of  awakening.  It  perpetuates  the
moment  when  human  personality  turns  from  external  objects  into
itself,  and  comes  to  know  its  purely  negative  or  formal  infinity
devoid  of  all  definite  content.  The  individual  is  aware  of  his
infinitude,  freedom,  and  universality  simply  because  he  transcends
all  given  determination,  relation,  and  character,  because  he  is
conscious  of  something  within  himself  which  is  more  and  higher
than  this  caste,  this  nationality,  this  cult,  this  manner  of  life  of
something  that  is  higher  than  all  this.  Whatever  objective
determination  a  self-conscious  person  might  put  before  himself,
he  does  not  stop  there  ;  he  knows  that  he  had  himself  posited  it
and  that  his  own  creation  is  not  worthy  of  him  and  therefore  he
forsakes  it:  ’■all  is  empty.'  All  that  belongs  to  the  external  world
is  rejected,  nothing  is  found  to  be  worthy  of  existence,  but  man’s
spiritual  power  of  rejecting  remains  ;  and  it  is  very  significant
that  Buddhism  recognises  this  power  not  as  belonging  to  the
solitary  individual,  but  as  having  an  individually-social  form  of
the  so-called  Triratna ,  i.e.  ‘three  jewels’  or  ‘three  treasures,’  in
which  every  Buddhist  must  believe  :  “  I  take  my  refuge  in  the
Buddha  ;  I  take  my  refuge  in  the  doctrine  or  the  law  [pharma)  ;

I  take  my  refuge  in  the  order  of  the  disciples  ( Sangha ).”  Thus
even  in  the  consciousness  of  its  negative  infinity  human  personality
cannot  remain  separate  and  isolated,  but  by  means  of  a  universal
doctrine  is  inevitably  led  to  a  social  organisation.

All  is  deception  except  three  things  that  are  worthy  of  belief :
(i)  the  spiritually-awakened  man  ;  (2)  the  word  of  awakening  ;
(3)  the  brotherhood  of  those  who  are  awake.  This  is  the  true
essence  of  Buddhism  which  still  nurtures  millions  of  souls  in
distant  Asia.1  This  is  the  first  lasting  stage  of  human  universalism

1  It  should  be  noted,  by  the  way,  that  after  the  fashion  set  by  Schopenhauer,  who  was
prejudiced  in  favour  of  Buddhism,  the  number  of  Buddhists  is  usually  exaggerated  beyond
all  measure  ;  one  hears  of  400,  600,  700  million  followers  of  this  religion.  These
figures  would  be  probable  were  China  and  Japan  wholly  populated  by  Buddhists.  In
truth,  however,  the  teaching  of  Buddha  in  its  various  modifications  is  the  religion  of  the
masses  only  in  Ceylon,  Indo-China,  Nepal,  Tibet,  Mongolia,  and  among  the  Bouriats
and  Kalmucks  ;  this  amounts  at  most  to  75  or  80  millions.  In  China  and  Japan
Buddhism  is  simply  one  of  the  permitted  religions  which  is  more  or  less  closely  followed
by  the  educated  people,  who  do  not,  however,  give  up  their  national  cult  ;  in  a  similar
manner  in  Russia,  for  instance,  under  Alexander  I.  many  Orthodox  people  used  to
frequent  the  meetings  of  the  Freemasons.


INDIVIDUALLY -SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  229

that  rose  above  the  national  and  political  exclusiveness  of  the
religious  and  social  life.

Born  in  the  country  of  caste,  Buddhism  did  not  in  the  least
reject  the  division  of  society  into  castes,  or  seek  to  destroy  it ;  its
followers  simply  ceased  to  believe  in  the  principle  of  that  organisa¬
tion,  in  the  absolute  hereditary  inequality  of  the  classes.  Appear¬
ing  in  the  midst  of  a  nation  with  a  distinct  character  of  its  own,  it
did  not  reject  nationality,  but  simply  transferred  human  conscious¬
ness  into  the  domain  of  other,  universal  and  super-national  ideas.
In  consequence  of  this,  this  Indian  religion,  the  outcome  of
Hindu  philosophy,  was  able,  when  finally  rejected  in  India,  to
take  root  among  many  various  peoples  of  different  race  and
different  historic  education.

The  negative  infinity  of  human  personality  had  been  apparent
to  individual  philosophers  before  the  time  of  Buddhism.1  But
it  was  in  Buddhism  that  this  view  found  its  first  historical
expression  in  the  collective  life  of  humanity.  Owing  to  his
morally-practical  universalism  which  proceeded  from  the  heart
even  more  than  from  the  mind,  Buddha  Sakya-muni  created  a
form  of  common  life  hitherto  unknown  in  humanity  —  the
brotherhood  of  beggar-monks  from  every  caste  and  nation, — the
‘ listeners’  (Shravaki)  of  the  true  doctrine,  the  followers  of  the  true
way.  Here  for  the  first  time  the  worth  of  the  individual  and  his
relation  to  society  was  finally  determined  not  by  the  fact  of  being
born  into  a  certain  class  or  a  definite  national  and  political
organisation,  but  by  the  inner  act  of  choosing  a  certain  moral
ideal.  The  theoretical  conceptions  of  the  first  Buddha  and  the

1  Many  fantastic  ideas  used  to  prevail  with  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Hindu
philosophy,  but  they  are  beginning  to  disappear  in  the  light  of  the  more  scientific
inquiry.  Most  of  their  philosophic  wealth  the  Hindus  acquired  in  later  times,  partly
under  the  direct  influence  of  Greeks  after  Alexander  the  Great,  and  partly  later  still
with  the  help  of  the  Arabs  who  brought  Aristotle  to  the  East  no  less  than  to  the  West.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  doubt  that  even  the  Greeks — not  to  speak  of  Arabs
— on  their  first  acquaintance  with  India  found  there  a  peculiar  local  philosophy  of  the
‘naked  wise  men’  ( Gymnosophhts )  аз  a  typical  and  traditional  institution  of  ancient
standing.  From  their  outward  appearance  these  Indian  adamites  cannot  be  identified
with  the  followers  of  Buddhism  j  most  probably  they  were  adepts  of  ascetic  mysticism —
Yoga,  which  existed  before  the  time  of  Buddha.  Still  more  ancient  was  the  pantheism
of  the  Upanishads.  There  is  ground  to  believe  that  the  immediate  forerunner  of  Sakya-
muni  was  the  author  of  the  system  of  spiritualistic  dualism  (expounded  in  Sankya-
Karika),  although  the  person  and  even  the  name  of  this  sage — Kapila — are  somewhat
doubtful.


230  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

conditions  of  life  of  his  monastic  brotherhood  have  undergone  a
number  of  changes  in  the  course  of  history,  but  the  moral  essence
of  his  teaching  and  work  has  remained  in  a  clear-cut,  crystallised
form  in  the  Lamaian  monasteries  of  Mongolia  and  Tibet.

The  moral  essence  of  Buddhism  as  an  individually- social
system  has,  during  the  two  and  a  half  thousand  years  of  its
historical  existence,  evinced  itself  as  the  feeling  of  religious
reverence  for  the  blessed  master,  who  was  the  first  to  awake  to
the  true  meaning  of  reality,  and  is  the  spiritual  progenitor  of  all
who  subsequently  became  awake  ;  as  the  demand  for  holiness  or
perfect  absence  of  will  (the  inner  asceticism  in  contradistinction  to
the  external  mortification  of  the  flesh  which  had  been  and  still
is  practised  by  the  c  Gymnosophists,’  and  which  did  not  satisfy
Buddha  Sakya-muni)  ;  and,  finally,  as  the  commandment  of  universal
benevolence  or  kindly  compassion  to  all  beings.  It  is  this  latter,
the  simplest  and  most  attractive  aspect  of  Buddhism,  that  brings
to  light  the  defects  of  the  whole  doctrine.

IV

What,  from  the  Buddhistic  point  of  view,  is  the  difference
between  the  man  who  is  spiritually  awake  and  the  man  who
is  not?  The  latter,  influenced  by  the  delusions  of  sense,  takes
apparent  and  transitory  distinctions  to  be  real  and  final,  and
therefore  desires  some  things  and  fears  others,  is  attracted  and
repelled,  feels  love  and  hate.  The  one  who  has  awakened  from
these  dream  emotions  understands  that  their  objects  are  illusory
and  is  therefore  at  rest.  Finding  nothing  upon  which  it  would
be  worth  his  while  to  concentrate  his  will,  he  becomes  free  from
all  willing,  preference,  and  fear,  and  therefore  loses  all  cause  for
dissension,  anger,  enmity  and  hatred,  and,  free  from  these  passions,
he  experiences  for  everything,  without  exception,  the  same
feeling  of  benevolence  or  compassion.  But  why  should  he
experience  precisely  this  feeling  ?  Having  convinced  himself
that  all  is  empty ,  that  the  objective  conditions  of  existence  are
vain  and  illusory,  the  awakened  sage  ought  to  enter  a  state  of
perfect  impassibility ,  equally  free  both  from  malice  and  from  pity.
For  both  these  opposed  feelings  equally  presuppose  to  begin  with
a  conviction  of  the  reality  of  living  beings  ;  secondly,  their


INDIVIDUALLY-S0C1AL  CONSCIOUSNESS  231

distinction  from  one  another  (e.g.  the  distinction  between  the
man  who  suffers  in  his  ignorance  and  appeals  to  my  pity,  and
the  perfectly  blessed  Buddha  who  stands  in  no  need  of  it)  ;  and,
thirdly,  pity,  no  less  than  malice,  prompts  us  to  perform  definite
actions,  determined  by  the  objective  qualities  and  conditions
of  the  given  facts.  Now  all  this  is  absolutely  incompatible
with  the  fundamental  principle  of  universal  emptiness  and
indifference.  The  moral  teaching  of  Buddhism  demands  active
self-sacrifice,  which  is  involved  in  the  very  conception  of  a
Buddha.  The  perfect  Buddha — such  as  Gautama  Sakya-muni
— differs  from  the  imperfect  or  solitary  Buddha  (Pratyeka  Buddha)
precisely  by  the  fact  that  he  is  not  satisfied  by  his  own  know¬
ledge  of  the  agonising  emptiness  of  existence,  but  decides  to
free  from  this  agony  all  living  beings.  This  decision  was  pre¬
ceded  in  his  former  incarnations  by  individual  acts  of  extreme
self-sacrifice,  descriptions  of  which  abound  in  Buddhist  legends.
Thus  in  one  of  his  previous  lives  he  gave  himself  up  to  be
devoured  by  a  tiger  in  order  to  save  a  poor  woman  and  her
children.  Such  holy  exploits,  in  contradistinction  to  the  aimless
self-destruction  of  the  ancient  ascetics  of  India,  are  a  direct
means  to  the  highest  bliss  for  every  one  who  is  ‘awake.’  A
well-known  and  typical  story  is  told  of  one  of  the  apostles  of
Buddhism — Arya-Deva.  As  he  was  approaching  a  city,  he
saw  a  wounded  dog  covered  with  worms.  To  save  the  dog
without  destroying  the  worms,  Arya-Deva  cut  a  piece  off  his
own  body  and  placed  the  worms  upon  it.  At  that  moment  both
the  city  and  the  dog  disappeared  from  his  eyes,  and  he  entered  at
once  into  Nirvana.

Active  self-sacrifice  out  of  pity  for  all  living  beings,  so
characteristic  of  Buddhist  morality,  cannot  be  logically  reconciled
with  the  fundamental  principle  of  Buddhism — the  doctrine  that
all  things  are  empty  and  indifferent.  To  feel  equal  pity  for
every  one,  beginning  with  Brahma  and  Indra,  and  ending  with
a  worm,  is  certainly  not  opposed  to  the  principle  of  indifference  ;
but  as  soon  as  the  feeling  of  universal  compassion  becomes  the
work  of  mercy,  the  indifference  must  be  given  up.  If  instead
of  a  dog  with  worms,  Arya-Deva  had  met  a  man  suffering  from
vice  and  ignorance,  pity  to  this  living  creature  would  require
from  him  not  a  piece  of  his  flesh,  but  words  of  true  doctrine —


232  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

while  to  address  words  of  rational  persuasion  to  a  hungry  worm
would  be  no  less  absurd  than  to  feed  with  his  own  flesh  a  satisfied,
but  erring,  man.  Equal  pity  to  all  beings  demands  not  the  same ,
but  quite  a  different  active  relation  to  each  one  of  them.  Even
for  a  Buddhist  this  difference  proves  to  be  not  merely  illusory,
for  he  too  would  certainly  admit  that  had  Arya-Deva  not
distinguished  a  worm  or  a  dog  from  a  human  being,  and  offered
moral  books  to  suffering  animals,  he  would  hardly  be  likely
to  have  performed  any  holy  exploit  and  deserved  Nirvana.  All-
embracing  pity  necessarily  involves  discriminating  truth ,  which
gives  each  his  due  :  a  piece  of  meat  to  the  animal,  and  words  of
spiritual  awakening  to  the  rational  being.  But  we  cannot  stop
at  this.  Pity  for  every  one  compels  me  to  desire  for  all  and  each
the  supreme  and  final  blessedness  which  consists  not  in  satiety,
but  in  complete  freedom  from  the  pain  of  limited  existence
and  of  the  necessity  of  rebirth.  This  freedom,  this  only  true
blessedness,  the  worm — so  long  as  it  remains  a  worm — cannot
attain  ;  it  is  possible  only  to  a  self-conscious  and  rational  being.
Therefore  if  I  am  to  extend  my  pity  to  the  lower  creatures,
I  cannot  be  content  with  simply  alleviating  their  suffering  at
a  given  moment.  I  must  help  them  to  attain  the  final  end
through  rebirth  in  higher  forms.  But  the  objective  conditions
of  existence  are  rejected  by  Buddhism  as  an  illusion  and  empty
dream,  and  consequently  the  ascent  of  living  beings  up  the
ladder  of  rebirths  depends  exclusively  on  their  own  actions
(the  law  of  Karma).  The  form  of  the  worm  is  the  necessary
outcome  of  former  sins,  and  no  help  from  without  can  lift  that
worm  to  the  higher  stage  of  dog  or  elephant.  Buddha  himself
could  directly  act  only  upon  rational  self-conscious  beings,  and
that  only  in  the  sense  that  his  preaching  enabled  them  to  accept
or  to  reject  the  truth,  and,  in  the  first  case,  to  escape  from  the
torture  of  rebirth,  and,  in  the  second,  continue  to  endure  it.
The  work  of  salvation  that  those  who  are  c  awake  ’  can
accomplish  amounts  simply  to  pushing  their  sleeping  neigh¬
bours,  some  of  whom  are  awakened  by  it,  while  others  merely
exchange  one  series  of  bad  dreams  for  another,  still  more
agonising.

The  principle  of  active  pity  to  all  living  beings,  however
true  it  is  in  itself,  can,  from  the  Buddhist  point  of  view,  have


INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  233

no  real  application.  We  are  utterly  incapable  of  bringing  true
salvation  to  the  lower  creatures,  and  our  power  of  influencing
rational  creatures  in  this  respect  is  extremely  limited.  What¬
ever  their  commandments  and  legends  may  be,  the  very  formula
of  the  faith1  indicates  that  the  true  sphere  of  moral  relations
and  activity  is  for  the  Buddhist  limited  to  the  brotherhood  of
those  who,  like  himself,  are  ‘  awake,’  and  support  one  another
in  a  peaceful  life  of  contemplation — the  last  remainder  of  their
former  activities — before  they  finally  pass  into  Nirvana.

V

The  significance  of  Buddhism  in  the  world-history  lies  in  the
fact  that  in  it  the  human  individual  was  for  the  first  time  valued
not  as  the  member  of  a  tribe,  a  caste,  a  state,  but  as  the  bearer
of  a  higher  consciousness,  as  a  being  capable  of  awakening  from
the  deceptive  dream  of  everyday  existence,  of  becoming  free
from  the  chain  of  causality.  This  is  true  of  man  belonging  to
any  caste  or  nationality,  and  in  this  sense  the  Buddhist  religion
signalises  a  new  stage  in  the  history  of  the  world — the  universal
as  opposed  to  the  particular  tribal  or  national  stage.  It  is  clear,
however,  that  the  universality  of  Buddhism  is  merely  abstract  or
negative  in  character.  It  proclaims  the  principle  of  indifference,
rejects  the  importance  of  the  caste  or  the  national  distinctions,
gathers  into  a  new  religious  community  men  of  all  colours  and
classes — and  then  leaves  everything  as  it  was  before.  The  problem
of  gathering  together  the  disjecta  membra  of  humanity  and  forming
out  of  them  a  new  and  higher  kingdom,  is  not  even  contemplated.
Buddhism  does  not  go  beyond  the  universalism  of  a  monastic  order.
When  the  transition  is  effected  from  the  clan  to  the  state,  the
former  independent  social  wholes — the  clans — enter  as  subordinate
parts  into  the  new  and  higher  whole,  the  organised  political  union.
Similarly,  the  third  and  highest  stage  of  human  development— the
universal — demands  that  states  and  nations  should  enter  as  con¬
stituent  parts  into  the  all-embracing  new  organisation.  Other¬
wise,  however  broad  the  theoretical  principles  might  be,  the
positive  significance  in  concrete  life  will  entirely  remain  with  the
already  existing  national  and  political  groups.  c  All  men  ’  and,

1  See  above.


234  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

still  more,  ‘all  living  beings’  will  simply  be  an  abstract  idea
symbolically  expressed  by  the  monastery  that  is  severed  from  life.
Buddhism  remains  perfectly  strange  to  the  task  of  truly  uniting  all
living  beings,  or  even  the  scattered  parts  of  humanity,  in  a  new,
universal  kingdom.  It  therefore  proves  to  be  merely  the  first
rudimentary  stage  of  the  human  understanding  of  life.

The  personality  manifests  here  its  infinite  worth  in  so  far  as
the  absolute  self  negates  all  limitation,  in  so  far  as  it  asserts,  “  I
am  not  bound  by  anything,  I  have  experienced  all  things,  and
know  that  all  is  an  empty  dream  and  I  am  above  it  all.”  Negation
of  existence  through  the  knowledge  of  it— this  is  in  what,  from
the  Buddhist  point  of  view,  the  absolute  nature  of  the  human
spirit  consists.  It  lifts  man  above  all  earthly  creatures  and  even
above  all  gods,  for  they  are  gods  by  nature  only,  while  the  awakened
sage  becomes  god  through  his  own  act  of  consciousness  and  will :
he  is  an  auto-god ,  a  god  self-made.  All  creation  is  material  for
the  exercise  of  will  and  of  knowledge,  by  means  of  which  the
individual  is  to  become  divine.  Single  individuals  who  have
entered  upon  the  path  that  leads  to  this  end  form  the  normal  society
or  brotherhood  (the  monastic  order)  which  is  included  in  the
Buddhist  confession  of  faith  (I  take  my  refuge  ...  in  the
Sangha).  But  this  society  obviously  has  significance  temporarily
only,  until  its  members  attain  perfection  ;  in  Nirvana  communal
life,  like  all  other  determinations,  must  disappear  altogether.  In
so  far  as  the  absolute  character  of  the  personality  is  understood  in
Buddhism  in  the  negative  sense  only,  as  freedom  from  all  things,
the  individual  stands  in  no  need  of  completion.  All  his  relations
to  other  persons  simply  form  a  ladder  which  is  pushed  away  as  soon
as  the  height  of  absolute  indifference  is  attained.  The  negative
character  of  the  Buddhist  ideal  renders  morality  itself,  as  well
as  all  social  life,  a  thing  of  purely  transitory  and  conditional
significance.

The  religiously-moral  feeling  of  reverence  ( pietas )  has  in
Buddhism  no  true  and  abiding  object.  The  sage  who  knows  all
things  and  has  become  free  from  everything  finds  no  longer  any¬
thing  to  worship.  When  Buddha  Sakya-muni  attained  to  the
supreme  understanding,  not  only  Indra  with  the  host  of  all  the
Vedanta  deities,  but  the  supreme  god  of  the  all-powerful  priests,
Brahma,  came  like  a  humble  listener  to  hear  the  new  doctrine,


INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  235

and,  becoming  enlightened,  worshipped  the  teacher.  And  yet
Buddha  was  a  man,  who  by  his  own  power  became  god  or  reached
the  absolute  state — and  this  is  the  supreme  goal  for  every  human
being.  Buddhists  reverence  the  memory  and  the  relics  of  their
teacher  to  the  point  of  idolatry,  but  this  is  only  possible  so
long  as  the  worshippers  are  still  imperfect.  The  perfect
disciple  who  has  attained  Nirvana  no  longer  differs  from  Buddha
himself,  and  loses  all  object  of  religious  feeling.  Therefore,  in
principle,  the  Buddhist  ideal  destroys  the  possibility  of  the  religious
relation,  and,  in  its  inmost  essence,  Buddhism  is  not  only  a  religion
of  negation,  but  a  religion  of  self-negation.

The  altruistic  part  of  morality  also  disappears  at  the  higher
stages  of  the  true  way,  for  then  all  distinctions  are  seen  to  be
illusory,  including  those  which  evoke  in  us  a  feeling  of  pity  towards
certain  objects,  events,  and  states.  “  Be  merciful  to  all  beings,”
proclaims  the  elementary  moral  teaching  of  the  Sutras.  ct  There
are  no  beings,  and  all  feeling  is  the  fruit  of  ignorance,”  declares
the  higher  metaphysics  of  Abhidhamma.1  Not  even  the  ascetic
morality  has  positive  justification  in  Buddhism,  in  spite  of  its
monasteries.  These  monasteries  are  simply  places  of  refuge  for
contemplative  souls  who  have  given  up  worldly  vanity  and  are
awaiting  their  entrance  into  Nirvana.  But  the  positive  moral
asceticism — struggle  with  the  flesh  for  strengthening  the  spirit
and  spiritualising  the  body — lies  altogether  outside  the  range  of
Buddhist  thought.  The  spirit  is  for  it  only  the  knower,  and  the
body  a  phantom  known  as  such.  Bodily  death,  the  sight  of
which  had  so  struck  Prince  Siddhartha,  merely  proves  that  life  is
illusion,  from  which  we  must  become  free  ;  but  no  Buddhist
would  dream  of  resurrection.  If,  however,  the  supreme  goal  of
asceticism  is  absent,  the  means  towards  it  can  have  no  significance.
From  the  point  of  view  of  absolute  indifference  ascetic  rules,  like
all  other,  lose  their  own  inherent  meaning.  They  are  preserved
in  the  external  practice  of  Buddhism  simply  as  pedagogical. means
for  spiritual  babes,  or  as  the  historical  legacy  of  Brahmanism.  The
perfect  Buddhist  will  certainly  not  refrain  from  plentiful  food,  or
distinguish  between  meat  and  vegetable  diet.  It  is  very  remark-

1  The  Buddhist  doctrine  is  divided  into  three  sections  of  the  Holy  Law,  called,  there¬
fore,  ‘The  three  baskets  ’  (Tripitaka)  :  Sutra  contains  the  moral  doctrine,  Vinaya  the
monastic  rules,  and  Abhidhamma  the  transcendental  wisdom.


236  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

able  that  according  to  the  legend,  the  truth  of  which  there  is  no
reason  to  doubt,  the  founder  of  this  religion,  which  is  supposed
to  demand  strict  vegetarianism,  died  of  having  unwisely  partaken
of  pig’s  flesh.


VI

Like  every  negative  doctrine  Buddhism  is  dependent  upon
what  it  denies — upon  this  material  world,  this  sensuous  and  mortal
life.  “All  this  is  illusion,”  it  repeats — and  it  gets  no  further,  for
to  it  this  illusion  is  everything.  It  knows  with  certainty  only
what  it  denies.  Of  what  it  affirms,  of  what  it  regards  as  not
illusory,  it  has  no  positive  idea  at  all,  but  determines  it  negatively
only  :  Nirvana  is  inaction,  immovability,  stillness,  non-existence.
Buddhism  knows  only  the  lower,  the  illusory  ;  the  higher  and  the
perfect  it  does  not  know,  but  merely  demands  it.  Nirvana  is  only
a  postulate,  and  not  the  idea  of  the  absolute  good.  The  idea  came
from  the  Greeks  and  not  from  the  Hindus.

Human  reason,  having  discovered  its  own  universal  and
absolute  nature  by  rejecting  everything  finite  and  particular,
could  not  rest  content  with  this  first  step.  From  the  conscious¬
ness  that  the  material  existence  is  illusory  it  was  bound  to  pass
to  that  which  is  not  illusory,  to  that  for  the  sake  of  which  it
rejected  deceptive  appearance.  In  Indian  Buddhism  the  person¬
ality  finds  its  absolute  significance  in  the  rejection  of  being  that  is
unworthy  of  it.  In  Greek  thought,  which  found  its  practical
embodiment  in  Socrates,  and  was  put  into  a  theoretical  form  by
his  pupil,  the  absolute  value  of  personality  is  justified  by  the  affirma¬
tion  of  being  that  is  worthy  of  it — of  the  world  of  ideas  and  ideal
relations.  Greek  idealism  no  less  than  Buddhism  realises  that
all  transitory  things  are  illusory,  that  the  flux  of  material  reality
is  only  the  phantom  of  being,  is  essentially  non-being  (rb  p)  6v).
The  practical  pessimism  of  the  Buddhist  is  entirely  shared  by
the  Greek  consciousness.

“  Whoso  craves  the  ampler  length  of  life,  not  content  to
desire  a  modest  span,  him  will  I  judge  with  no  uncertain  voice  :
he  cleaves  to  folly.  For  the  long  days  lay  up  full  many  things
nearer  grief  than  joy  ;  but  as  for  thy  delights,  their  place  shall


INDIVIDUALLY -SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  237

know  them  no  more,  when  a  man’s  life  hath  lapsed  beyond  the
fitting  term.”  1

Although  there  is  here  involved  the  conception  of  measure  so
characteristic  of  the  Greek  mind,  reflection  does  not  stop  at  this.
Not  onlyadisproportionatelylong  life,  but  all  life  is  nothing  but  pain.

“  Not  to  be  born  is,  past  all  prizing,  best ;  but  when  a  man
hath  seen  the  light,  this  is  next  best  by  far,  that  with  all  speed  he
should  go  thither,  whence  he  hath  come.

“  For  when  he  hath  seen  youth  go  by,  with  its  light  follies,
what  troublous  affliction  is  strange  to  his  lot,  what  suffering  is  not
therein  ? — envy,  frictions,  strife,  battles,  and  slaughters  ;  and  last
of  all,  age  claims  him  for  her  own — age,  dispraised,  infirm,
unsociable,  unfriended,  with  whom  all  woe  of  woe  abides.”  2

It  was  as  clear  to  the  Greek  higher  consciousness  as  to  the
Hindu  that  human  will  blindly  striving  for  material  satisfaction
cannot  find  it  under  any  material  conditions,  and  that  therefore
the  real  good  from  this  point  of  view  is  not  the  enjoyment  of  life
but  the  absence  of  life.

“The  Deliverer  comes  at  the  last  to  all  alike — when  the  doom
of  Hades  is  suddenly  revealed,  without  marriage  song,  or  lyre,  or
dance — even  Death  at  the  last.”  3

This  pessimistic  conception  expressed  by  poetry  was  also
confirmed  by  Greek  philosophy  in  sentences  which  have  become
the  alphabetic  truths  of  all  idealistic  and  spiritualistic  morality  :
sensuous  life  is  the  prison  of  the  spirit,  body  is  the  coffin  of  the
soul,  true  philosophy  is  the  practice  of  death,  etc.  But  although
the  Greek  genius  appropriated  this  fundamental  conception  of
Buddhism,  it  did  not  stop  there.  The  non-sensuous  aspect  of
reality  revealed  to  it  its  ideal  content.  In  the  place  of  Nirvana
the  Greeks  put  the  Cosmos  of  eternal  intelligible  essences
(Platonic  Ideas)  or  the  organism  of  universal  reason  (in  the  philo¬
sophy  of  the  Stoics).  Human  personality  now  affirms  its
absolute  significance  not  by  merely  denying  what  is  false,  but  by
intellectually  participating  in  what  is  true.  The  personal  bearer
of  this  higher  universal  consciousness  is  not  the  monk  who
renounces  the  illusion  of  the  real  being,  in  accordance  with
the  principle  of  indifference,  but  the  philosopher  who  shares  in
the  fulness  of  the  ideal  being  in  the  inner  unity  of  its  many

1  The  Oedipus  Coloneus.  2  Ibid.  3  Ibid.


238  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

forms.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  wishes  to  live  by  the  senses,
but  the  second  lives  by  his  intellect  in  the  world  of  pure  Ideas,
that  is,  of  what  is  worthy  of  existence,  and  is  therefore  true  and
eternal.  It  is  a  dualistic  point  of  view  :  all  that  exists  has  a  true
positive  aspect,  in  addition  to  the  false,  material  side.  With
regard  to  the  latter  the  Greek  philosophers  adopt  an  attitude  as
negative  as  the  Hindu  ‘  Gymnosophists.’  That  which  to  the
senses  and  sensibility  is  a  deceptive  appearance  contains  for  reason
‘a  reflection  of  the  Idea,’  according  to  Plato,  or  ‘the  seed  of
Reason,’  according  to  the  Stoics  (Adyoi  отгер/хаті/ссн).  Hence  in
human  life  there  is  an  opposition  between  that  which  is  con¬
formable  to  Ideas  and  in  harmony  with  Reason,  and  that  which
contradicts  the  ideal  norm.  The  true  sage  is  no  longer  a  simple
hermit  or  a  wandering  monk,  who  has  renounced  life  and  is
mildly  preaching  the  same  renunciation  to  others ;  he  is  one  who
boldly  denounces  the  wrong  and  irrational  things  of  life.  Hence
the  end  is  different  in  the  two  cases.  Buddha  Sakya-muni  peacefully
dies  after  a  meal  with  his  disciples,  while  Socrates,  condemned  and
put  to  prison  by  his  fellow-citizens,  is  sentenced  by  them  to
drink  a  poisoned  cup.  But  in  spite  of  this  tragic  ending,  the
attitude  of  the  Greek  idealist  to  the  reality  unworthy  of  him  is
not  one  of  decisive  opposition.  The  highest  representative  of
humanity  at  this  stage — the  philosopher — is  conscious  of  his
absolute  worth  in  so  far  as  he  lives  by  pure  thought  in  the  truly-
existent  intelligible  realm  of  Ideas  or  of  the  all-embracing
rationality,  and  despises  the  false,  the  merely  phenomenal  being  of
the  material  and  sensuous  world.  This  contempt,  when  bold  and
genuine,  rouses  the  anger  of  the  crowd  which  is  wholly  engrossed
with  the  lower  things,  and  the  philosopher  may  have  to  pay  for
his  idealism  with  his  life — as  was  the  case  with  Socrates.  But
in  any  case  his  attitude  to  the  unworthy  reality  is  merely  one  of
contempt.  The  contempt  is  certainly  different  in  kind  from  that
characteristic  of  Buddhism.  Buddha  despises  the  world  because
everything  is  illusion.  The  very  indefiniteness  of  this  judgment,
however,  takes  away  its  sting.  If  all  is  equally  worthless,  no
one  in  particular  is  hurt  by  it,  and  if  nothing  but  Nirvana  is
opposed  to  the  bad  reality,  the  latter  may  sleep  in  peace.  For
Nirvana  is  an  absolute  state  and  not  the  norm  for  relative  states.
Now  the  idealist  does  possess  such  a  norm  and  he  despises  and


INDI VI  DU  ALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  239

condemns  the  life  that  surrounds  him  not  because  it  inevitably
shares  in  the  illusory  character  of  everything,  but  because  it  is
abnormal,  irrational,  opposed  to  the  Idea.  Such  condemnation  is
no  longer  neutral,  it  has  an  element  of  defiance  and  demand.  It
is  slighting  to  all  who  are  bound  by  worldly  irrationality  and
therefore  leads  to  hostility,  and  sometimes  to  persecution  and  the
cup  with  poison.

And  yet  there  is  something  accidental  about  this  conflict.
Socrates  condemned  Athenian  customs  all  his  life  long  but  he
was  not  persecuted  for  it  until  he  was  an  old  man  of  seventy  ;  the
persecution  was  obviously  due  to  a  change  in  political  circum¬
stances.  The  irrationality  of  the  Athenian  political  order  was  a
local  peculiarity  ;  the  customs  of  Sparta  were  better.  The  great¬
est  of  Socrates’  pupils,  Plato,  went  later  on  to  Sicily  in  order  to
found  there,  with  the  help  of  Dionysius  of  Syracuse,  an  ideal  state
in  which  philosophers  would  receive  the  reins  of  government
instead  of  a  cup  of  poison.  He  did  not  succeed,  but  on
returning  to  Athens  he  was  able  to  teach  in  his  academy  without
hindrance,  and  lived  undisturbed  to  a  profound  old  age.  The
disciples  of  Socrates,  as  well  as  other  preachers  of  idealism,  never
suffered  systematic  persecution  ;  they  were  disliked  but  tolerated.
The  fact  is  that  idealism  by  the  nature  of  the  case  has  its  centre
of  gravity  in  the  intelligible  world.  The  opposition  it  establishes
between  the  normal  and  the  abnormal,  the  right  and  the  wrong,
though  comparatively  definite,  remains  essentially  intellectual  and
theoretical.  It  touches  upon  the  reality  it  condemns  but  does
not  penetrate  to  the  heart  of  it.  We  know  how  superficial  were
the  practical  ideals  of  Plato,  the  greatest  of  the  idealists.  They
come  much  nearer  to  the  bad  reality  than  to  what  truly  is.  The
realm  of  Ideas  is  an  all-embracing,  absolutely-universal  unity  ;
there  are  no  limitations,  dissensions,  or  hostility  in  it.  But  Plato’s
pseudo-ideal  state,  though  involving  some  bold  conceptions  and  a
general  beauty  of  form,  is  essentially  connected  with  such  limita¬
tions  of  which  humanity  soon  freed  itself  not  in  idea  only  but  in
reality.  His  state  of  philosophers  is  nothing  more  than  a  narrow,
local,  nationally  Greek  community  based  upon  slavery,  constant
warfare,  and  such  relations  between  the  sexes  as  remind  one  of
stables  for  covering.  It  is  clear  that  the  political  problem  is  not
in  any  inner  connection  with  Plato’s  main  interest  and  that  he


24o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

does  not  really  care  in  what  way  men  are  going  to  live  upon
earth,  where  truth  does  not  and  will  not  dwell.  He  finds  his  own
true  satisfaction  in  the  contemplation  of  eternal  intelligible  truth.
The  natural  impulse  to  realise  or  embody  truth  in  the  environ¬
ment  is  checked  by  two  considerations,  which  idealism  necessarily
involves.  The  first  is  the  conviction  that  though  the  ideal  truth
can  be  reflected  or  impressed  upon  the  surface  of  real  existence,
it  cannot  become  substantially  incarnate  in  it.  The  second  is
the  belief  that  our  own  spirit  is  connected  with  this  reality  in  a
purely  transitory  and  external  fashion,  and  therefore  can  have  no
absolute  task  to  fulfil  in  it.

The  dying  Socrates  rejoiced  at  leaving  this  world  of  false
appearance  for  the  realm  of  what  truly  is.  Such  an  attitude
obviously  excludes  in  the  last  resort  all  practical  activity  ;  there
can  in  that  case  be  neither  any  obligation  nor  any  desire  to  devote
oneself  to  the  changing  of  this  life,  to  the  salvation  of  this  world.
Platonic  idealism,  like  Buddhist  nihilism,  lifts  up  human  person¬
ality  to  the  level  of  the  absolute,  but  does  not  create  for  it  a  social
environment  corresponding  to  its  absolute  significance.  The
brotherhood  of  monks,  like  the  state  of  philosophers,  is  merely  a
temporal  compromise  of  the  sage  with  the  false  existence.  His
true  satisfaction  is  in  the  pure  indifference  of  Nirvana,  or  in
the  purely  intelligible  world  of  Ideas.  Are  we  to  say,  then,  that
for  idealism  too  the  actual  life  is  devoid  of  meaning  ?  We  discover
at  this  point  so  great  an  inner  contradiction  in  the  idealistic  line
of  thought  that  human  consciousness  is  unable  to  stop  at  this
stage  and  to  accept  it  as  the  highest  truth.

VII

If  the  world  in  which  we  live  did  not  share  in  the  ideal  or  the
true  being  at  all,  idealism  itself  would  be  impossible.  The  direct
representative  of  the  ideal  principle  in  this  world  is,  of  course,  the
philosopher  himself,  who  contemplates  that  which  truly  is.  But
the  philosopher  did  not  drop  down  from  heaven  ;  his  reason  is
only  the  highest  expression  of  the  universal  human  reason  em¬
bodied  in  the  word  which  is  an  essentially  universal  fact  and  is  the
real  idea  or  the  sensible  reason.  This  was  clearly  perceived  by
Heraclitus,  worked  out  and  explained  by  Socrates,  Plato,  Aristotle,


INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  241

and  Zeno  the  Stoic.  But  the  presence  of  the  higher  principle  is
not  limited  to  the  human  world.  The  purposive  organisation  and
movements  of  living  creatures  and  the  general  teleological  con¬
nection  of  events  provided  Socrates  himself  with  his  favourite
argument  for  proving  the  presence  of  reason  in  the  world.  The
ideal  principle,  however,  is  found  not  only  where  there  is  evidence
of  purpose  ;  it  extends  to  all  determinate  being  and  excludes  only
the  principle  directly  opposed  to  it — the  unlimited,  the  chaos
(т£>  атгеіроѵ  =  то  цг)  6V).  Measure,  limit,  norm,  necessarily  in¬
volve  Reason  and  Idea.  But  if  so,  the  opposition,  so  essential  for
idealism,  between  the  world  of  sensible  appearances  and  the  world
of  intelligible  essences  proves  to  be  relative  and  changeable.
Since  all  determinate  existence  participates  in  Ideas,  the  difference
can  only  be  in  the  degree  of  the  participation.  A  plant  or  an
animal  exhibits  a  greater  wealth  of  definitely-thought  content,  and
stands  in  more  complex  and  intimate  relations  to  all  other  things
than  a  simple  stone  or  an  isolated  natural  event.  Therefore  we
must  admit  that  animal  and  vegetable  organisms  have  a  greater
share  of  the  Idea  or  a  greater  degree  of  ideality  than  a  stone  or  a
pool  of  water.  Further,  every  human  being  as  possessing  the
power  of  speech  or  capable  of  rational  thought,  presents,  as  com¬
pared  with  an  animal,  a  greater  degree  of  ideality.  The  same
relation  holds  between  an  ignorant  man  given  to  passions  and
vices  and  the  philosopher  whose  word  is  an  expression  of  reason
not  only  in  the  formal  sense  but  in  its  concrete  application.
Finally,  even  philosophers  differ  from  one  another  in  the  degree
to  which  they  have  mastered  the  higher  truth.  This  difference
in  the  degree  of  rationality  in  the  world,  ranging  from  a  cobble¬
stone  to  the  ‘divine’  Plato,  is  not  anything  meaningless  or
opposed  to  the  Idea.  It  would  be  that  if  reason  demanded  in¬
difference  and  the  ‘Idea’  designated  uniformity.  But  reason  is
the  universal  connectedness  of  all  things,  and  the  Idea  is  the  form
of  the  inner  union  of  the  many  in  the  one.  (Take,  e.g.y  the  idea  of
the  organism  which  includes  many  parts  and  elements  subservient
to  a  common  end  ;  or  the  idea  of  the  state  combining  a  multitude
of  interests  in  one  universal  good  ;  or  the  idea  of  science,  in  which
many  pieces  of  information  form  a  single  truth.)  Therefore  our
reality,  in  which  innumerable  things  and  events  are  combined  and
coexist  in  one  universal  order,  must  be  recognised  as  essentially


242  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

rational  or  conformable  to  the  Idea.  Condemnation  of  this  reality
on  the  part  of  the  idealist  can  in  justice  refer  not  to  the  general
nature  of  the  world,  or  to  the  differences  of  degree  that  follow
from  it  and  are  essential  to  the  higher  unity,  but  only  to  such
mutual  relation  of  degrees  as  does  not  correspond  to  their  inner
dignity.  The  Idea  of  man  is  not  violated  but  completed  by  the
fact  that  in  addition  to  intellect  man  has  active  will  and  sensuous
receptivity.  But  since  intellect,  which  contemplates  universal
truth,  is  essentially  higher  than  desires  and  sensations,  which  are
limited  to  the  particular,  it  ought  to  dominate  them.  If,  on  the
contrary,  these  lower  aspects  gain  the  upper  hand  in  the  life  of
man,  his  Idea  becomes  distorted  and  what  takes  place  in  him  is
abnormal  and  meaningless.  In  the  same  way,  the  distinction  of
state  or  class  is  not  opposed  to  the  idea  of  civic  community  pro¬
vided  the  interrelation  between  the  classes  is  determined  by  their
inner  quality.  But  if  a  group  of  men  who  have  more  capacity
for  menial  work  than  for  knowledge  and  realisation  of  higher
truth  dominate  the  community  and  take  into  their  hands  the
government  and  the  education  of  the  people,  while  men  of  true
knowledge  and  wisdom  are  forced  to  devote  their  powers  to
physical  labour,  then  the  state  contradicts  its  Idea  and  loses  all  its
meaning.  The  supremacy  of  the  lower  faculties  of  the  soul  over
reason  in  the  individual,  and  the  supremacy  of  the  material  class
over  the  intellectual  in  society,  are  instances  of  one  and  the  same
kind  of  distortion  and  absurdity.  This  is  how  idealism  regards
it  when  it  resolutely  denounces  the  fundamental  evil  both  of  the
mental  and  of  the  social  life  of  man.  It  is  for  thus  denouncing
it  that  Socrates  had  to  die,  but,  strange  to  say,  not  even  this
tragic  fact  made  his  disciples  realise  that  in  addition  to  the  moral
and  political  there  exists  in  the  world  a  third  kind  of  evil — the
physical  evil,  death.  This  illogical  limitation  to  the  first  two
anomalies — the  bad  soul  and  the  bad  society, — this  artificial  break
between  the  morally-social  and  the  naturally- organic  life  is
characteristic  of  the  idealist  point  of  view  as  of  an  intermediary
and  transitional  stage  of  thought,  a  half-hearted  and  half-expressed
universalism.

And  yet  it  is  clear  that  the  dominion  of  death  in  the  world  of
the  living  is  the  same  kind  of  disorder ,  the  same  distortion  of
degrees,  as  the  mastery  of  blind  passions  in  the  rational  soul  or  the


INDIVIDUALLY-SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  243

mastery  of  the  mob  in  human  society.  There  is  no  doubt  that
the  inwardly  purposive  structure  and  life  of  the  organism  realises
the  ideal  principle  in  nature  in  a  greater  measure  and  a  higher
degree  than  do  the  elementary  forces  of  inorganic  substance.  It
is  clear  then  that  the  triumph  of  these  forces  over  life,  their  escape
from  its  power  and  the  final  disruption  of  the  organism  by  them,
is  contradictory  to  the  normal,  ideal  order,  is  senseless  or  anomalous.
Life  does  not  destroy  the  lower  forces  of  substance  but  subordinates
them  to  itself  and  thereby  vivifies  them.  It  is  clear  that  such
subordination  of  the  lower  to  the  higher  is  the  norm,  and  that
therefore  the  reverse  relation,  involving,  as  it  does,  the  destruction
of  the  higher  form  of  existence  in  its  given  reality,  cannot  be
justified  or  pronounced  legitimate  from  the  point  of  view  of  reason
and  of  the  Idea.  Death  is  not  an  Idea,  but  the  rejection  of  the
Idea,  the  rebellion  of  blind  force  against  reason.  Therefore
Socrates’  joy  at  his  death  was,  strictly  speaking,  simply  an  excus¬
able  and  touching  weakness  of  an  old  man  wearied  by  the  troubles
of  life,  and  not  an  expression  of  the  higher  consciousness.  In  a
mind  occupied  with  the  essence  of  things  and  not  with  personal
feeling,  this  death  ought  to  evoke,  instead  of  joy,  a  double  grief.
Grievous  was  the  sentence  of  death  as  a  social  wrong,  as  the
triumph  of  the  wicked  and  ignorant  over  the  righteous  and  the
wise  ;  grievous  was  the  process  of  death  as  a  physical  wrong,  as
the  triumph  of  the  blind  and  soulless  power  of  a  poisonous  substance
over  a  living  and  organised  body,  the  abode  of  a  rational  spirit.

All  the  world — not  merely  the  mental  and  political,  but  the
physical  world  as  well — suffers  from  the  violated  norm  and  stands
in  need  of  help.  And  it  can  be  helped  not  by  the  will-lessness  of
the  ascetic,  renouncing  all  life  and  all  social  environment,  not  by
the  intellectual  contemplation  of  the  philosopher  who  lives  by
thought  alone  in  the  realm  of  Ideas,  but  by  the  living  power  of  the
entire  human  being  possessing  absolute  significance  not  negatively
or  ideally  only,  but  as  a  concrete  reality.  Such  a  being  is  the
perfect  man  or  the  God-man,  who  does  not  forsake  the  world
for  Nirvana  or  the  realm  of  Ideas,  but  comes  into  the  world  in
order  to  save  it  and  regenerate  it  and  make  it  the  Kingdom  ot
God,  so  that  the  perfect  individual  could  find  his  completion  in
the  perfect  society.


244  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


VIII

The  absolute  moral  significance  of  human  personality  demands
perfection  or  fulness  of  life.  This  demand  is  not  satisfied  either
by  the  mere  negation  of  imperfection  (as  in  Buddhism)  or  by
the  merely  ideal  participation  in  perfection  (as  in  Platonism
and  all  idealism).  It  can  only  be  satisfied  by  perfection  being
actually  present  and  realised  in  the  whole  man  and  in  the  whole
of  human  life.  This  is  what  true  Christianity  stands  for  and
wherein  it  essentially  differs  from  Buddhism  and  Platonism.
Without  going  at  present  into  the  metaphysical  aspect  of  Chris¬
tianity,  I  am  simply  referring  here  to  the  fact  that  Christianity
— and  it  alone — is  based  upon  the  idea  of  the  really  perfect  man
and  perfect  society,  and  therefore  promises  to  fulfil  the  demand  for
true  infinity,  inherent  in  our  consciousness.  It  is  clear  that  in
order  to  attain  this  purpose  it  is  necessary  first  of  all  to  cease  to  be
satisfied  with  the  limited  and  unworthy  reality,  and  to  renounce  it.
It  is  equally  clear,  however,  that  this  is  only  the  first  step,  and  that
if  man  goes  no  further  he  is  left  with  a  mere  negation.  This
first  step  which  the  universal  human  consciousness  had  to  take,  but
at  which  it  ought  not  to  stop,  is  represented  by  Buddhism.  Having
renounced  the  unworthy  reality,  I  ought  to  replace  it  by  what  is
worthy  of  existence.  But  to  do  so  I  must  first  understand  or
grasp  the  very  idea  of  worthy  existence — this  is  the  second  step,
represented  by  idealism.  And  once  more  it  is  clear  that  we
cannot  stop  at  this.  Truth  which  is  thinkable  only  and  not
realisable — truth  which  does  not  embrace  the  whole  of  life — is  not
what  is  demanded,  is  not  absolute  perfection.  The  third  and  final
step  which  Christianity  enables  us  to  take  consists  in  a  positive
realisation  of  worthy  existence  in  all  things.

The  Nirvana  of  the  Buddhists  is  external  to  everything — it  is
negative  universalism.  The  ideal  cosmos  of  Plato  represents  only
the  intelligible  or  the  thinkable  aspect  of  everything — it  is  incomplete
universalism.  The  Kingdom  of  God,  revealed  by  Christianity,
alone  actually  embraces  everything ,  and  is  positive ,  complete ,  and
perfect  universalism.  It  is  clear  that  at  the  first  two  stages  of  univer¬
salism  the  absolute  element  in  man  is  not  developed  to  the  end,  and
therefore  remains  fruitless.  Nirvana  lies  outside  the  boundaries  of
every  horizon  ;  the  world  of  Ideas,  like  the  starry  heaven,  envelops


INDIVIDUALLY -SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  245

the  earth  but  is  not  united  to  it  ;  the  absolute  principle  incarnate
in  the  Sun  of  Truth  alone  penetrates  to  the  inmost  depths  of
earthly  reality,  brings  forth  a  new  life,  and  manifests  itself  as
a  new  order  of  being — as  the  all-embracing  Kingdom  of  God  :
virtus  ejus  Integra  si  versa  fuerit  in  terram}  And  without  the
earth  there  can  be  no  heaven  for  man.

We  have  seen  that  Buddhism,  unable  to  satisfy  the  uncondi¬
tional  principle  of  morality  and  bring  about  the  fulness  of  life  or
the  perfect  society,  is  destructive,  when  consistently  worked  out,  of
the  chief  foundations  of  morality  as  such.  The  same  thing  must
be  said  with  regard  to  Platonism.  Where  is  a  consistent  idealist
to  find  an  object  for  his  piety  ?  The  popular  gods  he  regards
sceptically,  or  at  best  with  wise  restraint.  The  ideal  essences,
which  are  for  him  the  absolute  truth,  cannot  be  an  object  of  religious
worship  neither  for  his  mortal  c  body,’  which  knows  nothing
about  them,  nor  for  his  immortal  spirit,  which  knows  them  too
intimately  and,  in  immediate  contemplation,  attains  complete
equality  with  them.  Religion  and  religious  morality  is  a  bond
between  the  higher  and  the  lower — a  bond  which  idealism,  with
its  dual  character,  breaks  up,  leaving  on  the  one  side  the  divine
incorporeal  and  sterile  spirit,  and  on  the  other,  the  material  body
utterly  lacking  in  what  is  divine.  But  the  bond  thus  severed  by
idealism  extends  farther  still.  It  is  the  basis  of  pity  as  well  as
of  reverence.  What  can  be  an  object  of  pity  for  a  consistent
idealist  ?  He  knows  only  two  orders  of  being — the  false,  material,
and  the  true,  ideal  being.  The  false  being,  as  Anaximander  of
Miletus  had  taught  before  Plato,  ought  in  justice  to  suffer  and  to
perish,  and  it  deserves  no  pity.  The  true,  from  its  essence,  can¬
not  suffer,  and  therefore  cannot  excite  pity  —  and  this  was  the
reason  why  the  dying  Socrates  did  nothing  but  rejoice  at  leaving
a  world  unworthy  of  pity  for  a  realm  where  there  is  no  object
for  it.  Finally,  idealism  provides  no  real  basis  for  the  ascetic
morality  either.  A  consistent  idealist  is  ashamed  of  the  .general
fact  of  having  a  body,  in  the  words  of  the  greatest  of  Plato’s
followers — Plotinus,  but  such  shame  has  no  significance  from  the
moral  point  of  view.  It  is  impossible  for  man  so  long  as  he  lives
on  earth  to  be  incorporeal,  and,  according  to  the  indisputable  rule
ad  impossibilia  nemo  obligatur ,  the  shame  of  one’s  corporeality
1  “Its  power  is  whole  when  it  turns  to  the  earth”  ( Tabula  maragdina).


24.6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

either  demands  that  we  should  commit  suicide  or  demands  nothing
at  all.

If  instead  of  taking  Buddhism  and  Platonism  to  be  what  they
really  were,  viz.  necessary  stages  of  human  consciousness,  we  regard
either  the  one  or  the  other  as  the  last  word  of  universal  truth,  the
question  is,  what  precisely  had  they  given  to  humanity,  what  did
they  gain  for  it  ?  Taken  in  and  for  themselves  they  have  neither
given  nor  promised  anything.  There  had  been  from  all  eternity
the  opposition  between  Nirvana  and  Sansara — empty  bliss  for  the
spiritually  awake,  and  empty  pain  for  the  spiritually  asleep  ;  there
had  been  the  inexorable  law  of  causal  actions  and  caused  states —
the  law  of  Karma,  which  through  a  series  of  innumerable  rebirths
leads  a  being  from  painful  emptiness  to  empty  bliss.  As  it  was
before  Buddha,  so  it  remained  after  him,  and  so  it  will  remain  for
all  eternity.  From  the  point  of  view  of  Buddhism  itself,  not  one
of  its  followers  capable  of  critical  reflection  can  affirm  that
Buddha  had  changed  anything  in  the  world  order,  had  created
anything  new,  had  actually  saved  anyone.  Nor  is  there  any  room
for  promise  in  the  future.  The  same  thing  must  in  the  long-run
be  said  of  idealism.  There  is  the  eternal  realm  of  intelligible
essences  which  truly  is  and  the  phenomenal  world  of  sensuous
appearance.  There  is  no  bridge  between  the  two  ;  to  be  in  the
one  means  not  to  be  in  the  other.  Such  duality  has  always  been
and  will  remain  for  ever.  Idealism  gives  no  reconciliation  in  the
present  and  no  promise  of  it  in  the  future.1

Christianity  has  a  different  message.  It  both  gives  and
promises  to  humanity  something  new.  It  gives  the  living  image
of  a  personality  possessing  not  the  merely  negative  perfection
of  indifference  or  the  merely  ideal  perfection  of  intellectual
contemplation,  but  perfection  absolute  and  entire,  fully  realised,
and  therefore  victorious  over  death.  Christianity  reveals  to
men  the  absolutely  perfect  and  therefore  physically  immortal
personality.  It  promises  mankind  a  perfect  society  built  upon
the  pattern  of  this  personality.  And  since  such  a  society  cannot
be  created  by  an  external  force  (for  in  that  case  it  would  be  imper-


1  Plato’s  thought  rose  for  a  moment  to  the  conception  of  Eros  as  the  bridge  between
the  world  of  true  being  and  the  material  reality,  but  did  not  follow  it  out.  In  enigmatic
expressions  the  philosopher  indicated  this  bridge,  but  was  incapable  of  crossing  it  him¬
self  or  leading  others  across  it.


INDIVIDUALLY -SOCIAL  CONSCIOUSNESS  247

feet),  the  promise  of  it  sets  a  task  before  humanity  as  a  whole
and  each  man  individually,  to  co-operate  with  the  perfect  personal
power  revealed  to  the  world  in  so  transforming  the  universe  that
it  might  become  the  embodiment  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  The
final  truth,  the  absolute  and  positive  universalism  obviously  can¬
not  be  either  exclusively  individual  or  exclusively  social  :  it  must
express  the  completeness  and  fulness  of  the  individually-social  life.
True  Christianity  is  a  perfect  synthesis  of  three  inseparable
elements  :  (1)  the  absolute  event — the  revelation  of  the  perfect
personality,  the  God-man — Christ,  who  had  bodily  risen  from  the
dead  ;  (2)  the  absolute  promise — of  a  community  conformable  to  the
perfect  personality,  or,  in  other  words,  the  promise  of  the  Kingdom
of  God  ;  (3)  the  absolute  task — to  further  the  fulfilment  of  that
promise  by  regenerating  all  our  individual  and  social  environment
in  the  spirit  of  Christ.  If  any  one  of  these  three  foundations  is
forgotten  or  left  out  of  account  the  whole  thing  becomes  paralysed
and  distorted.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  moral  development  and
the  external  history  of  humanity  have  not  stopped  after  the
coming  of  Christ,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Christianity  is  the
absolute  and  final  revelation  of  truth.  That  which  has  been  ful¬
filled  and  that  which  has  been  promised  stands  firmly  wfthin  the
precincts  of  eternity  and  does  not  depend  upon  us.  But  the  task
of  the  present  is  in  our  hands ;  the  moral  regeneration  of  our  life
must  be  brought  about  by  ourselves.  It  is  with  this  general
problem  that  the  special  task  of  moral  philosophy  is  particularly
concerned.  It  has  to  define  and  explain,  within  the  limits  of
historical  fact,  what  the  relation  between  all  the  fundamental
elements  and  aspects  of  the  individually-social  whole  ought  to  be
in  accordance  with  the  unconditional  moral  norm.


CHAPTER  III


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY

I

At  the  historical  stage  reached  by  human  consciousness  in
Christianity,  moral  life  reveals  itself  as  a  universal  and  all-
embracing  task.  Before  going  on  to  discuss  its  concrete  historical
setting,  we  must  consider  the  view  which,  on  principle,  rejects
morality  as  a  historical  problem  or  as  the  work  of  collective
man,  and  entirely  reduces  it  to  the  subjective  moral  impulses  of
individuals.  This  view  arbitrarily  puts  such  narrow  limits  to  the
human  good  as  in  reality  it  has  never  known.  Strictly  speaking,
morality  never  has  been  solely  the  affair  of  personal  feeling  or  the
rule  of  private  conduct.  At  the  patriarchal  stage  the  moral
demands  of  reverence,  pity,  and  shame  were  inseparably  connected
with  the  duties  of  the  individual  to  his  kinsmen.  The  ‘moral’
was  not  distinguished  from  the  ‘social,’  or  the  individual  from  the
collective.  And  if  the  result  was  a  morality  of  rather  a  low  and
limited  order,  this  was  not  due  to  the  fact  of  its  being  a  collective
morality,  but  to  the  generally  low  level  and  narrow  limits  of  the
tribal  life,  which  expressed  merely  the  rudimentary  stage  of  the
historical  development.  It  was  low  and  limited,  however,  only  by
comparison  with  the  further  progress  of  morality,  and  certainly
not  by  comparison  with  the  morality  of  savages  living  in  caves  and
in  trees.  When  the  state  came  into  being,  and  the  domestic  life
became  to  a  certain  extent  a  thing  apart,  morality  in  general
was  still  determined  by  the  relation  between  individuals  and  the
collective  whole  to  which  they  belonged — henceforth  a  wider
and  a  more  complex  one.  It  was  impossible  to  be  moral
apart  from  a  definite  and  positive  relation  to  the  state ;

248


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  249

morality  was  in  the  first  place  a  civic  virtue.  And  the  reason
that  this  virtus  antiqua  no  longer  satisfies  us,  is  not  that  it  was
a  civic  and  not  merely  a  domestic  virtue,  but  that  the  civic  life
itself  was  too  remote  from  the  true  social  ideal,  and  was  merely
a  transition  from  the  barbarous  to  the  truly  human  culture.
Morality  was  rightly  taken  to  consist  in  honourably  serving  the
social  whole — the  state,  but  the  state  itself  was  based  upon  slavery,
constant  wars,  etc.  ;  what  is  to  be  condemned  is  not  the  social
character  of  morality,  but  the  immoral  character  of  the
social  whole.  In  a  similar  way  we  condemn  the  ecclesi¬
astical  morality  of  the  Middle  Ages,  not  of  course  because  it  was
ecclesiastical,  but  because  the  Church  itself  was  then  far  from  being
a  truly  moral  organisation,  and  was  responsible  for  evil  as  well  as
for  good — the  terrible  evil  of  religious  persecutions  and  torture —
thus  violating  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality  in  its  own
inner  domain.

Christianity  as  the  ‘  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  ’  proclaims  an
ideal  that  is  unconditionally  high,  demands  an  absolute  morality.
Is  this  morality  to  be  subjective  only ,  limited  to  the  inner  states
and  individual  actions  of  the  subject  ?  The  question  contains  its
own  answer  ;  but  to  make  the  matter  quite  clear,  let  us  first  grant
all  that  is  true  in  the  exclusively -subjective  interpretation  of
Christianity.  There  is  no  doubt  that  a  perfect  or  absolute  moral
state  must  be  inwardly  fully  experienced  or  felt  by  the  subject —
must  become  his  own  state,  the  content  of  his  life.  If  perfect
morality  were  recognised  as  subjective  in  this  sense,  the  difference
would  be  purely  verbal.  But  something  else  is  really  meant.
The  question  is,  how  is  this  moral  perfection  to  be  attained  by
the  individual  ?  Is  it  enough  that  each  should  strive  to  make
himself  inwardly  better  and  act  accordingly,  or  is  it  attained
with  the  help  of  a  certain-  social  process  the  effects  of  which  are
collective  as  well  as  individual  ?  The  adherents  of  the  former
theory,  which  reduces  everything  to  individual  moral  activity,
do  not  reject,  of  course,  either  the  social  life  or  the  moral  im¬
provement  of  its  forms.  They  believe,  however,  that  such  im¬
provement  is  simply  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  personal
moral  progress :  like  individual,  like  society.  As  soon  as  each
person  understands  and  reveals  to  others  his  own  true  nature,  and
awakens  good  feelings  in  his  soul,  the  earth  will  become  paradise.


250  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Now  it  is  indisputable  that  without  good  thoughts  and  feelings
there  can  be  neither  individual  nor  social  morality.  It  is  equally
indisputable  that  if  all  individual  men  were  good,  society  would  be
good  also.  But  to  think  that  the  actual  virtue  of  the  few  best  men
is  sufficient  for  the  moral  regeneration  of  all  the  others,  is  to  pass
into  the  world  where  babies  are  born  out  of  rose-bushes,  and  where
beggars,  for  lack  of  bread,  eat  cakes.  The  question  we  are  mainly
concerned  with  is  not  whether  the  individual  s  moral  efforts  are
sufficient  to  make  him  perfect,  but  whether  those  unaided
individual  efforts  can  induce  other  people ,  who  are  making  no
moral  efforts  at  all,  to  begin  to  make  them.

II

The  insufficiency  of  the  subjective  good  and  the  necessity  for
a  collective  embodiment  of  it  is  unmistakably  proved  by  the  whole
course  of  human  history.  I  will  give  one  concrete  illustration.

At  the  end  of  Homer’s  Odyssey  it  is  related,  with  obvious
sympathy,  how  this  typical  hero  of  the  Hellenes  re-established
justice  and  order  in  his  house,  having  overcome  at  last  the  enmity
of  gods  and  men  and  destroyed  his  rivals.  With  his  son’s  help
he  executed  those  of  his  servants  who,  during  his  twenty  years’
absence,  when  everybody  had  given  him  up  for  dead,  sided  with
Penelope’s  suitors  and  did  not  oppose  the  latter  making  themselves
at  home  in  Odysseus’s  house  :

“Now  when  they  had  made  an  end  of  setting  the  hall  in  order,
they  led  the  maidens  forth  from  the  stablished  hall,  and  drove
them  up  in  a  narrow  space  between  the  vaulted  room  and  the
goodly  fence  of  the  court,  whence  none  might  avoid  ;  and  wise
Telemachus  began  to  speak  to  his  fellows,  saying  :  ‘  God  forbid
that  I  should  take  these  women’s  lives  by  a  clean  death,  these  that
have  poured  dishonour  on  my  head  and  on  my  mother,  and  have
lain  with  the  wooers.’  With  that  word  he  tied  the  cable  of  a
dark-prowed  ship  to  a  great  pillar  and  flung  it  round  the  vaulted
room,  and  fastened  it  aloft,  that  none  might  touch  the  ground
with  her  feet.  And  even  as  when  thrushes,  long  of  wing,  or
doves  fall  into  a  net  that  is  set  in  a  thicket,  as  they  seek  to  their
roosting-place,  and  a  loathly  bed  harbours  them,  even  so  the
women  held  their  heads  all  in  a  row,  and  about  all  their  necks


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  251

nooses  were  cast,  that  they  might  die  by  the  most  pitiful  death.
And  they  writhed  with  their  feet  for  a  little  space,  but  for  no  long
while.  Then  they  led  out  Melanthius  through  the  doorway  and  the
court  and  cut  off  his  nostrils  and  his  ears  with  the  pitiless  sword,
and  drew  forth  his  vitals  for  the  dogs  to  devour  raw,  and  cut  off
his  hands  and  feet  in  their  cruel  anger”  ( Odyssey ,  xxii.  457-477).

Odysseus  and  Telemachus  were  not  monsters  of  inhumanity  ;
on  the  contrary,  they  represented  the  highest  ideal  of  the  Homeric
epoch.  Their  personal  morality  was  irreproachable,  they  were
full  of  piety,  wisdom,  justice,  and  all  the  family  virtues.  Odysseus
had,  into  the  bargain,  an  extremely  sensitive  heart,  and  in  spite  of
his  courage  and  firmness  in  misfortune,  shed  tears  at  every  con¬
venient  opportunity.  This  very  curious  and  characteristic  feature
attaches  to  him  throughout  the  poem.  As  I  have  not  in  literature
come  across  any  special  reference  to  this  peculiar  characteristic
of  the  Homeric  hero,  I  will  allow  myself  to  go  into  some  detail.

At  his  first  appearance  in  the  Odyssey  he  is  represented  as
weeping  : —

“  Odysseus  ...  sat  weeping  on  the  shore  even  as  aforetime,
straining  his  soul  with  tears  and  groans  and  griefs,  and  as  he  wept
he  looked  wistfully  over  the  unharvested  deep”  (v.  82-84;  also

I5I,  152,  156-158).

In  his  own  words  :  “  There  I  abode  for  seven  years  continually,
and  watered  with  my  tears  the  imperishable  raiment  that  Calypso
gave  me  ”  (vii.  259-260).

He  wept  at  the  thought  of  his  distant  native  land  and  family,
and  also  at  remembering  his  own  exploits  : —

“ .  .  .  The  Muse  stirred  the  minstrel  to  sing  the  songs  or
famous  men.  .  .  .  The  quarrel  between  Odysseus  and  Achilles,
son  of  Peleus.  .  .  .  This  song  it  was  that  the  famous  minstrel
sang ;  but  Odysseus  caught  his  great  purple  cloak  with  his
stalwart  hands,  and  drew  it  down  over  his  head,  and  hid  his
comely  face,  for  he  was  ashamed  to  shed  tears  beneath  his  brows
in  presence  of  the  Phaeacians  ”  (viii.  73-86).

Further  : —

“  This  was  the  song  that  the  famous  minstrel  sang.  But  the
heart  of  Odysseus  melted,  and  the  tear  wet  his  cheeks  beneath  the
eyelids.  And  as  a  woman  throws  herself  wailing  about  her  dead
lord,  who  hath  fallen  before  his  city  and  the  host,  warding  from


252  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

his  town  and  his  children  the  pitiless  day  .  .  .  even  so  pitifully
fell  the  tears  beneath  the  brows  of  Odysseus”  (viii.  521-525).

He  weeps  on  being  told  by  Circe  of  the  journey — though  a
perfectly  safe  one — he  has  to  make  to  Hades  : —

“Thus  spake  she,  but  as  for  me,  my  heart  was  broken,  and  I
wept  as  I  sat  upon  the  bed,  and  my  soul  had  no  more  care  to  live
and  to  see  the  sunlight  ”  (x.  496-499).

It  is  no  wonder  that  Odysseus  weeps  when  he  sees  his  mother’s
shadow  (xi.  87),  but  he  is  affected  just  as  much  by  the  shadow  of
the  worst  and  most  worthless  of  his  followers,  of  whom  “an  evil
doom  of  some  god  was  the  bane  and  wine  out  of  measure
(xi.  61 ).

“There  was  one,  Elpenor,  the  youngest  of  us  all,  not  very
valiant  in  war,  neither  steadfast  in  mind.  He  was  lying  apart
from  the  rest  of  my  men  on  the  housetop  of  Circe’s  sacred
dwelling,  very  fain  of  the  cool  air,  as  one  heavy  with  wine.  Now
when  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  voices  and  of  the  feet  of  my  fellows
as  they  moved  to  and  fro,  he  leaped  up  of  a  sudden  and  minded
him  not  to  descend  again  by  the  way  of  the  tall  ladder,  but  fell
right  down  from  the  roof,  and  his  neck  was  broken  from  the  bones
of  the  spine,  and  his  spirit  went  down  to  the  house  of  Hades”
(x.  552-561).

“At  the  sight  of  him  I  wept  and  had  compassion  on  him”

(xi.  55)-

He  weeps,  too,  at  the  sight  of  Agamemnon  : —

“  Thus  we  twain  stood  sorrowing,  holding  sad  discourse,  while
the  big  tears  fell  fast”  (xi.  465-466).

He  weeps  bitterly  at  finding  himself  at  last  in  his  native
Ithaca  (xiii.  219-22 1),  and  still  more  so  on  beholding  his  son  : —

“  ...  In  both  their  hearts  arose  the  desire  of  lamentation.
And  they  wailed  aloud,  more  ceaselessly  than  birds,  sea-eagles  or
vultures  of  crooked  claws,  whose  younglings  the  country  folk  have
taken  from  the  nest,  ere  yet  they  are  fledged.  Even  so  pitifully
fell  the  tears  beneath  their  brows”  (xvi.  215-220).

Odysseus  shed  tears,  too,  at  the  sight  of  his  old  dog  Argus  :  —

“Odysseus  looked  aside  and  wiped  away  a  tear  that  he  easily
hid  from  Eumaeus  ”  (xvii.  304-305).

He  weeps  before  assassinating  the  suitors,  he  weeps  as  he  em¬
braces  the  godlike  swine-herd  Eumaeus,  and  the  goodly  cow-herd


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  253

Philoetius  (xxi.  225-227),  and  also  after  the  brutal  murd-er  of  the
twelve  maid-servants  and  the  goat-herd  Melanthius  : —

“A  sweet  longing  came  upon  him  to  weep  and  to  moan,  for
he  remembered  them  every  one”  (xxii.  500-501).

The  last  two  chapters  of  the  Odyssey  also  have,  of  course,  an
abundant  share  of  the  hero’s  tears  : —

“ .  .  .  in  his  heart  she  stirred  yet  a  greater  longing  to  lament,
and  he  wept  as  he  embraced  his  beloved  wife  and  true”  (xxiii.
231-232).

And  further  : —

“  Now  when  the  steadfast  goodly  Odysseus  saw  his  father  thus
wasted  with  age  and  in  great  grief  of  heart,  he  stood  still  beneath
a  tall  pear  tree  and  let  fall  a  tear  ”  (xxiv.  233-235).

So  far  as  the  personal,  subjective  feeling  is  concerned  Odysseus
was  obviously  quite  equal  to  the  most  developed  and  highly-strung
man  of  our  own  day.  Speaking  generally,  Homeric  heroes  were
capable  of  all  the  moral  sentiments  and  emotions  of  the  heart  that
we  are  capable  of— and  that  not  only  in  relation  to  their  neighbours
in  the  narrow  sense  of  the  term,  i.e.  to  men  immediately  connected
with  them  by  common  interests,  but  also  in  relation  to  people
remote  and  distant  from  them.  The  Phaeacians  were  strangers
to  the  shipwrecked  Odysseus,  and  yet  what  kindly  human  relations
were  established  between  him  and  them  !  And  if,  in  spite  of  all
this,  the  heroes  of  antiquity  performed  with  a  clear  conscience  deeds
which  are  now  morally  impossible  for  us,  this  was  certainly  not
due  to  their  lack  of  personal,  subjective  morality.  These  men  were
certainly  as  capable  as  we  are  of  good  human  feelings  towards  both
neighbours  andstrangers.  What  then  is  the  differenceand  whatisthe
ground  of  the  change  ?  Why  is  it  that  virtuous,  wise,  and  sentunental
men  of  the  Homeric  age  thought  it  permissible  and  praiseworthy
to  hang  frivolous  maid-servants  like  thrushes  and  to  chop  unworthy
servants  as  food  for  the  dogs,  while  at  the  present  day  such  actions
can  only  be  done  by  maniacs  or  born  criminals  ?  Reasoning  in
an  abstract  fashion  one  might  suppose  that  although  the  men  of
that  distant  epoch  had  good  mental  feelings  and  impulses,  they  had
no  conscious  good  principles  and  rules.  Owing  to  the  absence  of
a  formal  criterion  between  right  and  wrong,  or  a  clear  consciousness
of  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  morality  was  purely
empirical  in  character,  and  even  the  best  of  men,  capable  of  the


254  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

finest  moral  emotions,  could  indulge  unchecked  in  wild  outbursts
of  brutality.  In  truth,  however,  we  find  no  such  formal  defect  in
the  thought  of  the  ancients.

Men  of  antiquity,  just  like  ourselves,  both  had  their  good  and
bad  qualities  as  a  natural  fact,  and  drew  the  distinction  of  principle
between  good  and  evil,  recognising  that  the  first  was  to  be
preferred  unconditionally  to  the  second.  In  those  same  poems  of
Homer  which  often  strike  us  by  their  ethical  barbarisms,  the  idea
of  moral  duty  appears  with  perfect  clearness.  Certainly  Penelope’s
mode  of  thought  and  expression  does  not  quite  coincide  with
that  of  Kant  ;  nevertheless  the  following  words  of  the  wife  of
Odysseus  contain  a  definite  affirmation  of  the  moral  good  as  an
eternal,  necessary,  and  universal  principle  : —

“Man’s  life  is  brief  enough  !  And  if  any  be  a  hard  man  and
hard  at  heart,  all  men  cry  evil  on  him  for  the  time  to  come,  while
yet  he  lives,  and  all  men  mock  him  when  he  is  dead.  But  if  any
be  a  blameless  man  and  blameless  of  heart,  his  guests  spread  abroad
his  fame  over  the  whole  earthy  and  many  people  call  him  noble  ”
(xix.  328-334).


Ill

The  form  of  moral  consciousness,  the  idea,  namely,  of  the  good
as  absolutely  binding  and  of  evil  as  absolutely  unpermissible,  was
present  in  the  mind  of  the  ancients  as  it  is  in  our  own.  It  might
be  thought,  however,  that  the  important  difference  between  us
and  them  in  the  moral  valuation  of  the  same  actions  is  due  to
the  change  in  the  actual  content  of  the  moral  ideal.  There  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  Gospel  has  raised  our  ideal  of  virtue  and  holiness
and  made  it  much  higher  and  wider  than  the  Homeric  ideal.  But
it  is  equally  certain  that  this  perfect  ideal  of  morality,  when  it  has
no  objective  embodiment  and  is  accepted  purely  in  the  abstract,
produces  no  change  whatever  either  in  the  life  or  in  the  actual
moral  consciousness  of  men,  and  does  not  in  any  way  raise  their
practical  standards  for  judging  their  own  and  other  people’s  actions.

It  is  sufficient  to  refer  once  more  to  the  representatives  of
mediaeval  Christianity,  who  treated  the  supposed  enemies  of  their
Church  with  greater  cruelty  than  Odysseus  treated  the  enemies
of  his  family — and  did  so  with  a  clear  conscience,  and  even  with


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  255

the  conviction  of  fulfilling  a  moral  duty.  At  a  time  more  en¬
lightened  and  less  remote  the  American  planters  who  belonged  to
the  Christian  faith,  and  therefore  stood  under  the  sign  of  an  un¬
conditionally  high  moral  ideal,  treated  their  black  slaves  on  the
whole  no  better  than  the  pagan  Odysseus  treated  his  faithless
servants,  and,  like  him,  considered  themselves  right  in  doing  so.
So  that  not  only  their  actions  but  even  their  practical  consciousness
remained  unaffected  by  the  higher  truth  which  they  theoretically
professed  in  the  abstract.

I.  I.  Dubasov’s  Historical  Sketches  of  the  Tambov  District
contain  an  account  of  the  exploits  of  K.,  a  landowner  in  the
district  of  Yelatma,  who  flourished  in  the  ’forties  of  the  present
century.  The  Commission  of  Inquiry  established  that  many  serfs
(children  especially)  had  been  tortured  by  him  to  death,  and  that
on  his  estate  there  was  not  a  single  peasant  who  had  not  been
flogged,  and  not  a  single  serf-girl  who  had  not  been  outraged.  But
more  significant  than  this  ‘misuse  of  power’  was  the  relation  of
the  public  to  it.  When  cross-examined,  most  of  the  gentry  in
the  district  spoke  of  K.  as  ‘a  true  gentleman.’  Some  added,
“K.  is  a  true  Christian  and  observes  all  the  rites  of  the  Church.”
The  Marshal  of  Nobility  wrote  to  the  Governor  of  the  province  :
“  All  the  district  is  alarmed  by  the  troubles  of  Mr.  K.”  In  the
end  the  ‘  true  Christian  ’  was  excused  from  legal  responsibility,
and  the  local  gentry  could  set  their  hearts  at  rest.1  The  same
sympathy  from  men  of  his  own  class  was  enjoyed  by  another  and
still  more  notorious  Tambov  landowner,  Prince  U.  N.  G — n,  of
whom  it  was  written  with  good  reason  to  the  Chief  of  the  Police  :
“  Even  animals  on  meeting  U.  N.  instinctively  seek  to  hide  wher¬
ever  they  can.” 2

Some  three  thousand  years  elapsed  between  the  heroes  of
Homer  and  the  heroes  of  Mr.  Dubasov,  but  no  essential  and  stable
change  had  taken  place  in  the  conduct  and  the  moral  consciousness
of  men  with  regard  to  the  enslaved  part  of  the  population.  The
same  inhuman  relations  that  were  approved  of  by  the  ancient
Greeks  in  the  Homeric  age  were  regarded  as  permissible  by  the
American  and  Russian  slave -owners  in  the  first  half  of  the
nineteenth  century.  These  relations  are  revolting  to  us  now,

1  Ocherki  iz  istorii  Tambovskago  Kraia,  by  I. 'I.  Dubasov,  vol.  i.,  Tambov,  1890,
pp.  162-167.  2  Ibid.  p.  92.


256  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

but  our  ethical  standards  have  been  raised  not  in  the  course  of  the
three  thousand  years,  but  only  of  the  last  thirty  years  (in  our  case
and  that  of  the  Americans,  and  a  few  dozens  of  years  earlier  in
Western  Europe).  What,  then,  had  happened  so  recently  ?
What  has  produced  in  so  short  a  period  the  change  which  long
centuries  of  historical  development  were  unable  to  accomplish  ?
Has  some  new  moral  conception,  some  new  and  higher  ideal  of
morality  appeared  in  our  day  ?

There  has  been  and  there  could  have  been  nothing  of  the  kind.
No  ideal  can  be  conceived  higher  than  that  revealed  eighteen
hundred  years  ago.  X  hat  ideal  was  known  to  the  ‘  true  Christians
of  the  American  States  and  the  Russian  provinces.  They  could
learn  no  new  idea  in  this  respect  ;  but  they  experienced  a  new  fact.
The  idea  restricted  to  the  subjective  sphere  of  personal  morality
could  not  during  thousands  of  years  bear  the  fruit  which  it  bore  in
the  course  of  the  few  years  when  it  was  embodied  as  a  social  force,
and  became  the  common  task.  Under  very  different  historical
conditions  the  organised  social  whole  invested  with  power  decided,
both  in  America  and  in  Russia,  to  put  an  end  to  the  too  glaring
violation  of  Christian  justice — both  human  and  divine — in  the  life
of  the  community.  In  America  it  was  attained  at  the  price  of
blood,  through  a  terrible  civil  war  ;  in  Russia — by  the  authoritative
action  of  the  Government.  It  is  owing  to  this  fact  alone  that  the
fundamental  demands  of  justice  and  humanity,  presupposed  by
the  supreme  ideal  though  not  exhaustive  of  it,  were  transferred
from  the  narrow  and  unstable  limits  of  subjective  feeling  to  the
wide  and  firm  ground  of  objective  reality  and  transformed  into
a  universally  binding  law.  And  we  see  that  this  external
political  act  immediately  raised  the  standard  of  our  inner  con¬
sciousness,  that  is,  achieved  a  result  which  millenniums  of  moral
preaching  alone  could  not  achieve.  The  social  movement  and  the
action  of  the  Government  were  of  course  themselves  conditioned  by
the  previous  moral  preaching,  but  that  preaching  had  effect  upon
the  majority,  upon  the  social  environment  as  a  whole,  only  when
embodied  in  measures  organised  by  the  Government.  Owing
to  external  restraint,  brutal  instincts  were  no  longer  able  to  find
expression  ;  they  had  to  pass  into  a  state  of  inactivity,  and  were
gradually  atrophied  from  lack  of  exercise  ;  in  most  people  they
disappeared  altogether  and  were  no  longer  passed  on  to  the


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  257

generations  that  followed.  At  present  even  men  who  openly  sigh
for  the  serfdom  make  sincere  reservations  with  regard  to  the  abuse
of  the  owners’  power,  while  forty  years  ago  that  abuse  was
regarded  as  compatible  with  ‘  true  nobility,’  and  even  with  ‘  true
Christianity.’  And  yet  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
fathers  were  intrinsically  worse  than  the  sons.

Let  it  be  granted  that  the  heroes  of  Mr.  Dubasov’s  chronicle,
whom  the  Tambov  gentry  defended  simply  from  class  interests,
were  really  below  the  average  of  the  society  around  them.  But
apart  from  them  there  was  a  multitude  of  perfectly  decent  men,
free  from  all  brutality,  who  conscientiously  felt  they  had  a  right  to
make  full  use  of  the  privileges  of  their  class— for  instance,  to  sell
their  serfs  like  cattle,  retail  or  wholesale.  And  if  such  things  are
now  impossible  even  for  scoundrels,— however  much  they  might
wish  for  them, — this  objective  success  of  the  good,  this  concrete
improvement  of  life  cannot  possibly  be  ascribed  to  the  progress  of
personal  morality.

The  moral  nature  of  man  is  unchangeable  in  its  inner
subjective  foundations.  The  relative  number  of  good  and  bad
men  also,  probably,  remains  unchanged.  It  would  hardly  be
argued  by  any  one  that  there  are  now  more  righteous  men  than
there  were  some  hundreds  or  thousands  of  years  ago.  Finally,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  highest  moral  ideas  and  ideals,
taken  in  the  abstract,  do  not  as  such  produce  any  stable  improve¬
ment  in  life  and  in  moral  consciousness.  I  have  referred  to  an
indisputable  and  certain  fact  of  history  :  the  same  and  even  worse
atrocities  which  were  committed  by  a  virtuous  pagan  of  the
Homeric  poem  with  the  approval  of  the  community  were  done
thousands  of  years  after  him  by  the  champions  of  Christian  faith
— the  Spanish  inquisitors,  and  by  Christian  slave-owners,  also
with  the  approval  of  the  community,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact
that  a  higher  ideal  of  individual  morality  has  meanwhile  been
evolved.  In  our  day  such  actions  are  only  possible  for  lunatics
and  professional  criminals.  And  this  sudden  progress  is  solely  due
to  the  fact  that  the  organised  social  force  was  inspired  by  moral
demands  and  transformed  them  into  an  objective  law  of  life.


s


25B  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


IV

The  principle  of  the  perfect  good  revealed  in  Christianity  does
not  abolish  the  external  structure  of  human  society,  but  uses  it  as
a  form  and  an  instrument  for  the  embodiment  of  its  own  absolute
moral  content.  It  demands  that  human  society  should  become
morally  organised.  Experience  unmistakably  proves  that  when
the  social  environment  is  not  morally  organised,  the  subjective
demands  of  the  good  in  oneself  and  in  others  are  inevitably  lowered.
It  is  not,  then,  really  a  choice  between  personal  or  subjective
and  social  morality,  but  between  weak  and  strong,  realised  and
unrealised  morality.  At  every  stage  the  moral  consciousness  in¬
evitably  strives  to  realise  itself  both  in  the  individual  and  in  the
society.  The  final  stage  differs  from  the  lower  stages,  not,  of
course,  by  the  fact  that  morality  at  its  highest  remains  for  ever
subjective,  i.e.  powerless  and  unrealised — this,  indeed,  would  be  a
strange  advantage! — but  by  the  fact  that  the  realisation  must  be
full  and  all-embracing ,  and  therefore  requires  a  far  more  difficult,
long,  and  complex  process  than  was  necessary  in  the  case  of  the
former  collective  embodiments  of  morality.  In  the  patriarchal  life
the  degree  of  the  good  of  which  it  is  capable  becomes  realised
freely  and  easily — without  any  history.  The  formation  of  exten¬
sive  nationally  political  groups,  which  is  to  realise  a  greater  sum
and  a  higher  grade  of  the  good,  fills  many  centuries  with  its
history.  The  moral  task  left  us  by  Christianity — to  form  the
environment  for  the  actual  realisation  of  absolute  and  universal
good — is  infinitely  more  complex.  The  positive  conception  of
this  good  embraces  the  totality  of  human  relations.  Humanity
morally  regenerated  cannot  be  poorer  in  content  than  natural
humanity.  The  task  then  consists  not  in  abolishing  the
already  existing  social  distinctions,  but  in  bringing  them  into
right,  good,  or  moral  relation  with  one  another.  When  the
higher  animal  forms  came  to  be  evolved  in  the  course  of  the
cosmical  process,  the  lower  form — that  of  worm — was  not  ex¬
cluded  as  intrinsically  unworthy,  but  received  a  new  and  more
fitting  position.  It  ceased  to  be  the  sole  and  obvious  foundation
of  life,  but  decently  clothed  it  still  exists  within  the  body  in  the
form  of  the  alimentary  canal — a  subservient  part  of  the  organism.


ABSTRACT  SUBJECTIVISM  IN  MORALITY  259

Other  forms,  predominant  at  the  lower  stages,  were  also  preserved,
both  materially  and  formally,  as  subordinate  constituent  parts  and
organs  of  a  higher  whole.  In  a  similar  way,  Christian  humanity
— the  highest  form  of  collective  spiritual  life — finds  realisation
not  by  destroying  the  different  forms  of  the  social  life  evolved  in
the  course  of  history,  but  by  bringing  them  into  due  relation  to
itself  and  to  each  other,  in  harmony  with  the  unconditional  prin¬
ciple  of  morality.

The  demand  for  such  harmony  deprives  moral  subjectivism,
based  on  the  wrongly  conceived  view  of  the  autonomy  of  the  will,
of  all  justification.  The  moral  will  must  be  determined  to  action
solely  through  itself ;  any  subordination  of  it  to  an  external  rule
or  command  violates  its  autonomy  and  must  therefore  be  recog¬
nised  as  unworthy — this  is  the  true  principle  of  moral  autonomy.
But  the  organisation  of  social  environment  in  accordance  with
the  principle  of  the  absolute  good  is  not  a  limitation  but  a  fulfilment
of  the  personal  moral  will — it  is  the  very  thing  which  it  desires.
As  a  moral  being  I  want  the  good  to  reign  upon  earth,  I  know
that  alone  I  cannot  bring  this  to  pass,  and  I  find  a  collective
organisation  intended  for  this  purpose  of  mine.  It  is  clear  that
such  an  organisation  does  not  in  any  sense  limit  me  but,  on  the
contrary,  removes  my  individual  limitations,  widens  and  strengthens
my  moral  will.  Every  one,  in  so  far  as  his  will  is  moral,  inwardly
participates  in  this  universal  organisation  of  morality,  and  it  is
clear  that  relative  external  limitations,  which  may  follow  therefrom
for  the  individual  persons,  are  sanctioned  by  their  own  higher
consciousness  and  consequently  cannot  be  opposed  to  moral  freedom.
For  the  moral  individual  one  thing  only  is  important  in  this  con¬
nection,  namely,  that  the  collective  organisation  should  be  really
dominated  by  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality ,  that  the  social
life  should  indeed  conform  to  moral  standards — to  the  demands  of
justice  and  mercy  in  all  human  affairs  and  relations — that  the
individually-social  environment  should  really  become  the  organised
good.  It  is  clear  that  in  subordinating  himself  to  a  social  environ¬
ment  which  is  itself  subordinate  to  the  principle  of  the  absolute  good
and  conformable  to  it,  the  individual  cannot  lose  anything.  Such
a  social  environment  is  from  the  nature  of  the  case  incompatible
with  any  arbitrary  limitation  of  personal  rights  and  still  less  with
rude  violence  or  persecution.  The  degree  of  subordination  of  the


26o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

individual  to  society  must  correspond  to  the  degree  of  subordination
of  society  to  the  moral  good ,  apart  from  which  social  environment
has  no  claim  whatever  upon  the  individual.  Its  rights  arise
simply  from  the  moral  satisfaction  which  it  gives  to  every  person.
This  aspect  of  moral  universalism  will  be  further  developed  and
explained  in  the  next  chapter.

As  to  the  autonomy  of  the  bad  will ,  no  organisation  of  the
good  can  prevent  conscious  evil-doers  from  desiring  evil  for  its
own  sake  and  from  acting  in  that  direction.  The  organisation  of
the  good  is  concerned  merely  with  external  limitations  of  the
evil  reality — limitations  that  inevitably  follow  from  the  nature
of  man  and  the  meaning  of  history.  These  objective  limits  to
objective  evil,  necessarily  presupposed  by  the  organisation  of
the  good  but  not  by  any  means  exhaustive  of  it,  will  be  dis¬
cussed  later  on  in  the  chapters  on  punishment  and  on  the  relation
between  legal  justice  and  morality.


CHAPTER  IV


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE

I

The  true  definition  of  society  as  an  organised  morality  disposes  of
the  two  false  theories  that  are  fashionable  in  our  day — the  view  of
moral  subjectivism  which  prevents  the  moral  will  from  being  con¬
cretely  realised  in  the  life  of  the  community,  and  the  theory  of
social  realism ,  according  to  which  given  social  institutions  and  in¬
terests  are  of  supreme  significance  in  and  for  themselves,  so  that
the  highest  moral  principles  prove  at  best  to  be  simply  the  means  or
the  instrument  for  safeguarding  those  interests.  From  this  point
of  view,  at  present  extremely  prevalent,  this  or  that  concrete  form
of  social  life  is  essential  per  se ,  although  attempts  are  made  to  give
it  a  moral  justification  by  connecting  it  with  moral  norms  and
principles.  But  the  very  fact  of  seeking  a  moral  basis  for  human
society  proves  that  neither  any  concrete  form  of  social  life  nor
social  life  as  such  is  the  highest  or  the  final  expression  of  human
nature.  If  man  were  defined  as  essentially  a  social  animal  (fwov
ttoXltlkov)  and  nothing  more ,  the  intension  of  the  term  c  man  ’  would
be  very  much  narrowed  and  its  extension  would  be  considerably
increased.  Humanity  would  then  include  animals  such  as  ants,  of
whom  social  life  is  as  essential  a  characteristic  as  it  is  of  man.
Sir  John  Lubbock,  the  greatest  authority  on  the  subject,  writes  :
“  Their  nests  are  no  mere  collections  of  independent  individuals,
rror  even  temporary  associations  like  the  flocks  of  migratory  birds,
but  organised  communities  labouring  with  the  utmost  harmony
for  the  common  good.”1  These  communities  sometimes  contain
a  population  so  numerous  that,  in  the  words  of  the  same  naturalist,

1  Ants ,  Bees,  and  Wasps,  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  7th  ed.,  p.  119.

261


2в2  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  human  cities  London  and  Pekin  can  alone  be  compared  to
them.1  Far  more  important  are  the  three  following  inner
characteristics  of  the  ants’  community.  They  have  a  complex
social  organisation.  There  is  a  distinct  difference  between  differ¬
ent  communities  in  the  degree  of  that  organisation  a  difference
completely  analogous  to  the  gradual  development  in  the  foims  of
human  culture  from  the  hunting  to  the  agricultural  stage.  It
proves  that  the  social  life  of  ants  did  not  arise  in  any  accidental
or  exceptional  fashion  but  developed  according  to  certain  general
sociological  laws.  Finally,  the  social  tie  is  remarkably  strong  and
stable,  and  there  is  wonderful  practical  solidarity  between  the
members  of  the  ants’  community,  so  far  as  the  common  good  is
concerned.

With  regard  to  the  first  point,  if  division  of  labour  be  the
characteristic  feature  of  civilised  life,  it  is  impossible  to  deny
civilisation  to  ants.  Division  of  labour  is  in  their  case  carried
out  very  sharply.  They  have  very  brave  soldiers  armed  with
enormously  developed  pincer-like  jaws  by  which  they  adroitly
seize  and  snap  off  the  heads  of  their  enemies,  but  who  are  in¬
capable  of  doing  anything  else.  They  have  workmen  remarkable
for  their  skill  and  industry.  They  have  gentlemen  with  opposite
characteristics  who  go  so  far  that  they  can  neither  feed  them¬
selves  nor  move  about  and  only  know  how  to  use  other  ants
services.  Finally,  they  have  slaves  (not  to  be  confused  with
workmen2)  who  are  obtained  by  conquest  and  belong  to  other
species  of  ants,  which  fact  does  not,  however,  prevent  them  from
being  completely  devoted  to  their  masters.  Apart  from  such
division  of  labour,  the  high  degree  of  civilisation  possessed  by  ants
is  proved  by  their  keeping  a  number  of  domestic  animals  (i.e.
tamed  insects  belonging  to  other  zoological  groups),  “So  that  we
may  truly  say,”  Sir  John  Lubbock  remarks,  of  course  with  some
exaggeration,  “  that  our  English  ants  possess  a  much  greater  variety
of  domestic  animals  than  we  do  ourselves.”  3

Some  of  these  domestic  insects  carefully  brought  up  by  ants
serve  for  food  (in  particular  the  plant-lice  aphidae ,  which  Linnaeus

1  Ants ,  Bees ,  and  Wasps,  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,  7th  ed.,  p.  119.

2  Working  ants  (like  working  bees)  do  not  form  a  distinct  species  ;  they  are  de¬
scended  from  the  common  queen  but  are  sexually  under-developed.

8  Ibid.  p.  73.


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  263

calls  ants’  cows  ( Aphis  formicarum  vacca ) ;  others  perform  certain
necessary  work  in  the  community,  e.g.  act  as  dustmen  ;  the  third,
in  Lubbock’s  opinion,  are  kept  simply  for  amusement  like  our
pug-dogs  or  canaries.  The  entomologist  Andr£  has  made  a  list
of  584  species  of  insects  which  are  usually  found  in  ants’  com¬
munities.

At  the  present  time  many  large  and  well-populated  communities
of  ants  live  chiefly  on  the  large  stores  of  vegetable  products  they
collect.  Crowds  of  working  ants  skilfully  and  systematically  cut
blades  of  grass  and  stems  of  leaves — reap  them,  as  it  were.  But
this  semblance  of  agriculture  is  neither  their  only  nor  their  original
means  of  subsistence.  “We  find,”  writes  Lubbock,  “in  the
different  species  of  ants  different  conditions  of  life,  curiously
answering  to  the  earlier  stages  of  human  progress.  For  instance,
some  species,  such  as  Formica  fusca ,  live  principally  on  the  produce
of  the  chase  ;  for  though  they  feed  partly  on  the  honey-dew  of
aphides,  they  have  not  domesticated  those  insects.  These  ants
probably  retain  the  habits  once  common  to  all  ants.  They  resemble
the  lower  races  of  men,  who  subsist  mainly  by  hunting.  Like
them  they  frequent  woods  and  wilds,  live  in  comparatively  small
communities,  and  the  instincts  of  collective  action  are  but  little
developed  among  them.  They  hunt  singly,  and  their  battles  are
single  combats,  like  those  of  the  Homeric  heroes.  Such  species
as  Lassius  flavus  represent  a  distinctly  higher  type  of  social  life  ;
they  show  more  skill  in  architecture,  may  literally  be  said  to  have
domesticated  certain  species  of  aphides,  and  may  be  compared  to
the  pastoral  stage  of  human  progress,  to  the  races  which  live  on  the
produce  of  their  flocks  and  herds.  Their  communities  are  more
numerous  5  they  act  much  more  in  concert  ;  their  battles  are  not
mere  single  combats,  but  they  know  how  to  act  in  combination.
I  am  disposed  to  hazard  the  conjecture  that  they  will  gradually
exterminate  the  mere  hunting  species,  just  as  savages  disappear
before  more  advanced  races.  Lastly,  the  agricultural  nations  may
be  compared  with  the  harvesting  ants.  Thus  there  seem  to  be
three  principal  types,  offering  a  curious  analogy  to  the  three  great
phases — the  hunting,  pastoral,  and  agricultural  stages  in  the  history
of  human  development.”  1

In  addition  to  the  complexity  of  social  structure  and  the

1  P.  91.


264  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

graduated  stages  in  the  development  of  culture,  ants  societies  are
also  noted,  as  has  been  said  above,  for  the  remarkable  stability  of
the  social  tie.  Our  author  continually  remarks  on  ‘  the  greatest
harmony  that  reigns  between  members  of  one  and  the  same  com¬
munity.’  This  harmony  is  exclusively  conditioned  by  the  common
good.  On  the  ground  of  many  observations  and  experiments,  Sir
John  Lubbock  proves  that  whenever  an  individual  ant  undertakes
something  useful  for  the  community  and  exceeding  its  own  powers,
e.g.  attempts  to  bring  to  the  ant-heap  a  dead  fly  or  beetle  it  has
come  across,  it  always  calls  and  finds  comrades  to  help  it.  When,
on  the  contrary,  an  individual  ant  gets  into  trouble  which  concerns
it  alone,  this  does  not  as  a  rule  excite  any  sympathy  whatever  and
no  help  is  rendered  to  it.  The  patient  scientist  had  a  number  of
times  brought  separate  ants  into  a  state  of  insensibility  by  chloroform
or  spirits  and  found  that  their  fellow-citizens  either  did  not  take  the
slightest  notice  of  the  unfortunate  ones  or  threw  them  out  as  dead.
Tender  sympathy  with  personal  grief  is  not  connected  with  any
social  function  and  therefore  does  not  form  part  of  the  idea  of  social
life  as  such.  But  the  feeling  of  civic  duty  or  the  devotion  to
general  order  are  so  great  among  ants  that  they  never  have  any
quarrels  or  civil  wars.  Their  armies  are  intended  solely  for  outside
wars.  And  even  in  the  highly  developed  communities,  which  have
a  special  class  of  dustmen  and  a  breed  of  domestic  clowns,  not  a
single  observer  could  discover  any  trace  of  organised  police  or
gendarmerie.

II

Social  life  is  at  least  as  essential  a  characteristic  of  these  insects
as  it  is  of  man.  If,  however,  we  do  not  admit  that  they  are  equal
to  ourselves — if  we  do  not  agree  to  bestow  upon  each  of  the  in¬
numerable  ants  living  in  our  forests  the  rights  of  man  and  of
citizen,  it  means  that  man  has  another  and  a  more  essential
characteristic,  one  that  is  independent  of  social  instincts  and,  on
the  contrary,  conditions  the  distinctive  character  of  human  society.
This  characteristic  consists  in  the  fact  that  each  man,  as  such,  is
a  moral  being — i.e.  a  being  who,  apart  from  his  social  utility,  has
absolute  worth  and  absolute  right  to  live  and  freely  develop  his
positive  powers.  It  directly  follows  from  this  that  no  man  under


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  265


any  conditions  and  not  for  any  reason  may  be  regarded  as  only  a  means
for  purposes  extraneous  to  himself.  We  cannot  be  merely  an
instrument  either  for  the  good  of  another  person  or  for  the  good  of  a
whole  class  or  even  for  the  so-called  common  good ,  i.e.  the  good  of
the  majority  of  men.  This  ‘common  good’  or  ‘general  utility’
has  a  claim  not  upon  man  as  a  person,  but  upon  his  activity  or
work  to  the  extent  to  which  that  work,  being  useful  for  the  com¬
munity,  secures  at  the  same  time  a  worthy  existence  to  the  worker.
The  right  of  the  person  as  such  is  based  upon  his  human  dignity
inherent  in  him  and  inalienable,  upon  the  formal  infinity  of  reason
in  every  human  being,  upon  the  fact  that  each  person  is  unique  and
individual,  and  must  therefore  be  an  end  in  himself  and  not  merely
a  means  or  an  instrument.  This  right  of  the  person  is  from  its
very  nature  unconditional ,  while  the  rights  of  the  community  with
regard  to  the  person  are  conditioned  by  the  recognition  of  his  in¬
dividual  rights.  Society,  therefore,  can  compel  a  person  to  do
something  only  through  an  act  of  his  own  will, — otherwise  it  will
not  be  a  case  of  laying  an  obligation  upon  a  person,  but  of  making
use  of  a  thing.  This  does  not  mean,  of  course  (as  one  of  my
critics  imagined),  that  in  order  to  pass  a  legal  or  administrative
measure,  the  central  power  must  ask  the  individual  consent  of  each
person.  The  moral  principle  in  its  application  to  politics  logically
involves  not  an  absurd  liberum  veto  of  this  kind,  but  the  right  of
each  responsible  person  freely  to  change  his  allegiance  as  well  as
his  religion.  In  other  words,  no  social  group  or  institution  has  a
right  forcibly  to  detain  any  one  among  its  members.

The  human  dignity  of  each  person  or  his  nature  as  a  moral
being  does  not  in  any  way  depend  upon  his  particular  qualities  or
his  social  utility.  Such  qualities  and  utility  may  determine  man’s
external  position  in  society  and  the  relative  value  set  upon  him  by
other  people  ;  they  do  not  determine  his  own  worth  and  his  human
rights.  Many  animals  are  by  nature  far  more  virtuous  than  many
human  beings.  The  conjugal  virtue  of  pigeons  and  storks,  the
maternal  love  of  hens,  the  gentleness  of  deer,  the  faithfulness  and
devotion  of  dogs,  the  good  nature  of  seals  and  dolphins,  the  industry
and  civic  virtues  of  ants  and  bees,  etc.,  are  characteristic  qualities
adorning  our  younger  brothers,  while  they  are  by  no  means  pre¬
dominant  in  the  majority  of  human  beings.  Why  is  it  then  that
it  has  never  occurred  to  any  one  to  deprive  the  most  worthless  of


266  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

men  of  his  human  rights  in  order  to  pass  them  to  the  most  excellent
of  animals  as  a  reward  for  its  virtue  ?  As  to  utility,  not  only  one
strong  horse  is  more  useful  than  a  number  of  sick  beggars,  but
even  inanimate  objects,  such  as  the  printing-press  or  the  steam-
boiler,  have  undoubtedly  been  of  far  more  use  to  the  historical
process  as  a  whole  than  entire  tribes  of  savages  or  barbarians.
And  yet  if  {per  impossibile)  Gutenberg  and  Watt  had,  for  the  sake
of  their  great  inventions,  intentionally  and  consciously  to  sacrifice
the  life  even  of  a  single  savage  or  barbarian,  the  usefulness  of  their
work  would  not  prevent  their  action  from  being  decidedly  con¬
demned  as  immoral— unless  indeed  the  view  be  taken  that  the
purpose  justifies  the  means.

If  the  common  good  or  the  general  happiness  is  to  have  the
significance  of  a  moral  principle,  they  must  be  in  the  full  sense
general,  i.e.  they  must  refer  not  merely  to  many  or  to  the
majority  of  men  but  to  all  without  exception.  That  which  is
truly  the  good  of  all  is  for  that  very  reason  the  good  of  each —
no  one  is  excluded  and,  therefore,  in  serving  such  a  social  good  as
an  end,  the  individual  does  not  thereby  become  merely  a  means
or  an  instrument  of  something  extraneous  and  foreign  to  himself.
True  society  which  recognises  the  absolute  right  of  each  person
is  not  the  negative  limit  but  the  positive  complement  of  the
individual.  In  serving  it  with  whole-hearted  devotion,  the  in¬
dividual  does  not  lose  but  realises  his  absolute  worth  and  signifi¬
cance.  For  when  taken  in  isolation  he  is  only  potentially  absolute
and  infinite,  and  becomes  so  actually  only  by  being  inwardly
united  to  all.1

The  only  moral  norm  is  the  principle  of  human  dignity  or  of  the
absolute  worth  of  each  individual ,  in  virtue  of  which  society  is
determined  as  the  inward  and  free  harmony  of  all.2  It  is  just  as  im¬
possible  that  there  should  be  many  moral  norms  in  the  strict  sense
of  the  term,  as  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  many  supreme
goods  or  many  moralities.  It  is  not  difficult  to  show  that  religion
(as  concretely  given  in  history),  family,  and  property  do  not  as
such  contain  a  moral  norm  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  A

1  See  above,  Part  III.,  Chapter  I.,  ‘The  Individual  and  Society.’

2  This  position  is  logically  established  in  moral  philosophy  in  its  elementary  part,
which,  thanks  to  Kant,  became  as  strictly  scientific  in  its  own  sphere  as  pure  mechanics
is  in  another.


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  267

thing  which,  taken  by  itself,  may  or  may  not  be  moral,  must
obviously  be  determined  as  one  or  the  other  by  means  of  something
else.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  a  moral  norm  on  its  own  account
— that  is,  it  cannot  give  to  other  things  a  character  which
it  itself  does  not  possess.  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  religion
may  or  may  not  be  moral.  Such  religions  as,  for  instance,  the  cult
of  Moloch  or  Astarte  (the  survivals  or  analogies  of  which  are  to
be  met  now  and  then  to  this  day),  cannot  possibly  serve  as  a  moral
norm  of  anything,  since  their  very  essence  is  directly  opposed  to
all  morality.  When,  therefore,  we  are  told  that  religion  is  the
norm  and  the  moral  foundation  of  society,  we  must  first  see
whether  religion  itself  has  a  moral  character  and  agrees  with  the
principle  of  morality  ;  and  this  means  that  the  ultimate  criterion
is  that  principle  and  not  religion  as  such.  The  only  reason  why
we  regard  Christianity  as  the  true  foundation  and  norm  of  all  that
is  good  in  the  world  is  that,  being  a  perfect  religion,  Christianity
contains  the  unconditional  moral  principle  in  itself.  But  if  a
separation  be  introduced  between  the  demand  for  moral  perfection
and  the  actual  life  of  Christian  society,  Christianity  at  once  loses
its  absolute  significance  and  becomes  historically  accidental.

If  now  we  take  the  family,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  family
too  may  or  may  not  be  moral,  both  in  individual  cases  and  in  the
whole  given  structure  of  society.  Thus  the  family  of  ancient
Greece  had  no  moral  character.  I  refer  not  to  the  exceptional
heroic  families  in  which  wives  murdered  their  husbands  and  were
killed  by  their  sons,  or  sons  killed  their  fathers  and  married  their
mothers,  but  to  the  usual  normal  family  of  a  cultured  Athenian,
which  required  as  its  necessary  complement  the  institution  of
heta2ras  and  worse  things  than  that.  The  Arabic  family  (before
Islam),  in  which  new-born  girl  babies,  if  there  were  more  than
one  or  two  of  them,  were  buried  alive,  had  no  moral  character
either,  though  it  was  stable  in  its  way.  T  he  very  stable  family
of  the  Romans  in  which  the  head  of  the  house  had  the  right  of
life  and  death  over  his  wife  and  children,  also  cannot  be  said  to
have  been  moral.  Thus  the  family,  like  religion,  has  no  intrinsic¬
ally  moral  character,  and,  before  it  can  become  the  norm  for  any¬
thing  else,  must  itself  be  put  upon  a  moral  basis.

As  to  property,  to  recognise  it  as  the  moral  foundation  of
normal  society,  i.e.  as  something  sacred  and  inviolable,  is  neither


268  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

logically  nor,  in  my  own  case  (and  I  think  in  that  of  my  con¬
temporaries),  psychologically  possible.  The  first  awakening  of
conscious  life  and  thought  in  our  generation  was  accompanied  by
the  thunder  of  the  destruction  of  property  in  its  two  fundamental
historical  forms  of  serfdom  and  slavery.  And  this  abolition  of
property,  both  in  America  and  in  Russia,  was  demanded  and  ac¬
complished  in  the  name  of  social  morality .  The  alleged  inviolability
was  brilliantly  disproved  by  the  fact  of  so  successful  a  violation,
approved  by  the  conscience  of  all.  It  is  obvious  that  property  is
a  thing  which  stands  in  need  of  justification,  and  so  far  from  con¬
taining  a  moral  norm,  demands  such  a  norm  for  itself

All  historical  institutions — whether  religious  or  social — are  of
a  mixed  character.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  moral  norm
can  only  be  found  in  a  pure  principle,  and  not  in  a  mixed  fact.
A  principle  which  unconditionally  affirms  that  which  ought  to  be
is  something  essentially  inviolable.  It  may  be  rejected  and
disobeyed,  but  this  is  detrimental  not  to  the  principle  but  to  the
person  who  rejects  and  disobeys  it.  The  law  which  proclaims
‘  you  ought  to  respect  the  human  dignity  of  each  person,  you  ought
to  make  no  one  a  means  or  an  instrument,’  does  not  depend  upon
any  fact,  does  not  affirm  any  fact,  and  therefore  cannot  be  affected
by  any  fact.

The  principle  of  the  absolute  worth  of  human  personality
does  not  depend  upon  any  one  or  anything  ;  but  the  moral  char¬
acter  of  societies  and  institutions  depends  entirely  upon  it.  We
know  in  ancient  and  modern  heathendom  of  highly  civilised  great
national  bodies  in  which  the  institutions  of  family,  of  religion,  of
property  were  extremely  stable,  but  which  nevertheless  were
devoid  of  the  moral  character  of  a  human  society.  At  best  they
resembled  communities  of  wise  insects  in  which  the  mechanism
of  the  good  order  is  present,  but  that  which  the  mechanism  is
to  subserve — the  good  itself — is  absent,  for  the  bearer  of  it,  the
free  personality,  is  not  there.


Ill

A  vague  and  distorted  consciousness  of  the  essence  of  morality
and  of  the  true  norm  of  human  society  exists  even  where  the
moral  principle  has  apparently  no  application.  Thus,  in  the


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  269

despotic  monarchies  of  the  East,  the  real  man  or  person  was
rightly  regarded  as  possessed  of  full  rights,  but  such  dignity  was
ascribed  to  one  man  only.  Thus  transformed,  however,  into  an
exclusive  and  externally  determined  privilege,  human  right  and
worth  loses  its  moral  character.  The  sole  bearer  of  it  ceases
to  be  a  person,  and  since  as  a  concrete  real  being  it  cannot
become  a  pure  ideal,  it  becomes  an  idol.  The  moral  principle
demands  of  the  individual  that  he  should  respect  human  dignity
as  such — that  is,  should  respect  it  in  other  people  as  in  himself.
It  is  only  in  treating  others  as  persons  that  the  individual  is
himself  determined  as  a  person.  The  Eastern  despot,  however,
finds  in  his  world  no  persons  possessed  of  rights,  but  only  rightless
things.  And  since  it  is  thus  impossible  for  him  to  have  personal
moral  relations  to  any  one,  he  inevitably  himself  loses  his  personal
moral  character,  and  becomes  a  thing — the  most  important,
sacred,  divine,  worshipped  thing — in  short,  a  fetish  or  an  idol.

In  the  civic  communities  of  the  classical  world  the  fulness  of
rights  was  the  privilege  not  of  one  man  but  of  a  few  (in  the
aristocracies)  or  of  many  (in  the  democracies).  This  extension
was  very  important  for  it  rendered  possible,  though  within  narrow
limits  only,  independent  moral  interaction  of  individuals,  and
consequently  personal  self-consciousness,  and  realised,  at  any  rate
for  the  given  social  union,  the  idea  of  justice  or  equality  of  rights.1
But  the  moral  principle  is  in  its  essence  universal,  since  it
demands  the  recognition  of  the  absolute  inner  worth  of  man  as
such,  without  any  external  limitations.  The  communities  of  the
ancients,  however,  —  the  aristocracy  of  Sparta,  the  Athenian
demos,  and  the  peculiar  combination  of  the  two — senatus  populusque
Romanus — recognised  the  true  dignity  of  man  only  within  the
limits  of  their  civic  union.  They  were  not  therefore  societies
based  upon  the  moral  principle,  but  at  best  approached  and
anticipated  such  a  society.

This  structure  of  lire  has  more  than  merely  a  historical
interest  for  us  :  in  truth,  we  have  not  outlived  it  yet.  Consider,
indeed,  what  it  was  that  limited  the  moral  principle  and  prevented

1  In  the  despotic  monarchies  of  the  East  there  could  be  no  question  of  any  equality
of  rights—  there  was  only  the  negative  equality  of  general  rightlessness.  But  equal
distribution  of  an  injustice  does  not  render  it  just.  The  idea  of  equality  taken  in  the
abstract  is  mathematical  only,  not  ethical.


270  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

its  realisation  in  the  world  of  antiquity.  There  were  three
classes  of  men  who  were  not  recognised  as  bearers  of  any  rights  or
as  objects  of  any  duties.  They  were  therefore  in  no  sense  an  end
of  action,  were  not  included  in  the  idea  of  the  common  good  at  all,
and  were  regarded  merely  as  material  instruments  of,  or  material
obstacles  to,  that  good.  Namely,  these  were  (i)  enemies ,  i.e.
originally  all  strangers,1  then  (2)  slaves ,  and,  finally,  (3)  criminals.
In  spite  of  individual  differences  the  legalised  relation  to  these
three  categories  of  men  was  essentially  the  same,  for  it  was
equally  immoral.  There  is  no  need  to  represent  the  institution
of  slavery,  which  replaced  the  simple  slaughter  of  the  prisoners  of
war,  in  an  exaggeratedly  horrible  form.  Slaves  had  means  of
livelihood  secured  to  them,  and  on  the  whole  were  not  badly
treated.  This,  however,  was  an  accident — though  one  of  frequent
occurrence — and  not  a  duty,  and,  therefore,  had  no  moral  signi¬
ficance.  Slaves  were  valued  for  their  utility,  but  this  had  nothing
to  do  with  the  recognition  of  their  worth  as  human  beings.  In
contradistinction  to  these  useful  things,  which  ought  to  be  looked
after  for  reasons  of  expediency,  external  and  internal  enemies,  as
things  unquestionably  harmful ,  were  to  be  mercilessly  extermin¬
ated.  With  regard,  however,  to  the  enemy  in  war,  mercilessness
might  be  tempered  by  the  respect  for  his  force  or  the  fear  of
revenge  ;  but  with  regard  to  defenceless  criminals,  real  or
supposed,  cruelty  knew  no  limits.  In  cultured  Athens,  persons
accused  of  ordinary  crimes  were  tortured  as  soon  as  they  were
taken  into  custody,  previously  to  any  trial.

All  these  facts — war,  slavery,  executions — were  legitimate  for
the  ancient  world,  in  the  sense  that  they  logically  followed  from

1  Hospitality  to  peaceful  strangers  is  a  fact  of  very  ancient  date,  but  can  hardly  be
said  to  be  primitive.  In  Greece  its  founder  was  supposed  to  be  Zeus — the  repre¬
sentative  of  the  third  generation  of  gods  (after  Chronos  and  ІІгапиз).  Before  being  a
guest  in  the  sense  of  simply  a  friendly  visitor,  the  stranger  was  a  ‘guest  ’  in  the  sense  of
‘  merchant,’  and  earlier  still  he  was  only  regarded  in  the  sense  of  the  Latin  Aostis
(enemy).  In  times  still  more  ancient,  accounts  of  which  have  been  handed  down  in
classical  tradition,  a  good  guest  was  met  with  still  greater  joy  than  in  the  later,
hospitable  times,  but  only  as  a  savoury  dish  at  the  family  feast.  Apart  from  such
extremes,  the  prevalent  attitude  to  strangers  in  primitive  society  was  no  doubt
similar  to  that  observed  by  Sir  John  Lubbock  among  ants.  When  a  stranger  ant
belonging  to  a  different  community,  though  one  of  the  same  species,  came  to  an
ant  heap,  ants  would  drag  it  about  for  a  while  by  its  antennae  till  it  was  half-dead,  and
then  either  finish  it  off  or  drive  it  away.


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  271

the  view  held  by  every  one,  and  were  conditioned  by  the  general
level  of  consciousness.  If  the  worth  of  man  as  an  independent
individual  and  the  fulness  of  his  rights  and  dignity  depend
exclusively  upon  his  belonging  to  a  certain  civic  union,  the
natural  consequence  is  that  men  who  do  not  belong  to  that  union
and  are  strange  and  hostile  to  it,  or  men  who,  though  they  belong
to  it,  violate  its  laws  and  are  a  menace  to  common  safety,  are  by
that  very  fact  deprived  of  human  rights  and  dignity,  and  that
with  regard  to  them  all  things  are  lawful.

This  point  of  view,  however,  came  to  be  changed.  The
development  of  ethical  thought  first  among  the  Sophists  and  in
Socrates,  then  among  the  Greco-Roman  Stoics,  the  work  of  Roman
lawyers  and  the  very  character  of  the  Roman  Empire,  which
embraced  many  peoples  and  nations,  and  therefore  inevitably
widened  the  theoretical  and  practical  outlook, — all  this  has
gradually  effaced  the  old  limits  and  established  a  consciousness  of
the  moral  principle  in  its  formal  universality  and  infinity.  At  the
same  time,  in  the  East  the  religiously  moral  teaching  of  the  Jewish
prophets  was  evolving  a  living  ideal  of  absolute  human  dignity.
And  while  a  Roman  in  the  theatre  of  the  eternal  city  proclaimed,
by  the  mouth  of  the  actor,  the  new  word  ‘  homo  sum  ’  as  the
expression  of  the  highest  personal  dignity,  instead  of  the  old
‘  civ  is  Romanus]  another  Roman  in  a  remote  Eastern  province
and  at  a  scene  more  tragic  completed  the  statement  of  this  new
principle  by  simply  pointing  to  the  actual  personal  incarnation  of
it  :  Ecce  homo!

The  inner  change  which  took  place  in  humanity  as  the  result
of  the  interaction  of  the  events  in  Palestine  and  the  Greco-
Roman  theories  ought,  it  would  seem,  to  have  been  the  beginning
of  an  entirely  new  order  of  things.  Indeed,  a  complete  regenera¬
tion  of  the  physical  world  was  expected  ;  and  yet  the  social  and
moral  world  of  heathendom  still  stands  essentially  unchanged.
This  will  not  be  an  object  for  grief  and  wonder  if  the  problem  of
the  moral  regeneration  of  humanity  is  considered  in  its  full
scope.  It  is  clear  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  is  foretold  in
the  Gospels,1  that  this  problem  can  only  be  solved  by  a  gradual
process  before  the  final  catastrophe  comes.  The  process  of  such
preparation  is  not  yet  completed,  but  is  being  carried  on,  and

1  In  the  parables  of  the  leaven,  of  wheat  and  tares,  of  the  mustard  seed,  etc.


272  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

there  is  no  doubt  that  from  the  fifteenth  and  especially  from
the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  has  been  a  noticeable
change  in  the  rate  of  the  historical  progress.  It  is  important
from  the  practically  moral  point  of  view  to  make  clear  to  ourselves
what  has  been  done  already  and  what  still  remains  to  be  done  in
certain  definite  directions.


IV

When  men  of  different  nationality  and  social  position  were
spiritually  united  in  worshipping  a  foreigner  and  a  beggar— the
Galilean  who  was  executed  as  a  criminal  in  the  name  of  national
and  class  interests — international  wars,  rightlessness  of  the  masses,
and  executions  of  criminals  were  inwardly  undermined.  Granted
that  the  inner  change  took  eighteen  centuries  to  manifest  itself
even  to  a  small  extent  ;  granted  that  its  manifestation  is  becoming
noticeable  just  at  the  time  when  its  first  mover  the  Christian
faith— is  weakened,  and  seems  to  disappear  from  the  surface  of
consciousness — still,  man’s  inner  attitude  towards  the  old  heathen
foundations  of  society  is  changing,  and  the  change  shows  itself
more  and  more  in  his  life.  Whatever  the  thoughts  of  individual
men  may  be,  advanced  humanity  as  a  collective  whole  has
reached  a  degree  of  moral  maturity,  a  state  of  feeling  and
consciousness,  which  is  beginning  to  make  impossible  for  it  things
which  to  the  ancient  world  were  natural.  And  even  individual
men,  if  they  have  not  renounced  reason  altogether,  hold,  in  the
form  of  rational  conviction  if  not  in  the  form  of  religious  faith,
the  moral  principle  which  does  not  permit  the  legalisation  of
collective  crimes.  The  very  fact  of  the  remotest  parts  of
humanity  coming  into  contact,  of  getting  to  know  one  another
and  becoming  mutually  connected,  does  much  to  abolish  the
barriers  and  estrangement  between  men,  natural  from  the  narrow
point  of  view  of  the  ancients,  for  whom  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar
were  the  extreme  limit  of  the  universe,  and  the  banks  of  the
Dnieper  or  the  Don  were  populated  by  men  with  dogs’  heads.

International  wars  are  not  yet  abolished,  but  the  point  of  view
with  regard  to  them  has  changed  in  a  striking  degree,  especially
of  late.  The  fear  of  war  has  become  the  predominant  motive  of
international  policy,  and  no  Government  would  venture  to  confess


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  273

to  harbouring  plans  of  conquest.  Slavery  in  the  proper  sense  has
been  finally  and  wholly  abolished.  Other  crude  forms  of  personal
dependence  which  survived  till  the  last  century,  and,  in  places,  till
the  middle  of  the  present,  have  also  been  done  away  with.  What
remains  is  only  the  indirect  economic  slavery,  but  this  too  is  a
question  whose  turn  has  come.  Finally,  the  point  of  view  with
regard  to  criminals  has  since  the  eighteenth  century  been  clearly
tending  to  become  more  moral  and  Christian.  And  to  think
that  this  progress — belated,  but  quick  and  decisive — along  the
path  mapped  out  nineteen  centuries  ago,  should  cause  anxiety
for  the  moral  foundations  of  society  !  In  truth,  a  false  conception
of  these  foundations  is  the  chief  obstacle  to  a  thorough  moral
change  in  the  social  life  and  consciousness.  Religion,  family,
property  cannot  as  such,  that  is,  simply  as  existent  facts,  be  the
norm  or  the  moral  foundation  of  society.  The  problem  is  not
to  preserve  these  institutions  at  any  cost  in  statu  quo  but  to
make  them  conformable  to  the  one  and  only  moral  standard,  so
that  they  might  be  wholly  permeated  by  the  one  moral  principle.

This  principle  is  essentially  universal,  the  same  for  all.
Now,  religion  as  such  need  not  be  universal,  and  all  religions
of  antiquity  were  strictly  national.  Christianity,  however,  being
the  embodiment  of  the  absolute  moral  ideal,  is  as  universal  as
the  moral  principle  itself,  and  at  the  beginning  it  had  this
character.  But  historical  institutions,  which  in  the  course  of
history  came  to  be  connected  with  it,  ceased  to  be  universal
and  therefore  lost  their  pure  and  all-embracing  moral  character-
And  so  long  as  we  affirm  our  religion,  first,  in  its  denominational
peculiarity,  and  then  only  as  universal  Christianity,  we  deprive  it
both  of  a  sound  logical  basis  and  of  moral  significance,  and  make
it  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  spiritual  regeneration  of  humanity.
Further,  universality  expresses  itself  not  only  by  the  absence  of
external,  national,  denominational  and  other  limitations,  but  still
more  by  freedom  from  inner  limitations.  To  be  truly  universal,
religion  must  not  separate  itself  from  intellectual  enlightenment,
from  science,  from  social  and  political  progress.  A  religion
which  fears  all  these  things  has  obviously  no  faith  in  its  own
power  and  is  inwardly  permeated  with  unbelief.  While  claiming
to  be  the  sole  moral  norm  of  society,  it  fails  to  fulfil  the  most
elementary  moral  condition  of  being  genuine.


T


274  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

The  positive  significance  of  the  family ,  in  virtue  of  which  it
may,  in  a  sense,  be  the  moral  norm  of  society,  is  apparent  from
the  following  consideration.  It  is  physically  impossible  for  a
single  individual  concretely  to  realise  in  his  everyday  life  his  moral
relation  to  all.  However  sincerely  a  man  may  recognise  the
absolute  demands  of  the  moral  ideal,  he  cannot,  in  real  life,
apply  these  demands  to  all  human  beings,  for  the  simple  reason
that  the  ‘all’  do  not  concretely  exist  for  him.  He  cannot
give  practical  proof  of  his  respect  for  the  human  dignity  of  the
millions  of  men  about  whom  he  knows  nothing  ;  he  cannot
make  them  in  concreto  the  positive  end  of  his  activity.  And
yet,  unless  the  moral  demand  is  completely  realised  in  perceptible
personal  relations,  it  remains  an  abstract  principle  which
enlightens  the  mind,  but  does  not  regenerate  the  life  of  man.
The  solution  of  this  contradiction  is  that  moral  relations  ought
to  be  fully  realised  within  a  certain  limited  environment  in
which  each  man  is  placed  in  his  concrete  everyday  existence.
This  is  precisely  the  true  function  of  the  family.  Each  member
of  it  is  not  only  intended  and  meant  to  be,  but  actually  is,  an
end  for  all  the  others  ;  each  is  perceptibly  recognised  to  have
absolute  significance,  each  is  irreplaceable.  From  this  point  of
view  the  family  is  the  pattern  and  the  elementary  constitutive  cell
of  universal  brotherhood  or  of  human  society  as  it  ought  to  be.
But  in  order  to  preserve  such  a  significance,  the  family  obviously
must  not  become  the  embodiment  of  mutual  egoism.  It  must
be  the  first  stage  from  which  each  of  its  members  may  be  always
able  to  ascend,  as  much  as  in  him  lies,  to  a  greater  realisation  of
the  moral  principle  in  the  world.  The  family  is  either  the  crown¬
ing  stage  of  egoism  or  the'  beginning  of  world- wide  union.  To
uphold  it  in  the  first  sense  does  not  mean  to  uphold  a  ‘  moral
foundation  ’  of  society.

Property  as  such  has  no  moral  significance.  No  one  is
morally  bound  either  to  be  rich  or  to  enrich  other  people.
General  equality  of  property  is  as  impossible  and  unnecessary
as  sameness  in  the  colouring  or  in  the  quantity  of  hair.  There
is  one  condition,  however,  which  renders  the  question  as  to
the  distribution  of  property  a  moral  question.  It  is  inconsistent
with  human  dignity  and  with  the  moral  norm  of  society  that
a  person  should  be  unable  to  support  his  existence,  or,  that  in


THE  MORAL  NORM  OF  SOCIAL  LIFE  275

order  to  do  so  he  should  spend  so  much  time  and  strength  as
to  have  none  left  for  looking  after  his  human,  intellectual  and
moral  improvement.  In  that  case  man  ceases  to  be  an  end  for
himself  and  for  others,  and  becomes  merely  a  material  instrument
of  economic  production,  on  a  level  with  soulless  machines.
And  since  the  moral  principle  unconditionally  demands  that  we
should  respect  the  human  dignity  of  all  and  each,  and  regard
every  one  as  an  end  in  himself  and  not  only  as  a  means,  a  society
that  desires  to  be  morally  normal  cannot  remain  indifferent  to
such  a  position  of  any  one  of  its  members.  It  is  its  direct  duty
to  secure  to  each  and  all  a  certain  minimum  of  well-being,  just
as  much  as  is  necessary  to  support  a  worthy  human  existence.
The  way  to  attain  this  is  a  problem  for  economics  and  not
for  ethics.  In  any  case  it  ought  to  be,  and  therefore  it  can
be,  done.

All  human  society,  and  especially  society  that  professes  to
be  Christian,  must,  if  it  is  to  go  on  existing  and  to  attain  to  a
higher  dignity,  conform  to  the  moral  standard.  What  matters  is
not  the  external  preservation  of  certain  institutions,  which  may
be  good  or  bad,  but  a  sincere  and  consistent  striving  inwardly  to
improve  all  institutions  and  social  relations  which  may  be  good,
by  subordinating  them  more  and  more  to  the  one  unconditional
moral  ideal  of  the  free  union  of  all  in  the  perfect  good.

Christianity  put  forward  this  ideal  as  a  practical  task  for
all  peoples  and  nations,  answered  for  its  being  realisable — given
a  good  will  on  our  part — and  promised  help  from  above  in  the
execution  of  it — help,  of  which  there  is  sufficient  evidence  both
in  personal  and  in  historical  experience.  But  just  because
the  task  Christianity  sets  before  us  is  a  moral  and  therefore  a
free  one,  the  supreme  Good  cannot  help  man  by  thwarting  the
evil  will  or  externally  removing  the  obstacles  which  that  will
puts  in  the  way  of  the  realisation  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
Humanity  as  represented  by  individuals  and  nations  must  itself
outlive  and  overcome  these  obstacles,  which  are  to  be  found  both
in  the  individual  evil  will  and  in  the  complex  effects  of  the
collective  evil  will.  This  is  the  reason  why  progress  in  the
Christian  world  is  so  slow,  and  why  Christianity  appears  to  be
lifeless  and  inactive.


CHAPTER  V

THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  FROM  THE  MORAL  POINT  OF  VIEW

T  he  work  of  embodying  perfect  morality  in  the  collective
whole  of  mankind  is  hindered,  in  addition  to  individual  passions
and  vices,  by  the  inveterate  forms  of  collective  evil  which  act
like  a  contagion.  In  spite  of  the  slow  but  sure  progress  in  the
life  of  humanity,  that  evil  shows  itself  now,  as  it  did  of  old,  in
a  threefold  hostility,  a  threefold  immoral  relation  —  between
different  nations,  between  society  and  the  criminal,  between
the  different  classes  of  society.  Listen  to  the  way  in  which  the
French  speak  of  the  Germans,  the  Portuguese  of  the  Dutch,
the  Chinese  of  the  English,  and  Americans  of  the  Chinese.
Consider  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  the  audience  at  a  criminal
trial,  the  behaviour  of  a  crowd  using  lynch  law  in  America,
or  settling  accounts  with  a  witch  or  a  horse-stealer  in  Russia.
Hear  or  read  the  remarks  exchanged  between  socialist  workmen
and  representatives  of  the  propertied  classes  at  meetings,  and  in
the  newspapers.  It  will  then  become  evident  that  apart  from
the  anomalies  of  the  personal  will  we  must  also  take  into  account
the  power  of  the  superpersonal  or  collective  hostility  in  its  three
aspects.  The  national,  the  penal  and  the  socially  economic
questions  have,  independently  of  all  considerations  of  internal  and
external  policy,  a  special  interest  for  the  moral  consciousness.
To  deal  with  them  from  this  point  of  view  is  all  the  more
essential,  because  a  new  and  worse  evil  has  been  added  of  late  to
the  calamity  of  the  hereditary  disease — namely,  the  rash  attempt
to  cure  it  by  preaching  new  forms  of  social  violence  on  the  one
hand,  and  a  passive  disintegration  of  humanity  into  its  individual
units  on  the  other.


276


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION


2  77


I

Man’s  relation  to  nationality  is  in  our  day  generally  determined
in  two  ways  :  as  nationalistic  or  as  cosmopolitan.  There  may  be
many  shades  and  transition  stages  in  the  domain  of  feeling  and  of
taste,  but  there  are  only  two  clear  and  definite  points  of  view.
The  first  may  be  formulated  as  follows  :  We  must  love  our  own
nation  and  serve  it  by  all  the  means  at  our  command ,  and  to  other
nations  we  may  be  indifferent.  If  their  interests  conflict  with  ours ,
we  must  take  up  a  hostile  attitude  to  the  foreign  nations.  The  essence
of  the  cosmopolitan  view  is  this  :  Nationality  is  merely  a  natural
fact ,  devoid  of  all  moral  significance  ;  we  have  no  duties  to  the  nation
as  such  ( neither  to  our  own  nor  to  any  other )  ;  our  duty  is  only  to
individual  men  without  any  distinction  of  nationality.

It  is  at  once  apparent  that  neither  view  expresses  the  right
attitude  towards  the  fact  of  national  difference.  The  first  ascribes
to  this  fact  an  absolute  significance  which  it  cannot  possess,  and
the  second  deprives  it  of  all  significance.  It  will  be  easily  seen
also  that  each  view  finds  its  justification  solely  in  the  negative
aspect  of  the  opposite  view.

No  rational  believer  in  cosmopolitanism  would,  of  course,  find
fault  with  the  adherents  of  nationalism  for  loving  their  own
country.  He  would  only  blame  them  for  thinking  that  it  is
permissible,  and  in  some  cases  even  obligatory,  to  hate  and  despise
men  of  a  different  race  and  nationality.  In  the  same  way  the
most  ardent  nationalist  will  not,  unless  he  is  altogether  devoid  of
reason,  attack  the  champions  of  cosmopolitanism  for  demanding
justice  for  other  nations,  but  will  accuse  them  of  being  indifferent
to  their  own.  So  that  in  each  of  these  views  even  its  direct
opponents  cannot  help  distinguishing  the  good  side  from  the  bad,
and  the  question  naturally  arises  whether  these  two  sides  are
necessarily  connected.  Does  love  for  one’s  own  people  necessarily
imply  the  view  that  all  means  of  serving  it  are  permissible,  and
justify  an  indifferent  and  hostile  relation  to  other  nations  ?  Does
the  same  moral  relation  to  all  human  beings  necessarily  mean
indifference  to  nationality  in  general,  and  to  one’s  own  in
particular  ?

The  first  question  is  easily  solved  by  analysing  the  content  of


278  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  idea  of  true  patriotism  or  love  for  one’s  country.  The
necessity  for  such  an  elementary  analysis  will  be  recognised  by
every  one.  For  every  one  will  agree  that  patriotism  may  be
irrational ,  do  harm  instead  of  the  intended  good,  and  lead  nations
to  disaster  ;  that  patriotism  may  be  vain ,  and  based  on  unfounded
pretensions  ;  and,  finally,  that  it  may  be  directly  false ,  and  serve
merely  as  a  cloak  for  low  and  selfish  motives.  In  what,  then,
does  true  or  real  patriotism  consist  ?

When  we  really  love  some  one,  we  wish  and  strive  to  obtain
for  them  both  moral  and  material  good, — the  latter,  however,
only  on  condition  of  the  former.  To  every  one  whom  I  love
I  wish,  among  other  things,  material  prosperity,  provided,  of
course,  that  it  is  attained  by  honourable  means  and  made  good
use  of.  But  if,  when  my  friend  is  in  need,  I  were  to  assist  him
in  making  his  fortune  by  fraud,  even  supposing  that  he  would
be  certain  to  escape  punishment — or,  if  he  were  a  writer,  and  I
advised  him  to  increase  his  literary  fame  by  a  successful  plagiarism,

I  should  be  rightly  considered  by  every  one  to  be  either  a  madman
or  a  scoundrel,  and  certainly  not  a  good  friend.

It  is  clear  then  that  the  goods  which  love  leads  us  to  desire  for
our  neighbours  differ  both  in  their  external  character  and  in  their
inner  meaning  for  the  will.  Spiritual  goods  exclude,  by  the  very
conception  of  them,  the  possibility  of  being  attained  by  bad
means  ;  one  cannot  steal  moral  dignity,  or  plunder  justice,  or
appropriate  benevolence.  These  goods  are  unconditionally  desirable.
Material  goods,  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  admit  of  bad
means,  are  on  the  contrary  desirable  on  condition  that  such  means
are  not  used,  i.e.  on  condition  that  material  ends  are  subordinate
to  the  moral  end.

Up  to  a  certain  point  every  one  will  agree  with  this  element¬
ary  truth.  Every  one  would  grant  that  it  is  wrong  to  enrich
oneself  at  the  cost  of  a  crime,  or  to  enrich  a  friend,  one’s  own  or
his  family,  or  even  one’s  town  or  province  at  the  cost  of  a  crime.
But  this  elementary  moral  truth  which  is  as  clear  as  day  suddenly
becomes  dim  and  altogether  obscure  as  soon  as  we  get  to  one's
country.  Everything  becomes  permissible  in  the  service  of  its
supposed  interests,  the  purpose  justifies  the  means,  the  black
becomes  white,  falsehood  is  preferred  to  truth,  violence  is  extolled
as  a  virtue.  Nationality  here  becomes  the  final  end,  the  highest


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  279

good  and  the  standard  of  good  for  human  activity.  Such  undue
glorification  is,  however,  purely  illusory,  and  is  in  truth  degrading
to  the  nation.  The  highest  human  goods  cannot,  as  we  have
seen,  be  attained  by  immoral  means.  By  admitting  bad  means
into  our  service  of  the  nation  and  by  justifying  them  we  limit  the
national  interest  to  the  lower  material  goods  which  may  be
obtained  and  preserved  by  wrong  and  evil  methods.  This  is  a
direct  injury  to  the  very  nation  we  wish  to  serve.  It  means
transferring  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  national  life  from  the
higher  sphere  to  the  lower,  and  serving  national  egoism  under
the  guise  of  serving  the  nation.  The  moral  worthlessness  of  such
nationalism  is  proved  by  history  itself.  There  is  abundant
evidence  that  nations  prospered  and  were  great  only  so  long  as
they  did  not  make  themselves  their  final  end,  but  served  the
higher,  the  universal  ideal  ends.  History  shows  also  that  the
very  conception  of  the  nation  as  a  final  and  ultimate  bearer  of
the  collective  life  of  humanity  is  ill-founded.

II

The  division  of  humanity  into  definite  and  stable  groups
possessing  a  national  character  is  a  fact  which  is  neither  universal
nor  first  in  the  order  of  time.  Not  to  speak  of  savages  and
barbarians,  who  are  still  living  in  separate  families,  clans  or
nomadic  bands,  division  into  nations  did  not  exclusively  pre¬
dominate  even  in  the  civilised  part  of  humanity  when  the  tribe
was  finally  superseded  by  the  ‘  city  ’  or  ‘  country.’  The  country
and  the  nation,  though  more  or  less  closely  associated,  do  not  alto¬
gether  coincide.  In  the  ancient  world  we  find  hardly  any  clear
division  into  nations  at  all.  We  find  either  independent  civic  com¬
munities,  i.e.  groups  smaller  than  the  nation  and  united  politically
only  and  not  by  the  bond  of  nationality — such  as  the  cities  of
Phoenicia,  Greece  and  Italy — or,  on  the  contrary,  groups  larger
than  the  nation — the  so-called  c  world  empires  ’  which  included
many  peoples,  from  the  Assyro-Babylonic  down  to  the  Roman.
In  these  crude  precursors  of  the  universal  unity  of  mankind
national  considerations  had  merely  a  material  significance  and
were  not  the  determining  factor.  The  idea  of  nationality
as  the  supreme  principle  of  life  found  neither  the  time  nor


28o  the  justification  of  the  good

the  place  for  its  application  in  the  ancient  world.  The
opposition  between  one’s  own  people  and  aliens  was  then
far  more  sharp  and  ruthless  than  it  is  now,  but  it  was
not  determined  by  nationality.  In  the  kingdom  of  Darius  and
Xerxes  men  of  different  race  and  nationality  were  all  regarded  as
members  of  one  body,  since  they  were  equally  subject  to  one
common  authority  and  one  supreme  law.  Enemies  or  aliens  were
the  men  who  were  not  yet  brought  under  the  rule  of  ‘the  great
king.’  On  the  other  hand,  in  Greece,  the  fact  that  Spartans  and
Athenians  spoke  the  same  language,  had  the  same  gods  and  realised
that  they  belonged  to  the  same  nation,  did  not  prevent  them  from
treating  each  other  as  foreigners  throughout  their  history,  or  even
from  being  mortal  enemies.  Similar  relations  held  between  other
cities  or  civic  communities  of  Greece,  and  only  once  in  a  thousand
years  did  the  true  national  or  pan-Greek  patriotism  actively  show
itself,  namely,  during  the  Persian  war.  The  coincidence — and  that
only  an  approximate  one — between  practical  solidarity  and  national
character  hardly  lasted  for  forty  years,  and  was  superseded  by  a
fierce  and  prolonged  slaughter  of  the  Greeks  by  the  Greeks  during
the  Peloponnesian  war.  This  state  of  deadly  struggle  between
small  communities  belonging  to  one  and  the  same  nation  was  con¬
sidered  perfectly  normal  and  continued  up  to  the  moment  when
all  these  communities  together  lost  their  independence.  They
lost  it  not  in  order  to  form  a  national  unity,  but  in  order  that  the
Greek  nation  might,  under  the  power  of  foreign  kings,  immediately
pass  from  its  state  of  political  disruption  to  becoming  the  uniting
and  civilising  element  in  the  whole  of  the  ancient  world.  The
opposition  between  fellow-citizens  and  aliens  (j.e.  inhabitants  of
another  city,  though  a  Greek  one)  had  now  lost  its  meaning  as  a
supreme  political  principle,  and  was  not  replaced  by  the  opposition
between  their  own  and  other  nations.  What  remained  was  the
wider  opposition  between  Hellenism  and  barbarism,  meaning  by
the  former  participation  in  the  higher  intellectual  and  aesthetic
culture,  and  not  necessarily  the  fact  of  being  a  Greek  by  birth,  or  of
using  the  Greek  language.  Not  even  the  most  arrogant  of  Greeks
ever  regarded  Horaceand  Vergil,  Augustusor  Maecenas  as  barbarians.
Indeed  the  founders  of  the  Hellenic  ‘  world  empire  ’  themselves —
the  Macedonian  kings  Philip  and  Alexander,  were  not  Greeks
in  the  ethnographical  sense.  And  it  was  owing  to  these  two


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  281

foreigners  that  Greeks  immediately  passed  from  the  narrow  local
patriotism  of  separate  civic  communities  to  the  consciousness  of
themselves  as  bearers  of  a  world-wide  culture,  without  ever  return¬
ing  to  the  stage  of  the  national  patriotism  of  the  Persian  wars.
As  to  Rome,  the  whole  of  Roman  history  was  a  continuous
transition  from  the  policy  of  a  city  to  the  policy  of  a  world
Empire — ab  urbe  ad  orbem — without  pausing  at  a  purely  national
stage.  When  Rome  was  defending  herself  against  the  Punic
invasion,  she  was  merely  the  most  powerful  of  the  Italian  cities.
When  she  crushed  her  enemy,  she  imperceptibly  overstepped  the
ethnographical  and  the  geographical  boundaries  of  Latinism  and
became  conscious  of  herself  as  a  moving  force  in  the  world-history,
anticipating  by  two  centuries  the  poet’s  reminder —

But,  Rome,  ’tis  thine  alone,  with  awful  sway,

To  rule  mankind  and  make  the  world  obey,

Disposing  peace  and  war  thy  own  majestic  way,

To  tame  the  proud,  the  fetter’d  slave  to  free.

Roman  citizenship  soon  became  accessible  to  all,  and  the  formula
1  Rome  for  the  Romans  ’  appealed  to  no  one  on  the  banks  of  the
Tiber  :  Rome  was  for  the  world.

While  Alexanders  and  Caesars  were  politically  abolishing  in
East  and  West  the  vague  limits  of  nationality,  cosmopolitanism  as
a  philosophical  doctrine  was  developed  and  disseminated  by  the
representatives  of  the  two  most  popular  schools  of  thought — the
wandering  Cynics  and  the  dispassionate  Stoics.  They  preached
the  supremacy  of  nature  and  reason,  the  unity  underlying  all
existence  and  the  insignificance  of  all  artificial  and  historical
limitations  and  divisions.  They  taught  that  man  by  his  very
nature  and  therefore  every  man  had  a  supreme  destination  and
dignity,  consisting  in  freedom  from  external  affections,  errors  and
passions,  in  the  steadfast  courage  of  the  man  who  “  if  the  whole
world  were  dashed  to  fragments,  would  remain  serene  among  the
ruins.  ”  1  Hence  they  inevitably  recognised  all  the  externally  given
determinations,  social,  national,  etc.,  as  conventional  and  illusory.
Roman  jurisprudence,2  in  its  own  sphere  and  from  its  own  point

1  Si  fractus  illabatur  orbis

Impavidum  ferient  ruinae.

2  For  confirmation  of  these  statements  see  last  chapter  of  Part  I.  of  Natsionalny
Vopros  ( The  national  question),  by  the  present  author.


282  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  view,  also  supported  the  philosophical  ideas  of  natural  and
therefore  universal  reason,  of  virtue  which  is  the  same  for  all,  and
of  the  equality  of  human  rights.  As  a  result  of  this  collective
intellectual  work  the  conception  c  Roman  became  identical
with  the  conception  of  ‘  universal,’  both  in  its  external  range  of
application  and  in  its  inner  content.1


Ill

At  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  the  Jewish  people  were
the  only  one  within  the  civilised  world  of  antiquity  who  had  a
strong  national  consciousness.  But  in  their  case  it  was  intimately
associated  with  their  religion,  with  the  true  feeling  of  its  inner
superiority  and  a  presentiment  of  world-wide  historical  destiny.
The  national  consciousness  of  the  Jews  had  no  real  satis¬
faction  ;  it  lived  by  hopes  and  expectations.  The  short-lived
greatness  of  David  and  Solomon  was  idealised  and  transformed
into  a  golden  age.  But  the  vital  historical  instinct  of  the  people
who  were  the  first  to  evolve  a  philosophy  of  history  (in  the  book
of  Daniel  on  the  world  empires  and  on  the  kingdom  of  truth  of
the  Son  of  man)  did  not  allow  them  to  stop  at  the  glorified  image
of  the  past  and  made  them  transfer  their  ideal  into  the  future.  T.  his
ideal,  however,  had  from  the  first  certain  features  of  universal
significance,  and  when,  by  the  inspiration  of  the  prophets,  it  was
transferred  to  the  future  it  became  finally  free  from  all  narrow
nationalistic  limitations.  Isaiah  proclaimed  the  Christ  as  the
banner  that  is  to  gather  all  nations  round  Himself,  and  the  author
of  the  book  of  Daniel  entirely  adopted  the  point  of  view  of  universal
history.

This  universalistie  conception  of  the  Messiah,  expressing  the
true  national  self-consciousness  of  the  Jews  as  the  finest  ideal
flower  of  the  spirit  of  the  people,  was  held  only  by  the  elect  few.
When  the  banner  for  all  the  peoples  was,  as  foretold  by  the
prophets,  raised  in  Jerusalem  and  Galilee,  the  majority  of  the  Jews
with  their  official  leaders  (the  Sadducees),  and  partly  with  their
unofficial  teachers  (the  Pharisees),  proved  to  be  on  the  side  of  the

1  Although  the  Stoic  philosophy  originated  in  Greece,  independently  of  Rome,  it
developed  only  in  the  Roman  era,  was  particularly  prevalent  among  the  Romans,  and
manifested  its  practical  influence  chiefly  through  Roman  lawyers.


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  283

national  and  religious  exclusiveness  as  against  the  highest  realisation
of  the  prophetic  ideal.  The  inevitable  conflict  and  breach  between
these  two  tendencies — these  ‘  two  souls,’ 1  as  it  were — of  the
Jewish  people  sufficiently  explains  (from  the  purely  historical  point
of  view)  the  great  tragedy  of  Golgotha,  with  which  Christianity
began.2

It  would,  however,  be  an  obvious  mistake  to  associate
Christianity  with  the  principle  of  cosmopolitanism.  There  was
no  occasion  for  the  Apostles  to  preach  against  nationality.  The
dangerous  and  immoral  aspect  of  national  divisions,  namely,  mutual
hatred  and  malignant  struggle,  no  longer  existed  within  the  limits
of  the  c  universe  ’ 3  of  that  day  ;  Roman  peace — pax  Romana — had
abolished  wars  between  nations.  Christian  universalism  was
directed  against  other  and  more  profound  divisions,  which  remained
in  full  force  in  practical  life  in  spite  of  the  ideas  of  the  prophets,
the  philosophers,  and  the  jurists.  There  remained  the  distinction
of  religion  between  Judaism  and  paganism,  the  distinction  of
culture  between  Hellenism  (which  included  educated  Romans)
and  barbarism,  and,  finally,  the  worst  distinction — the  socially-
economic  one — between  freemen  and  slaves.  It  had  retained  all
its  force  in  practice,  in  spite  of  the  theoretical  protests  of  the  Stoics.
These  divisions  were  in  direct  opposition  to  the  moral  principle —
which  was  not  the  case  with  the  national  distinctions  of  that  time.
The  latter  had  in  the  Roman  Empire  as  innocent  a  character  as,
for  instance,  the  provincialism  of  Gascogne  or  Brittany  has  in
modern  France.  But  the  opposition  between  the  Jews  and  the
Gentiles,  the  Hellenes  and  the  barbarians,  freemen  and  slaves,
involved  the  denial  of  all  solidarity  between  them  ;  it  was  an  opposi¬
tion  of  the  higher  beings  to  the  lower,  the  lower  having  their  moral
dignity  and  human  rights  denied  to  them.4  This  is  the  reason  why
St.  Paul  had  to  proclaim  that  in  Jesus  Christ  there  is  neither  Jew

1  Two  souls  live  in  my  breast,

They  struggle,  and  long  to  be  parted.

Goethe.

8  That  the  best  among  the  Pharisees  took  no  part  in  the  persecution  of  Jesus  Christ,
and  were  favourable  to  primitive  Christianity,  is  shown  in  Professor  Hvolson’s  excellent
article  in  the  Memuari  Akademii  Nauk  ( Proceedings  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences),  1893.

3  Оіко/хіѵг]  (i.c.  7І7),  the  Greek  name  for  the  Roman  Empire.

4  In  speaking  of  the  opposition  between  Judaism  and  paganism,  I  am  referring,  of
course,  not  to  the  teaching  of  Moses  and  the  prophets  and  sages — they  all  recognised  in
principle  that  the  pagans  had  human  rights — but  to  the  spirit  of  the  crowd  and  its  leaders


284  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

nor  Greek,  neither  bond  nor  free,  buta  new  creation — а  ят/ creation,
however,  and  not  simple  reduction  of  the  old  to  one  denominator.
In  the  place  of  the  negative  ideal  of  the  dispassionate  Stoic  un¬
moved  by  the  downfall  of  the  world,  the  Apostle  puts  the  positive
ideal  of  a  man  full  of  compassion  and  at  one  with  all  that  lives,
who  shares  in  the  sufferings  of  the  universal  man,  Christ,  and  in
His  death  that  redeems  the  world,  and  therefore  participates  in
His  triumph  over  death  and  in  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world.
In  Christianity  the  mind  passes  from  the  abstract  man  in  general
of  the  philosophers  and  jurists  to  the  concrete  universal  man.
The  old  hostility  and  estrangement  between  different  sections  of
humanity  is  thereby  completely  abolished.  Every  man,  if  only
he  lets  ‘  Christ  be  formed  in  him,’ 1  i.e.  if  he  enters  into  the  spirit
of  the  perfect  man,  and  determines  all  his  life  and  activity  by  the
ideal  revealed  in  the  image  of  Christ,  participates  in  the  Godhead
through  the  power  of  the  Son  of  God  abiding  in  him.  For  the
regenerated  man  individuality,  like  all  other  characteristics  and
distinctions,  including  that  of  nationality,  ceases  to  be  a  limit ,  and
becomes  the  basis  of  positive  union  with  the  collective  all-
embracing  humanity  or  Church  (in  its  true  nature),  which  is
complementary  to  him.  According  to  the  well-known  saying
of  St.  Paul  the  peculiarities  of  structure  and  of  function  which
distinguish  a  given  bodily  organ  from  other  organs  do  not  separate
it  from  them  and  from  the  rest  of  the  body,  but  on  the  contrary
are  the  basis  of  its  definite  positive  participation  in  the  life  of  the
organism,  and  make  it  of  unique  value  to  all  the  other  organs
and  the  body  as  a  whole.  Likewise  in  the  ‘  body  of  Christ  ’  in¬
dividual  peculiarities  do  not  separate  one  person  from  others,  but
unite  each  with  all,  being  the  ground  of  his  special  significance
for  all  and  of  his  positive  interaction  with  them.  Now  this  ob¬
viously  applies  to  nationality  as  well.  The  all-embracing  humanity
(or  the  Church  which  the  Apostle  preached)  is  not  an  abstract  idea,
but  is  a  harmonious  union  of  all  the  concrete  positive  characteristics
of  the  new  or  the  regenerated  creation.  It  therefore  includes  the
national  as  well  as  the  personal  characteristics.  The  body  of
Christ  is  a  peifect  organism  and  cannot  consist  of  simple  cells
alone  ;  it  must  contain  larger  and  more  complex  organs,  which
in  this  connection  are  naturally  represented  by  the  different  nations.

1  St.  Paul’s  expression.


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  285

The  difference  between  the  personal  and  the  national  character
is  not  one  of  principle 1  but  of  greater  stability  and  wider  range  in
the  case  of  the  latter.  Since  Christianity  does  not  demand  absence
of  individual  character,  it  cannot  demand  absence  of  national  char¬
acter.  The  spiritual  regeneration  it  demands  both  of  individuals
and  of  nations  does  not  mean  a  loss  of  the  natural  qualities  and
powers  ;  it  means  that  these  qualities  are  transformed,  that  a  new
direction  and  a  new  content  are  given  them.  When  Peter  and  John
were  regenerated  by  the  spirit  of  Christ,  they  did  not  lose  any  of
their  positive  peculiarities  and  distinct  characteristic  features.  So
far  from  losing  their  individuality,  they  developed  and  strengthened
it.  This  is  how  it  must  be  with  entire  nations  converted  to
Christianity.

Actual  adoption  of  the  true  religion  containing  the  uncondi¬
tional  principle  of  morality  must  sweep  away  a  great  deal  from  the
national  as  well  as  from  the  individual  life.  But  that  which  is  in¬
compatible  with  the  unconditional  principle  and  has  therefore  to  be
destroyed  does  not  constitute  a  positive  characteristic  or  peculiarity.
There  is  such  a  thing  as  collective  evil  will,  as  historical  sin
burdening  the  national  conscience,  as  a  wrong  direction  of  the  life
and  activity  of  a  nation.  From  all  these  wrongs  a  nation  must  set
itself  free,  but  such  freedom  can  only  strengthen  it,  and  increase
and  widen  the  expression  of  its  positive  character.

The  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel  had  no  reason  to  occupy
themselves  with  the  national  question  which  the  life  of  humanity
had  not  yet  brought  to  the  fore,  since  there  were  hardly  any
distinct,  independent  nations  conscious  of  themselves  as  such  on
the  historical  arena  of  the  time.  Nevertheless  we  find  in  the  New

1  ТЬіз  is  brought  out  by  the  fact  that  the  only  rational  way  of  accounting  for  the
genesis  of  a  stable  national  character,  such  as  the  Jewish— which  is  not  affected  by  the
external  influences  of  climate,  history,  etc.,  is  to  suppose  that  it  is  the  inherited,  personal
character  of  the  national  ancestor.  The  inner  truth  of  the  Biblical  characteristic  of

Jacob _ the  ancestor  of  the  Jews — and  also  of  Ishmail,  the  ancestor  of  the  Northern

Arabs,  will  be  recognised  by  any  impartial  reader,  whatever  his  attitude  to  the  historical
side  of  the  narrative  may  be.  Even  granting  that  the  man  named  Jacob,  who  did  all
that  in  the  book  of  Genesis  he  is  said  to  have  done,  never  existed  at  all,  anyway  the
Jews,  or  at  any  rate  the  chief  tribe  of  Judah,  must  have  had  a  common  progenitor  ;  and
starting  with  the  national  character  of  the  Jews  we  must  conclude  that  that  progenitor
had  precisely  the  typical  peculiarities  which  the  Bible  ascribes  to  Jacob.  See  S.  M.
Solovyov’s  Nabludeniya  nad  istoricheskoiu  zhiznyu  narodov  [Observations  on  the  historical
life  of  nations),  and  also  my  Filosofa  Bibleiskoi  Istorii  ( The  Philosophy  of  the  Biblical
History)  in  the  Istoria  Teokratii  ( History  of  Theocracy).


286  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Testament  definite  indications  of  a  positive  attitude  to  nationality.
The  words  spoken  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  “  salvation  is  of  the
Jewsf  1  and  the  preliminary  direction  to  the  disciples,  “  go  rather
to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,”  2  clearly  show  Christ’s
love  for  His  own  people.  And  His  final  command  to  the  Apostles,
tc  Go  ye  therefore,  and  teach  all  nations ,”  3  implies  that  even  out¬
side  Israel  He  contemplated  not  separate  individuals  only,  but
entire  peoples.4  When  St.  Paul  became  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles
he  did  not  thereupon  become  a  cosmopolitan.  Though  separated
from  the  majority  of  his  compatriots  in  the  all-important  question
of  religion,  he  was  not  indifferent  to  his  people  and  their  special
destination  :

“  I  say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  conscience  also  bearing
me  witness  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  I  have  great  heaviness  and
continual  sorrow  in  my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that  myself
were  accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according
to  the  flesh  :  who  are  Israelites  ;  to  whom  pertaineth  the  adoption,
and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and
the  service  of  God,  and  the  promises ;  whose  are  the  fathers,  and  of
whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came.  .  .  .  Brethren,  my
heart’s  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  might  be
saved.”  5 6


IV

Before  they  could  realise  the  ideal  of  universal  humanity,
nations  had  first  to  be  formed  as  distinct  independent  bodies.
Let  us  consider  this  process  with  special  reference  to  Western
Europe,  where  it  is  finally  completed.  The  Apostles’  successors,  to
whom  the  command  to  teach  all  nations  was  handed  down,  soon
came  to  deal  with  nations  in  their  infancy,  standing  in  need  of
elementary  upbringing  before  they  could  be  taught.  The  Church
nurtured  them  conscientiously  and  with  self-sacrificing  devotion,

1  St.  John  iv.  22.  2  St.  Matthew  x.  6.  3  St.  Matthew  xxviii.  19.

4  The  words  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (i.  8),  “Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me  both

in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the

earth,”  show  still  more  clearly  that  the  Saviour  of  the  world  recognised  a  definite,  local

and  national  starting-point  for  His  world-wide  work.

6  Romans  ix.  1-5,  x.  1.


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  287

and  then  continued  to  act  as  their  guardian,  making  them  pass
through  a  school  that  was  somewhat  one-sided  though  not  bad.
1  he  historical  childhood  and  youth  of  the  Romano-Germanic
nations  under  the  guardianship  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church—
the  so-called  Middle  Ages — did  not  end  in  anything  like  a  normal
way.  The  spiritual  authorities  failed  to  observe  that  their
nurslings  had  come  of  age,  and,  from  natural  human  weakness,
insisted  on  treating  them  in  the  same  old  way.  The  anomalies
and  changes  that  arose  from  this  fact  have  no  bearing  on  our
subject.  What  is  of  importance  to  us  is  the  phenomenon  which
took  place  in  the  development  of  every  European  nation.  It  un¬
doubtedly  indicates  a  certain  general  ethico-historical  law,  for  it
was  manifested  under  the  most  various  and  often  directly  opposed
conditions.

For  reasons  sufficiently  obvious  Italy  was  the  first  of  European
countries  to  attain  to  national  self-consciousness.  The  Lombard
League  in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century  clearly  indicates
national  awakening.  The  external  struggle,  however,  was  only  an
impetus  that  called  to  life  the  true  forces  of  the  Italian  genius.  At
the  beginning  of  the  next  century  the  newly-born  Italian  language
was  used  by  St.  Francis  to  express  ideas  and  feelings  of  universal
significance  that  could  be  understood  by  Buddhists  and  Christians
alike.  At  the  same  period  began  Italian  painting  (Cimabue),
and  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century  appeared  Dante’s
comprehensive  poem,  which  would  alone  have  been  sufficient
to  make  Italy  great.  From  the  fourteenth  to  the  seventeenth
centuries  Italy,  torn  asunder  by  the  hostilities  between  the  cities
and  the  podestas,  the  Pope  and  the  Emperor,  the  French  and
the  Spanish,  produced  all  for  which  humanity  loves  and  values
her,  all,  of  which  Italians  may  justly  pride  themselves.  All  these
immortal  works  of  the  philosophical  and  scientific,  poetical  and
artistic  genius  had  the  same  value  for  other  nations,  for  the  world
as  a  whole  as  for  the  Italians  themselves.  Men  to  whom  Italy’s
true  greatness  was  due  were  no  doubt  real  patriots.  They  set
the  greatest  value  upon  their  country,  but  it  was  not  in  their  case
an  empty  claim  leading  to  false  and  immoral  demands — they  em¬
bodied  the  lofty  significance  of  Italy  in  works  of  absolute  value.
They  did  not  consider  it  true  and  beautiful  to  affirm  themselves
and  their  nationality,  but  they  directly  affirmed  themselves  in


288  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

what  is  true  and  beautiful.  Their  works  were  good  not  because
they  glorified  Italy,  but  rather  they  glorified  Italy  because  they
were  good  in  themselves — good  for  all.  Under  such  conditions
patriotism  stands  in  no  need  of  defence  and  justification.  It
justifies  itself  in  practice,  evincing  itself  as  creative  power  and
not  as  fruitless  reflection  or  ‘excitement  of  idle  thought.’  Cor¬
responding  to  the  inner  intensity  of  the  creative  work  at  this
blossoming  time  of  Italy  was  the  wide  extension  of  the  Italian
race  at  that  period.  Its  civilising  influence  extended  to  the
Crimea  in  the  East  and  Scotland  in  the  North-West.  The  first
European  to  penetrate  to  Mongolia  and  China  was  Marco  Polo,  an
Italian.  Another  Italian  discovered  the  new  world,  and  the  third,
enlarging  that  discovery,  left  it  his  name.  The  literary  influence
of  Italy  was  for  several  centuries  prevalent  throughout  Europe.
Italian  poetry,  epic  and  lyric,  and  the  Italian  novel  were  examples
for  imitation.  Shakespeare  took  from  the  Italians  the  subjects
and  the  form  of  his  plays.  The  ideas  of  Giordano  Bruno  roused
philosophical  reflection  both  in  England  and  in  Germany.  The
Italian  language  and  Italian  fashions  universally  prevailed  in  the
higher  classes  of  society.  And  while  the  national  creative  work  and
influence  were  at  their  highest,  Italians  were  obviously  concerned
not  with  keeping  Italy  for  themselves — at  that  time  indeed  it
was  for  any  one  who  liked  to  take  it — but  only  with  things  which
made  them  be  something  for  others  and  gave  them  a  universal
significance.  They  cared  for  the  objective  ideas  of  beauty  and
truth,  which  through  their  national  spirit  received  a  new  and
worthy  expression.  Wbat  conception  of  nationality  can  be
logically  deduced  from  this  ?  It  cannot  be  said,  with  Italy’s
national  history  before  us,  that  nationality  is  something  self-
existent  and  self-contained,  living  in  itself  and  for  itself,  for  this
great  nation  proves  to  be  simply  a  special  form  of  universal
content,  living  in  that  content,  filled  with  it  and  embodying  it
not  for  itself  only  but  for  all.

The  Spanish  nation  developed  under  very  peculiar  conditions.
For  seven  centuries  Spain  was  the  vanguard  on  the  right  flank  of
the  Christian  world  in  its  struggle  with  Mohammedanism.  And
just  when  the  left  flank — Byzantium — was  overthrown  by  the
enemy,  on  the  right  flank  Spaniards  won  a  final  and  decisive
victory.  This  long  and  successful  struggle  was  justly  regarded  as


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  289

the  national  glory  of  Spain.  It  is  not  permissible  for  a  Christian
people  to  hate  and  despise  Mohammedans — or  any  one  else — or
seek  to  exterminate  them  ;  but  to  defend  Europe  against  invasion
by  them  was  a  direct  Christian  duty.  For  in  so  far  as  Christianity,
in  spite  of  all  its  historical  perversions,  contains  absolute  truth,  to
which  the  future  belongs,  in  so  far  the  defence  even  of  the  external
boundaries  of  Christian  faith  and  culture  against  the  destructive
violence  of  the  armed  hordes  of  unbelievers  is  an  unquestionable
merit  from  the  point  of  view  of  humanity.  Apart  from  the
question  of  religious  belief,  would  it  have  been  a  gain  for  historical
progress  had  Western  Europe  met  with  the  fate  of  Western
Asia  or  of  the  Balkan  Peninsula  ? 1  In  defending  themselves
against  the  Moors  the  Spaniards  were  serving  the  common  cause
of  humanity,  and  they  knew  it.  They  would  not  dream  of
saying  ‘  Spain  is  for  the  Spaniards,’  for  in  that  case  why  should
they  not  go  further  and  say  1  Castile  is  for  the  Castilians,
Arragon  is  for  the  Arragonians,’  etc.  ?  They  felt,  they  thought,
and  they  proclaimed  that  Spain  was  for  all  Christendom,  as
Christianity  was  for  all  the  world.  Their  feeling  was  perfectly
genuine,  they  really  wished  to  serve  their  religion  as  a  universal
religion,  as  the  highest  good  for  all,  and  one  can  only  reproach
them  with  having  a  wrong  or  a  one  -  sided  conception  of
Christianity.  The  continuous  struggle  for  a  common  and
just  cause  lasted  for  seven  centuries,  and,  being  chiefly  an
external  struggle  waged  by  the  force  of  arms,2  it  created  both

1  At  one  time  the  Moorish  culture  in  Spain  was  not  inferior,  and  in  some  respects
it  was  superior  to  the  Christian  culture  of  the  period.  But  history  clearly  proves  how
short-lived  all  Mohammedan  culture  is.  The  end  with  which  it  met  in  the  Middle
Ages  in  Damascus,  Bagdad  and  Cairo  would  no  doubt  have  been  repeated  once
more  in  the  West.  There  too  it  would  have  been  replaced  by  stable  barbarism,  such
as  the  Turkish.  And  if  the  Bashi-Bazouks  were  to  overrun  London,  and  Saxony  were
to  be  constantly  raided  by  the  Kurds,  what  would  become  of  the  British  Museum  and  the
Leipzig  Press?  This  is  an  argument  ad  homines.  But  speaking  quite  seriously  and
wholly  admitting  the  comparative  merits  of  Mohammedanism  and  the  historical  tasks
it  still  has  to  accomplish  in  Asia  and  Africa,  it  must  be  remembered  that  this  religion
professedly  renounces  the  absolute  moral  ideal,  i.e.  the  principle  ot  the  perfect  mani¬
festation  of  God  in  man,  and  has  no  right  therefore  to  dominate  Christian  peoples.  To
repulse  the  Mohammedan  invasion  of  Europe  was  therefore  both  a  historical  necessity
and  a  historical  merit  for  the  Christian  nations  which  took  a  leading  part  in  the
struggle.

2  Chiefly,  but  not  exclusively,  for  Spain  too  had  some  truly  spiritual  champions  of
Christianity.  Such,  e.g.,  was  Raymond  Lullius,  who  devoted  his  life  to  spreading  the

U


29o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  strength  and  the  narrowness  of  the  national  spirit  of  Spain.
More  than  any  other  nation  the  Spaniards  distorted  the  truth
of  Christianity  in  their  practical  conception  of  it  and  in  their
actions  ;  more  decisively  than  any  one  they  associated  it  with
violence.  According  to  the  general  custom  of  the  Middle
Ages,  the  Spaniards  based  their  practical  view  of  the  world
upon  the  distinction  between  the  two  swords — the  spiritual
sword  of  the  monks  under  the  rule  of  the  Pope,  and  the  worldly
sword  of  the  knights  under  the  rule  of  the  king.  But  in  their
case — more  than  in  the  case  of  any  other  nation — the  two
swords  were  so  closely  connected  as  to  become  essentially  alike.
The  spiritual  sword  proved  in  the  end  to  be  as  material  and
violent  as  the  worldly,  though  more  painful  and  less  noble  than
the  latter.  The  special  part  played  by  the  Spanish  nation
in  this  respect  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Inquisition  had
twice  been  started  by  Spaniards — by  the  monk  Dominique  in
the  thirteenth,  and  the  king  Ferdinand  in  the  fifteenth  century.* 1

The  struggle  of  Spanish  knights  with  the  bellicose  Moham¬
medan  invaders  was  a  gain  to  Christianity  and  the  source  of  the
greatness  of  Spain.  The  work  of  the  ‘spiritual  sword’  against
the  conquered  Moors  and  defenceless  Jews  was  treason  to  the
spirit  of  Christ,  a  disgrace  to  Spain  and  the  first  cause  of  its
downfall.  The  bitter  fruits  of  the  fatal  historical  sin  did  not
ripen  at  once.  In  following  its  old  path  of  external  service
to  the  Christian  faith  Spain  did  one  good  thing  more  for  the
common  cause  —  namely,  she  spread  Christianity  beyond  the


true  religion  by  means  of  rational  persuasion.  He  worked  out  a  special  method,
which  he  thought  could  render  the  dogmas  of  the  faith  as  self-evident  as  the  truths  of
pure  mathematics  and  formal  logic.  Later  on  he  became  a  missionary,  and  was
assassinated  in  the  Bastarian  Colonies  for  peaceful  preaching  of  the  Gospel.

1  It  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  in  both  the  East  and  the  West  the  first  persecution
for  religious  beliefs — namely,  the  persecution  of  the  Manichean  heresy  in  the  fourth
century — was  due  to  a  Spaniard — Theodosius  the  Great.  It  is  curious  too  that  the
heresy  of  the  Albigenses,  against  which  the  Dominican  inquisition  was  originally
intended,  was  a  direct  development  of  Manicheism,  on  account  of  which  the  Emperor
Theodosius  had  appointed  his  ‘  inquisitors  ’  ten  centuries  before.  Shortly  before  that
time  the  deplorable  part  which  the  Spanish  nation  was  to  play  with  regard  to  religious
persecutions  was  foreshadowed  by  the  fact  that  the  first  execution  for  religious  belief
(viz.  that  of  the  Priscillian  heretics)  was  due  to  the  instigation  of  two  Spanish  bishops.
This  unheard-of  action  called  forth  protests  both  in  Italy  (St.  Ambrose  of  Milan)  and
in  France  (St.  Martin  of  Tours).


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  291

ocean.  Spanish  knights  and  pirates  acquired  for  Christian
culture,  such  as  it  was,  the  greater  part  of  the  new  world.  They
saved  a  whole  country  (Mexico)  from  such  abominations  and
horrors  of  satanic  heathendom  1  as  cause  even  the  horrors  of  the
Inquisition  to  fade  (and  the  Inquisition  itself  was  abolished
soon  after).  They  founded  in  Southern  and  Central  America
a  dozen  new  States  which  take  some  part  in  the  common
historical  life  of  humanity.  At  the  same  time  Spanish  mission¬
aries — a  real  saint  like  the  Jesuit  Francis  Xavier  among  them —
were  the  first  to  carry  the  Gospel  to  India  and  Japan.  Spain,
however,  still  regarded  as  its  main  task  the  defence  of  Christianity
(as  she  understood  it,  i.e.  of  the  Roman  Church)  from  its  im¬
mediate  and  most  dangerous  enemies.  In  the  fifteenth  century
it  found  such  enemies  no  longer  in  the  Mohammedans  but
in  the  Protestants.  At  the  present  time  we  can  look  upon
the  Reformation  as  a  necessary  moment  in  the  history  of
Christianity  itself.  But  for  people  who  lived  at  that  epoch  it
was  impossible  to  take  this  view.  They  either  themselves
became  Protestants  or  regarded  Protestantism  as  a  hostile  attack,
proceeding  from  the  devil,  against  the  Christian  truth  embodied
in  the  Church.  For  Spain,  whose  whole  history  was  bound  up
with  the  Catholic  idea,  there  could  be  no  choice.  All  the
strength  of  the  most  powerful  country  of  the  time  was  directed
to  crushing  the  new  religious  movement.  It  was  a  work  wrong
in  principle,  revoltingly  cruel  in  practice,  and  a  hopeless  failure
in  its  result.  The  moral  guilt  of  Spain,  which  made  the  Duke
of  Alba  her  national  and  ‘  Christian  ’  hero,  is  beyond  all  doubt.
One  can  only  point  to  some  extenuating  circumstances.  The
Spanish  were  sincerely,  though  blindly,  convinced  that  they
were  standing  up  for  a  good  that  is  universal,  for  what  is  most
important  and  precious  to  humanity — the  one  true  religion,
of  which  godless  renegades,  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  evil,  wanted
to  rob  mankind.  In  this  national  struggle  against  Protestantism
the  Spanish  defended  a  certain  universal  principle,  namely,  the
principle  of  the  external  guardianship  of  a  divine  institution  over
humanity.  It  was  a  false  and  untenable  universalism,  but  its
champions  sincerely  believed  in  it  and  served  it  disinterestedly

i  For  an  impartial  statement  of  the  facts  see  A.  Reville’s  book  on  the  religion  of
Mexico  and  Peru.


292  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

without  any  selfish  considerations,  whether  nationally-political  or
personal.  At  the  same  time  the  Spanish  genius  of  Ignatius
Loyola  founded,  with  the  purpose  of  combating  Protestantism
by  peaceful  means,  the  order  of  Jesuits— an  order  of  which
people  may  think  what  they  like,  but  to  which  one  thing  can
certainly  not  be  denied  —  viz.  its  universal  and  international
character.  So  that  in  making  the  struggle  with  Protestantism
into  a  national  idea  the  Spanish  did  not  separate  it  from  the
interests  of  the  common  good,  as  they  understood  it.  The
unsuccessful  external  struggle  for  Roman  Catholicism  under¬
mined  the  kingdom  of  Spain,  but  did  not  exhaust  the  spiritual
forces  of  the  Spanish  nation.  Moral  energy  shown  in  the
defence  of  a  universal  though  a  wrongly  conceived  cause  found
another  and  a  better  expression  in  the  realm  of  the  spirit.  In
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  Spain  made  considerable
national  contributions  to  the  general  treasury  of  higher  culture
in  the  domain  of  art,  poetry,  and  contemplative  mysticism.  In
all  these  things  the  Spanish  genius  was  occupied  with  objects
important  not  for  the  Spanish  nation  only  but  for  all  mankind.
Its  work  was  extremely  national  in  character,  but  this  came
about  naturally,  without  any  deliberate  intention  on  the  part
of  the  authors.  It  undoubtedly  had  a  universal  interest,  and
supported  the  glory  of  Spain  at  a  time  when  her  external  power
was  on  the  wane  and  her  arms  were  justly  suffering  defeat.  The
influence  of  Spanish  culture  rivalled  that  of  the  Italian  in  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  precisely  at  a  time  when
half  Europe  entertained  a  natural  hostility  towards  the  defenders
of  the  old  religion.

The  highest  development  of  the  English  national  spirit  may,
for  the  sake  of  brevity,  be  designated  by  five  names  :  Bacon,
Shakespeare,  Milton,  Newton,  and  Penn.  These  five  names  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  demands  and  pretensions  of  exclusive
nationalism.  They  stand  for  what  is  of  importance  and  value  to
all  mankind,  and  express  the  common  debt  of  humanity  to  England.
The  men  who  created  the  national  greatness  of  England  never
thought  of  nationalism  as  such.  One  was  concerned  with  the
true  knowledge  of  nature  and  of  man,  and  was  occupied  with  the
problem  of  a  new  and  better  scientific  method  ;  another  sought
artistically  to  represent  the  human  soul,  human  passions,  characters


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  293

and  destinies,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  borrow  his  subjects  from
foreign  literature  and  transfer  the  place  of  action  to  foreign
countries.  The  great  leaders  of  the  Puritan  movement,  who  found
their  prophet  in  Milton,  thought  above  all  things  of  ordering  life
in  accordance  with  the  Biblical  ideal,  equally  binding,  in  their
view,  upon  all  nations.  These  Englishmen  did  not  hesitate  to
recognise  for  their  own  and  to  carry  beyond  the  ocean  an  ideal
Hebrew  in  its  first  origin  and  German  in  its  Protestant  form.
And  the  greatest  representative  of  modern  science  discovered  with
his  English  intellect  a  universal  truth  about  the  physical  world  as
an  interconnected  whole,  containing,  as  a  principle  of  its  unity,
that  which  he  called  the  ‘sensorium  of  the  Deity.’

A  broadly  conceived  world  of  scientific  experience,  open  on
all  sides  to  the  intellect ;  profound  artistic  humanism  ;  high  ideas
of  religious  and  political  freedom  and  a  grand  conception  of  the
physical  unity  of  the  universe — this  is  what  the  English  nation
produced  through  her  heroes  and  men  of  genius.  c  England  for
the  English  ’  was  not  enough  for  them  ;  they  thought  that  the
whole  world  was  for  the  English,  and  they  had  a  right  to  think  so,
because  they  themselves  were  for  the  whole  world.  The  wide
diffusion  of  the  English  race  was  in  close  correlation  with  the
good  qualities  of  the  national  character.  British  merchants,
of  course,  always  observed  their  own  interests  ;  but  it  is  not
any  merchants  who  could  succeed  in  colonising  North  America
and  forming  a  new  great  nation  of  it.  For  the  United  States
were  built  up,  not  by  the  Redskins  or  Negroes,  but  by  English
people  and  English  political  and  religious  ideas — ideas  of  universal
significance.  Nor  is  it  any  merchants  who  could  take  firm
possession  of  India  and  build  a  civilised  Australia  on  a  perfectly
virginal  soil.1

The  culminating  point  in  the  national  history  of  France  is  the
epoch  of  the  great  Revolution  and  of  the  Napoleonic  wars,  when

1  Hindus  taught  in  English  schools  begin  to  complain — in  the  English  and  their
own  newspapers,  after  the  English  style  —  that  the  English  yoke  is  burdensome
and  to  say  that  their  nation  must  be  united  and  obtain  freedom  for  itself.  Why
is  it  that  this  had  never  occurred  to  them  before?  The  fact  is  that  they  obtained  ideas,
such  as  that  of  nationality,  national  spirit,  national  dignity,  patriotism,  solidarity,
development,  exclusively  from  the  English.  Left  to  themselves  they  had  not  been
able  to  arrive  at  them  during  the  two  and  a  half  thousand  years  of  their  history,  in  spite
of  their  ancient  wisdom.


294  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  universal  significance  of  that  country  was  most  clearly  apparent.
The  national  life  was  then  at  its  highest,  not  perhaps  from  the
point  of  view  of  its  content,  but  of  its  intensity  and  of  the  breadth
of  external  influence.  No  doubt,  the  rights  of  man  and  of  citizen
proclaimed  to  all  the  world  proved  to  be  largely  fictitious  ;  no
doubt  the  all-embracing  revolutionary  trinity  —  liberty  egalit i,
fraternite — was  realised  in  a  very  peculiar  fashion.  But  in  any
case  the  fact  that  the  people  were  carried  away  by  these  universal
ideas  showed  that  the  spirit  of  narrow  nationalism  was  foreign  to
them.  Did  France  want  to  be  ‘for  the  French’  only  when  she
surrendered  herself  to  a  half-Italian  in  order  that  he  should  direct
her  powers  and  sweep  away  in  the  whole  of  Europe  the  old  order
of  things,  introducing  everywhere  the  principles  of  civic  equality,
religious  and  political  freedom  ?  Apart  from  this  epoch,  indeed,
France  was  always  noted  for  a  special  kind  of  universal  receptivity
and  communicativeness,  by  a  power  and  a  desire  to  grasp  the  ideas
of  others,  give  them  a  finished  and  popular  form,  and  then  to  send
them  forth  into  the  world.  This  power  makes  the  history  of
France  a  vivid  and  emphatic  rSsumt  of  universal  history,  and  is
too  obvious  and  too  well  known  to  dwell  upon.

Having  first  shown  the  greatness  of  her  national  spirit  in  the
Reformation,  Germany  has  in  modern  times  (from  the  middle
of  the  eighteenth  to  the  middle  of  the  nineteenth  century)
occupied  the  foremost  place  in  the  domain  of  higher  culture,
intellectual  and  aesthetic — the  place  which  Italy  had  held  at  the
end  of  mediaeval  and  at  the  beginning  of  modern  history.  The
universal  character  and  significance  of  the  Reformation,  of  the
poetry  of  Goethe,  of  the  philosophy  of  Kant  or  Hegel,  stands
in  no  need  of  proof  or  demonstration.  I  will  only  observe  that
for  Germany,  as  for  Italy,  the  period  of  the  highest  development
of  the  spiritual  forces  of  the  nation  coincided  with  the  period  of
political  weakness  and  disruption.

The  broad  idealism  of  the  Polish  spirit,  receptive  of  foreign
influences  to  the  point  of  enthusiasm  and  devotion,  is  only
too  obvious.  The  universalism  of  the  Poles  caused  the  narrow
nationalists  to  reproach  them  of  ‘  treason  to  the  cause  of  the
Slavs.’  But  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  shining  lights  of
Polish  thought — Mickiewicz,  Krasinski,  Tovianski,  Slowacki —
know  how  greatly  the  power  of  the  national  genius  showed


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  295

itself  in  their  universalistic  work.  As  to  our  own  country,  the
Russian  spirit  has  hitherto  found  no  embodiment  more  vivid  and
powerful  than  the  Tsar,  whose  powerful  arm  has  demolished  our
national  exclusiveness  for  ever,  and  the  poet  who  had  a  special
gift  to  identify  himself  with  the  genius  of  other  nations  and  yet
remain  wholly  Russian.1  Peter  the  Great  and  Pushkin — these
two  names  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  dignity  of  our  national
spirit  found  its  realisation  only  in  unreserved  communion  with
the  rest  of  humanity,  and  not  apart  from  it.

Without  enumerating  all  the  other  nations,  I  will  only  mention
Holland  and  Sweden.  The  national  glory  and  prosperity  of  the
first  were  due  to  her  struggle  for  the  faith  against  Spanish
despotism.  As  a  consequence  of  it,  the  little  country  did  not  shut
itself  up  in  its  dearly  bought  independence,  but  became  the  abode
of  free  thought  for  all  Europe.  Sweden  manifested  hei  national
greatness  when,  under  Gustavus  Adolphus,  she  devoted  herself  to
the  service  of  the  common  cause  of  religious  freedom  against  the
policy  of  compulsory  uniformity.


V

The  history  of  all  nations  which  have  had  a  direct  influence
upon  the  destinies  of  humanity  in  ancient  and  modern  times
teaches  one  and  the  same  thing.  At  the  period  when  their  powers
were  unfolded  to  the  utmost,  they  took  the  greatness  and  the
value  of  their  nationality  to  lie  not  in  itself  taken  in  the  abstract,
but  in  something  universal,  supernational  that  they  believed  in,
that  they  served  and  that  they  realised  in  their  creative  work — a
work  national  in  its  origin  and  means  of  expression,  but  wholly
universal  in  its  content  and  in  its  objective  result.  Nations  live
and  act  not  for  their  own  sakes,  nor  for  the  sake  of  their  material
interests,  but  of  their  idea,  i.e.  for  the  sake  of  what  is  most
important  to  them  and  can  be  of  service  to  the  world  as  a  whole—
they  live  not  for  themselves  only,  but  for  all.  That  which  a  nation
believes  in  and  does  in  faith  it  is  bound  to  regard  as  unconditionally
good — not  as  its  own  good,  but  as  good  in  itself  and  therefoie  as

1  The  well-known  remark  of  Dostoevsky,  who  at  his  best  was  himself  equally  all-
embracing.


2g6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

good  for  all  ;  and  such  it  generally  proves  to  be.  Historical
representatives  of  a  nation  may  wrongly  understand  this  or  that
aspect  of  a  nationally-universal  idea  which  they  serve,  and  then
their  service  is  bad  and  fruitless.  Philip  II.  and  the  Duke  of
Alba  had  a  very  wrong  idea  of  ecclesiastical  unity,  and  the  Paris
Convention  understood  the  idea  of  human  rights  no  better.  But
the  bad  understanding  passes  away  and  the  idea  remains,  and,  if
it  is  really  rooted  in  the  soul  of  a  people,  it  finds  new  and  better
expression  free  from  the  old  imperfections.

The  creative  work  of  a  nation,  i.e.  that  which  a  nation  con¬
cretely  realises  in  the  world,  is  universal  ;  the  object  of  true  national
self-consciousness  is  universal  also.  A  nation  is  not  aware  of  itself
in  the  abstract,  as  of  an  empty  subject  separate  from  the  content
and  the  meaning  of  its  life.  It  is  conscious  of  itself  in  relation  to
that  which  it  does  and  wants  to  do,  in  relation  to  what  it  believes
in  and  what  it  serves.

It  is  clear  from  history  that  a  nation  does  not  regard  itself,
taken  in  the  abstract,  as  the  purpose  of  its  life.  In  other  words,
it  does  not  set  an  absolute  value  upon  its  material  interest  apart
from  its  supreme  ideal  condition.  But  if  this  be  so,  the  individual
too  has  no  right  in  his  love  for  his  nation  to  separate  it  from  the
meaning  of  its  existence  and  to  put  the  service  of  its  material
advantages  above  the  demands  of  morality.  A  nation  in  and
through  its  true  creative  work  and  self-consciousness  affirms  itself
in  the  universal — in  that  which  is  of  value  for  every  one  and  in
which  all  are  united.  How  then  can  a  true  patriot,  for  the  sake  of
a  supposed  ‘advantage’  to  his  nation,  destroy  its  solidarity  with
other  nations,  and  despise  or  hate  foreigners  ?  A  nation  finds  its
true  good  in  the  common  good  ;  how  then  can  a  patriot  take  the
good  of  his  nation  to  be  something  distinct  from  and  opposed  to
everything  else  ?  It  will  clearly  not  be  the  ideal  moral  good
which  the  nation  itself  desires,  and  the  supposed  patriot  will
prove  to  be  opposed  not  to  other  nations  but  to  his  own  in  its  best
aspirations.  National  hostility  and  opposition  no  doubt  exist,  just
as  cannibalism  once  existed  everywhere  ;  they  exist  as  a  zoological
fact,  condemned  by  the  best  consciousness  of  the  peoples  themselves.
Made  into  an  abstract  principle  this  zoological  fact  hangs  over
the  life  of  nations,  obscuring  its  significance  and  destroying
its  inspiration  —  for  the  significance  and  the  inspiration  of  the


THE  NATIONAL  QUESTION  297

particular  is  only  to  be  found  in  its  connection  and  harmony  with  the
universal.

As  against  false  patriotism  or  nationalism,  which  supports  the
predominance  of  the  animal  instincts  of  a  people  over  its  higher
national  self-consciousness,  cosmopolitanism  is  right  in  demanding
that  the  moral  law  shall  be  unconditionally  applied  to  all,  apart
from  all  difference  of  nationality.  But  it  is  the  moral  principle
itself  which,  when  consistently  worked  out,  prevents  us  from  being
satisfied  with  the  negative  demand  of  cosmopolitanism.

Let  it  be  granted  that  the  immediate  object  of  the  moral
relation  is  the  individual  person.  But  one  of  the  essential  peculiari¬
ties  of  that  person  —  direct  continuation  and  expansion  of  his
individual  character — is  his  nationality  (in  the  positive  sense  of
character,  type,  and  creative  power).  This  is  not  merely  a
physical,  but  also  a  psychical  and  moral  fact.  At  the  stage
of  development  now  reached  by  humanity  the  fact  of  belong¬
ing  to  a  given  nationality  is  to  a  certain  extent  confirmed
by  the  individual’s  self-conscious  will.  Thus  nationality  is  an
inner,  inseparable  property  of  the  person — is  something  very  dear
and  close  to  him.  It  is  impossible  to  stand  in  a  moral  relation
to  this  person  without  recognising  the  existence  of  what  is  so
important  to  him.  The  moral  principle  does  not  allow  us  to
transform  a  concrete  person,  a  living  man  with  his  inseparable
and  essential  national  characteristics  into  an  empty  abstract  subject
with  all  his  determining  peculiarities  left  out.  If  we  are  to
recognise  the  inner  dignity  of  this  particular  man  this  obligation
extends  to  all  positive  characteristics  with  which  he  connects  his
dignity  ;  if  we  love  a  man  we  must  love  his  nation  which  he  loves
and  from  which  he  does  not  separate  himself.  The  highest  moral
ideal  demands  that  we  should  love  all  men  as  we  love  ourselves.  But
since  men  do  not  exist  outside  of  nations  (just  as  nations  do  not
exist  apart  from  individual  men),  and  since  this  connection  has
already  become  moral  and  inward  as  well  as  physical,  the  direct
logical  deduction  is  that  we  must  love  all  nations  as  we  love  our  own.
This  commandment  affirms  patriotism  as  a  natural  and  fundamental
feeling,  as  a  direct  duty  of  the  individual  to  the  collective  whole
immediately  above  him,  and  at  the  same  time  it  frees  that  feeling
from  the  zoological  properties  of  national  egoism  or  nationalism,
and  makes  it  the  basis  of  and  the  standard  for  a  positive  relation


298  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

to  all  other  nations  in  accordance  with  the  absolute  and  all-
embracing  principle  of  morality.  The  significance  of  this  demand
of  loving  other  nations  does  not  in  any  way  depend  upon  the
metaphysical  question  as  to  whether  nations  are  independent
collective  entities.  Even  if  a  nation  exists  only  in  its  visible  indi¬
vidual  representatives,  at  any  rate  in  them  it  constitutes  a  positive
peculiarity  which  one  may  value  and  love  in  foreigners  just  as
much  as  in  men  belonging  to  our  own  people.  If  such  a  relation
actually  becomes  a  rule,  national  differences  will  be  preserved  and
even  intensified,  while  hostile  divisions  and  aggressiveness,  that  are
so  fundamental  an  obstacle  to  the  moral  organisation  of  humanity,
will  disappear.

The  demand  to  love  other  nations  as  our  own  does  not  at  all
imply  a  psychological  identity  of  feeling,  but  only  an  ethical  identity
of  conduct.  I  must  desire  the  true  good  of  all  other  nations
as  much  as  that  of  my  own.  This  ‘love  of  benevolence’  is
identical  if  only  because  the  true  good  is  one  and  indivisible.  Such
ethical  love  involves,  of  course,  a  psychological  understanding  and
approval  of  the  positive  characteristics  of  other  nations.  Once  the
senseless  and  ignorant  national  hostility  has  been  overcome  by
the  moral  will,  we  begin  to  know  and  to  value  other  nations — we
begin  to  like  them.  This  ‘  approving  love,’  however,  can  never
be  identical  with  the  love  we  feel  for  our  own  people,  just  as  the
sincerest  love  to  our  neighbours  (according  to  the  commandment
of  the  Gospel)  can  never  be  psychologically  identical  with  the  love
for  oneself,  although  it  is  ethically  equivalent  to  it.  One’s  own
self. \  just  as  one’s  own  nation,  always  retains  the  priority  of  a  starting-
point.  When  this  difficulty  is  cleared  away,  no  serious  objections
can  be  raised  against  the  principle :  love  all  other  nations  as  your  own У

1  I  cannot  regard  as  serious  the  objection  made  by  one  of  my  critics  that  it  is
impossible  to  love  one’s  own  and  other  nations  equally,  because  in  war  it  is  necessary  to
fight  for  one’s  own  people  against  the  others.  I  would  have  thought  it  obvious  that
the  moral  norm  of  international  relations  must  be  deduced  from  some  other  fact  than  that
of  war.  Otherwise  we  might  be  driven  to  take  as  the  norm  for  personal  relations  such
facts  as,  e.g.,  a  furious  fight  between  an  actor  and  a  Government  clerk,  which  recently
engaged  the  attention  of  the  newspapers.


CHAPTER  VI


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  FROM  THE  MORAL  POINT  OF  VIEW

Having  accepted  the  unconditional  principle  of  morality  as  the
standard  of  all  human  relations  we  shall  find  no  real  inner  difficulty
in  applying  it  to  international  morality,  i.e.  to  the  question  as  to
how  we  ought  to  regard  foreigners  as  such  ;  neither  the  character¬
istics  of  this  or  that  people  nor  the  general  fact  of  belonging  to  a
foreign  nation  contain  any  moral  limitation  in  virtue  of  which  we
might  a  priori  regard  a  given  foreigner  as  a  worse  man  than  any  of  our
compatriots.  There  is  therefore  no  moral  ground  for  national  in¬
equality.  The  general  demand  of  altruism — to  love  one’s  neighbour
as  oneself  and  another  nation  as  one’s  own — remains  here  in  full
force.  The  fact  of  international  hostility  must  be  unconditionally
condemned  as  directly  opposed  to  the  absolute  norm  and  as  essen¬
tially  anti-Christian.1  The  normal  or  the  right  attitude  to  foreign
nations  is  directly  demanded  by  the  unconditional  principle  of
morality.  Its  application  involves  great  practical  difficulties,  both
historical  and  psychological,  but  it  does  not  give  rise  to  any  inner
moral  difficulties,  complications,  or  questions.  Such  difficulties
arise  when  instead  of  the  morally  indifferent  fact  of  nationality
we  have  to  deal  with  a  fact  which  undoubtedly  belongs  to  the
moral  sphere,  namely,  that  of  criminality.

The  connotation  and  the  denotation  of  this  idea  vary  with
regard  to  detail  according  to  time  and  place.  Much  that  was
formerly  regarded  as  criminal  is  no  longer  recognised  as  such.
The  very  fact  of  criminality  which  had  once  extended  to  the

1  The  question  of  ivar  is  historically  connected  with  the  fact  of  international  hostility
but  is  not  exhausted  thereby.  Apart  from  international  wars  there  have  been,  and  may
be  in  the  future,  intestine  wars — social  and  religious.  The  problem  of  war  must  be
considered  separately,  and  one  of  the  subsequent  chapters  will  be  devoted  to  it.

299


Зоо  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

criminal’s  family  and  relatives  is,  at  a  certain  stage  of  spiritual
development,  recognised  as  exclusively  a  personal  characteristic.
But  these  historical  changes  do  not  affect  the  nature  of  the  case.
Apart  from  the  supposed  criminals  of  different  kinds,  in  all  human
societies  there  have  always  been  and  to  the  end  of  the  world  there
will  be  real  criminals,  i.e.  men  with  an  evil  will  sufficiently  strong
and  decided  to  be  directly  realised  in  practice  to  the  detriment  of
their  neighbours  and  the  danger  of  the  community  as  a  whole.
How  then  are  we  to  regard  these  avowedly  bad  people  ?  It  is
clear  that  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  absolute  moral  principle
the  demands  of  altruism  which  received  their  final  expression  in
the  Christian  commandments  of  love  must  extend  to  these  men
too.  But  the  q-uestion,  in  the  first  place,  is  how  we  are  to
combine  love  for  the  evil-doer  with  love  for  his  victim,  and
secondly,  what  should  be  the  practical  expression  of  our  love  for
the  evil-doer  or  criminal  so  long  as  he  is  in  this  obviously  abnormal
moral  condition.  No  one  can  avoid  this  moral  question.  Even  if
a  person  never  came  into  personal  contact  with  unquestionable
crimes  and  criminals,  as  a  member  of  society  he  must  know  that
there  exists  a  very  complex  administrative,  legal  and  penal  organi¬
sation  intended  for  dealing  with  crime.  He  must,  therefore,  in
any  case,  determine  his  moral  relation  to  these  institutions — and
this  in  the  last  resort  depends  on  his  attitude  to  crime  and  the
criminal.  What  ought  this  attitude  to  be  from  the  purely  moral
point  of  view  ?  In  dealing  with  this  important  question,  I  will
begin  with  the  simplest  case,  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  further
complications.


I

When  one  man  is  doing  injury  to  another,  e.g.  when  the
stronger  man  is  beating  the  weaker,  a  person  witnessing  the
injury — if  he  takes  the  moral  point  of  view — experiences  a  double
feeling  and  an  impulse  to  a  twofold  course  of  action.  In  the
first  place,  he  wants  to  defend  the  victim ,  and  in  the  second,  to
bring  the  injur er  to  his  senses.  Both  impulses  have  the  same  moral
source — -the  recognition  of  another  person’s  life  and  the  respect
for  another  person’s  dignity,  psychologically  based  upon  the  feeling
of  pity  or  compassion.  We  experience  direct  pity  for  the  being


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  301

who  undergoes  physical  and  mental  suffering  ;  the  mental  suffer¬
ing,  of  which  he  is  more  or  less  clearly  conscious,  consists  in  the
fact  that  human  dignity  has  been  violated  in  his  person.  Such
external  violation  of  human  dignity  in  the  injured  is  inevitably
connected  with  the  inward  degradation  of  that  dignity  in  the
injurer;  in  both  cases  it  demands  to  be  re-established.  Psycho¬
logically,  our  feeling  for  the  victim  is  very  different  from  our
feeling  for  the  aggressor — the  first  is  pure  pity,  and  in  the  second
anger  and  moral  indignation  predominate.  But  to  be  moral,  that
indignation  must  not  pass  into  injustice  towards  the  wrong-doer,
into  denying  his  human  right,  although  that  right  materially
differs  from  the  right  of  the  victim.  The  latter  has  a  right  to
our  defence,  the  former  has  a  right  to  be  brought  to  reason  by  us.
The  moral  basis  of  the  two  relations  is,  however,  in  the  case  of
rational  beings,  one  and  the  same — the  absolute  worth  or  dignity
of  human  personality,  which  we  recognise  in  others  as  well  as  in
ourselves.  The  twofold  violation  of  that  dignity  taking  place  in
criminal  assault— violation  passive  in  the  injured  and  active  in  the
injurer — calls  forth  a  moral  reaction  in  us,  which  is  essentially  the
same  in  both  cases,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  its  psychological
expression  is  different  and  even  opposed.  Of  course,  when  the
injury  directly  or  indirectly  causes  physical  pain  to  the  victim,  the
latter  excites  a  more  strong  and  immediate  feeling  of  pity  ;  but
speaking  generally,  the  injurer  ought  to  rouse  even  greater  pity,
for  he  inwardly  loses  his  moral  dignity.  However  this  may  be,
the  moral  principle  demands  that  we  should  recognise  the  right  of
both  to  our  help  in  re-establishing  the  violated  norm  both  in  the
one  and  in  the  other.

This  deduction  from  the  moral  principle,  demanding  that  in
the  case  of  crime,  i.e.  of  injury  to  man  by  man,  we  should  take
up  a  moral  attitude  to  both  parties,  is  far  from  being  universally
recognised.  It  must  be  defended  against  two  kinds  of  adversaries.
Some — and  they  are  in  the  majority— recognise  only  the  right  of
the  victim  or  of  the  injured  person  (or  community)  to  be  defended
and  avenged.  The  wrong-doer  or  the  criminal,  once  his  guilt  has
been  proved,  they  regard,  at  any  rate  in  practice,  as  a  rightless,
passive  object  of  retribution,  i.e.  of  more  or  less  complete  crushing
or  extermination — c  hanging  is  too  good  for  him,’  ‘  to  the  dog  a
dog’s  death,’  is  the  popular  sincere  expression  of  this  point  of  view.


302  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Its  direct  opposition  to  the  moral  principle  and  its  incompati¬
bility  with  any  degree  of  developed  human  feeling  1  explains  and
psychologically  excuses  the  extreme  opposite  view,  which  is
beginning  to  gain  ground  in  our  time.  This  view  recognises  the
right  of  the  injurer  to  be  brought  to  reason  by  means  of  verbal
persuasion  only,  and  admits  of  no  compulsion  with  regard  to  him
which  practically  amounts  to  depriving  the  injured  person  or
society  of  their  right  to  defence.  Their  safety  is  made  to  depend
upon  the  success  of  persuasion,  i.e.  on  something  quite  problematical,
which  no  one  can  control  or  be  held  responsible  for.  Let  us
carefully  consider  the  two  opposed  doctrines,  which,  for  the  sake
of  brevity,  I  will  describe  respectively  as  the  doctrine  of  retribution
and  the  doctrine  of  verbal  persuasion.

II

The  doctrine  of  retribution  admits  of  a  very  real  explanation
and  of  fictitious  proof,  and  when  dealing  with  it,  it  is  very  im¬
portant  not  to  mix  the  one  with  the  other.  When  an  animal
is  attacked  by  another  about  to  devour  it,  the  instinct  of  self-
preservation  urges  it  to  defend  itself  with  its  claws  and  teeth,  or,
if  these  are  not  strong  enough,  to  seek  safety  in  flight.  No  one
would  look  for  moral  motives  in  this  case  any  more  than  in  the
physical  self-defence  of  man,  whose  natural  means  of  defence  are
replaced  or  supplemented  by  artificial  weapons.  Even  the  savage,
however,  does  not  as  a  rule  live  by  himself,  but  belongs  to  some
social  group — a  family,  a  clan,  a  band.  Therefore  when  he
encounters  an  enemy  the  affair  does  not  end  with  their  single
combat.  Murder  or  any  other  injury  inflicted  upon  a  member  of
a  group  is  felt  by  the  group  as  a  whole  and  rouses  in  it  a  feeling
of  resentment.  In  so  far  as  that  feeling  includes  pity  for  the
victim,  we  must  recognise  the  presence  of  a  moral  element  in  it.
But  no  doubt  the  predominant  part  is  played  by  the  instinct  of
collective  self-preservation,  like  among  bees  and  other  social
animals.  In  defending  one  of  its  members,  the  clan  or  the  family
is  defending  itself ;  in  avenging  one  of  its  members,  it  is  aveng¬
ing  itself.  But  for  the  same  reasons  the  aggressor  too  is  defended

1  This  is  shown,  among  other  things,  by  the  fact  that  among  the  people,  at  any  rate
among  the  Russian  people,  criminals  are  called  the  unfortunate.


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  303

by  his  clan  or  family.  Single  combats  thus  develop  into  wars
between  entire  communities.  The  Homeric  poems  have  preserved
for  us  this  stage  of  social  relations  by  immortalising  the  Trojan
war,  which  arose  out  of  a  private  injury  inflicted  by  Paris  upon
Menelaus.  The  history  of  the  Arabs  before  Mohammed  is  full
of  such  wars.  The  ideas  of  crime  and  punishment  do  not  really
exist  at  this  stage  at  all  ;  the  injurer  is  an  enemy  to  be  revenged
upon,  not  a  criminal  to  be  punished.  The  place  which  later  on  is
occupied  by  legal  justice  is  here  entirely  taken  up  by  the  uni¬
versally  recognised  and  absolutely  binding  custom  of  blood-
vengeance.  This  custom  applies,  of  course,  to  injuries  between
members  of  different  clans  or  tribes.  But,  speaking  generally,
other  kind  of  injuries  are  not  found  at  this  stage  of  the  communal
life.  The  cohesion  of  the  social  group  bound  together  by  kinship
is  too  strong,  and  the  prestige  of  the  patriarchal  power  too  great,
for  the  individual  to  rebel  against  it.  It  is  almost  as  impossible
as  the  conflict  of  an  individual  bee  with  the  rest  of  the  hive.  No
doubt  even  at  the  primitive  stage  man  retained  his  power  of
arbitrary  choice  and  did  in  some  few  instances  manifest  it.  But
these  exceptional  cases  were  dealt  with  by  exceptional  measures
on  the  part  of  the  patriarchal  authority,  and  did  not  call  forth  any
general  regulations.  Things  were  changed  with  the  transition  to
the  order  of  the  state.  When  many  clans  and  tribes  for  any
reason  chose  or  were  compelled  to  unite  in  one  way  or  another
under  one  common  leader  with  a  more  or  less  definite  power
they  lost  their  independence  and  forfeited  the  right  of  blood-
vengeance.

It  is  curious  that  philosophers  and  jurists,  from  ancient  times
and  almost  down  to  our  own  day,  made  a  priori  theories  with
regard  to  the  origin  of  the  state,  as  though  all  actual  states  had
arisen  in  some  remote  prehistoric  times.  This  is  due,  of  course,
to  the  extremely  imperfect  state  of  historical  science.  But  what
may  be  permissible  to  Hobbes  and  even  to  Rousseau  cannot  be
allowed  on  the  part  of  modern  thinkers.  The  kinship-group  stage
through  which  all  nations  have  passed  in  one  way  or  another  is
not  anything  enigmatic  :  the  clan  is  a  direct  consequence  of  the
natural  blood-tie.  The  question  is,  then,  as  to  the  transition  from
the  stage  of  kinship  to  that  of  the  state — and  this  can  be  an  object  of
historical  observation.  It  is  sufficient  to  mention  the  transformation


304  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

which  took  place  in  quite  historical  times  of  the  disconnected
tribes  and  clans  of  Northern  Arabia  into  a  powerful  .Mohammedan
state.  Its  theocratic  character  is  not  an  exception  :  such  were  to
a  greater  or  lesser  extent  all  the  important  states  of  antiquity.
Consider  the  way  in  which  a  state  comes  to  be  formed.  A  leader,
military  or  religious,  or  most  frequently  both,  impelled  by  the
consciousness  of  his  historic  calling  and  also  by  personal  motives,
gathers  round  himself  men  from  different  clans  and  tribes,  thus
forming  an  inter-tribal  nucleus.  Around  this  nucleus  entire
clans  and  tribes  come  to  be  grouped  voluntarily  or  by  compulsion,
receiving  from  the  newly  formed  supreme  power  laws  and
government,  and  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent  losing  their  inde¬
pendence.  When  a  social  group  has  a  government  organised  on
the  principle  of  hierarchy  with  a  supreme  central  authority  at
the  head,  a  regular  army,  a  financial  system  based  upon  taxa¬
tion,  and  laws  accompanied  by  penal  sanctions,  such  a  group
has  the  essential  characteristics  of  a  state.  All  the  characteristics
enumerated  were  present  in  the  Mohammedan  community  during
the  later  years  of  Mohammed’s  life.  It  is  remarkable  that  the
history  of  the  original  formation  of  this  state  confirms  to  a  certain
extent  the  ‘  social  contract  ’  theory.  All  the  chief  actions  of
the  Arab  prophet  in  this  connection  have  been  signalised  by
formal  treaties,  beginning  with  the  so-called  ‘oath  of  women,’
and  ending  with  the  conditions  he  dictated  at  Mecca  after  his
final  victory  over  the  tribe  of  the  Koreishites  and  their  allies.  It
should  be  noted,  too,  that  the  fundamental  point  of  all  these  treaties
is  the  abolition  of  blood-vengeance  between  the  tribes  and  clans
which  are  to  enter  the  new  political  union.

Hence  arises  the  distinction,  which  did  not  exist  before,
between  private  and  public  right.  With  regard  to  blood-vengeance
and  other  important  matters,  the  interests  of  the  collective
group  were  identical  with  the  interests  of  the  individual.  This
was  all  the  more  natural  as  in  a  small  social  group  such  as  the
clan  or  the  tribe  all,  or  at  any  rate  most,  of  its  members  could
know  each  other  personally,  and  thus  each  was  for  all,  and  all  for
each — a  concrete  unit.  In  the  state,  however,  the  social  group
embraces  hundreds  of  thousands  or  even  millions  of  men,  and
the  concrete  personal  relation  between  the  parts  and  the  whole
becomes  impossible.  A  clear  distinction  is  drawn  between


THE  PENAL  QUESTION


3°5


private  and  public  interests  and  between  the  corresponding
rights.  In  opposition  to  our  modern  legal  notions,  at  that  stage
murder,  robbery,  bodily  injuries,  etc.,  are  treated  as  the  violations
of  private  rights.  Formerly,  at  the  kinship-group  stage,  all  such
crimes  were  regarded  as  directly  affecting  the  interests  of  the  com¬
munity,  and  the  whole  clan  retaliated  upon  the  culprit  and  his
kinsmen.  When  a  wider  political  union  was  formed,  this  right
and  duty  of  blood-vengeance  was  taken  away  from  the  clan,  but  did
not  pass,  unchanged,  to  the  state.  The  new  common  authority,
the  source  of  government  and  of  law,  could  not  at  once  enter  into
the  interests  of  all  its  numerous  subjects  to  such  an  extent  as  to
defend  them  like  its  own.  The  head  of  the  state  cannot  act  and
feel  like  the  elder  of  a  clan.  And  we  find  that  with  regard  to
the  defence  of  private  persons  and  property  the  state  is  at  first
content  with  very  little.  For  bodily  injury  or  other  violence  to  a
free  man,  and  even  for  the  murder  of  one,  the  culprit  or  his
relatives  pay  to  the  family  of  the  victim  compensation  in  money,
the  amount  of  which  is  settled  by  mutual  agreement  (composition
and  is  generally  very  moderate.  Ancient  law-codes,  e.g.  the  laws
of  the  Salic  Francs,  or  our  own  Russkaya  Pravda ,  which  are
relics  of  a  primitive  political  order,  are  full  of  the  enumerations
of  fines  differing  according  to  the  sex  of  the  person  and  to  other
circumstances.  The  direct  and  rapid  transition  from  merciless
blood-vengeance,  often  accompanied  by  long  and  devastating  wars
between  entire  tribes,  to  simple  money  compensation  is  remark¬
able  ;  but  from  the  point  of  view  indicated  it  is  perfectly  natural.

At  this  stage  of  social  development  the  only  capital  offences
are,  strictly  speaking,  political  crimes  all  other,  murder  included,
are  regarded  as  private  quarrels  rather  than  crimes.

Such  elementary  opposition  between  public  and  private
rights  could  not  be  stable.  Money-fine  for  every  kind  of  injury
to  a  private  person  does  not  satisfy  the  injured  party  (e.g.  the
family  of  the  murdered  man),  nor  does  it  deter  the  wrong-doer,
especially  if  he  be  rich,  from  committing  further  crimes.  Under
such  conditions  blood-vengeance  for  private  offences,  abolished  by

1  The  denotation  of  this  idea  differed  in  accordance  with  the  historical  circum¬
stances.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  capital  character  of  simple  murder  was  not
yet  clear  to  the  legal  consciousness,  coining  false  money  was  punished  by  painful  death,
as  a  crime  detrimental  to  society  as  a  whole,  infringing  upon  the  privileges  of  the
central  authority  and,  in  this  sense,  political.


X


3o6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  state  as  opposed  to  its  very  conception,  is  renewed  de  facto
and  threatens  to  destroy  the  raison  d'etre  of  the  state  :  if  each  has
to  avenge  his  own  wrongs,  why  should  he  bear  the  hardships
imposed  by  the  new  political  order?  To  justify  the  demands
that  private  persons  make  upon  it,  the  state  must  really  take
upon  itself  to  protect  their  interests  ;  in  order  to  abolish  the
private  right  of  blood-vengeance,  the  state  must  make  it  a  public
right,  i.e.  must  itself  exercise  it.  At  this  new  and  higher
stage  the  solidarity  of  the  central  power  with  its  individual
subjects  becomes  more  clear.  The  distinction  between  crimes
directed  against  the  government  (political  crimes)  and  those  in¬
fringing  upon  private  interests  only  is  still  retained,  but  it  is
now  merely  a  distinction  of  degree.  Each  free  man  becomes  a
citizen,  i.e.  a  member  of  the  state  which  undertakes  to  protect
his  safety  ;  every  violation  of  it  is  regarded  by  the  state  authority
as  an  attack  upon  its  own  rights,  as  a  hostile  action  against  the
social  whole.  All  attacks  against  person  and  property  are  re¬
garded  as  violations  of  the  law  of  the  state,  and  no  longer  as
private  offences,  and  are  therefore,  like  political  crimes,  for  the  state
itself  to  avenge.


Ill

The  legal  doctrine  of  retribution  has  then  a  historical  founda¬
tion  in  the  sense  that  legal  punishments  still  in  use  in  our  day
are  a  historical  transformation  of  the  primitive  principle  of  blood-
vengeance.  Originally,  the  injured  person  was  avenged  by  a
more  narrow  social  union  called  the  clan,  then  by  a  wider  and
more  complex  union  called  the  state.  Originally,  the  criminal
lost  all  human  rights  in  the  eyes  of  the  clan  he  injured  ;  now  he
became  the  rightless  subject  of  punishment  in  the  eyes  of  the
state,  which  revenges  itself  on  him  for  the  violation  of  its  laws.
The  difference  consists  chiefly  in  the  fact  that  at  the  patriarchal
stage  the  act  of  vengeance  itself  was  accomplished  very  simply —
the  aggressor  was,  at  the  first  opportunity,  killed  like  a  dog— but
the  consequences  were  very  complex,  and  took  the  form  of
endless  inter-tribal  wars.  In  the  state,  on  the  contrary,  the  act
of  vengeance,  which  the  public  authorities  took  upon  themselves,
was  performed  slowly  and  with  all  sorts  of  ceremonies,  but  no


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  307

further  complications  ensued,  for  the  criminal  had  no  one
sufficiently  strong  to  avenge  him — he  was  defenceless  before  the
power  of  the  state.

But  can  the  unquestionable  fact  that  legal  executions  are
a  historical  transformation  of  blood- vengeance  be  used  as  an
argument  in  favour  of  the  executions  themselves,  or  in  favour  of
the  principle  of  retaliation  ?  Does  this  historical  basis  justify
us  in  determining  our  attitude  towards  the  criminal  by  the  idea  of
vengeance,  the  idea,  i.e.,  of  paying  evil  for  evil,  pain  for  pain  ?
Speaking  generally,  logic  does  not  allow  us  to  make  such  deduc¬
tions  from  the  genetic  connection  between  two  events.  Not  a
single  Darwinian,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  drew  the  conclusion  that
because  man  is  descended  from  the  lower  animals  he  ought  to  be
a  brute.  From  the  fact  that  the  urban  community  of  Rome  had
been  originally  established  by  a  band  of  robbers,  no  historian
has  yet  concluded  that  the  true  principle  of  the  Holy  Roman
Empire  ought  to  have  been  brigandage.  With  regard  to  the
question  before  us,  it  is  clear  that  since  we  are  dealing  with  the
evolution  of  blood-vengeance  there  is  no  reason  to  regard  this
evolution  as  completed.  We  know  that  the  relation  of  society
and  of  law  to  the  criminal  has  undergone  great  changes.  Pitiless
blood-vengeance  was  replaced  by  money-fines,  and  these  were
replaced  by  ‘civil  executions,’  extremely  cruel  at  first,  but,
beginning  with  the  eighteenth  century,  getting  more  and  more
mild.  There  is  not  the  slightest  rational  ground  to  suppose
that  the  limit  of  mercy  has  already  been  reached  and  that  the
gallows  and  the  guillotine,  penal  servitude  for  life,  and  solitary
confinement  must  for  ever  remain  in  the  penal  code  of  civilised
countries.

But  while  historical  progress  clearly  tends  to  eliminate  the
principle  of  vengeance  or  of  exact  retaliation  from  our  treatment
of  criminals,  and  finally  to  abolish  it  altogether,  many  philosophers
and  jurists  still  continue  to  urge  abstract  arguments  in  defence  of
it.  These  arguments  are  so  feeble  that  no  doubt  they  will  be
an  object  of  astonishment  and  ridicule  to  posterity,  just  as
Aristotle’s  arguments  in  favour  of  slavery,  or  the  ecclesiastical
proofs  of  the  flatness  of  the  earth,  are  a  source  of  wonder  to  us
now.  The  pseudo-arguments  used  by  the  champions  of  the
doctrine  of  retribution  are  not  in  themselves  worth  considering.


3o8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

But  since  they  are  still  repeated  by  authors  worthy  of  respect,
and  since  the  subject  is  of  vital  importance,  the  refutation  of  them
ought  also  to  be  repeated.

“Crime  is  a  violation  of  right  ;  right  must  be  re-established  ;
punishment,  i.e.  equal  violation  of  the  criminal’s  right,  performed
in  accordance  with  a  definite  law  by  public  authority  (in  contra¬
distinction  to  private  vengeance),  balances  the  first  violation,  and
thus  right  is  re-established.”  This  pseudo-argument  turns  on
the  term  ‘  right.’  But  concrete  right  is  always  somebody's  right
(there  must  be  a  subject  of  rights).  Whose  right  is  then  here
referred  to  ?  In  the  first  place,  apparently,  it  is  the  right  of  the
injured  person.  Let  us  put  this  concrete  content  in  the  place
of  the  abstract  term.  Peaceful  shepherd  Abel  has  no  doubt  a
right  to  exist  and  to  enjoy  all  the  good  things  of  life  ;  but  a
wicked  man,  Cain,  comes  and  deprives  him  of  this  right  by
murdering  him.  The  violated  right  must  be  re-established  ;
to  do  so  public  authority  comes  on  the  scene  and,  against
the  direct  warning  of  Holy  Writ  (Genesis  iv.  15)5  hangs  the
murderer.  Well,  does  this  re-establish  Abel’s  right  to  live?
Since  no  one  but  an  inmate  of  Bedlam  would  affirm  that  the
execution  of  the  murderer  raises  the  victim  from  the  dead,  we
must  take  the  word  ‘right’  in  this  connection  to  mean,  not
the  right  of  the  injured  person,  but  of  somebody  else.  The
society  or  the  state 1  may  be  the  subject  of  the  right  violated  by
the  crime.  All  private  rights  (of  life,  of  property,  etc.)  are
guaranteed  by  the  state  ;  it  answers  for  their  inviolability  in
placing  them  under  the  defence  of  its  laws.  The  law  forbidding
private  persons  to  take  the  life  of  their  fellow-citizens  at  their
own  discretion  is  proclaimed  by  the  state  in  its  own  right,  and
therefore  the  violation  of  the  law  (a  murder)  means  violation  of
the  right  of  the  state.  The  execution  of  the  murderer  re¬
establishes  the  right  of  the  state  and  the  dignity  of  the  law—
not  the  right  of  the  murdered  man.2

1  In  this  connection  either  term  may  be  used  indifferently.

2  In  the  opinion  of  one  of  my  critics,  I  am  wrong  in  supposing  that  a  crime  must
necessarily  be  the  violation  of  somebody’s  right.  Apart  from  any  subject  of  rights—
individual  or  collective,  private  or  public— and  also  apart  from  the  moral  norm  or  the
absolute  good,  there  exists,  it  is  urged,  right  as  such,— an  independent  objective  essence,
and  the  proper  object  of  punishment  is  the  satisfaction  of  this  self-existent  right.  The
critic  is  mistaken  in  thinking  that  I  am  ignorant  of  this  metaphysical  impersonation  of


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  309

What  justice  this  argument  contains  has  nothing  to  do  with
the  case.  There  is  no  doubt  that  once  laws  exist,  their  viola¬
tion  must  not  be  overlooked,  and  that  it  is  the  business  of  the
state  to  see  to  it.  But  we  are  not  dealing  here  with  the  general
question  of  the  punishability  of  crime,  for  in  this  respect  all  crimes
are  identical.  If  a  law  is  sacred  in  itself  as  proceeding  from  the
state,  this  is  true  of  all  laws  in  an  equal  degree.  They  all  equally
express  the  right  of  the  state  ;  and  the  violation  of  any  law  what¬
ever  is  the  violation  of  this  supreme  right.  Material  differences
between  crimes  have  to  do  with  the  particular  interests  which
are  infringed  ;  but  on  its  formal  side,  in  relation  to  what  is
universal ,  that  is  to  the  state  as  such ,  and  to  its  law  and  power,
every  crime,  if,  of  course,  it  is  committed  by  a  responsible  agent,
presupposes  a  will  opposed  to  the  law,  a  will  that  sets  it  at  nought
and  is  therefore  criminal — and  from  this  point  of  view  all  crimes
ought  logically  to  require  the  same  punishment.  But  the
difference  in  punishments  for  the  different  crimes  exists  in  all
legal  codes,  and  it  obviously  presupposes,  in  addition  to  the  general
principle  of  punishability,  a  certain  other  specific  principle  which
determines  the  particular  connection  between  this  crime  and  this
punishment.  The  doctrine  of  retribution  discovers  this  connection
in  the  fact  that  the  right  violated  by  a  particular  criminal  action
is  re-established  by  a  corresponding  or  equal  action — for  instance,
a  murderer  must  be  killed.  There  can,  however,  be  no  real
correspondence  or  equality.  The  most  famous  champions  of  the
doctrine  conceive  of  the  matter  as  follows  :  Right  is  something
positive,  say  a  +  (plus)  ;  the  violation  of  it  is  something  negative,
-  (a  minus).  If  the  negation  in  the  form  of  crime  has  taken  place
(e.g.  a  man  has  been  deprived  of  life),  it  must  call  forth  equal
negation  in  the  form  of  punishment  (taking  the  murderer’s  life).
Then  such  double  negation,  or  the  negation  of  the  negative,  will
once  more  bring  about  a  positive  state,  i.e.  re-establish  the  right  :
minus  multiplied  by  minus  makes  plus.  It  is  difficult  to  take  this
‘  play  of  mind  ’  seriously  ;  it  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  idea


the  ancient  Moloch.  But  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  go  into  it,  since  no  serious  crimino¬
logist  has  for  a  long  time  past  upheld  it.  It  is  obvious  that  ‘right’  is  by  its  very
meaning  a  relation  between  subjects,  conditioned  by  certain  moral  and  practical  norms,
and  that  therefore  a  subjectless  and  unrelated  right  is  an  Unding — a  thought  that  has
no  content.


Зю  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

of  the  negation  of  the  negative  logically  expresses  a  direct  inner
relation  between  two  opposed  acts.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  an
impulse  of  ill-will  in  man  is  c  negative,’  is,  namely,  a  negation
of  the  moral  norm,  the  opposite  act  of  will,  suppressing  that
impulse,  will  indeed  be  a  ‘negation  of  the  negative,’  and  the
result  will  be  a  positive  one— man’s  affirmation  of  himself  as
normal.  Similarly,  if  crime  as  an  active  expression  of  ill-will  is
negative,  the  criminal’s  active  repentance  will  be  a  negation  of  the
negative  (that  is,  not  of  the  fact,  of  course,  but  of  the  inner  cause
that  produced  it),  and  the  result  will  again  be  positive — his  moral
regeneration.  But  the  execution  of  the  criminal  has  obviously
no  such  significance  ;  in  this  case  the  negation  is  directed,  as  in
the  crime  itself,  upon  something  positive — upon  human  life.  It
cannot  indeed  be  maintained  that  the  execution  of  the  criminal
negates  his  crime,  for  that  crime  is  an  irrevocably  accomplished
fact,  and,  according  to  the  remark  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,
God  Himself  cannot  undo  what  has  been  done.  Nor  does  it
negate  the  criminal’s  evil  will,  for  the  criminal  has  either  repented
of  his  crime — and  in  that  case  there  is  no  longer  any  evil  will —
or  he  remains  obdurate  to  the  end,  and  then  his  will  is  inaccessible
to  the  treatment  he  is  receiving  ;  and  in  any  case  an  external
enforced  action  can  neither  cancel  nor  change  the  inner  state
of  will.  What,  then,  is  negated  by  the  execution  of  the
criminal  is  not  his  evil  will,  but  the  positive  good  of  life, — and
this  is  once  more  a  simple  negation,  and  not  a  ‘negation  of  the
negative.’  But  a  simple  succession  of  two  negatives  cannot  lead
to  anything  positive.  The  misuse  of  the  algebraic  formula  makes
the  argument  simply  ridiculous.  In  order  that  two  minuses,  that
is,  two  negative  quantities,  should  make  a  plus,  it  is  not  sufficient
to  place  them  one  after  another,  but  it  is  necessary  to  multiply  one
by  the  other.  But  there  is  no  intelligible  meaning  in  multiplying
crime  by  punishtnent }

IV

The  inherent  absurdity  of  the  doctrine  of  retribution  or
‘  avenging  justice  ’  is  emphasised  by  the  fact  that,  with  a  few

1  It  is  obvious  that  we  cannot  in  this  case  go  further  than  addition  (of  the  material
results).  The  corpse  of  the  murdered  victim  may  be  added  to  the  corpse  of  the  hanged
murderer  and  then  there  will  be  two  corpses— i.e.  two  negative  quantities.


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  31 1

exceptions,  it  has  no  relation  whatever  to  the  existing  penal  laws.
Strictly  speaking,  there  is  only  one  case  in  which  it  appears  to  be
applicable — that  of  the  death  penalty  for  murder.  Therefore  the
pseudo-philosophical  arguments  in  favour  of  this  doctrine,  the  gist
of  which  has  been  considered  above,  refer  to  this  single  instance
only — a  bad  omen  for  a  principle  which  lays  claim  to  universal
significance.  In  Russia,  where  capital  punishment  is  the  penalty
for  certain  political  crimes  only,  there  is  not  even  this  one  case  of
apparent  correspondence.  No  trace  of  equality  between  crime
and  punishment  can  be  detected  in  the  case  of  parricide  and  penal
servitude  for  life,  or  simple  murder  with  a  view  to  robbery  and
twelve  years’  penal  servitude.  The  best  argument  against  the
doctrine  is  the  circumstance  that  it  finds  its  fullest  application  in
the  penal  codes  of  some  half-savage  peoples,  or  in  the  laws  pre¬
valent  at  the  epoch  of  barbarism,  when,  e.g.,  for  inflicting  a
certain  injury  the  culprit  underwent  a  similar  injury,  for  speaking
insolent  words  a  person  had  his  tongue  cut  out,  etc.  A  prin¬
ciple  the  application  of  which  proves  to  be  incompatible  with  a
certain  degree  of  culture  and  refinement  is  condemned  by  the
verdict  of  history.

In  modern  times  the  doctrine  of  re-establishing  right  by  means
of  equal  retribution  was,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  defended  by
abstract  philosophers  more  than  by  jurists.  The  latter  under¬
stand  the  equalisation  of  crime  with  punishment  in  the  relative
and  quantitative  sense  only  (the  measure  of  punishment).  They
demand,  i.e.,  that  a  crime  more  grave  than  another  should  be
punished  more  severely,  so  that  there  should  be  a  scale  of  punish¬
ments  corresponding  to  the  scale  of  crimes.  But  the  basis  and,
consequently,  the  apex  of  the  penal  ladder  remains  indefinite,  and
therefore  the  punishments  may  be  either  inhumanly  cruel  or
extremely  mild.  Such  a  scale  of  penalties  has  existed  in  the
penal  codes  in  which  all,  or  almost  all,  simple  crimes  were
punished  by  a  fine  :  a  larger  fine  was  paid  for  the  murder  of  a
man  than  for  the  murder  of  a  woman,  for  a  serious  bodily  injury
than  for  a  slight  one,  etc.  On  the  other  hand,  codes  in  which
the  penalty  for  theft  was  hanging  punished  more  heinous  crimes
by  capital  punishment  accompanied  by  various  degrees  of  torture.
What  is  in  this  case  immoral  is  the  cruelty  of  the  punishments,
and  not,  of  course,  their  graduated  character.


3i2  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

From  the  moral  point  of  view  it  is  of  interest  that  the  penal
laws  show  a  tendency  to  preserve  the  cruel  punishments  as  far  as
possible.  This  tendency  has  no  doubt  become  weaker,  but  it  has
not  yet  disappeared  altogether.  Not  finding  a  sufficiently  secure
foundation  in  the  pseudo-rational  principle  of  ‘re-established  right,’
it  seeks  empirical  support  in  the  principle  of  intimidation.  In
truth,  the  latter  has  always  formed  part  of  the  doctrine  of  retribu¬
tion.  The  popular  aphorism,  ‘  To  a  dog  a  dog’s  death,’  has  always
been  accompanied  by  the  addition,  ‘  as  a  warning  to  others.’

This  principle  can  hardly  be  said  to  be  wholly  valid  even  from
the  utilitarian  and  empirical  point  of  view.  No  doubt  fear  is  an
important  human  instinct,  but  it  has  no  decisive  significance  for
man.  The  perpetually  increasing  number  of  suicides  proves  that,
in  many,  death  itself  inspires  no  fear.  Prolonged  solitary  con¬
finement  or  penal  servitude  may  in  themselves  be  more  terrible
but  they  do  not  produce  an  immediate  intimidating  effect.  I
will  not  dwell  upon  these  and  other  well-known  arguments  against
the  theory  of  intimidation,  such  as  the  contention  that  the
criminal  always  hopes  to  avoid  detection  and  escape  punishment,
or  that  the  enormous  majority  of  crimes  are  committed  under  the
influence  of  some  passion  which  stifles  the  voice  of  sagacity.
The  relative  force  of  all  these  arguments  is  open  to  dispute.  In¬
disputable  refutation  of  the  deterrent  theory  is  only  possible  from
the  moral  point  of  view.  It  is  refuted,  first,  on  the  ground  of
principle,  as  directly  opposed  to  the  fundamental  law  of  morality,
and,  secondly,  by  the  fact  that  this  opposition  compels  the
champions  of  intimidation  to  be  inconsistent  and  gradually  to
relinquish,  on  the  strength  of  moral  motives,  the  most  clear  and
effective  demands  of  their  own  theory.  It  is  understood,  of
course,  that  I  am  referring  here  to  intimidation  as  a  fundamental
principle  of  legal  justice  and  not  merely  as  a  psychological  fact,
which  naturally  accompanies  any  method  of  dealing  with  crime.
Even  supposing  it  were  intended  to  reform  criminals  by  means  of
moral  exhortation  alone,  the  prospect  of  such  tutelage,  however
mild  and  rational,  might  intimidate  vain  and  self-willed  men  and
deter  them  from  criminal  actions.  Obviously,  however,  this  is
not  what  is  meant  by  the  theory  which  regards  intimidation  as
the  essence  and  the  direct  object  of  punishment,  and  not  as  an
indirect  consequence  of  it.


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  313

The  moral  principle  asserts  that  human  dignity  must  be
respected  in  every  person,  and  that  therefore  no  one  may  be  made
merely  a  means  of  or  an  instrument  for  the  advantage  of  others.
According  to  the  deterrent  theory,  however,  the  criminal  who  is
being  punished  is  regarded  as  merely  a  means  for  intimidating
others  and  safeguarding  public  safety.  The  penal  law  may,  of
course,  intend  to  benefit  the  criminal  himself,  by  deterring  him,
through  fear  of  punishment,  from  committing  the  crime.  But  once
the  crime  has  been  committed,  this  motive  obviously  disappears,
and  the  criminal  in  being  punished  becomes  solely  a  means  of  intimi¬
dating  others,  i.e.  a  means  to  an  end  external  to  him ;  and  this  is  in
direct  contradiction  to  the  unconditional  law  of  morality.  From
the  moral  point  of  view  a  punishment  inspiring  fear  would  only
be  permissible  as  a  threat ;  but  a  threat  which  is  never  fulfilled
loses  its  meaning.  Thus,  the  principle  of  penal  intimidation  can
be  moral  only  on  condition  of  being  useless,  and  can  be  materially
useful  only  on  condition  of  being  applied  immorally.

In  point  of  fact  the  theory  of  intimidation  finally  lost  its
sting  from  the  time  when  all  civilised  and  half-civilised  countries
abolished  cruel  corporal  punishments  and  capital  punishment
accompanied  by  torture.  It  is  clear  that  if  the  object  of  punish¬
ment  is  to  intimidate  both  the  criminal  and  others,  these  means
are  certainly  the  most  effective  and  rational.  Why  then  do  the
champions  of  intimidation  renounce  the  true  and  the  only  reliable
means  of  intimidation  ?  Probably  because  they  consider  these
means  immoral  and  opposed  to  the  demands  of  pity  and  humanity.
In  that  case,  however,  intimidation  ceases  to  be  the  determining
factor  in  punishment.  It  must  be  one  or  the  other  :  either  the
meaning  of  punishment  is  intimidation — and  in  that  case  execution
accompanied  by  torture  must  be  admitted  as  pre-eminently  in¬
timidating  ;  or  the  nature  of  punishment  is  determined  by  the
moral  principle — and  in  that  case  intimidation  must  be  given  up
altogether,  as  a  motive  essentially  immoral.1

1  In  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the  movement  against  the  cruelty  of  penal  laws  was
at  its  height,  several  writers  sought  to  prove  that  torturing  prisoners  is  both  inhuman
and  useless  as  a  deterrent,  for  it  does  not  prevent  any  one  from  committing  crimes.  If
this  contention  could  be  substantiated  it  would  deprive  the  theory  of  intimidation  of
all  meaning  whatever.  It  is  obvious  that  if  even  painful  executions  are  insufficient  to
intimidate  criminals,  punishments  more  mild  are  still  less  likely  to  do  so.


3 14  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


V

The  circumstance  that  the  most  consistent  forms  of  retribution
and  intimidation  have  disappeared  from  modern  penal  codes,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  from  the  first  point  of  view  such  forms  must
be  recognised  as  the  most  just,  and  from  the  second  as  the  most
effective,  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  a  different,  a  moral  point  of
view  has  penetrated  into  this  sphere  and  made  considerable  pro¬
gress  in  it.  This  undoubted  and  fairly  rapid  progress  has  failed
to  affect  the  penal  codes  of  savage  or  barbarian  peoples  alone —
such  as  the  Abyssinians  or  the  Chinese  ;  and  even  they,  indeed,
are  about  to  enter  into  the  general  life  of  civilised  humanity.
Nevertheless,  our  own  penal  systems — I  mean  those  of  Europe
and  America — still  retain  much  unnecessary  violence  and  cruelty,
which  can  only  be  explained  as  a  dead  legacy  of  the  defunct
principles  of  retribution  and  intimidation.  Among  these  vestiges
of  the  past  are  capital  punishment,  which  is  still  being  obstinately
defended  though  it  has  lost  its  grounds  ;  indefinite  deprivation  of
liberty  ;  penal  servitude  ;  exile  into  distant  countries  with  unbear¬
able  conditions  of  life,  etc.

All  this  systematic  cruelty  is  revolting  to  the  moral  feeling
and  brings  about  a  change  in  our  original  attitude  towards  the
criminal.  Pity  to  the  injured  person  and  the  impulse  to  defend
him  set  us  against  the  injurer  (the  criminal).  But  when  society,
which  is  incomparably  stronger  than  the  individual  criminal,  turns
upon  him  its  insatiable  hostility  after  he  has  been  disarmed,  and
makes  him  undergo  prolonged  suffering,  it  is  he  who  becomes
the  injured  party  and  excites  in  us  pity  and  a  desire  to  protect  him.
Although  the  legal  theory  and  the  legal  practice  have  decidedly
renounced  consistent  application  of  the  principles  of  retribution  and
intimidation,  they  have  not  given  up  the  principles  themselves.
The  system  of  punishments  that  exists  in  civilised  countries  is
a  meaningless  and  lifeless  compromise  between  these  worthless
principles  on  the  one  hand  and  certain  demands  of  humanity  and
justice  on  the  other.  In  truth,  what  we  find  are  simply  the  more
or  less  softened  vestiges  of  the  old  brutality,  with  no  uniting
thought,  no  guiding  principle  involved.  The  compromise  cannot


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  315

help  us  to  solve  the  question  that  is  essential  for  the  moral  con¬
sciousness  :  does  the  fact  of  crime  deprive  the  criminal  of  his
human  rights,  or  does  it  not  ?  If  it  does  not ,  how  can  we  rob
him  of  the  first  condition  of  any  right — of  existence,  as  is  done  in
the  case  of  capital  punishment  ?  And  if  the  fact  of  crime  does
deprive  the  criminal  of  his  natural  rights,  what  need  is  there  of
legal  ceremony  with  rightless  beings  ?  Empirically  this  dilemma
is  solved  by  a  distinction  being  drawn  between  crimes,  some  of
which  are  taken  to  deprive  the  criminal  of  human  rights,  and
others  merely  to  limit  them  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent.  Both
the  principle  and  the  degree  of  such  limitation  are,  however,
changeable  and  indefinite,  and  the  very  distinction  between  the
two  kinds  of  crime  proves  to  be  arbitrary  and  to  differ  according
to  time  and  place.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  Western  Europe  political
crimes  do  not  involve  the  loss  of  human  rights,  while  in  Russia  the
old  view  is  still  in  full  force,  and  these  crimes  are  regarded  as  the
most  heinous  of  all.  One  would  have  thought  that  so  important
a  fact  as  the  transformation  of  man  from  an  independent  being
fully  possessed  of  rights  into  passive  material  for  punitary  exercises
must  depend  upon  some  objective  reason  or  determining  principle,
the  same  for  all  times  and  at  all  places.  In  fact,  however,  it
appears  that  in  order  to  change  from  a  person  into  a  thing,  man
must  in  one  country  commit  a  simple  murder  ;  in  another,  a
murder  with  aggravating  circumstances ;  in  the  third,  some
political  crime,  etc.

The  extremely  unsatisfactory  condition  of  this  important
question,  the  frivolous  attitude  to  the  life  and  destiny  of  men  are
revolting  to  the  intellect  and  conscience,  and  produce  a  reaction
of  the  moral  feeling.  Unfortunately,  however,  this  reaction
leads  many  moralists  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  induces  them
to  reject  the  idea  of  punishment  in  general,  i.e.  in  the  sense
of  real  opposition  to  crime.  According  to  this  modern  doctrine,
violence  or  compulsion  towards  any  one  is  never  permissible.,  and
therefore  the  criminal  may  only  be  dealt  with  by  rational  persua¬
sion.  The  merit  of  this  doctrine  is  the  moral  purity  of  its  pur¬
pose  ;  its  defect  is  that  the  purpose  cannot  be  realised  in  the  way
advocated.  The  principle  of  taking  up  a  passive  attitude  towards
criminals  not  only  rejects  retribution  and  intimidation  (which  is
the  right  thing  to  do),  but  also  excludes  measures  intended  to


3i6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

prevent  crimes  and  to  improve  criminals.  From  this  point  of
view  the  state  has  not  the  right  to  lock  up,  even  only  for  a  time,
a  vicious  murderer,  though  the  circumstances  of  the  case  make
it  clear  that  he  will  continue  his  crimes  ;  nor  has  it  a  right  to
place  the  criminal  in  a  more  normal  environment,  even  if  it
were  exclusively  for  his  own  good.  Similarly,  it  is  contended
that  a  private  person  has  no  right  forcibly  to  detain  a  would-be
murderer  from  rushing  at  his  victim,  but  may  only  address  him
with  words  of  exhortation.  In  criticising  the  theory  1  will  con¬
sider  this  instance  of  individual  opposition  to  crime,  as  it  is  more
simple  and  fundamental.

It  is  only  in  extremely  rare,  exceptional  cases  that  men  who
are  depraved  and  capable  of  deliberate  crime  are  affected  by  words
of  rational  persuasion.  To  ascribe  beforehand  such  exceptional
power  to  one’s  own  words  would  be  morbid  self-conceit ;  to  be
content  with  words  without  being  certain  of  their  success  when  a
man’s  life  is  at  stake  would  be  inhuman.  The  victim  has  a  right
to  all  the  help  we  can  render  him,  and  not  to  verbal  intercession
only,  which,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  can  be  nothing  but
comical.  In  the  same  way,  the  aggressor  has  a  right  to  all  the
help  we  can  give  to  restrain  him  from  a  deed  which  is  for  him
even  a  greater  disaster  than  for  his  victim.  Only  after  having
stopped  his  action  can  we  with  calm  conscience  address  words  of
exhortation  to  him.  If  I  see  the  criminal’s  arm  raised  to  murder
his  victim  and  I  seize  hold  of  it,  will  this  be  a  case  of  immoral
violence  ?  It  will  no  doubt  be  violence,  but  so  far  from  being
immoral,  it  will  be  conscientiously  binding ,  and  will  directly  follow
from  the  demands  of  the  moral  principle.  In  restraining  a  man
from  murder  I  actively  respect  and  support  his  human  dignity,
which  is  seriously  menaced  by  his  carrying  out  his  intention.  It
would  be  strange  to  believe  that  the  very  fact  of  such  violence —
i.e.  a  certain  contact  of  the  muscles  of  my  arm  with  the  muscles
of  the  murderer’s  arm,  and  the  necessary  consequences  of  the
contact — contains  an  element  of  immorality.  Why,  in  that  case
it  would  be  immoral  to  pull  a  drowning  man  out  of  water,  for  it
too  cannot  be  done  without  much  physical  exertion  and  some
physical  pain  to  the  person  who  is  being  saved.  If  it  is  per¬
missible  and  a  moral  duty  to  pull  a  drowning  man  out  of  the
water,  even  if  he  resists,  it  is  all  the  more  permissible  to  pull  a


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  317

criminal  away  from  his  victim,  even  if  it  means  bruises,  scratches,
and  dislocations.1

It  must  be  one  or  the  other.  Either  the  criminal  whom  we
restrain  has  not  yet  lost  all  human  feeling,  and  then  he  will,  of
course,  be  grateful  for  having  been  saved  in  time  from  sin — no  less
than  the  drowning  man  is  grateful  for  having  been  taken  out  of  the
water  ;  in  that  case,  the  violence  which  he  suffered  was  done  with
his  own  tacit  consent,  and  his  right  has  not  been  violated,  so  that,
strictly  speaking,  there  has  been  no  violence  at  all,  since  volenti
non  fit  injuria .2  Or  the  criminal  has  lost  human  feeling  to  such
an  extent  that  he  is  annoyed  at  having  been  prevented  from  cut¬
ting  his  victim’s  throat.  But  to  address  a  man  in  such  a  condi¬
tion  with  words  of  rational  persuasion  would  be  the  height  of
absurdity  ;  it  would  be  the  same  as  preaching  to  one  who  is  dead-
drunk  the  advantages  of  abstinence,  instead  of  pouring  cold  water
over  him.

Were  the  fact  of  physical  violence,  i.e.  of  the  application  of
muscular  force,  in  itself  bad  or  immoral,  it  would,  of  course,  be
wrong  to  use  this  bad  means  even  with  the  best  of  intentions — it
would  be  admitting  the  immoral  rule  that  the  purpose  justifies  the
means.  To  resist  evil  by  evil  is  wrong  and  useless  ;  to  hate  the
evil-doer  for  his  crime  and  therefore  to  revenge  oneself  on  him  is
childish.  But  there  is  no  evil  in  restraining  the  evil-doer  from
crime  for  the  sake  of  his  own  good  and  without  any  hatred  of
him.  Since  there  is  nothing  bad  in  muscular  force  as  such,  the
moral  or  the  immoral  character  of  its  application  depends  in  each
case  upon  the  intention  of  the  person  and  the  circumstances  of
the  case.  Physical  force  rationally  used  for  the  real  good  of  others,
both  moral  and  material,  is  a  good  and  not  a  bad  means,  and  such
application  of  it,  so  far  from  being  forbidden,  is  directly  prescribed
by  the  moral  principle.  The  dividing  line  between  the  moral
and  immoral  use  of  physical  compulsion  may  be  a  fine  one,  but  it
is  perfectly  clear  and  definite.  The  whole  point  is  the  attitude

1  What,  however,  if  in  restraining  the  murderer  we  may  in  the  struggle  unintentionally
cause  him  grave  injuries  and  even  death  ?  It  will  be  a  great  misfortune  for  us,  and  we
will  grieve  over  it  as  over  an  involuntary  sin  ;  but,  in  any  case,  unintentionally  to  kill  a
criminal  is  a  lesser  sin  than  deliberately  to  allow  an  intentional  murder  of  an  innocent
person.

2  ‘There  is  no  injury  to  the  willing,’  i.e.  an  action  which  is  in  accordance  with  the
will  of  the  person  who  suffers  it  cannot  be  a  violation  of  his  right.


3i8  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

we  take  towards  the  evil-doer  in  resisting  evil.  If  we  retain  a
human,  moral  relation  to  him  and  are  thinking  of  his  own  good,
there  will  obviously  be  nothing  immoral  in  our  enforced  violence
no  trace  of  cruelty  or  revenge.  The  violence  will,  in  that  case,
be  simply  an  inevitable  condition  of  our  helping  the  man,  just
like  a  surgical  operation  or  the  locking  up  of  a  dangerous  lunatic.

The  moral  principle  forbids  to  make  a  human  being  merely
a  means  to  extraneous  purposes,  i.e.  to  ends  which  do  not  include
his  own  good.  If,  therefore,  in  resisting  crime  we  regard  the
criminal  simply  as  a  means  for  the  defence  or  the  satisfaction  of
the  injured  person  or  society,  our  action  is  immoral,  even  though
its  motive  might  be  unselfish  pity  for  the  victim  and  genuine
anxiety  for  public  safety.  From  the  moral  point  of  view  this  is
not  sufficient.  We  ought  to  pity  both  the  victim  and  the  criminal  ;
and  if  we  do  so,  if  we  really  have  the  good  of  them  both  in  view,
reason  and  conscience  will  tell  us  what  measure  and  what  form
of  physical  compulsion  is  necessary.

Moral  questions  are  finally  decided  by  conscience,  and  I
confidently  ask  every  one  to  turn  to  his  own  inner  experience
(imaginary,  if  there  has  not  been  any  other)  and  say  in  which
of  the  two  cases  does  conscience  reproach  us  more  :  in  the  case
when,  being  able  to  prevent  a  crime  we  had  callously  passed  by,
saying  a  few  useless  words,  or  when  we  had  actually  prevented  it
even  at  the  expense  of  inflicting  certain  physical  injuries.  Every
one  understands  that  in  a  perfect  society  there  must  be  no  compulsion
at  all.  But  the  perfection  has  yet  to  be  attained ;  and  it  is  quite
obvious  that  to  let  evil  and  irrational  men  exterminate,  unhindered,
the  normal  people  is  not  the  right  method  of  creating  the  perfect
society.  What  is  desirable  is  the  organisation  of  the  good,  and
not  the  freedom  of  evil.  “  But,”  the  modern  sophists  will  urge,
“  society  has  often  taken  for  evil  what  afterwards  proved  to  be  a
good,  and  has  persecuted  innocent  men  as  criminals  ;  therefore
legal  justice  is  worth  nothing,  and  all  compulsion  must  be  given
up.”  This  argument  is  not  my  invention — I  have  read  and  heard
it  many  times.  Reasoning  in  this  way  we  should  have  to  say  that
the  mistakes  in  the  astronomical  theories  of  Ptolemy  are  a
sufficient  ground  for  giving  up  astronomy,  and  that  the  errors  of
the  alchemists  prove  chemistry  to  be  worthless.

It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  men  of  a  different  stamp  from


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  319

obvious  sophists  can  defend  so  poor  a  doctrine.  The  truth  is,  I
think,  that  its  real  foundation  is  mystical  and  not  ethical.  The
idea  underlying  the  doctrine  seems  to  be  this  :  “  That  which  seems
to  us  to  be  evil,  may  not  be  evil  at  all  ;  the  Deity  or  Providence
knows  better  than  we  do  the  true  connection  of  things  and  the
way  to  produce  real  good  out  of  apparent  evil.  We  can  only  know
and  judge  our  own  inner  states  and  not  the  objective  signifi¬
cance  and  consequences  of  our  own  and  other  people’s  actions.”
It  must  be  confessed  that  to  a  religious  mind  this  view  is
extremely  attractive  ;  nevertheless,  it  is  a  mistaken  view.  The
truth  of  a  theory  is  tested  by  the  fact  whether  it  can  be  con¬
sistently  carried  out  without  landing  us  in  contradictions  and
absurdities.  The  view  in  question  cannot  bear  this  test.  If  our
ignorance  of  all  the  objective  consequences  of  our  own  and  other
people’s  actions  were  a  sufficient  ground  for  remaining  inactive,
we  ought  not  to  resist  our  own  passions  and  evil  impulses.  For
aught  we  know,  the  all-merciful  Providence  might  derive
wonderful  results  from  a  person’s  profligacy,  drunkenness,  ill-
feeling  to  his  neighbours,  etc.

Suppose,  for  instance,  that  for  motives  of  abstinence  a  man
stayed  away  from  a  public-house.  But  had  he  not  resisted  his
inclination  and  gone,  he  would  on  his  way  back  have  found  a
half-frozen  puppy.  Being  in  a  condition  when  one  is  inclined
to  be  sentimental,  he  would  have  picked  up  the  puppy  and  warmed
it  back  to  life.  The  puppy,  upon  growing  up  into  a  big  dog,  would
have  saved  a  little  girl  from  drowning  in  the  pond  ;  and  the  little
girl  would  eventually  become  the  mother  of  a  great  man.  Now,
however,  the  misplaced  abstinence  has  interfered  with  the  plans
of  Providence.  The  puppy  was  frozen,  the  little  girl  drowned,
and  the  great  man  is  doomed  to  remain  for  ever  unborn.  Another
person,  given  to  anger,  felt  inclined  to  slap  in  the  face  the  man
he  was  arguing  with,  but  thought  that  this  would  be  wrong,  and
restrained  himself.  And  yet,  had  he  not  controlled  his  anger,  the
injured  person  would  have  taken  the  opportunity  to  turn  him  the
other  cheek,  and  would  have  thus  softened  the  heart  of  the
aggressor.  Virtue  would  have  doubly  triumphed,  while,  as  it  was,
their  meeting  ended  in  nothing.

The  doctrine  which  absolutely  rejects  all  forcible  resistance  to
evil,  or  all  defence  of  one’s  neighbours  by  means  of  physical  force,


320  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  really  based  upon  an  argument  of  this  nature.  A  man  has
saved  another’s  life  by  using  force  and  disarming  the  brigand  who
attacked  him.  But,  later  on,  the  person  saved  became  a  terrible
malefactor,  far  worse  than  the  brigand  ;  therefore  it  would  have
been  better  not  to  have  saved  him.  Exactly  the  same  disappoint¬
ment,  however,  might  ensue  if  the  man  were  threatened  by  a
rabid  wolf  instead  of  by  a  brigand.  Does  it  follow,  then,  that
we  are  not  to  defend  any  one  even  from  wild  beasts  ?  Besides,
when  I  save  people  in  a  fire  or  in  an  inundation,  it  may  very
well  happen  that  the  saved  may  subsequently  be  extremely  un¬
happy  or  prove  to  be  terrible  scoundrels,  so  that  it  would  have
been  better  for  them  to  have  been  burnt  or  drowned.  Does  it
follow  that  one  ought  not  to  help  any  one  in  any  calamity  whatso¬
ever  ?  Actively  helping  one’s  neighbours  is  a  direct  and  positive
demand  of  morality.  If  we  renounce  the  duty  of  kindness  on  the
ground  that  actions  inspired  by  that  feeling  may  have  bad  con¬
sequences  unknown  to  us,  we  can  just  as  well  for  the  same  reason
renounce  the  duty  of  abstinence  and  all  others,  because  these,  too,
may  prompt  us  to  actions  which  may  lead  to  evil  consequences,
as  in  the  examples  cited  above.  If,  however,  that  which  appears
to  us  to  be  good  leads  to  evil,  then,  vice  versa ,  that  which  appears
to  us  to  be  evil  may  lead  to  good.  Perhaps,  then,  the  best  plan
would  be  to  do  evil  straight  away  in  order  that  good  might  ensue.
Fortunately,  this  whole  line  of  thought  is  self-destructive,  for  the
series  of  unknown  events  may  go  further  than  we  think.  Take
the  first  instance,  in  which  Mr.  X.,  by  resisting  his  inclination
for  strong  drink,  indirectly  prevented  the  birth  of  a  great  man.
We  cannot  tell  whether  this  great  man  would  not  have  caused
great  disasters  to  humanity  ;  and  if  he  would,  it  is  just  as  well
that  he  has  not  been  born  ;  therefore  Mr.  X.  did  very  well  in
making  himself  stay  at  home.  In  the  same  way,  we  do  not
know  what  further  consequences  might  ensue  from  the  triumph
of  virtue  due  to  a  slap  in  the  face  magnanimously  endured.  It  is
highly  probable  that  this  extreme  magnanimity  would  eventually
lead  to  spiritual  pride,  which  is  the  worst  of  all  sins,  and  thus
ruin  the  man’s  soul.  Therefore  Mr.  Y.  did  well  in  controlling
his  anger  and  preventing  the  magnanimity  of  his  opponent  from
showing  itself.  Altogether,  since  we  know  nothing  for  certain,
we  have  equal  right  to  make  all  sorts  of  suppositions  with  regard


THE  PENAL  QUESTION  321

to  possibilities.  But  it  by  no  means  follows  that  because  we  do
not  know  what  consequences  our  actions  may  lead  to,  we
ought  to  refrain  from  all  action.  This  conclusion  would  only
be  correct  if  we  knew  for  certain  that  the  consequences  would
be  bad.  Since,  however,  they  may  equally  be  good  or  bad,
we  have  equal  ground  (or,  rather,  equal  absence  of  ground)  for
action  or  inaction.  All  these  reflections  on  the  indirect  results  of
our  actions  can  then  have  no  practical  significance.  They  could
be  a  real  determining  force  in  our  life  only  if  we  could  know
more  than  the  immediate  links  in  the  series  of  consequences.
The  immediate  links  may  be  always  supposed  to  be  followed  by
further  links  of  an  opposite  character  and  destructive  of  our  con¬
clusion.  It  would  therefore  be  necessary  to  know  the  whole  series
of  consequences  down  to  the  end  of  the  world,  which  is  impossible
for  us.

Our  actions  or  refusal  to  act  must  then  be  determined,  not  by
the  consideration  of  their  possible  indirect  consequences  unknown
to  us,  but  by  impulses  directly  following  from  the  positive  demands
of  the  moral  principle.  This  is  true  not  only  from  the  ethical
but  also  from  the  mystical  point  of  view.  If  everything  be  referred
back  to  Providence,  it  is  certainly  not  without  Its  knowledge  that
man  possesses  reason  and  conscience,  which  tell  him  in  each
concrete  case  what  direct  good  he  can  do,  independently  of  all
indirect  consequences.  And  if  we  believe  in  Providence,  we
certainly  believe  also  that  It  cannot  allow  that  actions  conformable
to  reason  and  conscience  should  ultimately  lead  to  evil.  If  we
know  that  it  is  immoral  or  opposed  to  human  dignity  to  stupefy
oneself  with  strong  drink,  our  conscience  will  not  permit  us  to
consider  whether  in  the  state  of  intoxication  we  might  not  do
something  which  would  subsequently  lead  to  good  results.
Similarly,  if  from  a  purely  moral  motive,  apart  from  any  malice  or
revenge,  we  prevented  a  brigand  from  killing  a  man,  it  will
never  occur  to  us  to  argue  that  this  may  perhaps  lead  to  some  evil,
and  that  it  might  have  been  better  to  let  the  murder  take  place.

Through  our  reason  and  conscience  we  know  for  certain  that
carnal  passions — drunkenness  or  profligacy — are  bad  in  themselves
and  ought  to  be  restrained.  The  same  reason  and  conscience  tell
us  with  equal  certainty  that  active  love  is  good  in  itself  and  that
one  must  act  in  the  spirit  of  it — to  help  our  neighbours,  to  defend


322  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

them  from  the  elements,  from  wild  beasts,  and  also  from  men
who  are  evil  or  insane.  Therefore  the  man  who  from  a  pure
impulse  of  pity  snatches  away  the  knife  from  a  would-be
murderer’s  hand  and  thus  saves  him  from  an  extra  sin  and  his
victim  from  a  violent  death,  or  the  man  who  uses  physical
violence  to  prevent  a  patient  ill  with  delirium  tremens  from  freely
running  about  the  streets,  will  always  be  justified  by  his  own  con¬
science  and  by  the  universal  verdict  of  humanity  as  one  who
carried  out  in  practice  the  moral  demand  :  Help  all  as  much  as  in
thee  lies.

Providence  certainly  extracts  good  from  our  evil,  but  from
our  good  it  derives  a  still  greater  good.  And  what  is  of  especial
importance  is  that  this  second  kind  of  good  comes  about  with
our  direct  and  active  participation,  while  the  first,  that  derived
from  our  evil,  does  not  concern  us  nor  belong  to  us.  It  is  better
to  be  a  helper  than  a  dead  instrument  of  the  all- merciful
Providence.


VI

Punishment  as  intimidating  revenge  (the  typical  instance  of
which  is  capital  punishment)  cannot  from  the  moral  point  of  view
be  justified,  for  it  denies  the  criminal  his  human  character,  deprives
him  of  the  right  of  existence  which  belongs  to  every  person,  and
makes  him  a  passive  instrument  of  other  people’s  safety.  No
more,  however,  can  we  justify  from  the  moral  point  of  view  an
indifferent  attitude  to  crime,  the  attitude  of  not  resisting  it.  It
does  not  take  into  account  the  right  of  the  injured  party  to  be
protected  nor  the  right  of  the  whole  society  to  a  secure  existence,
and  makes  everything  depend  upon  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  worst
people.  The  moral  principle  demands  real  resistance  to  crimes,
and  determines  this  resistance  (or  punishment  in  the  wide  sense  of
the  term,  as  distinct  from  the  idea  of  retribution)  as  a  rightful
means  of  active  pity ,  legally  and  forcibly  limiting  the  external  expres¬
sions  of  evil  will ,  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  safety  of  the  peaceful
members  of  society ,  but  also  in  the  interests  of  the  criminal  himself
Thus  the  true  conception  of  punishment  is  many-sided,  but
each  aspect  is  equally  conditioned  by  the  universal  moral
principle  of  pity,  which  includes  both  the  injured  and  the


3*3


THE  PENAL  QUESTION

injurer.  The  victim  of  a  crime  has  a  right  to  protection  and,
as  far  as  possible,  to  compensation  ;  society  has  a  right  to  safety  ;
the  criminal  has  a  right  to  correction  and  reformation.  Resistance
to  crimes  that  is  to  be  consistent  with  the  moral  principle  must
realise  or,  at  any  rate,  aim  at  an  equal  realisation  of  those  three
rights.

Protection  of  individuals,  public  safety,  and  the  subsequent  good
of  the  criminal,  demand  in  the  first  place  that  the  person  guilty  of
a  crime  should  be  for  a  time  deprived  of  liberty.  In  the  interests
of  his  relatives  and  his  own,  a  spendthrift  is  rightly  deprived  of
freedom  in  the  administration  of  his  property.  It  is  all  the  more
just  and  necessary  that  a  murderer  or  a  seducer  should  be  deprived
of  freedom  in  his  line  of  activity.  For  the  criminal  himself
deprivation  of  freedom  is  especially  important  as  a  pause  in  the
development  of  the  evil  will,  as  an  opportunity  to  bethink  himself
and  repent.

At  the  present  time,  the  criminal’s  fate  is  finally  decided  by  the
court,  which  both  determines  his  guilt  and  decrees  his  punishment.
If,  however,  the  motives  of  revenge  and  intimidation  are  consistently
banished  from  penal  law,  the  conception  of  punishment  as  of  a
measure  determined  beforehand  and,  in  truth,  arbitrarily ,  must
disappear  also.  The  consequences  of  the  crime  for  the  criminal
must  stand  in  a  natural  and  inner  relation  with  his  real  condition.
The  law  court,  having  established  the  fact  of  guilt,  must  then
determine  its  nature,  the  degree  of  the  criminal’s  responsibility  and
of  his  further  danger  to  society,  that  is,  it  must  make  a  diagnosis
and  a  prognosis  of  the  moral  disease.  But  it  is  opposed  to  reason  to
prescribe  unconditionally  the  means  and  the  length  of  the  period  of
treatment.  The  course  and  the  methods  of  treatment  must  differ
according  to  the  changes  in  the  course  of  the  illness,  and  the  court
must  leave  this  to  penitentiary  institutions,  into  the  hands  of  which
the  criminal  should  pass.  A  short  time  ago  this  idea  would  have
been  thought  an  unheard-of  heresy,  but  of  late  attempts  have  been
made  to  realise  it  in  a  few  countries  {e.g.  in  Belgium  and  Ireland),
in  which  conditional  sentences  may  be  passed.  In  certain  cases  the
criminal  is  sentenced  to  a  definite  punishment,  but  undergoes  it
only  if  he  repeats  his  crime.  If  he  does  not,  he  remains  free,  and  his
first  crime  is  regarded  as  accidental.  In  other  cases,  the  sentence
is  conditional  with  regard  to  the  length  of  imprisonment,  which


324  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

may  be  shortened  according  to  the  subsequent  behaviour  of  the
criminal.  From  the  point  of  view  of  principle  these  conditional
sentences  are  an  advance  of  enormous  importance.


VII

There  had  been  a  time  when  men  suffering  from  mental  disease
were  treated  like  wild  beasts,  chained,  beaten,  etc.  Less  than  a
hundred  years  ago  it  was  considered  to  be  the  right  thing  ;  but
now  we  remember  it  with  horror.  Since  the  rate  of  progress  is
continually  increasing,  I  hope  to  live  to  a  time  when  prisons  and
penal  servitude  of  the  present  day  will  be  looked  upon  in  the  same
way  as  we  now  look  upon  the  old-fashioned  asylums  with  iron
cages  for  the  patients.  Although  the  penal  system  has  undoubtedly
progressed  of  late,  it  is  still  largely  determined  by  the  old  idea  of
punishment  as  torment  deliberately  inflicted  on  the  criminal,  in
accordance  with  the  principle,  c  The  thief  deserves  all  he  gets.’

In  the  true  conception  of  punishment  its  positive  end,  so  far  as
the  criminal  is  concerned,  is  not  to  cause  him  physical  pain,  but  to
heal  or  reform  him  morally.  This  idea  has  been  accepted  long
ago  (chiefly  by  theologians,  partly  by  philosophers,  and  by  a  very
few  jurists),  but  it  calls  forth  strong  opposition  on  the  part  of
jurists  and  of  a  certain  school  of  anthropologists.  From  the  legal
side  it  is  urged  that  to  correct  the  criminal  means  to  intrude  upon
his  inner  life,  which  the  state  and  society  have  no  right  to  do.
There  are  two  misconceptions  involved  here.  In  the  first  place,
the  task  of  reforming  criminals  is,  in  the  respect  we  are  here  con¬
sidering,  merely  an  instance  of  the  positive  influence  which  the
society  (or  the  state)  ought  to  exert  upon  such  members  of  it  as
are  in  some  respects  deficient,  and  therefore  not  fully  possessed  of
rights.  If  such  influence  is  rejected  on  principle  as  intrusion  into
the  individual’s  inner  life,  it  will  be  necessary  to  reject  also  public
education  of  children,  treatment  of  lunatics  in  public  asylums,  etc.

And  in  what  sense  can  it  be  said  to  be  an  intrusion  into  the
inner  world  ?  In  truth,  by  the  fact  of  his  crime  the  criminal  has
bared  or  exposed  his  inner  world,  and  is  in  need  of  influence  in  the
opposite  direction  which  would  enable  him  once  more  to  withdraw
into  the  normal  boundaries.  It  is  particularly  surprising  that
although  the  argument  recognises  the  right  of  society  to  put  a


325


THE  PENAL  QUESTION

man  into  demoralising  conditions  (such  as  our  present  prisons  and
penal  servitude,  which  the  jurists  do  not  reject),  it  denies  the  right
and  the  duty  of  society  to  put  him  into  conditions  that  might
render  him  moral.

The  second  misunderstanding  consists  in  imagining  that
reformation  of  the  criminal  means  forcing  upon  him  ready-made
principles  of  morality.  But  why  regard  incompetence  as  a
principle  ?  When  a  criminal  is  capable  of  reformation  at  all,  it
consists,  of  course,  chiefly  in  self-reformation.  External  influences
must  simply  put  the  man  into  conditions  most  favourable  for  it,
help  him  and  support  him  in  this  inner  work.

The  anthropological  argument  is  that  criminal  tendencies  are
innate  and  therefore  incorrigible.  That  there  exist  born  criminals
and  hereditary  criminals,  there  is  no  doubt.  That  some  of  them
are  incorrigible  it  is  difficult  to  deny.  But  the  statement  that  all
criminals  or  even  the  majority  of  them  are  incorrigible  is  absolutely
arbitrary  and  does  not  deserve  to  be  dwelt  upon.  If,  however,  all
we  may  admit  is  that  some  criminals  are  incorrigible,  no  one  can  or
has  a  right  to  be  certain  beforehand  that  this  particular  criminal
belongs  to  that  group.  All  therefore  ought  to  be  put  into  con¬
ditions  most  favourable  for  possible  reformation.  The  first  and
the  most  important  condition  is,  of  course,  that  at  the  head  of  penal
institutions  should  stand  men  capable  of  so  high  and  difficult  a
task — the  best  of  jurists,  alienists,  and  men  with  a  religious  calling.

Public  guardianship  over  the  criminal,  entrusted  to  competent
persons  with  a  view  to  his  possible  reformation, — this  is  the  only
conception  of  c  punishment  ’  or  positive  resistance  to  crime
compatible  with  the  moral  principle.  A  penal  system  based  upon
it  will  be  more  just  and  humane  than  the  present  one,  and  will,  at
the  same  time,  be  certainly  more  efficient.


CHAPTER  VII


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  FROM  THE  MORAL  POINT  OF  VIEW

I

If  individuals  and  nations  learnt  to  value  the  national  peculiarities
of  foreign  peoples  as  much  as  they  value  their  own  ;  if  within
each  nation  individual  criminals  were,  as  far  as  possible,  reformed
by  re-education  and  rational  guardianship,  from  which  all
vestige  of  legal  ferocity  were  eliminated, — this  moral  solution
of  the  national  and  the  penal  questions  would  still  leave
untouched  an  important  cause  both  of  national  hostility  and  of
criminality,  namely,  the  economic  cause.  The  chief  reason
why  Americans  hate  the  Chinese  is  certainly  not  that  the
Chinese  wear  plaits  and  follow  the  moral  teaching  of  Confucius,
but  that  they  are  dangerous  rivals  in  the  economic  sphere.
Chinese  labourers  in  California  are  persecuted  for  the  same
cause  for  which  Italians  are  ill-treated  in  southern  France,
Switzerland,  and  Brazil.  In  exactly  the  same  way  the  feeling
against  the  Jews,  whatever  the  inmost  causes  of  it  may  be,
clearly  rests  upon  and  is  obviously  due  to  economic  considera¬
tions.  Individual  criminality  is  not  created  by  environment,  but
it  is  largely  kept  up  and  encouraged  by  pauperism,  excessive
mechanical  labour,  and  the  inevitable  coarsening  that  follows
therefrom.  The  influence  of  the  most  rational  and  humane
penal  system  upon  individual  criminals  would  have  but  little
general  effect  so  long  as  these  conditions  prevailed.  The  bad
effect  of  the  economic  conditions  of  the  present  day  upon  the
national  and  the  criminal  questions  is  obviously  due  to  the  fact
that  these  conditions  are  in  themselves  morally  wrong.  Their
abnormality  is  manifested  in  the  economic  sphere  itself,  since

326


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  327

the  struggle  between  the  different  classes  of  society  for  the
possession  of  material  goods  is  becoming  more  and  more  acute,
and  in  many  countries  of  Western  Europe  and  America
threatens  to  become  a  deadly  strife.

For  a  man  who  takes  the  moral  point  of  view  it  is  as  im¬
possible  to  take  part  in  this  socially-economic  struggle  as  to
participate  in  the  hostility  between  races  and  nations.  But
at  the  same  time  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  remain  indifferent
to  the  material  position  of  his  neighbours.  If  the  elementary
moral  feeling  of  pity,  which  has  received  its  highest  sanction
in  the  Gospel,  demands  that  we  should  feed  the  hungry,
give  drink  to  the  thirsty,  and  warm  the  cold,  this  demand
does  not,  of  course,  lose  its  force  when  the  cold  and  hungry
number  millions  instead  of  dozens.  And  if  alone  I  cannot
help  these  millions,  and  am  not  therefore  morally  bound  to  do
so,  I  can  and  must  help  them  together  with  others.  My  personal
duty  becomes  a  collective  one — it  still  remains  my  own,  although
it  becomes  wider  in  so  far  as  I  participate  in  the  collective  whole
and  its  universal  task.  The  very  fact  of  economic  distress  proves
that  economic  conditions  are  not  connected  with  the  principle
of  the  good  as  they  should  be,  that  they  are  not  morally  organised.
A  whole  pseudo-scientific  school  of  conservative  anarchists  in
economics  directly  denied,  and  still  denies,  though  without  the
old  self-confidence,  all  ethical  principles  and  all  organisation  in
the  sphere  of  economic  relations.  The  prevalence  of  this  school
had  much  to  do  with  the  birth  of  revolutionary  anarchism.  On
the  other  hand,  the  many  varieties  of  socialism,  both  radical  and
conservative,  do  more  to  detect  the  presence  of  the  disease  than
to  offer  a  real  cure  for  it.

The  defect  of  the  orthodox  school  of  political  economy — the
liberal  or,  more  exactly,  the  anarchical  school — is  that  it  separates
on  principle  the  economic  sphere  from  the  moral.  The  defect
of  socialism  is  that  it  more  or  less  confuses  or  wrongly  identifies
these  two  distinct,  though  indivisible,  spheres.

II

All  practical  affirmation  of  a  thing  apart  from  its  due
connection  or  correlation  with  everything  else  is  essentially


328  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

immoral.  To  affirm  a  particular,  conditional,  and  relative
activity  as  a  thing  by  itself,  as  absolutely  independent  and  self-
contained,  is  wrong  in  theory  and  immoral  in  practice,  and  can
lead  to  nothing  but  disaster  and  sin.

To  regard  man  as  merely  an  economic  agent  a  producer,
owner,  and  consumer  of  material  goods — is  a  wrong  and  immoral
point  of  view.  These  functions  have  in  themselves  no  significance
for  man,  and  do  not  in  any  way  express  his  essential  nature  and
worth.  Productive  labour,  possession  and  enjoyment  of  its
results,  is  one  of  the  aspects  of  human  life  or  one  of  the  spheres
of  human  activity.  The  truly  human  interest  lies  only  in  the
fact  as  to  how  and  with  what  object  man  acts  in  this  particular
domain.  Free  play  of  chemical  processes  can  only  take  place  in
a  corpse  ;  in  a  living  body  these  processes  are  connected  and
determined  by  organic  purposes.  Similarly,  free  play  of  economic
factors  and  laws  is  only  possible  in  a  community  that  is  dead
and  is  decomposing,  while  in  a  living  community  that  has  a
future,  economic  elements  are  correlated  with  and  determined
by  moral  ends.  To  proclaim  laissez  faire ,  laissez  passer  is  to  say
to  society  ‘die  and  decompose.’

No  doubt  economic  relations  as  a  whole  are  based  upon
a  simple  and  ultimate  fact,  which  cannot  as  such  be  deduced
from  the  moral  principle — the  fact,  namely,  that  work,  labour,
is  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of  life.  There  has  never
been,  however,  a  stage  in  the  life  of  humanity  at  which  this
material  necessity  was  not  complicated  by  moral  considerations
— not  even  at  the  very  lowest  stage.  Necessity  compels  the
half-brutal  savage  to  procure  means  of  livelihood  ;  but  in  doing
so  he  may  either  think  of  himself  alone  or  include  in  his  need
the  need  of  his  mate  and  his  young.  If  the  hunt  has  been
unsuccessful  he  can  either  share  his  scarce  booty  with  them,
hardly  satisfying  his  own  hunger,  or  can  take  everything  for
himself,  leaving  them  to  fare  as  best  they  can  ;  or,  finally,  he
may  kill  them  so  as  to  satisfy  his  hunger  with  their  flesh.
Whichever  course  he  adopts,  even  the  most  orthodox  devotee
of  political  economy  would  not  be  likely  to  ascribe  his  action  to
the  effect  of  inexorable  economic  ‘  laws.’

The  necessity  to  work  in  order  to  obtain  the  means  of  liveli¬
hood  is  indeed  a  matter  of  fate  and  is  independent  of  human  will.


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  329

But  it  is  merely  an  impetus  which  spurs  man  to  activity,  the
further  course  of  that  activity  being  determined  by  psychological
and  moral,  and  not  by  economic,  causes.  When  social  structure
becomes  somewhat  more  complex,  not  only  the  distribution  of
the  products  of  labour  and  the  manner  of  enjoying  them,  or
‘consumption,’  but  the  labour  itself  is  determined  by  motives
other  than  those  of  physical  need — motives  which  have  no  element
of  compulsion  or  natural  necessity  about  them.  It  is  sufficient  to
name  as  an  instance  the  most  prevalent  among  them — the  greed
for  acquisition  and  the  thirst  for  pleasure.  There  is  no  economic
law  which  determines  the  degree  of  cupidity  or  voluptuousness  for
all  men,  and  there  is  indeed  no  law  that  these  passions  should  be
necessarily  inherent  in  man  at  all,  as  inevitable  motives  of  his
actions.  Therefore  in  so  far  as  economic  activities  and  relations
are  determined  by  these  mental  propensities  they  do  not  belong  to
the  domain  of  economics  and  do  not  obey  any  ‘  economic  laws  ’
with  necessity.

Take  the  most  elementary  and  the  least  disputable  of  these
so-called  laws,  namely,  the  law  that  the  price  of  goods  is  deter¬
mined  by  the  relation  between  supply  and  demand.  This  means
that  the  more  demand  there  is  for  a  particular  article  and  the  less
there  is  of  it,  the  more  it  costs — and  vice  versa.

Suppose,  however,  that  a  rich  but  benevolent  trader  who  has
a  constant  supply  of  some  article  of  the  first  necessity  decides,  in
spite  of  the  increased  demand  for  that  article,  not  to  raise  his  prices
or  even  decides  to  lower  them  for  the  good  of  his  needy  neigh¬
bours.  This  will  be  a  violation  of  the  supposed  economic  ‘law,’
and  yet,  however  unusual  the  case  may  be,  certainly  no  one  would
think  it  impossible  or  supernatural.

Let  us  grant  that  if  everything  depended  upon  the  good  will  of
private  individuals,  we  might,  in  the  domain  of  economics,  regard
magnanimous  motives  as  a  negligible  quantity,  and  build  every¬
thing  upon  the  secure  foundation  of  self-interest.  Every  society,
however,  has  a  central  government,  a  necessary  function  of  which
is  to  limit  private  cupidity.  There  are  a  good  many  historical
instances  in  which  the  state  made  the  habitual  and — from  the
point  of  view  of  self-interest — the  natural  order  of  things  un¬
natural  and  unusual,  sometimes  indeed  rendering  it  altogether
impossible,  and  transforming  the  former  exceptions  into  a  universal


330  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

rule.  Thus,  for  instance,  in  Russia  for  two  and  a  half  centuries
landowners  who  set  all  their  serfs  free  and,  in  doing  so,  gave
them  land  were  the  most  rare  and  extraordinary  exception,
the  usual  order  or  ‘  law  ’  of  relations  between  the  landed  gentry
and  the  peasants  being  that  the  latter,  together  with  the  land  on
which  they  lived,  were  the  property  of  the  former.  But  with
remarkable  completeness  and  rapidity  this  universal  law  was,  by
the  good  will  of  the  government,  made  illegal  and  impossible  in
practice,  while  the  former  rare  exceptions  were  transformed  into
an  absolutely  binding  rule,  admitting  of  no  exception  at  all.
Similarly,  the  exceptional  case  of  the  tradesman  who  does  not  put
up  the  price  of  the  articles  of  first  necessity  with  the  increase  in
demand,  becomes  a  universal  rule  as  soon  as  the  government
deems  it  necessary  to  regulate  the  price  of  goods.  In  that  case
this  direct  violation  of  the  supposed  c  law  ’  actually  becomes  law,
— not  a  ‘  natural  ’  one,  but  positive  law  or  law  of  the  state.

It  should  be  noted  that  notwithstanding  the  difference  between
the  two  conceptions  of  the  law  of  nature  and  the  man-made  law
of  the  state,  the  latter  resembles  the  former  in  that  within  the
sphere  of  its  application  it  has  a  universal  force  and  admits  of  no
unforeseen  exception.1  But  the  alleged  economic  laws  never
have  such  a  significance  and  can  at  any  moment  be  freely  violated
and  annulled  by  the  moral  will  of  man.  In  virtue  of  the  law  of
1 86 1  not  a  single  landowner  in  Russia  may  buy  or  sell  peasants
otherwise  than  in  his  dreams.  On  the  other  hand,  in  spite  of
the  ‘law’  of  supply  and  demand,  nothing  prevents  any  virtuous
Petersburg  landlord,  even  when  fully  awake,  from  lowering  the
rent  of  his  flats  out  of  philanthropic  motives.  The  fact  that  only
a  very  few  take  the  opportunity  of  doing  so,  proves  not  the  power
of  the  economic  factors,  but  the  weakness  of  individual  virtue.
For  as  soon  as  this  lack  of  personal  benevolence  is  supplanted  by
the  demand  of  the  law  of  the  state,  rents  will  be  immediately
lowered,  and  the  ‘  iron  ’  necessity  of  economic  laws  will  at  once
prove  to  be  as  fragile  as  glass.  This  self-evident  truth  is  at  the
present  time  admitted  by  writers  altogether  foreign  to  socialism,
such  as  Laveleye,  for  instance.  In  earlier  days,  J.  S.  Mill,  anxious
to  preserve  to  political  economy  the  character  of  an  exact  science

1  Direct  violation  of  the  law  by  the  evil  will  is  foreseen  by  the  law  itself  and  is
treated  as  a  crime  which  calls  forth  a  corresponding  punishment.


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  331

and  at  the  same  time  to  avoid  too  obvious  a  contradiction  with
reality,  invented  the  following  compromise.  Admitting  that  the
economic  distribution  of  the  products  of  labour  depends  upon  the
human  will  and  may  be  subordinated  to  moral  purposes,  he  in¬
sisted  that  the  production  is  entirely  determined  by  economic  laws
which  have  in  this  case  the  force  of  the  laws  of  nature — as  if
production  did  not  take  place  in  the  same  general  conditions  and
depend  upon  the  same  human  powers  and  agents  as  distribution  !
This  anti-scientific  and  scholastic  distinction  met,  indeed,  with
no  success,  and  was  equally  rejected  by  both  opposed  camps  which
Mill  had  sought  to  reconcile  by  means  of  it.

Freedom  of  the  individual  and  society  from  the  supposed
natural  laws  of  the  materially-economic  order  stands,  of  course,  in
no  immediate  connection  with  the  metaphysical  question  of  free¬
will.  When  I  say,  e.g .,  that  Petersburg  landlords  are  free  from
the  supposed  law  which  determines  the  price  by  the  relation  of
supply  and  demand,  I  am  far  from  maintaining  that  any  one  of
these  landlords  whatever  his  character  may  be  can  at  any  given
moment  lower  the  rent  of  his  flats  in  spite  of  the  increased  demand
for  them.  I  only  urge  the  obvious  truth  that  given  a  sufficiently
strong  moral  impulse,  no  alleged  economic  necessity  can  prevent
the  individual,  especially  in  his  public  capacity,  from  subordinating
material  considerations  to  the  moral  in  this  or  in  that  instance.
Hence  it  logically  follows  that  in  the  realm  of  economics  there
exist  no  natural  laws  acting  independently  of  the  individual  will
of  the  given  agents.  I  do  not  deny  the  presence  of  law  in  human
activity  ;  I  only  argue  against  a  special  kind  of  materially-economic
necessity  invented  a  hundred  years  ago,  and  taken  to  be  inde¬
pendent  of  the  general  conditions  that  determine  volition  through
psychological  and  moral  motives.  The  character  of  objects  and
events  which  fall  within  the  province  of  economics  is  on  the  one
hand  due  to  physical  nature,  and  is  therefore  subject  to  material
necessity  (to  the  mechanical,  chemical,  and  biological  laws),  and
on  the  other  hand  is  determined  by  human  activity,  which  is  subject
to  the  moral  and  psychological  necessity.  And  since  no  further
causality,  in  addition  to  the  natural  and  the  human,  can  be  found
in  the  phenomena  of  the  economic  order,  it  follows  that  there  can
be  in  that  domain  no  independent  necessity  and  uniformity  of
its  own.


332  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  lack  of  moral  initiative  in
private  individuals  is  successfully  supplemented  by  state  legislation,
which  regulates  economic  relations  in  the  moral  sense  with  a  view
to  the  common  good.  Reference  to  this  fact  does  not  prejudge  the
question  as  to  the  extent  to  which  such  regulation  may  be  desirable
in  the  future  and  as  to  the  form  it  should  take.  Of  one  thing
only  there  can  be  no  doubt :  the  very  fact  of  state  interference
in  the  domain  of  economics  [e.g.  the  legislative  regulation  of  prices)
unmistakably  proves  that  the  given  economic  relations  do  not
express  any  natural  necessity.  For  it  is  clear  that  lav/s  of  nature
could  not  be  cancelled  by  laws  of  the  state.

Ill

Subordination  of  material  interests  and  relations  in  human
society  to  some  special  economic  laws  acting  on  their  own  account
is  the  fiction  of  a  bad  metaphysic,  and  has  not  the  least  foundation
in  reality.  Therefore  the  general  demand  of  reason  and  con¬
science  remains  in  force — the  demand,  namely,  that  this  province
too  should  be  subordinated  to  the  supreme  principle  of  morality,
and  that  in  its  economic  life  society  should  be  the  organised
realisation  of  the  good.

There  are  not  and  there  cannot  be  any  independent  economic
laws,  any  economic  necessity,  for  economic  phenomena  can  only
be  thought  of  as  activities  of  man  who  is  a  moral  being,  and  is
capable  of  subordinating  all  his  actions  to  the  pure  idea  of  the
good.  There  is  only  one  absolute  and  independent  law  for  man
as  such — the  moral  law,  and  only  one  necessity,  namely,  the  moral.
The  peculiarity  and  independence  of  the  economic  sphere  of  rela¬
tions  lies,  not  in  the  fact  that  it  has  ultimate  laws  of  its  own,  but
in  the  fact  that  from  its  very  nature  it  presents  a  special  and  pecu¬
liar  field  for  the  application  of  the  one  moral  law.  Thus  earth
differs  from  other  planets,  not  by  having  an  independent  source  of
light  all  to  itself,  but  by  receiving  and  reflecting  the  one  universal
light  of  the  sun  in  a  special  and  definite  way,  dependent  upon  its
place  in  the  solar  system.

This  truth  is  fatal  both  to  the  theories  of  the  orthodox
economists  and  to  the  socialist  doctrine  which  seems  at  first  sight
to  be  opposed  to  them.  When  the  socialists  denounce  the  exist-


333


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION

ing  economic  system  and  declaim  against  the  unequal  distribution
of  property,  the  cupidity  and  callousness  of  the  rich,  they  appear
to  adopt  the  moral  point  of  view,  and  to  be  inspired  by  the  good
feeling  of  pity  towards  those  who  labour  and  are  heavy  laden.
The  positive  side  of  their  doctrine,  however,  clearly  shows  that
they  take  up,  to  begin  with,  an  ambiguous  and,  subsequently,  a
directly  hostile  attitude  to  the  moral  principle.

The  inmost  essence  of  socialism  has  for  the  first  time  found
expression  in  the  remarkable  doctrine  of  the  followers  of  St.
Simon,  who  proclaimed  as  their  motto  the  rehabilitation  of
matter  in  the  life  of  humanity.  There  is  no  doubt  that  matter
has  its  rights,  and  the  less  they  are  respected  in  principle  the
more  they  assert  themselves  in  practice.  The  nature  of  these
rights,  however,  may  be  interpreted  in  two  different  and,  indeed,
directly  contradictory  ways.  According  to  the  first  meaning — a
perfectly  true  and  an  extremely  important  one — the  sphere  of
material  relations  (more  immediately  of  the  economic  ones)  has  a
right  to  become  the  object  of  man’s  moral  activity.  It  has  a
right  to  have  the  supreme  spiritual  principle  realised  or  incarnate
in  it — matter  has  a  right  to  be  spiritualised.  It  would  be  unjust
to  maintain  that  this  meaning  was  entirely  foreign  to  the  early
socialistic  systems.  But  they  did  not  dwell  upon  it  or  develop
it,  and  very  soon  this  glimmer  of  a  higher  consciousness  proved
to  be  merely  a  deceptive  light  over  the  quagmire  of  carnal  passions
which  gradually  sucked  in  so  many  noble  and  inspired  minds.

The  other  and  more  prevalent  meaning  given  to  the  principle
of  the  rehabilitation  of  matter  justifies  the  degradation  of  the  St.
Simonists,  and  indeed  makes  it  into  a  principle.  The  material  life
of  humanity  is  not  regarded  as  merely  a  special  province  of  human
activity  or  of  the  application  of  the  moral  principles.  It  is  said
to  have  an  entirely  independent  material  principle  of  its  own,
existing  in  its  own  right  both  in  and  for  man,  namely,  the
principle  of  instinct  or  passion.  This  element  must  be  given
full  scope  so  that  the  normal  social  order  should  naturally  follow
from  personal  passions  and  interests  supplementing  and  replacing
one  another  (Fourier’s  fundamental  conception).  This  ‘normal’
order  neither  need  nor  can  be  moral.  Alienation  from  the  higher
spiritual  interests  becomes  inevitable  as  soon  as  the  material
side  of  human  life  is  recognised  to  have  an  independent  and


334  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

unconditional  value.  One  cannot  serve  two  masters  ;  and  social¬
ism  naturally  gives  predominance  to  the  principle  under  the  banner
of  which  the  whole  movement  had  first  originated,  i.e.  to  the
material  principle.  The  domain  of  economic  relations  is  entirely
subordinated  to  it,  and  is  recognised  as  the  chief,  the  fundamental,
the  only  real  and  decisive  factor  in  the  life  of  humanity.  At  this
point  the  inner  opposition  between  socialism  and  the  bourgeois
political  economy  disappears.

In  truth,  the  morally  abnormal  condition  of  the  civilised  world
at  the  present  day  is  due,  not  to  this  or  that  particular  institution,
but  to  the  general  conception  and  trend  of  life  in  modern  society.
Material  wealth  is  becoming  all-important,  and  social  structure
itself  is  distinctly  degenerating  into  a  plutocracy.  It  is  not
personal  and  hereditary  property,  division  of  labour  and  capital,
or  inequality  of  material  possessions  that  is  immoral.  What  is
immoral  is  plutocracy,  which  distorts  the  true  social  order,  raising
the  lower  and  the  essentially  subservient  factor — the  economic
one — to  the  supreme  and  dominant  position,  and  relegating  all
other  things  to  be  the  means  and  instruments  of  material  gain.
Socialism  leads  to  a  similar  distortion,  though  in  a  different  way.
From  the  plutocratic  point  of  view  the  normal  man  is  in  the  first
place  a  capitalist  and  then,  per  accidens ,  a  citizen,  head  of  a  family,
an  educated  man,  member  of  some  religious  union,  etc.  Similarly
from  the  socialist  point  of  view  all  other  interests  become  in¬
significant  and  retreat  into  the  background — if  they  don’t  disappear
altogether — before  the  economic  interest.  In  socialism,  too,  the
essentially  lower,  material  sphere  of  life— the  industrial  activity
— becomes  decidedly  predominant  and  overshadows  all  else.  Even
in  its  most  idealistic  forms  socialism  has  from  the  first  insisted
that  the  moral  perfection  of  society  wholly  and  directly  depends
upon  its  economic  structure,  and  sought  to  attain  moral  reforma¬
tion  or  regeneration  exclusively  by  means  of  an  economic  revolu¬
tion.  This  fact  clearly  shows  that  socialism  really  stands  on  the
same  ground  as  the  bourgeois  r6gime  hostile  to  it,  namely,  the
supremacy  of  the  material  interest.  Both  have  the  same  motto  :
‘  man  liveth  by  bread  alone.’  For  a  plutocrat  the  worth  of  man
depends  upon  his  possessing  or  being  capable  of  acquiring  material
wealth.  For  a  consistent  socialist  the  worth  of  man  depends  upon
his  producing  material  wealth.  In  both  cases  man  is  taken  as  an


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  335

economic  agent,  apart  from  other  aspects  of  his  being.  In
both  cases  economic  welfare  is  taken  to  be  the  final  end  and
the  highest  good.  The  struggle  between  the  two  hostile  camps
is  not  one  of  principle  ;  or,  rather,  the  struggle  is  waged,  not  about
the  content  of  a  principle,  but  only  about  the  extent  of  its  realisa¬
tion.  One  party  is  concerned  with  the  material  welfare  of  the
capitalist  minority,  and  the  other  with  the  also  material  welfare  of
the  labour  majority.  And  in  so  far  as  that  majority,  the  working
classes  themselves,  begin  to  care  exclusively  about  their  material
welfare  they  obviously  prove  to  be  as  selfish  as  their  adversaries,
and  lose  all  moral  advantage  over  the  latter.  In  certain  respects
indeed  socialism  applies  the  principle  of  material  interest  more
fully  and  consistently  than  its  opponents.  Although  plutocracy
really  cares  for  the  economic  interest  alone,  it  admits  the  existence,
though  in  a  subordinate  sense  only,  of  other  spheres  of  life,  with
independent  institutions — such  as  the  state  and  the  Church— cor¬
responding  to  them.  Socialism  in  its  pure  form,  however,  rejects
all  this.  For  it  man  is  exclusively  a  producer  and  consumer,  and
human  society  is  merely  an  economic  union — a  union  of  work¬
men  proprietors  involving  no  substantial  distinctions.  And
since  the  predominance  of  the  material  interests — of  the  economic,
industrial  and  financial  elements  —  constitutes  the  character¬
istic  feature  of  the  bourgeois  regime,  consistent  socialism  which
intends  finally  to  limit  the  life  of  humanity  to  these  lower  in¬
terests  alone  is  certainly  not  an  antithesis  to,  but  the  extreme  ex¬
pression,  the  crowning  stage  of  the  one-sided  bourgeois  civilisation.

Socialists  and  their  apparent  opponents — the  plutocrats — un¬
consciously  join  hands  on  the  most  essential  point.  Plutocracy
subjugates  the  masses  of  the  people  to  its  own  selfish  interests,
disposes  of  them  to  its  own  advantage,  for  it  regards  them  merely
as  labour,  as  producers  of  material  wealth.  Socialism  protests
against  such  ‘  exploiting/  but  its  protest  is  superficial  and  is
not  based  upon  principles,  since  socialism  itself  in  the  long-run
regards  man  as  merely  (or  in  any  case  as  mainly  and  primarily)  an
economic  agent — and  if  he  is  only  that,  there  is  no  inherent  reason
why  he  should  not  be  exploited.  On  the  other  hand,  the  exclus¬
ive  importance  which  attaches  to  material  wealth,  in  the  com¬
mercial  state  of  the  present  day,  naturally  leads  those  who  directly
produce  this  wealth,  the  working  classes,  to  demand  an  equal


ззб  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

share  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  goods  which,  but  for  them,  could
not  exist  and  which  they  are  brought  up  to  regard  as  the  chief
thing  in  life.  Thus  the  practical  materialism  of  the  ruling  classes
themselves  calls  forth  and  justifies  socialistic  tendencies  in  the
subjugated  working  classes.  And  when  fear  of  social  revolution
brings  about  an  insincere  conversion  of  the  plutocrats  to  the  ideal¬
istic  principles,  it  proves  to  be  a  useless  game.  The  masks  of
morality  and  religion  hastily  put  on  do  not  deceive  the  masses,
who  know  perfectly  well  what  the  true  worship  of  their  masters
is.1  And  having  learnt  this  cult  from  their  superiors,  working
people  naturally  want  to  be  the  priests  and  not  the  victims.

The  two  hostile  parties  mutually  presuppose  one  another  and
cannot  escape  from  the  vicious  circle  until  they  acknowledge  and
adopt  in  practice  the  unquestionable  truth,  forgotten  by  them,
that  the  significance  of  man,  and  therefore  of  human  society,  is
not  essentially  determined  by  economic  relations,  that  man  is  not
primarily  the  producer  of  material  goods  or  market  values,  but  is
something  infinitely  more  important,  and  that  consequently  society,
too,  is  more  than  an  economic  union.2


IV

For  the  true  solution  of  the  so-called  ‘social  question  ’  it  must
in  the  first  place  be  recognised  that  the  economic  relations  con¬
tain  no  special  norm  of  their  own,  but  are  subject  to  the  universal
moral  norm  as  a  special  realm  in  which  it  finds  its  application.
The  triple  moral  principle  which  determines  our  due  relation  to¬
wards  God,  men,  and  the  material  nature  is  wholly  and  entirely

1  A  remarkably  characteristic  specimen  of  plutocratic  hypocrisy  is  an  article  by  the
well-known  Jules  Simon  (now  deceased)  which  appeared  some  years  ago  without
attracting  notice.  The  article  deals  with  the  three  chief  evils  of  modern  society  :  the
decline  of  religion,  of  family,  and  of  .  .  .  rentes  !  The  treatment  of  religion  and  family
is  dull  and  vague,  but  the  lines  dealing  with  the  fall  of  interest  on  capital  (from  4  per
cent  to  2fj  per  cent,  if  I  remember  rightly)  are  written  with  the  blood  of  the  heart.

2  The  contention  that  socialism  and  plutocracy  are  based  upon  one  and  the  same
materialistic  principle  was  put  forward  by  me  eighteen  years  ago  (in  chapter  xiv.  of  the
Kritika  otvlet  chonnih  natchal  ( Critique  of  Abstract  Principles),  first  published  in  the  Russky
Viestnik  in  1878)  and  led  my  critics  to  accuse  me  of  having  a  wrong  conception  of
socialism  and  of  misjudging  its  value.  I  need  no  longer  answer  these  criticisms,  for
they  have  been  brilliantly  disproved  by  the  history  of  the  socialistic  movement  itself,
the  main  current  of  which  has  decidedly  evinced  itself  as  economic  materialism.


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  337

applicable  in  the  domain  of  economics.  The  peculiar  character  of
the  economic  relations  gives  a  special  importance  to  the  last  member
of  the  moral  trinity,  namely,  the  relation  to  the  material  nature
or  earth  (in  the  wide  sense  of  the  term).  This  third  relation  can
only  have  a  moral  character  if  it  is  not  isolated  from  the  first  two
but  is  conditioned  by  them  in  their  normal  position.

The  realm  of  economic  relations  is  exhaustively  described  by
the  general  ideas  of  production  (labour  and  capital),  distribution  of
property,  and  exchange  of  values.  Let  us  consider  these  funda¬
mental  ideas  from  the  moral  point  of  view,  beginning  with  the
most  fundamental  of  them — the  idea  of  labour.  We  know  that
the  first  impulse  to  labour  is  given  by  the  material  necessity.

But  for  a  man  who  recognises  above  himself  the  absolutely

perfect  principle  of  reality,  or  the  will  of  God,  all  necessity  is  an
expression  of  that  will.  From  this  point  of  view  labour  is  a
comtnandment  of  God.  This  commandment  requires  us  to
work  hard  ( ‘  in  the  sweat  of  thy  face  ’ )  to  cultivate  the
ground,  i.e.  to  perfect  material  nature.  For  whose  sake  ?  In

the  first  place  for  our  own  and  that  of  our  neighbours.  This

answer,  clear  at  the  most  elementary  stages  of  moral  develop¬
ment,  no  doubt  remains  in  force  as  humanity  progresses,  the
only  change  being  that  the  denotation  of  the  term  ‘  neighbour  ’
becomes  more  and  more  wide.  Originally  my  neighbours  were
only  those  to  whom  I  was  related  by  the  blood  tie  or  by  personal
feeling ;  finally  it  is  all  mankind.  When  Bastiat,  the  most
gifted  representative  of  economic  individualism,  advocated  the
principle  ‘each  for  himself’  he  defended  himself  against  the  charge
of  selfishness  by  pointing  to  the  economic  harmony  in  virtue  of
which  each  man  in  working  solely  for  himself  (and  his  family),
unconsciously,  from  the  very  nature  of  social  relations,  works
also  for  the  benefit  of  all,  so  that  the  interest  of  each  harmonises
in  truth  with  the  interest  of  all.  .In  any  case,  however,  this
would  be  merely  a  natural  harmony,  similar  to  that  which
obtains  in  the  non-human  world  where  certain  insects,  seeking
nothing  but  sweet  food  for  themselves,  unconsciously  bring
about  the  fertilisation  of  plants  by  transferring  the  pollen  from
one  flower  to  another.  Such  harmony  testifies,  of  course,  to  the
wisdom  of  the  Creator,  but  does  not  make  insects  into  moral
beings.  Man,  however,  is  a  moral  being  and  natural  solidarity

z


338  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  not  sufficient  for  him  ;  he  ought  not  merely  to  labour  for  all
and  participate  in  the  common  work,  but  to  know  that  he  does
so  and  to  wish  to  do  it.  Those  who  refuse  to  recognise  this
truth  as  a  matter  of  principle  will  feel  its  force  as  a  fact  in
financial  smashes  and  economic  crises.  Men  who  are  the
cause  of  such  anomalies  and  men  who  are  the  victims  of  them,
both  belong  to  the  class  of  people  who  work  for  themselves,
and  yet  the  natural  harmony  neither  reconciles  their  interests
nor  secures  their  prosperity.  The  merely  natural  unity  of
economic  interests  is  not  sufficient  to  secure  the  result  that
each,  in  working  for  himself,  should  also  work  for  all.  To
bring  this  about  economic  relations  must  be  consciously  directed
towards  the  common  good.

To  take  selfishness  or  self-interest  as  the  fundamental  motive
of  labour  means  to  deprive  labour  of  the  significance  of  a
universal  commandment,  to  make  it  into  something  accidental.
If  I  work  solely  for  the  sake  of  my  own  and  my  family  s  welfare,
then  as  soon  as  I  am  able  to  attain  that  welfare  by  other  means  I
must  lose  my  only  motive  for  work.  And  if  it  were  proved  that  a
whole  class  or  group  of  persons  can  prosper  by  means  of  robbery,
fraud,  and  exploitation  of  other  people’s  labour,  no  theoretically
valid  objection  could  be  urged  against  this  from  the  point  of  view
of  unrestrained  self-interest.  Is  it  for  the  natural  harmony
of  interests  to  abolish  such  abuses  ?  But  where  was  the  natural
harmony  in  the  long  ages  of  slavery,  feudalism,  serfdom  ?  Or
perhaps  the  fierce  intestine  wars  which  abolished  feudalism  in
Europe  and  slavery  in  America  were  the  expression — though
somewhat  a  belated  one  —  of  natural  harmony  ?  In  that  case
it  is  difficult  to  see  in  what  way  such  harmony  differs  from
disharmony,  and  in  what  way  the  freedom  of  the  guillotine  is
better  than  the  restrictions  of  state  socialism.  If,  however,
natural  harmony  of  interests,  seriously  understood,  proves  to  be
powerless  against  economic  abuses  due  to  the  unrestrained
selfishness  of  individuals  and  classes  whose  freedom  in  this
respect  has  to  be  restricted  in  the  name  of  higher  justice,  it  is
unfair  and  unpermissible  to  appeal  to  justice  in  the  last  resort  only,
and  to  put  it  at  the  end  and  not  at  the  beginning  of  social
structure.  In  addition  to  being  unfair  and  unpermissible  it
is  also  quite  useless.  For  such  morality  ex  machina  has  no


339


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION

power  to  attract  or  to  inspire.  No  one  will  believe  in  it  or  be
restrained  by  it  from  anything,  and  the  only  thing  left  will  be
bare  compulsion — one  day  in  one  direction,  and  the  next  in
another.

When  the  principle  of  the  individualistic  freedom  of  interests
is  adopted  by  the  strong,  it  does  not  make  them  work  more  but
gives  rise  to  the  slavery  of  ancient  times,  to  the  seigniorial  right  of
the  Middle  Ages,  and  to  modern  economic  slavery  or  plutocracy.
When  adopted  by  the  weak,  who,  however,  are  strong  as  the
majority,  as  the  masses,  this  principle  of  unrestrained  selfishness
does  not  make  them  more  united,  in  their  work,  but  merely  creates
an  atmosphere  of  envious  discontent,  which  produces  in  the  end  the
bombs  of  the  anarchists.  Had  Bastiat,  who  was  fond  of  expressing
his  ideas  in  the  form  of  popular  dialogues,  lived  to  our  day,  he
might  have  played  the  chief  part  in  the  following  conversation  :

Anarchist.  Out  of  especial  friendliness  for  you,  Mr.  Bastiat,  I
warn  you  take  yourself  away  from  here,  as  far  as  ever  you  can —
I  am  just  going  to  blow  up  all  this  neighbourhood,  for  there  are
lots  of  tyrants  and  exploiters  about.

Bastiat.  What  a  terrible  position  !  But  consider  :  you  are
doing  irreparable  damage  to  the  principle  of  human  liberty  !

Anarchist.  On  the  contrary — we  are  putting  it  into  practice.

Bastiat.  Who  has  put  these  devilish  ideas  into  your  mind  ?

Anarchist.  You  yourself.

Bastiat.  What  an  absurd  slander  !

Anarchist.  It  is  perfectly  true.  We  are  your  pupils.  Have
you  not  proved  that  the  root  of  all  evil  is  the  interference  of
public  authority  with  the  free  play  of  individual  interests  ?  Have
you  not  ruthlessly  condemned  all  intentional  organisation  of
labour,  all  compulsory  social  order  ?  And  that  which  is  con¬
demned  as  evil  must  be  destroyed.  We  translate  your  words  into
practice  and  are  saving  you  from  dirty  work.

Bastiat.  I  struggled  only  against  the  interference  of  the  state
in  the  economic  life,  and  against  the  artificial  organisation  of  labour
advocated  by  socialists.

Anarchist.  Socialists  are  no  concern  of  ours  ;  if  they  are
deluded  by  fancies,  so  much  the  worse  for  them.  We  are  not
deluded.  We  fight  against  one  organisation  only — one  which
really  exists  and  is  called  social  order.  Towns  and  factories,  stock


340  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

exchanges  and  academies,  administration,  police,  army,  Church
— all  these  did  not  spring  from  the  ground  of  themselves  ;  they
are  the  product  of  artificial  organisation.  Therefore  on  your  own
premisses  they  are  an  evil  and  ought  to  be  destroyed.

Bastiat.  Even  if  this  were  true,  things  ought  not  to  be
destroyed  by  violent  and  disastrous  means.

Anarchist.  What  is  disaster  ?  You  have  yourself  beautifully
explained  that  apparent  calamities  lead  to  the  real  good  of  all,  and
you  have  always  very  subtly  distinguished  between  the  unim¬
portant  things  that  are  evident  and  the  important  that  cannot  be
seen.  In  the  present  case  what  is  evident  are  the  flying  sardine
boxes,  demolished  buildings,  disfigured  corpses — this  is  evident
but  unimportant.  And  that  which  is  not  seen  and  which  alone  is
important  is  the  future  humanity  which  will  be  free  from  all
‘  interference  ’  and  all  ‘  organisation  ’ — since  the  persons,  classes,
and  institutions  which  might  interfere  and  organise  will  be  ex¬
terminated.  You  preached  the  principle  of  anarchy,  we  carry
out  anarchy  in  practice.

Bastiat.  Policeman  !  policeman  !  seize  him  quick  before  he
blows  us  up.  What  are  you  thinking  about  ?

Policeman.  Well,  I  was  wondering  whether,  from  the  point
of  view  of  self-interest,  which  I  too  have  adopted  after  reading
your  eloquent  arguments,  it  is  of  more  advantage  to  me  to  seize
this  fellow  by  the  scruff  of  the  neck  or  to  make  haste  and  establish
a  natural  harmony  of  interests  between  us.

V

In  opposition  to  the  alleged  economic  harmony,  facts  compel
us  to  admit  that  starting  with  private  material  interest  as  the
purpose  of  labour  we  arrive  at  universal  discord  and  destruction
instead  of  universal  happiness.  If,  however,  the  principle  and  the
purpose  of  labour  is  found  in  the  idea  of  the  common  good,  under¬
stood  in  the  true  moral  sense — i.e.  as  the  good  of  all  and  each  and
not  of  the  majority  only — that  idea  will  also  contain  the  satisfaction
of  every  private  interest  within  proper  limits.

From  the  moral  point  of  view  every  man,  whether  he  be  an
agricultural  labourer,  a  writer,  or  a  banker,  ought  to  work  with
a  feeling  that  his  work  is  useful  to  all,  and  with  a  desire  for  it


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  341

to  be  so  ;  he  ought  to  regard  it  as  a  duty,  as  a  fulfilment  of  the
law  of  God  and  a  service  to  the  universal  welfare  of  his  fellow-men.
But  just  because  this  duty  is  universal,  it  presupposes  that  every
one  else  must  regard  the  person  in  question  in  the  same  way,  i.e.
to  treat  him  not  as  a  means  only  but  as  an  end  or  purpose  of  the
activity  of  all.  The  duty  of  society  is  to  recognise  and  to  secure
to  each  of  its  members  the  right  to  enjoy  unmolested  worthy  human
existence  both  for  himself  and  his  family.  Worthy  existence  is
compatible  with  voluntary  poverty,  such  as  St.  Francis  preached
and  as  is  practised  by  our  wandering  pilgrims ;  but  it  is  incompatible
with  work  which  reduces  all  the  significance  of  man  to  being
simply  a  means  for  producing  or  transferring  material  wealth.
Here  are  some  instances.

“We  watch  the  kriuchniks  at  work :  the  poor  half-naked  Tatars
strain  every  nerve.  It  is  painful  to  see  the  bent  back  flatten  out
all  of  a  sudden  under  a  weight  of  eight  to  eighteen  puds 1  (the
last  figure  is  not  exaggerated).  This  terrible  work  is  paid  at  the
rate  of  five  roubles  per  thousand  puds.2  The  most  a  kriuchnik
can  earn  in  the  twenty-four  hours  is  one  rouble,  and  that  if  he
works  like  an  ox  and  overstrains  himself.  Few  can  endure  more
than  ten  years  of  such  labour,  and  the  two-legged  beasts  of  burden
become  deformed  or  paralytic”  ( Novoe  Vremya ,  N.  7356).  Those
who  have  not  seen  the  Volga  kriuchniks  are  sure  to  have  seen  the
porters  in  big  hotels  who,  breathless  and  exhausted,  drag  to  the
fourth  or  fifth  floor  boxes  weighing  several  hundredweight.  And
this  in  our  age  of  machines  and  all  sorts  of  contrivances  !  No  one
seems  to  be  struck  by  the  obvious  absurdity.  A  visitor  arrives  at
an  hotel  with  luggage.  To  walk  up  the  stairs  would  be  a  useful
exercise  for  him,  but  instead  he  gets  into  a  lift,  while  his  things,
for  which,  one  would  have  thought,  the  lift  was  expressly  meant,
are  loaded  on  the  back  of  the  porter,  who  thus  proves  to  be  not
even  an  instrument  of  another  man  but  an  instrument  of  his
things — the  means  of  a  means  !

Labour  which  is  exclusively  and  crudely  mechanical  and  in¬
volves  too  great  a  strain  of  the  muscular  force  is  incompatible  with
human  dignity.  But  equally  incompatible  with  it  and  equally
immoral  is  work  which,  though  in  itself  not  heavy  or  degrading,
lasts  all  day  long  and  takes  up  all  the  time  and  all  the  forces  of

1  z\  cwt.  and  .5^  cwt.  2  16Д  tons.


342  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  person,  so  that  the  few  hours  of  leisure  are  necessarily  devoted
to  physical  rest,  and  neither  time  nor  energy  is  left  for  thoughts
and  interests  of  the  ideal  or  spiritual  order.1  In  addition  to  hours
of  leisure,  there  are,  of  course,  entire  days  of  rest  Sundays  and
other  holidays.  But  the  exhausting  and  stupefying  physical  work
of  the  week  produces  in  holiday  time  a  natural  reaction — a  craving
to  plunge  into  dissipation  and  to  forget  oneself,  and  the  days  of
rest  are  devoted  to  the  satisfaction  of  that  craving.

“  Let  us  not,  however,  dwell  on  the  impression  which  individual
facts  susceptible  of  observation  produce  upon  us,  even  though
such  facts  be  numerous.  Let  us  turn  to  statistics  and  inquire  as
to  how  far  wages  satisfy  the  necessary  wants  of  the  workers.
Leaving  aside  the  rate  of  wages  in  the  different  industries,  the
quality  of  food,  the  size  of  the  dwelling,  etc.,  we  will  only  ask  of
statistics  the  question  as  to  the  relation  between  the  length  of
human  life  and  the  occupation  pursued.  The  answer  is  as  follows  :
Shoemakers  live  on  the  average  to  the  age  of  49  ;  printers,  48.3  ;
tailors,  46.6;  joiners,  44.7;  blacksmiths,  41.8;  turners,  41.6;
masons,  33.  And  the  average  length  of  life  of  civil  servants,
capitalists,  clergymen,  wholesale  merchants,  is  60-69  years.2  Now
take  the  figures  referring  to  the  death-rate  in  relation  to  the  size  of
the  dwellings  and  the  amount  of  rent  in  the  different  parts  of
town.  It  will  be  seen  that  in  parts  of  the  town  with  a  poor  popula¬
tion,  belonging  chiefly  to  the  working  class  and  paying  low  rents,
mortality  is  far  higher  than  in  the  neighbourhood  with  a  relatively
larger  number  of  rich  people.  For  Paris  this  relation  was  estab¬
lished  by  Ѵіііагтё  as  early  as  the  ’twenties  of  the  present  century.
He  calculated  that  during  the  five  years  from  1822  to  1826,  in
the  II.  arrondissement  of  Paris,  where  the  average  rent  per  flat
was  605  francs,  there  was  one  death  per  71  inhabitants,  while  in
the  arrondissement  XII.,  where  the  average  rent  was  148  francs,
there  was  one  death  per  44  inhabitants.  Similar  data  are  to  hand
for  many  other  towns,  Petersburg  among  them.3  Hence  the
following  true  conclusion  is  deduced  :  ‘  If  a  workman  is  not

1  Tram  conductors  in  Petersburg  work  more  than  eighteen  hours  a  day  for  twenty-
five  or  thirty  roubles  a  month  (see  No-voe  Vremya,  N.  7357).

2  The  author  quoted  refers  here  to  Hanshofer’s  book,  Lehrbuch  der  Statistik.  All
the  figures  quoted  are  apparently  for  the  countries  of  Western  Europe.

3  A.  A.  Isaev,  Natchala  polititchcskoi  cconomii  ( Principles  of  Political  Economy ),  2nd
ed.  pp.  254-255.


343


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION

regarded  as  a  means  of  production,  but  is  recognised,  like  every
other  human  being,  to  be  a  free  agent  and  an  end  in  himself,  the
average  forty  years  of  life  cannot  be  regarded  as  normal,  while
men  belonging  to  richer  classes  live  on  the  average  till  sixty  or
seventy  years.  This  life,  the  longest  possible  under  the  social
conditions  of  the  present  day,  must  be  regarded  as  normal.  All
deviation  below  this  average,  unless  it  can  be  ascribed  to  the
peculiarities  of  the  particular  work  in  question,  must  be  entirely
put  down  to  excessive  labour  and  insufficient  income  which  does
not  allow  to  satisfy  the  most  essential  needs  and  the  minimum
demands  of  hygiene  with  regard  to  food,  clothing,  and  housing.1

The  absolute  value  of  man  is  based,  as  we  know,  upon  the
possibility  inherent  in  his  reason  and  his  will  of  infinitely  approach¬
ing  perfection  or,  according  to  the  patristic  expression,  the
possibility  of  becoming  divine  ( Ѳтсп s).  This  possibility  does  not
pass  into  actuality  completely  and  immediately,  for  if  it  did  man
would  be  already  equal  to  God — which  is  not  the  case.  The
inner  potentiality  becomes  more  and  more  actual,  and  can  only  do
so  under  definite  real  conditions.  If  an  ordinary  man  is  left  for
many  years  on  an  uninhabited  island  or  in  strict  solitary  confine¬
ment  he  cannot  improve  morally  or  intellectually,  and  indeed,  ex¬
hibits  rapid  and  obvious  regress  towards  the  brutal  stage.  Strictly
speaking,  the  same  is  true  of  a  man  wholly  absorbed  in  physical
labour.  Even  if  he  does  not  deteriorate  he  is  certainly  unable  to
think  of  actively  realising  his  highest  significance  as  man.  The
moral  point  of  view  demands,  then,  that  every  one  should  have  the
means  of  existence  (e.g.  clothes  and  a  warm  and  airy  dwelling)  and
sufficient  physical  rest  secured  to  him,  and  that  he  should  also  be
able  to  enjoy  leisure  for  the  sake  of  his  spiritual  development.
This  and  this  alone  is  absolutely  essential  for  every  peasant  and
workman  ;  anything  above  this  is  from  the  evil  one.

Those  who  are  opposed  to  improving  the  social  and  economic
relations  in  accordance  with  the  demands  of  morality  urge  the
following  consideration.  They  maintain  that  the  only  way  in
which  the  working  people  can,  in  addition  to  a  secured  material
existence,  have  leisure  to  pursue  their  moral  and  intellectual  de¬
velopment,  is  by  reducing  the  number  of  hours  of  work,  without

1  A.  A.  Isaev,  Natchala  polititcheskoi  economii  ( Principles  of  Political  Economy),  2nd
ed.  p.  226.


344  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

reducing  the  wages.  And  this,  they  argue,  will  lead  to  a  decrease
of  output,  i.e.  to  economic  loss  or  regress.  Let  it  be  provisionally
granted  that  shorter  hours  of  work  with  no  reduction  in  wages
will  indeed  inevitably  lead  to  a  diminution  in  productiveness.
But  a  temporary  diminution  of  output  does  not  necessarily  mean
regress  or  loss.  When  the  hours  of  work  have  been  reduced  to
a  certain  norm,  positive  reasons  conditioning  the  increase  of  pro¬
ductiveness  will  continue  to  operate.  Such  causes  are  to  be
found  in  technical  improvements,  greater  proximity  between
different  districts  and  countries  owing  to  new  means  of  com¬
munication,  a  closer  intercourse  between  the  different  classes —
causes  all  of  which  are  wholly  or  partly  independent  of  wages
and  hours  of  work.  Thus  the  general  quantity  of  output  will
again  begin  to  increase  ;  and  even  at  the  time  when  the  increase
will  not  yet  have  attained  the  former  level,  production  of  the
objects  of  first  necessity  for  individuals  and  the  state  will  obviously
not  be  decreased  at  all,  and  the  decrease  will  entirely  affect  objects
of  luxury.  It  will  be  no  great  hardship  to  society  if  gold  watches,
satin  skirts,  and  velvet  chairs  become  twice  or  even  three  times  as
dear  as  they  are  now.  It  may  be  said  that  shorter  hours  of  work
with  the  same  pay  means  a  direct  loss  to  the  factory  owners.
It  is  impossible,  however,  to  do  anything  without  loss  to  some
one  or  other  ;  and  it  could  hardly  be  called  a  calamity  or  an  in¬
justice  if  certain  manufacturers  were  to  get  half  a  million  instead
of  a  million,  or  fifty  instead  of  a  hundred  thousand  dividend.
This  social  class,  no  doubt  an  important  and  necessary  one,  does
not  inevitably  consist  of  avaricious,  greedy,  and  selfish  men.  I
know  several  capitalists  entirely  free  from  these  vices  ;  and  those  of
them  who  are  not  have  a  right  to  demand  that  society  should  pity
them  and  not  condone  their  abnormal  and  dangerous  state  of  mind.

The  hackneyed  philippics,  prompted  by  low  envy,  that  socialists
indulge  in  against  the  rich  are  perfectly  sickening  ;  demands  for
equalisation  of  property  are  unreasonable  to  the  point  of  absurdity.1
But  it  is  one  thing  to  attack  private  wealth  as  though  that  in

1  The  diametrical  opposition  between  socialism  and  Christianity  has  often  been
noted,  but  the  essence  of  it  is  generally  wrongly  understood.  The  popular  saying  that
socialism  demands  that  the  poor  should  take  from  the  rich,  while  Christianity  wants
the  rich  to  give  to  the  poor,  is  more  witty  than  profound.  The  opposition  is  far
deeper  than  this,  and  lies  in  the  moral  attitude  towards  the  rich.  Socialism  envies  them
and  Christianity  pities  them — pities  them  because  of  the  obstacles  which  connection


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  345

itself  were  an  evil,  and  another — to  demand  that  wealth,  as  a
relative  good,  should  harmonise  with  the  common  good  under¬
stood  in  the  light  of  the  unconditional  moral  principle.  It  is  one
thing  to  strive  for  an  impossible  and  unnecessary  equalisation  of
property,  and  another,  while  preserving  the  advantages  of  larger
property  to  those  who  have  it,  to  recognise  the  right  of  every
one  to  the  necessary  means  of  worthy  human  existence.

Apart  from  the  false  conclusions  which  the  opponents  of  the
moral  regulation  of  economic  relations  deduce  from  their  funda¬
mental  assertion,  they  are  wrong  in  that  assertion  itself.  Regula¬
tion  of  the  hours  of  work  and  of  the  amount  of  wages  need  not
necessarily  curtail  the  production  at  all  (not  even  of  the  articles
of  luxury)  or  cause  corresponding  losses  to  the  factory  owners.
This  would  be  the  case  if  the  quantity — not  to  speak  of  quality — of
the  production  entirely  depended  upon  the  number  of  hours  ex¬
pended  upon  it.  No  thoughtful  and  conscientious  economist
would,  however,  venture  to  maintain  such  a  crying  absurdity.
It  is  easy  to  see  that  a  worker  exhausted,  dulled,  and  embittered
by  excessive  labour  can  produce  in  sixteen  hours  less  than  he  can
produce  in  eight  hours  if  he  works  zealously  and  cheerfully,  with
a  consciousness  of  his  human  dignity  and  a  faith  in  his  moral
connection  with  the  society  or  the  state  which  looks  after  his
interests  instead  of  exploiting  him.  Thus  a  moral  adjustment  of
economic  relations  would  at  the  same  time  make  for  economic
progress.


VI

In  considering  the  organisation  of  human  relations — in  this
case,  of  the  economic  ones — moral  philosophy  is  not  concerned
with  the  concrete  particular  forms  and  determinations.  These
are  dictated  by  life  itself,  and  find  realisation  through  the  work  of
specialists  and  of  men  endowed  with  authority — men  of  theory
and  men  of  practice.  Moral  philosophy  is  only  concerned  with
the  immutable  conditions  which  follow  from  the  very  nature  of  the


with  Mammon  puts  in  the  way  of  moral  perfection  :  it  is  hard  for  the  rich  to  enter  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  But  socialism  takes  that  kingdom  itself — i.e.  the  highest  good
and  blessedness — to  consist  in  nothing  other  than  wealth,  provided  it  is  differently  dis¬
tributed.  That  which  for  Christianity  is  an  obstacle,  for  socialism  is  an  end  ;  if  this
is  not  an  antithesis  I  do  not  know  what  else  to  call  by  that  name.


346  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

good,  and  apart  from  which  no  concrete  organisation  could  be
moral.  From  the  ethical  point  of  view  every  social  organisation
is  valuable  and  desirable  only  in  so  far  as  it  embodies  the  moral
principle,  only  in  so  far  as  justifies  the  good.  To  make  projects  or
prophecies  is  not  the  business  of  philosophy.  It  can  neither  offer
definite  plans  of  social  organisation,  nor  even  know  whether  indi¬
viduals  and  nations  will  seek  to  adjust  their  relations  according  to
the  demands  of  the  absolute  moral  principle  at  all.  Its  problem  is
as  clear  and  as  independent  of  any  external  circumstances  as  the
problems  of  pure  mathematics.  Under  what  conditions  is  a
fragment  of  a  three-sided  prism  equal  to  three  pyramids  ?  Under
what  conditions  do  social  relations  in  a  given  sphere  correspond
to  the  demands  of  the  moral  principle  and  ensure  the  stability  and
the  constant  moral  progress  of  a  given  community  ?

We  already  know  under  what  conditions  social  relations  in
the  domain  of  material  labour  become  moral.  The  first  general
condition  is,  that  the  sphere  of  economic  activity  should  not  be
isolated  or  affirmed  as  independent  and  self-contained.  The
second,  more  special  condition  is  that  production  should  not  be  at
the  expense  of  the  human  dignity  of  the  producers  ;  that  not
one  of  them  should  become  merely  a  means  of  production,  and
that  each  should  have  secured  to  him  material  means  necessary
for  worthy  existence  and  development.  The  first  demand  has  a
religious  character  :  not  to  put  Mammon  in  the  place  of  God,  not
to  regard  material  wealth  as  an  independent  good,  and  the  final
purpose  of  human  activity,1  not  even  in  the  economic  sphere.
The  second  is  a  demand  of  humane  feeling  :  to  pity  those  who
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  not  to  set  a  lower  value  upon  them
than  upon  soulless  things.  To  these  two  a  third  condition  is
necessarily  added,  which,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  has  never  yet  been
insisted  upon  in  this  connection.  I  am  referring  to  the  duties
of  man  as  an  economic  agent  towards  material  nature  itself,
which  he  is  called  upon  to  cultivate.  This  duty  is  directly  indi¬
cated  in  the  commandment  of  labour  :  Till  the  ground.2  To

1  The  recognition  of  material  wealth  as  the  end  of  economic  activity  may  be  called
the  original  sin  of  political  economy,  since  it  dates  back  to  Adam  Smith.

2  The  Hebrew  words  laobod  ef  gaadama  (Gen.  iii.  23)  literally  mean  ‘to  serve  the
earth  ’ — not,  of  course,  to  serve  in  the  sense  of  a  religious  cult  (although  the  word  obod
is  used  in  this  sense  also)  but  in  the  sense  in  which  angels  serve  humanity  or  a  teacher
serves  the  children,  etc.


347


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION

cultivate  the  ground  means  not  to  misuse,  exhaust,  or  devastate  it,
but  to  improve  it,  to  bring  it  to  greater  power  and  fulness
of  being.  Neither  our  fellow-men  nor  material  nature  must
be  a  mere  passive  or  impersonal  instrument  of  economic  pro¬
duction  or  exploitation.  Taken  in  itself  or  in  isolation  it  is
not  the  end  of  our  activity,  but  it  is  a  distinct  and  independent
part  of  that  end.  Its  subordinate  position  in  relation  to  the  Deity
and  humanity  does  not  render  it  rightless :  it  has  a  right  to  our
help  in  transforming  and  uplifting  it.  Things  are  rightless,  but
nature  or  earth  is  not  merely  a  thing  but  an  objectified  essence,
which  we  can  and  therefore  must  help  to  become  spiritualised.
The  end  of  labour,  so  far  as  material  nature  is  concerned,  is  not  to
make  it  an  instrument  for  obtaining  things  and  money,  but  to
perfect  it — to  revive  the  lifeless,  to  spiritualise  the  material  in  it.
The  methods  whereby  this  can  be  achieved  cannot  be  indicated
here  ;  they  fall  within  the  province  of  art  (in  the  broad  sense  of
the  Greek  т exvl)'  But  what  is  essential  is  the  point  of  view,  the
inner  attitude  and  the  direction  of  activity  that  results  from  it.
Without  loving  nature  for  its  own  sake  it  is  impossible  to  organise
material  life  in  a  moral  way.

Man’s  relation  to  material  nature  may  be  of  three  kinds  :
passive  submission  to  it  as  it  now  exists ;  active  struggle  with  it,
its  subjugation  and  the  using  of  it  as  an  indifferent  instrument  ;
and  finally,  the  affirmation  of  it  in  its  ideal  state — of  that  which
it  ought  to  become  through  man.  The  first  relation  is  wholly  un¬
just  both  to  man  and  to  nature — to  man,  because  it  deprives  him
of  his  spiritual  dignity  by  making  him  the  slave  of  matter  ;  to
nature,  because,  in  worshipping  it  in  its  present  imperfect  and  per¬
verted  condition,  man  deprives  it  of  the  hope  of  perfection.  The
second,  the  negative  relation  to  nature  is  relatively  normal,  as  a
transitory  and  temporary  stage ;  for  it  is  clear  that  in  order  to
make  nature  what  it  ought  to  be,  we  must  first  condemn  it  as  it
is,  as  it  ought  not  to  be.  But  absolutely  normal  and  final  is  of
course  only  the  third,  the  positive  relation,  in  which  man  uses  his
superiority  over  nature  for  the  sake  of  uplifting  it  as  well  as
of  raising  himself.  It  will  be  easily  noted  that  man’s  threefold
relation  to  earthly  nature  is  a  repetition,  though  on  a  wider  scale,
of  his  relation  to  his  own  material  nature.  Here,  too,  we  neces¬
sarily  distinguish  the  abnormal  (passive)  and  the  normal  (positively


348  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

active)  relation  and  the  transition  from  the  first  to  the  second
(negatively  active).  The  carnal  man  submits  and  surrenders  him¬
self  to  the  material  life  in  its  undue,  perverted  state.  The  ascetic
struggles  with  the  flesh  in  order  to  conquer  it.  The  perfect  man,
having  passed  through  such  a  struggle,  does  not  destroy  his  bodily
life  but  attains  to  its  transfiguration,  resurrection,  and  ascension.
Asceticism  or  the  subjugation  of  the  flesh  in  individual  life,  struggle
with  external  earthly  nature  and  the  subjugation  of  it  in  the
common  life  of  humanity,  is  merely  a  necessary  transition  and  not
the  ideal  form  of  activity.  The  ideal  is  to  cultivate  the  earth,  to
minister  to  it ,  so  that  it  might  be  renewed  and  regenerated.

VII

The  efficient  or  producing  cause  of  labour  is  found  in  the  needs
of  man.  This  cause  holds  good  for  all  the  factors  of  production
which  appear  now  as  the  subjects  and  now  as  the  objects  of  needs.
The  worker,  as  a  living  being,  has  need  of  the  means  of  liveli¬
hood,  and,  as  labour,  he  is  the  object  of  need  to  the  capitalist,
who  in  his  turn,  as  employer,  is  an  object  of  need  to  the  worker,
and  in  this  sense  is  the  immediate  efficient  cause  of  his  labour.
The  same  persons,  as  producers,  stand  in  a  similar  relation  to
consumers,  etc.

The  material  (and  instrumental)  cause  of  labour  and  production
is  found  on  the  one  hand  in  the  forces  of  nature,  and  on  the  other
in  the  various  faculties  and  forces  of  man.  But  these  twofold
(efficient  and  material)  economic  causes,  studied  by  political
economy  and  statistics  from  different  points  of  view,  are  physically
unlimited  and  morally  indefinite.  The  needs  may  increase  in
number  and  complexity  ad  infinitum  ;  both  needs  and  faculties
may  be  of  different  worth,  and,  finally,  the  forces  of  nature  may
be  used  in  the  most  various  directions.  All  this  leads  to  practical
questions  to  which  political  economy,  as  a  science  limited  to  the
material  and  existent  aspect  of  things,  can  give  no  answer.  Many
persons  have  a  need  of  pornography.  Should  this  need  be  satisfied
by  the  production  of  indecent  books,  pictures,  immoral  spectacles  ?
Some  demands,  as  well  as  some  faculties,  are  obviously  perverted
in  character  ;  thus  in  the  case  of  many  persons  certain  positive
qualities  of  intellect  and  will  degenerate  into  a  peculiar  capacity


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  349

for  clever  swindling  within  the  limits  of  legality.  Should  we
allow  this  capacity  to  develop  freely  and  become  a  special  pro¬
fession  or  branch  of  work  ?  Political  economy  as  such  can
obviously  answer  nothing  to  questions  such  as  these — they  in
no  wise  concern  it.  They  directly  concern,  however,  the  re¬
cognised  interests  of  society  which  cannot  confine  itself  to  matters
of  fact  alone,  but  must  submit  them  to  a  higher  causality,  by
drawing  a  distinction  between  the  normal  and  abnormal  needs
and  faculties,  the  normal  and  abnormal  use  of  the  forces  of  nature.
Since  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  needs  on  the  one  hand  and
of  forces  and  faculties  on  the  other  does  not  solve  the  practical
question  as  to  the  extent  to  which  the  first  should  be  satisfied
and  the  manner  in  which  the  latter  should  be  used,  appeal  has
to  be  made  to  the  moral  principle  as  determining  that  which
ought  to  be.  It  does  not  create  the  factors  and  elements  of  labour,
but  indicates  how  those  already  in  existence  should  be  used.
Hence  follows  a  new  conception  of  labour,  both  more  general
and  more  definite  than  that  given  by  political  economy  as  such.
For  political  economy  labour  is  an  activity  of  man  ensuing  from
his  needs,  conditioned  by  his  faculties,  applied  to  the  forces  of
nature,  and  having  for  its  purpose  the  production  of  the  greatest
possible  wealth.  From  the  moral  point  of  view  labour  is  interaction
between  men  in  the  material  world  ;  it  must ,  in  accordance  with  the
moral  demands ,  secure  to  each  and  all  the  necessary  means  of  worthy
existence ,  enabling  man  to  bring  to  perfection  all  his  powers ,  and  is
finally  destined  to  transfigure  and  spiritualise  material  nature.  Such
is  the  essence  of  labour  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  higher
causality — of  the  formal  and  final  cause— apart  from  which  the
two  lower  causes  remain  practically  indefinite.

Further  conditions  of  the  normal  economic  life  become  clear
in  analysing  the  conceptions  of  property  and  exchange.


VIII

All  the  acute  questions  of  the  economic  life  are  closely  con¬
nected  with  the  idea  of  property,  which  in  itself,  however,  belongs
to  the  sphere  of  jurisprudence,  morality,  and  psychology  rather
than  to  that  of  economic  relations.  This  fact  alone  clearly


350  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

shows  how  mistaken  is  the  attempt  to  conceive  of  the  economic
phenomena  as  entirely  independent  and  self-contained.

The  ultimate  basis  of  property,  as  all  serious  philosophers  of
modern  times  rightly  recognise,  is  to  be  found  in  the  very  nature
of  man.  Even  in  the  contents  of  inner  psychical  experience  we
necessarily  distinguish  ourselves  from  what  is  ours :  all  our  thoughts,
feelings,  desires,  we  regard  as  belonging  to  us,  in  contradistinction
to  ourselves  as  thinking,  feeling,  desiring.  The  relation  is  two¬
fold.  On  the  one  hand,  we  necessarily  put  ourselves  above  what
is  ours,  for  we  recognise  that  our  existence  is  not  by  any  means
exhausted  by  or  limited  to  any  particular  mental  states — that
this  thought,  this  desire  may  disappear  while  we  ourselves  remain.
This  is  the  fundamental  expression  of  human  personality  as
formally  unconditional,  quite  apart  from  the  metaphysical  question
of  the  soul  as  substance.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  we  are
aware  that  if  we  are  deprived  of  all  mental  states  altogether  we
shall  become  a  blank  ;  so  that  for  the  reality  and  fulness  of  being
it  is  insufficient  to  be  c  oneself,’  but  it  is  necessary  to  have  ‘  one’s
own.’  Even  in  the  inner  psychical  sphere  that  which  belongs
to  the  self  is  not  always  the  absolute  property  of  the  person  and
is  not  always  connected  with  him  to  the  same  extent.

Some  mental  states  express  by  their  content  in  the  most  inti¬
mate,  direct,  and  immediate  way  that  which  is  essential  and  funda¬
mental  to  the  given  individual,  and  are  in  a  sense  inseparable  from
him.  Thus,  for  instance,  when  a  person  has  an  implicit  steadfast
faith  in  God,  such  faith  is  his  unalienable  property — not  in  the  sense
that  he  must  always  actually  have  in  mind  a  positive  thought  of
God  with  corresponding  thoughts  and  impulses,  but  only  in  the
sense  that  every  time  the  idea  of  God  actually  arises  in  his  mind,
or  that  he  is  faced  with  a  question  concerning  God,  a  definite
positive  answer  accompanied  by  corresponding  states  of  feeling
and  will  is  bound  to  follow.  Other  mental  states  are,  on  the
contrary,  merely  superficial  and  transitory  reactions  of  the  person  to
external  influences — accidental  both  in  contentand  inorigin,  though
conditioned  by  a  more  or  less  complex  association  of  ideas  and
other  mental  and  bodily  processes.  Thus  when  a  person  happens
to  think  of  the  advantages  or  disadvantages  of  cycling,  or  to
wish  for  a  drink  of  beer,  or  to  feel  indignation  at  some  lie  in
the  newspapers,  etc.,  it  is  obvious  that  such  accidental  states  are


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  351

but  feebly  connected  with  the  person  to  whom  they  belong,
that  he  loses  nothing  and  experiences  no  essential  change  when
they  disappear.  Finally,  some  mental  states  cannot,  apart  from
their  content  and  manner  of  origin,  be  regarded  as  reactions  on
the  part  of  the  individual  who  experiences  them  at  all,  so  that
their  belonging  to  him  must  be  recognised  as  fictitious.  To
this  category  belong  the  suggested  [hypnotically  or  otherwise)
ideas,  desires  and  feelings,  and  actions  ensuing  therefrom.  It
is  very  difficult  to  offer  a  theoretical  account  of  them,  but  they
unquestionably  exist.  Without  going  into  these  exceptional
phenomena,  however,  it  is  sufficient  to  indicate  the  fact  that
both  in  theory  and  in  practice  certain  actions  are  not  laid  to  the
responsibility  of  the  persons  who  commit  them.  In  view  of  the
circumstance  that,  for  the  most  part,  these  actions  are  conditioned
by  corresponding  ideas,  feelings,  and  impulses  on  the  part  of  the
agent,  the  recognition  that  he  is  not  responsible  for  them  implies
that  certain  mental  states  do  not  belong  to  or  form  the  property
of  the  person  who  experiences  them.

Thus  even  in  the  sphere  of  the  inner  psychical  life  we  find
that  property  is  but  relative  and  different  in  degree,  beginning
with  the  ‘treasure’  in  which  man  ‘puts  his  very  soul’  and  which
may  nevertheless  be  taken  from  him,  and  ending  with  states
which  prove  to  belong  to  him  in  an  utterly  fictitious  sense.
Similar  relativity  obtains  with  regard  to  external  property.  The
immediate  object  of  it  is  man’s  own  body,  which,  however,
belongs  to  man  only  more  or  less.  This  is  true,  first,  in  the
natural  sense  that  the  individual  himself  cannot  regard  as  equally
his  own  those  organs  or  parts  of  the  body  without  which  earthly
life  is  altogether  impossible  [e.g.  the  head  or  the  heart),  those
without  which  it  is  possible  but  not  enjoyable  [e.g.  ‘the  apple  of
the  eye’),  and  those  the  loss  of  which  is  no  misfortune  at  all
[e.g.  an  amputated  finger  or  an  extracted  tooth,  not  to  speak  of
nails,  hair,  etc.).  If,  however,  the  real  connection  of  the  person
with  his  body  is  thus  relative  and  unequal,  there  is  no  natural
ground  for  regarding  the  body  as  his  absolute  property  or  as
absolutely  inviolable.  And  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  un¬
conditional  moral  principle  the  bodily  inviolability  of  a  person  is
not  anything  distinct  and  on  its  own  account,  but  is  connected
with  universal  and  generally  binding  norms,  and  is  therefore


352  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

incompatible  with  the  violation  of  these  norms.  If  it  is  both  my
right  and  my  duty  forcibly  to  prevent  a  man  from  injuring  a
defenceless  being,  it  must  be  the  right  and  the  duty  of  other
persons  to  exercise  such  bodily  compulsion  over  myself  too  in  a
similar  case.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  property  is  understood  in  the  strict
sense  as  the  ‘jus  utendi  and  abutendi  re  sua  ’  (the  right  to  use
and  to  abuse  of  one’s  own  thing),  such  a  right  is  not  absolute  so
far  as  one’s  body  is  concerned.  On  this  side  too  it  is  limited  by
just  considerations  of  the  common  good  which  have  found
expression  in  legal  codes  of  all  epochs  and  nations.  If  the  whole
of  man’s  physical  powers  are  needed,  for  instance,  for  the  defence
of  his  country,  even  so  slight  an  ‘  abuse  ’  of  one’s  body  as  cutting
off  a  finger  is  recognised  as  criminal.  And  even  apart  from  such
special  conditions,  not  by  any  means  every  use  that  man  may
make  of  his  body  is  regarded  as  permissible.

But  whatever  the  moral  and  social  limitations  of  man’s  rights
over  his  own  body  may  be,  in  any  case  it  unquestionably  belongs  to
him,  just  as  his  mental  states  do,  in  virtue  of  a  direct  and  natural
connection,  independent  of  his  will,  between  himself  and  what  is
his.  As  to  external  things,  the  ground  upon  which  they  belong
to  this  or  that  person,  or  are  appropriated  by  him,  is  not  im¬
mediately  given  and  calls  for  explanation.  Even  when  there
appears  to  be  the  closest  connection  between  a  person  and  a
thing,  as  for  instance  between  necessary  clothing  and  the  person
who  is  wearing  it,  the  question  as  to  property  still  remains  open,
for  the  clothes  may  not  be  his  own  but  may  have  been  stolen
from  somebody  else.  On  the  other  hand,  a  person  living  in
Petersburg  or  London  may  have  immovable  property  in  East
Siberia  which  he  has  never  seen  nor  ever  will  see.  If,  then,  the
presence  of  the  closest  real  connection  between  a  person  and  a
thing  (as  in  the  first  case)  is  in  no  sense  a  guarantee  of  property,
while  the  absence  of  any  real  connection  (as  in  the  second
instance)  is  no  obstacle  to  property,  it  follows  that  the  real
connection  is  altogether  irrelevant  and  that  the  right  of  property
must  have  an  ideal  basis.  According  to  a  current  philosophical
definition,  property  is  the  ideal  continuation  of  the  person  in
things  or  the  extension  of  the  person  to  things.  In  what  way,
however,  and  upon  what  ground  is  the  self  thus  extended  to


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  353

what  is  other  than  it  and  appropriates  that  other  ?  Such  extension
cannot  be  due  to  the  act  of  personal  will  alone  ;  an  act  of  will
can  transfer  the  already  existing  right  of  property  (through  gift
or  legacy,  etc.),  but  it  cannot  create  the  right  itself.  The  right
of  property  is  usually  held  to  arise  in  two  ways  only,  through
possession  and  work.  Possession  in  the  strict  sense,  i.e.  apart
from  any  special  work  (such  as  the  military),  through  simple
seizure  resulting  from  a  direct  act  of  will  gives  rise  to  a  special
right  of  property,  ‘the  right  of  the  first  occupier’  (‘ jus  primi
occupantis  ’),  but  does  so  only  in  exceptional  cases,  more  and
more  rarely  met  with,  when  that  which  is  seized  belongs  to  no
one  (cra  nullius'\

Work  thus  remains,  in  the  general  opinion,  the  essential  basis
of  property.  The  product  of  one’s  work  and  effort  naturally
becomes  one’s  own,  one’s  property.  This  ground,  however,  also
proves  to  be  insecure.  If  it  were  sufficient,  children  would  have
to  be  recognised  as  the  property  of  the  mother  who  brought
them  into  the  world  with  no  little  labour  and  effort.  Reservations
have  to  be  made  and  human  beings  must  be  a  priori  excluded
from  the  class  of  objects  of  property  ;  and  this  can  only  be  done  in
virtue  of  principles  utterly  foreign  to  the  economic  sphere  as
such.  At  this  point,  however,  a  new  and  more  important
difficulty  arises.  It  has  been  granted  that  things  alone  can  be
objects  of  property,  and  that  the  ground  of  property  is  labour
which  produces  them.  This  would  be  all  very  well  if  labour
could  produce  things  j  but  in  truth  labour  produces  not  things
but  utility  in  things.  Utility,  however,  is  a  relation  and  not  a
thing  and  cannot  therefore  be  the  object  of  property.  In  common
parlance,  dating  from  primitive  times,  it  is  usual  to  speak  of
workmen  making  things  ;  but  even  persons  ignorant  of  political
economy  understand  that  workmen  merely  produce  in  the  given
material  changes  which  communicate  to  it  some  relatively  new
qualities  corresponding  to  certain  human  needs.  There  is  no
doubt  that  they  work  for  their  own  sake  as  well  as  for  other
people’s,  and  that  their  work  must  give  satisfaction  to  their  own
needs.  “The  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat,”1 — this  is  a
moral  axiom  which  no  one  would  honestly  challenge.  The
question,  however,  is  what  can  be  the  ground  of  the  workman’s

1  ‘  Meat  ’  should,  of  course,  be  understood  in  the  wide  sense  explained  above.


354  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

ownership  of  the  so-called  products  of  labour.  Labour  which
does  not  produce  a  thing,  but  only  a  certain  particular  quality  in
it,  inseparable  from  the  thing  itself,  cannot  justify  the  ownership
of  that  which  it  did  not  produce,  and  which  does  not  depend
upon  it.  The  employer  is  responsible  for  the  workman  s  labour
but  not  for  the  reality  of  its  products,  and  is  therefoie  in  the
same  position  as  the  workman  with  regard  to  the  latter.

Thus  there  exists  no  real  ground  why  the  product  of  labour
should  be  the  property  of  any  one,  and  we  must  therefore  turn  to
the  ideal  grounds.


IX

In  virtue  of  the  absolute  significance  of  personality  every  man
has  a  right  to  the  means  of  a  worthy  existence.  Since,  however,
the  individual  as  such  has  this  right  potentially  only,  and  it
depends  upon  society  actually  to  realise  or  to  secure  it,  it
follows  that  the  individual  has  a  corresponding  duty  towards
society — the  duty  to  be  useful  to  it  or  to  work  for  the  common
good.  In  this  sense  work  is  the  source  of  property  :  the
worker  has  an  unquestionable  right  of  property  over  what  he
has  earned.  Within  certain  limits  demanded  by  the  moral  prin¬
ciple,  wages  may  be  regulated  by  society  —  i.e.  by  the  central
authority  or  the  Government  —  and  not  be  allowed  to  tall
below  a  certain  minimum,  but  they  cannot  be  prescribed  with
absolute  exactness.  On  the  other  hand,  the  needs  and  the
conditions  of  a  worthy  existence  are  even  in  a  normal  society  only
an  approximately  constant  and  definite  quantity.  Hence  it
becomes  possible  for  individual  persons  to  save  or  to  accumulate
material  means,  i.e.  to  form  capital.  There  is,  of  course,  still
less  visible  and  real  connection  between  capital  and  the  person
who  has  saved  it  than  there  is  between  the  workman  and  the
thing  he  has  made,  but  the  close  and  complete  ideal  connection
is  obvious.  Capital  as  such,  in  its  general  nature — apart  from
the  circumstances  owing  to  which  it  may  in  individual  cases  have
been  built  up — is  a  pure  product  of  human  will,  for  originally  it
depended  upon  that  will  to  save  a  part  of  the  earnings  or  to  use
it  too  for  current  needs.  Capital,  therefore,  ought  in  justice  to
be  recognised  as  property  par  excellence}

1  I  have  indicated  the  source  of  capital  in  the  simplest  normal  scheme.  But


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  355

The  conception  of  property  involves  the  conception  of  freely
disposing  of  the  object  of  property.  Ought  this  freedom  to  be
absolute  and  include  both  the  use  and  the  abuse  of  property  ?
Since  the  realisation  of  any  right  at  all  is  only  possible  if  society
guarantees  it,  there  is  no  reason  why  society  should  guarantee
personal  misuse  of  a  right  that  conflicts  with  the  common  good.
From  the  fact  that,  according  to  the  moral  principle,  the
individual  has  absolute  and  inalienable  rights,  it  by  no  means
follows  that  every  act  of  his  will  is  the  expression  of  such  an
inalienable  right.  Apart  from  being  irrational  such  a  supposition
would  be  practically  self-destructive,  since  a  will  which  trespasses
upon  all  rights  would  also  in  that  case  be  inviolable,  and  there¬
fore  there  would  be  no  inalienable  right  left.  And  if  it  is  both
permissible  and  obligatory  to  prevent  a  person  from  misusing  his
hands  (for  instance,  from  committing  a  murder),  it  is  also
permissible  and  obligatory  to  prevent  him  from  misusing  his
property  to  the  detriment  of  the  common  good  or  social  justice.* 1

The  only  question  is  as  to  what  we  are  to  understand  by
misuse  that  calls  for  the  intervention  of  the  state.  Socialism
recognises  as  misuse  all  transfer  of  earned  property  to  another
person  by  legacy  or  testament.  This  transference  of  economic
advantages  to  persons  who  have  not  personally  deserved  them  is
alleged  to  be  the  main  wrong  and  the  source  of  all  social  evils.
But  although  inheritance  of  property  has  some  real  drawbacks,
they  disappear  in  the  face  of  the  positive  side  of  this  institution,
which  necessarily  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  man.  The
continuous  chain  of  progress  in  humanity  is  kept  together  by
the  conscious  successiveness  of  its  links.  While  the  all-
embracing  unity  of  the  future  is  still  in  the  making,  the  very

whatever  anomalies  may  accompany  the  formation  and  growth  of  capital  in  actual
life,  the  part  played  by  the  will  or  the  strength  of  spirit  remains  in  any  case  essential.
Since  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  wealth  may  be  squandered,  the  mere  fact  of  saving  it
is  an  obvious  merit  of  will  on  the  part  of  the  saver  ;  it  is  null  in  comparison  with
merits  of  a  different  and  higher  order,  but  in  their  absence  it  undoubtedly  has  an
importance  of  its  own.

1  Even  Roman  law,  thoroughly  individualistic  as  it  was  in  this  respect,  introduced
an  important  reservation  into  the  formula  quoted  above  :  proprietas  est  jus  utendi  et
abutendi  re  sua  quatenus  juris  ratio  patitui — property  is  the  right  to  use  and  to  abuse  of
one’s  thing  in  so  far  as  it  is  compatible  with  the  meaning  (or  the  rational  basis)  of
justice.  But  the  meaning  of  justice  demands  precisely  that  private  caprice  should  be
limited  by  the  common  good.


356  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

process  whereby  it  comes  about  demands  mutual  moral  dependence
between  generations,  in  virtue  of  which  one  does  not  merely
follow  the  other  but  also  inherits  from  it.  If  it  were  not  for
the  intentional  and  voluntary  handing  down  of  what  has  been
acquired,  we  should  have  only  a  physical  succession  of  generations,
the  later  repeating  the  life  of  the  former,  as  is  the  case  with
animals.  The  most  important  thing,  of  course,  is  the  continuous
accumulation  of  spiritual  inheritance ;  but  since  it  is  only
given  to  a  few  to  hand  down  to  universal  posterity  permanent
spiritual  acquisitions,  and  since  moral  demands  are  the  same  for
all,  it  is  the  right  and  the  duty  of  the  majority  of  men  to  try
and  improve  the  material  conditions  of  life  for  their  immediate
successors.  Those  who  wholly  devote  themselves  to  the  service
of  the  universal  future  and  already  anticipate  it  as  an  ideal

have  a  right  to  refer  to  the  precept  of  taking  no  thought  for

the  morrow  advocated  in  the  Gospels.  To  imitate  the  lilies
of  the  field  one  must  be  as  pure  as  they  are,  and  to  be  like

the  fowls  of  the  air  one  must  be  able  to  fly  as  high.  But

if  either  purity  or  loftiness  be  lacking,  practical  carelessness
likens  us  not  to  the  lilies  or  the  birds  of  the  air,  but  to  the
animal  which,  careless  of  the  future,  grubs  up  the  roots  of  the
kindly  oak  tree,  and  even,  on  occasion,  devours  its  own  offspring
instead  of  acorns.

When  dealing  with  an  institution  which  is  not  immoral  and
is  based  upon  ideal  foundations  though  it  corresponds  only  to
the  medium  level  of  morality,  no  serious  moralist  ought  to
forget  the  unquestionable  truth  that  it  is  far  more  difficult  for
society  to  rise  above  this  level  than  to  sink  below  it.  Even
if  socialism  and  theories  akin  to  it  did  .intend  to  turn  every
human  being  into  an  angel,  they  would  certainly  fail  to  do  so;  but
to  bring  the  human  mass  down  to  the  brutal  stage  is  not  at  all
difficult.  To  reject  in  the  name  of  the  absolute  moral  ideal  the
necessary  social  conditions  of  moral  progress  means,  in  the  first
place,  in  defiance  of  logic,  to  confuse  the  absolute  and  eternal
value  of  that  which  is  being  realised  with  the  relative  value  of  the
degree  of  realisation  as  a  process  in  time.  Secondly,  it  means
a  thoughtless  attitude  towards  the  absolute  ideal  which,  apart
from  the  concrete  conditions  of  its  realisation,  becomes  for  man
an  empty  phrase.  Thirdly,  this  pseudo-moral  uncompromising


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  357

straightforwardness  means  the  absence  of  the  most  fundamental
and  elementary  moral  impulse — pity ,  and  pity  precisely  to
those  who  are  most  in  need  of  it — to  the  ‘least  of  these.’  To
preach  absolute  morality  and  reject  all  moralising  institutions,  to
lay  burdens  too  heavy  to  be  borne  upon  the  weak  and  helpless
shoulders  of  average  humanity,  is  illogical ,  thoughtless ,  and  immoral.

Inherited  property  is  the  abiding  realisation  of  moral  inter¬
action  in  the  most  intimate  and  the  most  fundamental  social
group — namely,  in  the  family.  Inherited  wealth  is,  on  the  one
hand,  the  embodiment  of  pity,  reaching  beyond  the  grave,
of  the  parents  for  their  children,  and,  on  the  other,  a  con¬
crete  point  of  departure  for  a  pious  memory  of  the  departed
parents.  With  these  two  is  connected,  at  any  rate  with  regard  to
the  most  important  kind  of  property — the  property  in  land,  a  third
moral  factor,  viz.  man’s  relation  to  the  external  nature,  i.e.  to  the
earth.  For  the  majority  of  men  this  relation  can  become  moral
only  on  condition  of  their  having  inherited  landed  property.  To
understand  earthly  nature  and  to  love  it  for  its  own  sake  is  given
to  a  few  only  ;  but  every  one  becomes  naturally  attached  to  his
own  native  spot,  to  the  graves  of  his  fathers  and  the  haunts  of
his  childhood.  It  is  a  moral  bond,  and  one  which  extends  human
solidarity  to  material  nature,  thus  making  a  beginning  of  its
spiritualisation.  This  fact  both  justifies  the  institution  of  in¬
herited  property  in  land  and  serves  as  a  basis  for  making  it  more
conformable  to  the  demands  of  morality.  It  is  not  sufficient  to
recognise  the  ideal  character  which  obviously  attaches  to  such
property  :  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen  and  develop  this
character,  protecting  it  from  the  low  and  selfish  motives  which
are  natural  enough  at  the  present  stage  of  human  progress  and
may  easily  gain  the  upper  hand.  Decisive  check  must  be  put  upon
the  treatment  of  the  earth  as  a  lifeless  instrument  of  rapacious
exploitation  ;  the  plots  of  land  handed  down  from  one  generation
to  another  must,  in  principle,  be  made  inalienable  and  sufficient
to  maintain  in  each  person  a  moral  attitude  towards  the  earth.
It  will  be  said  that,  with  the  population  constantly  increasing,
enough  land  cannot  be  found  both  to  preserve  to  each  what  he  has
got,  or  even  a  part  of  it,  and  to  give  some  to  those  who  have  not
got  any.  This  objection  appears  to  be  a  serious  one,  but  is  in  truth
either  thoughtless  or  unfair.  It  would  certainly  be  very  absurd


358  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

to  suggest  as  an  absolute,  separate,  and  independent  measure  that
an  inalienable  plot  of  land  should  be  secured  to  each  and  all.
This  measure  may  and  ought  to  be  taken  only  in  connection
with  another  reform — the  cessation,  namely,  of  that  rapacious
method  of  cultivation  which  will  end  in  there  not  being  enough
land  for  any  one,  let  alone  for  all.  And  if  land  is  treated  in  the
moral  way  and  looked  after  like  a  being  whom  one  loves,  the
minimum  amount  of  land  sufficient  for  each  person  may  become
so  small  that  there  will  be  enough  for  those  who  have  not  got
any,  without  doing  injustice  to  those  who  have.

As  to  the  unlimited  increase  of  population,  it  is  not  ordained  by
any  physical,  and,  still  less,  by  any  moral  law.  It  is  understood,
of  course,  that  normal  economics  are  only  possible  in  connection
with  the  normal  family,  which  is  based  upon  rational  asceticism
and  not  upon  unchecked  carnal  instincts.  The  immoral  exploita¬
tion  of  land  cannot  stop  so  long  as  there  is  immoral  exploitation
of  woman.  If  man’s  relation  to  his  inner  house  (this  is  the  name
applied  by  the  Scriptures  to  the  wife)  is  wrong,  his  relation  to  his
external  house  cannot  be  right  either.  A  man  who  beats  his
wife  cannot  care  for  the  earth  as  he  should.  Speaking  generally,
the  moral  solution  of  the  economic  question  is  intimately  con¬
nected  with  the  whole  problem  of  life  in  the  individual  and  the
race.


X

Just  as  there  can  be  no  physiological  life  without  the  inter¬
change  of  substances,  so  there  can  be  no  social  life  without  the
interchange  of  things  (and  of  signs  representing  them).  This
important  section  of  human  material  relations  is  studied  on  its
technical  side  by  political  economy,  financial  and  commercial
law,  and  falls  within  the  scope  of  moral  philosophy  only  in
so  far  as  exchange  becomes  fraud.  To  judge  economic  pheno¬
mena  and  relations  as  such — to  affirm,  e.g.^  as  some  moralists  do,
that  money  is  an  evil,  that  there  must  be  no  commerce,  that
banks  ought  to  be  abolished,  etc. — is  unpardonable  childishness.
It  is  obvious  that  objects  which  are  thus  condemned  are  morally
indifferent  or  neutral,  and  become  good  or  evil  only  according  to
the  quality  and  direction  of  the  will  that  uses  them.  If  we  are


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  359

to  give  up  money  as  an  evil  because  many  people  use  money  for
evil  purposes,  we  ought  also  to  give  up  the  power  of  articulate
speech,  since  many  use  it  for  swearing,  idle  talk,  and  slander  ;  we
should  also  have  to  give  up  using  fire  for  fear  of  conflagrations,
and  water  for  fear  of  persons  committing  suicide  by  drowning.
In  truth,  however,  money,  commerce,  and  banks  are  not  in  them¬
selves  an  evil  but  become  an  evil,  or,  more  exactly,  become  the
consequence  of  an  already  existing  evil  and  the  cause  of  a  new  one,
when,  instead  of  necessary  interchange,  they  serve  the  purposes  of
selfish  fraud.

The  root  of  evil  in  this  case,  as  in  the  whole  of  the  economic
sphere,  is  one  and  the  same,  namely,  that  the  material  interest  is
made  dominant  instead  of  subservient,  independent  instead  of
dependent,  an  end  instead  of  a  means.  From  this  poisonous  root
three  noxious  stems  spring  in  the  domain  of  exchange — falsifica¬
tion,  speculation,  and  usury.

A  modern  text-book  of  political  economy  gives  as  a  current
definition  of  commerce  that  it  is  a  trade  “consisting  in  the  buying
and  selling  of  goods  with  the  object  of  gain.”  The  description
of  commerce  as  the  buying  and  selling  of  goods  is  purely  verbal ;
the  important  thing  is  the  purpose  which  is  here  said  to  consist
entirely  in  the  gain  of  the  trader.1  If,  however,  the  one  object
of  commerce  is  gain,  all  profitable  falsification  of  goods  and
all  successful  speculation  is  justified.  And  if  gain  is  the  purpose
of  commerce,  it  is  certainly  also  the  purpose  of  money-lending  ;
and  since  the  latter  is  more  profitable  the  higher  the  rate  of
interest,  unlimited  usury  is  also  justified.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
such  facts  are  recognised  as  inconsistent  with  the  moral  norm,  it
must  also  be  recognised  that  commerce  and  exchange  in  general
may  only  be  a  means  of  private  gain  on  condition  that  they  should
in  the  first  place  serve  the  community  as  a  whole  and  fulfil  a
social  function  for  the  good  of  all.

From  this  point  of  view  the  economic  anomalies  indicated
can  only  be  abolished  if  their  immoral  root  is  destroyed.  But
every  one  understands  that  the  unchecked  growth  of  a  plant
strengthens  its  roots  and  extends  them  in  breadth  and  in  depth,  and
that  if  the  roots  are  very  deep,  the  stem  must  be  cut  down  first.

1  I  do  not,  of  course,  hold  the  author  of  the  book  responsible  for  this  definition,
since  he  only  gives  expression  to  the  popular  idea.


Збо  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

To  speak  without  metaphors  :  apart  from  the  inner,  purely  ideal
and  verbal  struggle  with  the  vice  of  cupidity,  normal  society
can  and  ought  decisively  to  oppose  by  means  of  concrete  external
measures  such  luxurious  growths  of  unlimited  cupidity  as  com¬
mercial  falsification,  speculation,  and  usury.

Falsification  of  goods,  especially  of  the  objects  of  necessary
consumption,  is  a  menace  to  public  welfare  and  is  not  merely
immoral  but  positively  criminal.  In  some  cases  it  is  regarded  as
such  even  at  the  present  day,  but  this  view  must  be  worked  out
more  consistently.  When  the  whole  legal  procedure  and  system
of  penalties  1  is  reformed,  increased  persecution  of  these  special
offences  will  not  be  an  act  of  cruelty  but  of  justice.  Two  things
ought  to  be  remembered  in  this  connection  :  in  the  first  place,
that  people  who  suffer  most  from  this  evil  are  the  poor  and
ignorant,  who  are  unfortunate  enough  as  it  is  ;  and  secondly,  that
the  unchecked  performance  of  these  crimes,  as  of  all  others,  is  in¬
jurious  not  only  to  the  victims  but  to  the  criminals  themselves,
who  may  feel  that  their  immorality  is  justified  and  encouraged  by
the  condonation  of  society.

Financial  operations  with  fictitious  values  (the  so-called
‘speculations  ’)  are  certainly  a  social  disease  rather  than  a  personal
crime,  and  the  first  remedy  is  absolute  prohibition  of  institutions
whereby  this  disease  is  nurtured.  As  to  usury,  the  only  sure
method  of  abolishing  it  is,  obviously,  universal  development  of
normal  credit,  not  with  the  object  of  gain  but  as  a  charitable
institution.

In  discussing  economic  relations  which  ought  to  hold  in  the
domain  of  labour,  property,  and  exchange,  I  have  spoken  throughout
of  justice  and  right,  conceptions  which  have  also  been  presupposed
in  the  treatment  of  the  penal  question.  For  the  most  part  the
terms  ‘justice  ’  and  ‘right’  carry  the  same  meaning.  The  idea  of
justice,  however,  expresses  a  purely  moral  demand,  and  therefore
belongs  to  the  ethical  sphere,  while  right  determines  a  special
sphere  of  relations — namely,  the  legal  one.  Is  this  distinction
merely  a  misunderstanding  or,  if  it  is  well  grounded,  what  is  the
meaning  and  the  degree  of  it  ?  Turning  now  to  the  question  as
to  the  relation  of  morality  and  legal  justice  or  right,  we  may  note,
without  prejudging  the  content  of  our  inquiry,  that  the  question

1  See  above,  Part  III.,  Chap.  VI.


THE  ECONOMIC  QUESTION  361

is  an  extremely  wide  one,  for  the  idea  of  right  inevitably  involves  a
series  of  other  ideas — law,  authority,  legal  compulsion,  state.  In
discussing  the  organisation  of  just  social  relations  I  took  these  ideas
for  granted,  since  such  an  organisation  can  obviously  not  be  realised
through  moral  preaching  alone.


CHAPTER  VIII

MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE

I

The  absolute  moral  principle,  the  demand ,  namely,  or  the  command¬
ment  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,  or  to  realise
in  ourselves  the  image  and  likeness  of  God,  already  contains  in  its
very  nature  the  recognition  of  the  relative  element  in  morality.
For  it  is  clear  that  the  demand  for  perfection  can  only  be  addressed
to  a  being  who  is  imperfect  ;  urging  him  to  become  like  the  higher
being,  the  commandment  presupposes  the  lower  stages  and  the
relative  degrees  of  advance.  Thus,  the  absolute  moral  principle
or  the  perfect  good  is  for  us,  to  use  Hegel’s  language,  a  unity  of
itself  and  its  other,  a  synthesis  of  the  absolute  and  the  relative.
The  existence  of  the  relative  or  the  imperfect,  as  distinct  from  the
absolute  good,  is  a  fact  not  to  be  got  over,  and  to  deny  it,  to
confuse  the  two  terms,  or,  with  the  help  of  dialectical  tricks  and
on  the  strength  of  mystical  emotions,  to  affirm  them  as  identical,
would  be  false.  Equally  false,  however,  is  the  opposite  course —
the  separation ,  namely,  of  the  relative  from  the  absolute,  as  of  two
wholly  distinct  spheres  which  have  nothing  in  common.  From
this  dualistic  point  of  view  man  himself,  whose  striving  towards
the  absolute  is  inseparably  connected  with  relative  conditions,
proves  to  be  the  incarnation  of  absurdity.  The  only  rational
point  of  view,  which  both  reason  and  conscience  compel  us  to
adopt,  consists  in  recognising  that  the  actual  duality  between  the
relative  and  the  absolute  resolves  itself  for  us  into  a  free  and
complete  unity  (but  not  by  any  means  into  an  empty  identity  of
indifference)  through  the  real  and  moral  process  of  approaching

362


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  363

perfection — a  process  ranging  from  the  rigid  stone  to  the  glory
and  freedom  of  the  sons  of  God.

At  each  stage  the  relative  is  connected  with  the  absolute
as  a  means  for  concretely  bringing  about  the  perfection  of  all  ;
and  this  connection  justifies  the  lesser  good  as  a  condition  of
the  greater.  At  the  same  time  it  justifies  the  absolute  good  itself,
which  would  not  be  absolute  if  it  could  not  connect  with  itself  or
include  in  one  way  or  another  all  concrete  relations.  And  indeed,
nowhere  in  the  world  accessible  to  us  do  we  find  the  two
terms  in  separation  or  in  their  bare  form.  Everywhere  the
absolute  principle  is  clothed  with  relative  forms,  and  the  relative
is  inwardly  connected  with  the  absolute  and  held  together  by  it.
The  difference  lies  simply  in  the  comparative  predominance  of
one  or  the  other  aspect.

When  some  two  species  of  concrete  relations  or  some  two
domains  within  which  they  are  exemplified  are  separated  from  and
opposed  to  one  another,  one  being  regarded  as  absolute  and  another
as  purely  relative  in  meaning,  we  may  be  certain  that  the  opposi¬
tion  itself  is  purely  relative.  Each  of  the  two  domains  is  simply
a  special  instance  of  the  relation  between  the  absolute  and  the
relative, — relation  different  in  form  and  degree,  but  identical  in
nature  and  supreme  purpose.  And  it  is  in  this  relation  of  both
to  the  absolute  that  the  positive  connection  or  the  unity  of  the
two  consists.

Within  the  limits  of  the  active  or  practical  life  of  humanity
there  is  apparent  opposition  between  the  moral  sphere  in  the
strict  sense  and  the  sphere  of  legal  justice.  From  ancient  times,
beginning  with  the  pagan  Cynics  and  the  Christian  gnostics,  and
down  to  our  own  day,  this  opposition  has  been  taken  to  be  un¬
conditional.  Morality  alone  has  been  regarded  as  absolute,  and
legal  justice,  as  a  purely  conventional  phenomenon,  has  been
rejected  in  the  name  of  the  absolute  demands.  One  immediately
feels  that  this  view  is  false,  but  moral  philosophy  compels  us  to
disregard  this  feeling  which  may,  after  all,  be  deceptive,  and  to
consider  the  true  relation  between  morality  and  legal  justice
from  the  standpoint  of  the  absolute  good.  Is  this  good  justified
by  its  relation  to  justice  ?  A  person  interested  in  etymology
may  note  that  the  answer  is  already  contained  in  the  terms  of
the  question.  This  philological  circumstance  will  be  discussed


364  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

further  on,  but  it  must  not  as  such  prejudge  the  philosophic
problem.


II

In  his  lectures  on  Criminal  Law  Professor  N.  S.  Tagantsev
quotes,  among  other  things,  the  following  Prussian  enactment  of
the  year  1739  :

“  If  an  advocate  or  a  procurator  or  any  similar  person  ventures
to  present  any  petition  to  his  Royal  Majesty,  either  personally
or  through  somebody  else,  it  is  the  pleasure  of  his  Royal  Majesty
that  the  aforesaid  person  should  be  hanged  without  mercy,  and  a
dog  be  hanged  by  the  side  of  him.”

Of  the  legality  or  conformity  to  law  of  the  enactment  in
question  there  can  be  no  doubt ;  and  there  can  be  equally  no
doubt  of  its  being  opposed  to  the  most  elementary  demands  of
justice.  The  opposition  seems  to  be  intentionally  emphasised  by
extending  the  punishment  of  the  advocate  or  procurator  to  the
perfectly  innocent  dog.  Similar,  though  not  such  glaring  cases  of
disagreement  between  morality  and  positive  right,  between  justice
and  law,  are  frequently  met  with  in  history.  The  question  must
then  be  asked,  how  is  this  fact  to  be  regarded,  and  which  ot
the  two  conflicting  principles  are  we  to  adopt  in  practical  life  ?
The  answer  appears  to  be  clear.  Moral  demands  have  an  inherent
character  of  being  absolutely  binding,  which  may  be  entirely
absent  from  the  enactments  of  positive  law.  Hence  the  conclusion
seems  legitimate  that  the  question  as  to  the  relation  between
morality  and  legal  justice  is  settled  by  a  simple  rejection  of  the
latter  as  a  binding  principle  of  action.  All  human  relations  must
accordingly  be  reduced  to  purely  moral  interaction,  and  the  sphere
of  the  legal  or  juridical  determinations  and  relations  must  be
entirely  rejected.

This  conclusion  is  very  easily  thought  of,  but  is  also  extremely
thoughtless.  This  ‘antinomy,’  or  the  absolute  opposition  between
morality  and  law,  has  never  subjected  its  fundamental  assumption
to  any  consistent  or  far-reaching  criticism.

That  a  formally  legal  enactment,  such  as  the  edict  of  the  king
of  Prussia,  quoted  above,  is  opposed  to  the  demands  of  morality  is
only  too  obvious.  But  it  may  well  be  that  it  is  also  opposed  to


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  365

the  demands  of  legal  justice  itself.  The  possibility  of  conflict
between  the  formal  legality  of  certain  actions  and  the  essence  of
legal  justice  will  become  clearer  to  the  reader  if  I  give  a  concrete
instance  of  an  analogous  conflict  between  the  formally- moral
character  of  an  action  and  the  true  nature  of  morality.

It  was  reported  in  the  papers  a  little  while  ago  that  a  woman
suspected  of  causing  the  illness  of  a  boy  by  means  of  a  bewitched
apple  was  terribly  injured  and  almost  killed  by  the  crowd  in  the
centre  of  Moscow — near  St.  Panteleimon’s  Chapel  in  Nikolsky
Street.  Now  these  people  acted  independently  of  any  interested
motives  or  external  considerations  ;  they  had  no  personal  enmity  to
the  woman  and  no  personal  interest  in  beating  her  ;  their  sole
motive  was  the  feeling  that  so  outrageous  a  crime  as  the  poisoning
of  an  innocent  babe  by  means  of  sorcery  ought  to  meet  with  just
retribution.  Thus  it  cannot  be  denied  that  their  behaviour  had  a
formally- moral  character,  though  every  one  will  agree  that  it
certainly  was  essentially  immoral.  If,  however,  the  fact  that
revolting  crimes  may  be  committed  from  purely  moral  motives
does  not  lead  us  to  reject  morality  as  such,  there  is  no  reason  why
such  essentially  unjust,  though  legal,  enactments  as  the  Prussian
law  of  1739  should  be  regarded  as  sufficient  ground  for  rejecting
legal  justice.  In  the  case  of  the  crime  in  Nikolsky  Street  it  is
not  the  moral  principle  that  is  at  fault,  but  the  insufficient  develop¬
ment  of  the  moral  consciousness  in  the  half-savage  crowd  ;  in  the
case  of  the  absurd  Prussian  law  it  is  not  the  idea  of  legal  justice
or  law  that  is  at  fault,  but  only  the  small  degree  to  which  the  idea
of  justice  was  developed  in  the  consciousness  of  King  Friedrich-
Wilhelm.  It  would  not  be  worth  while  to  discuss  the  subject
were  it  not  for  the  bad  habit,  which  has  become  established  of
late,  especially  with  reference  to  legal  questions,  to  deduce,
contrary  to  logic,  general  conclusions  from  concrete  particular
instances.


Ill

It  is  not  legal  justice  and  morality  that  conflict  and  are  incom¬
patible  with  one  another,  but  the  different  states  both  of  the  legal
and  the  moral  consciousness.  Apart  from  these  states  and  their
concrete  expressions,  there  exist,  however,  in  the  domain  of  legal


366  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

justice,  just  as  much  as  in  the  domain  of  morality,  abiding  and
essential  norms,  the  presence  of  which  is  unconsciously  admitted
even  by  the  spirit  of  lying,  in  his  sophistic  attack  on  jurisprudence  :

All  rights  and  laws  are  still  transmitted
Like  an  eternal  sickness  of  the  race, —

From  generation  unto  generation  fitted
And  shifted  round  from  place  to  place.

Reason  becomes  a  sham,  Beneficence  a  worry  :

Thou  art  a  grandchild,  therefore  woe  to  thee.

The  right  born  with  us,  ours  in  verity
This  to  consider,  there’s,  alas  !  no  hurry.

Even  Mephistopheles  recognises  this  natural  right ,  and  merely
complains  that  it  is  ignored.1  In  truth,  however,  it  is  referred  to
whenever  a  question  of  right  arises.  No  fact  belonging  to  the
legal  sphere,  no  expression  of  legal  justice,  can  be  judged  of  except
by  reference  to  a  general  conception  or  norm  of  justice.  Mephis¬
topheles  himself  applies  this  conception  or  norm  when  he  says
that  certain  rights  and  laws,  once  rational  and  beneficial,  have
become  senseless  and  mischievous.  He  indicates  here  one  aspect
of  the  case  only,  namely,  the  so-called  conservatism  of  legal  justice.
This  fact,  too,  has  its  rational  foundation,  and  the  disadvantages
which  it  involves,  and  upon  which  Mephistopheles  exclusively
dwells,  are  cancelled  by  another  fact,  not  mentioned  by  the  spirit
of  lying  for  his  own  reasons — the  fact,  namely,  that  legal  con¬
sciousness  gradually  develops,  and  that  legal  enactments  are,  as
a  fact,  improved.  This  unquestionable  progress  in  the  domain
of  legal  justice  can  be  shown  even  in  the  case  of  the  unjust  law
quoted  above.  I  do  not  simply  mean  that  enactments  like  the
Prussian  edict  of  1739  have  become  utterly  impossible  in  any
European  country,  and  that  the  penalty  of  death  even  for  the
worst  and  unquestionable  crimes  has  long  been  condemned  by  the
best  representatives  of  the  legal  profession.  I  contend  that  this
edict  itself  meant  unquestionable  progress  in  comparison  with
the  state  of  things  which  had  once  prevailed  in  Brandenburg  and
Pomerania,  as  in  the  rest  of  Europe,  when  every  powerful  baron
could  calmly  put  peaceful  people  to  death  for  motives  of  personal

1  Apart  from  the  direct  meaning  of  this  remark,  it  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
prophecy  of  the  persecution  which,  a  quarter  of  a  century  after  Goethe’s  death,  the  idea
of  the  natural  right  suffered  in  jurisprudence.  There  are  signs  which  show  that  this
persecution  is  coming  to  an  end.


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  36 7

vengeance,  or  for  the  sake  of  seizing  their  property.  At  the  time
of  Frederick  the  Great’s  father  it  was  the  king  alone  who  had  the
power  to  take  a  man’s  life,  and,  in  doing  so,  he  had  no  personal
or  selfish  purpose  in  view.  It  is  obvious,  indeed,  that  Friedrich
Wilhelm’s  object  in  composing  his  edict  was  to  put  down  denun¬
ciation  and  slander  by  the  threat  of  the  penalty  of  death,  and  not
actually  to  deprive  of  life  advocates,  procurators,  and  dogs.  The
barons  of  the  old  times  were  unquestionably  guilty  of  murder  and
robbery,  but  the  king,  even  when  publishing  the  revolting  edict,
was  still  acting  as  the  guardian  of  justice,  though  at  a  very  low
level  of  legal  consciousness.

This  difference  of  degree,  this  actual  progress  in  legal  justice,
the  steady  advance  of  the  legal  enactments  towards  legal  norms,
conformable  to,  though  not  identical  with,  the  moral  demands,
sufficiently  proves  that  the  relation  between  the  two  principles
is  not  merely  negative.  It  shows  that  it  is  unpermissible  from
the  point  of  view  of  morality  itself  to  dismiss  the  whole  range  of
legal  facts  and  problems  by  a  simple  and  meaningless  rejection
of  them.


IV

The  relation  between  the  moral  and  the  legal  sphere  is
one  of  the  fundamental  questions  of  practical  philosophy.  It
is  really  the  question  as  to  the  relation  between  the  ideal  moral
consciousness  and  the  actual  life.  The  vitality  and  the  fruitfulness
of  the  moral  consciousness  depends  upon  this  relation  being  under¬
stood  in  a  positive  sense.  Between  the  ideal  good  on  the  one
hand  and  the  evil  reality  on  the  other  lies  the  intermediate  sphere
of  law  and  justice,  whose  function  is  to  give  concrete  embodiment
to  the  good,  to  limit  and  to  correct  the,  evil.  Justice  and  its
embodiment — the  state — condition  the  actual  organisation  of  the
moral  life  of  humanity.  Moral  preaching  which  takes  up  a
negative  attitude  towards  justice  as  such  could  have  no  objective
basis  or  means  of  expression  in  the  real  environment  that  is  foreign
to  it,  and  would  remain  at  best  an  innocent  pastime.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  the  formal  conceptions  and  institutions  of  legal  justice
were  completely  severed  from  the  moral  principles  and  purposes,
legality  would  lose  its  absolute  basis  and  become  purely  arbitrary.


368  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Indeed,  in  order  consistently  to  carry  out  the  separation  between
legal  right  and  morality  it  would  be  necessary  to  give  up  the
ordinary  use  of  speech,  which,  in  all  languages,  unmistakably  testifies
to  the  fundamental  inner  relation  between  the  two  ideas.  The
conception  of  right  and  the  correlative  conception  of  duty  form  so
essential  a  part  of  the  system  of  moral  ideas  that  they  may  serve
as  a  direct  expression  of  them.  Every  one  understands  and  no  one
would  dispute  such  moral  affirmations  as  :  I  am  conscious  of  the
duty  to  abstain  from  everything  shameful,  or,  what  is  the  same
thing,  I  recognise  that  human  dignity  (in  my  own  person)  has  a
right  to  my  respect  ;  it  is  my  duty  to  help  my  neighbours  as  much
as  in  me  lies  and  to  serve  the  common  good,  i.e.  my  neighbours
and  society  as  a  whole  have  a  right  to  my  help  and  service  ;  finally,
it  is  my  duty  to  harmonise  my  will  with  what  I  regard  as  the
highest  of  all,  or,  in  other  words,  the  absolutely  highest  has  a  right
to  a  religious  attitude  on  my  part  (which  is  the  ultimate  basis  of
all  religious  worship).

There  is  not  a  single  moral  relation  which  could  not  be
correctly  and  intelligibly  expressed  in  terms  of  right.  One  would
think  that  nothing  could  be  more  remote  from  the  juridical  order
of  ideas  than  love  for  one’s  enemies.  And  yet  if  the  supreme
moral  law  proclaims  it  my  duty  to  love  my  enemies,  it  is  clear  that
my  enemies  have  a  right  to  my  love.  If  I  deny  love  to  them,  I
act  unjustly,  I  sin  against  what  is  right.  Here  we  have  a  term
which  alone  embodies  the  essential  unity  of  the  juridical  and  the
moral  principles.1  For  rights  are  nothing  more  than  the  expression
of  what  is  right,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  all  virtues2  are  reducible
to  the  idea  of  right  or  justice,  i.e.  to  what  is  right  or  due  in  the
ethical  sense.  This  is  not  a  case  of  accidental  similarity  of  terms,
but  of  essential  homogeneity  and  inner  connection  of  the  ideas
themselves.

It  does  not,  of  course,  follow  that  the  sphere  of  legal  justice
and  morality  coincide,  or  that  the  moral  and  the  juridical  concep-

1  In  all  languages,  moral  and  juridical  conceptions  are  expressed  either  by  the  same
terms  or  by  terms  derived  from  the  same  root.  The  Russian  dolg,  like  the  Latin  debitum
(hence  the  French  devoir )  and  the  German  Schuld  have  both  a  moral  and  a  juridical
meaning  $  in  the  case  of  5lkt)  and  StKaLoavvij,jus  and  justitia,  of  the  Russian  pra-vo  and
pravda,  the  German  Recht  and  Gerechtigkeit,  the  English  right  and  righteousness ,  the  two
meanings  are  distinguished  by  the  use  of  suffixes.  Cp.  also  the  Hebrew  tsedeksni  tsedakah.

2  See  above,  Part  I.,  Chapter  V.  :  “  Virtues.”


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  369

tions  should  be  confused.  One  thing  only  is  indisputable,  namely,
that  there  is  a  positive  and  intimate  relation  between  the  two
spheres,  which  does  not  permit  of  one  being  rejected  in  the  name
of  the  other.  The  question,  then,  is  in  what  precisely  does  the
connection  and  the  difference  between  them  consist.

V

The  fact  that  we  speak  of  moral  right  and  moral  duty,  on  the
one  hand  proves  the  absence  of  any  fundamental  opposition  or
incompatibility  of  the  moral  and  the  juridical  principles,  and,
on  the  other,  indicates  an  essential  difference  between  them.  In
designating  a  given  right  (e.g.  the  right  of  my  enemy  to  my  love)
as  moral  only,  we  imply  that  in  addition  to  the  moral  there
exist  other  rights,  i.e.  rights  in  a  more  restricted  sense,  or  that
there  exists  right  as  such ,  which  is  not  directly  and  immediately
characterised  as  moral.  Take,  on  the  one  hand,  the  duty  of  loving
our  enemies  and  their  corresponding  right  to  our  love,  and  on  the
other,  take  the  duty  to  pay  one’s  debts,  or  the  duty  not  to  rob
and  murder  one’s  neighbours  and  their  corresponding  right  not  to
be  robbed,  murdered,  or  deceived  by  us.  It  is  obvious  that  there
is  an  essential  difference  between  the  two  kinds  of  relation,  and
that  only  the  second  of  them  falls  within  the  scope  of  justice  in
the  narrow  sense  of  the  term.

The  difference  can  be  reduced  to  three  main  points  :

(1)  A  purely  moral  demand,  such,  e.g.,  as  the  love  for  one’s
enemies,  is  unlimited  or  all-embracing  in  nature  ;  it  presupposes
moral  perfection,  or,  at  any  rate,  an  unlimited  striving  towards
perfection.  Every  limitation  admitted  as  a  matter  of  principle  is
opposed  to  the  nature  of  the  moral  commandment  and  under¬
mines  its  dignity  and  significance.  If  a  person  gives  up  the
absolute  moral  ideal  as  a  principle,  he  gives  up  morality  itself  and
leaves  the  moral  ground.  Juridical  law,  on  the  contrary,  is
essentially  limited,  as  is  clearly  seen  in  all  cases  of  its  application.
In  the  place  of  perfection  it  demands  the  lowest,  the  minimum
degree  of  morality,  that  is,  simply,  actual  restraint  of  certain
manifestations  of  the  immoral  will.  This  distinction,  however,  is
not  an  opposition  leading  to  real  conflict.  From  the  moral  point
of  view  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  demand  conscientiously  to


370  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

fulfil  monetary  obligations,  to  abstain  from  murder,  robbery,  etc.,  is
a  demand  for  what  is  good— though  extremely  elementary— and
not  for  what  is  evil.  It  is  clear  that  if  we  ought  to  love  our
enemies,  it  goes  without  saying  that  we  ought  to  respect  the  life  and
property  of  all  fellow-men.  The  higher  commandments  cannot
be  fulfilled  without  observing  the  lower.  As  to  the  juridical
side  of  the  matter,  though  the  civil  or  the  penal  law  does  not
demand  the  supreme  moral  perfection,  it  is  not  opposed  to  it.  For¬
bidding  every  one  to  murder  or  be  fraudulent,  it  cannot,  and  indeed
has  no  need  to,  prevent  any  one  from  loving  his  enemies.  Thus
with  regard  to  this  point  (which  in  certain  moral  theories  is
erroneously  taken  to  be  the  only  important  one),  the  relation
between  the  two  principles  of  the  practical  life  may  be  only
expressed  by  saying  that  legal  justice  is  the  lowest  limit  or  the
minimum  degree  of  morality.

(2)  The  unlimited  character  of  the  purely  moral  demands  leads
to  another  point  of  difference.  The  way  in  which  such  demands
are  to  be  fulfilled  is  not  definitely  prescribed,  nor  is  it  limited  to
any  concrete  external  manifestations  or  material  actions.  The
commandment  to  love  one’s  enemies  does  not  indicate,  except
as  an  example,  what  precisely  we  ought  to  do  in  virtue  of  that
love,  i.e.  which  particular  actions  we  ought  to  perform  and  from
which  to  abstain.  At  the  same  time,  if  love  is  expressed  by
means  of  definite  actions,  the  moral  commandment  cannot  be
regarded  as  already  fulfilled  by  these  actions  and  as  demanding
nothing  further.  The  task  of  fulfilling  the  commandment,  which
is  an  expression  of  the  absolute  perfection,  remains  infinite.
Juridical  laws,  on  the  contrary,  prescribe  or  prohibit  perfectly
definite  external  actions,  with  the  performance  or  non-perform¬
ance  of  which  the  law  is  satisfied  and  demands  nothing  further.
If  I  produce  in  due  time  the  money  I  am  owing,  and  pass  it  to
my  creditor,  if  I  do  not  murder  or  rob  any  one,  etc.,  the  law
is  satisfied  and  wants  nothing  more  from  me.  This  difference
between  the  moral  and  the  juridical  law  once  more  involves  no
contradiction.  The  demand  for  the  moral  inner  disposition,  so
far  from  excluding  external  actions,  directly  presupposes  them  as
its  own  proof  or  justification.  No  one  would  believe  in  the
inward  goodness  of  a  man  if  it  never  showed  itself  in  any  works
of  mercy.  On  the  other  hand,  the  request  to  perform  definite


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  371

actions  is  in  no  way  opposed  to  the  inner  states  corresponding  to
them,  though  it  does  not  demand  them.  Both  the  moral  and  the
juridical  laws  are  concerned  with  the  inner  being  of  man,  with
his  will ;  but  while  the  first  takes  this  will  in  its  universality  and
entirety,  the  second  has  only  to  do  with  particular  expressions  of
it  in  respect  of  certain  external  facts,  which  fall  within  the
province  of  justice  in  the  narrow  sense, — such  as  the  inviolability
of  the  life  and  property  of  each  person,  etc.  What  is  of  im¬
portance  from  the  juridical  point  of  view  is  precisely  the  objective
expression  of  our  will  in  committing  or  in  refraining  from  certain
actions.  This  is  another  essential  characteristic  of  legal  justice,
and,  in  addition  to  the  original  definition  of  it  as  a  certain
minimum  of  morality,  we  may  now  say  that  legal  justice  is  the
demand  for  the  realisation  of  this  minimum,  i.e.  for  carrying  out  a
certain  minimum  of  the  good ,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  for  doing
away  with  a  certain  amount  of  evil.  Morality  in  the  strict  sense
is  immediately  concerned,  not  with  the  external  realisation  of  the
good,  but  with  its  inner  existence  in  the  heart  of  man.

(3)  This  second  distinction  involves  a  third  one.  The  demand
for  moral  perfection  as  an  inner  state  presupposes  free  or  voluntary
fulfilment.  Not  only  physical  but  even  psychological  compulsion
is  here,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  both  undesirable  and  impossible.
External  realisation  of  a  certain  uniform  order,  on  the  contrary,
admits  of  direct  or  indirect  compulsion.  And  in  so  far  as  the  direct
and  immediate  purpose  of  legal  justice  is  precisely  the  realisation
or  the  external  embodiment  of  a  certain  good — e.g.  of  public  safety
— in  so  far  the  compelling  character  of  the  law  is  a  necessity  ;  for
no  genuine  person  could  seriously  maintain  that  by  means  of
verbal  persuasion  alone  all  murders,  frauds,  etc.,  could  be  im¬
mediately  stopped.


VI

Combining  the  three  characteristics  indicated  we  obtain  the
following  definition  of  legal  justice  in  its  relation  to  morality  :
legal  justice  is  a  compulsory  demand  for  the  realisation  of  a  definite
minimum  of  the  good, ,  or  for  a  social  order  which  excludes  certain
manifestations  of  evil.

The  question  has  now  to  be  asked,  what  is  the  ground  for  such


372  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

a  demand,  and  in  what  way  is  this  compulsory  order  compatible
with  the  purely  moral  order,  which  apparently  by  its  very  nature
excludes  all  compulsion.  It  may  be  urged  that  once  the  perfect
good  is  established  in  consciousness  as  an  ideal,  each  ought  to  be
allowed  freely  to  realise  it  as  much  as  in  him  lies.  Why,  it  will
be  said,  make  into  a  law  the  compulsory  minimum  of  morality,
when  we  ought  freely  to  fulfil  the  maximum  ?  Why  declare
under  penalty,  ‘  Thou  shalt  not  kill,’  when  we  ought  mildly  to
exhort  people  not  to  be  angry  ?

All  this  would  be  perfectly  true  were  the  moral  problem  a
theoretical  one  and  were  the  perfect  good  compatible  with  selfish
impassibility  or  indifference  to  the  sufferings  of  others.  But
since  the  true  conception  of  the  good  necessarily  includes  the
principle  of  altruism,  which  demands  corresponding  behaviour  on
our  part,  i.e.  demands  that  compassion  for  the  ills  of  others
should  prompt  us  actively  to  save  them  from  evil,  moral  duty
certainly  requires  us  to  do  more  than  simply  to  profess  the
perfect  ideal.  In  the  natural  course  of  things,  which  ought  not
to  be  approved  of  or  acquiesced  in,  but  which  it  is  childish  not  to
take  into  account,  what  would  happen  is  this  :  whilst  some  would
be  freely  striving  towards  the  supreme  ideal  and  grow  perfect  in
impassibility,  others  would  exercise  themselves,  unhindered,  in
every  conceivable  crime  and  would  certainly  exterminate  the  first
before  they  could  attain  a  high  degree  of  moral  perfection.  But
even  supposing  that  men  of  good  will  were  by  some  miracle  saved
from  extermination  by  the  bad  ones,  these  good  men  themselves
would  obviously  prove  to  be  insufficiently  good  if  they  would  be
content  with  pious  conversations  about  the  good,  instead  of  actively
helping  their  neighbours  and  protecting  them  against  the  extreme
and  destructive  forms  of  evil.

Moral  interest  demands  personal  freedom  as  a  condition  apart
from  which  human  dignity  and  higher  moral  development  is
impossible.  But  man  cannot  exist,  and,  consequently,  cannot
perfect  his  freedom  and  his  moral  nature  apart  from  society.
Moral  interest  therefore  demands  that  personal  freedom  should
not  conflict  with  the  conditions  which  render  the  existence  of
society  possible.  This  demand  cannot  be  carried  into  effect  by
means  of  the  ideal  of  moral  perfection,  which  the  individual  is
to  attain  by  his  own  free  efforts.  For  the  essential  practical


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  373

purpose  before  us  this  ideal  gives  both  too  much  and  too  little —
its  demands  are  too  great  and  its  concrete  results  too  small.  Of
the  person  who  recognises  it,  the  ideal  demands  that  he  should
love  his  enemies  ;  but  it  cannot  compel  those  who  do  not  recognise
its  demands  to  abstain  even  from  murder  and  robbery.  The
strict  moralist  will  perhaps  say,  ‘  We  don’t  want  people  to  abstain
from  crimes  unless  they  do  so  voluntarily  ’  ;  but  in  saying  this
he  would  be  guilty  of  obvious  injustice.  He  will  have  forgotten
to  ask  the  opinion  of  the  plundered  people  themselves  and  of  the
families  whose  members  have  been  murdered — as  though  the
injury  they  had  suffered  is  the  ground  for  regarding  them  as
completely  rightless.

The  moral  law  has  been  given  to  man  ‘that  he  might  live
thereby  * ;  and  if  human  society  did  not  exist,  morality  would
remain  merely  an  abstract  idea.  The  existence  of  society,  however,
depends  not  on  the  perfection  of  some,  but  on  the  security  of
all.  This  security  is  not  guaranteed  by  the  moral  law,  which
is  non-existent  for  persons  in  whom  anti-social  instincts  pre¬
dominate,  but  it  is  safeguarded  by  the  compulsory  law  which  has
actual  power  over  every  one.  To  appeal  to  the  gracious  power
of  providence  to  restrain  and  exhort  lunatics  and  criminals  is
sheer  blasphemy.  It  is  impious  to  lay  upon  the  Deity  that  which
can  be  successfully  performed  by  a  good  legal  system.

The  moral  principle  demands,  then,  that  men  should  freely
seek  perfection.  To  this  end  the  existence  of  society  is  necessary.
Society  cannot  exist  if  each  person  wishing  to  do  so  may,
without  let  or  hindrance,  rob  and  murder  his  neighbours.  Hence
the  compulsory  law,  which  actually  prevents  these  extreme  expres¬
sions  of  the  evil  will,  is  a  necessary  condition  of  moral  perfection  ;
as  such  it  is  demanded  by  the  moral  principle  itself,  though  it
is  not  a  direct  expression  of  it.

Let  it  be  granted  that  the  highest  morality,  on  its  ascetic
side,  demands  that  I  should  be  indifferent  to  the  prospect,  of
being  killed,  mutilated,  or  robbed.  But  the  same  supreme
morality  on  its  altruistic  side  does  not  permit  me  to  remain
indifferent  to  the  fact  that  my  neighbours  may,  without  inter¬
ference  from  any  one,  become  murderers  or  be  murdered,
robbers  or  the  robbed,  and  that  society,  apart  from  which
the  individual  cannot  live  and  develop,  should  run  the  risk  of


374  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

being  destroyed.  Such  indifference  would  be  a  clear  sign  of
moral  death.

The  demand  for  personal  liberty  presupposes  for  its  realisation
the  restriction  of  that  liberty  to  the  extent  in  which,  at  the
given  state  of  humanity,  it  is  incompatible  with  the  existence  of
society  or  with  the  common  good.  From  the  point  of  view  of
abstract  thought  there  appears  to  be  an  opposition  between
these  two  interests,  both  of  which  are  equally  binding  morally.
In  reality,  however,  they  coincide,  and  legal  justice  is  the  off¬
spring  of  their  union.


VII

The  principle  of  legal  justice  may  be  considered  in  the
abstract,  and  in  that  case  it  is  simply  a  direct  expression  of  moral
justice.  I  affirm  my  freedom  as  my  right  in  so  far  as  I  recognise
the  freedom  of  others  as  their  right ;  but  the  conception  of
right  necessarily  involves,  as  we  have  seen,  an  objective  element,
or  a  demand  to  be  realised.  Right  must  be  capable  of  realisation  :
that  is,  the  freedom  of  others,  whether  recognised  by  me  or
not,  must,  independently  of  my  personal  feeling  of  justice,
restrict  my  freedom  within  limits  equally  binding  upon  every  one.
This  demand  for  compulsory  justice  follows  from  the  idea  of
the  common  good  or  public  interest,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,
from  the  idea  of  the  realisation  of  the  good,  which  inevitably
requires  that  justice  should  be  an  actual  fact  and  not  an  idea
merely.  The  degree  and  the  means  of  the  realisation  depend,
of  course,  upon  the  state  of  the  moral  consciousness  in  the  given
society  and  upon  other  historical  conditions.  The  natural  right
thus  becomes  the  positive  right,  and  can,  from  this  point  of  view,
be  formulated  as  follows  :  legal  justice  is  the  historically  changeable
determination  of  the  necessary  equilibrium ,  maintained  by  compulsion ,
between  two  moral  interests — that  of  personal  freedom  and  of  the
common  good.

It  would  be  a  fatal  confusion  of  ideas  to  believe  that  justice
has  for  its  purpose  material  equalisation  of  private  interests.
Justice  as  such  has  nothing  to  do  with  this.  It  is  concerned
only  with  the  two  main  factors  of  human  life — the  freedom  of
the  individual  and  the  good  of  society.  When  legal  justice


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  375

limits  itself  to  this  and  does  not  introduce  the  element  of  com¬
pulsion  into  private  relations,  it  does  the  best  service  to  morality.
The  individual  must  be  moral  by  his  free  choice,  and  for  that
he  must  have  a  certain  freedom  to  be  immoral.  Within  certain
limits  justice  secures  this  freedom  to  him,  though  it  in  no  way
inclines  him  to  take  advantage  of  it.  Had  not  the  creditor  the
right  to  compel  his  debtor  to  pay  the  money  owing  to  him,  he
would  not  be  able  by  a  free  moral  act  to  renounce  his  right  and
to  forgive  a  poor  man  his  debt.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact
that  the  debtor  is  compelled  to  abide  by  the  obligation  he  has
freely  entered  upon,  preserves  his  freedom  and  his  full  rights  in
relation  to  the  creditor  :  he  is  not  dependent  upon  the  creditor’s
will  but  upon  his  own  decision  and  the  law  of  the  land.  The
interest  of  individual  freedom  coincides  in  this  case  with  the
interest  of  the  common  good,  since  without  the  security  of  free
contracts  there  can  be  no  normal  social  life.

The  harmony  of  the  two  moral  interests  is  still  more  obvious
in  the  case  of  the  penal  law.  It  is  clear  that  the  freedom  of
the  individual,  or  his  natural  right  to  live  and  to  strive  for
perfection,  would  be  an  empty  sound  if  it  depended  upon  the
whim  of  every  other  individual  who  might  want  to  murder  or
to  cripple  his  neighbour,  or  to  deprive  him  of  the  means  of
subsistence.  It  is  our  moral  right  to  defend  our  freedom  and
safety  from  the  attacks  made  upon  it  by  the  evil  will  of  others,
and  it  is  our  moral  duty  to  help  other  people  to  do  the  same.
This  common  duty  is  discharged  for  the  benefit  of  all  by  the
penal  law.

Legal  compulsion  in  this  sphere  secures  the  freedom  of  peace¬
ful  citizens,  but  it  leaves  sufficient  room  for  the  exercise  of  evil
propensities  and  compels  no  one  to  be  virtuous.  A  malicious  man
may,  if  he  likes,  give  vent  to  his  malice  in  evil-speaking,  intrigues,
slander,  quarrels,  etc.  It  is  only  when  the  evil  will  attacks  the
objective  public  rights  of  the  individuals,  and  threatens  the
security  of  society  itself,  that  it  becomes  necessary  for  the  sake  of
the  common  good,  which  coincides  with  the  freedom  of  peaceful
citizens,  to  limit  the  freedom  of  evil.  In  the  interests  of  freedom,
legal  justice  allows  men  to  be  wicked,  and  does  not  interfere  with
their  free  choice  between  good  and  evil.  But  in  the  interests  of
the  common  good  it  prevents  the  evil  man  from  becoming  an


376  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

evil-doer ,  dangerous  to  the  very  existence  of  society.  The  purpose
of  legal  justice  is  not  to  transform  the  world  which  lies  in  evil  into
the  kingdom  of  God,  but  only  to  prevent  it  from  changing  too
soon  into  hell.

Such  premature  hell  has  threatened  and,  to  a  certain  extent,
still  threatens  humanity  on  two  sides.  The  normal  society,  that
is,  a  society  that  leads  a  secure  and  worthy  existence  and  progresses
towards  perfection,  is  conditioned  by  the  proper  balance  being
maintained  between  the  individual  and  the  collective  interest.
Hence,  anomalies  perilous  to  society  may  arise  either  from  the
excess  of  individual  power,  breaking  up  the  social  solidarity,  or,
on  the  contrary,  from  the  excess  of  social  control  crushing  the
individual.  The  first  anomaly  menaces  humanity  with  the
burning  hell  of  anarchy  ;  the  second,  with  the  icy  hell  of  despot¬
ism,  i.e.  of  the  same  anarchy  or  arbitrariness  concentrated  at  one
point  and  pressing  upon  society  from  without.

In  actual  history  the  balance  between  free  individual  powers
and  the  collective  power  of  the  social  organisation  is,  of  course,
movable  and  variable,  made  up  of  a  number  of  particular  deviations
and  rectifications.  But  the  very  fact  that  we  note  these  variations
is  sufficient  to  prove  that  above  them  lie  the  abiding  norms  of
social  and  individual  relations— the  eternal  boundaries  which
spring  from  the  very  nature  of  morality,  and  cannot,  without
fatal  consequences,  be  overstepped  by  society  either  in  the  one
direction  or  in  the  other.  The  most  universal  and  in  this  sense
the  most  important  of  these  boundaries  is  that  which  limits  the
compelling  power  of  social  organisations  to  the  domain  of  the
objective  or  practical  good,  leaving  all  the  rest,  i.e.  all  the  inner
or  spiritual  world  of  man,  to  the  entire  responsibility  of  individuals
and  of  free  associations.  To  defend  the  life  and  property  of
every  one  against  the  attacks  of  external  and  internal  enemies,
to  secure  to  all  the  necessary  education,  food,  medical  assistance,
and  all  that  is  connected  therewith  (means  of  communication,
post,  etc.), — this  is  the  practical  good  which  can  and  ought  to  be
realised  by  the  organised  power  of  the  society.  For  this  end
society  must  inevitably  impose  certain  restrictions  or  liabilities.
The  compulsory  character  of  these  restrictions  is  specific  only,  for
it  is  clear  that  a  person  who,  for  instance,  voluntarily  abstains
from  crimes  does  not  experience  any  personal  inconvenience  from


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  377

the  legal  and  penal  institutions.  Speaking  generally,  all  restric¬
tions  due  to  the  necessary  organisation  of  social  forces  are  as  little
opposed  to  individual  freedom  as  the  fact  that  if  I  intend  to  buy  a
thing  I  must  pay  for  it,  or  that  if  I  do  not  want  to  get  wet  in  the
rain  I  must  take  an  umbrella.

The  essential  characteristic  of  the  good  which  is  conditioned  by
the  organisation  of  legal  justice  in  society  is  not  its  compulsory
character — -which  is  merely  a  possible  consequence  of  it — but  the
direct  objectivity  of  its  aim.  What  is  above  all  things  important  is
that  certain  things  should  and  certain  things  should  not  exist  as  a
fact.  It  is  important  that  there  should  be  protection  against
savage  peoples,  so  that  they  should  not  burn  and  destroy  towns
and  villages  ;  it  is  important  that  evil  men  should  not  rob  and
murder  the  wayfarers  ;  it  is  important  that  the  population  should
not  be  exterminated  by  diseases  ;  it  is  important  that  every  one
should  have  access  to  intellectual  education  and  enlightenment.

These  necessary  goods  are  external  in  character,  and  the  way
to  obtain  them  is  also  external,  admitting  of  compulsion  where  it
is  inevitable.  To  the  immediate,  essential  work  of  the  law  courts,
hospitals,  schools,  it  makes  no  difference  whatever  whether  they
are  supported  by  voluntary  subscriptions  or  by  compulsory  taxation.
The  same  thing,  however,  cannot  be  said  of  spiritual  goods,
which  from  their  very  nature  cannot  be  compulsory.  There  are,
in  the  last  resort,  two  such  goods  for  man  :  virtue,  i.e.  inner
inclination  of  our  will  to  the  good  as  such ,  and  truth  or  right  belief,
i.e.  inner  agreement  of  our  reason  with  truth  as  such.  It  is  clear  from
these  definitions  alone  that  freedom  or  spontaneousness  forms  an
essential  part  of  both  the  spiritual  or  inward  goods.  Therefore
all  compulsory  external  action  in  this  sphere  is,  in  the  first  place,
a  fraud.  The  purpose  of  externally  compelling  or  forcing  a  man
to  have  an  inner,  i.e.  an  inwardly  determined,  disposition  for  the
good,  or  an  inner  receptivity  for  the  true,  cannot  possibly  be
achieved,  and  is  indeed  a  logical  contradiction  or  absurdity  ;  and
to  use  compulsion  to  no  purpose  is  obviously  an  evil.  Hence,  all
compulsory  measures  with  regard  to  spiritual  things  in  the  supposed
interests  of  truth  and  virtue  are  nothing  other  than  the  use  of  evil
means  for  a  false  purpose — an  abuse  in  the  fullest  sense.

There  are  three  kinds  of  violence  in  our  world:  (1)  brutal
violence,  such  as  is  committed  by  murderers,  highwaymen,


378  the  justification  of  the  good

corrupters  of  children  ;  (2)  human  violence,  necessarily  permitted
by  the  compulsory  organisation  of  society  for  safeguar  mg  t  e
external  goods  of  life  j  and  (3)  violent  intrusion  of  the  external
social  organisation  into  the  spiritual  life  of  man,  with  the  fa  se
purpose  of  safeguarding  the  inner  goods— a  species  of  violence
which  is  wholly  false  and  evil,  and  may  therefore  justly  be  called

diabolical.


VIII

From  the  nature  of  legal  justice,  which  serves  the  external
or  the  objective  good,  it  follows  that  truth  and  virtue  must  always
remain  a  private  concern,  and  one  which  is  perfectly  free.  n
addition  to  the  principle  of  unlimited  religious  tolerance,  certain

other  consequences  follow  from  this.

In  the  domain  of  the  penal  as  well  as  of  the  civil  law  the
freedom  of  the  individual  is  limited,  not  by  the  private  or  sub¬
jective  interest  of  other  individuals  taken  separately ,  but  by  the
aood  of  all.  Many  vain  and  self-conscious  people  would  rather
be  plundered  or  even  crippled  than  suffer  secret  abuse,  slander,
and  heartless  condemnation.  If,  therefore,  legal  justice  aimed  at
the  protection  of  private  interest  as  such,  it  would  in  cases  of
this  kind  have  to  limit  the  freedom  of  slanderers  and  evil-speakers
even  more  than  the  freedom  of  robbers  and  men  of  violence.
But  it  does  not  do  so,  for  verbal  insults  are  not  so  detrimental
to  the  safety  of  society,  and  do  not  indicate  so  menacing  a
degree  of  evil  will  as  the  crimes  against  person  and  property.
Even  if  the  law  intended  to  cope  with  such  actions,  it  would  be
impossible  for  it  to  take  into  account  all  the  forms  and  degrees  of
individual  sensibility  to  insults.  And  if  it  could  do  so,  it  would  be
unjust,  for  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  the  guilty  person  intended
to  cause  the  high  degree  of  suffering  which  he  did  cause  in
reality.  Common  law  may  only  be  guided  by  definite  intentions
and  objective  actions  which  can  be  verified  by  every  one.  Besides,
in  the  cases  which  do  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  penal  law,
the  injured  person  may,  if  he  likes,  avenge  himself  on  the
injurer  by  the  same  means.  His  freedom  in  this  respect  is
respected  as  much  as  that  of  his  adversary.  And  if  he  is  morally
superior  to  the  latter,  and  thinks  that  he  ought  not  to  avenge


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  379

himself,  he  would  not  in  any  case  have  appealed  to  the  law,
however  sensible  he  may  have  been  of  the  injury.  If  he  abstains
from  personal  revenge,  so  much  the  better  for  him  and  for  society,
which  is  at  liberty  freely  to  express  its  moral  judgment.  What
matters  from  the  legal  point  of  view  is  not  the  evil  will  as  such ,
and  not  the  result  of  action,  which  may,  as  such ,  be  accidental,
but  only  the  connection  of  the  intention  with  the  result,  or  the
extent  to  which  the  evil  will  is  realised  in  action.  It  matters
to  it  because  the  degree  of  realisation  and  the  corresponding
degree  of  danger  to  society  may  be  determined  objectively  and
is  an  external  evil,  the  protection  from  which  is  an  external  good,
admitting  of  legal  compulsion.


IX

Since  the  essence  of  legal  justice  consists  in  maintaining  the
balance  between  two  moral  interests — that  of  individual  liberty
and  of  the  common  good,  it  is  clear  that  though  the  latter
interest  may  limit  the  former  it  may  not  under  any  circumstances
abolish  it.  For  in  that  case  the  balance  would  obviously  be
disturbed  and  disappear  through  the  destruction  of  one  of  the
terms  of  the  relation.  Therefore  measures  against  the  criminal
should  never  go  so  far  as  to  deprive  him  of  life  or  to  take  away
his  freedom  for  ever.  Laws  which  permit  capital  punishment,
lifelong  penal  servitude,  or  lifelong  solitary  confinement  cannot
be  justified  from  the  legal  point  of  view — they  contradict  the
very  nature  of  legal  justice.  Besides,  the  contention  that  in
certain  cases  the  common  good  requires  that  a  given  person  should
be  completely  done  away  with,  involves  a  logical  self-contradiction.
Common  good  is  common  just  because  in  a  certain  sense  it  contains
the  good  of  all  individual  persons  without  exception  ;  if  it  did  not,
it  would  be  the  good  of  the  majority.  It  does  not  follow  that
it  therefore  is  a  mere  sum  of  private  interests,  or  that  it  allows
of  unlimited  individual  freedom.  This  would  be  another
contradiction,  since  the  unlimited  freedom  of  one  individual  may,
and  actually  does,  conflict  with  the  liberty  of  others.  But  the
conception  of  the  common  good  implies  with  logical  necessity  that
in  restricting  particular  interests  and  activities  within  common
bounds  it  cannot  do  away  with  a  single  bearer  of  such  interests


38o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  activities  by  depriving  him  of  life  or  of  all  possibility  of  free
action.  The  common  good  must,  in  one  way  or  another,  be  the
good  of  this  individual  also.  But  if  it  deprives  him  of  existence
and  of  the  possibility  of  free  action — that  is,  of  the  possibility  of
any  good  at  all — it  ceases  to  be  a  good  for  him  ;  it  itself  then
becomes  merely  a  private  interest,  and  therefore  loses  its  right  to
limit  personal  liberty.1

With  reference  to  this  point,  too,  we  see  that  the  demands
of  morality  entirely  coincide  with  the  essence  of  legal  justice.
Speaking  generally,  although  legal  justice  in  exercising  compulsion
to  secure  the  minimum  of  good  differs  from  morality  in  the
strict  sense,  yet  in  its  exercise  of  compulsion  it  observes  the
demands  of  morality,  and  must  on  no  account  conflict  with  it.
If,  therefore,  some  positive  law  is  opposed  to  the  moral  con¬
sciousness  of  the  good,  we  may  be  a  priori  certain  that  it  does  not
satisfy  the  essential  demands  of  justice  either.  So  far  as  such
laws  are  concerned,  it  is  not  in  the  interests  of  justice  that  they
should  be  retained,  but  that  they  should  be  lawfully  repealed.

X

External  compulsion  is  one  of  the  essential  characteristics  of
the  norms  of  legal  justice  as  distinct  from  moral  norms  in  the
strict  sense.  Hence,  justice  from  its  very  nature  requires
guarantees ,  i.e.  sufficient  power  to  enforce  the  realisation  of  its
norms.

Every  person  in  virtue  of  his  absolute  moral  worth  has  an
inalienable  right  to  exist  and  to  strive  for  perfection.  This
moral  right  would,  however,  be  an  empty  word  were  its  actual
realisation  to  depend  entirely  upon  external  happenings  and  the
arbitrary  will  of  others.  To  be  real,  a  right  must  contain  within
itself  the  conditions  of  its  own  realisation,  i.e.  it  must  be  safe¬
guarded  from  violation.  The  first  and  essential  condition  of  this
is  communal  life,  since  a  solitary  man  is  obviously  powerless
against  the  forces  of  nature,  wild  beasts,  and  brutal  men.  But

1  After  what  has  been  said  in  Chapter  VI.  on  the  penal  question,  I  need  not
explain  that  the  moral  principle  not  only  permits  but  in  certain  cases  actually  demands
that  the  criminal  should  for  a  time  be  deprived  of  liberty,  both  for  his  own  good  and
for  the  sake  of  public  safety.  But  it  is  morally  impossible  to  inflict  the  penalty  of
death,  or  to  pass  a  sentence  depriving  a  man  of  liberty  for  the  rest  of  his  life.


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  381

being  the  necessary  defence  of  individual  liberty,  or  of  the  natural
rights  of  man,  communal  life  involves  at  the  same  time  a  limita¬
tion  of  these  rights — not  an  accidental  or  arbitrary  limitation,
but  one  that  follows  from  the  nature  of  the  case  and  is  inwardly
binding.  Making  use  of  the  social  organisation  to  safeguard  my
existence  and  free  activity,  I  must  recognise  in  my  turn  the
right  of  that  organisation  to  exist  and  to  exercise  its  authority
over  me — that  is,  I  must  submit  my  activity  to  conditions  that
are  necessary  to  the  existence  and  the  development  of  society.
In  this  case  the  two  interests  coincide,  for  if  I  desire  to  realise
my  right,  or  to  secure  for  myself  a  sphere  of  free  activity,  I  must
determine  the  degree  of  the  realisation  or  the  extent  of  the
freedom  in  accordance  with  the  fundamental  demands  of  the
social  good,  apart  from  which  there  can  be  no  realisation  of  my
rights  at  all  nor  any  safeguards  of  my  freedom.  The  individual’s
subordination  to  society  is  in  perfect  agreement  with  the  absolute
moral  principle  which  does  not  sacrifice  the  particular  to  the
universal,  but  unites  them  by  an  inner  bond  of  solidarity.  In
surrendering  to  society  his  unlimited  but  insecure  and  unreal
freedom,  the  individual  has  his  determined  or  rational  freedom
secured  to  him — the  sacrifice  is  as  profitable  as  the  exchange
of  a  dead  lion  for  a  living  dog.

The  definite  limitation  of  personal  freedom  in  given  conditions
of  time  and  place,  in  accordance  with  the  demands  of  the  common
good,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  a  certain  balance  or  a  constant
harmony  between  these  two  principles,  is  a  positive  right  or  law
in  the  strict  sense.

Law,  as  such,  is  a  universally  recognised  and  impersonal — i.e.
independent  of  personal  opinions  and  desires — determination  of
right,  or  an  expression  of  a  proper  balance  (under  given  con¬
ditions  and  in  certain  respects),  between  individual  liberty  and
the  good  of  the  whole.  It  is  a  definition  or  a  general  notion
which  finds  concrete  realisation  through  particular  judgments
in  the  individual  cases  or  instances.

Hence  the  three  necessary  characteristics  of  law  are  :  (1)  its
publicity  ;  an  enactment  that  is  not  made  generally  known  cannot
be  universally  binding,  i.e.  cannot  be  a  positive  law  ;  (2)  its  con¬
creteness  ;  it  is  the  norm  of  some  particular  definite  relations  in
a  given  real  environment  and  not  the  expression  of  any  abstract


382  the  justification  of  the  good

truth  or  ideal  ; 1  (3)  its  real  applicability  in  each  individual  case  ;
this  is  ensured  by  the  law  being  always  accompanied  by  a
‘  sanction,’  i.e.  by  its  holding  out  the  threat  of  compulsory  and
punitive  measures  if  its  demands  are  unfulfilled  or  its  prohibi¬
tions  violated.2

In  order  that  the  sanction  might  not  remain  an  empty
threat  the  law  must  be  supported  by  some  real  power  sufficient
to  carry  its  demands  into  execution.  In  other  words,  justice
must  have  its  actual  bearers  or  representatives  in  society  who
would  be  sufficiently  powerful  to  give  a  binding  force  to  the
laws  they  publish  and  to  the  sentences  they  pass.  Such  actual
representatives  of  justice  or  agents  of  the  law  are  called  authorities.

I  am  bound  to  demand  that  the  social  whole  should  safe¬
guard  my  natural  rights  in  a  way  in.  which  I  myself  am  unable
to  safeguard  them,  and  in  doing  so  I  am  bound  in  reason  and
conscience  to  recognise  the  positive  right  of  this  social  whole
to  use  means  and  methods  of  action  without  which  it  could  not
fulfil  this  necessary  and  desirable  task.  Namely,  I  must  leave
to  the  social  whole,  (1)  the  power  to  issue  generally  binding  laws  ;
(2)  the  power  to  judge,  in  accordance  with  these  laws,  private
affairs  and  actions  ;  and  (3)  the  power  to  compel  each  and  all  to
fulfil  the  legal  verdicts  and  all  other  measures  necessary  for  general
security  and  welfare.

It  is  clear  that  these  three  different  powers — the  legislative,
the  judicial  and  the  executive,  though  necessarily  distinct ,  cannot
be  separate ,  and  ought  on  no  account  to  conflict  with  one
another  :  they  all  have  one  and  the  same  purpose — to  serve  the
common  good  in  accordance  with  the  law.  Their  unity  finds
its  real  expression  in  their  being  equally  subordinate  to  one
supreme  authority,  invested  with  all  the  positive  rights  of  the
social  whole  as  such.  This  central  power  finds  immediate  ex¬
pression  as  legislative  authority.  Judicial  authority  is  conditioned
by  the  first,  since  a  court  of  justice  is  not  autonomous,  but  acts
in  accordance  with  a  law  that  is  binding  upon  it.  The  first

1  Certain  law-codes  still  preserve — on  paper — enactments  which  require  that  people
should  abstain  from  drunkenness,  be  pious,  honour  their  parents,  etc.  But  such
spurious  laws  are  merely  a  vestige  of  the  primitive  state  in  which  the  moral  and  the
juridical  conceptions  were  confused  or  merged  into  one.

2  The  pious  wishes  of  the  lawgiver  referred  to  in  the  last  note  are  not  accompanied
by  any  sanction,  which  fact  sufficiently  proves  that  they  are  spurious  laws.


MORALITY  AND  LEGAL  JUSTICE  383

two  authorities  condition  the  third,  which  is  concerned  with
enforcing  laws  and  verdicts.  In  virtue  of  this  inner  connection,
without  the  one  supreme  authority  in  one  form  or  another
there  could  be  neither  universally  binding  laws,  nor  regular
functioning  of  justice,  nor  effective  administration,  and  the
purpose  of  social  organisation  could  not  be  attained.  It  is  clear,
of  course,  that  the  due  relationship  between  the  three  authorities
is  violated  both  by  separating  and  placing  them  in  hostile
opposition  to  one  another,  and  by  confusing  them  and  distorting
their  natural  order.  This  happens,  for  instance,  when  the  second
authority,  the  judicial  one,  is  subordinate  not  to  the  first  but  to
the  third,  and  is  dependent  not  upon  the  law  but  upon  the  different
organs  of  the  executive  power.

The  social  body  with  a  definite  organisation,  containing  in
itself  the  fulness  of  positive  rights  or  the  one  supreme  authority,
is  called  the  state.  In  every  organism  it  is  necessary  to  dis¬
tinguish  the  organising  principle,  the  system  of  the  organs  or  of
the  instruments  whereby  the  organisation  is  carried  out  and  the
totality  of  elements  to  be  organised.  Corresponding  to  this,  we
distinguish  in  the  collective  organism  of  the  state,  taken  in  the
concrete,  (1)  the  supreme  authority;  (2)  its  different  organs  or
subordinate  authorities  ;  (3)  the  substratum  of  the  state,  i.e.  the
mass  of  the  population  of  a  given  territory,  consisting  of  individuals,
families  and  other  more  or  less  broad  private  unions  subordinate
to  the  authority  of  the  state.  In  the  state  alone  does  justice  find
all  the  conditions  necessary  for  its  concrete  realisation,  and  from
this  point  of  view  the  state  is  the  embodiment  of  justice.

Without  dwelling  here  upon  the  question  as  to  the  actual
historical  origin  and  the  supreme  sanction  of  the  state  authority,1
I  have  simply  indicated  its  formal  basis  as  the  necessary  condition
of  a  just  organisation  of  society.  In  its  simplest  practical
expression  the  meaning  of  the  state  consists  in  subordinating,
within  its  limits,  violence  to  justice,  arbitrariness  to  legality,  and
replacing  the  chaotic  and  destructive  conflict  of  the  particular
elements  of  natural  humanity  by  a  regular  order  of  existence.
Compulsion  is  exercised  by  the  state  only  in  the  last  extremity,
the  extent  of  it  is  determined  beforehand  in  accordance  with
law,  and  it  is  justified  by  the  fact  that  it  proceeds  from  a  common
1  See  above,  Part  III.,  Chapters  I.  and  VI.,  and  below,  Chapters  IX.  and  X.


384  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

and  impartial  authority.  This  authority,  however,  extends  only
to  the  boundaries  of  the  given  state’s  territory.  There  is  no
supreme  authority  above  individual  states,  and  therefore  conflicts
between  them  are  in  the  last  resort  decided  by  means  of
violence  only — by  war.  That  this  fact  contradicts  the  absolute
principle  of  morality,  there  can  be  no  question.  The  relative
significance  of  war  and  the  best  means  of  abolishing  it  are  the
last  of  the  fundamental  practical  questions  which  the  collective
life  of  historical  humanity  puts  before  the  moral  consciousness.


CHAPTER  IX


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR

I

No  one,  I  fancy,  doubts  that,  speaking  generally,  health  is  a
good  thing  and  disease  a  bad  one,  that  the  first  is  normal  and
the  second  anomalous.  The  only  way  to  define  health,  indeed,
is  to  call  it  the  normal  state  of  the  organism,  and  disease  ‘  the
deviation  of  the  physiological  life  from  its  normal  condition.’
This  anomaly  of  the  physiological  life,  called  disease,  is  not
however  a  meaningless  accident  or  an  arbitrary  product  of
external  evil  forces.  Not  to  speak  of  the  inevitable  diseases
of  growth  or  development,  the  opinion  of  all  thoughtful  medical
men  is  that  the  true  cause  of  all  disease  lies  in  the  inner
deep  -  lying  changes  of  the  organism  itself,  and  the  external
immediate  causes  of  illness  ( e.g .  catching  cold,  exhaustion,
infection,  etc.)  are  merely  the  occasions  for  the  inner  cause  to
manifest  itself.  Similarly,  the  abnormal  phenomena  which
ignorant  people  usually  identify  with  the  disease  itself  {e.g.  fever
and  shivering  fits,  cough,  various  pains,  abnormal  secretion)  in
truth  simply  express  the  successful  or  the  unsuccessful  struggle
of  the  organism  against  the  destructive  effect  of  the  inner
disturbances  in  which  the  disease  really  consists  ;  their  ultimate
nature  for  the  most  part  remains  unknown,  though  they  un¬
doubtedly  exist  as  a  fact.  Hence  follows  the  practical  conclusion
that  medical  art  must  have  for  its  main  object  not  the  external
symptoms  of  a  disease  but  its  inner  causes.  At  any  rate  it  must
detect  their  presence  and  then  assist  the  healing  work  of  the
organism  itself,  by  hastening  and  encouraging  the  natural  processes
and  not  doing  violence  to  them.

38s  2  c


386  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

The  position  of  the  chronic  disease  of  humanity — inter¬
national  hostility,  expressing  itself  in  wars,  is  analogous.  Its
symptomatic  treatment,  a  treatment,  that  is,  directed  upon  its
external  expressions  rather  than  its  inner  causes,  would  be  at
best  a  doubtful  procedure  ;  a  simple  and  absolute  rejection  of  it
would  have  no  definite  meaning  whatever.  So  long  as  there  is
moral  disturbance  within  humanity,  external  wars  may  be  useful
and  necessary,  just  as  in  the  case  of  profound  physical  disturbance
such  abnormal  phenomena  as  fever  or  sickness  may  be  useful  and
necessary.

In  strictness,  we  ought  to  ask  with  regard  to  war  three
different  questions  instead  of  one  only.  In  addition  to  the  moral
value  of  war  in  general,  there  is  another  question,  namely,  its
significance  in  the  history  of  humanity — a  history  which  is  not  yet
completed ,  and  there  is  a  third  personal  question  as  to  how  I
(that  is,  how  any  human  being),  recognising  with  reason  and
conscience  the  binding  character  of  moral  demands,  must  regard
here  and  now  the  fact  of  war  and  the  practical  consequences  that
follow  from  it.  The  confusion  or  the  wrong  division  of  these
three  questions — the  generally  moral  or  theoretical,  the  historical,
and,  finally,  the  personally-moral  or  the  practical — is  the  chief  cause
of  all  misunderstandings  and  misconceptions  with  regard  to  war
which  have  of  late  become  particularly  prevalent.

Theoretical  condemnation  of  war  has  long  been  a  common¬
place  among  civilised  people.  Every  one  agrees  that  peace  is  a
good  and  war  an  evil.  Our  tongue  automatically  speaks  of  the
blessings  of  peace  and  the  horrors  of  war,  and  no  one  would  venture
to  say  the  opposite — ‘  the  blessings  of  war  ’  or  ‘  the  horrors  of
peace.’  In  all  churches  prayers  are  offered  for  peaceful  times  and
for  deliverance  from  the  sword  or  wars,  which  are  placed  along
with  fire,  famine,  pestilence,  earthquake  and  flood.  With  the
exception  of  savage  paganism  all  religions  condemn  war  in
principle.  The  Jewish  prophets  had  preached  the  coming  of
peace  among  men  and  peace  in  the  whole  realm  of  nature.
The  Buddhist  principle  of  compassion  to  all  living  beings
requires  the  same  thing.  The  Christian  commandment  of
loving  one’s  enemies  excludes  war,  since  a  loved  enemy  ceases  to
be  an  enemy  and  cannot  be  made  war  upon.  Even  the  bellicose
religion  of  Islam  regards  war  only  as  a  temporary  necessity  and


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


387

condemns  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ideal.  “  Fight  your
enemies  until  Islam  is  established,”  and  then  “  let  all  hostility
cease  ”  for  “God  abominates  the  aggressor  ”  ( Koran ,  sura  ii.).

■

II

Thus  to  the  first  question  with  regard  to  war  there  exists
only  one  indisputable  answer :  war  is  an  evil.  Evil  may  be
either  absolute  (such  as  deadly  sin,  eternal  damnation)  or  relative,
that  is,  it  may  be  less  than  some  other  evil,  and,  as  compared  with
it,  may  be  regarded  as  a  good  ( e.g .  a  surgical  operation  to  save  a
patient’s  life).

The  significance  of  war  is  not  exhausted  by  the  negative
definition  of  it  as  an  evil  and  a  calamity.  There  is  also  a  positive
element  in  it — not  in  the  sense  that  it  can  itself  be  normal,  but
in  the  sense  that  it  may  be  actually  necessary  in  the  given  condi¬
tions.  This  way  of  regarding  abnormal  phenomena  in  general
is  not  to  be  avoided  and  must  be  adopted  in  virtue  of  the  direct
demands  of  the  moral  ideal  and  not  in  contradiction  to  it.  Thus,
for  instance,  every  one  will  agree  that,  speaking  generally,  it  is
godless,  inhuman,  and  unnatural  to  throw  children  out  of  the
window  on  to  the  pavement.  Yet  in  case  of  a  fire,  if  there  were
no  other  means  of  extricating  the  unfortunate  babes  from  the
burning  house,  this  terrible  action  would  become  permissible  and
even  obligatory.  It  is  obvious  that  the  rule  to  throw  children  in
extreme  cases  out  of  the  window  is  not  an  independent  principle
on  a  level  with  the  moral  principle  of  saving  those  in  danger ;
this  latter  moral  demand  still  remains  the  only  motive  of  action.
It  is  not  a  case  of  deviation  from  the  moral  norm  but  of  actual
realisation  of  that  norm  in  a  way  which,  though  dangerous  and
irregular,  proves  from  real  necessity  to  be  the  only  possible  one
under  given  conditions.

It  may  be  that  war  too  depends  upon  a  necessity  which
renders  this  essentially  abnormal  course  of  action  permissible  and
even  obligatory  under  certain  conditions.  This  question  can  only
be  settled  by  an  appeal  to  history.  Sometimes,  however,  it  is
mistakenly  treated  from  the  wider  naturally-scientific  point  of
view,  and  the  necessity  of  war  is  connected  with  the  alleged
universal  principle  of  struggle  for  existence.


388  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

In  truth,  however,  the  struggle  for  existence  neither  in  the
human  nor  in  the  animal  kingdom  has  anything  to  do  with  war.
When  it  is  said  that  a  certain  species  was  victorious  in  the  struggle
for  existence,  this  does  not  at  all  mean  that  it  had  overcome  any
enemies  in  direct  encounters  or  real  battles.  It  simply  means
that  sufficient  adaptation  to  external  environment  enabled  the
species  in  question  to  survive  and  to  multiply — which  all  do  not
equally  succeed  in  doing.  In  the  struggle  for  existence  mammoths
in  Siberia  disappeared  and  martens  were  victorious.  But  this  does
not  mean,  of  course,  that  martens  were  braver  than  mammoths
and  exterminated  the  latter  in  open  fight  with  the  help  of  their
teeth  and  paws.  In  a  similar  way  the  Jewish  nation,  which  is
comparatively  small  and  was  disarmed  long  ago,  has  proved  to  be
unconquerable  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  whilst  many  centuries
of  military  successes  did  not  save  from  downfall  the  huge  Roman
Empire,  as  well  as  other  warlike  states  that  had  preceded  it.

Just  as  the  struggle  for  existence  is  independent  of  war  and
carried  on  by  methods  which  have  nothing  in  common  with
fighting,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  war  has  grounds  of  its  own
distinct  from  the  struggle  for  the  means  of  livelihood.  If  the  latter
were  the  only  ground  of  war,  the  primitive  epoch  of  history  would
have  been  the  most  peaceful  of  all.  For  men  were  then  few  in
number,  their  demands  were  of  the  simplest,  and  each  had  ample
room  for  satisfying  them.  Fighting  and  mutual  extermination
would  in  that  case  involve  great  risks  and  bring  no  advantages.
In  this  respect  the  normal  issue  of  all  quarrels  suggested  itself
naturally.  “  And  Abraham  said  unto  Lot,  Let  there  be  no  strife,

I  pray  thee,  between  me  and  thee,  and  between  my  herdmen  and
thy  herdmen  ;  for  we  be  brethren  (ki  anashim  achim  anachnu ).  Is
not  the  whole  land  before  thee  ?  Separate  thyself,  I  pray  thee,
from  me  :  if  thou  wilt  take  the  left  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the
right  ;  or  if  thou  depart  to  the  right  hand,  then  I  will  go  to  the
left.  And  Lot  lifted  up  his  eyes,  and  beheld  all  the  plain  of
Jordan,  that  it  was  well  watered  everywhere,  before  the  Lord
destroyed  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  even  as  the  garden  of  the  Lord,
like  the  land  of  Egypt,  as  thou  comest  unto  Zoar.  Then  Lot
chose  him  all  the  plain  of  Jordan  ;  and  Lot  journeyed  east :
and  they  separated  themselves  the  one  from  the  other  ”
(Gen.  xiii.  8-1 1).


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR  389

If  such  friendly  agreement  was,  however,  but  a  rare  occur¬
rence  in  those  days,  and,  speaking  generally,  the  mutual  relations  of
pi  imitive  humanity  were  more  like  c  helium  omnium  contra  omnes,’
according  to  the  well-known  theory  of  Hobbes,  this  was  due,  not
to  the  inevitable  struggle  for  existence,  but  to  the  free  play  of  evil
passions.  The  fratricide  with  which  history  begins  was  caused  by
envy  and  not  by  hunger.  And  the  most  ancient  poetical  work  that
has  been  handed  down — the  savage  song  of  Lamech,  a  grandson
of  Cain,  recorded  in  the  Bible — bears  witness  not  to  material  need
but  to  savage  malice,  vindictiveness  and  ferocious  pride.  “  And
Lamech  said  unto  his  wives,  Adah  and  Zillah,  Hear  my  voice  ;
ye  wives  of  Lamech,' hearken  unto  my  speech  :  for  I  have  slain  a
man  to  my  wounding,  and  a  young  man  to  my  hurt.  If  Cain
shall  be  avenged  sevenfold,  truly  Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold  ”
(Gen.  iv.  23,  24).


Ill

The  predominance  of  such  feelings  at  a  time  when  the  human
race,  multiplying  slowly  as  compared  with  the  majority  of  other
animals,  was  small  in  number,  would  have  menaced  it  with  speedy
extermination  were  not  the  war  of  all  against  all  counterbalanced
from  the  first  by  the  tie  of  kinship.  This  tie  has  its  root  in  the
maternal  instinct,  is  developed  by  means  of  family  feelings  and
relations,  and  receives  its  final  sanction  in  the  religion  of  ancestor-
worship.  The  kinship-group  organisation  (in  the  wide  sense1),
which  resulted  from  all  these  circumstances,  may  be  regarded  as  the
primitive  stage  in  the  historical  development  of  humanity,  which
had  never  consisted  of  separate  isolated  entities  at  war  with  one
another.  The  tie  of  kinship  had  existed  from  the  first,  and  the
‘  war  of  all  against  all  ’  expresses  the  mutual  relation  not  between
separate  individuals,  but  between  distinct  groups,  each  of  which  was
held  together  by  kinship.  This  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that  each
clan  was  as  a  fact  at  continual  war  with  other  clans,  but  only  that
no  clan  was  secure  against,  or  protected  from,  the  possibility  of
war  with  any  other  clan.  This  state  of  things,  however,  could  not
be  permanent.  It  was  only  in  rare  cases  that  war  between  clans
ended  in  the  extermination  of  the  weaker.  Given  a  certain


1  See  above,  Chap.  X.


390  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

equality  of  power,  the  issue  of  war  was  a  treaty  or  contract
sanctioned  by  religion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  weaker  groups,
to  avoid  extermination  in  an  unequal  struggle,  either  severally
joined  a  stronger  clan  and  became  subordinate  to  it,  or  many  of
them  together  formed  a  federated  union.  Thus  war  itself  gave
rise  to  rights  and  treaties  as  a  security  of  peace.  Such  unions  of
tribes  are  the  beginning  of  the  state.

At  the  period  with  which  continuous  historical  records  begin
for  us,  a  considerable  part  of  humanity  was  already  organised  into
states.  There  were  two  fundamental  types  of  state  :  the  Western
or  Hellenic  republic ,  i.e.  a  small  city  commune,  and  the  Eastern
despotic  monarchy ,  an  extensive  organisation  embracing  either  one
(as  in  Egypt)  or  many  nations  (the  so-called  world  empires).

Without  the  state  there  could  be  no  progress  in  human  culture,
based  upon  a  complex  co-operation  of  many  forces.  Such  co¬
operation  was  impossible  to  any  large  extent  for  disconnected
tribes,  at  constant  blood-feud  with  one  another.  In  the  state  we
find  human  masses  for  the  first  time  in  history  acting  in  concord.
War  has  already  been  banished  from  within  these  masses  and
transferred  to  the  wider  circumference  of  the  state.  In  the  primi¬
tive  social  group  all  grown-up  men  are  always  under  arms.  In
the  state  warriors  either  form  a  special  caste  or  profession,  or,  in
the  case  of  conscription,  military  service  is  merely  a  temporary
occupation  of  the  citizens.  The  organisation  of  war  by  the  state
is  the  first  great  step  towards  the  establishment  of  peace.  I  his  is
particularly  clear  in  the  history  of  large  states  built  up  by  conquest —
the  so-called  world  empires.  Each  conquest  meant  in  this  case
the  spreading  of  peace,  that  is,  a  widening  of  the  circle  within
which  war  ceased  to  be  a  normal  event  and  became  a  criminal  feud
— a  rare  and  reprehensible  accident.  ‘The  world  empires’
undoubtedly  strove,  though  only  half  consciously,  to  give  peace
to  the  world  by  subjugating  all  nations  to  one  common  power.
The  greatest  of  the  states  founded  upon  conquest,  the  Roman
Empire,  directly  described  itself  as  peace — ‘ pax  Romana .’

But  the  older  monarchies  also  aimed  at  the  same  thing.
Inscriptions  of  the  Assyrian  and  Persian  kings,  discovered  in  the
nineteenth  century,  leave  no  doubt  that  these  conquerors  con¬
sidered  it  their  true  vocation  to  subdue  all  nations  for  the  sake  of
establishing  peace  on  earth,  though  their  conception  of  the  task


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


39 1


and  of  the  means  of  fulfilling  it  was,  as  a  rule,  much  too  simple.
More  complex  and  more  fruitful  were  the  world-wide  historical
plans  of  the  Macedonian  Empire,  which  rested  upon  the  superior
power  of  Hellenic  culture  deeply  and  firmly  rooted  among  the
conquered  races  of  the  East.  The  idea  of  universal  and  eternal
peace  became  perfectly  definite  among  the  Romans,  who  firmly
believed  that  they  were  destined  to  subjugate  the  universe  to  the
power  of  one  single  law.  This  idea  was  particularly  dwelt  upon
by  Vergil.  Apart  from  the  well-known  ‘  tu  regere  imperio
populos,’  etc.,

But  Rome  !  ’tis  thine  alone,  with  awful  sway
To  rule  mankind  and  make  the  world  obey.

Disposing  peace  and  war  thy  own  majestic  way
To  tame  the  proud,  the  fetter’d  slave  to  free —

he  returns  to  it  at  every  opportunity  in  his  Aeneid ,  as  the  inspiring
motive  of  the  whole  poem.  Thus,  for  instance,  he  represents
Jupiter  as  saying  to  Venus  about  her  descendants  :

“The  people  Romans  call,  the  city  Rome.

To  them  no  bounds  of  empire  I  assign,

Nor  term  of  years  to  their  immortal  line.  .  .  .

Then  dire  debate,  and  impious  war,  shall  cease,

And  the  stern  age  be  softened  into  peace.

Then  banish’d  faith  shall  once  again  return,

And  Vestal  fires  in  hallow’d  temples  burn  ;

And  Remus  with  Quirinus  shall  sustain

The  righteous  laws,  and  fraud  and  force  restrain.”

Aeneid  i.  378-294.

The  same  god  tells  Mercury  that  the  ancestor  of  the  Romans,
Aeneas,  is  destined  to  conquer  Italy  throbbing  with  war,  and  to
instal  in  power  the  noble  line  of  the  Teucre,  who  ‘shall  on  the
conquered  world  impose  the  law’  ( Aeneid  iv.  229-231).

In  comparing  the  four  ‘  world  empires  ’  we  find  that  as  they
succeeded  one  another  they  gradually  approached  the  ideal  of
universal  peace  both  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  extension
and  of  their  inner  principles.  The  first  empire,  the  Assyro-
Babylonian,  did  not  extend  beyond  near  Asia,  was  supported  by
constant  devastating  wars,  and  its  legislation  was  limited  to
military  decrees.  The  second  empire,  that  of  Cyrus  and  the
Achaemenides,  added  to  the  near  Asia  a  considerable  part  of
Central  Asia  on  the  one  hand  and  extended  to  Egypt  on  the


392  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

other  ;  its  inner  force  was  the  light  religion  of  Ormuzd,  which
sanctioned  morality  and  justice.  In  the  third  empire,  that  of
Alexander  and  his  successors,  historical  East  was  for  the  first
time  united  to  historical  West,  and  the  two  were  welded  to¬
gether  not  merely  by  the  force  of  the  sword  but  also  by  the
ideal  elements  of  hellenic  culture.  Finally,  the  progress  made  by
the  fourth — the  Roman  Empire,  consisted  both  in  the  fact  that
Romans  extended  the  former  unity  as  far  as  the  Atlantic  Ocean,
and  that  they  gave  it  a  firm  political  organisation  and  a  stable
juridical  form.  War  was  inevitably  the  means  and  the  armed
powers  the  necessary  support  of  this  work  of  establishing  peace.
War  and  peace  were  correctly  symbolised  by  the  opposed  but
inseparable  faces  of  the  Roman  god  Janus.

War  unites  more  powerfully  than  anything  else  the  inner
forces  of  each  of  the  warring  states  and  at  the  same  time  proves
to  be  the  condition  for  subsequent  coming  together  and  mutual
interpenetration  of  the  opponents  themselves.  This  is  most
clearly  seen  in  the  history  of  Greece.  It  was  only  three  times
in  the  course  of  their  history  that  the  majority  of  independent
Greek  tribes  and  city-states  united  for  the  sake  of  a  common
cause  and  manifested  their  inner  national  unity  in  a  practical
way — and  every  time  it  was  due  to  a  war  :  the  Trojan  war  at
the  beginning,  the  Persian  wars  in  the  middle,  and  the  expedition
of  Alexander  the  Great  as  the  culminating  achievement,  owing  to
which  the  creations  of  the  national  genius  of  Greece  finally
became  the  common  property  of  humanity.

The  Trojan  war  established  the  Greek  element  in  Asia
Minor,  where,  nurtured  by  other  civilising  influences,  it  blossomed
out  for  the  first  time.  It  was  on  the  shores  of  Asia  Minor  that
Greek  poetry  was  born  (the  Homeric  epos)  and  that  the  most
ancient  school  of  their  philosophy  arose  and  developed  (Thales
of  Miletus,  Heracleitus  of  Ephesus).  The  quickening  of  the
united  national  forces  in  the  struggle  with  the  Persians  gave  rise
to  another  and  a  still  more  rich  manifestation  of  the  creative
genius  of  the  Greeks.  And  the  conquests  of  Alexander,  throwing
as  they  did  these  ripe  seeds  of  Hellenism  on  to  the  ancient  soil
of  civilised  Asia  and  Egypt,  produced  that  great  Helleno-oriental
synthesis  of  religious  and  philosophical  ideas  which,  together
with  the  subsequent  unity  established  by  the  Roman  Empire,  was


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


393


the  necessary  historical  condition  for  the  spread  of  Christianity.
Without  the  Greek  language  and  Greek  ideas,  as  well  as  without
the  ‘  Roman  peace  ’  and  Roman  military  roads,  the  work  of
preaching  the  Gospel  could  not  have  been  accomplished  so  quickly
as  it  was  and  on  so  wide  a  scale.  The  Greek  words  and  ideas
became  common  property  solely  thanks  to  the  warlike  Alexander
and  his  generals  ;  the  Roman  ‘  peace  ’  was  attained  through  many
centuries  of  wars,  and  was  guarded  by  legions ;  and  it  was
for  these  legions  that  the  roads  were  made  along  which  walked
the  apostles.  ‘  Throughout  the  earth  their  voice  was  heard  and
to  the  ends  of  the  world  their  words  went  forth,’  sings  the
Church.  This  ‘earth,’  these  ‘ends  of  the  world,’  were  no  other
than  the  wide  circle  ( orbis )  which  Rome  drew  round  itself  with
its  blood-stained  sword.

Thus  all  the  wars  in  which  ancient  history  abounds  served
to  increase  the  sphere  of  peace.  The  heathen  ‘kingdoms  of  the
beast ’  prepared  the  way  for  the  messengers  proclaiming  the
kingdom  of  the  Son  of  man.

Apart  from  this,  however,  the  military  history  of  antiquity  shows
important  progress  in  the  direction  of  peace  in  another  respect.
Not  only  did  war  serve  the  purposes  of  peace  ;  as  time  went  on,
lesser  and  lesser  numbers  of  active  military  forces  were  required
for  the  attainment  of  these  purposes,  while  the  peaceful  results
became,  on  the  contrary,  more  and  more  important  and  far-
reaching.  This  paradoxical  fact  is  beyond  dispute.  In  order
to  take  Troy  it  was  necessary  for  almost  all  the  Greek  population
to  be  under  arms  for  a  period  of  ten  years,1  and  the  direct  result
of  this  terrible  effort  was  next  to  nothing.  But  to  accomplish
the  great  catastrophe — the  conquest  of  the  East  by  Alexander  the
Great,  which  crowned  the  whole  of  the  Greek  history  and  had
immediate  consequences  for  the  civilisation  of  the  world,  all  that
was  needed  from  the  military  point  of  view  was  a  three-year  long
expedition  of  an  army  of  thirteeen  thousand  men.  If  we  compare
the  results  and,  on  the  other  hand,  take  into  account  the  total
population  of  Greece  and  Macedon  under  Alexander  and  the

1  The  number  of  Greek  forces  given  in  the  Iliad  cannot,  of  course,  be  taken  as
literally  exact,  but  as  an  approximate  estimate.  This  number  (110,000  men)  seems  to
be  entirely  probable.  It  should  be  noted  with  reference  to  the  Iliad  generally  that
recent  excavations  have  re-established  the  historical  value  of  the  poem,  allowing,  of
course,  for  its  mythological  setting.


394  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

small  number  of  the  Achaean  population  which  sent  to  Troy  so
large  a  contingent  of  military  force,  we  shall  be  struck  by  the
relative  diminution  that  has  taken  place  in  the  course  of  these
seven  centuries  in  the  number  of  lives  that  had  to  be  sacrificed
for  the  attainment  of  historical  purposes.  Another  comparison
leads  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  Persian  Empire,  whose
millions  of  soldiers  could  not  secure  to  it  military  success  in  the
struggle  with  tiny  Greece,  was  hardly  able  to  exist  for  two
centuries.  The  Roman  Empire,  three  times  as  great  and  with  a
population  of  at  least  200  millions,  kept  under  arms  some  400
thousand  legionaries  to  defend  its  endless  frontiers,  and  existed
three  times  as  long  as  the  kingdom  of  Darius  and  Xerxes.  And
how  immeasurably  more  important  to  humanity  were  the  blessings
of  culture  guarded  by  those  few  legions  than  the  objects  for  the  sake
of  which  gathered  the  innumerable  hordes  of  the  king  of  kings  !
The  nature  of  military  progress  exemplified  in  the  advantages  of
the  Macedonian  phalanx  and  the  Roman  legion  over  the  Persian
hordes,  consisted,  generally  speaking,  in  the  preponderance  of
quality  over  quantity  and  of  form  over  matter.  It  was  at  the
same  time  a  great  moral  and  social  progress,  since  it  led  to  an
enormous  decrease  in  the  number  of  human  lives  swallowed  up
by  war.

IV

When  the  Roman  world — and  peace — came  to  be  replaced
by  the  Christian,  the  problem  of  war  remained  essentially  un¬
changed  on  its  externally  historical  side.  True,  by  its  absolute
condemnation  of  all  hatred  and  enmity,  Christianity  abolished  the
principle,  the  moral  root  of  war.  But  cutting  down  the  roots
does  not  mean  felling  the  tree  ;  and  indeed  the  preachers  of  the
Gospel  did  not  wish  to  fell  this  Nebuchadnezzar’s  tree,  for  they
knew  that  the  earth  needed  its  shade  until  out  of  the  small  seed
of  true  faith  there  would  grow  up,  to  replace  it,  ‘  the  greatest  of
plants,’  under  the  boughs  of  which  there  would  be  secure  shelter
both  for  men  and  beasts  of  the  field.

The  teachers  of  Christianity  did  not  reject  the  state  and  its
destination  to  ‘bear  the  sword  against  the  wicked,’  and  therefore
they  did  not  reject  war.  The  followers  of  the  new  faith  saw
great  triumph  in  the  fact  that  two  victorious  wars  allowed


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


395

Caesar  Constantine  to  plant  the  cross  of  Christ  over  the  old
unchanged  building  of  the  Roman  Empire.  Under  the  unchanged
external  appearance  of  the  state,  however,  secret  spiritual  forces
were  at  work.  The  state,  even  when  surmounted  by  the  cross,
ceased  for  the  Christian  to  be  the  supreme  good  and  the  final
form  of  life.  Faith  in  the  eternal  Rome,  that  is,  in  the  absolute
significance  of  political  unity,  was  replaced  by  the  expectation  of
c  the  new  Jerusalem,’  that  is,  of  the  inner  spiritual  union  of
regenerated  men  and  nations.  Apart,  however,  from  human
consciousness  being  thus  ideally  raised  to  a  higher  level,  the
process  of  external  realisation  of  unity  in  the  body  of  humanity
continued  unceasingly,  though  at  first  slowly.

The  Christian  world  (tot a  christianitas ,  toute  la  chretiente ),
which  in  the  Middle  Ages  took  the  place  of  the  ancient  Roman
Empire,  was  considerably  wider  than  it.  True,  there  were
frequent  wars  within  it — just  as  in  the  Roman  Empire  there  had
been  insurrections  of  peoples  and  mutinies  of  military  leaders  ;
but  the  representatives  of  the  Christian  principles  looked  upon
these  wars  as  upon  lamentable  feuds,  and  in  every  way  tried  to
put  a  stop  to  them.  As  to  the  constant  struggle  between  the
Christian  and  the  Mahommedan  world  (in  Spain  and  the  Levant),
it  undoubtedly  was  in  the  interests  of  progress  and  culture.  The
defence  of  Christianity  against  the  advance  of  Islam  preserved  for
historical  humanity  the  possibility  of  higher  spiritual  development
which  was  in  danger  of  being  submerged  by  the  comparatively
lower  religious  principle.1  Besides,  the  interaction  between  the
two  worlds,  though  based  on  hostility,  could  not  be  limited  to
bloodshed  alone  and  gradually  led  to  a  widening  of  the  intellectual
horizon  on  both  sides.  It  thus  prepared  the  ground  in  the  case  of
Christians  for  the  great  epoch  of  the  Renaissance  of  arts  and
learning,  and  later  on  for  the  Reformation.

In  modern  history  three  general  facts  have  the  most  important
bearing  upon  the  question  we  are  considering — namely,  (i)  the
development  of  nationality  ;  (2)  the  corresponding  development  of
international  relations  of  all  kinds  ;  and  (3)  the  extension  of  the
unity  of  culture  to  the  whole  of  the  globe.

Having  freed  themselves  from  the  tutelage  of  the  Roman
Church,  and  rejected  the  impotent  pretensions  of  the  holy  Roman
1  See  above,  Part  III.,  Chap.  V.


396  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Empire,  European  nations  became  differentiated  into  independent
political  wholes.  Each  national  state  recognised  itself  and  was
recognised  by  others  as  a  perfect  body ,  as  possessed,  i.e .,  of  supreme
authority  or  absolute  fulness  of  power  and  therefore  as  un¬
subordinated  to  any  other  power  on  earth.  The  direct  consequences
of  this  national  segregation  were  not  favourable  to  the  cause  of
peace.  In  the  first  place,  it  legitimised  war  even  among  Christian
states,  since  war  proved  to  be  the  sole  means  of  settling  disputes
between  separate  and  absolutely  independent  wholes  which  had  no
supreme  arbiter  to  appeal  to,  after  the  manner  in  which  in  the
Middle  Ages  they  always  could,  and  sometimes  did,  appeal  to  the
Pope  and  to  the  Emperor.  Secondly,  the  national  idea,  when  taken
to  be  the  supreme  principle  in  the  life  of  nations,  naturally  became
national  pride ;  patriotism  lost  its  true  character  ;  active  love  for  one’s
own  people  became  idolatrous  worship  of  it  as  of  the  supreme  good,
and  this  in  its  turn  passed  into  hatred  and  contempt  for  other  nations,
and  led  to  unjust  aggressive  wars  and  oppression  of  other  peoples.

Concealed  by  these  negative  features,  however,  lies  the  positive
significance  of  nationality.  Nations  must  live  and  develop  in
their  essential  peculiarities  as  the  living  organs  of  humanity;  apart
from  them  its  unity  would  be  dead  and  devoid  of  content,  and
this  peace  of  death  would  be  worse  than  war.  The  true  unity  of
mankind  and  the  hoped-for  peace  must  be  based  not  upon  the
weakness  and  subjugation  of  nations  but  upon  the  highest  develop¬
ment  of  their  powers  and  a  free  interaction  between  nationalities
which  serve  as  a  complement  to  one  another.  And  in  spite  of  all
the  efforts  of  national  selfishness  which  strives  to  bring  about
hostile  estrangement  between  nations,  positive  interaction  among
them  exists,  and  is  constantly  increasing  in  depth  and  in  breadth.
The  former  international  relations  have  not  disappeared  but  have
gained  in  inner  force,  and  new  ones  have  been  added  to  them.
Thus  in  the  West  the  Roman  Church,  in  spite  of  losing  its  external
power,  has  considerately  gained  in  spiritual  authority  ;  it  has  been
purged  of  many  of  the  crude  abuses  of  the  Middle  Ages,  and  has
made  good  by  other  conquests  the  damage  it  deservedly  suffered
at  the  hands  of  the  Reformation.  By  the  side  of  this  Church
and  in  opposition  to  it  arose  the  equally  wide-embracing  and
powerful  brotherhood  of  the  freemasons,  which,  however  enigmatic
it  may  be  in  other  respects,  is  unquestionably  international  and


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


397


universal  in  character.  Relations  of  another  kind  came  to  be
established  on  an  unprecedented  scale  in  the  economic  sphere.
W orld-market  came  into  existence.  There  is  not  a  single  country
which  is  economicallyse]f-sufficient,producingeverything  necessary
for  itself,  getting  nothing  from  others  and  giving  them  nothing
in  return,  so  that  the  idea  of  the  state  as  ca  perfect  body,’  i.e.  an
absolutely  independent  social  organism,  proves  in  this  fundamental
respect  to  be  the  purest  fiction.  Further,  constant  co-operation  of
all  educated  countries  in  scientific  and  technical  work,  the  results  of
which  immediately  become  common  property;  inventions  whereby
distance  is  annulled  ;  the  daily  press,  with  its  continual  news  from
everywhere  ;  finally,  the  remarkable  increase  in  the  international
c  exchange  of  substances  ’  by  the  new  means  of  communication —
all  this  makes  civilised  humanity  one  whole  which  actually,  even
though  involuntarily,  lives  one  common  life.

And  civilised  humanity  tends  more  and  more  to  become  the
whole  of  humanity.  When  at  the  beginning  of  modern  history
Europeans  extended  their  activity  on  all  sides,  taking  America
in  the  West,  India  in  the  South-east,  and  Siberia  in  the  North¬
east,  the  greater  part  of  the  globe  proved  to  be  in  their  power.
Now  this  power  may  be  said  to  have  extended  to  the  whole  of  the
globe.  The  Mahommedan  world  is  surrounded  and  permeated
through  and  through  with  European  culture,  and  it  is  only  in  the
tropical  deserts  of  the  Soudan  that  it  can,  and  that  without  any
hope  of  success,  maintain  its  primitive  independence  (the  kingdom
of  the  Dervishes).  The  whole  of  the  African  coast  has  been
divided  between  European  Powers,  and  now  the  centre  of  the
black  continent  has  become  the  arena  of  their  rivalry.  Mongolian
Asia — China  and  Japan — had  alone  remained  outside  the  boundary
of  European  influence,  but  this  last  barrier  between  human  races
is  being  removed  before  our  eyes.  With  astonishing  success  and
rapidity  the  Japanese,  in  the  course  of  a  quarter  of  a  century,
acquired  all  the  material  and  positively  scientific  side  of  European
civilisation  and  then  at  once  proceeded  to  prove  to  their  Mongolian
brethren,  in  the  most  convincing  way  possible,  the  necessity  or
following  their  example.  The  Chinese,  who  had  already  been
shaken  in  their  self-confidence  by  the  English,  but  were  still
rather  slow  at  understanding  these  foreigners,  understood  a  fellow-
nation  at  once  ;  and  henceforth  the  famous  wall  of  China  is  no


398  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

longer  a  symbol  of  a  continuing  isolation  but  only  a  relic  of  the
irrevocable  past.

We  must  now  consider  what  bearing  this  curious  process
of  c  gathering  together  of  lands  ’  by  means  of  a  single  material
culture  had  upon  war.  On  the  one  hand,  war  played  an
active  part  in  it.  The  wars  of  the  Revolution  and  the
Napoleonic  wars  are  well  known  to  have  had  a  powerful  influence
upon  the  advance  and  the  dissemination  of  universally-European
ideas  which  conditioned  the  scientific,  technical,  and  economic
progress  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  thus  brought  about  the
material  unification  of  humanity.  In  a  similar  way  the  final
act  of  that  unification — its  extension  to  the  last  stronghold  of
isolated  barbarism,  China — began,  in  our  eyes,  with  war  and  not
with  peaceful  persuasion.  On  the  other  hand,  the  universality
of  material  culture,  realised  partly  through  means  of  war,  itself
becomes  a  powerful  means  and  ground  of  peace.  At  the  present
time  the  enormous  majority  of  the  population  of  the  globe
constitutes  one  connected  body,  between  the  parts  of  which
there  is  physical,  if  not  moral,  solidarity.  This  solidarity
shows  itself  in  the  sphere  from  which  none  can  escape — the
economic  sphere.  Some  industrial  crisis  in  New  York  im¬
mediately  makes  itself  felt  in  Moscow  and  Calcutta.  The  body
of  humanity  has  evolved  a  common  sense-organ  ( sensorium
commune ),  owing  to  which  every  particular  stimulus  sensibly
produces  a  general  effect.

Every  prolonged  and  serious  war  is  inevitably  accompanied
by  profound  economic  disturbances  which  are  bound  to  be  world¬
wide ,  now  that  the  different  parts  of  the  earth  have  become  so
closely  connected.  This  state  of  things  was  being  evolved
throughout  the  nineteenth  century,  though  it  became  clear  to
all  only  at  the  end  of  it.  It  is  a  sufficient  foundation  for  the  fear
of  war ,  completely  unknown  in  earlier  times,  which  has  now
taken  possession  of  all  civilised  nations.  During  the  first  half
of  the  century  wars  became  shorter  and  more  rare.  Between
Waterloo  and  Sebastopol,  Europe  had  forty  years  of  peace — a
thing  which  had  not  happened  during  the  whole  of  its  previous
history.  Later  on,  special  historical  causes  brought  about  several
comparatively  short  European  wars  in  1859,  1864,  1866,  and
1870;  the  Russo-Turkish  war  of  1877-78  could  not  be  made


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


399


into  a  general  European  war.  The  most  important  of  these
wars — the  Franco-Prussian — is  very  characteristic.  It  left  in  the
most  civilised  nation  of  Europe  a  feeling  of  national  injury  and
a  thirst  for  vengeance — and  yet  for  the  last  twenty-eight  years
these  feelings  have  not  been  able  to  pass  into  action  solely  from
fear  of  war.  In  the  seventeenth  or  eighteenth  century,  not
to  speak  of  epochs  more  remote,  such  prudence  would  have  been
quite  inconceivable.  And  what  do  the  monstrous  armaments  of
European  countries  indicate  if  not  the  terrible,  overwhelming
fear  of  war,  and  consequently  the  approaching  end  of  wars  ? 1

It  would  be  irrational,  however,  to  think  and  to  act  as
though  that  approaching  end  had  already  come.  Although  the
common  economic  sensorium  does  at  present  unite  all  the  parts
of  the  earth  with  a  tie  of  which  the  people  themselves  are
conscious,  yet  this  tie  is  not  everywhere  of  the  same  strength  and
the  parts  are  not  all  equally  sensitive.  There  are  still  some
nations  left  which  in  the  case  of  a  world  war  risk  little — and
there  are  some  which  are  prepared  to  risk  a  great  deal.  The
introduction  of  the  Mongolian  race  into  the  sphere  of  the
material  European  culture  has  a  twofold  significance.  This
race,  the  chief  representatives  of  which,  the  Chinese  people,
number  at  least  two  hundred  million  souls,  are  noted  for  great
racial  pride  and  extreme  contempt  for  life,  both  their  own  and
other  people’s.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  now  inevitable
acquisition  of  the  technique  of  European  culture  by  the  yellow
race  will  only  serve  it  as  a  means  for  proving  in  a  decisive
struggle  the  superiority  of  its  spiritual  powers  over  the  spiritual
powers  of  Europe.  This  forthcoming  armed  struggle  between
Europe  and  Mongolian  Asia  will  certainly  be  the  last  war,
but  it  will  on  that  account  be  all  the  more  terrible.  It  will
indeed  be  a  world  war,  and  it  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  to
the  destinies  of  humanity  which  side  will  prove  victorious.

V

There  is  a  wonderful  system  and  unity  in  the  general
history  of  human  wars,  the  chief  moments  of  which  I  have

1  The  three  last  half-European  wars  do  not  contradict  this  statement.  The  Servo-
Bulgarian  war  of  1885,  the  Greco-Turkish  of  1897,  and  the  Spanish-American  of  1898
all  came  to  an  end  before  they  had  really  begun.


4oo  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

indicated.  From  the  rosy  mist  of  historical  childhood  there
stands  out  in  the  first  place  the  clear  though  half-fantastical
image  of  the  T rojan  war — that  first  great  encounter  of  East
and  West,  of  Europe  and  Asia.  This  is  how  Herodotus  regarded
the  Trojan  war,  with  which  his  history  begins ;  and  it  is  not
for  nothing  that  the  first  inspired  work  of  purely  human  poetry
(the  Iliad)  is  connected  with  it  too.  This  war  was  indeed  the
beginning  of  the  earthly,  worldly  history  of  humanity  which
throughout  its  course  turns  round  the  fateful  struggle  between
East  and  West,  while  its  arena  is  becoming  wider  and  wider.  Now
that  arena  has  reached  its  utmost  limit — the  whole  surface  of
the  globe.  In  the  place  of  the  deserted  Skamander  there  is  the
Pacific  Ocean,  in  the  place  of  the  smoking  Troy — the  ominous
mass  of  China,  and  the  struggle  is  still  as  before  between  the
opposing  principles  of  East  and  West.  There  was  a  moment
of  crisis,  a  pause  in  the  struggle,  when,  following  upon  the
external  union  of  the  historical  East  with  the  West  in  the  Roman
Empire — under  the  power  of  the  descendants  of  Aeneas  of  Troy,
— the  light  of  Christianity  abolished  the  ancient  hostility  from
within  :

And  streaming  afar  the  light  that  came

Out  of  the  East  arose,

And  glimmering  with  portent  and  celestial  power

It  reconciled  East  and  West.

But  the  old  material  and  cultural  union  proved  to  be  unstable,
and  the  spiritual  is  still  awaiting  its  final  realisation.  True,
in  the  place  of  the  political  unity  of  the  Roman  Empire,  modern
humanity  has  evolved  another  unity — the  economic  one,  which,
like  the  first,  puts  great  external  obstacles  in  the  way  of  armed
struggle.  But  these  obstacles  which  have  of  late  saved  us  from
a  European  war  are  unable  to  prevent  the  last  and  the  greatest
struggle  between  the  two  worlds — of  Europe  and  of  Asia.
These  now  are  no  longer  represented  by  separate  peoples,  such
as  the  Acheans  and  the  Trojans,  or  even  the  Greeks  and  the
Persians,  but  appear  in  their  true  proportions  as  the  two  great
and  hostile  halves  into  which  the  whole  of  humanity  is  divided.
The  victory  of  one  side  or  another  will  indeed  give  peace  to  the
whole  world.  There  will  be  no  more  struggle  between  nations  ;
but  the  question  still  remains  whether  this  political  peace,  this


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


401


establishment  of  international  unity  in  the  shape  of  a  world
empire — be  it  a  monarchy  or  some  other  form  of  state, — will  indeed
mean  a  real  and  lasting  peace,  whether  it  will  stop  the  struggle
— sometimes  an  armed  struggle — between  other,  non-political
elements  of  humanity.  Or,  maybe,  it  will  simply  be  a  repeti¬
tion  on  a  vast  scale  of  what  has  happened,  within  our  memory,
in  more  narrow  limits.  Germany  had  once  consisted  of  many
states  at  war  with  one  another.  The  national  body  suffered  from
lack  of  real  unity,  and  the  creation  of  such  a  unity  was  the
cherished  dream  of  the  patriots.  It  came  to  be  realised  after
several  wars — and  it  proved  to  be  insufficient.  The  Germans,  of
course,  will  never  relinquish  their  political  unity,  but  they  clearly
see  that  it  was  only  one  necessary  step  forward  and  not  the
attainment  of  the  supreme  goal.  The  political  struggle  between
small  states  came  to  be  replaced  throughout  the  empire  by  a
more  deep-rooted  struggle  —  religious  and  economical.  The
Ultramontanes  and  the  social  democrats  are  proving  to  be  more
formidable  foes  than  the  Austrian  and  the  French.  When  the
whole  of  humanity  is  politically  united,  whether  in  the  form  of
a  world  empire  or  a  world-wide  federation  of  states,  the  question
still  remains  whether  such  union  will  put  an  end  to  the  struggle
of  freemasonry  with  clericalism,  or  appease  the  hostility  of
socialism  against  the  propertied  classes  and  of  anarchism  against
all  social  and  political  organisation.  It  is  clear  that  the  struggle
between  religious  beliefs  and  material  interests  survives  the
struggle  between  states  and  nations,  and  that  the  final  establish¬
ment  of  external  political  unity  will  clearly  show  its  inner
insufficiency.  It  will  make  plain  the  moral  truth  that  external
peace  is  not  necessarily  a  true  good  in  itself  and  that  it  becomes
a  good  only  in  connection  with  an  inner  regeneration  of
humanity.  And  it  is  only  when  the  insufficiency  of  external
union  will  have  been  known  by  experience  and  not  merely  in
theory  that  the  time  will  be  ripe  for  spiritualising  the  united
body  of  the  universe,  and  for  realising  in  it  the  Kingdom  of
Truth  and  of  Eternal  Peace.


2  D


402  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


VI

War,  as  we  have  seen,  has  been  the  chief  historical  means  of
bringing  about  the  external  political  unification  of  humanity-
Wars  between  clans  and  tribes  led  to  the  formation  of  the  state
which  abolished  war  within  its  own  limits.  External  wars
between  separate  states  gave  rise  to  vaster  and  more  complex
political  bodies  possessing  a  unity  of  culture,  and  seeking  to
establish  peace  and  equilibrium  within  their  limits.  At  one  time
the  whole  mass  of  humanity,  broken  up  and  divided,  was  per¬
meated  through  and  through  with  war  which  never  ceased
between  innumerable  small  groups.  War  was  everywhere;  but
gradually  driven  further  and  further  back  it  now  appears  to  be  an
almost  inevitable  danger  at  one  point  only — at  the  dividing  line
between  the  two  chief  races  into  which  historical  humanity  is
divided.  The  process  of  unification  is  drawing  towards  its  end,
but  that  end  has  not  yet  come.  It  is  extremely  improbable  that
the  yellow  race  will  peacefully  enter  within  the  circle  of  European
culture,  and,  from  the  historical  point  of  view,  there  is  no  reason
to  believe  that  war  is  to  be  immediately  and  completely  abolished.
Is,  however,  this  point  of  view  binding  upon  the  moral  conscious¬
ness  ?

The  matter  appears  as  follows:  “Whatever  the  historical
significance  of  war  may  be,  it  is  in  the  first  place  murder  of
men  by  men.  But  our  conscience  condemns  murder,  and  there¬
fore  we  ought  conscientiously  to  refuse  to  take  any  part  in  war,
and  ought  to  persuade  others  to  do  the  same.  To  spread  such  a
view  by  word  and  example  is  the  true  and  the  only  certain  means
of  abolishing  war,  since  it  is  clear  that  when  every  one  refuses
to  do  military  service,  war  will  become  impossible.”  In  order
that  this  argument  might  be  convincing,  it  would  have  in  the
first  place  to  be  proved  that  war  and  even  military  service  is  the
same  as  murder.  But  this  is  not  the  case.  Military  service
means  only  a  possibility  of  war.  During  the  forty  years  between
the  wars  of  Napoleon  I.  and  Napoleon  III.  several  million  men
in  Europe  underwent  military  training,  but  only  an  insignificant
part  of  them  had  actual  experience  of  war.  Even  when  war  does
break  out,  however,  it  cannot  be  reduced  to  murder,  that  is,  to  a


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


403


crime  which  presupposes  evil  intention  directed  upon  a  certain
object,  upon  this  particular  man  whose  life  I  take.  In  war  the
individual  soldier  has,  generally  speaking,  no  such  intention,
especially  with  the  present  method  of  fighting  by  means  of  guns
and  cannons  against  an  enemy  who  is  too  far  off"  to  be  seen.  Only
in  cases  of  actual  hand-to-hand  fighting  does  the  question  of  con¬
science  arise  for  the  individual,  and  then  it  must  be  decided  by
each  according  to  his  conscience.  Speaking  generally,  war  as  a
conflict  between  collective  organisms  (states)  and  their  collective
organs  (armies)  is  not  the  work  of  individuals  who  play  a  passive
part  in  it,  and  for  them  possible  murder  is  accidental  only.

It  might  be  said,  however,  that  it  is  better  to  avoid  the  very
possibility  of  accidental  murder  by  refusing  to  do  military  service.
This  is  undoubtedly  true  if  it  is  a  question  of  free  choice.  A
man  who  has  attained  a  certain  level  of  moral  consciousness,  or
one  whose  feeling  of  pity  is  strongly  developed,  will  certainly
not  choose  the  army  as  a  profession,  but  will  prefer  to  follow  a
peaceful  calling.  But  so  far  as  compulsory  military  service  re¬
quired  by  the  state  is  concerned,  it  must  be  admitted  that  so  long
as  it  exists  a  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  individual  to  submit  to  it
is  a  greater  evil  than  the  institution  itself,  however  much  we  may
disapprove  of  the  modern  system  of  universal  military  service,  the
disadvantages  of  which  are  obvious  and  the  efficiency  doubtful.
The  person  who  refuses  to  serve  his  time  in  the  army  knows  that
the  requisite  number  of  recruits  will  in  any  case  be  gathered  and
that  somebody  else  will  be  called  in  his  stead.  Therefore  he  con¬
sciously  forces  his  neighbour,  who  would  otherwise  be  free,  to  all
the  hardships  of  military  service.  Besides,  the  whole  meaning
of  such  a  refusal  satisfies  the  demands  neither  of  logic  nor  of
morality,  since  this  is  what  it  comes  to.  For  the  sake  of
avoiding  a  remote  future  possibility  of  accidentally  killing  an
enemy  in  a  war  which  will  not  depend  upon  me,  I  myself  declare
war  to  the  state  now  and  compel  its  representatives  to  take:  a
number  of  violent  measures  against  me  at  once ,  in  order  that  I
might  save  myself  from  committing  problematic  and  accidental
violence  in  the  unknown  future.

The  purpose  of  military  service  is  defined  in  our  law  by
the  formula  ‘to  defend  the  throne  and  the  fatherland,’  that  is,
the  political  whole  to  which  a  given  individual  belongs.  The


404  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

state  may,  as  it  often  has  done  in  the  past,  abuse  its  armed  forces,
and,  instead  of  self-defence,  undertake  unjust  and  aggressive  wars  ;
but  this  is  not  a  sufficient  ground  for  determining  my  own
present  actions.  Such  actions  must  be  solely  determined  by  my
own  moral  duties  and  not  by  those  of  others.  The  question  then
in  the  last  resort  comes  to  this  :  Is  it  my  moral  duty  to  take  part  in
the  defence  of  my  country  ?

Theories  which  take  up  an  absolutely  negative  attitude
towards  war  and  maintain  that  it  is  the  duty  of  every  one  to  refuse
the  demand  of  the  state  for  military  service,  altogether  deny  that
the  individual  has  any  duties  towards  the  state.  From  their  point
of  view  the  state  is  simply  a  band  of  brigands  who  hypnotise  the
crowd  in  order  to  keep  it  in  subjection,  and  to  use  it  for  their  own
purposes.  But  seriously  to  believe  that  this  account  exhausts  or
in  the  least  expresses  the  true  nature  of  the  case  would  be  altogether
too  naive.  This  view  is  particularly  ill-founded  when  it  appeals
to  Christianity.

Christianity  has  revealed  to  us  our  absolute  dignity,  the  un¬
conditional  worth  of  the  inner  being  or  of  the  soul  ot  man.  T  his
unconditional  worth  imposes  upon  us  an  unconditional  duty  to
realise  the  good  in  the  whole  of  our  life,  both  personal  and
collective.  We  know  for  certain  that  this  task  is  impossible  for
the  individual  taken  separately  or  in  isolation,  and  that  it  can  only
be  realised  if  the  individual  life  finds  its  completion  in  the  universal
historical  life  of  humanity.  One  of  the  means  ot  such  comple¬
tion,  one  of  the  forms  of  the  universal  life — at  the  present  moment
of  history  the  chief  and  the  dominant  form  —  is  the  fatherland
definitely  organised  as  the  state.  This  form  is  not,  of  course,  the
supreme  and  final  expression  of  human  solidarity,  and  the  lather-
land  must  not  be  put  in  the  place  of  God  and  of  His  universal
kingdom.  But  from  the  fact  that  the  state  is  not  everything,  it
by  no  means  follows  that  it  is  unnecessary  and  that  it  would  be
right  to  aim  at  abolishing  it.

Suppose  that  the  country  in  which  I  live  is  visited  by  a
calamity  such  as  famine.  What  is  in  this  case  the  duty  of  the
individual  as  an  unconditionally  moral  being  ?  Both  reason  and
conscience  clearly  say  that  he  must  do  one  of  two  things — either
feed  all  the  hungry  or  himself  die  of  starvation.  It  is  impossible
for  me  to  feed  millions  who  are  starving,  and  yet  my  conscience


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


405


does  not  in  the  least  reproach  me  for  remaining  alive.  Now  this
is  naturally  due  to  the  fact  that  the  state  takes  upon  itself  my
moral  duty  to  provide  bread  for  all  the  starving,  and  that  it  can
fulfil  it  owing  to  its  collective  resources  and  to  its  organisation
intended  for  prompt  action  on  a  wide  scale.  In  this  case  the
state  proves  to  be  an  institution  which  can  successfully  perform
work  that  is  morally  binding  but  physically  impossible  for  the
individual.  If,  however,  the  state  fulfils  for  me  my  direct  moral
duties,  it  cannot  be  said  that  I  owe  nothing  to  it  and  that  it  has
no  claim  upon  me.  If  it  had  not  been  for  it  I  would  have  been
in  conscience  bound  to  give  my  very  life  ;  can  I  then  refuse  to
contribute  my  small  share  towards  the  means  which  it  needs  for
carrying  out  my  own  work  ?

But,  it  will  be  said,  the  rates  and  taxes  collected  by  the  state
may  be  expended  upon  things  which  appear  to  me  to  be  useless,
and  even  pernicious,  instead  of  upon  obviously  useful  work.  In
that  case  it  will  be  my  duty  to  expose  such  abuses,  but  certainly
not  to  deny,  by  word  and  deed,  the  very  principle  of  taxation  by
the  state,  the  recognised  destination  of  which  is  to  serve  the
general  welfare.

Now  the  military  organisation  of  the  state  is  really  based  upon
the  same  principle.  If  savages  such  as  the  Caucasian  mountaineers
of  the  old  days,  or  the  Kurds  and  the  Black  Flags  of  the  present
times,  attack  a  traveller  with  the  obvious  intention  of  murdering
him  and  his  family,  it  is  no  doubt  his  duty  to  fight  them — not  out
of  hostility  or  malice  against  them,  not  to  save  his  life  at  the  ex¬
pense  of  his  neighbour’s  life,  but  to  save  the  defenceless  beings
entrusted  to  his  protection.  To  help  others  in  such  circumstances
is  an  absolute  moral  duty,  and  it  cannot  be  limited  to  one’s  own
family.  But  successfully  to  defend  all  the  weak  and  innocent
against  the  attacks  of  evil-doers  is  impossible  for  isolated  individuals
or  even  for  groups  of  many  men.  Collective  organisation  of  such
defence  is  precisely  the  destination  of  the  military  force  of  the
state,  and  to  support  the  state  in  one  way  or  another  in  this  work
of  pity  is  the  moral  duty  of  every  one,  which  no  abuses  can  render
void.  Just  as  the  fact  that  ergot  is  poisonous  does  not  prove  that
rye  is  injurious,  so  the  burdens  and  the  dangers  of  militarism
are  no  evidence  against  the  necessity  of  armed  forces.

The  military  or  indeed  any  compulsory  organisation  is  not


4o6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

an  evil,  but  a  consequence  and  a  symptom  of  evil.  There  was
no  trace  of  such  an  organisation  at  the  time  when  the  innocent
shepherd  Abel  was  killed  by  his  brother  out  of  malice.  Justly
fearing  lest  the  same  thing  should  happen  to  Seth  and  other
peaceful  men,  the  guardian  angels  of  humanity  mixed  the  clay
with  copper  and  iron  and  created  the  soldier  and  the  policeman.
And  until  Cain’s  feelings  disappear  from  the  hearts  of  men,  soldier
and  policeman  will  be  a  good  and  not  an  evil.  Hostility  against
the  state  and  its  representatives  is,  after  all,  hostility — and  this  fact
would  alone  be  sufficient  to  justify  the  necessity  of  the  state.  And
it  is  strange,  indeed,  to  be  hostile  to  it  for  the  sole  reason  that  the
state  merely  limits  by  external  means  and  does  not  inwardly  abolish
in  the  whole  world  the  malice  which  we  are  unable  to  abolish  in
ourselves  !


VII

Between  the  historical  necessity  of  war  on  the  one  hand,  and
the  abstract  denial  of  it  on  the  other,  lies  the  duty  of  the  indi¬
vidual  to  the  organised  whole — the  state — which,  down  to  the
end  of  history,  conditions  both  the  existence  and  the  progress
of  humanity.  The  unquestionable  fact,  however,  that  the  state
possesses  the  means  both  for  preserving  human  society  in  its
present  condition,  and  also  for  moving  it  forward,  imposes  upon
the  individual  other  duties  with  regard  to  the  state  than  a  mere
fulfilment  of  its  lawful  demands.  Such  fulfilment  would  be  suffi¬
cient  were  the  state  a  perfect  embodiment  of  the  normal  social
order.  But  since  in  truth  it  is  only  the  condition  and  the  means
of  human  progress,  and  is  itself  gradually  becoming  more  perfect
in  different  respects,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  individual  to  take,  so
much  as  in  him  lies,  active  part  in  this  general  political  progress.
The  individual  is  the  bearer  of  the  absolute  moral  consciousness,
of  the  perfect  ideal  of  truth  and  peace,  or  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
This  consciousness  he  received,  not  from  the  state,  but  from  above
and  from  within.  The  ideal,  however,  cannot  be  actually  realised.
in  the  collective  life  of  humanity  except  by  means  of  a  preparatory
state  organisation.  Hence  for  every  individual  who  really  adopts
the  moral  point  of  view  there  follows  the  direct  positive  duty  of
helping  the  state  by  persuasion  or  preaching  to  fulfil  in  the  best
possible  way  its  preliminary  function.  After  this  function  has


THE  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  WAR


407


been  discharged — but  not  until  then— the  state  itself  will  of  course
become  superfluous.  The  individual  both  can  and  must  thus  in¬
fluence  society  both  with  reference  to  war  and  to  all  other  aspects
of  the  political  life.

The  evil  of  war  is  in  the  extreme  hostility  and  hatred  between
the  disjecta  membra  of  humanity.  In  personal  relations  bad  feelings
are  not  justified  by  any  one,  and  it  is  useless  to  denounce  them.
In  the  case  of  international  hatred,  however,  the  bad  feeling  is
usually  associated  with  false  opinions  and  erroneous  reasoning,
and  is  indeed  often  created  by  them.  To  struggle  against  this
deception  is  the  first  duty  of  every  man  who  truly  desires  to  bring
humanity  nearer  to  a  good  peace.

As  to  the  future  decisive  struggle  between  Europe  and  Asia,
probable  as  it  is,  it  does  not  threaten  us  as  an  unavoidable  impend¬
ing  doom.  The  future  is  still  in  our  hands.  The  first  condition
which  could  render  the  peaceful  inclusion  of  the  Mongolian  race
within  the  circle  of  Christian  culture  possible — though  not  very
probable — is  that  the  Christian  nations  should  themselves  become
more  Christian,  and  that  in  all  relations  of  the  collective  life  they
should  be  more  guided  by  moral  principles  than  by  shameful  selfish¬
ness  and  evil  economic  and  religious  hostility.

Not  long  ago  at  the  world  congress  of  religion  in  Chicago
some  Asiatic  men  —  Buddhists  and  Brahmanists — addressed  the
Europeans  with  the  following  words,  expressive  of  the  popular
opinion  of  the  East:  “You  send  to  us  missionaries  to  preach
your  religion.  We  do  not  deny  its  merits,  but  having  got  to
know  you  during  the  last  two  centuries  we  see  that  your  whole
life  is  opposed  to  the  demands  of  your  faith.  You  are  moved,  not
by  the  spirit  of  love  and  truth  which  your  God  revealed  to  you,
but  by  the  spirit  of  greed  and  violence,  natural  to  all  bad  people.
It  must  then  be  one  of  two  things  :  either  your  religion,  in  spite
of  its  inner  excellence,  cannot  be  practically  realised,  and  therefore
is  of  no  use  even  to  you  who  profess  it ;  or  you  are  so  bad  that
you  do  not  want  to  fulfil  the  demands  which  you  can  and  you
ought  to  fulfil.  In  either  case  you  have  no  advantage  over  us
and  you  should  leave  us  in  peace.”  The  only  convincing  answer
to  this  criticism  are  deeds  and  not  words.  Asia  would  be  neither
justified  in  fighting  nor  capable  of  conquering  a  Europe  that  was
inwardly  united  and  truly  Christian.


4o8  the  justification  of  the  good

War  has  been  the  direct  means  of  the  external  and  the  indirect
means  of  the  inward  unification  of  humanity.  Reason  forbids  us
to  give  up  this  weapon  so  long  as  it  is  needed,  but  conscience
compels  us  to  strive  that  it  should  be  needed  no  longer ,  and  that
the  natural  organisation  of  the  human  race  divided  into  hostile
parts  should  really  become  a  moral  or  spiritual  organisation.
Such  an  organisation  has  its  source  in  the  nature  of  man,  is  in¬
wardly  based  upon  the  absolute  good,  and  attains  complete
realisation  through  means  of  the  world  history.  The  description
of  this  moral  organisation,  or  of  the  totality  of  the  moral  condi¬
tions  which  justify  the  good  in  the  world,  must  be  the  coping-
stone  of  moral  philosophy.


CHAPTER  X

THE  MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  AS  A  WHOLE

I

The  natural  organisation  of  humanity  consists  in  the  fact  that
different  individuals  and  groups  are  compelled  by  nature  to  inter¬
act  in  such  a  way  that  their  private  needs  and  activities  lead  to
results  of  universal  significance  and  to  comparative  progress  of  the
whole.  Thus  from  ancient  times  the  needs  of  the  shepherds  and
the  agriculturists,  the  warlike  spirit  of  the  chieftains,  and  the  self-
interested  enterprise  of  the  merchants  created  material  culture
and  were  the  means  of  historical  progress.  This  natural  arrange¬
ment,  owing  to  which  private  interests  lead  to  the  common  good,
expresses  a  certain  real  unity  of  the  human  race.  But  this  unity
is  both  inwardly  and  outwardly  imperfect.  It  is  outwardly  im¬
perfect  because,  as  a  fact,  it  is  incomplete  ;  it  is  imperfect  in¬
wardly  because  it  is  not  the  object  of  the  conscious  will  of  the
individuals  and  the  groups  which  enter  into  it.  Such  unconscious
and  involuntary  solidarity  is  already  found  in  the  pre-human
world  in  the  unity  of  the  genus  and  the  development  of  organic
•species.  To  advance  no  further  is  unworthy  of  man  in  whom
the  objective  and  generic  reason  —  the  universal  predicate  of
nature — becomes  the  individual  subject.  What  is  needed  is  a
moral,  conscious,  and  voluntary  organisation  of  humanity  for  the
sake  of,  and  inspired  by,  the  all-embracing  good.  It  became  the
direct  object  and  purpose  of  life  and  thought  from  the  moment
when,  in  the  middle  of  the  historical  development,  this  good  was
revealed  as  absolute  and  complete.  Unity  in  the  good  means
not  only  a  coexistence  of  private  interests  and  actions  and  a
harmony  between  them  in  the  general  result,  but  a  direct  co-

409


4Ю  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

fellowship  of  individuals  and  of  social  groups  in  unanimous  striving
to  attain  a  universal  purpose — it  means  that  absolute  perfection
is  taken  and  understood  by  each  as  his  own  purpose.

The  purpose  of  the  moral  organisation  of  human  life  is  to
realise  the  absolute  norm  of  the  good  or  of  the  active  (practical)
perfection,  and  the  life  as  morally  organised  may  be  defined  as
the  process  of  growing  perfect.  This  logically  involves  the
question,  TVho  is  growing  perfect  ?  i.e.  the  question  as  to  the
subject  of  the  moral  organisation.  We  know  that  isolated  in¬
dividuals  do  not  exist  and  therefore  do  not  grow  in  perfection.
The  true  subject  of  the  moral  progress  —  as  well  as  of  the
historical  progress  in  general — is  the  individual  man  together  with
and  inseparably  from  the  collective  man  or  society.  Not  every
configuration  of  molecules  forms  a  living  cell,  and  not  every  con¬
glomeration  of  cells  forms  a  living  being.  Similarly  not  every
gathering  of  individual  men  or  of  social  groups  constitutes  a  true
and  living  bearer  of  the  moral  organisation.  In  order  to  possess
such  a  significance,  i.e.  in  order  to  be  an  organic  complement  of
the  moral  personality,  the  collective  whole  must  be  no  less  real
than  the  individual,  and,  in  this  sense,  must  possess  the  same
worth  and  the  same  rights  as  the  latter.

The  natural  groups  which  actually  widen  the  life  of  the
individual  are  the  family,  the  nation,  and  humanity — the  three
abiding  stages  in  the  development  of  the  collective  man.  Corre¬
sponding  to  them  we  have  in  the  historical  order  the  kinship-group
stage,  the  nationally-political  stage,  and  the  spiritually  universal
stage.  The  latter  may  only  be  revealed  on  condition  that  the
first  two  become  spiritualised.

It  will  be  asked  whether  the  family  is  to  form  part  of  the
final  and  universal  organisation  of  morality  or  whether  it  is
simply  a  transitory  limitation  in  the  development  of  human  life.
But  the  individual  person  in  his  given  condition  and  in  his  selfish
striving  for  exclusive  separateness  is  also  only  a  transitory  stage,
just  like  the  nation  or  even  humanity  itself.  It  is  not  a  question  of
idealising  and  preserving  for  all  eternity  the  corruptible  aspect  of
this  or  that  living  subject,  but  of  discovering  and  setting  aglow
the  spark  of  divinity  hidden  under  the  corruption,  of  finding  the
absolute  and  eternal  significance  inherent  in  the  conditional  and
the  temporal,  and  of  affirming  it  not  as  a  fixed  idea  only,  but


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  41 1

as  the  beginning  of  fulfilment,  as  a  token  of  perfection.  The
positive  elements  of  life  in  their  relative  and  temporary  manifesta¬
tions  must  be  understood  and  recognised  as  conditional  data  for  the
solution  of  an  unconditional  problem.  In  the  case  of  the  family  these
natural  data  are  the  three  generations  successively  connected  by
the  fact  of  birth  :  grandparents,  parents,  and  grandchildren.
The  continuous  and  the  relative  character  of  the  bond  does  not
abolish  its  triple  character  as  an  abiding  norm.  The  members  of
the  series  which  extend  beyond  it  on  either  side — great-grand¬
parents  and  great  -  grandchildren  —  constitute  no  independent
element  in  the  idea  of  the  family  relation.  The  supreme  task
is  to  spiritualise  the  relative  natural  connection  of  the  three
generations  and  to  make  it  unconditionally  moral.  This  purpose
is  achieved  in  three' ways  —  through  family  religion,  marriage,
and  the  bringing  up  of  children.


II

Family  religion  is  the  most  ancient,  deeply  rooted,  and  stable
institution  of  humanity.  It  has  survived  the  patriarchal  stage
and  all  the  religious  and  political  changes.  The  object  of  family
religion  is  the  older  generation,  the  departed  fathers  or  forefathers.
According  to  the  most  ancient  ideas,  the  forefathers  must
necessarily  be  dead  ;  this  was  so  inevitable  that,  by  a  natural  pro¬
cess  of  thought,  all  the  dead,  independently  of  their  age  and  sex,
were  called  forefathers  (the  Lithuanian  and  Polish  dziady — a  relic
of  remote  antiquity).  If  a  real  grandfather  happened  to  live  too
long,  it  was  out  of  order,  it  violated  the  religiously  moral  norm,
which,  however,  was  easily  re-established  by  the  voluntary  sacrifice
of  the  old  man.  This  barbarous  practice  really  contained  a  true
idea,  or,  rather,  two  true  ideas — In  the  first  place  that  a  being
who  is  on  the  same  level  as  man  and  has  the  same  needs  and
faculties  cannot  be  the  true  object  of  reverence  and  worship,  and,
secondly,  that  in  order  to  have  a  powerful  and  beneficial  influence
in  the  earthly  sphere,  such  as  is  characteristic  of  a  higher  being,
one  must  withdraw  from  that  sphere  and  sever  one’s  immediate
physical  connection  with  it.  If  family  worship  of  the  older
generation  was  to  be  maintained  in  the  epoch  when  force  pre¬
dominated,  it  could  not  be  allowed  to  be  associated  with  the


412  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

spectacle  of  debility  and  weakness.  The  old  men  understood  it
themselves  and  with  noble  wisdom  parted  in  good  time  with  their
enfeebled  life  for  the  sake  of  another,  powerful  and  mysterious
existence.

“  My  day  is  drawing  to  its  close,”  the  Konung  thus  began,

“  Mead  does  not  taste  sweet  to  me,  my  helmet  weighs  me  down.

“  Make  then  two  mounds  for  us,  О  sons,

On  the  banks  of  the  bay,  by  the  wave-beaten  shore.

“When  the  rocks  are  white  with  the  light  of  the  moon,

And  wet  our  graves  with  the  dew,

We  shall  rise  from  the  hills,  from  the  waters,  О  Thorsten,

And  whisper  of  the  days  to  be.”

Even  in  the  heathen  ancestor-worship  the  natural  bond  between
the  successive  generations  tended  to  acquire  a  spiritual  and  moral
meaning.  A  complete  realisation  of  this  religious  bond  with  the
forefathers  is  made  possible  through  the  revelation  of  the  absolute
significance  of  life  in  Christianity.  Instead  of  the  material
sacrificial  feeding  of  the  departed  who  on  their  side  help  the  living
in  affairs  of  this  world,  there  is  established  a  spiritual  interaction
in  prayer  and  sacrament.  Both  sides  pray  for  one  another,  both
help  one  another  in  attaining  an  eternal  good.  Both  are  con¬
cerned  with  an  unconditional  good — the  salvation  of  the  soul.
Eternal  memory,1  rest  with  the  saints,  universal  resurrection  of
life — this  is  what  the  living  desire  for  the  departed ,  what  they
help  them  to  attain,  and  it  is  in  this  that  they  expect  help  from
the  departed  for  themselves.  The  mutual  relation,  as  it  enters  the
sphere  of  the  absolute,  ceases  to  be  self-interested  and  becomes
purely  moral,  being  understood  and  carried  out  as  part  of  the  per¬
fect  good.

Eternal  memory  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that  people  on  earth
will  eternally  remember  the  dead  as  those  who  have  been  and  are
no  more.  To  begin  with,  it  would  not  be  of  much  import¬
ance  for  the  dead,  and,  secondly,  it  is  impossible,  since  earthly
humanity  itself  ought  certainly  not  to  expect  an  eternal  continua¬
tion  of  its  temporal  existence — if  there  is  any  meaning  in  the
world.  We  ask  eternal  memory  of  God  and  not  of  men,  and

1  The  prayer  for  granting  ‘eternal  memory’  to  the  departed  forms  an  important  part
of  the  funeral  and  the  requiem  services  in  the  Orthodox  Church.— Translator' s  Note.


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  413

it  means  dwelling  in  the  eternal  mind  of  God.  cTo  grant
eternal  memory  ’  means  to  make  a  man  conformable  to  his
eternal  idea — to  God’s  eternal  thought  about  him,  and  to  raise
him  to  the  sphere  of  the  absolute  and  the  changeless.  By  com¬
parison  with  the  anxieties  of  the  world,  it  is  eternal  rest.
Death  as  such  is  not  rest,  and  the  dead  among  natural
humanity  may  be  more  appropriately  described  as  restless  (the
French  revenant ,  the  German  Poltergeister )  than  as  those  at
rest.  The  rest  we  ask  for  our  departed  depends  upon  God’s
eternal  memory  of  them.  Affirmed  in  their  absolute  idea,  they
find  in  it  a  secure  and  indefeasible  token  that  the  perfect  good
will  be  finally  realised  in  the  world,  and  therefore  they  cannot  be
troubled.  The  distinction  between  the  present  and  the  future
still  exists  for  them,  but  no  element  of  doubt  or  anxiety  attaches
to  that  future.  It  is  separated  from  them  only  by  an  inevitable
delay,  and  they  may  already  contemplate  it  sub  specie  aeternitatis.
But  for  those  who  die  in  the  natural  humanity,  the  future,
though  it  becomes  their  main  interest,  still  remains  an  awe-inspir¬
ing  riddle  and  mystery.

We  shall  rise  from  the  hills,  from  the  waters,  О  Thorsten,

And  whisper  of  the  days  to  be.

Eternal  rest  is  not  inactivity.  The  departed  remain  active,  but
the  character  o'f  the  activity  is  essentially  changed.  It  no  longer
springs  from  an  anxious  striving  towards  a  distant  and  uncertain
end.  It  proceeds  on  the  basis  and  in  virtue  of  the  already  attained
and  the  ever -abiding  connection  with  the  absolute  good.
Therefore  in  this  case  activity  is  compatible  with  serene  and
happy  rest.  And  just  as  the  beneficial  influence  of  the  departed
expresses  their  moral  connection  with  their  neighbours  in  nature ,
their  living  posterity,  so  in  their  blessed  rest  they  are  inseparable
from  their  neighbours  in  God  and  in  eternity.  It  is  rest  with  the
saints.

This  is  the  ideal.  If  it  is  not  attained  by  all,  if  the  de¬
parted  are  not  all  at  rest,  if  not  all  to  whom  ‘  eternal  memory  ’
is  sung  deserve  it  of  God,  this  fact  in  no  way  affects  our  religious
attitude  to  the  c  forefathers,’  which  is  the  foundation  of  the  family
morality,  and,  through  it,  of  all  morality.  For  in  the  first  place
the  actual  destiny  of  each  of  the  departed  remains  for  us,  after  all,
problematical  only.  Secondly,  even  if  the  unfavourable  supposi-


4i4  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

tion  is  the ’more  probable  one,  our  religious  attitude  simply
acquires  a  different  character,  and  the  feeling  of  pity  which  comes
to  be  added  to  it  prompts  us  to  more  active  intercession.  Finally,
in  the  case  of  each  person  the  majority,  or  at  any  rate  a  certain
number,  of  his  ancestors  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  ‘  eternal
memory  ’  and  of  £  rest  with  the  saints.’  Therefore  every  man  in
addition  to  all  other  relations  is  bound  to  have  a  generic  bond,  a
bond  of  kinship  with  the  world  of  God’s  eternity.  In  this
essential  respect  the  family  may  have  an  absolute  significance  for
every  one,  and,  through  the  abiding  past,  be  the  true  complement
of  our  moral  personality.

On  the  other  hand,  the  fulness  of  life  for  the  forefathers,  even
when  they  are  eternally  remembered  by  God  and  are  at  rest  with
the  saints,  depends  upon  the  work  of  their  descendants  who  bring
about  the  earthly  conditions  under  which  the  end  of  the  world
process  may  come,  and,  with  it,  the  bodily  resurrection  of  the
departed.  Each  of  the  departed  is  naturally  connected  with  the
final  humanity  of  the  future  through  the  blood  tie  of  successive
generations.1  By  spiritualising  his  bodily  organism  and  the
external  material  nature,  each  fulfils  his  duty  in  relation  to  his
forefathers,  and  pays  his  moral  debt  to  them.  Having  received
from  them  physical  existence  and  all  the  legacy  of  the  past  ages,
the  new  generation  continues  further  the  work  which  will  finally
make  the  fulness  of  life  possible  for  the  departed  also.  Thus
from  this  new  point  of  view,  the  natural  bond  with  former  genera¬
tions,  or  the  family  religion  of  the  past,  acquires  an  absolute
significance  and  becomes  an  expression  of  the  perfect  good.

It  is  only  when  the  purpose  shall  have  been  reached  that  man’s
work  of  spiritualising  his  body  and  the  earthly  nature  in  general
will  be  reflected  backwards  and  exercise  its  beneficial  influence
upon  the  past.  It  is  only  in  the  future  that  the  past  will  attain
the  fulness  of  reality.  But  until  this  task  is  accomplished,  until
the  perfection  of  life  is  attained  in  which  the  spiritual  and  the
corporeal  being  will  entirely  interpenetrate  one  another,  until  the
gulf  between  the  visible  and  the  invisible  world  is  bridged  and

1  I  cannot  enlarge  upon  the  details  of  this  connection  and  upon  other  cognate
questions  without  passing  into  the  sphere  of  metaphysics  and  mystical  aesthetics.  But
the  general  necessity  of  resurrection  as  the  fulness  of  the  spiritual  and  bodily  existence
is  sufficiently  clear  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  absolute  moral  principle  and  of  the
moral  order  of  reality.


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  415

death  becomes  impossible  both  for  the  living  and  for  the  dead —
until  then  the  necessary  condition  of  this  future  perfection  and
the  moral  problem  of  the  present  state  is  the  struggle  of  the  spirit
with  the  flesh,  its  strengthening  and  concentration.  The  present
means  of  bodily  resurrection  is  the  subjugation  of  the  flesh  ;  the
necessary  condition  of  the  fulness  of  life  is  asceticism  or  the  sup¬
pression  of  the  unlimited  vitality.  True  asceticism,  i.e.  spiritual
power  over  the  flesh  leading  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  has  two
forms — monasticism  and  marriage.  The  first,  exclusive  and  ex¬
ceptional,  has  already  been  discussed  elsewhere  ; 1  the  explanation
of  the  second  forms  part  of  the  argument  now  before  us.

Ill

It  is  not  for  nothing  that  the  relation,  which  appears  to  be  so
simple,  and  the  physical  basis  of  which  is  found  in  the  animal  and
even  in  the  vegetable  kingdom,  is  called  c  a  great  mystery,’  and  is
recognised  as  the  abiding  symbol,  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God,
of  the  union  of  the  God  of  Israel  with  His  people,  of  Christ
crucified  with  the  earthly  church,  and  of  Christ  the  King  of
Glory  with  the  New  Jerusalem.  Reverence  for  the  forefathers
and  religious  interaction  with  them  connects  man  with  the  perfect
good  through  the  past ;  true  marriage  has  the  same  significance
for  the  present,  for  the  central  period  of  life.  It  is  the  realisation
of  the  absolute  moral  norm  in  the  vital  centre  of  human  existence.
The  opposition  of  the  sexes,  which  in  the  world  of  pre-human
organisms  expresses  simply  a  general  interaction  between  life  as
giving,  and  as  receiving,  form,  between  the  active  and  the  passive
principles,  acquires  a  more  definite  and  profound  meaning  in  the
case  of  man.  Woman,  unlike  the  female  of  animals,  is  not  merely
the  embodiment  of  the  passively  receptive  aspect  of  the  material
reality.  She  is  the  concentrated  substance  of  nature  as  a  whole,
the  final  expression  of  the  material  world  in  its  inward  passivity,
as  ready  to  pass  into  a  new  and  higher  kingdom  and  be  morally
spiritualised.  And  man  in  his  relation  to  woman  does  not  merely
represent  the  active  principle  as  such,  but  is  the  bearer  of  the
purely  human  activity,  determined  by  the  absolute  meaning  of
life,  in  which  woman  comes  to  participate  through  him.  And
1  See  above,  Part  I.  Chapter  II.,  ‘The  Ascetic  Principle  of  Morality.’


4i6  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

he  in  his  turn  owes  to  her  the  possibility  of  realising  that  meaning
or  the  absolute  good  in  a  direct  and  immediate  way.

The  highest  morality,  proceeding  from  the  absolute  principle
and  determined  by  it  (that  which  in  theology  is  called  grace))  does
not  annihilate  nature  but  imparts  true  perfection  to  it.  The
natural  relation  between  man  and  woman  involves  three  elements  .
(i)  the  material ,  namely,  the  physical  attraction,  due  to  the  nature
of  the  organism  ;  (2)  the  ideal. ,  that  exaltation  of  feeling  which  is
called  being  in  love  ;  and,  finally,  (3)  the  purpose  of  the  natuial
sexual  relation  or  its  final  result,  namely,  reproduction.

In  true  marriage  the  natural  bond  between  the  sexes  does  not
disappear  but  is  transmuted.  Until,  however,  this  transmutation
becomes  a  fact,  it  is  a  moral  problem,  for  which  the  elements  of
the  natural  sexual  relation  are  the  data.  The  chief  significance
belongs  to  the  intermediate  element  —  the  exaltation  or  the
ecstasy  of  love.  In  virtue  of  it  man  sees  his  natural  com¬
plement,  his  material  other — the  woman, — not  as  she  appears
to  external  observation,  not  as  others  see  her,  but  gains  insight
into  her  true  essence  or  idea.  He  sees  her  as  she  was  from  the
first  destined  to  be,  as  God  saw  her  from  all  eternity,  and  as  she
shall  be  in  the  end.  Material  nature  in  its  highest  individual
expression — the  woman — is  here  truly  recognised  as  possessed  of
absolute  worth  ;  she  is  affirmed  as  an  end  in  herself,  an  entity
capable  of  spiritualisation  and  ‘deification.’  From  such  re¬
cognition  follows  the  moral  duty  —  so  to  act  as  to  realise  in
this  actual  woman  and  in  her  life  that  which  she  ought  to
be.  The  highest  form  of  love  in  woman  has  a  corresponding
character.  The  man  whom  she  has  chosen  appears  to  her  as  her
true  saviour,  destined  to  reveal  to  her  and  to  realise  for  her  the
meaning  of  her  life.

Marriage  remains  the  satisfaction  of  the  sexual  want,  which,
however,  no  longer  refers  to  the  external  nature  of  the  animal
organism,  but  to  the  nature  that  is  human  and  is  awaiting  to
become  divine.  A  tremendous  problem  arises  which  can  only  be
solved  by  constant  renunciation.  To  be  victorious  in  the  struggle
with  the  hostile  reality  the  soul  has  to  pass  through  martyrdom?


1  D.  P.  Yurkevitch,  Professor  of  Philosophy,  now  deceased,  told  me  that  a  young
scholar,  son  of  an  evangelical  pastor  in  Moscow,  was  present  once  at  the  marriage
ceremony  in  the  Russian  Church,  and  was  very  much  struck  by  the  fact  that  in  the


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  417

From  this  point  of  view  the  complete  and  real  satisfaction  which
includes  bodily  sensibility  is  connected  not  with  desire  that  precedes
it,  but  with  the  subsequent  joy  of  realised  perfection.

It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  in  a  perfect  marriage  in  which
the  inner  completeness  of  the  human  being  is  finally  attained
through  a  perfect  union  with  the  spiritualised  material  essence,
reproduction  becomes  both  unnecessary  and  impossible.  It
becomes  unnecessary  because  the  supreme  purpose  has  been
achieved,  the  final  goal  attained.  It  becomes  impossible,  just  as
it  is  impossible  that  when  two  equal  geometrical  figures  are  placed
one  upon  the  other  there  should  be  a  remainder  that  does  not
coincide.  The  perfect  marriage  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  pro¬
cess  which  does  not  reproduce  life  in  time  but  re-creates  it  for
eternity.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  perfect  marriage  is  not
necessarily  the  original  condition  of,  but  only  the  final  means  for,
the  moral  union  of  man  and  woman.  One  cannot  assume  this
higher  stage  from  the  first,  just  as  one  cannot  begin  to  build  a
house  by  making  a  roof,  or  call  the  roof  a  real  house.  The  true
human  marriage  is  one  which  consciously  aims  at  the  perfect
union  of  man  and  woman,  at  the  creation  of  the  complete  human
being.  So  long,  however,  as  it  merely  aims  at  this  and  has  not
yet  actually  realised  the  idea,  so  long  as  there  still  is  a  duality
between  the  idea  and  the  empirical  material  reality  opposed  to  it,
so  long  external,  physical  reproduction  is  both  the  natural  conse¬
quence  of  the  perfection  not  yet  attained  and  the  necessary  means  for  its
future  attainment.  It  is  clear  that  so  long  as  the  union  of  man
and  woman  is  not  wholly  spiritualised,  so  long  as  it  is  complete  in
idea  and  subjective  feeling  only,  and  in  objective  reality  continues
to  be  superficial  and  external  like  that  of  animals,  it  can  have  no
other  result.  But  it  is  equally  clear  that  in  the  present  imperfect
condition  this  result  is  of  supreme  importance,  for  the  children  will
do  what  the  parents  failed  to  accomplish.  The  external,  temporal
succession  of  generations  exists  because  marriage  has  not  yet


service  the  bridal  crowns  are  compared  to  crowns  of  the  martyrs.  This  profound  idea
affected  him  so  deeply  that  it  caused  a  complete  revolution  in  his  mind.  As  a  result
of  it,  the  young  philologist  gave  up  worldly  learning  and  the  university  chair  he  was
going  to  occupy,  and,  to  the  distress  of  his  relatives,  went  into  a  monastery.  He  was
the  well-known  Father  Clement  Sederholm,  of  whose  life  and  character  the  late  K.  N.
Leontyev  wrote  so  excellent  an  account.


4i8  the  justification  of  the  good

attained  perfection,  because  the  union  of  individual  man  and
woman  is  not  sufficiently  spiritual  and  inwardly  complete  to  re¬
create  in  them  the  perfect  human  being  in  the  image  and  likeness
of  God.  But  this  ‘  because ’  also  proves  to  be  4n  order  that ’ — namely,
in  order  that  the  task  which  has  been  too  great  for  the  strength
of  this  individual  being  (man  and  woman)  should  be  realised  by
him  indirectly,  through  a  series  of  future  generations  taking  their
start  from  him.  Thus  the  inward  completeness  and  the  uncon¬
ditional  meaning  of  family  is  re-established  ;  man  even  in  his
imperfect  state  retains  his  absolute  significance,  and  the  living
bond  between  the  temporal  members  of  the  series,  extending  to
eternity,  remains  unbroken.

For  the  moral  organisation  of  humanity  the  connection  with
the  past  through  heredity  alone,  through  the  fact  of  descent,  i.e.
from  a  particular  line  of  ancestors,  is  insufficient ;  there  must
also  be  an  abiding  moral  bond,  and  this  is  found  in  the  family
religion.  Further,  so  far  as  the  present  is  concerned,  the  natural
fact  of  the  sexual  relation  is  also  insufficient  for  that  organisation  ;
the  relation  must  be  raised  to  the  spiritual  level,  which  is  done  in
true  marriage.  Finally,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  future,  it
is  not  enough  for  the  moral  organisation  of  the  collective  man
that  the  children  should  be  simply  a  new  generation,  with  an
unknown  future  before  it  ;  in  addition  to  the  fact  of  external
succession  there  must  be  the  inner  moral  succession  as  well — the
parents  must  not  merely  produce  the  children  for  the  future,  but
are  in  duty  bound  to  bring  them  up  so  that  they  could  work  in
the  future  for  the  realisation  of  their  world-wide  historical  task.


IV

The  natural  moral  feeling  of  pity  which  does  not  permit  us  to
injure  our  neighbours  and  compels  us  to  help  them  is  naturally
concentrated  upon  those  of  them  who  are  most  intimately  related
to  us  and  at  the  same  time  need  our  help  most  —  that  is,  on
the  children.  This  relation  has  a  moral  character  when  the
family  is  simply  an  empirical  factor  in  the  natural  life  of  man  ;  it
acquires  an  absolute  significance  when  the  family  becomes  the
basis  of  a  new,  spiritually-organised  life.

The  moral  significance  of  marriage  consists  in  the  fact  that


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  419

woman  ceases  to  be  the  instrument  of  natural  desires  but  is  recog¬
nised  as  a  being  possessed  of  absolute  worth,  as  a  complement
necessary  to  make  the  individual  man  truly  whole.  When  the
marriage  fails  or  does  not  completely  succeed  in  realising  this
absolute  significance  of  human  individuality,  the  task  acquires  a
different  object  and  is  transferred  to  the  children  as  bearers  of  the
future.  With  the  simple  natural  pity  for  the  weak  and  suffering
offspring  comes  to  be  associated  the  world-woe  for  the  evils  and
troubles  of  life,  the  hope  that  these  new  beings  shall  be  able  to
lighten  the  universal  burden,  and,  finally,  the  duty  to  preserve
them  for  this  work  and  to  prepare  them  for  it.

In  a  spiritually-organised  family  the  relation  of  the  parents  to
children  is  chiefly  determined  by  the  conception  of  the  supreme
destiny  of  man.  The  purpose  of  education  is  to  connect  the
temporal  life  of  this  future  generation  with  the  supreme  and  eternal
good  which  is  common  to  all  generations,  and  in  which  the  grand¬
parents,  parents,  and  children  are  indivisibly  one.  For  it  is  only
through  abolishing  the  temporal  disruption  of  humanity  into
generations  that  exclude  and  expel  one  another  from  existence
that  the  Kingdom  of  God  can  be  revealed  and  the  resurrection  of  life
accomplished.  But  until  the  perfection  is  reached,  the  moral  bond
between  generations  and  the  absolute  supertemporal  unity  of  man
is  maintained  by  reverent  regard  for  the  forefathers  on  the  one
hand,  and  by  the  bringing  up  of  children  on  the  other.

There  is  a  great  argument  going  on  in  man  between  Time  and
Eternity  as  to  who  is  the  stronger — the  Good  or  Death.  “Your
fathers,”  says  the  Prince  of  this  world  to  man,  “those  through
whom  you  have  received  everything  you  possess,  were  and  are  no
more,  nor  ever  shall  be;  but, if  so,  where  is  the  Good?  You  are  recon¬
ciled  to  the  death  of  your  fathers,  you  sanction  it  by  your  consent,
you  live  and  enjoy  yourself^  whilst  those  to  whom  you  owe  your  existence
are  gone  forever .  Where,  then,  is  the  good,  where  is  the  very  source
of  piety — gratitude,  where  is  pity,  where  is  shame  ?  Have  they  not
been  completely  conquered  by  selfishness,  self-seeking,  sensuality  ?
Yet  do  not  despair.  This  condemnation  of  your  life  has  meaning
only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Good,  only  on  the  supposition
that  the  Good  exists.  But  this  is  just  where  the  fundamental  error
lies  :  there  is  no  Good.  If  there  were,  either  your  fathers  would
not  have  died,  or  you  could  not  have  been  reconciled  to  their  death.


420  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

And  now  it  is  clear  that  the  Good,  with  its  fictitious  demands  and
standards  of  piety,  shame,  and  pity,  is  but  an  empty  claim.  If  you
want  to  live,  live  forgetful  of  the  Good,  for  it  has  been  swallowed
up  by  death,  is  no  more  and  never  shall  be.”  “  Your  fathers  died,
but  they  have  not  ceased  to  exist,  for  the  keys  of  life  are  in  my
hands,”  says  Eternity.  “  Believe  not  that  they  disappeared.  That
you  might  behold  them  again  bind  yourself  to  the  unseen  by  the
secure  bond  of  the  Good  :  revere  them,  pity  them,  be  ashamed  to
forget  them.”  “  Illusion  !  ”  says  the  Prince  of  Time  again.  “You
may  believe  in  their  hidden  subjective  existence  if  you  like  ;  but
if  you  are  not  content  with  such  a  counterfeit  of  life  for  yourself,
and  cling  to  the  fulness  of  the  visible  objective  life,  then,  if  the
Good  exists,  you  must  demand  the  same  for  your  fathers.  But  the
visible  objective  existence — the  only  one  worth  speaking  about —
has  been  lost  by  your  fathers,  and  shall  never  more  be  returned  to
them.  Renounce,  then,  the  impotent  Good,  the  exhausting  struggle
with  chimeras,  and  enjoy  life  to  the  full.”  But  the  last  word  is
with  Eternity,  which,  admitting  the  past,  appeals  all  the  more  con¬
fidently  to  the  future.  “The  Good  does  not  depend  upon  the
degree  of  your  power,  and  your  weakness  is  not  the  impotence  of
the  Good.  And  you  yourself  are  only  impotent  when  you  do  not
go  beyond  your  own  self ;  the  incompleteness  of  your  life  is  your
own  doing.  In  truth  all  is  open  to  you.  Live  in  all  things,  be
a  unity  of  yourself  and  your  other,  not  only  in  relation  to  the  past,
to  your  forefathers,  but  also  in  relation  to  the  future.  Affirm  your¬
self  in  new  generations  that  with  active  help  from  you  they  might
bring  the  world  to  that  final  stage  in  which  God  will  give  back  the
fulness  of  life  to  all — to  them  themselves,  to  you,  and  to  your  fathers
before  you.  By  doing  this  you  can  at  the  present  moment  show
the  absolute  power  of  the  Good  over  time  and  death,  not  by  idly
denying  them,  but  by  making  use  of  them  for  the  full  and  perfect
revelation  of  the  immortal  life.  Make  use  of  the  death  of  your
forefathers,  so  as  to  preserve,  in  the  religious  regard  for  the  departed,
a  sure  token  of  their  resurrection.  Make  use  of  your  temporal
existence,  so  that,  by  giving  it  to  posterity,  by  transferring  the
centre  of  your  moral  gravity  into  the  future,  you  might  anticipate
and  bring  nearer  the  final  revelation  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  in
the  world.”


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY


421


V

Even  the  conventional  everyday  morality  demands  that  man
should  hand  down  to  his  children  not  only  the  goods  he  has
acquired,  but  also  the  capacity  to  work  for  the  further  maintenance
of  their  lives.  The  supreme  and  unconditional  morality  also
requires  that  the  present  generation  should  leave  a  twofold  legacy
to  the  next, — in  the  first  place,  all  the  positive  acquisitions  of  the
past,  all  the  savings  of  history  ;  and,  secondly,  the  capacity  and  the
readiness  to  use  this  capital  for  the  common  good,  for  a  nearer
approach  to  the  supreme  goal.  This  is  the  essential  purpose  of
true  education,  which  must  be  at  once  both  traditional  and  pro¬
gressive.  The  division  and  opposition  between  these  two  factors
of  the  true  life — between  the  ground  and  that  which  is  built  upon
it,  between  the  root  and  that  which  grows  out  of  it — is  absurd  and
detrimental  to  both  sides.  If  the  past  that  is  good  is  self-contained
and  is  no  longer  a  real  foundation  for  the  new  that  is  better,  it
means  that  the  old  has  lost  its  vital  force.  In  regarding  it  as
finished  and  worshipping  it  in  this  form  as  an  external  object,  we
make  religion  into  a  relic — dead,  but  not  working  miracles.  This
is  the  besetting  sin  of  popular  conservatism  which  strives  to  replace
the  living  fruits  of  the  spirit  by  artificial  preserves.  In  so  far  as  it
finds  expression  in  religion,  this  pseudo-conservatism  produces  men
who  are  hostile  and  indifferent  to  religion.  Faith  cannot  be  the
consequence  of  such  bringing  up,  since  it  is  absent  from  the  ground
of  it.  It  is  obvious,  indeed,  that  exclusive  zeal  for  preserving  faith
can  only  be  due  to  the  lack  of  faith  in  the  zealots  themselves.
They  would  have  neither  time  nor  occasion  to  be  so  distressed  and
worried  about  faith  if  they  lived  by  faith.

When  tradition  is  put  in  the  place  of  its  object — when,  e.g.,  the
traditional  conception  of  Christ  is  preserved  in  absolute  purity,  but
the  presence  of  Christ  Himself  and  of  His  spirit  is  not  felt — religious
life  becomes  impossible,  and  all  efforts  artificially  to  evoke  it  only
make  the  fatal  loss  more  clear.

But  can  the  life  of  the  future  grow  out  of  a  past  that  is
really  dead  ?  If  there  is  no  real  connection  between  the  parts
of  time,  what  is  the  meaning  of  progress  ?  Who  is  it  that
progresses  ?  Could  a  tree  actually  grow  if  its  roots  and
trunk  existed  in  thought  only,  and  its  branches  and  leaves  alone


422  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

were  actually  real?  Without  dwelling  at  present  upon  the
logical  absurdity  involved  in  this  point  of  view,  let  us  deal  with  its
ethical  aspect  alone.  Man  as  a  moral  being  has  absolute  worth  ;
his  present  condition,  taken  as  such,  does  not  correspond,  or  is
inadequate  to  that  worth.  Hence  arises  the  moral  problem,  not  to
separate  oneself,  one’s  own  personality  and  existence,  from  the
absolute  good  which  abides  as  the  one  in  all.  In  so  far  as  a  moral
being  is  inwardly  related  to  all,  he  really  has  absolute  worth  and
his  dignity  is  satisfied.  In  the  order  of  time  the  all  from  which
we  must  not  separate  ourselves,  and  to  which  we  must  be  inwardly
united,  appears  in  two  immediate  ways,  as  our  past  and  as  our
future ,  as  ancestors  and  posterity.  In  order  to  realise  our  moral
dignity  in  time,  we  must  spiritually  become  that  which  physically
we  are  already,  namely,  a  uniting  and  intermediate  link  between
the  two.  And  to  do  so  we  must  recognise  the  abiding  reality  of
the  departed  and  the  unconditional  future  of  the  posterity.  We
must  not  regard  the  deceased  as  ended.  They  are  bearers  of  the
absolute  principle,  which  must  be  completely  realised  for  them
also.  The  departed,  the  forefathers,  living  in  the  memory  of  the
past,  have  also  a  hidden  existence  in  the  present,  which  will  become
manifest  in  the  future.  They  have  both  future  and  actuality.

It  is  on  this  basis  alone  that  true  education  is  possible.  If  we
are  indifferent  to  the  future  of  our  forefathers,  we  can  have  no
motive  for  caring  about  the  future  of  the  new  generation.  If  we
can  have  no  absolute  moral  solidarity  with  those  who  died ,  there
can  be  no  ground  for  such  solidarity  with  those  who  certainly
will  die.  In  so  far  as  education  mainly  consists  in  transferring  moral
duty  from  one  generation  to  another,  the  question  arises  what
duty  and  in  relation  to  whom  are  we  to  hand  down  to  our  successors,
if  our  own  bond  with  our  ancestors  be  severed.  It  would  be  a
mere  play  of  words  to  say  that  it  is  the  duty  to  move  humanity
forward,  for  neither  ‘forward’ nor  ‘humanity’  have  in  this  case
any  real  meaning.  ‘Forward’  must  mean  to  the  good,  but  there
can  be  no  good  if  we  start  with  evil — the  most  elementary  and
unquestionable  evil  of  ingratitude  to  the  fathers,  acquiescence  in
their  disappearance,  callous  separation  and  estrangement  from  them.
And  what  is  the  humanity  which  our  pupils  and  successors  are  to
move  forward  ?  Do  last  year’s  leaves,  scattered  by  the  wind  and
rotten  on  the  ground,  form  part,  together  with  the  new  leaves,


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  423

of  one  and  the  same  tree  ?  From  this  point  of  view  there  is  no
humanity  at  all,  and  what  exists  are  merely  separate  generations
of  men  that  replace  one  another.

If  this  external  relation,  which  is  constantly  passing  away,  is
to  be  replaced  by  the  real  and  abiding  moral  tie,  this  obviously
must  be  done  in  two  directions.  The  form  of  time,  in  itself
morally  indifferent,  cannot  really  determine  our  moral  relations.
Compromise  here  is  impossible — there  cannot  be  two  absolute
principles  of  life.  The  question  whether  we  attach  absolute  signi¬
ficance  to  the  temporal  order  of  events  or  to  the  moral  order,  that
is,  to  the  inner  bond  between  beings,  must  be  settled  finally  and
once  for  all.  If  the  first  alternative  be  adopted,  humanity,  irre¬
mediably  broken  up  in  time,  is  devoid  of  real  unity  ;  there  can  be
no  common  task  and  therefore  no  duty  to  bring  up  future  genera¬
tions  that  they  might  carry  it  on  further.  In  case  of  the  second
alternative,  however,  education  inevitably  involves  reverence  for
the  past,  of  which  it  is  the  natural  complement.  This  traditional
element  in  education  conditions  its  progressive  character,  since
moral  progress  can  only  consist  in  a  better  and  more  far-reaching  fulfil¬
ment  of  the  duties  which  follow  from  tradition.

The  absolute  worth  of  man — his  capacity  to  be  the  bearer  of
eternal  life  and  to  participate  in  the  divine  fulness  of  being —
which  we  religiously  revere  in  the  departed,  we  morally  educate
in  the  coming  generation  by  affirming  that  the  two  are  connected
by  a  bond  that  triumphs  over  time  and  death.  Special  problems,
the  technique  of  education,  belong  to  a  sphere  of  its  own  which  I
need  not  touch  upon  here.  But  if  pedagogy  is  to  be  based  upon
a  positive  universal  principle,  indisputable  from  the  moral  point  of
view  and  bestowing  absolute  worth  upon  its  aims,  it  can  find  it
only  in  the  indissoluble  bond  between  generations  which  support
one  another  in  furthering  one  common  task  —  the  task  of
preparing  for  the  revelation  of  the  kingdom  of  God  and  for  universal
resurrection.


VI

Reverence  for  the  forefathers  and  family  education  based  upon
it  overcome  the  immoral  separateness  and  re-establish  the  moral
solidarity  of  men  in  the  order  of  time  or  in  the  succession  of  existence.


424  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

It  is  a  victory  of  the  good  over  individual  selfishness — the  affirma¬
tion  of  the  personality  as  a  positive  element  in  the  family  union
which  abides  in  spite  of  time  and  death.  But  if  it  is  to  be  the
basis  of  a  moral  and,  therefore,  a  universal  organisation,  if  it  is  to
be  the  incipient  form  of  the  absolute  and  therefore  all-embracing
good,  this  union  cannot  be  self-contained,  limited,  and  exclusive.
The  family  directly  re-establishes  the  moral  wholeness  in  one
fundamental  relation — that  of  the  succession  of  generations.  This
wholeness,  however,  must  also  be  re-established  in  the  order  of
coexistence.

The  linear  infinity  of  the  family  can  only  become  morally
complete  in  another  wider  whole — just  as  a  geometrical  line
becomes  real  only  as  the  limit  of  a  surface,  which  has  the  same
relation  to  the  line  as  the  line  itself  has  to  a  point.  The
moral  point — the  single  individual — has  actual  reality  only  as
the  bearer  of  generic  succession.  The  whole  line  of  this  suc¬
cession  becomes  truly  real  only  in  connection  with  a  multitude
of  collectively  coexisting  families  which  constitute  a  nation.  We
received  all  our  physical  and  moral  possessions  from  our  fathers,
and  the  fathers  had  them  only  through  the  fatherland.  Family  tradi¬
tions  are  fractions  of  the  national  traditions  ;  the  future  of  the
family  is  inseparable  from  the  future  of  the  nation.  Therefore
reverence  for  the  fathers  necessarily  passes  into  reverence  for  the
fatherland  or  into  patriotism,  and  family  education  is  linked  with
national  education.

The  good  which  is  in  its  essence  inexhaustible  and  ungrudging
bestows  upon  every  subject  of  moral  relations,  whether  individual
or  collective,  an  inner  dignity  and  absolute  worth  of  its  own.
For  this  reason  the  moral  bond  and  the  moral  organisation  differs
essentially  from  every  other  by  the  fact  that  in  it  the  subject  of
the  lower,  or,  more  strictly,  of  the  narrower  order  in  becoming
the  subordinate  member  of  a  higher  or  a  wider  whole,  is  not
absorbed  by  it,  but  preserves  its  own  individual  peculiarity.  Indeed,
it  finds  in  this  subordination  both  the  inner  condition  and  the
external  environment  for  realising  its  highest  dignity.  Just  as
the  family  does  not  blot  out  its  individual  members,  but  gives
them,  within  a  certain  sphere,  the  fulness  of  life,  and  lives  not  by
them  only,  but  also  in  and  for  them,  so  the  nation  absorbs  neither
the  individual  nor  the  family,  but  fills  them  with  living  content


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  425

in  a  definite  national  form.  This  definite  form,  which  constitutes
the  particular  significance  or  the  positive  quality  of  a  nation,  is
to  be  found,  in  the  first  place,  in  language.  As  a  definite  ex¬
pression,  as  a  special  characteristic  of  universal  reason,  language
unites  those  who  speak  some  one  particular  language  without
separating  them,  however,  from  people  who  speak  another  language
— for  all  languages  are  but  special  qualifications  of  the  all-embracing
word ;  in  it  all  languages  are  commensurate  with  or  understandable
by  one  another.

The  multiplicity  of  languages  is  in  itself  something  as  positive
and  normal  as  the  multiplicity  of  grammatical  elements  and  forms
in  each  of  these  languages.  What  is  abnormal  is  mutual  lack  of
understanding  and  the  alienation  that  follows  therefrom.  Accord¬
ing  to  the  sacred  story  of  the  tower  of  Babel,  the  divine  punish¬
ment  for,  and  at  the  same  time  the  natural  consequence  of  seeking
external  and  godless  unity,  consists  in  the  loss  of  the  inner  unity
and  solidarity  and  in  being  unable  to  understand  one  another’s
speech  (which  is  possible  even  when  the  vocabulary  is  identical).
Had  not  the  inner  moral  unity  been  lost,  the  difference  of  languages
would  not  have  mattered  ;  one  might  have  learnt  them,  and  there
would  have  been  no  need  to  scatter  upon  the  face  of  the  earth.
The  important  point  was  not  the  creation  of  new  languages,  but
confusion  of  them.  “  Go  to,  let  us  go  down,  and  there  confound
( nabla )  their  language  (safatam\  that  they  may  not  understand  one
another’s  speech.  So  the  Lord  scattered  them  abroad  from  thence
upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth”  (Gen.  xi.  7-9).  It  is  clear  that  the
story  does  not  refer  to  the  origin  of  the  many  languages,  for  in
order  that  they  might  be  confused  they  must  have  existed  already.

The  profound  significance  of  this  remarkable  ancient  revela¬
tion  can  be  fully  understood  only  by  comparing  the  book  of
Genesis  with  the  New  Testament  book  of  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles.  “And  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come,
they  were  all  with  one  accord  in  one  place.  And  suddenly  there
came  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it
filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting.  And  there  appeared
unto  them  cloven  tongues,  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon  each  of
them.  And  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  began  to
speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  And
there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem  Jews,  devout  men,  out  of  every


426  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

nation  under  heaven.  Now  when  this  was  noised  abroad,  the  multi¬
tude  came  together,  and  were  confounded,  because  that  every  man
heard  them  speak  in  his  own  language.  And  they  were  all
amazed,  and  marvelled,  saying  one  to  another,  Behold,  are  not  all
these  which  speak  Galilaeans  ?  And  how  hear  we  every  man  in
our  own  tongue,  wherein  we  were  born  ?  Parthians,  and  Medes,
and  Elamites,  and  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  in  Judaea,
and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus,  and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pamphylia,  in
Egypt,  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Cyrene,  and  strangers
of  Rome,  Jews  and  proselytes,  Cretes  and  Arabians,  we  do  hear
them  speak  in  our  tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  God”  (Acts
ii.  i-ii).

True  unity  does  not  annul  multiplicity  but  finds  its  realisa¬
tion  in  it,  setting  it  free  from  the  limitations  of  exclusive¬
ness.  One  language  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God  means  com¬
municability  and  understanding  between  many  distinct  languages ,
which  are  divided  hut  do  not  divide.  This  is  not  the  idea  of  the
inventors  and  adherents  of  various  Volapucs  and  Esperantos,  who
consciously  or  unconsciously  imitate  the  builders  of  the  Tower  of
Babel.1

The  normal  relation  between  languages  is  at  the  same  time
the  normal  relation  between  nations  (in  Slavonic  the  two  concep¬
tions  are  expressed  by  the  same  word).  The  true  unity  of
languages  is  found  not  in  a  single  language  but  in  an  all-embracing
language,  that  is  in  an  interpenetration  of  all  languages  which
would  make  them  equally  understandable  to  all  while  the  peculiarity
of  each  would  be  preserved.  Similarly  the  true  unity  of  nations
does  not  mean  a  single  nationality,  but  an  all-embracing  nationality,
that  is,  interaction  and  solidarity  of  all  nations  for  the  sake  of
each  having  an  independent  and  full  life  of  its  own.

VII

When,  having  learnt  a  new  language,  we  understand  a
foreigner  whose  language  it  is,  when  we  not  only  understand  the
meaning  of  words  he  speaks  but  by  means  of  them  enter  into  a

1  The  inner  relation  and  contrast  between  the  confusion  of  Babel  and  the  meeting
of  the  Apostles  in  Sion,  as  the  violation  and  the  restitution  of  the  norm,  are  clearly
indicated  in  the  Church  anthems  sung  at  Pentecost.


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  427

real  communion  of  feelings,  thoughts,  and  aspirations  with  him,
we  clearly  prove  thereby  that  true  unity  of  men  is  not  limited  to
persons  belonging  to  the  same  people.  It  is  impossible  to  deny
the  fact  of  this  inter -lingual  and  international  and  therefore
universally-human  communion,  but  it  may  be  maintained  that
the  communion  is  purely  a  superficial  relation  based  upon  no  real
unity.  This  contention  is  often  urged  by  those  who  maintain
that  although  a  nation  is  a  real  whole,  humanity  is  purely  a
general  idea,  abstracted  from  the  fact  of  interaction  between
separate  nations  essentially  external  to  one  another.  Leaving  it
to  metaphysics  to  decide  to  what  extent  all  interaction  involves
an  underlying  unity  of  those  that  interact,  I  will  only  note  here
that  the  peculiarity  of  the  particular  interaction  which  obtains
between  different  nations  or  between  individuals  belonging  to
different  nations,  presupposes,  apart  from  all  metaphysics,  at  least
the  same  kind  of  real  unity  which  is  assumed  to  hold  within  each
nation  between  the  groups  and  individual  persons  who  compose  it.

What  ground  is  there  for  regarding  nationality  as  a  real
power  and  a  nation  as  a  real  unit  rather  than  a  mere  conglomera¬
tion  of  human  entities  ?  With  regard  to  the  family  the  question
is  answered  by  pointing  out  the  evident  physical  bond.  With
regard  to  the  nation  three  grounds  are  indicated.

1.  The  supposed  physical  bond ,  or  the  unity  of  descent. — This
supposition ,  however,  has  equal  and,  indeed,  far  greater  force  in
reference  to  humanity  as  a  whole  than  to  distinct  nations.  The
original  unity  of  mankind  is  a  dogma  of  three  monotheistic
religions  and  the  prevailing  opinion  of  philosophers  and  naturalists
— while  a  direct  unity  of  physical  descent  within  the  limits  of  a
nation  is,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  obvious  fiction.

2.  Language. — Identity  of  language  unites  those  who  speak
it,  but  we  know  that  difference  of  language  does  not  prevent  men
from  being  of  the  same  mind,  thinking  the  same  thoughts,  and
even  using  the  same  words.  For  such  difference  does  not  abolish
but  makes  manifest  the  one  inner  language  undoubtedly  common
to  all  men,  who  can  under  certain  conditions  understand  each
other  whatever  their  particular  tongue  may  be.  This  is  not  a
superficial  result  of  external  interaction,  for  that  which  is  here
mutually  understood  refers  not  merely  to  accidental  objects  but
embraces  the  inmost  contents  of  the  human  soul.  This  funda-


428  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

mental  and  profoundly  real  fact  expresses  the  actual  connection  and
unity  of  all  men.  Difference  of  tongue  is  the  difference  between
the  essential  forms  of  the  mental  life,  and  is  important,  since  every
such  form  represents  a  particular  quality  of  the  soul.  Yet  still
more  important  is  the  content  which  each  form  expresses  in
its  own  way  and  which  though  present  in  all  is  not  exhausted  by,
nor  is  exclusive  of,  any.  That  content  is  the  positive  and  in¬
dependent  principle  of  the  hidden  unity  and  of  the  visible  unifica¬
tion  of  all.

Language  is  the  deepest  and  most  fundamental  expression  of
character.  But  just  as  differences  of  individual  character  do  not
destroy  the  unity  of  the  nation  which  includes  all  the  different
people,  so  differences  of  national  character  cannot  destroy  the  real
unity  of  all  nations  in  humanity,  which  is  also  a  ‘character.’

3.  History. — If  national  history  is  the  basis  of  national  unity,
universal  or  world-history  is  the  basis  of  a  wider,  but  not  less
stable,  all-human  unity.  Moreover,  national  history  is  altogether
unthinkable  except  as  an  inseparable  part  of  world-history.  Try
to  think  of  Russian  history  from  the  exclusively  national  point
of  view.  Even  if  the  Scandinavian  origin  of  our  state  could
somehow  be  explained  away,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  intro¬
duction  of  Christianity  into  Russia  by  the  Greeks  at  once
brought  our  nation  into  the  sphere  of  the  supernational  life  of
the  world.  Christianity  as  such  or  in  its  content  is  an  absolute
truth  and  is  therefore  superhuman,  and  not  merely  supernational.
Even  from  the  purely  historical  point  of  view,  however,  it  cannot
be  traced  to  any  one  particular  nationality.  It  is  impossible  to
separate  the  Jewish  nucleus  from  the  Chaldean  and  Persian,
Egyptian  and  Phoenician,  Greek  and  Roman  setting.  And  yet
without  this  national  nucleus  and  this  national  setting  there
could  have  been  no  Christianity  as  positive  revelation,  and  the
foundation  for  the  world-wide  Kingdom  of  God  would  not  have
been  laid.  But  whatever  the  significance  of  the  national  elements
in  the  historical  formation  of  the  world  religion  may  be,  new
nations  such  as  Russia,  which  appeared  after  Christianity  became
established  and  accepted  it  in  its  crystallised  form  as  the  final
revelation  of  the  supreme  and  absolute  good,  cannot  look  to  them¬
selves  for  the  true  source  of  their  life.  Their  history  can  only  have
meaning  as  a  more  or  less  perfect  acquisition  of  the  given,  as


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  429

a  more  or  less  successful  preparation  for  fulfilling  the  task
Christianity  had  put  before  them.  It  is  obvious  that  during  such
a  preparatory  process  not  a  single  Christian  nation  can  or  ought
to  be  separate  from,  alien  or  hostile  to  other  nations,  for  such  a
relation  is  opposed  to  the  very  essence  of  Christianity — and  it
is  impossible  to  prepare  for  carrying  out  a  given  task  while
remaining  in  direct  opposition  to  its  inner  meaning.  Russia
definitely  confirmed  her  faith  in  Christian  universalism  when  in
the  most  glorious  and  important  epoch  of  her  new  history  she
finally  abandoned  her  national  isolation  and  showed  herself  to  be
a  living  member  of  the  international  whole.  And  it  was  not  till
then  that  the  national  strength  of  Russia  found  expression  in  what
is  still  the  most  significant  and  precious  thing  we  have — and  not
for  ourselves  only,  but  for  other  nations  as  well.  On  the  powerful
stem  of  the  state,  ‘  Europeanised  ’  by  Peter,  grew  the  beautiful
flower  of  our  pensive,  deep,  and  tender  poetry.  Russian  uni¬
versalism  —  which  resembles  cosmopolitanism  as  little  as  the
language  of  the  Apostles  resembles  Volapuc — is  connected  with
the  names  of  Peter  the  Great  and  Pushkin.  What  other  national
Russian  names  can  be  said  to  equal  these  ?

Just  as  the  individual  man  finds  the  meaning  of  his  personal
existence  through  the  family,  through  his  connection  with  his
ancestors  and  posterity,  just  as  the  family  has  an  abiding  living
content  in  the  nation  and  national  tradition,  so  the  nation  lives,
moves,  and  has  its  being  only  in  a  supernational  and  an  inter¬
national  environment.  Just  as  the  whole  series  of  successive
generations  live  in  and  through  the  individual  man,  just  as  the
whole  nation  lives  and  acts  in  and  through  the  totality  of  these
series,  so  the  whole  humanity  lives  and  works  out  its  history  in  the
totality  of  nations.

If  nation  be  a  real  fact  and  not  an  abstract  general  idea,  if  the
inward  organic  nature  of  the  bond  which  unites  nations  with  one
another  in  the  universal  history  be  a  fact  also,  humanity  as  a  whole,
too,  must  be  recognised  as  a  fact.  Real  living  organs  can  only  be
organs  of  a  real  living  organism,  and  not  of  an  abstract  idea.  The
absolute  moral  solidarity  in  the  good,  uniting  man  with  his
ancestors  and  his  descendants,  and  thus  forming  the  normal  family,
also  unites  him,  by  means  of  this  elementary  and  immediate  bond  of
liberation,  to  theworld-whole  concentrated  inhumanity.  Humanity


430  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  the  complete  collective  subject  or  ‘recipient’  of  the  perfect
good,  the  full  image  and  likeness  of  the  Deity,  the  bearer  of  the
actual  moral  order — the  Kingdom  of  God.  But,  as  has  already
been  said,  it  follows  from  the  very  nature  of  the  moral  order  or
the  moral  organisation  that  every  part  or  every  member  of
the  great  collective  man  participates  in  the  absolute  complete¬
ness  of  the  whole,  since  he  is  as  necessary  to  that  complete¬
ness  as  it  is  to  him.  The  moral  bond  is  perfectly  mutual.
Humanity  is  unthinkable  apart  from  the  nations  that  compose  it,
the  nation  is  unthinkable  apart  from  families  and  the  family  apart
from  individuals,  and,  vice  versa ,  the  individual  cannot  exist,  either
physically  or  morally,  apart  from  the  succession  of  generations,  the
moral  life  of  the  family  is  impossible  apart  from  the  nation,  and  the
life  of  the  nation  is  impossible  apart  from  humanity.  This  truism
used  to  be  readily  accepted  by  all.  Recently,  however,  for  reasons
which  the  existing  systems  of  the  philosophy  of  history  have  not  yet
been  able  to  discover,  it  has  become  customary  to  separate,  contrary
to  all  logic,  this  elementary  truth  from  its  necessary  apex,  and  to
declare  that  the  inner  dependence  of  nations  upon  humanity  is  a
fancy  and  a  chimera.  It  is  granted  that  a  bad  son  and  a  bad  father,
a  man  who  has  no  reverence  for  his  ancestors  and  does  not  care  about
the  upbringing  of  his  descendants  (whether  physical  or  spiritual),
cannot  be  a  good  patriot,  and  that  a  bad  patriot  cannot  truly  serve
the  common  good.  It  is  also  granted  that,  vice  versa ,  a  bad
patriot  cannot  be  a  good  member  of  a  family,  and  that  a  bad  member
of  a  family  cannot  be  a  really  good  man.  But  it  is  not  allowed
that  in  virtue  of  the  same  solidarity  between  the  different  degrees
of  organisation  a  man  indifferent  to  the  one  supreme  good  of  all
nations  taken  together  cannot  be  a  really  good  patriot  (and  con¬
sequently  cannot  be  a  good  member  of  a  family,  and,  finally,  cannot
be  individually  good).  And  yet  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  if  a  man  has
for  his  supreme  purpose  the  good  of  his  own  nation,  taken  separ¬
ately  and  independently  of  others,  he  in  the  first  place  deprives  the
highest  good  of  its  essential  characteristic  of  universality,  and
therefore  distorts  the  purpose  itself.  Secondly,  in  dividing  the
interest  of  one  nation  from  the  interests  of  the  others,  while  in
reality  they  are  intimately  connected,  he  distorts  the  idea  of  his
own  nation.  Thirdly,  it  follows  from  this  double  distortion  that
such  a  man  can  only  be  serving  a  distorted  nation  by  communi-


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  431

eating  to  it  a  distorted  good — that  is,  he  can  only  be  serving  evil,
and,  since  he  does  nothing  but  harm  to  his  fatherland,  he  must  be
pronounced  a  bad  patriot.

The  good  embraces  all  the  details  of  life,  but  in  itself  it  is
indivisible.  Patriotism  as  a  virtue  is  part  of  the  right  atti¬
tude  to  everything,  and  in  the  moral  order  this  part  cannot  be
separated  from  the  whole  and  opposed  to  it.  In  the  moral  organisa¬
tion  not  a  single  nation  can  prosper  at  the  expense  of  others  ;  it
cannot  positively  affirm  itself  to  the  detriment  or  the  disadvantage
of  others.  Just  as  the  positive  moral  dignity  of  a  private  person  is
known  from  the  fact  that  his  prosperity  is  truly  useful  to  all  others,
so  the  prosperity  of  a  nation  true  to  the  moral  principle  is  neces¬
sarily  connected  with  the  universal  good.  This  logical  and  moral
axiom  is  crudely  distorted  in  the  popular  sophism  that  we  must
think  of  our  own  nation  only,  because  it  is  good,  and  therefore  its
prosperity  is  a  benefit  to  every  one.  It  either  thoughtlessly  over¬
looks  or  impudently  rejects  the  obvious  truth  that  this  very  aliena¬
tion  of  one’s  own  nation  from  others,  this  exclusive  recognition  of
it  as  pre-eminently  good,  is  in  itself  evil,  and  that  nothing  but  evil
can  spring  from  this  evil  root.  It  must  be  one  or  the  other.
Either  we  must  renounce  Christianity  and  monotheism  in  general,
according  to  which  “  there  is  none  good  but  one,  that  is,  God,”
and  recognise  our  nation  as  such  to  be  the  highest  good — that  is,
put  it  in  the  place  of  God — or  we  must  admit  that  a  people
becomes  good  not  in  virtue  of  the  simple  fact  of  its  particular
nationality,  but  only  in  so  far  as  it  conforms  to  and  participates  in
the  absolute  good.  And  it  can  only  do  so  if  it  has  a  right  attitude
to  everything,  and,  in  the  first  place,  to  other  nations.  A  nation
cannot  be  really  good  so  long  as  it  feels  malice  or  hostility  against
other  nations,  and  fails  to  recognise  them  as  its  neighbours  and  to
love  them  as  itself.

The  moral  duty  of  a  true  patriot  is  then  to  serve  the  nation  in
the  good,  or  to  serve  the  true  good  of  a  nation,  inseparable  from
the  good  of  all,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  to  serve  the  nation  in
humanity ,  and  humanity  in  the  nation.  Such  a  patriot  will  discover
a  positive  aspect  in  every  foreign  race  and  people,  and  by  means
of  it  will  seek  to  relate  this  race  or  people  with  his  own  for  the
benefit  of  both.

When  we  hear  of  a  rapprochement  between  nations,  of  inter-


432  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

national  agreements,  friendships,  and  alliances,  we  must,  before
rejoicing  or  being  grieved  about  it,  know  in  what  it  is  that  the
nations  are  being  united,  in  good  or  in  evil.  The  fact  of  union
as  such  decides  nothing.  If  two  private  people  or  two  nations  are
united  by  the  hatred  of  a  third,  their  union  is  an  evil  and  a  source  of
fresh  evil.  If  they  are  united  by  mutual  interest  or  by  common  gain,
the  question  still  remains  open.  The  interest  may  be  unworthy,
the  gain  may  be  fictitious,  and  in  that  case  the  union  of  nations,
as  well  as  of  individuals,  even  if  it  is  not  a  direct  evil,  can  certainly
not  be  a  good  desirable  for  its  own  sake.  The  union  of  men  and
nations  can  be  positively  approved  only  in  so  far  as  it  furthers  the
moral  organisation  of  humanity,  or  the  organisation  of  the  absolute
good  in  it.  We  have  seen  that  the  ultimate  subject  of  this
organisation,  the  real  bearer  of  the  moral  order ,  is  the  collective
man  or  humanity,  successively  differentiated  into  its  organs  and
elements — nations,  families,  persons.  Having  determined  who  it
is  that  is  morally  organised,  we  must  decide  what  he  is  organised
in — that  is,  must  consider  the  question  as  to  the  universal  forms  of
the  moral  order.


VIII

The  right  or  the  due  relation  of  man  to  the  higher  world,  to
other  men,  and  to  the  lower  nature  is  collectively  organised  in
the  forms  of  the  Church,  the  state,  and  the  economic  society  or
the  zemstvo.

Individual  religious  feeling  finds  its  objective  development  and
realisation  in  the  universal  Church,  which  thus  may  be  said  to  be

organised  piety.

From  the  point  of  view  of  religious  morality,  man  lives  in
three  different  spheres  :  the  worldly  or  the  conditional  (this  world),
the  Divine  or  the  unconditional  (the  Kingdom  of  God),  and  the
sphere  which  is  intermediary  between  the  two,  and  binds  them
together — the  religious  sphere  in  the  strict  sense  (the  Church).

To  stop  at  a  direct  opposition  between  the  world  and  the
Deity,  between  earth  and  heaven,  is  contrary  to  sound  religious
feeling.  Even  supposing  that  we  are  genuinely  prepared  to
regard  the  universe  as  worthless  dust,  that  dust  does  not  fear
our  contempt — it  remains.  On  whom  or  what?  To  say  that  it


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  433

remains  on  the  Deity  would  obviously  be  impious.  To  declare
the  world  dust  to  be  an  illusion  of  our  imagination  would  mean
that  our  own  self,  enslaved  by  the  weary  nightmare  of  phenomena
and  powerless  before  the  phantoms  it  has  created,  is  itself  a  worth¬
less  speck  of  dust  which  has  somehow  got  into  the  eye  of  eternity
and  hopelessly  mars  its  purity  ;  and  this  second  view  would  be
still  more  impious  than  the  first.  Everything  in  the  long  run
must  be  referred  to  God,  and,  therefore,  the  more  contempt
we  have  for  the  world,  the  more  unworthy  is  our  conception  of
the  Absolute  being.  To  declare  that  the  world  is  pure  nothing
is  the  height  of  blasphemy,  since  in  that  case  all  the  evil  aspects
of  existence,  which  are  not  abolished  by  a  verbal  rejection  of  them,
must  be  directly  and  immediately  ascribed  to  God.  This  argu¬
ment  cannot  be  avoided  so  long  as  only  two  opposing  terms  are
recognised.  But  there  exists  a  third  intermediary  term,  the
historical  environment  in  and  through  which  the  worthless  dust
of  the  earth  is  converted,  by  a  skilful  system  of  fertilisation,  into
a  fruitful  ground  for  the  future  Kingdom  of  God.

Sound  religious  feeling  demands  not  that  we  should  reject  the
world  and  seek  to  abolish  it,  but  only  that  we  should  not  accept
the  world  as  an  absolutely  independent  principle  of  our  life.
Being  in  the  world  we  must  become  not  of  the  world ,  and  in  this
capacity  influence  the  world  so  that  it  too  should  cease  to  be  on
its  own  account  and  become  more  and  more  from  God.

The  essence  of  piety  at  the  highest  stage  of  universal  con¬
sciousness  consists  in  ascribing  absolute  worth  to  God  alone  and
in  valuing  all  else  only  as  related  to  Him  and  as  capable  of  having
absolute  worth  not  in  itself  and  of  itself,  but  in  and  through  God.
Everything  acquires  worth  through  the  fixing  of  its  positive  relationship
with  the  one  worthiness.

If  all  men  and  nations  were  truly  pious,  that  is,  identified
their  own  good  with  the  one  absolute  good  and  blessedness,  that
is,  God,  they  would  obviously  be  united  among  themselves.  And
being  at  one  in  God,  they  would  live  in  God’s  way  ;  their  unity
would  be  holiness.  The  present  humanity,  however,  which  is
not  brought  together  and  elevated  by  the  one  exclusive  interest
in  God,  is  following  its  own  will,  and  is  divided  between  a
multitude  of  relative  and  disconnected  interests.  The  result  is
alienation  and  disruption  ;  and  since  good  actions  cannot  spring


434  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

from  an  evil  root,  the  activity  of  divided  humanity  can  as  such
lead  to  nothing  but  sin.  Therefore  the  moral  organisation
of  humanity  cannot  begin  until  mankind  is  really  united  and  its

activity  is  consecrated.  .....

Perfect  unity  and  holiness  is  in  God,  sin  and  division  in  the
worldly  humanity,  union  and  consecration  in  the  Church  which
harmonises  and  reconciles  the  divided  and  sinful  world  with  God.
But  in  order  to  unite  and  consecrate,  the  Church  must  itself  be  one
and  /го/у,  that  is,  it  must  have  its  foundation  in  God,  independently
of  the  divided  and  sinful  men  who  are  in  need  of  union  and  consecra¬
tion,  and  therefore  cannot  obtain  it  of  themselves.  The  Church ,
then ,  is  in  its  essence  the  unity  and  holiness  of  the  Godhead ,  not,  how¬
ever,  of  the  Godhead  as  such,  but  as  abiding  and  acting  in  the  world.
It  is  the  Godhead  in  its  other ,  the  true  substance  of  God-in-man.
The  unity  and  the  holiness  of  the  Church  are  expressed  in  space
as  its  universality  or  catholicity ,  and  in  time  as  apostolic  succession.
The  meaning  of  catholicity  ( каѲ ’  6\ov  —  according  to  or  in
conformity  with  the  whole)  is  that  all  the  forms  and  activities
of  the  Church  unite  individuals  and  nations  with  the  whole  of
the  divine  humanity,  both  in  its  individual  concentiation  the
Christ,  and  in  its  comprehensive  form — the  world  of  the  incor¬
poreal  *  powers  and  the  departed  saints  living  in  God,  and  of  the
faithful  who  are  still  fighting  the  battle  here  on  earth.  In  so  far
as  everything  in  the  Church  is  catholic,  conformable  to  the  absolute
whole,  all  exclusiveness  of  racial  and  personal  characteristics  and
of  social  position  disappear  in  it.  All  divisions  or  separations  dis¬
appear,  and  all  the  differences  are  left— for  piety  requires  that  unity
in  God  should  be  understood  not  as  empty  indifference  and  bare
uniformity,  but  as  the  absolute  fulness  of  every  life.  There  is
no  division  but  there  is  difference  between  the  invisible  and  the
visible  Church,  since  the  first  is  the  hidden  moving  power  of  the
second,  and  the  second  the  growing  realisation  of  the  first.  The
two  are  one  in  essence  but  different  in  condition.  There  is  no
division  but  there  is  difference  in  the  visible  Church  between
the  many  tribes  and  nations  to  which,  in  their  unity,  the  one  spirit
speaks  in  different  tongues  of  the  one  identical  truth,  and  com¬
municates  by  different  gifts  and  callings  one  and  the  same  good.
Finally,  there  is  no  division  but  there  is  difference  between  the
Church  as  teaching  and  as  taught,  between  the  clergy  and  the


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  435

people,  between  the  mind  and  the  body  of  the  Church.  In  a
similar  manner  the  difference  between  husband  and  wife  is  not
an  obstacle  to,  but  the  basis  of,  their  perfect  union.

IX

The  catholicity  of  the  Church — the  fundamental  form  of  the
moral  organisation  of  humanity — is  the  conscious  and  intentional
unity  between  all  the  members  of  the  universal  body  in  relation
to  the  one  absolute  purpose  of  existence,  a  unity,  accompanied  by
complete  division  of  c  spiritual  labour,’  of  gifts  and  services,  by
which  that  purpose  is  expressed  and  realised.  This  moral  unity
essentially  differs  by  its  voluntary  and  conscious  character  from
the  natural  unity  of  the  organs  in  the  body  or  the  members  in
the  various  natural  groups.  It  forms  a  true  brotherhood  which
gives  to  man  positive  freedom  and  positive  equality.  The  individual
does  not  enjoy  true  freedom  when  his  social  environment  weighs
upon  him  as  external  and  alien  to  him.  Such  alienation  is  abol¬
ished  by  the  conception  of  the  universal  Church  alone,  according
to  which  each  must  find  in  the  social  whole  not  the  external
limit  but  the  inward  completion  of  his  liberty.  Man  in  any  case
stands  in  need  of  such  completion  by  his  ‘  other  ’  ;  for  in  virtue
of  his  natural  limitations  he  is  necessarily  a  dependent  being,  and
cannot  by  himself  or  alone  be  a  sufficient  ground  of  his  own
existence.  Deprive  man  of  what  he  owes  to  others,  beginning
with  his  parents  and  ending  with  the  state  and  the  world-history,
and  nothing  will  be  left  of  his  existence,  let  alone  his  freedom.
It  would  be  madness  to  deny  this  fact  of  inevitable  dependence.
Man  is  not  strong  enough  and  he  needs  help  in  order  that  his
freedom  might  be  a  real  thing  and  not  merely  a  verbal  claim.
But  the  help  which  man  obtains  from  the  world  is  accidental,
temporal,  and  partial,  whilst  the  universal  Church  promises  him
secure,  eternal  and  all-sufficient  help  from  God.  It  is  with  that
help  alone  that  he  can  be  actually  free,  that  is,  have  sufficient
power  to  satisfy  his  will.  Man  obviously  cannot  be  truly  free  so
long  as  that  which  he  does  not  want  is  inevitable,  and  that  which
is  demanded  by  his  will  is  impossible.  Every  object  of  desire,
every  good  is  only  possible  for  man  on  condition  that  he  himself
lives,  and  those  whom  he  loves  live  also.  There  is  therefore  one


436  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

fundamental  object  of  desire — the  continuation  of  life,  and  one
fundamental  object  of  aversion — death.  But  it  is  precisely  in  the
face  of  this  that  all  worldly  help  proves  to  be  of  no  avail.  The
calamity  of  calamities  —  death  —  proves  to  be  inevitable;  and
the  good  of  goods — immortality — utterly  impossible.  The  world
then  can  give  no  real  freedom  to  man.  It  is  only  God-in¬
man,  or  the  Church,  based  upon  an  inner  unity  and  a  perfect
harmony  of  the  visible  and  the  invisible  life  in  the  kingdom  of
God — the  Church  affirming  the  essential  primacy  of  spirit  and
promising  the  final  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  that  alone  discloses
to  man  the  sphere  in  which  his  freedom  can  find  positive  realisa¬
tion,  and  his  will — actual  satisfaction.  Whether  we  believe  this
or  not  does  not  depend  upon  philosophical  arguments.  But
although  the  most  perfect  philosophy  can  neither  give  faith  nor
take  it  away,  the  simplest  art  of  logical  reflection  is  sufficient  to
show  that  man  who  wants  to  live  and  is  sentenced  to  death  cannot
be  seriously  regarded  as  free,  and  from  the  standpoint  of  the
world  or  of  nature  this  no  doubt  is  the  position  of  every  man
and  of  all  mankind.  It  is  then  through  the  universal  Church
alone  that  the  individual  can  obtain  positive  freedom.  In  no
other  way  is  positive  equality  possible  for  him  either.

The  natural  dissimilarity  of  people  is  as  inevitable  as  it  is
desirable.  It  would  be  very  regrettable  if  all  men  were  spiritually
and  physically  alike,  and  in  that  case  the  multiplicity  of  men
would  have  no  meaning.  Direct  equality  between  distinct  parti¬
cular  men  is  altogether  impossible.  They  can  be  equal  not  in
themselves,  but  only  in  their  common  relationship  to  something
other,  supreme  and  universal.  Such  is  the  equality  of  all  before
the  law,  or  equal  civic  rights.  This  equality  of  rights,  important
as  it  is  in  the  order  of  worldly  existence,  remains  essentially  formal
and  negative.  The  law  fixes  certain  general  limits  to  human
activity,  equally  binding  upon  all  and  each,  but  it  does  not  form  the
content  of  any  one’s  life,  secures  to  no  one  the  essential  goods  of
life,  and  indifferently  leaves  to  some  their  helpless  nothingness,  and
to  others  the  superabundance  of  all  possible  advantages.  The  world
may  recognise  as  an  abstract  possibility  or  a  theoretical  right  the
unconditional  significance  of  each  human  being,  but  the  realisation
of  this  possibility  and  this  right  is  given  by  the  Church  alone.  It
initiates  each  into  the  wholeness  of  the  Divine  life  made  manifest


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  437

in  man,  communicates  to  each  the  absolute  content  of  life,  and  thus
equalises  all — in  the  way  similar  to  that  in  which  all  finite  magni¬
tudes  are  equal  to  one  another  in  relation  to  infinity.  If  in  Christ
“dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily”  in  the  words  of  the
Apostle,  and  Christ  lives  in  every  believer,  there  can  be  no  room
for  inequality.  Participation  in  the  absolute  content  of  life  through
the  universal  Church,  liberating  and  equalising  all  in  a  positive
way,  makes  of  them  one  absolute  whole  or  a  perfect  brotherhood.

In  so  far,  however,  as  this  brotherhood,  perfect  in  nature,
is  conditioned  in  origin,  as  established  and  matured  in  time,  it
requires  a  corresponding  expression  for  its  connection  with  God-
in-man  throughout  the  ages — it  requires  religious  succession  or
spiritual  parentage.  This  demand  is  satisfied  by  the  definition  of
the  Church  as  apostolic.


X

Since  we  live  in  time,  the  bond  of  our  dependence  upon  the
divine  principle  as  manifested  in  history  must  also  be  preserved  in
time  and  handed  down  through  it.  In  virtue  of  that  bond  our
present  spiritual  life  begins  not  of  itself  but  springs  from  the  earlier
or  older  bearers  of  the  grace  of  God.  The  one  holy  catholic  Church
is  of  necessity  an  apostolic  Church.  Apostleship  or  messengership
is  the  opposite  of  imposture.  Messengership  is  a  religious  basis  of
activity  and  imposture — an  anti-religious  one.  It  is  precisely  with
reference  to  this  point  that  Christ  indicates  the  opposition  between
Himself  and  the  antichrist.  “I  am  come  in  My  Father’s  name
and  ye  receive  Me  not ;  if  another  shall  come  in  his  own  name ,
him  ye  will  receive.”  The  primitive  basis  of  religion,  namely,  the
pious  recognition  of  one’s  dependence  upon  the  progenitor,  attains
its  perfect  expression  in  Christianity.  u  The  Father  sent  Me.”
<£  I  do  the  will  of  Him  Who  sent  me.”  The  only-begotten  Son  is
pre-eminently  a  messenger,  is  essentially  the  apostle  of  God,  and,
strictly  speaking,  the  profound  and  eternal  meaning  of  calling  the
Church  ‘apostolic’  refers  to  Him— and  the  other,  the  direct  his¬
torical  meaning,  depends  upon  that.  “As  My  Father  has  sent
Me,  even  so  send  I  you  ” — the  apostles  born  of  Christ  by  the
word  and  the  spirit  are  sent  by  Him  to  give  spiritual  birth  to  new
generations  so  that  the  eternal  bond  between  the  Father  and  the


438  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Son,  the  One  Who  sends  and  the  One  Who  is  sent,  should  be
continually  handed  down  through  time.

Filial  relationship  is  the  archetype  of  piety ,  and  the  only-begotten
Son  of  God — the  Son  by  pre-eminence — is  the  individual  embodi¬
ment  of  piety  itself.  The  Church  as  the  collective  organisation  of
piety  must  be  entirely  determined  by  Him  in  its  social  structure,
in  its  doctrine  and  holy  practices.  Christ  as  the  incarnation  of
piety  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life  of  His  Church.

The  way  of  piety  for  all  that  exists  (with  the  exception,  of
course,  of  the  First  Beginning  and  the  First  Object  of  all  piety)
consists  in  starting  not  with  oneself  or  with  what  is  lower,  but
with  the  higher,  the  senior,  the  preceding.  It  is  the  way  of
hierarchy,  of  holy  succession  and  tradition.  Therefore  whatever
external  forms  the  order  of  the  Church  government  might  assume
under  the  influence  of  historical  conditions,  the  strictly  ecclesiastical
religious  form — ordination  through  the  laying  on  of  hands — always
proceeds  in  the  hierarchical  order,  from  above  downwards.  Lay¬
men  may  not  ordain  their  spiritual  fathers,  and  indeed  the  clergy
themselves  must  necessarily  be  arranged  in  order  of  degrees  so
that  those  of  the  highest  degree — the  bishops — alone  represent  the
active  principle  itself,  and  transfer  the  grace  of  consecration  to  the
two  other  orders.

The  truth  of  the  Church  depends  upon  the  same  piety,  though
in  another  way,  or  in  another,  theoretic  respect.  The  truth  of  the
Church,  revealing  to  us  the  mind  of  Christ,  is  neither  scientific
nor  philosophical,  nor  even  theological — it  contains  nothing  but
dogmas  of  piety.  This  fact  is  the  key  to  the  understanding  of
Christian  dogmatism,  and  of  the  Councils  that  were  engaged  in
formulating  it.  With  regard  to  religious  teaching  the  interest
of  piety  is  obviously  concerned  with  the  fact  that  our  conceptions
of  the  Deity  should  not  in  any  way  detract  from  the  fulness  of  our
religious  attitude  to  it,  given  once  for  all  in  Christ  as  the  Son  of
God  and  the  Son  of  Man.  All  ‘  heresies  ’  from  which  the  Church
protected  itself  by  its  dogmatic  definitions  denied,  in  one  way  or
another,  this  religious  fulness  or  the  entirety  and  completeness  of
our  adoption  by  God  through  the  perfect  God-man.  Some  re¬
garded  Christ  as  a  half-god,  others  as  a  half-man  ;  some  put
a  kind  of  double  personality  in  the  place  of  the  one  God-man,
others  limited  His  nature  as  God -man  to  the  intelligible  side


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  439

alone,  and  regarded  the  divinity  as  incapable  of  sensible  expres¬
sion,  etc.1

The  lawful  way  of  the  hierarchical  order,  as  well  as  the  truth
of  faith,  finds  its  fulfilment  and  justification  in  the  life  of  the
Church.  Human  life  must  be  inwardly  collected,  united,  and
consecrated  by  the  action  of  God  and  thus  transformed  into  a
divinely-human  life.  The  nature  of  the  case  and  the  principle  of
piety  demand  that  the  process  of  regeneration  should  begin  from
above,  from  God,  that  it  should  be  founded  upon  the  effects  of
grace  and  not  upon  the  natural  human  will  alone — it  demands
that  the  process  should  be  divinely-human  and  not  humanly-
divine.  This  is  the  meaning  of  sacraments  as  the  special  founda¬
tion  of  the  new  life.  The  moral  significance  of  sacraments  in
general  consists,  from  the  point  of  view  of  religious  morality  or
piety,  precisely  in  this — that  in  sacraments  man  adopts  his  proper
attitude  of  absolute  dependence  upon  a  perfectly  real  and  yet  per¬
fectly  mysterious,  sensuously  unknowable  good  which  is  given  to
him  and  not  created  by  him.  In  the  presence  of  the  sacrament
the  human  will  renounces  all  that  is  its  own ,  remains  in  a  state  of
perfect  potentiality  or  purity,  and  in  virtue  of  it  becomes  capable,
as  pure  form,  of  receiving  superhuman  content.  Through  sacra¬
ments  the  one  and  holy  essence,  which  is  the  Church  in  itself  (the
Ding  an  sich  or  the  noumenon  of  the  Church,  to  use  philosophic
language),  actually  unites  to  itself  or  absorbs  into  itself  the  inner
being  of  man  and  renders  his  life  divine.

This  life,  supernatural  so  far  as  the  other  kingdoms  of  nature,
including  the  rationally-human,  are  concerned,  but  perfectly  natural
for  the  kingdom  of  God,  has  its  regular  cycle  of  development,  the
chief  moments  of  which  are  signalised  by  the  Church  in  the  seven
sacraments  especially  so  called.  This  life  comes  to  birth  (in  baptism),
receives  the  beginning  of  a  right  organisation  and  the  power  to
grow  and  develop  (in  confirmation),  is  healed  from  accidental  im¬
perfections  (in  penitence),  nurtured  for  eternity  (in  Eucharist)  ;  it

1  The  profound  and  important  significance  of  the  dogmatic  disputes  dealing  with  the
very  essence  of  the  Christian  religion  or  piety  I  have  more  definitely  indicated  else¬
where.  See,  e.g.,  Veliki  spor  i  christianskaya  politika  ( The  Great  Dispute  and  Christian
Policy )  (1883),  Dogmatitcheskoe  raosvitie  tserkvi  (The  Dogmatic  Development  of  the  Church)
(1886),  La  Russie  et  I'Eglise  universelle  (1889).  This  significance  is  particularly  clear
in  the  dispute  concerning  the  ikons  which  in  the  Christian  East  completed  the  circle  of
the  dogmatic  development.


440  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

completes  or  integrates  the  individual  being  of  man  (in  marriage),
creates  spiritual  fatherland  as  the  basis  of  the  true  social  order
(in  ordination),  and,  finally  (in  extreme  unction),  sanctifies  the
diseased  and  dying  bodily  nature  for  the  perfect  wholeness  of
future  resurrection.1


XI


The  real  and  mysterious  tokens  of  the  higher  life  or  the
Kingdom  of  God,  received  in  the  sacraments  of  the  Church,  do
not  in  their  origin  and  their  essence  depend  upon  the  will  of  man.
But  since  this  higher  life  is  the  divinely-human  life ,  our  part  in  it
cannot  be  merely  passive.  It  demands  a  conscious  and  voluntary
co-opeiation  of  the  human  soul  with  the  supreme  Spirit.  The
positive  strength  for  such  co-operation  is  from  the  very  first  given
by  the  grace  of  God  (disregard  of  this  truth  leads  to  the  dangerous
errors  of  semi-Pelagianism),  but  it  is  received  by  the  will  of  man,
which  formally  differs  from  the  divine  will';  and  it  is  manifested'
in  actions  which  spring  from  the  human  will.  Disregard  of  this
second  truth,  which  is  as  important  as  the  first,  found  expression
in  the  Monothelite  heresy,  so  far  as  Christology  is  concerned,  and
in  Quietism  in  the  sphere  of  the  moral  doctrine.

The  specifically-human  actions  conformable  to  the  grace  of
God  (and  caused  by  its  preliminary  influence)  must  obviously
express  man’s  normal  relation  to  God,  men,  and  to  his  own  material
nature,  in  accordance  with  the  three  general  foundations  of
morality  piety,  pity, and  shame.  The  first  concentrated  active  ex¬
pression  of  the  religious  feeling  or  piety— its  chief  work— is  prayer ;
in  the  same  way,  the  work  of  pity  is  almsgiving ,  and  the  work  of
shame  is  abstinence  ox  fasting?  These  three  works  condition  the
beginning  and  the  development  of  the  new  life  of  grace  in  man.
This  is  depicted  with  wonderful  clearness  and  simplicity  in  the
holy  narrative  about  the  devout  centurion  Cornelius,  “which  gave
much  alms  to  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God  alway.”  In  his  own
words,  “  I  was  fasting  until  this  hour  :  and  at  the  ninth  hour  I


•  *  Jr'3/-!3  d‘SC)'SS®d  m°re  fuliy  in  ray  Duhovnia  osno-vi  zhizni  ( The  Spiritual  Founda¬

tions  oj  Life)  and  La  Russie  et  l  ’ Eglise  uni-versel/e  (last  chapter).

2  These  three  religiously  moral  works  are  dealt  with  at  length  in  the  first  part  of
the  Duhoumya  osnovi  zkixtii,  *


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  441

prayed  in  my  house ;  and,  behold,  a  man  stood  before  me  in  bright
clothing,  and  said,  Cornelius,  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  thine  alms
are  had  in  remembrance  in  the  sight  of  God  ”  (then  follows  the
command  to  send  for  Simon,  who  has  the  words  of  salvation).
The  hidden  anticipatory  effect  of  God’s  grace,  which  Cornelius
did  not  reject,  incited  him  to  do  human  good  and  strengthened  him
in  the  works  of  prayer,  almsgiving,  and  fasting  ;  and  these  works
themselves,  as  is  here  directly  indicated,  called  forth  new  manifest
effects  of  the  Divine  grace.  It  is  noteworthy,  too,  that  just  as
the  appearance  of  the  angel  from  heaven  was  simply  an  exceptional
means  of  carrying  out  the  established  method  of  piety  and  sending
for  the  earthly  messenger  of  God,  the  earthly  mediator  of  the
higher  life  and  truth,  so  the  exceptional  and  abundant  pouring  out
of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  Cornelius  and  his  household  after
Peter’s  preaching  at  his  house  did  not  render  superfluous  for  them
the  usual  and,  so  to  speak,  the  organic  method  of  beginning  the
life  of  grace  through  the  real  and  mystical  means  of  baptism.1

This  typical  narrative  is  still  more  remarkable  for  what  it  does
not  contain.  Neither  the  angel  of  God  nor  Peter  the  apostle  of
Christ's  peace ,  nor  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself,  suddenly
revealed  in  the  newly  converted,  told  the  centurion  of  the  Italian
band  that  which,  according  to  the  recent  interpretation  of  Christi¬
anity,  was  the  most  important  and  urgently  necessary  thing  for
this  Roman  soldier.  They  did  not  tell  him  that  in  becoming  a
Christian  he  had  first  of  all  to  lay  down  his  arms,  and  was  bound
to  give  up  military  service.  This  supposed  necessary  demand  of
Christianity  is  not  even  hinted  at  in  the  narrative,  although  it  is
concerned  with  a  soldier.  Refusal  to  do  military  service  does
certainly  not  form  part  of  the  New  Testament  idea  of  what  is
required  of  a  warrior  of  this  world  in  order  that  he  might  become  a
citizen  with  full  rights  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  addition  to  the
things  the  centurion  Cornelius  was  already  doing,  namely,  prayer,
almsgiving,  fasting, — he  had  “to  call  Simon,  whose  surname,  is
Peter:  ...  he  shall  tell  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do.”  And  when
Peter  came,  Cornelius  said  to  him,  “Now  therefore  are  we  all  here
present  before  God,  to  hear  all  things  that  are  commanded  thee  of
God."  But  the  things  which  God  commanded  the  apostle  to
reveal  to  the  Roman  soldier  for  his  salvation  contained  no  reference


1  Acts  x.


442  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

to  military  service.  “Then  Peter  opened  his  mouth  and  said,
Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  :  but  in
every  nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is
accepted  with  him.  The  word  which  God  sent  unto  the  children
of  Israel,  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ  :  (he  is  Lord  of  all :)
that  word,  I  say,  ye  know,  which  was  published  throughout
all  Judaea,  and  began  from  Galilee,  after  the  baptism  which  John
preached  ;  how  God  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  power  ;  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing
all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil :  for  God  was  with  him.
And  we  are  witnesses  of  all  things  which  he  did,  both  in  the  land
of  the  Jews,  and  in  Jerusalem  ;  whom  they  slew  and  hanged  on  a
tree  ;  him  God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and  shewed  him  openly  ;
not  to  all  the  people,  but  unto  witnesses  chosen  before  of  God,
even  to  us,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him  after  he  rose  from  the
dead.  And  he  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to
testify  that  it  is  he  which  was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  Judge
of  quick  and  dead.  To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that
through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remis¬
sion  of  sins.  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost
fell  on  all  them  which  heard  the  word.”

I  am  dwelling  upon  the  story  of  Cornelius  the  centurion,  not
because  I  want  to  raise  once  more  the  question  of  military  service,1
but  because  this  story  seems  to  me  to  throw  clear  light  on  the
general  question  as  to  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  the  state,  of
Christianity  to  the  empire,  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  to  the  kingdom
of  this  world,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  on  the  question  of  the
Christian  state.  If  the  centurion  Cornelius,  having  become  a  real
Christian,  remained,  nevertheless,  a  soldier,  and  was  not  divided
into  two  alien  and  disconnected  personalities,  it  is  clear  that  he
must  have  become  a  Christian  soldier.  A  collection  of  such  soldiers
forms  a  Christian  army.  Now  the  army  is  both  the  extreme
expression  and  the  first  real  basis  of  the  state  ;  and  if  a  Christian
army  is  possible,  a  Christian  state  is  therefore  even  more  possible.
That  the  historical  Christianity  solved  the  question  precisely
in  this  sense  there  can  be  no  doubt.  The  only  thing  that  can
be  called  in  question  is  the  inner  ground  for  that  solution.

1  See  above,  Chapter  IX.,  1  The  Significance  of  War,’


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  443


XII

When  the  centurion  Cornelius  was  a  pagan,  the  same  feeling
of  pity  which  impelled  him  ‘to  give  much  alms’  also  urged  him,
no  doubt,  to  defend  the  weak  from  injuries  and  to  force  violent
and  aggressive  men  to  obey  the  law.  He  knew  that  law,  like
every  human  utility,  is  only  a  relative  good  and  may  be  abused  ;
he  may  have  heard  of  the  revolting  abuse  of  legal  authority  which
the  procurator  Pontius  allowed  when,  under  the  influence  of  the
envious  and  vindictive  priesthood  of  Jerusalem,  he  sentenced  to
death  the  virtuous  Rabbi  from  Nazareth.  But  being  a  just  man,
Cornelius  knew  also  that  abusus  non  tollit  usum ,  and  deduced  no
general  conclusions  from  exceptional  instances.  A  true  Roman —
to  judge  by  his  name, — he  was  conscious  with  noble  pride  of  his
own  share  in  the  destiny  of  the  city  that  ruled  the  world  :

...  to  make  the  world  obey,

To  tame  the  proud,  the  fetter’d  slave  to  free.

And  it  was  not  for  him  an  abstract  conviction.  In  Palestine,
where  his  band  was  stationed,  it  was  Roman  arms  alone  that  put
a  stop,  for  a  time  at  any  rate,  to  the  fierce  intestine  wars  between
different  dynasties  and  parties,  accompanied  by  savage  slaughter.
And  it  was  only  under  the  zegis  of  the  Roman  power  that  the
neighbouring  clans  of  the  Edomites  and  the  Arabs  gradually
emerged  out  of  the  condition  of  continual  wars  and  crude
barbarism.

Cornelius  then  did  not  err  in  thinking  highly  of  his  vocation,
and  in  considering  the  state  and  its  chief  organ,  the  army,  a  power
necessary  for  the  common  good.  Ought  he  to  have  changed  his
judgment  when  he  became  a  Christian  ?  A  new,  higher,  and
purely  spiritual  life  was  revealed  in  himy  but  this  fact  did  not
abolish  the  evil  outside  of  him.  The  pity  which  justified  his
military  calling  referred  precisely  to  those  who  were  suffering
from  the  external  evil,  which  remained  what  it  was.  Or  perhaps
the  higher  life  revealed  in  him,  ought,  without  abolishing  the
external  evil,  to  have  abolished  the  inward  good  in  him — the  pity
or  charity  which  was  ‘remembered  by  God,’  and  to  have  replaced
it  by  indifference  to  the  sufferings  of  others.  Such  indifference  or
unfeelingness,  however,  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  the  stone — of


444  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD


the  lower  and  not  of  the  higher  grade  of  being.  But  perhaps,  in
addition  to  compassion,  the  Christian  receives,  together  with  the
new  life,  a  special  power  to  overcome  every  external  evil  without
resisting  it  by  force — to  overcome  it  by  immediate  moral  effect
alone,  or  by  the  miracle  of  grace.  This  supposition  is  remarkably
ill-founded  and  is  based  upon  a  complete  misunderstanding  both
of  the  nature  of  grace  and  of  its  moral  conditions.  We  know  that
Christ  Himself  encountered  upon  earth  such  human  environment
that  His  grace  could  not  work  miracles  ‘because  of  their  unbelief.’
We  know  that  in  the  very  best  environment — in  the  midst  of  His
apostles — He  found  ‘  the  son  of  perdition.’  We  know  that  of  the
two  thieves  who  were  crucified  only  one  repented.  It  is  uncertain
whether  he  would  have  been  susceptible  to  the  Divine  grace  under
other  circumstances,  but  it  is  quite  certain  that  his  comrade
remained  inaccessible  to  it  even  under  these  circumstances.

Those  who  affirm  that  every  evil-doer  may  be  all  at  once  con¬
verted  to  the  good  and  restrained  from  crime  by  the  immediate
effect  of  the  inner  power  of  grace  alone,  do  not  in  the  least
realise  the  meaning  of  what  they  are  saying.  So  far  as  the
inward,  purely-spiritual  power  of  the  good  is  concerned,  its  dis¬
tinctive  characteristic  lies  precisely  in  the  fact  that  it  does  not
work  like  a  mechanical  agency  which  inevitably  produces  external
physical  changes,  but  that  it  acts  only  on  condition  of  being
inwardly  received  by  the  person  upon  whom  it  acts — a  truth
which,  one  would  have  thought,  the  case  of  Judas  made  obvious
to  the  blind.

The  power  of  the  grace  of  Christ  affected  men  who  were
sinful  owing  to  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh  and  not  owing  to  the
firmness  of  the  evil  will — men  who  were  not  happy  in  their  sins
but  suffered  from  them  and  felt  the  need  of  a  physician.  It  was
of  these  sick  ready  to  be  healed  Christ  said  that  they  will  enter
the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  the  self-righteous,  and  this  precisely
was  the  reason  why  the  latter  hated  Him  and  reproached  Him
for  condescending  to  mix  with  publicans  and  sinners.  But
even  His  enemies  could  find  no  pretext  to  accuse  Him  of  con¬
doning  bloodthirsty  murderers,  impious  blasphemers,  shameless
seducers,  and  professional  criminals  of  all  kinds,  enemies  of
human  society.  But,  it  will  be  said,  He  left  them  in  peace.
There  was,  however,  no  occasion  for  Him  to  deal  with  them


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  445

since  there  existed  Roman  and  Jewish  authorities  whose  business
it  was  precisely  to  restrain  evil,  as  far  as  possible,  by  compulsion.

According  to  both  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  the  Gospel  we
must  not  appeal  to  the  powers  that  be  for  enforced  defence  of
ourselves,  against  attacks  on  our  person  or  property.  I  ought  not
to  drag  into  the  law  court  and  prison  the  man  who  strikes  me  or
walks  away  with  my  fur  coat.  I  ought  with  all  my  heart  to
forgive  the  wrong-doer  for  the  wrong  which  he  does  me,  and  not
to  offer  any  resistance  to  him  so  far  as  I  alone  am  concerned.
This  is  clear  and  obvious.  It  is  clear,  too,  that  I  must  not  give
way  to  evil  feeling  against  the  person  who  wrongs  my  neighbours
— him,  too,  I  must  forgive  in  my  heart  and  regard  him  as  a  fellow-
man.  What  practical  duty,  however,  does  the  moral  principle
impose  upon  us  in  that  case  ?  Can  my  duty  be  actually  the  same
in  the  case  of  my  own  injury  and  that  of  another  ?  To  allow
injury  to  myself  means  to  sacrifice  myself,  and  is  a  moral  act  ;  to
allow  injury  to  others  means  sacrificing  others,  and  this  can  certainly
not  be  called  self-sacrifice.  The  moral  duty  towards  others,  psycho¬
logically  based  upon  pity,  must  not  in  practice  give  rights  to
violent  men  and  evil-doers  alone.  Peaceful  and  weak  persons  also
have  a  right  to  our  active  pity  or  help.  And  since,  as  individuals,
we  are  unable  to  give  continual  and  sufficient  help  to  all  the
injured,  we  must  do  this  in  our  collective  capacity,  that  is,  through
the  state.  Political  organisation  is  a  naturally-human  good,  as
necessary  to  our  life  as  our  physical  organism  is  necessary  to  it.
In  giving  us  a  higher  spiritual  good  Christianity  does  not  deprive
us  of  the  lower,  natural  goods — it  does  not  pull  from  under  our
feet  the  ladder  which  we  are  mounting.

With  the  coming  of  Christianity  and  the  good  news  of  the
Kingdom  of  God,  the  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms
did  not  disappear.  And  if  they  have  not  been  abolished,  there  is
no  reason  why  the  naturally-human  kingdom,  embodied  in  political
organisation,  should  be  abolished  either,  since  it  is  just  as  necessary
in  the  historical  process  as  the  others  are  in  the  cosmical.  Nothing
could  be  more  absurd  than  to  maintain  that  although  we  cannot
cease  to  be  animals  we  ought  to  cease  being  citizens.

The  fact  that  the  purpose  of  Christ’s  coming  to  the  earth
could  not  consist  in  creating  a  kingdom  of  this  world  or  a  state —
which  had  already  been  founded  long  ago — in  no  way  proves  that


446  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

He  took  up  a  negative  attitude  with  regard  to  the  state.  The
circumstance  that  the  Gospel  does  not  deal  with  the  external
means  of  protecting  humanity  from  the  crudely-destructive  effect
of  the  powers  of  evil  could  entitle  us  to  draw  conclusions  only
if  the  Gospel  had  appeared  before  the  foundation  of  the  state,
in  a  community  that  had  neither  law  nor  authority  nor  organised
justice.  There  was  no  need  to  give  in  the  Gospel  over  again  the
principles  of  civic  and  juridical  order  which  had,  many  centuries
before,  been  already  given  in  the  Pentateuch.  If  Christ  did  not
intend  to  reject  them,  He  could  do  nothing  but  confirm  them,
and  this  was  precisely  what  He  did.  “  One  jot  or  one  tittle  shall
in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law.  .  .  .  Think  not  that  I  am  come
to  destroy  the  law.  ...  1  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil.”

But,  it  will  be  urged,  the  grace  and  truth  manifested  in  Christ
made  the  law  void.  Now,  when  exactly  did  this  happen  ?  Was
it  when  Judas  betrayed  his  master,  or  when  Ananias  and  Sapphira
deceived  the  Apostles,  or  when  the  deacon  Nicolas  introduced
sexual  laxity  under  the  pretext  of  brotherhood,  or  when  a
Christian  of  Corinth  was  guilty  of  incest  ?  Or  was  it  when  the
Spirit  wrote  through  the  prophet  of  the  New  Testament  to  the
Churches  and  said  to  the  representative  of  one  of  them,  “  I  know
thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead  ”
(Rev.  iii.  i)  ;  and  to  another,  “  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art
neither  cold  nor  hot :  I  would  thou  wert  cold  or  hot.  So  then
because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue
thee  out  of  my  mouth”  (vv.  15,  16).

If  then,  from  the  time  grace  and  truth  first  appeared  and  to  this
day,  they  have  not  taken  possession  either  of  the  whole  nor  even
of  the  majority  of  Christian  humanity,  the  question  is  how  and  in
whom  has  the  law  been  made  void.  Could  the  law  have  been
made  void  by  grace  in  those  who  have  neither  law  nor  grace  ?
It  is  obvious  that  for  them,  that  is,  for  the  majority  of  mankind,
the  law  must,  according  to  the  word  of  Christ,  remain  in  full
force  as  the  external  limit  of  their  liberty.  And  in  order  to  be
such  a  limit,  the  law  must  possess  sufficient  power  of  compulsion,
that  is,  must  be  embodied  in  the  organisation  of  the  State  with
its  law  courts,  police,  armies.  And  in  so  far  as  Christianity  did
not  abolish  the  law,  it  could  not  abolish  the  State.  This  necessary
and  rational  fact  does  not,  however,  by  any  means  prove  that  the


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  447

inner  relation  of  men  to  the  external  force  embodied  in  the  state,
and  consequently  the  general  and  particular  character  of  its
activity,  remained  unchanged.  Chemical  substance  does  not
disappear  in  vegetable  and  animal  bodies,  but  acquires  new
peculiarities  in  them,  so  that  there  exists  a  whole  science  of
organic  chemistry.  The  case  of  Christian  policy  is  similar.  A
Christian  state  must,  if  it  is  not  a  mere  name,  distinctly  differ
from  a  heathen  state,  though  as  states  both  have  the  same  basis
and  common  aim.


XIII

“  A  peasant  goes  forth  into  the  fields  to  his  husbandry  ;  a
Polovets  falls  upon  him,  slays  him,  and  drives  away  his  horse.
Then  in  a  crowd  the  Polovtsi  come  out  against  the  village,  kill
all  the  peasants,  set  fire  to  the  houses  and  lead  the  women  away
into  captivity,  while  the  princes  are  taken  up  with  feuds  among
themselves.”  1  If  pity  for  these  peasants  was  not  to  be  confined
to  sentimental  words  alone,  it  was  bound  to  lead  to  the  organisation
of  a  strong  central  authority  sufficient  to  defend  the  peasants  from
intestine  wars  between  the  princes  and  the  raids  of  the  Polovtsi.

When,  in  another  country,  the  greatest  of  her  poets  ex¬
claimed  with  profound  grief,  which  he  showed  not  in  words  only  :

Ahi,  serva  Italia  dei  dolor’  ostello,

Nave  senza  nocchiero  in  gran  tempesta  !  2

— the  same  pity  directly  incited  him  to  call  from  beyond  the
Alps  a  supreme  representative  of  state  authority,  a  strong  pro¬
tector  from  incessant  and  unbearable  acts  of  violence.  The  pity
for  the  actual  calamities  of  Italy,  expressed  in  many  passages  of
the  Divine  Comedy ,  and  the  appeal  for  a  state  invested  with  the
fulness  of  power  as  a  necessary  means  of  salvation  took  the  form
of  a  definite,  well-thought-out  conviction  in  Dante’s  book  On
Monarchy.

The  troubles  of  anarchy  or  of  a  weakly-developed  state,  that
called  forth  the  pity  of  Vladimir  Monomakh  and  of  Dante,  can

1  From  the  Instruction  of  Vladimir  Monomakh,  one  of  the  rulers  of  Russia  in  the
eleventh  century,  to  his  children. —  Translator  s  Note.

2  “  Italy,  the  slave  and  the  abode  of  suffering,  a  ship  without  a  pilot  amidst  terrible
storms.”


448  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

only  be  cured  or  remedied  by  a  powerful  state,  and  would  inevit¬
ably  arise  again  if  it  disappeared.  The  purely  moral  motives  were
obviously  insufficient  in  the  thirteenth  century  to  prevent  men
from  trying  to  exterminate  one  another.  And  even  granting  that
at  the  present  day  these  motives  have  become  stronger  and  more
widely  spread — though  this  is  doubtful, — it  would  be  ridiculous  to
maintain  that  they  are  in  themselves  sufficient  for  the  maintenance
of  peace.  It  is  obvious  that  Italian  citizens  no  longer  give  vent
to  their  party  differences  by  cutting  each  other’s  throats  solely
because  of  the  compulsory  order  of  the  state  with  its  army  and
police.  As  to  Russia — not  to  speak  of  the  intestine  wars  among
the  princes,  and  of  the  people  taking  the  law  into  their  own  hands,
— there  is  no  doubt  that  the  savage  races  which  the  duchy  of
Moscow  and  the  Russian  empire  had  with  such  difficulty  gradu¬
ally  driven  farther  and  farther  away  from  the  centre  of  the  country,
submitted  to  force  rather  than  became  regenerated.  And  if,  God
forbid,  the  lance  and  the  bayonet  were  to  disappear  or  to  lose  their
force  on  the  Caucasian,  Turkestan,  or  Siberian  frontier  all  moralists
would  become  at  once  convinced  of  the  true  nature  of  these  ex¬
cellent  institutions.1

Just  as  the  Church  is  collectively  organised  piety ,  so  the  state  is
collectively  organised  pity.  To  affirm,  therefore,  that  from  its  very
nature  the  Christian  religion  is  opposed  to  the  state  is  to  affirm
that  the  Christian  religion  is  opposed  to  pity.  In  truth,  however,
the  Gospel  not  merely  insists  upon  the  morally  binding  character  of
pity  or  altruism,  but  decidedly  confirms  the  view,  expressed  already
in  the  Old  Testament,  that  there  can  be  no  true  piety  apart  from
pity  :  “  I  will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice.”

If,  however,  pity  be  admitted  in  principle,  it  is  logically  inevit¬
able  to  admit  also  the  historical  organisation  of  social  forces  and
activities,  which  raises  pity  from  the  stage  of  a  powerless  and
limited  feeling  and  gives  it  actuality,  wide  application,  and  means
of  development.  From  the  point  of  view  of  pity  it  is  impossible

1  My  father  had  as  a  boy  heard  first-hand  reminiscences  of  how  armed  bands  of
Mongolians  on  the  Volga  engaged  in  open  brigandage  carried  away  into  captivity  whole
families  of  Russian  travellers  and  tormented  them  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  At  the  present
time  this  no  longer  happens  on  the  Volga,  but  on  the  Amur  such  things  are  still  known
to  take  place.  The  perpetual  war  mission  of  the  state  is  therefore  not  yet  over  for
Russia,  and,  had  the  good  centurion  Cornelius  lived  in  our  day,  no  moral  motives  could
prevent  him  from  being  a  sotnik  of  the  Kossacks  in  the  Ussuriisky  region.


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY


449


to  reject  the  institution  owing  to  which  one  can  practically  pity ,
i.e.  give  help  and  protection  to  tens  and  hundreds  of  millions  of  men
instead  of  dozens  or  at  most  hundreds  of  people.

The  definition  of  the  state  (so  far  as  its  moral  significance  is
concerned)  as  organised  pity  can  only  be  rejected  through  miscon¬
ception.  Some  of  these  misconceptions  must  be  considered  before
we  go  on  to  deal  with  the  conception  of  the  Christian  state.

XIV

It  is  urged  that  the  stern  and  often  cruel  character  of  the  state
obviously  contradicts  the  definition  of  it  as  organised  pity.  But
this  objection  is  based  on  a  confusion  between  the  necessary  and
sensible  severity  and  useless  and  arbitrary  cruelty.  The  first  is
not  opposed  to  pity,  and  the  second,  being  an  abuse,  is  opposed  to
the  very  meaning  of  the  state ,  and  therefore  does  not  contradict  the
definition  of  the  state — of  the  normal  state,  of  course — as  organised
pity.  The  supposed  contradiction  is  based  upon  grounds  as  super¬
ficial  as  the  argument  that  the  senseless  cruelty  of  an  unsuccessful
surgical  operation  and  the  sufferings  of  the  patient  in  the  case  even
of  a  successful  operation  are  in  obvious  contradiction  to  the  idea
of  surgery  as  a  beneficent  art  helpful  to  man  in  certain  bodily
sufferings.  It  is  obvious  that  such  representatives  of  state  authority
as  Ivan  the  Terrible  are  as  little  evidence  against  the  altruistic
basis  of  the  state,  as  bad  surgeons  are  against  the  usefulness  of
surgery.  I  am  aware  that  an  educated  reader  may  well  feel  in¬
sulted  at  being  reminded  of  such  elementary  truths,  but  if  he  is
acquainted  with  the  recent  movement  of  thought  in  Russia  he
will  not  hold  me  responsible  for  the  insult.

But,  it  will  be  maintained,  even  the  most  normal  state  is
inevitably  pitiless.  In  pitying  peaceful  people  whom  it  defends
against  men  of  violence,  it  is  bound  to  treat  the  latter  without
pity.  Such  one-sided  pity  is  out  of  keeping  with  the  moral  ideal.
This  is  indisputable,  but  again  it  says  nothing  against  our  defini¬
tion  of  the  state,  for,  in  the  first  place,  even  one-sided  pity  is  pity
and  not  anything  else  ;  and  secondly,  even  the  normal  state  is  not
by  any  means  an  expression  of  the  moral  ideal  already  attained,  but
only  one  of  the  chief  means  necessary  for  its  attainment.  The
ideal  condition  of  mankind,  or  the  Kingdom  of  God,  when  attained,

2  G


450  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

is  obviously  incompatible  with  the  state,  but  it  is  also  incompatible
with  pity.  When  everything  will  once  more  be  good  there  will
be  no  one  to  pity.  And  so  long  as  there  are  men  to  be  pitied,  there
are  men  to  be  defended  ;  and  the  moral  demand  for  organising
such  protection  efficiently  and  on  a  wide  scale — i.e.  the  moral
significance  of  the  state — remains  in  force.  As  for  the  pitiless¬
ness  of  the  state  to  those  from  whom  or  against  whom  it  has  to
defend  the  peaceful  society,  it  is  not  anything  fatal  or  inevitable  ;
and  although  it  undoubtedly  is  a  fact,  it  is  not  an  unchangeable
fact.  In  point  of  history  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  relation  of
the  state  towards  its  enemies  is  becoming  less  cruel,  and  conse¬
quently  more  merciful.  In  old  days  they  used  to  be  put  to  painful
death  together  with  their  family  and  relatives  (as  is  still  the  case
in  China).  Later,  every  one  had  to  answer  for  himself,  and  sub¬
sequently  the  very  character  of  the  responsibility  has  changed.
Criminals  have  ceased  to  be  tormented  solely  for  the  sake  of  inflict¬
ing  pain  ;  and  at  the  present  time  the  positive  task  of  helping  them
morally  is  recognised.  What  can  be  the  ultimate  reason  of  such  a
change  ?  When  the  state  limits  or  abolishes  the  penalty  of  death,
abolishes  torture  and  corporal  punishment,  is  concerned  with  im¬
proving  prisons  and  places  of  exile,  it  is  obvious  that  in  pitying
and  protecting  peaceful  citizens  who  suffer  from  crimes,  it  begins
to  extend  its  pity  to  the  opposite  side  also — to  the  criminals  them¬
selves.  The  reference,  therefore,  to  the  one-sided  pity  is  beginning
to  lose  force  as  a  fact.  And  it  is  through  the  state  alone  that  the
organisation  of  pity  ceases  to  be  one-sided,  since  the  human  crowd
is  still  for  the  most  part  guided  in  its  relation  to  the  enemies  of
society  by  the  old  pitiless  maxims,  ‘  to  the  dog,  a  dog’s  death  ’  ;
‘  the  thief  deserves  all  he  gets  ’  ;  ‘as  a  warning  to  others,’  etc.
Such  maxims  are  losing  their  practical  force  precisely  owing  to
the  state,  which  is  in  this  case  more  free  from  partiality  either  to
the  one  side  or  the  other.  Restraining  with  an  authoritative  hand
the  vindictive  instincts  of  the  crowd,  ready  to  tear  the  criminal
to  pieces,  the  state  at  the  same  time  never  renounces  the  humane
duty  to  oppose  crimes,— as  the  strange  moralists,  who  in  truth
pity  only  the  aggressive,  violent,  and  rapacious,  and  are  utterly
indifferent  to  their  victims,  would  have  it  do.  This  indeed  is  a
case  of  one-sided  pity  ! 1

1  See  above,  Part  III.  Chapter  VI.,  ‘The  Penal  Question  from  the  Moral  Point  of  View.’


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  451


XV

Our  definition  of  state  may  lead  to  a  less  crude  misconception
on  the  part  of  the  jurists,  who  regard  the  state  as  the  embodiment
of  legality  as  an  absolutely  independent  principle,  distinct  from
morality  in  general  and  from  motives  of  pity  in  particular.  The
true  distinction  between  legal  justice  and  morality  has  already
been  indicated.1  It  does  not  destroy  the  connection  between
them  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  due  to  that  connection.  If  this  dis¬
tinction  is  to  be  replaced  by  separation  and  opposition,  an  uncon¬
ditional  principle  must  be  found  which  shall  ultimately  determine
every  legal  relation  as  such  and  be  altogether  outside  of,  and  as  far
as  possible  removed  from,  the  moral  sphere.

Such  an  a-moral  and  even  anti-moral  principle  is  to  be  found
in  the  first  place  in  might  or  force  :  Macht  geht  vor  Recht.  That
in  the  order  of  history  relations  based  upon  right  follow  those
based  upon  force  is  as  unquestionable  as  the  fact  that  in  the  his¬
tory  of  our  planet  the  organic  life  appeared  after  the  inorganic
and  on  the  basis  of  it— which  does  not  prove,  of  course,  that
inorganic  matter  is  the  specific  principle  of  the  organic  forms  as
such.  The  play  of  natural  forces  in  humanity  is  simply  the
material  for  relations  determined  by  the  conception  of  right  and
not  the  principle  of  such  relations,  since  otherwise  there  could  be
no  distinction  between  right  and  rightlessness.  Right  means  the
limitation  of  might,  and  the  whole  point  is  the  nature  of  the
limitation.  Similarly,  morality  might  be  defined  as  the  overcoming
of  evil ,  which  does  not  imply  that  evil  is  the  principle  of  morality.

We  shall  not  advance  any  further  in  the  definition  of  right  it
we  replace  the  conception  of  might,  derived  from  the  physical
sphere,  by  the  more  human  conception  of  freedom.  That
individual  freedom  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  relations  determined  by
law  there  can  be  no  doubt,  but  is  it  really  the  unconditional
principle  of  legality  ?  There  are  two  reasons  why  this  cannot
be  the  case.  In  the  first  place,  because  in  reality  it  is  not  uncon¬
ditional,  and,  secondly,  because  it  is  not  the  determining  principle
of  legality.  With  regard  to  the  first  point,  I  mean  not  that
human  freedom  is  never  unconditional,  but  that  it  is  not  uncon-

1  See  above,  Part  III.  Chapter  VIII.,  ‘  Morality  and  Legal  Justice.’


452  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

ditional  in  that  sphere  of  concrete  relations  in  which  and  for  the
sake  of  which  law  exists.  Suppose  that  some  man  living  in  the
flesh  on  earth  actually  possessed  absolute  freedom,  that  is,  that  he
could  by  the  act  of  his  will  alone,  independently  of  any  external
circumstances  and  necessary  intermediate  processes,  accomplish
everything  he  wished.  It  is  obvious  that  such  a  man  would
stand  outside  the  sphere  of  relations  determined  by  legality.  If
his  unconditionally  free  will  determined  itself  on  the  side  of  evil,
no  external  action  could  limit  it ;  it  would  be  inaccessible  to  law
and  authority.  And  if  it  were  determined  on  the  side  of  the
good  it  would  make  all  law  and  all  authority  superfluous.

It  is  then  irrelevant  to  speak  of  unconditional  freedom  in
this  connection,  since  it  belongs  to  quite  a  different  sphere  of
relations.  Legality  is  concerned  only  with  limited  and  conditional
freedom,  and  the  question  is  precisely  as  to  what  limitations  or
conditions  are  lawful.  The  liberty  of  one  person  is  limited  by
the  liberty  of  another,  but  not  every  such  limitation  is  consistent
with  the  principle  of  legality.  If  the  freedom  of  one  man  is
limited  by  the  freedom  of  his  neighbour  who  is  free  to  wring  his
neck  or  chain  him  up  at  his  pleasure,  there  can  be  no  question  of
legality  at  all,  and  in  any  case  such  a  limitation  of  freedom  shows
no  specific  characteristics  of  the  principle  of  legality  as  such.
These  characteristics  must  be  sought  not  in  the  mere  fact  of  the
limitation  of  freedom,  but  in  the  equal  and  universal  character  of
the  limitation.  If  the  freedom  of  one  is  limited  to  the  same
extent  as  the  freedom  of  the  other,  or  if  the  free  activity  of  each
meets  with  a  restriction  that  is  common  to  all,  then  only  is  the
limitation  of  freedom  determined  by  the  conception  of  law.

The  principle  of  legality  is  then  freedom  within  the  limits  of
equality,  or  freedom  conditioned  by  equality — consequently  a
conditional  freedom.  But  the  equality  which  determines  it  is
not  an  absolutely  independent  principle  either.  The  essential
characteristic  of  the  legal  norms  is  that,  in  addition  to  equality,
they  should  necessarily  answer,  too,  the  demand  for  justice.
Although  these  two  ideas  are  akin,  they  are  far  from  being  identical.
When  the  Pharaoh  issued  a  law  commanding  to  put  to  death  all
the  Jewish  new-born  babes,  this  law  was  certainly  not  unjust
on  account  of  the  unequal  treatment  of  the  Jewish  and  the
Egyptian  babes.  And  if  the  Pharaoh  subsequently  gave  orders  to


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  453

put  to  death  all  new-born  infants  and  not  only  the  Jewish  ones,
no  one  would  venture  to  call  this  new  law  just,  although  it
would  satisfy  the  demand  for  equality.  Justice  is  not  mere
equality,  but  equality  in  fulfilling  that  which  is  right.  A  just
debtor  is  not  one  who  equally  refuses  to  pay  all  his  creditors  but
who  equally  pays  them  all.  A  just  father  is  not  one  who  is
equally  indifferent  to  all  his  children  but  who  shows  equal  love
for  all  of  them.

Equality,  then,  can  be  just  or  unjust,  and  it  is  the  just  equality
or,  in  the  last  resort,  justice  that  determines  the  legal  norms.
The  conception  of  justice  at  once  introduces  us  into  the  moral
sphere.  And  in  that  sphere  we  know  that  each  virtue  is  not  in  a
cage  by  itself,  but  all  of  them,  justice  among  them,  are  different
modifications  of  one  or,  rather,  of  the  threefold  principle  which
determines  our  rightful  relation  to  everything.  And  since  justice
is  concerned  with  man’s  moral  interaction  with  his  fellow-beings,
it  is  merely  a  species  of  the  moral  motive  which  lies  at  the  basis
of  inter-human  relations,  namely  of  pity  :  justice  is  pity  equally
applied.1

In  so  far  then  as  legality  is  determined  by  justice  it  is
essentially  related  to  the  moral  sphere.  All  definitions  of  law
which  try  to  separate  it  from  morality  leave  its  real  nature  un¬
touched.  Thus,  in  addition  to  the  definition  already  mentioned,
Iering’s  famous  definition  declares  that  ‘  law  is  a  protected  or
safeguarded  interest.’  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  law  does
defend  interest,  but  not  every  interest.  It  obviously  defends
only  the  just  interests  or,  in  other  words,  it  defends  every  interest
in  so  far  as  it  is  just.  What,  however,  is  meant  by  justice  in
this  connection  ?  To  say  that  a  just  interest  is  an  interest  safe¬
guarded  by  law  is  to  be  guilty  of  the  crudest  possible  logical
circle  which  can  only  be  avoided  if  justice  be  once  more  taken  in
its  essential,  i.e.  in  its  moral,  sense.  This  does  not  prevent  us
from  recognising  that  the  moral  principle  itself,  so  far  as  the
inevitable  conditions  of  its  existence  are  concerned,  is  realised  in
different  ways,  and  to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree.  For  instance
there  is  the  distinction  between  the  external,  formal,  or  strictly-
legal  justice  and  the  inner,  essential,  or  purely-moral  justice,  the
supreme  and  ultimate  standard  of  right  and  wrong  being  one  and

1  See  above,  Part  I.  Chapter  V.,  ‘  Virtues.’


454  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

the  same — namely,  the  moral  principle.  Possible  conflict  between
‘  outer  ’  and  c  inner  ’  justice  in  particular  cases  is  in  itself  no  argu¬
ment  against  their  being  essentially  one,  since  similar  conflict  may
arise  in  the  carrying  out  of  the  simplest  and  most  fundamental
moral  demands.  Thus,  for  instance,  pity  may  demand  that  I
should  save  two  men  who  are  drowning,  but  being  unable  to  save
both,  I  have  to  choose  between  the  two.  The  cases  of  difficult
choice  between  complex  applications  of  legal  justice  and  morality
in  the  strict  sense  are  no  proof  of  there  being  any  essential  and
irreducible  opposition  between  the  two.  The  argument  that  the
conceptions  of  justice  and  morality  alter  in  the  course  of  history
is  equally  unconvincing.  It  might  carry  some  weight  if  the  rights
and  laws  remained  meanwhile  unchanged.  In  truth,  however,  they
change  even  more  according  to  place  and  time.  What  conclusion,
then,  are  we  to  adopt  ?  There  is  change  in  the  particular  con¬
ceptions  of  justice,  there  is  change  in  the  rights  and  laws,  but  one
thing  remains  unchangeable  :  the  demand  that  the  rights  and
laws  should  be  just.  The  inner  dependence  of  legal  forms  upon
morality — independently  of  all  external  conditions — remains  a
fact.  I  о  avoid  this  conclusion  one  would  have  to  go  very  far —
to  the  country,  seen  by  the  pilgrim  women  in  Ostrovsky’s  play,
where  lawful  requests  to  Mahmut  of  Persia  and  Mahmut  of
Turkey  were  to  begin  by  the  phrase  “Judge  me,  О  thou  unjust
judge.”

Iering’s  definition  undergoes  a  change  in  the  formula  accord¬
ing  to  which  law  discriminates  between  interests  in  contradistinc¬
tion  to  morality  which  values  them.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that
legal  justice  discriminates  between  people’s  interests  and,  equally,
that  it  defends  them.  But  this  fact  alone  gives  as  yet  no  idea
of  the  essence  of  legality.  There  may  be  discrimination  of
interests  on  grounds  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  legality,  and
the  definition  thus  proves  to  be  too  wide.  Thus  if  robbers  in  a
wood  attack  the  travellers  and  leave  them  their  life  but  seize  all
their  property,  this  will  no  doubt  be  a  case  of  the  discrimination
of  interests,  but  to  see  in  it  anything  in  common  with  legal  right
is  only  possible  in  the  sense  in  which  all  violence  is  the  expres¬
sion  of  the  right  of  the  fist,  or  the  right  of  brute  force.  In
truth,  legality  is  determined  not  of  course  by  the  fact  of  the
discrimination  between  interests,  but  by  the  constant  and  universal


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  455

norm  of  such  discrimination.  To  be  consistent  with  the  concep¬
tion  of  right,  the  discrimination  of  interests  must  be  correct,
normal,  or  just.  In  drawing  a  distinction  between  the  normal
and  the  abnormal  discrimination  of  interests,  and  referring  the  first
only  to  the  province  of  legal  justice,  we  obviously  make  a  valuation
of  them,  and  therefore  the  supposed  opposition  between  legality
and  morality  falls  to  the  ground.  When  we  find  some  laws  to  be
unjust  and  work  for  their  repeal,  then,  though  we  do  not  leave
the  domain  of  legality,  we  are  concerned  not  with  any  real  dis¬
crimination  of  interests,  but  in  the  first  place  with  valuing  the
already  existing  discrimination,  which  in  its  own  day  was  also
conditioned  by  judgments  of  value,  though  they  were  different
from  those  we  pass  now  and  opposed  to  them.

If  morality  then  be  defined  as  the  valuation  of  interests,  legal
justice  forms  an  essential  part  of  morality.  This  is  by  no  means
contradicted  by  the  fact  that  the  standard  of  value  in  morality  in
the  strict  sense  and  in  the  legal  sphere  is  not  the  same.  This
difference,  the  necessity,  namely,  for  recognising  legal  relations
apart  from  the  purely- moral  ones,  is  itself  based  upon  moral
grounds  —  upon  the  demand,  namely,  that  the  highest,  the  final
good  should  be  realised  apart  from  any  external  compulsion,  and
that,  consequently,  there  should  be  some  possibility  of  choice
between  good  and  evil.  Or,  to  put  it  in  a  paradoxical  form,  the
highest  morality  demands  a  certain  freedom  to  be  immoral.  This
demand  is  carried  out  by  legal  justice  which  compels  the  individual
to  do  the  minimum  of  good  necessary  to  the  social  life,  and,  in
the  interest  of  the  truly  moral,  that  is,  of  free  perfection,  safe¬
guards  him  from  the  senseless  and  pernicious  experiments  in
compulsory  righteousness  and  obligatory  holiness.1

Thus  if  the  state  is  the  objective  expression  of  right,  it
necessarily  forms  part  of  the  moral  organisation  of  humanity,
which  is  binding  upon  the  good  will.

XVI

The  connection  of  right  with  morality  makes  it  possible  to
speak  of  the  Christian  state.  It  would  be  unjust  to  maintain
that  in  pre-Christian  times  the  state  had  no  moral  foundation.

1  See  above,  Part  III.  Chapter  VIII.,  ‘  Morality  and  Legal  Justice.’


456  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

In  the  kingdoms  of  Judaea  and  of  Israel,  the  prophets  directly
put  moral  demands  to  the  state,  and  reproached  it  for  not  ful¬
filling  these  demands.  In  the  pagan  world  it  is  sufficient  to
mention  Theseus,  for  instance,  who  at  the  risk  of  his  life  freed
his  subjects  from  the  cannibalistic  tribute  to  Crete,  in  order  to
recognise  that  here  too  the  fundamental  moral  motive  of  the  state
was  pity,  demanding  active  help  to  the  injured  and  the  suffering.
The  difference  between  the  Christian  and  the  pagan  state  is  not
then  in  their  natural  basis  but  in  something  else.  From  the
Christian  point  of  view  the  state  is  only  a  part  in  the  organisation
of  the  collective  man — a  part  conditioned  by  another  higher  part,
the  Church,  which  consecrates  the  state  in  its  work  of  serving
indirectly  in  its  own  worldly  sphere  and  by  its  own  means  the
unconditional  purpose  which  the  Church  directly  puts  before  it —
to  prepare  humanity  and  the  whole  earth  for  the  Kingdom  of  God.
From  this  follow  the  two  chief  tasks  of  the  state — the  conservative
and  the  progressive  :  to  preserve  the  foundations  of  social  life  apart
from  which  humanity  could  not  exist ,  and  to  improve  the  conditions  of
its  existence  by  furthering  the  free  development  of  all  human
powers  which  are  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  future  perfection,
and  apart  from  which  the  Kingdom  of  God  could  not  be
realised  in  humanity.  It  is  clear  that  just  as  without  the  con¬
servative  activity  of  the  state  humanity  would  fall  apart  and  there
would  be  no  one  left  to  enter  the  fulness  of  life,  so  without  its
progressive  activity  mankind  would  always  remain  at  the  same
stage  of  the  historical  process,  would  never  attain  the  power
finally  to  receive  or  to  reject  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  therefore
there  would  be  nothing  to  live  for.

In  paganism  it  was  the  conservative  task  of  the  state  that  was
exclusively  predominant.  Although  the  state  furthered  historical
progress,  it  did  so  involuntarily  and  unconsciously.  The  supreme
purpose  of  action  was  not  put  by  the  agents  themselves,  it  was
not  their  purpose  since  they  had  not  yet  heard  c  the  gospel  of  the
kingdom.’  The  progress  itself,  therefore,  although  it  formally
differed  from  the  gradual  perfecting  of  the  kingdoms  of  the
physical  nature  did  not  really  have  a  purely-human  character:  it
is  unworthy  of  man  to  move  in  spite  of  himself  to  a  purpose  he
does  not  know.  God’s  word  gives  a  beautiful  image  of  the  great
heathen  kingdoms  as  powerful  and  wonderful  beasts  which  rapidly


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  457

appear  and  disappear.  The  natural,  earthly  men  have  no  final
significance,  and  cannot  have  it ;  and  the  state,  created  by  such
men,  is  their  collective  embodiment.  But  the  pagan  state,  con¬
ditional  and  transitory  in  nature,  affirmed  itself  as  unconditional.
Pagans  began  by  deifying  individual  bodies  (astral,  vegetable,
animal,  and  especially  human)  in  the  multitude  of  their  various
gods,  and  they  ended  by  deifying  the  collective  body — the  state
(cult  of  the  kings  in  the  Eastern  kingdoms,  the  apotheosis  of  the
Roman  emperors).

The  pagans  erred  not  in  ascribing  positive  significance  to  the
state,  but  only  in  thinking  that  it  possessed  that  significance  on
its  own  account.  This  was  obviously  untrue.  Neither  the  in¬
dividual  nor  the  collective  body  of  man  has  life  on  its  own  account
but  receives  it  from  the  spirit  that  inhabits  it.  This  is  clearly
proved  by  the  fact  of  the  decomposition  both  of  the  individual
and  of  the  collective  bodies.  The  perfect  body  is  that  in  which
dwells  the  spirit  of  God.  Christianity,  therefore,  demands  not
that  we  should  reject  or  limit  the  power  of  the  state,  but  that  we
should  fully  recognise  the  principle  which  alone  may  render  the
significance  of  the  state  actually  complete — namely,  its  moral
solidarity  with  the  cause  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth,  all
worldly  purposes  being  inwardly  subordinated  to  the  one  spirit  of
Christ.


XVII

The  question  as  to  the  relation  of  the  Church  to  the  state,
which  has  arisen  in  Christian  times,  can  be  solved  in  principle
from  the  point  of  view  here  indicated.  The  Church  is,  as  we
know,  a  divinely-human  organisation,  morally  determined  by  piety.
From  the  nature  of  the  case  the  Divine  principle  decidedly  pre¬
dominates  in  the  Church  over  the  human.  In  the  relation
between  them  the  first  is  pre-eminently  active  and  the  second  pre¬
eminently  passive.  This  obviously  must  be  the  case  when  the
human  will  is  in  direct  correlation  with  the  Divine.  The  active
manifestation  of  the  human  will,  demanded  by  the  Deity  itself,
is  only  possible  in  the  worldly  sphere  collectively  represented  by
the  state,  which  had  reality  previously  to  the  revelation  of  the
Divine  principle,  and  is  in  no  direct  dependence  upon  it.  The


458  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

Christian  state  is  related  to  the  Deity,  as  the  Church  is  ;  it  too
is  in  a  certain  sense  an  organisation  of  the  God-in-man,  but  in
it  the  human  element  predominates.  This  is  only  possible
because  the  Divine  principle  is  realised  not  in  the  state,  but
for  it  in  the  Church.  So  that  in  the  state  the  Divine  principle
gives  full  play  to  the  human  and  allows  it  independently  to  serve
the  supreme  end.  From  the  moral  point  of  view  both  the  in¬
dependent  activity  of  man  and  his  absolute  submission  to  the
Deity  as  such  are  equally  necessary.  This  antinomy  can  only  be
solved  and  the  two  positions  united  by  distinguishing  the  two
spheres  of  life  (the  religious  and  the  political),  and  their  two
immediate  motives  (piety  and  pity),  corresponding  to  the  difference
in  the  immediate  object  of  action,  the  final  purpose  being  one
and  the  same.  Pious  attitude  towards  a  perfect  God  demands
pity  for  men.  The  Christian  church  demands  a  Christian  state.
Here  as  elsewhere  separation  instead  of  distinction  leads  to  confusion ,
and  confusion  to  dissension  and  perdition.  Complete  separation
of  the  Church  from  the  state  compels  the  Church  to  do  one  of
two  things.  It  either  has  to  renounce  all  active  service  of  the
good  and  to  give  itself  up  to  quietism  and  indifference — which  is
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Christ ;  or,  zealous  actively  to  prepare
the  world  for  the  coming  of  God’s  kingdom,  but,  in  its  separation
and  alienation  from  the  state,  having  no  means  at  its  command  for
carrying  out  its  spiritual  activity,  the  Church,  in  the  person  of  its
authoritative  representatives  has  itself  to  seize  the  concrete  instru¬
ments  of  worldly  activity,  to  interfere  in  all  earthly  affairs  and,
absorbed  in  the  question  of  means,  forget  its  original  purpose —
an  unquestionably  pure  and  high  one — more  and  more.  Were
such  confusion  allowed  to  become  permanent,  the  Church  would
lose  the  very  ground  of  its  existence.  The  separation  proves  to
be  no  less  harmful  to  the  other  side.  The  state  separated  from
the  Church  either  gives  up  spiritual  interests  altogether,  loses  its
supreme  consecration  and  dignity,  as  well  as  the  moral  respect  and
the  material  submission  of  its  subjects,  or,  conscious  of  the
importance  of  the  spiritual  interests  for  the  life  of  man,  but,  in  its
separation  from  the  Church,  having  no  competent  and  independent
institution  to  which  it  could  entrust  the  supreme  care  of  the
spiritual  good  of  its  subjects, — the  task  of  preparing  the  nations  for
the  Kingdom  of  God, — it  decides  to  take  that  task  upon  itself.


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  459

To  do  so  consistently  the  state  would  have  to  assume  ex  officio  the
supreme  spiritual  authority — which  would  be  a  mad  and  dangerous
usurpation  recalling  the  c  man  of  lawlessness  ’  of  the  last  days.  It
is  clear  that  in  forgetting  its  filial  attitude  towards  the  Church,
the  state  would  be  acting  in  its  own  name,  and  not  in  the  name
of  the  Father.

The  normal  relation,  then,  between  the  state  and  the
Church  is  this.  The  state  recognises  the  supreme  spiritual  authority
of  the  universal  Churchy  which  indicates  the  general  direction  of
the  goodwill  of  mankind  and  the  final  purpose  of  its  historical
activity.  The  Church  leaves  to  the  state  full  power  to  bring  lawful
worldly  interests  into  conformity  with  this  supreme  will  and  to  har¬
monise  political  relations  and  actions  with  the  requirements  of  this
supreme  purpose.  The  Church  must  have  no  power  of  compulsion ,  and
the  power  of  compulsion  exercised  by  the  state  must  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  domain  of  religion.

The  state  is  the  intermediary  social  sphere  between  the  Church
on  the  one  hand  and  the  material  society  on  the  other.  The
absolute  aims  of  religious  and  moral  order  which  the  Church  puts
before  humanity  and  which  it  represents,  cannot  be  realised  in  the
given  human  material  without  the  formal  mediation  of  the  lawful
authority  of  the  state  (in  the  worldly  aspect  of  its  activity),  which
retains  the  forces  of  evil  within  certain  relative  bounds  until  the
time  comes  when  all  human  wills  are  ready  to  make  the  decisive
choice  between  the  absolute  good  and  the  unconditional  evil.
The  direct  and  fundamental  motive  of  such  restraint  is  pity,  which
determines  the  whole  progress  of  legal  justice  and  of  the  state.
The  progress  is  not  in  the  principle,  but  in  its  application.  Com¬
pulsion  exercised  by  the  state  draws  back  before  individual  freedom
and  comes  forward  to  help  in  the  case  of  public  distress.  The
rule  of  true  progress  is  this ,  that  the  state  should  interfere  as  little  as
possible  with  the  inner  moral  life  of  man ,  and  at  the  same  time  should
as  securely  and  as  widely  as  possible  ensure  the  external  conditions  of
his  worthy  existence  and  moral  development.  The  state  which  chose
on  its  own  authority  to  teach  its  subjects  true  theology  and  sound
philosophy,  and  at  the  same  time  allowed  them  to  remain  illiterate,
to  be  murdered  on  the  high-roads,  or  to  die  of  famine  and  of
infection,  would  lose  its  raison  d'etre.  The  voice  of  the  true
Church  might  well  say  to  such  a  state  :  “  It  is  I  that  am  entrusted


46o  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

with  the  spiritual  salvation  of  these  men.  All  that  thou  are
required  to  do  is  to  have  pity  on  their  worldly  difficulties  and
frailties.  It  is  written  that  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone ,  but
it  is  not  written  that  he  lives  without  bread.  Pity  is  binding  upon
all,  and  upon  me  also.  If,  therefore,  thou  wilt  not  be  the  collective
organ  of  my  pity,  and  wilt  not,  by  rightly  dividing  our  labour,
make  it  morally  possible  for  me  to  devote  myself  to  the  work  of
piety,  I  will  once  more  have  to  set  myself  to  do  the  work  of
pity,  as  I  have  done  in  the  old  days  when  thou,  the  state,  wast
not  yet  called  Christian.  I  will  myself  have  to  see  that  there
should  be  no  famine  and  excessive  labour,  no  sick  uncared  for,  that
the  injured  should  receive  reparation,  and  injurers  be  corrected.
But  will  not  then  all  men  say  :  What  need  have  we  of  the  state,
which  has  no  pity  for  us,  since  we  have  a  Church  which  took
pity  on  our  bodies  as  well  as  on  our  souls  ?  ”  The  Christian  state,
worthy  of  this  name,  is  one  which,  without  interfering  in  ecclesi¬
astical  affairs,  acts  within  its  own  domain  in  the  kingly  spirit  of
Christ,  who  pitied  the  sick  and  the  hungry,  taught  the  ignorant,
forcibly  restrained  abuses  (driving  out  the  money-changers),  was
kind  to  the  Samaritans  and  the  Gentiles,  and  forbade  his  disciples
to  use  violence  against  unbelievers.

XVIII

Just  as  the  fundamental  moral  motive  of  piety,  determining
our  right  attitude  to  the  absolute  principle,  is  organised  in  the
Church,  and  the  other  ultimate  moral  principle,  that  of  pity,
determining  our  right  attitude  to  our  neighbours,  is  organised  in
the  state,  so  with  reference  to  the  third  essential  aspect  of  human
life  our  moral  relation  to  the  lower  nature  (our  own  and  that  of
others)  is  organised  objectively  and  in  a  collective  form  in  society
as  an  economic  union  or  zemstvo.

I  he  moral  duty  of  abstinence  based  as  a  fact  upon  the  feeling
of  shame  inherent  in  human  nature,  is  the  true  principle  of  the
economic  life  of  humanity  and  of  the  corresponding  social  organisa¬
tion,  so  far  as  its  own  specific  task  is  concerned.  The  economic
task  of  the  state  which  acts  from  motives  of  pity,  is  compulsorily
to  secure  for  each  a  certain  minimum  of  material  welfare  as  the
necessary  condition  of  worthy  human  existence.  This  is  the  right


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  461

solution  of  the  economic  question  with  regard  to  one  aspect  of
it,  namely,  with  regard  to  relations  between  human  beings.
Economic  activity  as  such  is,  however,  vitally  concerned  with
man’s  relation  to  the  material  nature,  and  the  unconditional
character  of  the  moral  principle  and  the  completeness  of  the  moral
order  necessarily  demand  that  this  relation,  too,  should  be  brought
under  the  norm  of  the  good  or  of  perfection.  Humanity  must
therefore  be  morally  organised  not  only  in  the  ecclesiastical  and
the  political,  but  also  in  the  specifically  economic  sphere  of  rela¬
tions.  And  just  as  between  the  Church  and  the  state,  so  between
the  three  parts  of  the  collective  moral  organisation  there  must
be  unity  without  confusion  and  distinction  without  separation.

What  form  must,  then,  the  good  assume  in  the  materially-
economic  society  as  such  ?  It  is  understood,  of  course,  that
moral  philosophy  can  do  no  more  than  indicate  what  the  informing
principle  and  the  final  end  of  such  a  society  ought  to  be.  This
principle  is  abstinence  from  the  evil  of  inordinate  carnality  ;  this
end  is  the  transmutation  of  the  material  nature,  both  of  our  own
and  of  that  external  to  us,  into  the  free  form  of  the  human  spirit,
a  form  which  does  not  limit  it  from  without,  but  unconditionally
completes  its  inward  and  external  existence.

But  what  is  there  in  common,  it  will  be  asked,  between
these  ideas  and  the  economic  reality  whose  principle  is  the  infinite
multiplication  of  wants  and  whose  end  is  an  equally  infinite  multi¬
plication  of  things  that  satisfy  these  wants.  Shame  and  shameless¬
ness,  spiritualisation  of  the  body  and  materialisation  of  the  soul,
resurrection  of  the  flesh  and  death  of  the  spirit,  certainly  do  have
something  in  common,  but  the  common  element  is  purely  negative.
This,  however,  is  of  no  importance.  The  fact  that  a  moral  norm
is  rejected  does  not  abolish,  but,  on  the  contrary,  brings  out  its
inner  significance.  There  is  no  rational  ground  for  supposing
that  the  economic  life  corresponds  to  the  ideal  from  the  first  in
a  way  in  which  neither  the  Church  nor  the  state  in  their  empirical
reality  correspond  to  it.  There  undoubtedly  is  a  certain  op¬
position  between  the  feeling  of  shame  and  the  operations  on  the
stock  exchange,  but  the  opposition  is  certainly  not  any  greater,
and  perhaps  is  even  less  than  that  between  real  Christian  piety  and
the  policy  of  the  mediaeval  Church.  There  is  a  lack  of  correspond¬
ence  between  the  principle  of  abstinence  and  money  speculations,


462  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

but  again  it  is  not  any  greater,  and,  indeed,  is  less  great  than  that
between  the  principle  of  the  state  as  based  upon  justice  and
morality  and  the  institution  of  lettres  de  cachet ,  the  dragonnades  or
the  wholesale  expulsions  of  persons  belonging  to  a  different  religion.
On  the  strength  of  what  has  happened  and  of  what  happens  still,
one  may  think  that  the  whole  of  the  economic  sphere  is  simply
the  field  for  greed  and  self-interest,  just  as  for  some  people  the
whole  significance  of  religion  and  the  Church  is  summed  up  by
the  ambition  of  the  clergy  and  the  superstitiousness  of  the  masses,
and  for  others  the  political  world  contains  nothing  but  tyranny  of
the  rulers  and  blind  submissiveness  of  the  crowd.  Such  views,  no
doubt,  exist,  but  they  are  due  either  to  a  desire  to  misunderstand
the  true  meaning  of  things,  or  to  incapacity  to  understand  it.  The
following  argument  is  of  more  weight.  Even  if  we  give  up  the
immediate  demand  for  the  ideal  of  perfection  in  human  relations,
we  still  ought  to  insist  upon  two  things  before  we  recognise  that
the  relations  in  question  have  any  moral  worth  or  significance,
(i)  The  moral  principle  said  to  be  involved  in  them  must  not  be
altogether  foreign  to  them,  but  must  show  itself  in  them,  even  if
in  an  imperfect  way  only.  (2)  In  their  historical  development
they  must  approximate  to  the  norm  or  become  more  perfect.
But  the  economic  life,  if  it  is  taken  as  a  certain  organisation  of
the  material  relations,  does  not  in  any  way  satisfy  these  two
necessary  demands.  In  spite  of  all  possible  abuses  in  the  ecclesi¬
astical  sphere,  it  could  not  be  seriously  denied  that  the  moral
principle  of  piety  is  inherent  in  the  Church.  It  could  not,  for
instance,  be  denied  that  the  temples  of  God  are,  generally
speaking,  erected  owing  to  the  feeling  of  piety,  and  that  the
majority  of  people  coming  to  the  services  are  moved  by  it.  It
could  not  be  denied,  either,  that  in  some,  if  not  in  all,  respects  the
life  of  the  Church  is  improving,  and  that  many  of  the  old  abuses
have  now  become  impossible.  In  a  similar  way  no  just  man  will
deny  that  state  institutions — law  courts,  police,  schools,  hospitals,
etc.  are  intended  tor  the  moral  purpose  of  defending  men  from
injuiies  and  calamities  and  ot  promoting  their  welfare,  nor  that
the  means  of  attaining  that  purpose  by  the  state  are  gradually
improving  in  the  sense  of  becoming  more  merciful.  But  in  the
economic  realm  there  exists  no  institution  which  serves  of
objective  expression  to  the  virtue  of  abstinence  and  helps  to


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  463

spiritualise  the  material  nature.  The  moral  principle  by  which  our
material  life  ought  to  be  determined,  and  our  external  environment
transformed,  has  no  reality  whatever  in  the  domain  of  the  economic
relations,  and,  therefore,  there  is  in  that  domain  nothing  to  improve.

This  complete  separation  of  the  economic  life  from  its  own
moral  purpose  is  unquestionably  a  fact,  but  from  our  point  of
view  it  can  be  satisfactorily  explained.  The  moral  organisation
of  humanity,  the  principle  of  which  was  given  in  the  Christian
religion,  could  not  be  equally  realised  in  all  its  parts.  A  certain
historical  successiveness  followed  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case.
The  religious  task,  the  organisation  of  piety  in  the  Church,  was
bound  to  occupy  the  foremost  place,  both  because  it  was  the
most  essential  and,  in  a  sense,  the  simplest  thing,  and  the  least
conditioned  by  man.  Indeed,  man’s  relation  to  the  uncon¬
ditional  principle  revealed  to  him  cannot  be  determined  by  any¬
thing  other  than  that  principle  itself,  since  nothing  can  be
higher  than  it  j  the  relation  rests  upon  its  own  foundation,  upon
what  is  given.  The  second  task  of  the  moral  organisation —
the  task  of  the  Christian  state — is,  in  addition  to  the  motive
of  collective  pity,  also  conditioned  by  the  supreme  religious
principle  which  liberates  that  worldly  pity  from  the  limitations
it  had  in  the  heathen  state.  And  we  see  that  the  political  task
of  historical  Christianity,  more  complex  and  conditioned  than
the  religious  one,  comes  on  the  scene  subsequently  to  the  latter.
There  was  a  period  in  the  Middle  Ages  when  the  Church
acquired  definite  organic  forms,  while  the  Christian  state  was  in  the
same  condition  of  apparent  non-existence  as  the  Christian  economic
life  is  to-day.  The  right  of  the  fist,  which  was  predominant  in
the  Middle  Ages,  no  more  corresponded  to  the  ideal  of  the  state
than  modern  banks  and  stock  exchanges  correspond  to  the  ideal
of  economic  relations.  Practical  realisation  of  the  latter  is  natur¬
ally  the  last  in  the  order  of  time  since  the  economic  sphere  is  the
furthest  limit  for  the  application  of  the  moral  principle.  Its
rightful  organisation,  i.e.  the  establishment  of  the  moral  relation
between  man  and  material  nature,  is  inevitably  conditioned  in
two  ways  :  first,  by  the  normal  religious  attitude  of  humanity
organised  in  the  Church  ;  and,  secondly,  by  the  normal  inter¬
human  or  altruistic  relations  organised  in  the  state.

It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  true  economic  problem  to


464  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

which  some  socialists  of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century
vaguely  groped  their  way,  and  from  which  modern  socialists  are
as  far  removed  as  their  opponents,  has  not  yet  received  a  stable
and  definite  expression  even  in  theory.

But  however  indefinite  the  last  practical  task  may  be,  the
changes  in  the  moral  sentiments  that  predominated  in  the  history  of
the  Christian  world  point  with  sufficient  clearness  to  three  main
epochs.  The  epoch  of  piety  was  characterised  by  its  exclusive
interest  for  the  c  divine,’  its  indifference  and  distrust  of  the  human
element,  its  hostility  and  fear  of  the  physical  nature.  This  first
epoch,  in  spite  of  its  stability  and  long  duration,  contained  in  itself
a  seed  of  destruction  :  the  spirit  of  the  one-sided,  intolerant  piety
of  the  Middle  Ages  was  regarded  as  the  absolute  norm.  When
this  contradiction  found  its  direct  and  extreme  expression  in  the
inhuman  and  pitiless  religious  persecutions  inspired  by  c  piety,’
there  was  a  reaction  which  found  its  first  expression  in  idealistic
humanism,  and  then  showed  itself  in  works  of  practical  pity  and
mercy.  This  movement  of  human  morality  characteristic  of  the
second  epoch  of  the  Christian  history — from  the  fifteenth  to  the
nineteenth  century  inclusive — began  to  pass  in  the  course  of  that
century  into  a  third  stage.  Two  preliminary  truths  appeared  in
the  living  consciousness  of  mankind.  The  first  is  that  if  mercy
is  to  be  fully  carried  out  it  must  include  the  domain  of  the
material  life ,  and  the  second  is  that  the  norm  of  the  material
life  is  continence.  To  the  philosophers  this  truth  was  clear  in
times  of  antiquity,  but  it  has  not  yet  shed  its  light  upon  the
general  consciousness  for  which  it  is  but  vaguely  beginning  to  dawn.
A  glimmer  of  it  can  unquestionably  be  seen  in  the  nineteenth
century  in  such  phenomena  as  the  ascetic  morality  of  the  fashion¬
able  philosopher  Schopenhauer,  the  spread  of  vegetarianism,  the
popularity  of  Hinduism  and  Buddhism  which,  though  badly  under¬
stood,  are  taken  precisely  on  their  ascetic  side  ;  the  success  of  the
‘  Kreuzer  SonataJ  the  fear  of  the  good  people  lest  the  preaching
of  continence  might  lead  to  a  sudden  cessation  of  the  human
race,  etc.

Economic  relations  and  asceticism  are  the  two  apparently  wholly
heterogeneous  orders  of  facts  and  ideas,  which,  in  the  beginning  of
the  nineteenth  century,  were  brought  together  in  a  perfectly  crude
and  external  way  by  Malthusianism.  The  inner  and  essential  con-


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  465

nection  between  them  consists  in  the  positive  duty  of  man  to  save
material  nature  fro7n  the  necessity  of  death  and  decay ,  and  to  prepare  it
for  universal  bodily  resurrection.


XIX

It  is  generally  believed  that  the  purpose  of  the  economic
activity  is  the  increase  of  wealth.  But  the  purpose  of  wealth
itself — unless  one  adopts  the  point  of  view  of  the  c  avaricious
knight  ’ — is  to  possess  the  fulness  of  physical  existence.  This  fulness
no  doubt  depends  upon  man’s  relation  to  the  material  nature,  and
here  two  ways  are  open  before  us.  We  can  either  selfishly  exploit
the  earthly  nature  or  lovingly  cultivate  it.  The  first  way  has  already
been  tried,  and  although  it  has  been  of  some  indirect  benefit  to
the  intellectual  development  of  man  and  to  the  external  human
culture,  the  main  purpose  cannot  be  attained  by  it.  Nature  yields
to  man  on  the  surface,  gives  him  the  semblance  of  dominion  over
her,  but  the  fictitious  treasures,  won  bv  violence,  bring  no  happi¬
ness  and  scatter  in  the  wind  like  burnt- up  cinders.  By  means  of
external  exploitation  of  the  powers  of  the  earth  man  cannot  secure
that  which  is  essential  to  his  material  welfare, — he  cannot,  that  is,
heal  his  physical  life  and  render  it  immortal.  And  he  cannot
possess  nature  from  within,  for  its  true  substance  is  unknown  to
him.  But  in  virtue  of  his  reason  and  conscience  he  knows  the
moral  conditions,  lying  within  his  own  control,  which  may  place
him  in  the  right  relation  to  nature.  Reason  reveals  to  him
that  every  real  fact  or  event  is  subject  to  the  undefeasible  law
of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Carnal  desires  seek  to  bind
the  soul  to  the  surface  of  nature,  to  the  material  things  and
processes,  and  to  turn  the  inner  potential  infinity  of  the  human
being  into  the  evil  external  boundlessness  of  passions  and  lusts.
Conscience  even  in  its  elementary  form  of  shame  condemns  this
path  as  unworthy ,  and  reason  shows  that  it  is  perilous.  The
more  the  soul  expends  itself  outwardly,  upon  the  surface  of
things,  the  less  inner  force  it  has  left  for  penetrating  to
the  inmost  substance  of  nature  and  taking  possession  of  it.
It  is  clear  that  man  can  truly  spiritualise  nature,  that  is,  call
forth  and  develop  its  inner  life,  only  by  his  own  overflowing
spirituality  ;  and  it  is  equally  clear  that  man  himself  can  only

2  H


466  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

become  spiritualised  at  the  expense  of  his  external,  outwardly
directed  mental  powers  and  desires.  The  powers  and  desires  of
the  soul  must  be  drawn  within  and,  through  this,  increase  in
intensity.  And  the  inwardly  concentrated,  powerful  and  spiritual¬
ised  being  of  man  will  be  in  communion  with  the  inner  substance
of  nature  and  no  longer  with  its  material  surface.

What  is  required  is  not  that  man  should  give  up  externally
acting  upon  nature  and  carrying  on  the  work  of  civilisation,  but
that  he  should  change  the  purpose  of  his  life  and  the  centre  of
gravity  of  his  will.  External  objects  which  most  men  passionately
seek  as  ends  in  themselves,  expending  upon  them  their  inner
powers  of  feeling  and  will,  must  entirely  become  the  means  and
the  instruments,  while  the  inner  forces  gathered  and  concentrated
within  must  be  used  as  a  powerful  lever  to  lift  the  weight  of  the
material  being  which  crushes  both  the  scattered  soul  of  man  and
the  divided  soul  of  nature.

The  normal  principle  of  the  economic  activity  is  economy — the  saving ,
the  collecting  of  psychical  forces  by  means  of  transmuting  one  species  of
tnental  energy  ( the  external  or  extensive )  into  another  kind  of  energy
( the  internal  or  the  intensive').  Man  either  scatters  his  sensuous
soul  or  he  gathers  it  together.  In  the  first  case  he  achieves
nothing  either  for  himself  or  for  nature,  in  the  second  he  heals
and  saves  both  himself  and  it.  Speaking  generally,  organisation
signifies  that  the  means  and  instruments  of  the  lower  order  are
co-ordinated  for  the  attainment  of  one  general  purpose  of  a  higher
order.  Therefore  the  principle  of  economic  activity  that  has
hitherto  been  dominant — the  indefinite  multiplication  of  the  ex¬
ternal  and  particular  wants,  and  the  recognition  of  the  external
means  of  satisfying  them  as  ends  in  themselves — is  the  principle
of  disorganisation,  of  social  decomposition,  while  the  principle  of
moral  philosophy — the  collecting  and  the  drawing  in  of  all  the
external  material  purposes  into  one  inward  and  mental  purpose
of  the  complete  reunion  of  the  human  being  with  the  sub¬
stance  of  nature,  is  the  principle  of  organisation  and  universal
resuscitation.

It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  this  task  is  third  in  the
order  of  time  in  the  general  moral  organisation  of  humanity,  and
that  the  real  solution  of  it  is  conditioned  by  the  first  two.  The
practice  of  personal  asceticism  can  be  normal  and  rational  only  on


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  467

condition  of  a  pious  attitude  to  God  and  pity  to  men.  If  this
were  not  so,  the  devil  would  be  the  pattern  of  asceticism.  In  a
similar  manner  the  collective  organisation  of  the  material  life  of
man  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  gathering  the  inner  forces
and  restraining  the  outer  wants,  cannot  be  rightly  and  success¬
fully  carried  out  by  isolated  agents  in  the  economic  realm  taken
by  itself.  It  involves  the  recognition  of  the  absolute  purpose
— the  Kingdom  of  God — represented  by  the  Church,  and  requires
the  help  of  the  rightful  methods  of  state  organisation.  Neither
the  individual  nor  the  collective  man  can  introduce  normal  order
into  his  material  life  apart  from  his  religion  and  his  relation  to
other  men.

Moral  organisation  of  the  human  race  or  its  regeneration  into
the  divine  humanity  is  an  indivisible  threefold  process.  Its  absolute
purpose  is  laid  down  by  the  Church  as  the  organised  piety,  collec¬
tively  receptive  of  the  Divine  grace  ;  its  formal  means  and  instru¬
ments  are  supplied  by  the  purely  human,  free  principle  of  just  pity
or  sympathy,  collectively  organised  in  the  state  ;  and  it  is  only  the
ultimate  substratum  or  the  material  body  of  the  God-in-man  that
is  found  in  the  economic  life,  determined  by  the  principle  of
continence.


XX

The  individual  factor  is,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  inevitably
involved  in  the  social  or  the  collective  aspect  of  the  moral  organisa¬
tion  of  humanity.  It  is  only  in  and  through  the  activity  of  the
individual  bearers  of  the  supreme  principles  of  life  that  humanity
increases  in  perfection,  or  is  morally  organised  in  the  various
aspects  of  its  existence.  The  unity,  the  completeness,  and  the
right  direction  of  the  general  moral  progress  depend  upon  a  har¬
monious  co-operation  of  the  leading  or ‘representative’ individuals.
The  normal  relation  between  the  state  and  the  Church  would  find
its  essential  condition  and  visible  real  embodiment  in  the  abiding
harmony  of  their  supreme  representatives,  the  high  priest  and  the
king.  The  power  of  the  king  would  be  consecrated  by  the
authority  of  the  priest,  and  the  authoritative  will  of  the  latter  would
only  find  expression  through  the  fulness  of  the  power  of  the  former.
The  high  priest  of  the  Church,  the  direct  bearer  of  the  Divine


468  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

principle,  the  representative  of  the  spiritual  parentage ,  the  father  by-
pre-eminence,  ought,  every  time  that  he  is  tempted  to  abuse  his
authority  by  turning  it  into  a  power  of  compulsion,  to  remember
the  words  of  the  gospel  that  the  Father  judges  no  one,  but  has
passed  all  judgment  to  the  Son,  for  he  is  the  Son  of  man.  The
Christian  king,  pre-eminently  the  son  of  the  Church,  when
tempted  to  raise  his  supreme  temporal  power  to  the  level  of  the
highest  spiritual  authority,  and  allow  it  to  interfere  with  the
affairs  of  religion  and  conscience,  ought  in  his  turn  to  remember
that  even  the  King  of  Heaven  does  the  will  of  the  Father.

The  authority  of  the  high  priest,  as  well  as  the  power  of  the
king,  are,  however,  inevitably  connected  with  external  advan¬
tages,  and  are  open  to  temptations  that  may  prove  too  strong.
Disputes,  encroachments  and  misunderstandings  are  bound  to
arise,  and  they  obviously  cannot  be  finally  settled  by  one  of  the
interested  parties.  All  external  limitations  are,  as  a  matter  of
principle  or  of  ideal,  incompatible  with  the  supreme  dignity  of  the
pontifical  authority  and  of  the  royal  power.  But  a  purely  moral
control  over  them  on  the  part  of  the  free  forces  of  the  nation  and
society  is  both  possible  and  extremely  desirable.  In  the  old  Israel
there  had  existed-  a  third  supreme  calling,  that  of  the  prophet.
Abolished  by  Christianity  in  theory,  it  practically  disappeared  from
the  stage  of  history,  and  came  forward  in  exceptional  cases  only,
for  the  most  part  in  a  distorted  form.  Hence  all  the  anomalies  of
mediaeval  and  modern  history.  The  restoration  of  the  pro¬
phetic  calling  does  not  rest  with  the  will  of  man,  but  a  reminder
of  its  purely  moral  significance  is  very  opportune  in  our  day,  and
is  appropriate  at  the  end  of  an  exposition  of  moral  philosophy.

Just  as  the  high  priest  of  the  Church  is  the  highest  expression
of  piety,  and  the  Christian  monarch  the  highest  expression  of
mercy  and  truth,  so  the  true  prophet  is  the  highest  expression  of
shame  and  conscience.  This  inner  nature  of  the  prophetic  calling
determines  its  external  characteristics.  The  true  prophet  is  a
social  worker  who  is  absolutely  independent,  and  neither  fears,  nor
submits  to,  anything  external.  Side  by  side  with  the  representatives
of  absolute  authority  and  absolute  power  there  must  be  in  human
society  representatives  of  absolute  freedom.  Such  freedom  cannot
belong  to  the  crowd,  cannot  be  an  attribute  of  democracy.  Every
one,  of  course,  desires  to  have  moral  freedom,  as  every  one,  perhaps,


MORAL  ORGANISATION  OF  HUMANITY  469

might  wish  to  have  the  supreme  authority  and  power  ;  but  desiring
is  not  enough.  The  supreme  authority  and  power  are  given  by  the
grace  of  God ;  the  true  freedom  man  must  deserve  for  himself  by  self-
renunciation.  The  right  to  he  free  follows  from  the  very  nature  of
man  and  must  be  externally  safeguarded  by  the  state.  But  the
degree  to  which  this  right  may  be  realised  entirely  depends  upon
inner  conditions,  upon  the  level  of  the  moral  consciousness.  The
man  who  has  complete  freedom,  both  external  and  inward,  is  one
who  is  not  inwardly  bound  by  anything  external,  and  in  the  last
resort  knows  of  no  other  standard  of  judgment  and  conduct  than
the  good  will  and  the  pure  conscience.

The  high  priest  is  the  coping-stone  of  a  numerous  and  complex
hierarchy  of  the  clergy,  through  which  he  comes  into  contact  with
the  whole  of  the  laity  ;  the  king  carries  out  his  work  among  the
people  through  a  complex  system  of  civil  and  military  institutions
represented  by  individual  men  ;  in  a  similar  manner  the  free
followers  of  the  supreme  ideal  realise  it  in  the  life  of  the  community
through  a  number  of  men  who  more  or  less  fully  participate  in
their  aspirations.  The  three  services  can  be  best  distinguished
by  the  fact  that  the  office  of  the  priest  derives  its  main  force
from  pious  devotion  to  the  true  traditions  of  the  past  ;  the  office
of  the  king — from  a  correct  understanding  of  the  true  needs  of
the  present  and  the  office  of  the  prophet,  from  the  faith  in  the
true  vision  of  the  future.  The  difference  between  the  prophet
and  the  idle  dreamer  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  the  case  of  the  prophet
the  flowers  and  fruits  of  the  ideal  future  do  not  hang  in  the  air  of
personal  imagination,  but  are  supported  by  the  visible  stem  of  the
present  social  needs  and  by  the  mysterious  roots  of  religious
tradition.  And  it  is  this  same  fact  that  connects  the  calling  of
the  prophet  with  the  office  of  priest  and  king.


CONCLUSION


THE  FINAL  DEFINITION  OF  THE  MORAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  LIFE

AND  THE  TRANSITION  TO  THE  THEORETICAL  PHILOSOPHY

Our  life  acquires  moral  worth  and  significance  when,  through
striving  after  perfection,  it  becomes  related  to  the  perfect  good.
It  follows  from  the  very  conception  of  the  perfect  good  that  all
life  and  all  existence  are  connected  with  it.  There  is  meaning  in
the  animal  life,  in  its  functions  of  nourishment  and  reproduction.
But  this  meaning,  important  and  unquestionable  as  it  is,  ex¬
presses  only  an  involuntary  and  partial  connection  of  a  particular
being  with  the  universal  good,  and  cannot  satisfy  the  life  of  man  ;
his  will  and  his  reason,  being  forms  of  the  infinite,  demand
something  more.  The  spirit  is  nurtured  by  the  knowledge  of  the
perfect  good  and  is  propagated  by  doing  good,  by  realising,  that
is,  the  unconditional  and  universal  in  all  the  particular  con¬
ditions  and  relations.  In  inwardly  demanding  a  perfect  union  with
the  absolute  good  we  show  that  that  which  is  demanded  by  us
has  not  yet  been  given  us,  and  that,  therefore,  the  moral  signi¬
ficance  of  our  life  can  only  consist  in  approaching  the  perfect
association  with  the  good  or  in  rendering  perfect  our  actual  inner
connection  with  it.

The  demand  for  moral  perfection  involves  the  general  idea  of
the  absolute  good  and  of  its  necessary  attributes.  It  must  be  all-
embracing,  that  is,  it  must  be  the  criterion  of  our  moral  relation
to  all  things.  All  that  exists  or  may  exist  is  from  the  moral  point
of  view  exhausted  by  three  categories  :  it  is  either  above  us,  or
on  a  level  with  us,  or  below  us.  It  is  logically  impossible  to  find  a
fourth  relation.  Our  inner  consciousness  testifies  that  above  us
is  the  absolute  good  or  God  and  that  which  already  is  in  perfect
union  with  Him,  a  union  we  have  not  yet  attained  ;  on  a  level  with

470


THE  MORAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  LIFE


471


us  is  everything  which,  like  ourselves,  is  capable  of  spontaneously
increasing  in  moral  perfection,  everything  which,  like  us,  is  on  the
way  to  the  absolute,  and  can  conceive  the  purpose  of  its  action, — that
is,  all  human  beings  ;  below  us  is  all  that  is  incapable  of  inward
spontaneous  perfection  and  that  can  enter  through  us  only  into
a  perfect  relation  with  the  absolute — namely,  material  nature.
This  threefold  relation  in  its  most  general  form  is  a  fact.  We
are,  as  a  fact,  subordinate  to  the  absolute,  by  whatever  name  we
might  describe  it.  We  are,  as  a  fact,  equal  to  other  men  in  the
essential  attributes  of  human  nature,  and  through  heredity,  history,
and  social  life  are  one  with  them  in  our  earthly  destiny.  We
possess,  as  a  fact,  important  advantages  over  the  material  creation.
Ihe  moral  problem  then  can  only  consist  in  perfecting  what  is  given.
The  fact  of  the  threefold  relation  must  be  transformed  into  a
threefold  norm  of  rational  and  voluntary  activity.  The  inevitable
submission  to  the  supreme  power  must  become  the  conscious  and
free  service  of  the  perfect  good  ;  the  natural  solidarity  with  other
human  beings  must  be  transformed  into  sympathetic  and  har¬
monious  со  -  operation  ;  the  actual  advantages  we  have  over
material  nature  must  become  rational  mastery  over  it  for  our  good
and  its  own.

The  true  beginning  of  moral  progress  is  contained  in  the
three  fundamental  feelings  which  are  inherent  in  human  nature
and  constitute  natural  virtue  :  the  feeling  of  shame  which  safe¬
guards  our  higher  dignity  against  the  encroachments  of  the
animal  desires,  the  feeling  of  pity  which  establishes  an  inner
equality  between  ourselves  and  others,  and,  finally,  the  religious
feeling  which  expresses  our  recognition  of  the  supreme  good.
Inseparable  from  these  feelings  is  the  consciousness,  even  though
it  be  a  dim  one,  that  they  are  the  norm,  and  express  what  is
good,  while  the  opposite  of  them  is  bad  —  the  consciousness
that  one  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  immoderate  physical  desires  and
slavery  to  the  animal  nature,  that  one  ought  to  pity  others,  ought
to  do  homage  to  the  Divine.  These  feelings,  representing  the  good
nature  which  strives  from  the  first  towards  that  which  ought  to  be,
and  the  testimony  of  conscience  that  accompanies  them  constitute
the  one  or  rather  the  three-in-one  foundation  of  moral  progress.
Conscientious  reason  generalises  the  impulses  of  the  good  nature  and
makes  them  into  a  law.  The  content  of  the  moral  law  is  that


472  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

which  is  given  in  the  good  feelings,  but  it  is  clothed  in  the  form
of  a  universal  and  binding  demand  or  imperative.  Moral  law
grows  out  of  the  testimony  of  conscience,  and  conscience  itself
is  the  feeling  of  shame  developed  on  its  formal  and  not  on  its
material  side.

With  regard  to  our  lower  nature  the  moral  law,  generalising
the  immediate  feeling  of  modesty,  commands  us  always  to  dominate
all  sensual  desires,  admitting  them  only  as  a  subordinate  element
within  the  limits  of  reason  ;  morality  at  this  stage  no  longer  takes
the  form — as  in  the  elementary  feeling  of  shame — of  the  mere
instinctive  rejection  of  the  hostile  element  or  recoiling  before
it,  but  demands  actual  struggle  with  the  flesh.  With  regard  to
other  human  beings,  the  moral  law  gives  to  the  feeling  of  pity  or
sympathy  the  form  of  justice,  and  demands  that  we  should  recog¬
nise  each  of  our  neighbours  as  having  the  same  absolute  signifi¬
cance  as  ourselves,  or  that  we  should  regard  others  as  we  could
consistently  wish  them  to  regard  us,  independently  of  this  or  that
particular  feeling.  Finally,  in  relation  to  the  Deity  the  moral
law  affirms  itself  as  the  expression  of  Its  law-giving  will,  and
demands  that  that  will  should  be  unconditionally  recognised  for
the  sake  of  its  own  dignity  or  perfection.  But  when  this  pure
recognition  of  God’s  will  as  the  all-embracing  and  all-sufficient
good  has  been  attained,  it  must  be  clear  that  the  fulness  of  this
will  can  only  be  revealed  through  its  own  inner  effects  in  the  soul
of  man.  Having  risen  to  this  level,  the  formal  or  rational
morality  enters  the  domain  of  the  absolute  morality — the  good  of
the  rational  law  is  completed  by  the  good  of  the  Divine  grace.

According  to  the  usual  teaching  of  true  Christianity,  which
correctly  represents  the  position,  grace  does  not  abolish  nature
and  natural  morality  but  ‘perfects’  it,  that  is,  brings  it  to  perfec¬
tion  ;  in  like  manner  grace  does  not  abolish  law,  but  fulfils  it,
and  only  in  so  far  as  it  does  so,  renders  it  unnecessary.

The  fulfilment  of  the  moral  law,  whether  instinctive  or
deliberate,  cannot,  however,  be  limited  to  the  personal  life  of
the  individual — for  two  reasons,  a  natural  and  a  moral  one.  The
natural  reason  is  that  the  individual  taken  separately  does  not
exist  at  all.  From  the  point  of  view  of  practice  this  reason  is
quite  sufficient,  but  strict  moralists  who  care  not  for  what  is  but
for  what  ought  to  he  will  attach  greater  weight  to  the  moral


THE  MORAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  LIFE  473

reason — to  the  incompatibility,  namely,  between  the  idea  of  a
separate  isolated  man  and  the  idea  of  moral  perfection.  On
natural  and  moral  grounds  the  process  of  attaining  perfection,
which  constitutes  the  moral  significance  of  our  life,  can  only
be  conceived  as  a  collective  process,  taking  place  in  the  collec¬
tive  man,  that  is,  in  the  family,  in  the  nation,  in  humanity.
These  three  aspects  of  the  collective  man  do  not  replace  but
mutually  support  and  complete  one  another,  each  following  its
own  path  towards  perfection.  Perfection  is  being  attained  by  the
family  which  spiritualises  and  preserves  for  eternity  the  significance
of  the  individual  past  in  and  through  the  moral  bond  with  the
forefathers,  the  significance  of  the  real  present  in  true  marriage
and  the  significance  of  the  individual  future  in  the  upbringing  of
new  generations.  Perfection  is  being  attained  by  the  nation,
which  deepens  and  extends  its  natural  solidarity  with  other  nations
by  entering  into  moral  communion  with  them.  Perfection  is
being  attained  by  humanity  which  organises  the  good  in  the
general  forms  of  the  religious,  political,  and  social -economic
culture,  rendering  them  more  and  more  conformable  to  the
final  end  —  the  preparation  of  humanity  for  the  unconditional
moral  order,  or  the  kingdom  of  God.  Religious  good  or  piety
is  organised  in  the  Church  which  seeks  to  make  its  human
aspect  more  perfect  by  making  it  more  and  more  conformable  to
the  Divine.  The  inter-human  good  or  justice  and  pity  is  organised
in  the  State  which  grows  more  perfect  by  extending  the  domain
of  justice  and  mercy  at  the  expense  of  violence  and  arbitrariness
both  within  the  nation  and  between  nations.  The  physical  good
or  man’s  moral  relation  to  material  nature  is  organised  in  the
economic  union,  the  perfection  of  which  consists  not  in  the
accumulation  of  things,  but  in  the  spiritualisation  of  matter  as  the
condition  of  normal  and  eternal  existence  in  the  physical  world.

Constant  interaction  between  personal  moral  effort  and  the
organised  moral  work  of  collective  man  finally  justifies  the  moral
significance  of  life — that  is,  it  justifies  the  good,  which  thus  appears
in  all  its  purity,  fulness,  and  power.  The  system  of  moral  philo¬
sophy  worked  out  in  the  present  book  is  a  conceptual  reproduction
of  this  process  in  its  totality  ;  it  follows  history  in  what  has  been
attained  already,  and  anticipates  it  in  what  is  still  left  to  be  done.
In  reducing  its  contents  to  one  formula  we  shall  find  that  the


474  THE  JUSTIFICATION  OF  THE  GOOD

perfection  of  the  good  finally  shows  itself  as  the  inseverable
organisation  of  a  threefold  love.  The  feeling  of  reverence  or  piety
which  means  at  first  a  timid  and  involuntary  and  then  a  free  an
filial  submission  to  the  supreme  principle,  comes  to  know  its
object  as  absolute  perfection,  and  is  transformed  into  a  pure,  all-
embracing,  and  boundless  love  for  it,  conditioned  solely  by  the
recognition  of  its  absolute  character— an  ascending  love.  In  con¬
formity  with  its  all-embracing  object  this  love  includes  all  else  in
God,  and,  in  the  first  place,  those  who,  like  us,  can  participate  in
it,  i.e.  human  beings.  Our  physical  and  subsequently  our  moral
and  political  pity  for  men  becomes  a  spiritual  love  for  them,  or  an
equalising  love.  But  the  Divine  and  all-embracing  love  to  which
man  attains  does  not  stop  at  this  ;  becoming  a  descending  love  it
acts  upon  material  nature,  bringing  it  also  within  the  fulness  of
the  absolute  good,  making  it  the  living  throne  of  the  Divine
glory.

When  this  universal  justification  of  the  good,  its  extension  to
all  the  relations  of  life,  is  clearly  seen  as  a  historical  fact  by  every
mind,  the  only  question  for  the  individual  will  be  the  practical
question  of  will,— to  accept  this  perfect  moral  significance  of  life
for  oneself,  or  to  reject  it.  But  as  long  as  the  end  has  not  yet
come,  as  long  as  the  rightness  of  the  good  has  not  become  self-
evident  in  all  things  and  to  all,  further  theoretical  doubt  is  still
possible.  That  doubt  cannot  be  solved  within  the  limits  of
moral  or  practical  philosophy,  although  it  in  no  way  detracts  from
the  binding  character  of  its  maxims  upon  men  of  good  will.

If  the  moral  significance  of  life  in  the  last  resort  consists  in
the  struggle  with  evil  and  in  the  triumph  of  good  over  evil,  there
arises  the  eternal  question  as  to  the  origin  of  evil  itself.  If  evil
springs  from  the  good,  struggle  with  it  seems  to  be  based  upon  a
misconception  ;  if  it  arises  independently  of  the  good,  the  good
cannot  be  unconditional,  since  the  condition  of  its  realisation  will
be  external  to  it.  And  if  the  good  is  not  unconditional,  wherein
does  its  essential  superiority  consist,  and  what  is  the  final  guarantee
of  its  triumph  over  evil  ?

Rational  faith  in  the  absolute  good  is  based  upon  inner
experience,  and  upon  that  which  with  logical  necessity  follows
from  it.  But  inner  religious  experience  is  a  personal  matter,
and,  from  the  external  point  of  view,  is  conditional.  When,


THE  MORAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  LIFE  475

therefore,  rational  faith  based  upon  it  becomes  a  system  of  uni¬
versal  theoretic  assertions,  it  must  be  theoretically  justified.

The  question  as  to  the  origin  of  evil  is  purely  intellectual,
and  can  be  solved  by  a  true  metaphysic  alone,  which,  in  its  turn,
presupposes  the  solution  of  the  question  as  to  the  nature,  the
validity,  and  the  means  of  knowing  the  truth.

The  independence  of  moral  philosophy  in  its  own  sphere  does
not  prevent  it  from  being  inwardly  connected  with  theoretical
philosophy — the  theory  of  knowledge  and  metaphysics.

It  least  of  all  befits  believers  in  the  absolute  good  to  fear
philosophical  investigation,  as  if  the  moral  significance  of  the
world  could  lose  by  being  finally  explained,  and  as  though  union
with  God  in  love,  and  harmony  with  His  will,  could  leave  us  no
part  in  the  Divine  intellect.  Having  justified  the  good  as  such
in  moral  philosophy,  we  must,  in  theoretical  philosophy,  justify
the  good  as  Truth.


THE  END


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  &  R-  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh.


'


THE  LAST  OF  THE  ROMANOFS

By  CHARLES  RIVET

Petrograd  Correspondent  of  the  Paris  “Temps.”

Translated  with  an  Introduction  by  Hardress  O’Grady.

Demy  8 vo.  Illustrated,  ys.  6 d.  net.

In  this  careful  and  judicial  study  the  author  describes  the  influences  which
have  brought  about  the  present  situation  in  Russia.  Chapters  are  devoted  to  the
ex-Czar  and  his  Court — Russian  political  parties — the  genesis  of  the  Revolution —
the  Franco- Russian  Alliance,  etc.,  and  the  whole  book  forms  a  useful  and
authentic  guide  to  the  understanding  of  the  Russian  problem.

WAR  &  REVOLUTION  IN  RUSSIA

By  JOHN  POLLOCK

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Crown  8 vo.  Frontispiece.  6s.  net.

Contents  : — Bergen  to  the  Arctic — Russia’s  Klondyke — The  Port  of  Snows
— Karungi — Towards  the  Furnace — Life  in  Warsaw — Perimyshl — In  the  Russian
Trenches — Lemberg — Warsaw  in  lilac  time — With  the  Army — A  Visit  to  General
Alexeiev — Retreat— Polish  Distress — Lutsk — The  Galician  View — Refugees  at
Kiev — Winter  in  Petrograd — Rasputin — Before  the  Revolution — The  Revolution
• — The  Duma  of  the  Revolution — The  Danger  in  Russia — Soldiers  and  Workmen
—  Thoughts  on  the  Polish  Question— “  Peace  without  Annexations  or  Indem¬
nities” — The  Dog  Days,  1917.

THE  SELF-DISCOVERY  OF  RUSSIA

By  J.  Y.  SIMPSON,  M.A.,  D.Sc.

Author  of

“  Sidelights  on  Siberia,”  “  The  Spiritual  Interpretation  of  Nature,”  etc.

Demy  8 vo.  24  Illustrations.  6s.  net.


THE  RUSSIAN  PROBLEM

By  PAUL  VINOGRADOFF,  F.B.A.

Corpus  Professor  of  Jurisprudence  in  the  University  of  Oxford,
Sometime  Professor  of  History  in  the  University  of  Moscow.

Demy  8 vo.  Paper ,  u.  net.  Cloth,  2 s.  net.


PUBLISHED  BY

CONSTABLE  &  Co.,  Ltd.,  10  Orange  Street,  LONDON,  W.C.2.


A  HISTORY  OF  POLAND

FROM  THE  EARLIEST  TIMES  TO  THE
PRESENT  DAY

By  COLONEL  F.  E.  WHITTON

With  Maps ,  8s.  6 d.  net.


A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  POLAND

By  J.  S.  ORVIS

With  Maps ,  6s.  6d.  net.


MASTERS  OF  RUSSIAN  MUSIC

By  M.  MONTAGU-NATHAN

Author  of  “  A  History  of  Russian  Music.”

Imp.  1 6 mo.  Frontispiece.  2s.  net  each.

I.  GLINKA

II.  RIMSKY-KORSAKOF

III.  MOUSSORGSKY

THE  EPIC  SONGS  OF  RUSSIA

By  ISABEL  FLORENCE  HAPGOOD

With  an  Introduction  by  J.  W.  Mackail,  M.A.,  LL.  D.,  formerly
Professor  of  Poetry  in  the  University  of  Oxford.

Crown  8 no.  5r.  net.

This  collection  of  translations  of  the  most  important  epic
poetry  of  Russia  will,  it  is  hoped,  be  welcomed  by  the  large  public
who  are  anxious  to  become  better  acquainted  with  the  classics  of
Russian  literature.


PUBLISHED  BY

CONSTABLE  &  CO.,  Ltd.,  io  Orange  Street,  LONDON,  W.C.2.


CONSTABLE’S  RUSSIAN  LIBRARY.

Each  Edited  and  with  an  Introduction  by  Stephen  Graham.

Translations  of  important  Russian  books  that  have  not  hitherto

appeared  in  English.

THE  REPUBLIC
OF  THE  SOUTHERN  CROSS

AND  OTHER  STORIES
By  VALERY  BRUSSOF

5.9.  net.

THE  SWEET-SCENTED  NAME

AND  OTHER  FAIRY  TALES,  FABLES,  AND  STORIES
By  FEDOR  SOLOGUB

5.9.  net.

“  It  seems  to  me  the  greatest  literary  treasure  of  the  kind  that  has
appeared  during  the  present  year.” — Robert  Lynd  in  the  Daily  News.

“His  stories  are  drenched  with  light  and  colour,  kaleidoscopic,
the  pattern,  apparently,  continually  self-creative.  Their  onset  and
flow  is  like  that  of  water  rushing  from  the  heights  of  a  mountain.”- —
Times.


WAR  AND  CHRISTIANITY

FROM  THE  RUSSIAN  POINT  OF  VIEW

THREE  CONVERSATIONS  BY

VLADIMIR  SOLOVYOF

Sj.  net.

Solovyof,  who  died  in  1901,  is  Russia’s  greatest  philosopher  and
one  of  the  greatest  of  her  poets.  In  national  culture  he  owned
Dostoievsky  as  his  prophet,  and  with  him  is  one  of  the  spiritual
leaders  of  the  Russian  people.  In  this  volume  he  combats  Tolstoy
and  positivism,  expressing  the  trust  in  spiritual  power  which  was  his
deepest  faith.


PUBLISHED  BY

CONSTABLE  &  CO.,  Ltd.,  10  Orange  Street,  LONDON,  W.C.2.


CONSTABLE’S  RUSSIAN  LIBRARY —continued.


THE  WAY  OF  THE  CROSS

By  V.  DOROSHEVITCH

as.  6 d.  net.

A  remarkably  vivid  and  poignant  impression  of  the  millions  of
Russian  and  Polish  peasants  on  the  road  after  the  great  invasion  of
Russia  by  the  Germans,  written  by  one  of  the  most  famous  Russian
contemporary  journalists.

“It  is  sure  to  be  read  by  thousands,  and  will  bring  home  to  the  dullest  mind
the  suffering,  pain,  disease,  hunger,  wretchedness,  and  death  which  ensue  when  a
warlike  enemy  sweeps  over  a  land  of  peace  and  quiet.” — Country  Life.

“In  my  opinion,  the  most  wonderful  book  of  the  war.” — Robert  Lynd  in
the  Daily  News.

“A  more  graphic,  thrilling  and  poignant  picture  of  the  terrible  consequences
of  invasion  it  would  be  impossible  to  paint.” — Liverpool  Daily  Courier.

A  SLAV  SOUL

AND  OTHER  TALES
By  ALEXANDER  KUPRIN

5v.  net.

Kuprin  is  probably  the  most  popular  of  living  Russian  writers  and  the
greatest  of  the  modern  Russian  humorists.  The  tales  in  this  volume
have  been  very  carefully  selected,  and  it  is  believed  that  they  represent
the  best  of  his  work.

“Barrie  himself  might  have  written  the  whimsical  ‘Last  Word.’” —
Christian  World.

“As  searching  and  as  vivid  as  Mr.  Kipling’s  stories.” — Athenceum.

“‘Cain’  might  have  been  written  by  Tolstoy  himself.  A  charming,  richly-
coloured  and  good-humoured  book.” — Observer.


THE  EMIGRANT

By  L.  F.  DOSTOIEFFSKAYA

55-.  net.

“A  continuous  interesting  study.  .  .  .  Irene  is  attractive  and  appealing. ” —
The  Times.

“  Curiously  arresting.  .  .  .  ‘The  Emigrant’  is  to  be  recommended  to  those
who  care  to  stray  off  the  beaten  paths  of  fiction.” — Globe.

“  Of  considerable  power  and  interest.” — Athenceum.


PUBLISHED  BY

CONSTABLE  &  CO.,  Ltd.,  10  Orange  Street,  LONDON,  W.C.2.


DATE  DUE

CARR  McLEAN,  TORONTO  FORM  #38-297

BJ  1136  .S613  1918

Solovyov,  Vladimir  Sergey
The  justification  of  the  good


010101  000


0


63  001


3674  8


TRENT  UNIVERSITY


BJ1136  .S613  1918

Solovyov,  Vladimir  Sergeyevich
1853-1900

[Opravdanie  dobia.  English]

The  justification  of  the  good:
an  essay  on  moral  philosophy

094411


094411
