The Jews and Modern Capitalism
Werner Sombart (M. Epstein, trans.) (1913)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Werner Sombart's 'Die Juden und das Wirtschaftsleben' (1911) in M. Epstein's English translation as 'The Jews and Modern Capitalism' (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1913). Scan via Internet Archive (Digital Library of India). Ends with the translator's notes; the printer's imprint at the back is trimmed. This 1913 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE JEWS AND

MODERN CAPITALISM


By WERNER SOMBART

PROFESSOR AT THE HANDEX'SHOCHSCBULE
IN BERLIN ; FORMERLY PROF^OR OF
ECONOMICS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF BRESLAV


Translated, with Notes^ by
M. EPSTEIN, M.A., Ph.D.


T. FISHER UNWIN
IiONDON; ADELPHI TEftRACE
LEIPSiC : INSELSTRASSE 3 0


Fmt Eiighsk EdtUon^ igts


CONTENTS


[// is hoped that this ffiirk^comprehensive table of contents will ^ake up
for the lack of an ^ Index. 1

Translator’s Introductory Note,


PART I

THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE JEWS TO
MODERN ECONOMIC LIFE

CHAPTER I
introductory

Statistic and genetic methods, p. 3. Advantages and disadvantages
of the first, pp. 3-4. The need of supplementing it by the second,
p, 4. How the genetic method is to be applied, p, 5. Considerations
to be borne in mind in regard to the term *‘Jew,” p. 5. Jewish
influence may appear larger than it actually was, p. 6. Reasons for
this, p. 7. Lack of exact information, p. 7, Baptised Jews, p. 7.
Jewesses, p. 8. Crypto-Jews, p. 8. ** Unofficial” Jewish influence,
p, 9.


CHAPTER ir

THE SHIFTING OF THE CENTRE OF ECONOMIC LIFE SINCE THE
SIXTEENTH CENTURY

Northern Europe succeeds Southern Europe as the centre of ecojaomic’
life, p. 1 1 « Explanations that have been offered fbr this phenopabnon '


‘ CONTENTS


-vi

unsatisfactory, p. ii. Striking parallelism between the wanderings of
the Jews and the economic development of nations, p. 1 3. , An attempt
to bring the two into relationship, p. 14. Contemporary opinion on
the matter, p/iy, in Venice, p. 17, in England, p. 17, in France, p. 17,
in the Netherlands, p. 18, in Germany, p. 20. Twofold influence of
the Jews, p. 21.


CHAPTER III

THE QUICKENING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE

Jewish influence quantitatively considered, p. 22, in England, p. 22,
at the Leipi:ig fairs, p. 23, in the Levant trade, p. 24. The com-
modities in which they dealt, p. 25. Their trading on a large scale,
p. 25. They introduced new commodities, p. 26. The variety of
Jewish trade, p. 26. Their predominating influence in gold-producing
countries, p 27,


CHAPTER IV

THE foundation OF ‘MODERN COLONIES

. Jews keen colonial settlers, p. 28, in East Indies, p. 29, in Australia
and South Africa, p. 29, in America, p. 30. How America was bound
up with the Jews, p, 30. Jews and the discovery of America, p. 31.
Jewish settlers there, p. 32, in 'the West Indies and in South America,
p. 32, in the United States, p. 37. Americans debt to the Jews, p. 43.^
Jewish immigration into America, p. 45-’


CHAPTER V

THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE

s

The Jews and the founders of modem States, p. 49. Similarity, of
'interests, p. 50. What the Jews did for the modern State, p. 51.

(i) The Jews as Purveprs: in England, p. 51 ; in France, p. 51,;
in Germany, p. 52 ; in Austria, p. 53.

' (2) The Jews as Financiers : in Holland, p. 54 ; in England, p. 54 ;


CONTENTS


vii


in France, p. 56 ; in Germany and Austria, p. 57 5 “ Court Jews,”
p. 57 ; in the United States, p. 59.


CHAPTER VI

THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE IN ECONOMIC LIFE

Influence of Stock Exchange, p. 61 ; Securities — their rise, dealings
in and creation of, p. 61.

(1) The Origin of Securities : What they are, p. 61 ; what is meant
by the “ standardization of credit,” p. 62 ; illustrations from history
of bills of exchange, p. 62. The share of the Jews in creating credit
instruments, p. 63. Probability that the Jews introduced bills ot
exchange, p. 65 ; instances from Holland, p. 65, and Genoa, p. 66.
Illustrations from history of stocks and shares, p. 67, from that of
bank-notes, p. 68, and from that of Public Debt Bonds, p. 70. The
extent to which Jews were responsible for the standardization of credit,
p. 71. Only indirect evidence of Jewish influence, p. 72 ; but direct
proof in Rabbinic law, p. 73* The Mamran^ P- 73 5 its widespread
use, p. 75 ; standardization of credit is in accordance with the spirit
of Jewish Law, p. 78.

(2) Buying and Selling Securities : Necessity for a legal code regulating
exchange, p. 80 ; Jewish influence in the formation of such a code,
p. 81 ; as in the establishment of a market for securities, p. 82. History
of Stock Exchange activities, p. 83 ; Jews and their relation to these
activities, p. 83 ; in Venice and Amsterdam, .p. 83 ; in Frankfort,
Hamburg, and Bordeaux, p. 84. Where Stock Exchanges first arose,
p. 85 ; assumption — ^Jews were prominent speculators, p. 85 ; facts in
support of the assumption, p. 86 ; predominance of Jews on the London
Stock Exchange, p. 88 ; *‘Jews Walk” in ’Change Alley, p. 88 ;
wealthy Jews in England in 17th and i8th centuries, p. 89. Stock-
jobbing as a specialized profession introduced into the London Stock
Exchange by Jews, p. 90 ; proof of this, p, 90. London owes to the
Jews its position as the chief financial centre of the world, p* 91.
Jews and the Stock Exchange in Paris, p. 92 ; in Frankfort, Hamburg,
and Berlin, p, 93. Contemporary opinion concerning the Stock
Exchange in the i8th century, p. 9S > Postlethwayt, p. 95 ; Hume
and Adam Smith, p. 96 5 change in public opinion, p. 97. Hence
beginning of a new period in the history of the Stock Exchange, p. 97.
Some characteristics of the new state of affairs, p. 98 ; increase in the
volume of securities, p. 98 ; Jews and the new state of affairs, p, 99,
The Rothschilds, p, 99 ; their influence, p. 99.


vili


CONTENTS


(3) The Creation ofSecunties : a new kind of activity, p* loi ; which
owes its origin to Jews, p. 103. Company-promoting, p. 104 ; a
speciality of Jewish undertakers, p. 105.

(4) The CommerciaUzation of Industry ; meaning of the expression,
p. 109. Illustration from the electrical industry, p. 109. Jews as
industrial undertakers, p. iii.


CHAPTER VII

THE GROWTH OF A CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW
IN ECONOMIC LIFE

The outer structure of modern economic life owes much to Jews,
p. 1 15; so does its inner spirit, p. 115. Illustrations from contem-
porary opinion, p. 115. Jews regarded as “Interlopers,^* p. 116.
Instances from Germany, p. 116 ; England (Sir Josiah Child), p. 117 ;
France, p. 118; Sweden and Poland, p. 118. Why were the Jews
such keen competitors? p. 118. Contemporary opinion offered
various reasons, p. 118. Real reason: Jews were the pioneers of
anew economic order, p. 119. The economic outlook of the 17th
and 1 8th centuries, p. I20; regulated economic activities, p. 121 ;
no competition, p. 122 ; no advertisement, p, 122 ; just price, p. 126.
Attitude of the Jews to this outlook, p- 127 ; they were not the only
“interlopers,” p. 128 ; what distinguished the Jews from the others,
p. 129 ; the Jew a business man, p. 131 ; illustration from the Memoirs
of Gluckel von Hameln, p. 131 ; from non-Jewish sources, p. 133 ;
including popular proverbs, p, 134. Specific charges against Jewish
traders all characteristic of modern commerce : their enterprise,
p. 136; their attempts to catch customers, p. 137 ; their utilization
of advertisements, p. 140 ; their cutting of prices, p. 141. Explan-
ations for the last, p. 143 ; allegation that Jews lowered quality
of goods, p. 14s ; in reality Jews adopted principle of substitution,
p. 146. Jews sold more cheaply than others because they were
content wnth lesser profits, p. 148. Small profits, quick returns, p. 1 30.
Instances of Jewish commercial enterprise : the waste products
business, p. 1 5 1 ; the general store, p, 1 5 1 ; payment by instalments,
p. 152 ; and catering, p. 152, The Jewish outlook was the modern
outlook, p. 153. How may it be accounted for ? p. 153.


CONTENTS


ix


PART II

THE APTITUDE OF THE JEWS FOR MODERN
CAPITALISM

CHAPTER VIII

THE PROBLEM

Need for clear formulation of the question to be solved, p. 157.
The Jewish aptitude — for what! p. 157; how did this aptitude
develop? p. 157. The answer to the first question is Capitalism,
p. 158. Previous considerations of the question somewhat vague,
p. 158. The answer to the second question may refer to either
“ subjective ” or “objective ” circumstances, p. 158.


CHAPTER IX

WHAT IS A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER ?

Conception of capitalism, p. 160; profit the mainspring of the
system, p. 160 ; economic rationalism, p. 160. The functions of the
capitalistic undertaker, p. 161 ; his twofold nature, p. l6z ; he is an
undertaker — a man with an object in view, p. 162 ; he is also a trader,
p, 162. Analysis of the conception “undertaker,” p. 163. Analysis
of that of “ trader,” p. 165,


CHAPTER X

THE OBJECTIVE CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE JEWISH APTITUDE
FOR MODERN CAPITALISM

These circumstances looked at in a fourfold aspect, p. 169.

(1) Jewish Dispersion over a wide area: The Jews a scattered
people, p. 170. Branches of one family in different centres, p. 170 ;
hence their “great correspondence,” p. 17 1, The Spectator quoted,
p. 172; their linguistic ability, p. 173; consequences of this gift,
p. 174 ; consequence of their “great correspondence,*^ p. 175-

(2) The Jews as AVtens: in what sense true ! p. 175. Advantages of
this position, p. 176. True also in the sense that Jews looked upon


X


CONTENTS


themselves, and were regarded, as a peculiar people, ‘p. 177. Conse-
quences of this psycholo^cal contrast, p. 177.

( 3 ) as Smi-citizens : Subject to restrictions, p. 178 ; economic
.effects slight, p. 178. Some instances of restrictions, p, 178 ; case of
Prussia most instructive, p. 179. Xhe restrictions to a large extent a
dead letter, p. 181. Real restrictions : their exclusion from gilck and
from public life, p, 181, Economic consequences of the latter, p. 182.

( 4 ) W^ealth of the 7 ^^ • Much wealth found among Jews,
p. 184, Instances from Dutch Jews in the 17th and i8th centuries,
'p. 184; from English Jews in the 17th century, p. 185 ; from the
Jews of Hamburg and Frankfort, p. 186. Jewish money called into
existence the large undertakings of the 17th century, p. 188. Money-
lending, p. 189 ; its relation to the growth of capitalism, p. 189.


CHAPTER XI

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION IN
ECONOMIC LIFE

(1 ) The Importance of Religion for the 7 ^^isb Peopk : Religion and
economic life, p. 19 1. The Jewish religion : some characteristics,
p. 192. Its Comprehensive influence, p. 192; it is known of all,
p. 192. Jews a most “God-fearing’’ people, p. 193. Obedience to
religious precepts found among all classes of Jews, p. 195.

(2) The Sources of the fetotsh Religion : The Bible, the Talmud, and
the Codes, p. 197, Realistic [critical] attitude towards the sources,

,p. 198, The attitude of the orthodox Jew, p. 201. Significance of
the sources for practical life, p. 202.' To what extent is the Talmud a
norm } p. 203. Influence of the Codes, p. 205,

( 3 ) The Fundamental Ideas of the Religion:. Judaism and

Capitalism, p, 205. Judaism a product of intellect, p. 206 ; has no
mysteries, p. 207 ; does not appeal to the sensuous, p. 208 ; rests on a
contract between God and Israel, p. 209, Illustrations of the last,
p* 210. The quantitative conception of sin, p. 211, In theological
literature money is regarded as a means to an end, p. 212. The Tal-
mudic doctors are acquainted with business, p. 213.

(4) The Idea of Rewards and Punishments : The idea old, p. 214 ; its
earliest form : prosperity in this world, p. 215 ; in the time of Ezra,
the conception of world to come” appeared, p, 215, Great
possessions good, but only if they are used in the service of God, p. 216.
In praise of riclies, p. 216. Effect of this doctrine on economic
activities, p. 221.


CONTENTS


xi


(5) The RaHonalization of Life : The duty of the pious man is to be
holy and to obey God’s commandments, p. 222. Holiness degene-
rated into Formalism, p, 223. Holiness understood to mean the
Rationalization of Life; p. 225* The very existence of the law has

, an influence on man, p, 226, Wh^t was the purpose of its enact-
ment* ? p. 227. Rationalization of the love of Nature, p. 228 ; of the
love for art, p. 228, Self-control and circumspection in speech,
p. .229 ; food, p. 230; and sexual life, p. 231. The Jewish view of
marriage, p. 233. Effect of the rationalization of life, more especially
of the sexual life, on economic activities^ p. 234. The Jews’ intense
love of family-life, p. 235 ; purity of Jewish family-life, p. 235 ;
Jewish family-life and economic activities, p. 237.

(6) Israel and the , The Jew created the Ghetto, p. 238.

Jewish self-consciousness, p. 239. Jews always a people apart, p. 239.
Economic ‘eflect of this seclusion, p. 241. Lending at interest, p. 242.
“Your neighbour.” and the “stranger,” p. 242. Intercourse with the
“ stranger,” p. 245. The Jews the apostles of laissezfaire^ p. 246. *

(7) Jttdaism and Puritanism: Identity of ‘view in the two, p. 249.
How the latter was influenced by the former is a very difficult

' question, p, 249.


CHAPTER XII

JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

(1) The Problem: National characteristics in general, p. 252. Are
there specifically Jewish characteristics? p. 253. What are they?
p. 255. Only those will be touched upon that have reference to
economic life, p. 257.

(2) An Attempt at a Solution : Striking unanimity concerning Jewish
characteristics, p. 258. Jewish intellectuality, p. 258, Intellectual
pursuits held in high esteem, p. 259. Moack v, Koach^ p, 260. Weak-
ness of the quality, p. 261. The teleology of the Jew the result of his
intellectuality, p. 265. Tachlis^ p» 266% ' Characteristics of some
Jewish writers, p. 267- Jewish energy, p. 267. Mobility* of the
Jew, p. 268, His adaptability, p. 268,

(3) Jetoish Characteristics as app&ed to Capitalism : Similarity between
Judaism and Capitalism, p, 274. The kindred trio — Capitalism,
Judaism, and Liberalism, p. 275. The Jew is well fitted to be an
undertaker, p. 276 ; and also a trader, p. 277.


xii


CONTENTS


PART III

THE ORIGIN OF THE JEWISH GENIUS

CHAPTER XIII

THE RACE PROBLEM

Consideration of the origin of the Jewish genius necessary to supple-
ment the conclusion already arrived at, p. 281. The problem many-
sided, p. 282. The question of Jewish race and the general race
question, p. 283.

(1) TM Anthropobgy of the Jew : Agreement as to the essential
facts, p. 283.' Are the Jews a pure race? p, 285. Influence of
proselytes overestimated, p. 285. Mixed marriages, p. 286. Physio-
logical differences, p. 289 ; differences in physiognomy, p. 289.

(2) The Jewish ^^Race^^ : What is a “ race” ? p, 291, The Jews a
distinct anthropological group, p. 291.

(3) How the Jewish Genius remained constant : Jewish qualities may be
found throughout Jewish history, p. 293. Constancy in the attitude
of the Jews to the peoples among whom they dwelt, p. 293, Hatred
of the Jews, p. 294. Jewish elasticity, p, 295. The Jewish
Diaspora, p. 297. All Jewish dispersion not enforced, p. 298. The
Jewish religion and Jewish characteristics, p. 299. The economic
activities of the Jew also show a remarkable constancy, p. 300. The
generally accepted view of the economic history of the Jews, p. 300,
A new view, p. 301. Jews not traders, p. 301. Money-lending from
the earliest times the prime factor in the economic history of the Jews,
p. 306. In this too there is a constancy, p. 312. Knowledge of
economics among the Rabbis of the Talmud remarkable, p- 313.
Jewish wealth, p. 316 ; the thrift of the Jews, p. 318^

(4) Is the Jewish Genius natural or artificial: Unreliability of the
conclusions of race-theorists, p, 320. Are Jewish characteristics
accidental ? p. 321 ; do they spring from the blood ? p. 321 ; are they
the outcome of environment ? p, 321.


CHAPTER XIV

THE VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE

The great outstanding fact — a Southern people transplanted among
Northern peoples, p. 323. The Jews a desert and nomadic people.


CONTENTS


xiii


p. 324. They conquer Canaan, p. 325 j yet continue to be filled
with the nomadic spirit, p. 326. Proof of this in the nomadic
character of their early literature, p. 327. The term “Nomadic”
by no means uncomplimentary, p. 328. The influence of the Exile,
p. 329. The Diaspora, p. 331. The Wandering Jew, p. 333. The
Jews bbcome town-dwellers, p. 334. Modern cities are great deserts,
p. 334. Contrast between the cold North and the warm South,
p, 335. Jewish characteristics due to peculiar environment, p. 337.
The opinions of Juan Huarte de San Juan, p. 337. Jewish intellectu-
ality and desert life, p. 339. Jewish adaptability and nomad life,
p. 341. Jewish energy and their Southern origin, p. 342. “Sylvanism”
and Feudalism compared with “ Saharaism ” and Capitalism, p. 343.
The Jews and money, p. 344. The Jews and the Ghetto, p. 347.


NOTES AND REFERENCES, p. 355.


TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTORY NOTE


Werner Sombart is undoubtedly one of the niost
striking personalities in the Germany of to-day. Born
in 1863, he has devoted himself to research in economics,
and has contributed much that is valuable to economic
thought. Though his work has not always been accepted
without challenge, it has received universal recognition
for its brilliance, and his reputation has drawn hosts of
students to his lectures, both ait Breslaij, where he held
the Chair of Economics at the University (1890-190^),
and now in Berlin at the Handelshochschule, where he
occupies ■ a similar position.

But Sombart is an artist as well as a scholar; he
combines reason with imagination in an eminent degree,
and he has the gift, seldom enough associated with
German professors, of writing in a lucid, flowing, almost
eloquent style. That is one characteristic of all his
books, which are worth noting. The rise and devdop-
mentof modern capitalism has been the theme that, has
attracted him most, and his masterly treatment of it may .
be found in his Der moderne Kapiialismus (2 vols., Leipzig,
1902). In 1896 he published Sozialismus und soziale
Bewegung, which quickly went through numerous
editions and may be described as one of the most
widely read books in German-speaking countries.* Die

* An English version was prepared by the present writer and issued
by Messrs. J. M. Dent & Co. in 1909, under the title SoeiaBsm 4 md the
Social Movement


Xf


3 £vi TRAN SLA TOR'S - INTROD UCTOR Y NO TE


deutsche Volkswirtschaft itn i^ten Jahrhundert appeared
in 1903, and Das Proletariat in 1906.

For some years past Sombart has been considering the
revision of his magnum opus on modern capitalism, and in
the course of his studies came across the problem, CJuite
accidentally, as he himself tells us, of the relation between
the Jews and modern capitalism. The topic fascinated
him, and he set about inquiring what that relationship
precisely was. The results of his labours were published
in the book * of which this is an English edition.

The English version is slightly shorter than the
German original. The portions that have been left out
(with the author’s concurrence) are not very long and
relate to general technical questions, such as the modern
race theory or the early lustory of credit instruments.
Furthermore, everything found within square brackets
has been added by the translator.

My b&t thanks are due to my wife, who has been
constantly helpful vnith suggestions and criticisms, and
to my friend Leon Simon for the verse rendering on
p. 208.

M. E.,

London, April 21, 1913.


• Dfe Juien tmd das Tfirtsciaftskben. Leipzig: Duncker und
Humblot. 1911.


PART I


THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE JEWS
TO MODERN ECONOMIC LIFE


CHAPTER I


INTRODUCTORY

Two posable methods may be used to discover to what
extent any group of people participated in a particular
form of economic organization. One is the statistical ;
the other may be termed the genetic.

By means of the first we endeavour to ascertain the
actual number of persons taking part in some economic
activity — say, those who establish trade with a particular
country, or who found any given industry — and then we
calculate what percentage is represented by the members
of the group in which we happen to be interested. There
is no doubt that the statistical method has many advan-
tages. A pretty clear conception of the relative import-
ance for any branch of commerce of, let us say, foreigners
or Jews, is at once evolved if we are able to show by
actual figures that 50 or 75 per cent, of all the
persons engaged in that branch belong to either the
first or the second category named. More espedally
is this apparent when statistical information is forth-
coming, not only as to the number of persons
but also concerning other or more striking economic
factors — the amount of paid-up capital, the quantity
of the commodities produced, the size of the turnover,
and so forth. It will ^e useful, therefore, to adopt the
statistical method in questions such as the one we have
set ourselves. But at the same time it will soon become
evident that by its aid alone the complete solution cannot


4 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

be found. In the first place, even the best statistics do
not tell us everything ; nay, often the most important
aspect of what we are trying to discover is omitted.
Statistics are silent as to the dynamic effects which strong
individuaHties produce in economic, as indeed in'' all
human life — effects which have consequences reaching far
beyond the limits of their immediate surroundings.
Their actual importance for the general tendency of
any particular development is greater £ax than any set
of figures can reveal. Therefore the statistical method
must be supplemented by some other.

But more than this. The statistical method, owing
to lack of information, cannot always be utilized. It is
indeed a lucky accident that we possess figures record-
ing the number of those engaged in any industry or
trade, and showing their comparative relation to the
rest of the population. But a statistical study of this
kind, on a large scale, is really only a possibility for
modern and future times. Even then the path of the
investigator is beset by difficulties. Still, a careful
examination of various sources, including the assess-
ments made by Jewish communities on their members,
may lead to fruitful results. I hope that this book will
give an impetus to such studies, of which, at the present
time, there is only one that is really useful — the enquiry
of Sigmimd Mayr, of Vienna.

When all is said, therefore, the other method (the
genetic), to which I have already alluded, must be used
to supplement the results of statistics. What is this
method ? We wish to discover to what extent a group
of people (the Jews) infiuence or have influenced the
form and development of modern economic life — ^to
discover, that is, their qualitative or, as I have already
called it, thdr dynamic importance. We can do this
best of all by enquiring whether certain characteristics


INTRODUCTORY


S


that mark our modern economic life were given their
first form by Jews, i.e.^ either that some particular form
of organization was first introduced by the Jews, or that
some well-known business principles, now accepted on all
hands as fundamental, are specific expressions of the
Jemsh spirit. This of necessity demands that the history
of the factors in economic development should be traced
to their earliest beginnings. In other words, we must
study the childhood of the modern capitalistic system,
or, at any rate, the age in which it received its modern
form. But not the childhood only : its whole history
must be considered. For throughout, down to these very
days, new elements are constantly entering the fabric
of capitalism and changes appear in its characteristics.
Wherever such are noted our aim must be to discover
to whose infiuence they are due. Often enough this
will not be easy ; sometimes it will even be impossible ;
and scientific imagination must come to the aid of the
scholar.

Another point should not be overlooked. In many
cases the people who are responsible for a fundamental
idea or innovation in economic life are not always the
inventors (using that word in its narrowest meaning). It
has often been asserted that the Jews have no inventive
powers; that not only technical but also economic dis-
coveries were made by non-Jews alone, and that the Jews
have always been able cleverly to utilize the ideas of
others. I dissent from this general view in its entirety.
We meet with Jewish inventors in the sphere of technical
science, and certainly in that of economics, as I hope to
show in this work. But even if the assertion which we
have mentioned were true, it would prove nothing
against the view that Jews have given certain aspects of
economic life the specific features they bear. In the
economic world it is not so much the inventors that


6 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


matter as those who are able to apply the inventions :
not those who conceive ideas the hire-purchase

system) as those who can utilize them in everyday life.

Before proceeding to the problem before us — ^the sljare
of the Jews in the work of building up our modern
capitalistic system — ^we must mention one other point of
importance. In a specialized study of tins kind Jewish
influence may appear larger than it actually was. That is
in the nature of our study, where the whole problem is
looked at from only one point of view. If we were
enquiring into the influence of mechanical inventions on
modern economic life the same would apply : in a mono-
graph that influence would tend to appear larger than it
really was. I mention this jpoint, obvious though it is,
lest it be said that I have exaggerated the part played by
the Jews. There were undoubtedly a thousand and one
other causes that helped to make the economic system of
our time what it is. Without the discovery of America
and its silver treasures, without the mechanical inventions
of technical science, without the ethnical peculiarities of
modern European nations and their vicissitudes, capitalism
would have been as impossible as without the Jews.

In the long story of capitalism, Jemsh influence forms
but one chapter. Its relative importance to the others I
shall show in the new edition of my Modern Capitalism,
which I hope to have ready before long.

This cofueat will, I trust, help the general reader to a
proper appreciation of the influence of Jews on modern
economic life. But it must be taken in conjunction with
another. If on the one hand we are to make some allow-
ance, should our stucties apparently tend to give Jews a
preponderating weight in economic affairs, on the other
hand, their contribution is very often even larger than we
are led to believe. For our researches can deal only with
one portion of the problem, seeing that all the material


INTRODUCTORY


7


is not available. Who to-day knows anything definite
about the individuals, or groups, who founded this or
that industry, established this or that branch of commerce,
first adopted this or that business principle ? And even
wh^e we are able to name these pioneers with certainty,
there comes the further question, were they Jews or not ?

Jews — ^that is to say, members of the people who pro-
fess the Jewish faith. And I need hardly add that
although in this definition I purposely leave out any
reference to race characteristics, it yet includes those Jews
who have withdrawn from their religious community, and
even descendants of such, seeing that historically they
remain Jews. This must be borne in mind, for when we
are determining the influence of the Jew on modern
economic life, again and again men appear on the scene
as Christians, who in reality are Jews. They or their
fathers were baptized, that is all. The assumption that
many Jews in all ages changed their faith is not far
fetched. We hear of cases from the earliest Middle
Ages ; in Italy, in the 7th and 8th centuries ; at the
same period in Spain and in the Merovingian kingdoms ;
and from that time to this we find them among all
Christian nations. In the last third of the 19th century,
indeed, wholesale baptisms constantly occurred. But we
have reliable figures for the last two or three decades only,
and I am therefore inclined to doubt the statement of
Jacob Fromer that towards the end of the twenties in the
last century something like half the Jews of Berlin had
gone over to Christianity.* Equally improbable is the
view of Dr. Werner, Rabbi in Munich, who, in a paper
which he recently read, stated that altogether 120,000
Jews have been baptized in Berlin. The most reliable
figures we have are all agtiinst such a likelihood.
According to these, it was in the nineties that apostasy
on a large scale first showed itself, and even then the


8 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


highest anniial percentage never exceeded 1'28 (in 1905),
while the average percentage per annum (since 1895)
was I. Nevertheless, the number of Jews in Berlin
who from 1873 to 1906 went over to Christianity was
not small ; their total was 1869 precisely .2

The tendency to apostasy is stronger among Austrian
Jews, especially among those of Vienna. At the present
time, between five and six hundred Jews in that city
renounce their faith every year, and from i868 to 1903
there have been no less than 9085. The process grows
apace; in the years 1868 to 1879 there was on an
average one baptism annually for every 1 200 Jews ; in
the period 1880 to 1889 it was one for 420-430 Jews ;
while between 1890 and 1903 it had reached one for
every 260-270.3

But the renegade Jews are not the only group whose
influence on the economic development of our time it
is difficult to estimate. There are others to which the
same applies. I am not thinking of the Jewesses who
married into Christian families, and who, though they
thus ceased to be Jewish, at any rate in name, must never-
theless have retained their Jewish characteristics. The
people I have in mind are the crypto-Jews, who played so
important a part in history, and whom we encounter in
every century. In some periods they formed a very large
section of Jewry. But their non-JeWish pose was so
admirably sustained that among their contemporaries
they passed as Christians or Mohammedans. We are
told, for example, of the Jews of the South of France
in the 15th and i6th centuries, who came originally from
Spain and Portugal (and the description applies to the
Marannos everywhere) : “ They practised all the outward
forms of Catholicism ; their births, marriages and deaths
were entered on the registers of the church, and they
received the sacraments of baptism, marriage and


INTRODUCTORY


9


extreme unction. Some even took orders and became
priests.” 4 No wonder then that they do not appear
as Jews in the reports of commercial enterprises, indus-
trial undertakings and so forth. Some historians even
to-day speak in admiring phrase of the beneficial in-
fluence of Spanish or Portuguese “immigrants.” So
skilfully did the crypto-Jews hide their racial origin that
specialists in the field of Jewish history are still in doubt
as to whether a certain family was Jewish or not .5
In those cases where they adopted Christian names, the
uncertainty is even greater. There must have been a
large number of Jews among the Protestant refugees
in the 17th century. General reasons would warrant
this assumption, but when we take into consideration
the numerous Jewish names found among the Huguenots
the probability is strong indeed.^

Finally, our enquiries mil not be able to take any
account of all those Jews who, prior to 1848, took an
active part in the economic life of their time, but who
were unknown to the authorities. The laws forbade Jews
to exercise their callings. They were therefore com-
pelled to do so, either under cover of some fictitious
Christian person or under the protection of a “privi-
leged ” Jew, or they were forced to resort to some other
trick in order to circumvent the law. Reliable authorities
are of opinion that the number of Jews who in many a town
lived secretly in this way must have been exceedingly
large. In the forties of last century, for example, it
is said that no less than 12,000 Jews, at a moderate
estimate, were to be found in Vienna. The wholesale
textile trade was at that time already in their hands, and
entire districts in the centre of the city were full of
Jewish shops. But the ofiicial list of traders of 1845
contrined in an appendix the names of only sixty-three
Jews, who were described as “ tolerated Jewish traders,”


lo THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


and these were allowed to deal only in a limited number
of articles.7

But enough. My point was to show that, for many
and various reasons, the number of Jews of whom we hear
is 'less than those who actually existed. The rrader
should therefore bear in mind that the contribution of
the Jews to the fabric of modern economic life will,
of necessity, appear smaller than it was in reality.

What that contribution was we shall now proceed
to show.


CHAPTER II


THE SHIFTING OF THE CENTRE OF ECONOMIC
LIFE SINCE THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

One of the most important facts in the growth of modern
economic life is the removal of the centre of economic
activity from the nations of Southern Europe — the
Italians, Spaniards and Portuguese, with whom must
also be reckoned some South German lands — to those
of the North-West — the Dutch, the French, the English
and the North Germans. The epoch-making event in
the process was Holland’s sudden rise to prosperity, and
this was the impetus for the development of the economic
possibilities of France and England. All through the
17th century the philosophic speculators and the practical
politicians among the nations of North-Western Europe
had but one aim : to imitate Holland in commerce, in
industry, in shipping and in colonization.

The most ludicrous explanations of this well-known
fact have been suggested by historians. It has been said,
for example, that the cause which led to the economic
decline of Spain and Portugal and of the Italian and South
German city states was the discovery of America and of
tixe new route to the East Indies ; that the same cause
lessened the volume of the commerce of the Levant, and
therefore undermined the position of the Italian com-
mercial cities which depended upon it. But this explana-
tion is not in any way satisfactory. In the first place,
Levantine commerce maintained its pre-eminence through-


12 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


out the whole of the 17th and i8th centuries, and during
this period the prosperity of the maritime cities in the
South of France, as well as that of Hamburg, was very
closely bound up with it. In the second place, a number
of Italian towns, Venice among them, which in the 17 th
century lost all their importance, participated to a large
extent in the trade of the Levant in the i6th century, and
that despite the neglect of the trade route. It is a little
difficult to understand why the nations which had played
a leading part until the 1 5th century — the Italians, the
Spaniards, the Portuguese — should have suffered in the
least because of the new commercial relations with
America and the East Indies, or why they should have
been placed at any disadvantage by their geographical
position as compared with that of the French, the English
or the Dutch. As though the way from Genoa to
America or the West Indies were not the same as from
Amsterdam or London or Hamburg ! As though the
Spanish and Portuguese ports were not the nearest to the
new lands — ^lands which had been discovered by Italians
and Portuguese, and had been taken possession of by the
Portuguese and the Spaniards !

Equally unconvincing is another reason which is often
given. It is asserted that the countries of North-Western
Europe were strong consolidated states, while Germany
.and Italy were disunited, and accordingly the former were
able to take up a stronger position than the latter. Here,
too, we ask in wonder whether the powerful Queen of the
Adriatic was a weaker state in the i6th century than the
Seven Provinces in the 17 th ? And did not the empire
of Philip II excel all the kingdoms of his time in power
and renown ? Why was it, moreover, that, although
Germany was in a state of political disruption, certain
of its cities, like Hamburg or Frankfort-on-the-Main,
'reached a high degree of development in the 17th and


THE NEW CENTRES OF ECONOMIC LIFE 13


1 8th centuries, such as few French or English cities
could rival ?

This is not the place to go into the question in all
its many-sidedness. A number of causes contributed
to Hiring about the results we have mentioned. But from
the point of view of our problem one possibility should
not be passed over which, in my opinion, deserves most
serious consideration, and which, so far as I know, has not
yet been thought of. Cannot we bring into connexion
the shifting of the economic centre from Southern to
Northern Europe with the wanderings of the Jews ? The
mere suggestion at once throws a flood of light on the
events of those days, hitherto shrouded in semi-darkness.
It is indeed surprising that the parallelism has not before
been observed between Jewish wanderings and settlement
on the one hand, and the economic vicissitudes of the
different peoples and states on the other. Israel passes
over Europe like the sun : at its coming new life bursts
forth ; at its going all falls into decay. A short resume
of the changing fortunes of the Jewish people since the
15th centiury will lend support to this contention.

The first event to be recalled, an event of world-wide
import, is the expulsion of the Jews from Spain (1492)
and from Portugal (1495 and 1497). It should never be
forgotten that on the day before Columbus set sail from
Palos to discover America (August 3, 1492) 300,000
Jews are said to have emigrated from Spain to Navarre,
France, Portugal and the East ; nor that, in the years
during which Vasco da Gama searched for and found the
sea-passage to the East Indies, the Jews were driven from
other parts of the Pyrenean Peninsula. 7 *

It was by a remarkable stroke of fate that these two occur-
rences, equally portentous in their significance — the open-
ing-up of new continents and the mightiest upheavals in
the distribution of the Jewish people — should have coin-


14 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


dded. But the expulsion of the Jews from the Pyrenean
Peninsula did not altogether put an end to their history
there. Numerous Jews remained behind as pseudo-
Christians (Marannos), and it was only as the Inquisition,
from the days of Philip II onwards, became more 'and
more relentless that these Jews were forced to leave
the land of their birth.^ During the centuries that
followed, and especially towards the end of the i6th,
the Spanish and Portuguese Jews settled in other
countries. It was during this period that the doom of
the economic prosperity of the Pyrenean Peninsula was
sealed.

With the 15th century came the expuldon of the Jews
from the German commerdal cities — ^from Cologne
(1424-5), from Augsburg (1439-40), from Strass-
burg (1438), from Erfurt (1458), from Nuremberg
(1498-9), from Ulm (1499), and from Ratisbon (1519).

The same fate overtook them in the i6th century in a
number of Italian cities. They were driven from Sicily
(1492), from Naples (1540-1), from Genoa and from
Venice (1550). Here also economic decline and Jewish
emigration coindded in point of time.

On the other hand, the rise to econonuc importance, in
some cases quite unexpectedly, of the countries and towns
whither the refugees fled, must be dated from the first
appearance of the Spanish Jews. A good example is that
of Leghom ,9 one of the few Italian cities which enjoyed
economic prosperity in the i6th century. Now Leghorn
was the goal of most of the exiles who made for Italy.
In Germany it was Hamburg and Frankfort 9 * that
admitted the Jewish settlers. And remarkable to relate,
a keen-eyed traveller in the 1 8th century wandering all
over Germany found everywhere that the old commerdal
dties of the Empire, Ulm, Nuremberg, Augsburg,
Mayence and Cologne, had fallen into decay, and that


THE NEW CENTRES OF ECONOMIC LIFE 15


the only two that were able to maintain their former
splendour, and indeed to add to it from day to day,
were Frankfort and Hamburg,

In France in the 17th and i8th centuries the rising
towits were Marsdlles, Bordeaux, Rouen — again the
havens of refuge of the Jewish exiles.

As for Holland, it is well-known that at the end of the
1 6th century a sudden upward development (in the capi-
talistic sense) took place there. The first Portuguese
Marannos settled in Amsterdam in 1593, and very soon
their numbers increased. The first synagogue in
Amsterdam was opened in 1598, and by about the
middle of the 17 th century there were Jewish com-
munities in many Dutch cities. In Amsterdam, at the
beginning of the i8th century, the estimated number
of Jews was 2400.12 But even by the middle of the
17 th century their intellectual influence was already
marked ; the writers on international law and the politick
plulosophers speak of the ancient Hebrew commonwealth
as an ideal which the Dutch constitution might well seek
to emulate. 13 The Jews themselves called Amsterdam
at that time their grand New Jerusalem. ^4

Many of the Dutch settlers had come from the
Spanish Netherlands, especially from Antwerp, whither
they had fled on their expulsion from Spain. It is true
that the proclamations of 1532 and 1539 forbade the
pseudo-Christians to remain in Antwerp, but they proved
ineffective. The prohibition was renewed in 1550, but
this time it referred only, to those who had not been
domiciled for six years. But this too remained a dead
letter : “ the crypto-Jews are increasing from day to
day.” They took an active part in tiie struggle for
freedom in which the Netherlands were engaged, and its
result forced them to wander to the more northerly
provinces .*5 Now it is a remarkable thing ^t the


i6 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


brief space during which Antwerp became the commercial
centre and the money-market of the world should have
been just that between the coming and the going of the

Marannos.^6

It was the same in England. The economic develop-
ment of the country, in other words, the growth of
capitalism, 17 ran parallel with the influx of Jews,
mostly of Spanish and Portuguese origin. *8

It was believed that there were no Jews in England
from the time of their expulsion under Edward I (1290)
until the^more or less officially recognized return under
Cromwell (1654-56). The best authorities on Anglo-
Jewish history are now agreed that this is a mistake.
There were always Jews in England ; but not till the
1 6th century did they begin to be numerous. Already
in the reign of Elizabeth many were met with, and the
Queen herself had a fondness for Hebrew studies and for
intercourse with Jews. Her own physician was a Jew,
Rodrigo Lopez, on whom Shakespeare modelled his
Shylock. Later on, as is generally known, the Jews, as
a result of the efforts of Manasseh ben Israel, obtained
the right of unrestricted domicile. Their numbers were
increased by further streams of immigrants including,
after the i8th century, Jews from Germany, until,
according to the author of the Anglia Judaica, there
were 6000 Jews in London alone in the year 1738.19

When all is said, however, the fact that the migration
of the Jews and the economic vicissitudes of peoples were
coincident events does not necessarily prove that the
arrival of Jews in any land was the only cause of its rise
or their departure the only cause of its decline. To
assert as much would be to argue on the fallacy “post’
hoc, ergo propter hoc.” Nor are the arguments of later
< historians on this subject conclusive, and therefore I will
not mention any in support of my thesis.^® But the


THE NEW CENTRES OF ECONOMIC LIFE 17

opinions of contemporaries always, as I think, deserve
attention. So I will acquaint the reader with some of
them, for very often a word suffices to throw a flood
of light on their age.

■V^hen the Senate of Venice, in 1550, decided to expel
the Marannos and to forbid commercial intercourse with
them, the Christian merchants of the city declared that it
would mean their ruin and that they might as well leave
Venice with the exiles, seeing that they made their living
by trading vith the Jews. The Jews controlled the
Spanish wool trade, the trade in Spanish silk and crimsons,
sugar, pepper, Indian spices and pearls. A great part
of the entire export trade was carried on by Jews, who
supplied the Venetians with goods to be sold on com-
mission ; and they were also bill-brokers.®*

In England the Jews found a protector in Cromwell,
who was actuated solely by considerations of an economic
nature. He believed that he would need the wealthy
Jewish merchants to extend the financial and commer-
cial prosperity of the country. Nor was he blind to
the usefulness of having moneyed support for the
government.®®

Like Cromwell, Colbert, the great French statesman
of the 17th century, was also sympathetically inclined
towards the Jews, and in my opinion it is of no small
significance that these two organizers, both of whom
consolidated modern European states, should have been
so keenly alive to the fitness of the Jew in aiding the
economic (».e., capitalistic) progress of a country. In one
of his Ordinances to the Intendant of Languedoc, Colbert
points out what great benefits the city of Marseilles
derived from the commercial capabilities of the Jew 8.®3
The inhabitants of the great French trading centres in
which the Jews played an important role were in no need
of being taught the lesson ; they knew it from their ^own

3


i8 TH& JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

experience and, accordingly, they brought all their
influence to bear on keeping their Jewish fellow-citizens
within their walls. Again and again we hear laudatory
accounts . of the Jews, more especially from the
inhabitants of Bordeaux. In 1675 an army of ^ner7
cenaries ravaged Bordeaux, and many of the rich Jews
prepared to depart The Town Council was terrified,
and the report presented by its members is worth qudting.
“The Portuguese. who occupy whole streets and do con-
siderable business have asked for their passports. They
and those aliens who do a very large trade are resolved
to leave ; indeed, the wealthiest among them, Caspar
Gonzales and Alvares, have already departed. We are
very much afraid that commerce will cease alto-
gether.” 34 A few years later the Sous-Intendant of
Languedoc summed up the situation in the words
“ without them (the Jews) the trade of Bordeaux and
of the whole province would be inevitably ruined.”

We have already seen how the fugitives from the
Iberian .Peninsula in the i6th century streamed into
Antwerp, the commercial metropolis of the Spanish
Netherlands. About the' middle of the. century, the
Emperor in a decree dated July 17, 1549 withdrew the
privileges which had been accorded them. Thereupon
the mayor and sheriffs, as well as the Consul of the dty,
sent a petition to the Bishop of Arras in which they
showed the- obstacles in the way of carrying out the
Imperial mandate. The Portuguese, they pointed out,
were large undertakers ; they had brought great wealth
with them from the lands of their birth, and they main-
tmned an extensive trade. “We must bear in mind,”
they continued, “ that Antwerp has grown great
gradually, and that a long space of time was needed
before it could obtain possession of its commerce. Now
the ruin of the city would necessarily bring with it the


THE NEW CENTRES OF ECONOMIC LIFE 19


rvdn of the land, and all this must be carefully considered
before the Jews are expelled.” Indeed, the mayor,
Nicholas Van den Meeren, went even further in the
matter. When Queen Mary of Hungary, the Regent
of tlie Netherlands, was staying in Ruppelmonde, he paid
her a visit in order to defend the cause of the New
Christians, and excused the conduct of the rulers of
Antwerp in not publishing the Imperial decree by
informing her that it was contrary to all the best
interests of the city.26 His efforts, however, were
unsuccessful, and the Jews, as we have already seen, left
Antwerp for Amsterdam.

Antwerp lost no small part of its former glory by
reason of the departure of the Jews, and in the
17th century especially it was realized how much they
contributed to bring about material prosperity. In 1653
a committee was appointed to consider the question
whether the Jews should be allowed into Antwerp, and
it expressed itself on the matter in the following terms :
“ And as for the inconveniences which are to be feared
and apprehended in the public interest — that they (the
Jews) will attract to themselves all trade, that they will
be gmlty of a thousand frauds and tricks, and that by
their usury they will devour the wealth of good
Catholics — -it seems to us on the contrary that by the
trade which they will expand far beyond its present limits
the benefit derived will be for the good of the whole
land, and gold and silver will be available in greater
quantities for the needs of the state.” ^7

The Dutch in the 17th century required no such
recommendations ; they were fully alive to the gain
which the Jews brought. When Manasseh ben Israel left
Amsterdam on his famous mission to England, the Dutch
Government became anxious ; they feared lest it should
be a question of transplanting the Dutch Jews to


20 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

England, and they therefore instructed Newport, their
ambassador in London, to sound Manasseh as to his inten-
tion's. He reported (December 1655) that all was well,
and that there was no cause for apprehension. “Manasseh
ben Israel hath been to see me, and did assure me that
he doth not desire anything for the Jews in Holland but
only for those as sit in the Inquisition in Spain and
Portugal.” 28

It is the same tale in Hamburg. In the 17th century
the importance of the Jews had grown to such an ^tent
that they were regarded as indispensable to the growth
of Hamburg’s prosperity. On one occasion- the Senate
asked that permission should be given for synagogues to
be built, otherwise, they feared, the Jews would leave
Hamburg, and the city might then be in danger of
sinking to a mere village.29 On another occasion, in
1697, when it was suggested that the Jews should be.
expelled, the merchante earnestly entreated the Senate for
help, in order to prevent the serious endangering of
Hamburg’s commerce. 3 o Again, in 1733, in a spedal
report, now in the Archives of the Senate, we may
read : “ In bill-broking, in trade •mth jewellery and
brtid and in the manufacture of certain cloths the Jews
have almost a complete mastery, and have surpassed qur
own people. In the past there was no need to take
cognizance of them, but now they are increasing in
numbers. There is no section of the great merchant
class, the manufacturers and those who supply com-
modities for daily needs, but the Jews form an important
element therein. They have become a necessary
evil.” 31 To the callings enumerated in which the
Jews took a prominent part, we must add that -of
marine insurance brokers,

So much for the judgment of contemporaries. But as
a complete proof even that will not serve. We must


THE NEW CENTRES OF ECONOMIC LIFE 21


form- our own judgment from the facts, and therefore
our first aim must be to seek these out. That means
that we must, find from the original sources what
contributions the Jews made to the building-up of our
modern economic life from the end of the 15th century
onward — the period, that is, when Jewish history and
general European economic progress both tended in the
same direction. We shall then also be able to state
definitely to what extent the Jews influenced the shifting
of the centre of economic life.

My own view is, as I may say in anticipation, that the
importance of the Jews was twofold. On the one hand,
they influenced the outward form of modern capitalism ;
on the other, they gave expression to its inward spirit.
Under the first heading, the Jews contributed no small
share in giving to economic relations the international
aspect they bear to-day; in helping the modern state,
that framework of capitalism, to become what it is;
and lastly, in giving the capitalistic organization its
peculiar features, by inventing a good many details
of the commerciql machinery which moves the business
life of to-day, and by co-operating in the perfecting
of others. Under the second heading, the importanco
of the Jews is so* enormous because they, above all
others, endowed economic life with its modern spirit;
they seized upon the essential idea of capitalism and
carried- it to its fullest development.

We shall consider these points in turn, in order to
obtain a proper notion of the problem. Our intention
is to do no more than ask a question or two, and hisre
and there to suggest an answer. We want merely to set
the reader thinking. It will be for later research' to
gather sufficient material by which ' to judge whether,
and to what extent, the views as to cause and dFect
here propounded have any foundation in actual fiict.


CHAPTER III


THE QUICKENING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE

The transformation of European commerce which has
taken place since the shifting of the centre of economic
activity owed a tremendous debt to the Jews. If we
consider nothing but the quantity of commodities that
passed through their hands, their position is unique.
Exact statistics are, as I have already remarked, almost
non-existent ; special research may, however, bring some
figures to light that will be useful. At present there
is, to my knowledge, only some slight material on this
head, but its value cannot be overestimated.

It would appear that even before their formal admission
into England — ^that is, in the first half of the 17 th
century — the extent of the trade in the hands of Jews
totalled one-twelfth of that of the whole kingdom.33
Unfortunately we are not told on what authority this
calculation rests, but that it cannot be far from the truth
is apparent from a statement in a petition of the mer-
chants of London. The question was whether Jews
should pay the duty on imports levied on foreigners.
The petitioners point out that if the Jews were exempted,
the Crown would sustain a loss of ten thousand pounds
annually .34

We are remarkably well informed as to the proportion
of trading done by Jews at the Leipzig fairs, 35 and as
these were for a long period the centre of German com-
merce, we have here a standard by which to measure its


QUICKENING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 23


intensive and extensive development. But not alone for
Germany. One or two of the neighbouring countries,
especially Bohemia and Poland, can also be included in
the survey. From the end of the 17th century on-
wards we find that the Jews take an increasing share ip
the fairs, and all the authorities who have gone into the
figures are agreed that it was the Jews who gave to the
Leipzig fwrs their great importance.36

It is only since the Easter fair of 1756 that we are able
to compare the Jewish with the Christian traders, as far as
numbers are concerned, for it is only from that date that
the Archives possess statistics of the latter. The average
number of Jews attending the Leipzig fair was as follows : —


1675-1680 ...

... 416

1767-1769 ...

... 99 S

1681-1690 ■ ...

... 489

1770-1779 ...

... 1652

1691-1700 ...

... 834

1780-1789 ...

... 1073

1701-1710

... 854

1790-1799 ...

... 1473

1711-1720 ...

7159

1800-1809 ...

••• 3370

1721-1730 ...

... 899

1810-1819

... 4896

I 73 i-,i 740 ...

... 874

i8zo-i8z9 ...

— 3747

1741-1748 ...

... 708

1830-1839 ...

... 6444


Note especially the speedy increase towards the. end of
the 17th and i8th centuries and also at the beginning,
of the 19th.

If we glance at the period 1766 to 1839, we see that
the fairs were visited annually by an average of 3185
Jews and 13,005 Christians — that is to say, the Jews
form 24*49 per cent., or nearly one-quarter of the total
number of Christian merchants. Indeed, in some years,
as for example between i8io and 1820, the Jewish
visitors form 33I per cent, of the total of their colleagues
(4896 Jews and 14,366 Christians). This is signifitant
enough, and , there is no need to lay stress on the fiict
that in all probability the figures given in the table are-
und^estimated.


24 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

The share taken by Jews in the commerce of a country
may sometimes be ascertained by indirect means. We
know, for example, that the trade of Hamburg with
Spain and Portugal, and also with Holland, in the
17 th century was almost entirely in the hands of
the Jews .37 Now some 20 per cent, of the ships’
cargoes leaving Hamburg were destined for the Iberian
Peninsula, ahd some 30 per cent, for Holland. 38

Take another instance. The Levant trade was the
most important branch of French commerce in the
1 8th century. A contemporary authority informs us
that it was entirely controlled by Jews — “ buyers,
sellers, nuddlemen, bill-brokers, agents and so forth
were all Jews.” 39

In the 1 6th and 17th cepturies, and even far into the
1 8th, the trade of the Levant as well as that with, and
wa, Spain and Portugal, was the broadest stream in the
world’s commerce. This mere generalization goes far to
prove how pre-eminent, from the purely quantitative
point of view, the Jews were in forwarding the develop-
ment of international intercourse. Already in Spain
the Jews had managed to obtain control of the greater
portion of the Levant trade, and everywhere in the
Levantine ports Jewish offices and warehouses were to
be found. Many Spanish Jews at the time of the
expulsion from Spain settled in the East; the others
journeyed northwards. So it came about that almost
imperceptibly the Levantine trade became associated
with th^ more northerly peoples. In Holland, more
especially, is the effect of this seen : Holland became a
commercial country of world-wide influence. Altogether,
the conimerdal net, so to say, became bigger and stronger
in proportion as the Jews established their offices, pn the
one hand further afield, on the other in closer proximity
to each other. 4 o More particularly was this the c aff e


•QUICKENING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 25


when the Western Hemisphere — largely through Jewish
influence — was drawn into the commerce of the world.
We shall have more to say on this aspect of the question
in connexion with the part the Jews played in colonial
foundations.

Another means by which we may gain a clear concep-
tioi;i of what the Jews did for the extension of modern
commerce is to discover the kind of commodities in
which they for the most part traded. The quality
of the commerce matters more than its quantity. It
was by the character of their trade that they partially
revolutionized the older forms, and thus helped to make
commerce what it is to-day.

Here we are met by a striking fact. The Jews foi; a
long time practically monopolized the trade in articles
of luxury, and to the fashionable world of the aristocratic
17th and 1 8th centuries this trade was of supreme
moment. What sort of commodities, then, did the
Jews specialize in? Jewellery, precious stones, pearls
and silks.41 Gold and silver jewellery, because they
had. always been prominent in the market for precious
metals. Pearls and stones, because they were among
the first to settle in those lands (especially Brazil)
where these are to be found ; and silks, because of
their ancient connexions with the trading centres of the
Orient.

Moreover, Jews were to be found almost entirely, or
at least predominantly, in such branches of trade as were
concerned 'vtith exportation on a large scale. Nay, 1
believe it may with justice be asserted that the Jews were,
the first to place on the world’s markets the staple
articles of modern commerce. Side by side with the
products of the soil, such as wheat, wool, flax, and,
later on, distilled spirits, they dealt throughoiut the
1 8th century specially in textiles, 4“ the output of a


26 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


rapidly growing capitalistic industry, and in those
colonial products which for the first time became
articles of international trade, viz., sugar and tobacco.
I have little doubt that when the history of commerce
in modern times comes to be wrritten Jewish traders
will constantly be met mth in connexion with enter-
prises on a large scale. The references which qvute
by accident have come under my notice are already
sufficient to prove the truth of this assertion. 43

Perhaps the most far-reaching, because the most
revolutionary, influence of the Jews on the develop-
ment of economic life was due to their trade in new
commodities, in the preparation of which new ■ methods
supplanted the old. We may mention cotton,44
cotton goods of foreign make, indigo and so forth.4S
Dealing in these articles was looked upon at the time
as “ spoiling sport,” and therefore Jews were taunted
by one German writer with carrying on “unpatriotic
trade ”46 or “Jew-commerce, which gave little employ-
ment to German labour, and depended for the most
part on home consumption only.” 47
Another great characteristic of “ Jew-commerce,” one
which all later commerce took for its model, was its
variety and many-sidedness. When in 1740 the
merchants of Montpelier complained of the com-
petition of the Jewish traders, the Intendant replied
that if they, the Christians, had such well-assorted
stocks as the Jews, customers would come to them as
mflingly as they went to their Jewish competitors.45
We hear the same of the Jews at the Leipzig fairs :
“The Jewish traders had a beneficial influence on the
trade of the fairs, in that their purchases were so varied.
Thus it was the Jews who tended to make trade many-
sided and forced industry (especially the home industries)
to develop in more than one direction. Indeed,' at many


QUICKENING OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 27

fairs the Jews became the arbiters of the market by reason
of their extensive purchases.” 49

But the greatest characteristic of “ Jew-commerce ”
during the earlier capitalistic age was, to my mind, the
supremacy which Jewish traders obtained, either directly
or by way of Spain and Portugal, in the lands from which
it was possible to draw large supplies of ready money. I
am thiaHng of the newly discovered gold and silver
countries in Central and South America. Again and
again we find it recorded that the Jews brought ready
money into the country. 5° The theoretical speculator
and the practical politician knew well enough that
here was the source of all capitalistic development. We
too, now that the mists of Adam Smith’s doctrines have
lifted, have realized the same thing. The establishment
of modern economic life meant, for the most part, and
of necessity, the obtaining of the precious metals, and in
this work no one was so successfully engaged as the
Jewish traders. This leads us at once to the subject
of the next chapter, which deals with the share of the
Jews in colonial expansion.


CHAPTER IV


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES

We are only now beginning to realize that colonial
expansion was no small force in the development of
modern capitalism. It is the purpose of this chapter to
show that in the work of that expansion the Jews played,
if not the most decisive, at any rate a most prominent
part.

That the Jews should have been keen colonial settlers
was only natural, seeing that the New World, though it
was but the Old in a new garb, seemed to hold out a
greater promise of happiness to them than cross-grained
old Europe, more especially when their last Dorado
(Spain) proved an inhospitable refuge. And this applies
equally to' all' colonial enterprises, whether in the East or
the West or the South of the globe. There were
, probably many Jews resident in the East Indies even
in mediaeval times, and when the nations of Europe,
after 1498, stretched out their hands to seize the lands of
an ancient civilization, the Jews were welcomed as
bulwarks of European supremacy, though, primarily they
came aS pioneers of trade. In all likelihood — exact ‘
proofs have not yet been established — ^the ships of the
Portuguese and of the Dutch must have brought shoals
of Jewish settlers to their respective Indian possessions.
At any rate, Jews participated extensively in all the
Dutch se^ements, including those in the East. We are
told that Jews were large shareholders in the Dutch East


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 29

• , \

India Company. We know that the Governor of
the Company who, “ if he did not actually establish the
power of Holland in Java, certainly contributed most to
strengthen it,” S3 was called Cohn (Coen). Further-
more, a glance at the portraits of the Governors of the
Dutch colonies would make it appear that this Coen
is not the only Jew among them.S4 Jews were also
Directors of the Company ; SS in short, no colonial
enterprise was complete without them. 56

It is as yet unknown to what extent the Jews shared in
the growth of economic life in India after the English
became masters there. We have, however, fairly 'full
information as to the participation of the Jews in the
founding of the English colonies in South Africa and
Australia. There is no doubt that in these regions (more
particularly in Cape Colony), well-nigh ‘all economic
development was due to the Jews. In the twenties and
thirties of the 19 th century Benjamin Norden and Simon
Marks came to South Africa, and “ the industrial
awakening of almost the whole interior of Cape Colony ”
was their work. Julius Mosenthal and his brothers
Adolph and James established the trade in woo), skins,
and mohair. Aaron and Daniel de Pass monopolized the
whaling industry ; Joel Myers cotnmenced ostrich
farming. Lilienfeld, of Hopetown, bougjht the first
diamonds. S7 Similar leading positions were occupied

by the Jews in the other South African colonies, particu-
larly in the Transvaal, where it is said that to-day twenty-
five of the fifty thousand Jews of South Africa are
settled.sS It is the same story in Australia, where
the first wholesale trader was Montefiore. It would
seem to be no exaggeration therefore that “a large
proportion of the English colonial shipping trade was
for a considerable time in the hands of the Jews.” 59
But the real sphere of Jewish influent# in colonial


30 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

settlements, especially in the early capitalistic period, was
in the Western* Hemisphere. America in all its borders is
a land of Jews. That is the result to which a study of
the sources must inevitably lead, and it is pregnant with
meaning. From the first day of its cfiscovery America
has had a strong influence on the economic life of Europe
and on the whole of its civilization ; and therefore the
part which the Jews have played in building up the
American world is of supreme import as an element
in modern development. That is why I shall dwell on
this theme a little more fully, even at the risk of wearying
the reader.

The very discovery of America is most intimately
bound up with the Jews in an extraordinary fashion.
It is as though the New World came into the horizon by
their ^d and for them alone, as though Columbus and
the rest were but managing directors for Israel. It is in
this light that Jews, proud of their past, now regard
the story of that discovery, as set forth in the latest
researches.®^ These would seem to show that it was
the scientific knowledge of Jewish scholars which so
perfected the art of navigation that voyages across the
ocean became at all possible. Abraham Zacuto, Professor
of Mathematics and Astronomy at the University of
Salamanca, completed his astronomical tables and dia-
grams, the Almanack perpetuum^ in 1473. O”-

of these tables two other Jews, Jose Vecuho, who was
Court astronomer and physician to John II of Portugal,
and one Moses the Mathematician (in collaboration with
two Christian scholars), discovered the nautical astrolabe,
ah instrument by which it became possible to measure
from the altitude of the sun .the distance of a ship from
the Equator. Jose further translated the Almanack of
ills master into Latin and Spanish.

The scientific facts which prepared the way for the'


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES. 31

voyage of Columbus were thus supplied by Jews. The
money which was equally necessary came from the same
quarter, at any rate as regards his first two voyages.
For the first voyage, Columbus obtained a loan froth
Louis de Santangel, who was of the King’s Council ; and
it was to Santangel, the patron of the expedition, and to
Gabriel Saniheg, a Maranno, the Treasurer of Aragon,
that the first two letters of Columbus were addressed.
The second voyage was also undertaken with the aid of
Jewish money, this time certainly not voluntarily con-
tributed. On their expulsion from Spain in 1492, the
Jews were compelled to leave much treasure behind ; this
was seized by Ferdinand for the State Exchequer, and
with a portion of it Columbus was financed.

But more than that. A number of Jews were among
the companions of Columbus, and the first European to
set foot on American soil was a Jew — Louis de Torres.
So the latest . researches would have us believe.63

But what caps all — Columbus himself is claimed to
have been a Jew. I give this piece of information for
■ what it is worth, without guaranteeing its accuracy. At
a meeting of the Geographical Society of Madrid, Don
Celso Garcia de la Riega, a scholar famous for his
researches on Columbus, read a paper in which he stated
that Christobal Colon (not Columbus) was a Spaniard
who on his mother’s side was of Jewish descent. He
showed by reference to documents in the town of
Pontevedra, in the province of Galicia, that the family
of Colon lived there between 1428 and 1528, and that
the Christian names found among them were the same as
those prevalent among the relatives of the Spanish
admiral. These Colons and the Fonterosa family Inter-
married. The latter were undoubtedly Jews, or they had
only recently been converted, and Christobal’s mother
was called Suzanna Fonterosa. When disorders broke


32 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


QUt in. the province of Galida the parents of the dis-
'coverer of America migrated from Spain to Italy. ■ These
facts were substantiated by Don Celso from additional
sources, , and he is strengthened in his belief by distinct
echoes of Hebrew literature found in the writings of
Columbus, and also because the oldest portraits show him
to have had a Jewish face.

Scarcely were the doors of the New World opened to
Europeans than crowds of Jews came swarming in. We
have already seen that the discovery of America took
place in the year in which the Jews of Spain became
homeless, that the last years of the 15th century and
the early years of the i6th were a period in which
' millions of Jews were forced to become wanderers, when
European Jewry was like an ant-heap into which a stick
had been thrust. Little wonder, therefore, that a great
part of this heap betook itself to the New World, where
the future seemed so bright. The first traders in
America were Jews. The first industrial establishments
in America were 'th< 3 se of Jews. Already in the year
1492 Portuguese Jews settled in St, Thomas, where they
were the first plantation owners on a large scale ; they set
up many sugar factories and gave employment to nearly
> three thousand •negroes .®3 And as' for Jewish emigrar-
tion to South America, almost as soon as it was
discovered, the stream WM so great that Queen . Joart
in 1511 thought it necessary to take measures to stem
it .®4 But her efforts must have been without avail, for
the number of Jews increased, and finally, on May 21,
1577, the law forbidding Jews to emigrate to the Spanish
colonies was formally repealed.

In order to do full justice to the unceasing activity of
the Jews in South America as founders of colonial
commerce and industry, it will be advisable to glance
at the fortunes of one or two colonies.


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 33


The history of the Jews in the American colonies, and
therefore the history of the colonies themselves, falls into
two periods, separated by the expulsion of the Jews from
Brazil in 1654.

We have already mentioned the establishment of the
sugar industry in St. Thomas by Jews in 1492. By the
year 1550 this industry had reached the height of its
development on the island. There were sixty plantations
with sugar mills and refineries, producing annually, as
may be seen from the tenth part paid to the King,
150,000 arrobes of sugar.^S

From St, Thomas, or possibly from Madeira, ^6 where
they had for a long time been engaged in the sugar
trade, the Jews transplanted the industry to Brazil, the
largest of the American colonies. Brazil thus entered
on its first period of prosperity, for the growth of the
sugar industry brought with it the growth of the national
wealth. In those early years the colony was populated
almost entirely by Jews and criminals, two shiploads of
them being brought thither annually from Portugal.
The Jews quickly became the dominant class, “a not
inconsiderable number of the wealthiest Brazilian traders
were New Christians,” 68 Xhe first Governor-General
was of Jevrish origin, and he it was who brought order
into the government of the colony. It is not too much
to say that Portugal’s new possessions really began to
thrive only after Thome de Souza, a man of exceptional
ability, was sent out in 1549 to take matters in hand.69
Nevertheless the colony did not reach the zenith of
its prosperity until after the influx of rich Jews from
Holland, consequent on the Dutch entering into possession
in 1642, In that very year, a number of American Jews
combined to establish a colony in Brazil, and no less than
six hundred influential Dutch Jews joined them. 7 o Up
to about the middle of the lyth century all the large

4


34 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

sugar plantations belonged to Jews, 7 i and contemporary
travellers report as to their many - sided activities
and their wealth. Thus NieuhofF, who travelled in
Brazil from 1640 to 1649, says of them: 72 “Among
the free inhabitants of Brazil that were not in
the (Dutch West India) Company’s service the Jews
were the most considerable in number, who had trans-
planted themselves thither from Holland. They had a
vast traffic beyond the rest ; they purchased sugar-mills
and built stately houses in the Receif. They were all
traders, which would have been of great consequence to
the Dutch Brazil had they kept themselves within the
due bounds of traffic.” Similarly we read in F. Pyrard’s
Travels 72 ; « The profits they make after being nine or
ten years in those lands are marvellous, for they all come
back rich.”

The predominance of Jewish influence in plantation de-
velopment outlasted the episode of Dutch rule in Brazil,
and continued, despite the expulsion of 1654,73 down
to the first half of the nth century , 74 On one occasion,
“when a number of the most influential merchants of
Rio de Janeiro fell into the hands of the Holy Office (of
the Inquisition), the work on so many plantations came
to a standstill that the production and commerce of the
Province (of Bahia) required a long stretch of time to
recover from the blow.” Later, a decree of the 2nd
March 1768 ordered all the registers containing lists of
New Christians to be destroyed, and by a law of 25th
March 1773 New Christians were placed on a footing of
perfect civic equality with the orthodox. It is evident,
then, that very many crypto-Jews must have maintained
their prominent position in Brazil even after the Portu-
guese had r^dned possession of it in 1654, and that it
was they who brought to the country its flour ishing sugar
industry as well as its trade in precious stones.


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 35


Despite this, the year 1654 marks an epoch in the
annals of American-Jewish history. For it was in that
year that a goodly number of the Brazilian Jews settled
in other parts of America and thereby moved the
economic centre of gravity.

The change was specially profitable to one or two
important islands of the West Indian Archipelago and
also to the neighbouring coastlands, which rose in pros-
perity from the time of the Jewish influx in the 17th
century. Barbados, which was inhabited almost solely by
Jews, is a case in point.75 It came under English rule
in 1627; in 1641 the sugar cane was introduced, and
seven years later the exportation of sugar began. But the
sugar industry could not maintain itself. The sugar pro-
duced was so poor in quality that its price was scarcely
sufficient to pay for the cost of transport to England.
Not till the exiled “ Dutchmen ” from Brazil introduced
the process of refining and taught the natives the art of
drying and crystallizing the sugar did an improvement
manifest itself. As a result, the sugar exports of Bar-
bados increased by leaps and bounds, and in 1661
Charles II was able to confer baronetcies on thirteen
planters, who drew an annual income of 10,000 from
the island. By about the year 1676 the industry there
had grown to such an extent that no fewer than 400
vessels each carrying 1 80 tons of raw sugar left annually.

In 1664 Thomas Modyford introduced sugar manu-
facturing from Barbados into Jamaica, 76 which in con-
sequence soon became wealthy. Now, while in 1656, the
year in which the English' finally wrested the island from
Spain, there were only three small refineries in Jamaica,
in 1670 there were already 75 mills at work, many of
them having an output of 2000 cwts. By 1700 sugar
was the principal export of Jamaica and the source of
its riches. The petition of the English merchants of


36 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the colony in 1671, asking for the exclusion of the Jews,
makes it pretty plain that the latter must have contri-
buted largely to this development. The Government
however, encouraged the settlement of still more Jews,
the Governor in rejecting the petition remarking 77 that
“he was of opinion that his Majesty could not have
more profitable subjects than the Jews and the Hol-
landers ; they had great stocks and correspondence.”
So the Jews were not expelled from Jamaica, but
“became the first traders and merchants of the English
colony.” 78 In the 18th century they paid all the
taxes and almost entirely controlled industry and
commerce.

Of the other English colonies, the Jews showed a
special preference for Surinam .79 Jews had been
settled there since 1644 and had received a number of
privileges — “whereas we have found that the Hebrew .
nation . . . have . . . proved themselves useful and
beneficial to the colony.” Their privileged position
continued under the Dutch, to whom Surinam passed
in 1667. Towards the end of the 17th century their
proportion to the rest of the inhabitants was as one
to three, and in 1730 they owned 115 of the 344 sugar
plantations.

The story of the Jews in the English and Dutch
colonies finds a counterpart in the more important French
settlements, such as Martinique, Guadeloupe, and San
Domingo.80 Here also sugar was the source of wealth,
and, as in the other' cases, the Jews controlled the
industry and were the principal sugar merchants.

The first large plantation and refinery in Martinique
was established in 1655 by Benjamin Dacosta, who had
fled thither from Brazil with 900 co-religionists and
1100 slaves.

In San Domingo the sugar industry was introduced as


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 37


early as 1587, but it was not until the “ Dutch ” refugees
from Brazil settled there that it attained any degree of
success.

In all this we must never lose sight of the fact that
in those critical centuries in which the colonial system was
taking root in America (and with it modern capitalism),
the production of sugar was the backbone of the entire
colonial economy, leaving out of account, of course, the
mining of silver, gold and gems in Brazil. Indeed, it
is somewhat difficult exactly to picture to ourselves the
enormous significance in those centuries of sugar-making
and sugar-selling. The Council of Trade in Paris (1701)
was guilty of no exaggerated language when it placed
on record its belief that “ French shipping owes its
splendour to the commerce of the sugar-producing islands,
and it is only by means of this that the navy can be
maintained and strengthened.” Now, it must be remem-
bered that the Jews had almost monopolized the sugar
trade ; the French branch in particular being controlled
by the wealthy family of the Gradis of Bordeaux.8)t

The position which the Jews had obtained for them-
selves in Central and South America was thus a powerful
one. But it became even more so when towards the end
of the 17th century the English colonies in North America
entered into commercial relations with the West Indies.
To this close union, which again Jewish merchants helped
to bring about, the North American Continent (as we
shall see) owes its existence. We have thus arrived
at the point where it is essential to consider the Jewish
factor in the growth of the United States from their first
origins. Once more Jewish elements combined, this time
to give the United States their ultimate economic form.
As this view is absolutely opposed to that generally
accepted (at least in Europe), the question must receive
full consideration.


38 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


At first sight it would seem as if the economic system
of North America was the very one that developed inde-
pendently of the Jews. Often enough, when I have
asserted that modern capitalism is nothing more or less
than an expression of the Jewish spirit, I have been told
that the history of the United States proves the contrary.
The Yankees themselves boast of the fact that they throve
without the Jews. It was an American writer — Mark
Twain, if I mistake not — who once considered at some
length why the Jews played no great part in the States,
giving as his reason that the Americans were as “ smart ”
as the Jews, if not smarter. (The Scotch, by the way,
think the same of themselves.) Now, it is true that we
come across no very large number of Jewish names to-day
among the big captMns of industry, the well-known
speculators, or the Trust magnates in the country. Never-
theless, I uphold my assertion that the United States
(perhaps more than any other land) are filled to the brim
with the Jewish spirit. This is recognized in many
quarters, above all in those best capable of forming a
judgment on the subject. Thus, a few years ago, at the
magnificent celebration of the 250th anniversary of the
first settlement of the Jews in the United States, President
Roosevelt sent a congratulatory letter to the Organizing
Committee. In this he said that that was the first time
during his tenure of office that he had written a letter
of the kind, but that the importance of the occasion war-
ranted him in making an exception. The persecution
to which the Jews were then being subjected made it
an urgent duty for him to lay stress on the splendid civic
qualities which men of the Jewish faith and race had
developed ever since they came into the country. In
mentioning the services rendered by Jews to the United
States he used an expression which goes to the root of
the matter — “ The Jews participated in the up-building


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 39


of this country.” On the same occasion ex-President
Cleveland remarked : “ I believe that it can be safely
claimed that few, if any, of those contributing nationalities
have directly and indirectly been more influential in
eivine shape and direction to the Americanism of
to-day.” 83

Wherein does this Jewish influence manifest itself ?
In the first place, the number of Jews who took part in
American business life was never so small as would appear
at the first glance. It is a mistake to imagine that because
there are no Jews among the half-dozen well-known
multi-millionaires, male and female, who on account of
the noise they make in the world are on all men’s lips,
therefore American capitalism necessarily lacks a Jewish
element. To, begin with, even among the big Trusts there
are some directed by Jewish hands and brains. Thus,
the Smelters’ Trust, which in 1904 represented a com-
bination with a nominal capital of 201,000,000 dollars,
was the creation of Jews — the Guggenheims. Thus,
too, in the Tobacco Trust (500,000,000 dollars), in the
Asphalt Trust, in the Telegraph Trust, to mention but
a few, Jews occupy commanding positions.84 Again,
very many of the large banking-houses belong to Jews, who
in consequence exercise no small control over American
economic life. Take the Harriman system, which had
for its goal the fusion of all the American railways. It
was backed to a large extent by Kuhn, Loeb & Co., the
well-known banking firm of New York. Especially
influential are the Jews in the West. California is for
the most part their creation. At the foundation of the
State Jews obtained distinction as Judges, Congressmen,
Governors, Mayors, and so on, and last but not least,
as business men. The brothers Seligman — William,
Henry, Jesse and James — of San Francisco ; Louis Sloss
and Lewis Gerstle of Sacramento (where they established


40 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the Alaska Commercial Company), Heilman and New-
mark of Los Angelos, are some of the more prominent
business houses in this part of the world. During the
gold-mimng period Jews were the intermediaries between
California and the Eastern States and Europe. The im-
portant transactions of those days were undertaken by
such men as Benjamin Davidson, the agent of the Roth-
schilds ; Albert Priest, of Rhode Island ; Albert Dyer, of
Baltimore ; the three brothers Lazard, who established the
international banking-house of Lazard Freres of Paris,
London and San Francisco ; the Seligmans, the Glaziers
and the Wormsers. Moritz Friedlaender was one of the
chief “ Wheat kings.” Adolph Sutro exploited the Com-
stock Lodes. Even to-day the majority of the banking
businesses, no less than the general industries, are in the
hands of Jews. Thus, we may mention the London,
Paris and American Bank (Sigmund Greenbaum and
Richard Altschul) ; the Anglo-Californian Bank (Philip
N. Lilienthal and Ignatz Steinhart) ; the Nevada Bank ;
the Union Trust Company ; the Farmers’ and Merchants’
Bank of Los Angelos; John Rosenfeld’s control of the
coalfields ; the Alaska Commercial Company, which suc-
ceeded the Hudson Bay Company ; the North American
Commercial Company, and many more.8s

It can scarcely be doubted that the immigration of
numerous Jews into all the States during the last few
decades must have had a stupendous effect on American
economic life everywhere. Consider that there are more
than a million Jews in New York to-day, and that the
greater number of the immigrants have not yet embarked
on a capitalistic career. If the conditions in America
continue to develop along the same lines as in the last
generation, if the imnugration statistics and the propor-
tion of births among all the nationalities remain the same,
our imagination may picture the United States of fifty or


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 41

a hundred years hence as a land inhabited only by Slavs,
Negroes and Jews, wherein the Jews will naturally occupy
the position of economic leadership.

Blit these are dreams of the future which have no place
in this connexion, where our main concern is with the
past and the present. That Jews have taken a prominent
share in American life in the present and in the past may
be conceded ; perhaps a more prominent share than would
at first sight appear. Nevertheless, the enormous weight
which, in common with many others who have the right
of forming an opinion on the subject, I attach to their
influence, cannot be adequately explained merely from the
point of view of their numbers. It is rather the particular
kind of influence that I lay stress on, and this can be
accounted for by a variety of complex causes.

That is why I am not anxious to overemphasize the
fact, momentous enough in itself, that the Jews in
America practically control a number of important
branches of commerce ; indeed, it is not too much to say
that they monopolize them, or at least did so for a con-
siderable length of time. Take the wheat trade, especially
in the West ; take tobacco ; take cotton. We see at ondfc
that they who rule supreme in three such mighty industries
must perforce take a leading part in the economic activities
of the nation as a whole. For all that I do not labour
this fact, for to my mind the significance of the Jews for
the economic development of the United States lies rooted
in causes far deeper than these.

As the golden thread in the tapestry, so are the Jews
interwoven as a distinct thread throughout the fabric of
America’s economic history ; through the intricacy of
their fantastic design it received from the very beginning
a pattern all its own.

Since the first quickening of the capitalistic spirit on
the coastlands of the ocean and in the forests and prairies


42 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


of the New World, Jews have not been absent ; 1655 is
tisually given as the date of their first appearance.86
In that year a vessel with Jewish emigrants from Brazil,
which had become a Portuguese possession, anchored in
the Hudson River, and the passengers craved permission
to land in the colony which the Dutch West India Com-
pany had founded there. But they were no humble
petitioners asking for a favour. They came as members
of a race which had participated to a large extent in the
new foundation, and the governors of the colony were
forced to recognize their claims. When the ship arrived.
New Amsterdam was under the rule of Stuyvesant, who
was no friend to the Jews and who, had he followed his
own inclination, would have closed the door in the face
of the newcomers. But a letter dated March 26, 1665,
reached him from the Court of the Company in Amster-
dam, containing the order to let the Jews settle and trade
in the colonies under the control of the Company, “ also
because of the large amount of capital which they have
invested in shares of this Company.” ^7 It was not
long before they found their way to Long Island, Albany,
Rhode Island and Philadelphia.

Then their manifold activities began, and it was due to
them • that the colonies were able to maintain their exist-
ence. The entity of the United States to-day is only
possible, as we know, because the English colonies of
North America, thanks to a chain of propitious circum-
stances, acquired a degree of power and strength such as
ultimately led to their complete independence. In the
building up of this position of supremacy the Jews were
among the first and the keenest workers.

I am not thinking of the obvious jfact that the colonies
were only able to achieve their independence by the help
of a few wealthy Jewish firms who laid the economic
foundations for the existence of the New Republic. The


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 43


United States would never have won complete indepen-
dence had not the Jews supplied the needs of their armies
and furnished them with the indispensable sinews of
war. But what the Jews accomplished in this direction
did not arise out of specifically American conditions.
It wa*s a general phenomenon, met with throughout the
history of the modern capitalistic States, and we shall
do justice to instances of it when dealing with wider
issues.

No. What I have in mind is the special service which
the Jews rendered the North American colonies, one
peculiar to the American Continent — a service which
indeed gave America birth. I refer to the simple fact
that during the 17th and i8th centuries the trade of the
Jews was the source from which the economic system of
the colonies drew its life-blood. As is well known,
England forced her colonies to purchase all the manufac-
tured articles they needed in the Mother-country. Hence
the balance of trade of the colonies was always an adverse
one, and by constantly having to send money out of the
country they would have been drained dry. But there
was a stream which carried the precious metals into the
country, a stream diverted in this direction by the trade
of the Jews with South and Central America. The Jews
in the English colonies maintained active 4 )usiness relations
with the West Indian Islands and with Brazil, resulting in
a favourable balance of trade for the land of their sojourn.
The gold mined in South America was thus brought to
North America and helped to keep the economic system
in a healthy condition. 88

In the face of this fact, is there not some justification
for the opinion that the United States owe their very
existence to the Jews? And if this be so, how much
more can it be asserted that Jewish influence made the
United States just what they are — ^that is, American?


44 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


For what we call Americanism is nothing else, if we may
say so, than the Jewish spirit distilled.

But how comes it that American culture is so steeped
in Jemshness ? The answer is simple — through the early
and universal admixture of Jewish elements among the
first settlers. We may picture the process of colonizing
somewhat after this fashion. A band of determined men
and women — let us say twenty families — ^went forth into
the wilds to begin their life anew. Nineteen were
equipped with plough and scythe, ready to clear the
forests and till the soil in order to earn their livelihood
as husbandmen. The twentieth family opened a store to
provide their companions with such necessaries of life as
could not be obtained firom the soil, often no doubt
hawking them at the very doors. Soon this twentieth
family made it its business to arrange for the distribution
of the products which the other nineteen won from the
soil. It was they, too, who were most likely in possession
of ready cash, and in case of need could therefore be useful
to the others by lending them money. Very often the
store had a kind of agricultural loan-bank as its adjunct,
perhaps also an office for the buying and selling of land.
So through the activity of the twentieth family the farmer
in North America was from the first kept in touch with
the money and credit system of the Old World. Hence
the whole process of production and exchange was from
its inception along modern lines. Town methods made
their way at once into even the most distant villages.
Accordingly, it may be said that American economic life
was from its very start impregnated with capitalism. And
who was responsible for this } The twentieth family in
each village. Need we add that this twentieth family was
always a Jewish one, which joined a party of settlers or soon
sought them out in their homesteads ?

Such in outline is the mental picture I have conceived


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 45


of the economic development of the United States. Sub-
sequent writers dealing with this subject will be able to fill
in more ample details ; I myself have only come across a
few. But these are so similar in character that they can
hardly be taken as isolated instances. The conclusion is
forced upon us that they are typical. Nor do I alone hold
this view. Governor Pardel of California, for example,
remarked in 1905 : “ He (the Jew) has been the leading
financier of thousands of prosperous communities. He
has been enterprising and aggressive.” 89

Let me quote some of the illustrations I have met with.
In 1785 Abraham Mordecai settled in Alabama. “He
established a trading-post two miles west of Line Creek,
carrying on an extensive trade vdth the Indians, and
exch ang i ng his goods for pinkroot, hickory, nut oil and
peltries of all kinds. ” 9 ® Similarly in Albany: “As
early as i66i, when Albany was but a small trading post,
a Jewish trader named Asser Levi (or Leevi) became the
owner of real estate there.” Chicago has the same
story. The first brick house was built by a Jew, Benedict
Schubert, who became the first merchant tailor in Chicago,
while another Jew, Philip Newburg, was the first to intro-
duce the tobacco business. 9 ® In Kentucky we hear of
a Jewish settler as early as 1816. When in that year the
Bank of the United States opened a branch in Lexington,
a Mr. Solomon, who had arrived in 1808, was made
cashier .93 In Maryland ,94 Michigan ,95 Ohio 9 ^ and
Pennsylvania 97 it is on record that Jewish traders were
among the earliest settlers, though nothing is known of
their activity.

On the other hand, a great deal is known of Jews in
Texas, where they were among the pioneers of capitalism.
Thus, for example, Jacob de Cordova “ was by far the most
extenave land locator in the State until 1856.” The
Cordova’s Land Agency soon became famous not only in


46 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


Texas but in New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore,
where the owners of large tracts of Texas land resided.
AgMn, Morris Koppore in 1863 became President of
the National Bank of Texas. Henry Castro was an
immigration agent; “between the years 1843-6 Castro
introduced into Texas over 5000 immigrants . . .
transporting them in 27 ships, chiefly from the Rhenish
provinces. . . . He fed his colonists for a year, furnished
them \wth cows, farming implements, seeds, medicine,
and in short with everything they needed. ”98

Sometimes branches of one and the same family dis-
tributed themselves in different States, and were thereby
enabled to carry on bu^ness most successfully. Perhaps
the best instance is the history of the Seligman family.
There were eight brothers (the sons of David Seligman,
of Bayersdorf, in Bavaria) who started a concern which
now has branches in all the most important centres in the
States. Their story began with the arrival in America
in the year 1837 of Joseph Seligman. Two other brothers
followed in 1839 ; a third came two years later. The
four began business as clothiers in Lancaster, moving
shortly after to Selma Ala. From here they opened three
branches in three other towns. By 1848 two more
brothers had arrived from Germany and the six moved
North. In 1850, Jesse Seligman opened a shop in San
Francisco — in the first brick house in that city. Seven
years later a banking business was added to the clothing
shop, and in 1862 the house of Seligman Brothers was
established in New York, San Francisco, London, Paris
and Frankfort .99

In the Southern States likewise the Jew played the part
of the trader in the midst of agricultural settlers.*®®
Here also (as in Southern and Central America) we find
him quite early as the owner of vast plantations. In
South Carolina indeed, “Jew’s Land” is synonymous


THE FOUNDATION OF MODERN COLONIES 47


with “ Large Plantations.” It was in the South that
Moses Lindo became famous as one of the first under-
takers in the production of indigo.

These examples must suffice. We believe they tend
to illustrate our general statement, which is supported
also by the fact that there was a constant stream of Jewish
emigration to the United States from their earliest
foundation. It is true that there are no actual figures
to show the proportion of the Jewish population to the
total body of settlers. But the numerous indications of
a general nature that we do find make it pretty certain
that there must always have been a large number of Jews
in America.

It must not be forgotten that in the earliest years the
population was thinly scattered and very sparse. New
Amsterdam had less than 1000 inhabitants. That
being so, a shipful of Jews who came from Brazil to
settle there made a great difference, and in assessing
Jewish influence on the whole district we shall have to
rate it highly. Or take another instance. When

the first settlement in Georgia was established, forty
Jews were among the settlers. The number may seem
insignificant, but when we consider the meagre popula-
tion of the colony, Jewish influence must be accounted
strong. So, too, in Savannah, where in 1733 there were
already twelve Jewish femifies in what was then a tiny
commercial centre. 104

That America early became the goal tf German and
Polish Jewish emigrants is well known. Thus we are
told : “ Among the poorer Jewish families of Posen there
was seldom one which in the second quarter of the
19th century did not have ‘at least one son (and in most
cases the ablest and not least enterprising) who sailed
away across the ocean to flee from the narrowness and
the oppression of his native land.” *<>5 We are not


48 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


surprised, therefore, at the comparatively large number
of Jewish soldiers (7243) •v^ho took part in the Civil
War, and we should be inclined to say that the estimate
which puts the Jewish population of the United States
about the middle of the 19th century at 300,000 (of
whom 30,000 lived in New York) was if anything too
moderate.


CHAPTER V


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE

The development of the modern colonial system and the
establishment of the modern State are two phenomena
dependent on one another. The one is inconceivable
without the other, and the genesis of modern capitalism-
is bound up with both. Hence, in order to discover
the importance of any historic factor in the growth of
capitalism it will be necessary to find out what, and how
great a part that factor played in both the colonial
■ system and the foundation of the modern State. In the
last chapter we considered the Jews in relation to the
colonial system ; in the present we shall do the same for
the modern State.

A cursory glance would make it appear that in no
direction could the Jews, the “Stateless” people, have
had less influence than in the establishment of modern
States. Not one of the statesmen of whom we think in
this connexion was a Jew — neither Charles the Fifth, nor
Loms'the Eleventh, neither Richelieu, Mazarin, Colbert,
Cromwell, Frederick William of Prussia nor Frederick
the Great-^°7* However, when speaking of these
modem statesmen and rulers, we can hardly do so without
perforce thinking of the Jews : it would be like Faust
without Mephistopheles. Arm in arm the Jew and the
ruler stride through the age which historians call modern.
To me this union is symbolic of the rise of capitalism,
• and consequently of the modern State. In most countries

5


so THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the ruler assumed the role of protector of the persecuted
Jews against the Estates of the Realm and the Gilds —
both pre-capitalistic forces. And why ? Their interests
and their sympathies coincided. The Jew embodied
modern capitalism, and the ruler allied himself with this
force in order to establish, or maintain, his own position.
When, therefore, I speak of the part played by the Jews
in the foundation of modem States, it is not so much their
direct influence as organizers that I have in mind, as
rather their indirect co-operation in the process. I am
thinking of the fact that the Jews furnished the rising
States with the material means necessary to maintain
themselves and to develop ; that the Jews supported the
army in each country in two ways, and the armies were
the bulwarks on which the new States rested. In two
ways : on the one hand, the Jews supplied the army
in time of war with weapons, and munition and food ;
on the other hand, they prqyided money not only for
military purposes but also for the general needs of courts
and governments. The Jews throughout the i6th, 17th
and 1 8th centuries were most influential as army-
purveyors and as the moneyed men to whom the princes
looked for financial backing. This position of the Jews
was of the greatest consequence for the development of
the modern State. It is not necessary to expatiate on this
statement ; all that we shall do is to adduce instances in
proof of it. Here, too, we cannot attempt to mention
every possible example. We can only point the way ;
it will be for subsequent research to follow.

I, The Jews as Purveyors.

Although there are numerous cases on record of Jews
acting in the capacity of army-contractors in Spain
previous to 1492, 1 shall not refer to this period, because
it lies outside the scope of our present considerations.


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE 51

We shall confine ourselves to the centuries that followed
-and begin with England.

In the 17th and i8th centuries the Jews had already
achieved renowA as army-purveyors. ' Under the Com-
monwealth the most famous army-contractor was Antonio
Fernandez Carvajal, “ the great Jew,” who came to
London some time between 1630 and 1635, and was
very soon accounted among the most prominent traders
in the land. In 1649 he was one of the five London
merchants entrusted by the Council of State with the
army contract for corn.108 It is said that he annually
imported into England silver to the .value of 100,000.
In the period that ensued, especially in the wars of
William III, Sir Solomon Medina (“ the Jew Medina ”)
was “ the great contractor,” and for his services he was
knighted, being the first professing Jew to receive that
honour. ^09

It was the same in the wars of the Spanish Succes-
sion ; here, too, Jews were the principal army-con-
tractors. ”<> In 1716 the Jews of Strassburg recall the
services they rendered the armies of Louis XIV by
furnishing information and supplying provisions.***
Indeed, Louis XlV’s army-contractor-in-chief was a
Jew, Jacob Worms by name ; **2 and in the i8th
century Jews gradually took a more and more promi-
nent part in this work. In 17^7 the Jews of Metz
brought into the city in the space of six weeks 2000
horses for food and more than 5000 for remounts.* *3
Field-Marshal Maurice of Saxony, the victor of Fontenoy,
expressed the opinion that his armies were never better
served with supplies than when the Jews were the
contractors .**4 One of the best known of the Jewish
army-contractors in the time of the last two Louis
was Cerf Beer, in whose patent of naturalization it is
recorded that “ . . . in the wars which raged in Akace


52 • THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in 1770 and 1771 he found the opportunity of proving
his zeal in our service and in that of the State.” ^^5

ft '

Similarly, the house of the Gradis, of Bordeaux, was
an establishment of internadonal repute in the i8th
century. Abraham Gradis set up large storehouses in
Quebec to supply the needs of the French troops
there.'' 16 Under the Revolutionary Government,
imder the Directory, in the Napoleonic Wars it was
always Jews who acted as purveyors.^'? In this
connexion a public notice displayed in the streets of
Paris in 1795 is significant. There was a famine in
the city and the Jews were called upon to show their
gratitude for the rights bestowed upon them by the
Revolution by bringing in corn. “ They alone,” says
the author of the notice, “ can successfully accomplish
this enterprise, thanks to their business relations,
of which their fellow citizens ought to have full
benefit.” ""S ^ parallel story comes from Dresden.
In- 1720 the Court Jew, Jonas Meyer, saved the town
from starvation by supplying it with large quantities of
corn. (The Chronicler mentions 40,000 bushels .)”9

All over Germany the Jews from an early date
were found in the ranks of army-contractors. Let us
enumerate a few of them. There was Isaac Meyer in
the 1 6th century, who, when Cardinal Albrecht admitted
lum.a resident of Halberstadt in 1537, was enjoined
by Mm, in view of the dangerous times, “to supply
our monastery with good weapons and armour.”
There was Joselman von Rosheim, who in 1548
received an imperial letter of protection because he had
supplied both money and provisions for the army. In
1546 there is a record of Bohemian Jews who pro-
vided great-coats and blankets for the army. ''2° In
the next century (1633) another Bohemian Jew,
Lazarus by name, received an official declaration that


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE 53

he “obtained either in person, or at his own expense,
valuable information for the Imperial troops, and that
he made it his business to see that the army had a
good supply of ammunition and clothing.” The
Great Elector also had recourse to Jews for his
military needs. Leimann Gompertz and Solomon Elias
were his contractors for cannon, powder and so
forth. 122 There are numerous others : Samuel Julius,
remount contractor under the Elector Frederick
Augustus of Saxony ; the Model family, court-pur-
veyors and army-contractors in the Duchy of AnsbacH
in the 17th and i8th centuries are well known. *23
In short, as one writer of the time pithily expresses
it, “all the contractors are Jews and all the Jews are
contractors.” 124

Austria does not differ in this respect from Germany,
France and England. The wealthy Jews, who in the
reigil of the Emperor Leopold received permission to
re-settle in Vienna (1670) — the Oppenheimers, Wert-
heimers, Mayer Herschel and the rest — were all army-
contractors. 125 And we find the same thing in dl
the countries under the Austrian Crown. *26 Lastly,
we must mention the Jewish army-contractors who
provisioned the American troops in the Revolutionary
and Qvil Wars. *27

II. The Jews as Financiers.

This has been a theme on which many historians have
written, and we are tolerably well informed concerning
this aspect of Jewish history in all ages. It wU not be
necessary for me, therefore, to enter into this question in
great detMl ; the enumeration of a few well-known facts
will suffice.

Already in the Middle Ages we find that everywhere
taxes, sdt-niines and royal domdns were farmed out to'


54 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

Jews ; that Jews were royal treasurers and money-lenders,
most frequently, of course, in the Pyrenean Peninsula,
where the Almoxarife and the Rendeiros were chosen
preferably from among the ranks of the rich Jews. But
as this period does not specially concern us here, 1 will
not mention any names but refer the reader to the general
literature on the subject.^*®

It was, however, in modern times, when the State as
we know it to-day first originated, that the activity of thc'
Jews as financial advisers of princes was fraught with
mighty influence. Take Holland, where although
ofEdally deterred from being servants of the Crown,
they very quickly occupied positions of authority. We
recall Moses Machado, the favourite of William III ;
Belmonte, a family of ambassadors (Lords of Schoonen-
berg) ; the wealthy Suasso, who in 1688 lent William
two million gulden, and others ,^*9

The effects of the Jewish haute finance in Holland
made themselves felt beyond the borders of the Nether-
lands, because that country in the 17 th and i8th centuries
was the reservoir from which all the needy princes of
Europe drew their money. Men , like the Pintos,-
Belmontes, Bueno de Mesquita, Francis Mels and many
others may in truth be regarded as the leading financiers
of Northern Europe during that period. * 3 ®

Next, English finance was at this time also very
extensively controlled by Jews. *31 The monetary
needs of the Long Parliament gave the first impetus to
the settlement of rich Jews in England. Long before
their admission by Cromwell, wealthy crypto-Jews,
especially from Spain and Portugal, migrated thither via
Amsterdam : the year 1643 brought an exceptionally
large contingent. Their rallying-point was the house of
the Portuguese Ambassador in London, Antonio de
Souza, himself a Maranno, Prominent among them


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE 55

was Antonio Fernandez Carvajal, who has already been
nientioned, and who was as great a financier as he was an
army-contractor. It was he who supplied the Common-
wealth •vnth funds. The little colony was further
increased under the later Stuarts, notably under Charles
the Second. In the retinue of his Portuguese bride,
Catherine of Braganza, were quite a number of moneyed
Jews, among them the brothers Da Sylva, Portuguese
bankers of Amsterdam, who were entrusted with the trans-
mission and adnunistration of the Queen’s dowry,
Contemporaneously with them came the Mendes and the
Da Costas from Spain and Portugal, who united their
families under the name of Mendes da Costa.

About the same period the Ashkenazi (German) Jews
began to arrive in the country. On the whole, these
could hardly compare for wealth with their Sephardi
(Spanish) brethren, yet they also had their capitalistic
magnates, such as Benjamin Levy for example.

Under William III their numbers were still further
increased, and the links between the court and the rich
Jews were strengthened. Sir Solomon Me<fina, who has
also been already mentioned, followed the King from
Hollandi as his banker, and with him came the Suasso,
another of the plutocratic families. Under Queen Anne
one of the most prominent financiers in England was
Menasseh Lopez, and by the time the South Sea Bubble
burst, the Jews as a body were the greatest financial
power in the country. They had kept clear of the wild
speculations which had preceded the disaster and so
retained their fortunes unimpaired. Accordingly, wrhen
the Government issued a loan on the Land Tax, the Jews
were in a position to take up one quarter of it. During
this critical period the chief family was that of the
Gideons, whose representative, Sampson Gideon (1699-
1762), was the “ trusted adviser of the Government,” the


56 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

friend of Walpole, the “pillar of the State credit.”
In 1745, the year of panics, Sampson raised a loan of
,^1,700,000 for the assistance of the Government. On
his death his influence passed to the firm of Francis and
Joseph Salvador, who retained it till the beginning of the
19th century, when the Rothschilds succeeded to the
financial leadership.

It is the same story in France, and the powerful
position held by Samuel Bernard- in the latter part of the
rdgn of Louis XIV and in the whole of that of Louis XV
may serve as one example among many. We find
Louis XIV walking in his garden with this wealthy Jew,
“whose sole merit,” in the opinion of one cynical
writer, *33 “ was that he supported the State as the
rope does the hanged man.” He financed the Wars of
the Spanish Succession ; he aided the French candidate
for the throne of Poland ; he advised the Regent in all
money matters. It was probably no exaggeration when
the Marquis de Dangeau spoke of him in one of his
letters *34 as “ the greatest banker in Europe at the
present time.” In France also the Jews participated to a
large extent in the re-consolidation of the French East
India Company after the bursting of the South Sea
Bubble!. *35 It was not, however, until the 19th century
that they won a really leading position in financial circles
in France, and the important names here are the
Rothschilds, the Helphens, the Foulds, the Cerfbeers, the
Duponts, the Godchaux, the Dalemberts, th6 Pereires and
others. It is possible that in the 17th and i8th cen-
■ turies also a great many more Jews than those, already
mentioned were active as financiers in France, but that
owing to the rigorous exclusion of Jews .they became
crypto-Jews, and so we have no full information about
them.

It is earier to trace Jewish influence in finance m


THE FOUNDATION OF THE MODERN STATE 57

Germany and Austria through that clever invention — the
status of “ Court • Jew.” Though the law in these
countries forbade Jews to settle in their boundaries, yet
the princes and rulers kept a number of “ privileged ”
Jews at their courts. According to GraetZj^Sfi the
status of “ Court Jew ” was introduced by the Emperors
of Germany during the Thirty Years’ War. Be that as it
may, it is an undoubted fact that pretty well every State
in Germany throughout the 17th and i8th centuries had
its Court Jew or Jews, upbn whose support the finances
of the land depended.

A few examples by way of illustration. In the 17th
century *37 we find at the Imperial Court Joseph
Pinkherle> of Goerz, Moses and Jacob Marburger, of
Gradisca, Ventura Parente of Trieste, Jacob Bassewi
Batscheba Schmieles in Prague, the last of whom the
Emperor Ferdinand raised to the ranks of the nobility
under the title von Treuenburg on account of his faith-
ful services. In the reign of the Emperor Leopold I we
meet with the respected family of the Oppcnheimers, of
whom the Staatskanzler Ludewig wrote in the follow-
ing terms. *38 After saying that the Jews were the
arbiters of the most important events, he continues :
“In the year 1690 the Jew Oppenheimer was well known
among merchants and bankers not only in Europe but
throughout the world.” No less famous in the same
reign was Wolf Schlesinger, purveyor to the codrt, who
in company with , I-ewel Sinzheim raised more than one
large loan for the State. Maria Theresa utilized the
services of Schlesinger and others, notably the Wert-
heimers, Arnsteins and Eskeles. Indeed, for more than
a century the court bankers in Vienna were Jews .*39
We can gauge their economic influence from the fact
that when an anti-Jewish riot broke out in Frankfort-on-
the-Main, the local authorities thought it wise in the


58 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


interest of credit to call upon the Imperial Office to
interfere and protect the Frankfort Jews, who had very
close trade relations with their brethren in Vienna.

It was not otherwise at the smaller German courts.
“ The continually increasing needs of the various courts,
each vying with the other in luxury, rendered it im-
perative, seeing that communication was by no means
easy, to have skilful ^ents in the commercial centres.”
Accordingly the Dukes of Mecklenburg had such agents
in Hamburg ; Bishop John Philip of Wurzburg was
in 1700 served by Moses Elkan in Frankfort. This
activity opened new channels for the Jews ; the enter-
prising dealer who provided jewels for her ladyship,
liveries for the court chamberlain and dwnties for the
head cook was also quite willing to negotiate a loan. * 4 *
Frankfort and Hamburg, with their large Jewish popula-
tion, had many such financial agents, who acted for ruling
princes living at a distance. Besides those already
mentioned we may recall the Portuguese Jew, Daniel
Abensur, who died in Hamburg in 17 ii. He was
Minister-resident of the King of Poland in that city,
and the Polish Crown was indebted to him for many a
loan. *42 Some of these agents often moved to the
court which borrowed from them, and became “Court
Jews.” Frederick Augustus, who became Elector of
Saxony in 1694, had a number of them : Leffmann
Berentz, of Hanover, J. Meyer, of Hamburg, Berend
Lehmann, of Halberstadt (who advanced money for
the election of the King of Poland) and others. *43
Again, in Hanover the Behrends were Chief Court
Purveyors and Agents to the Treasury; * 44 ' the Models,
the Fraenkels and the Nathans acted in a similar
capacity to the Duchy of Ansbach. In the Palatinate we
come across Lemte Moyses and Michel May, who in
1719 paid the debt of 2^ million gulden which the


THE BOUND ATION OF THE MODERN STATE 59

Elector owed the Emperor , ^45 and lastly, in the Marg-
gravate of Bayreuth, there were the Baiersdorfs.146

Better known perhaps are the Court Jews of the
Brandenburg-Prussian rulers — ^lippold, under Joachim II ;
Gomperz and Joost Liebmann, under Frederick III ;
Veit, under Frederick William I ; and Ephraim, Moses,
'Isaac and Daniel Itzig, under Frederick II. Most
famous of all the German Court Jews, the man who
may be taken as their archetype, was Suess-Oppenheimer,
who was at the court of Charles Alexs,nder ■ of
W urtemberg.

Finally, we must not leave unmehtioned that during
the 1 8th century, more especially in the Revolutionary
Wars, the Jews played no small role as financiers in the
United States of America. Haym Salomon ranks
side by side with the Minis and the Cohens in
Georgia , >'49 but the most prominent of them all
was Robert Morris, the financier par excellence of the
American Revolution.^so

And now comes an extraordinary thing. Whilst for
centuries (especially during the 17th and the i8th — ^thc
two so momentous in the growth of the modern
State) the Jews had personal financial dealings with the
rulers, in the century that followed (but even during the
two already mentioned) the system of public credit gradu-
ally took a new form. This forced the big capitalist from
his dominating position more and more into the back-
ground, and allowed an ever-increasing number of mis-
cellaneous creditors to take his place. Through the
evolution of the modern method of floating loans the
public credit was, sp to speak, democratized,” and, in
consequence, the Court Jew became superfluous. But
the Jews themselves were not the least who aided ‘the
growth of this new system of borromng, and thus they


6o THE JE WS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

contributed to the removal of their own monopoly as
financiers. In so doing they participated to a greater
degree than ever before in the work of building up the
great States of the present.

The transformation in the public credit - system was
but a part of a much vaster change which crept over
economic life as a whole, a metamorphosis in which also
the Jews took a very great share. Let us consider this
change in its entirety.


CHAPTER VI


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE IN ECONOMIC

LIFE

It is a matter of common knowledge that the Stock
Exchange in modern times is becoming more and more
the heart of all economic activities. With the fuller
development of capitalism this was only to be expected,
and there were three clear stages in the process. The
first was the evolution of credit from being a personal
matter into one of an impersonal relationship. It took
shape and form in securities. Stage two : these securities
were made mobile — that is, bought and sold in a market.
The last stage was the formation of undertakings for the
purpose of creating such securities.

In all the stages the Jew was ever present with his
creative genius. We may even go further and say that it
was due specifically to the Jewish spirit that these charac-
teristics of modem economic life came into being.

I. The Origin of Securities.*Si

Securities represent the standardization of personal
indebtedness. *sa We may speak of “standardization”
in this sense when a relationship which was originally
personal becomes impersonal ; where before human beings
directly acted and reacted on each other, now a system
obtains. An instance or two will make our meaning
clear. Where before work was done by man, it is now
done by a machine. That is the standardization of work.


62 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM ,


In old«ti times a battle was won by the superior personal
initiative of the general in command ; nowadays victory
falls to the leader who can most skilfully utilize the body
of experience gathered in the course of years and can best
apply the complicated methods of tactics and strategy ;
who has at his disposal the best guns and who has the
most effective organization for provisioning his men. ■
We may speak in this instance of the “ standardization ”
of; war. A business becomes standardized when, the head
of the firm who came into personal contact with his
employees on the one hand and mth his customers on
the other, is succeeded by a board of directors, under
whom is an ■ army of officials, all working on an organ-
ized plan, and consequently business is more or less of
an automatic process.

Now, at a particular stage in the growth of capitalism
credit became standardized. That is to say, that whereas
before indebtedness arose as the result of an agreement
between two people who knew each other, it was now
rearranged on a systematic basis, and the people con-
cerned might be entire strangers. The new relationship
is expressed by negotiable instruments, whether bill of
exchange or security or banknote or mortgage deed, and
,a careful analysis of each of them will prove this
conclusively.

Of the three persons mentioned in a bill of exchange,
the specified party in whose favour the document is made
out (the payee) or, if no name is mentioned, the bearer
of the document may be quite unknown to the other
two ; he may have had no direct business relation with
the party making out the bill (the drawer), yet this
document establishes a claim of -the former on the
latter — general and impersonal. *S3

The security gives the owner the right to participate
in. the capital and the profit of a concern with which


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 63

he has no direct personal contact. He may never even
have seen the building in which the undertaking in
question is housed, and when he parts with his security
to another person he transfers his right of participation.

Similarly with a banknote. The holder has a claim
on the bank of issue despite the fact that he personally
.may never have deposited a penny with it.

So, in short, with all crecUt instruments : an impersonal
relationship is established between either an individual
or a corporation on the one hand (the receiver of
moneys), and an unknown body of people (we speak
of “ the public ”) on the other — the lender of moneys.

What share did the Jews take in the creation of this
credit machinery ? It would be difficult, perhaps im-
possible, to show what that share was by reference to
documentary evidence, even if we had a very full account
of the position of the Jews in the early economic history
’ of most lands. But unfortunately that aspect of economic
development which would have been invaluable for the
solution of the problem in hand has been sadly neglected.
I refer to the history of money and of banking in the
Pyrenean Peninsula during the last centuries of the
Middle Ages. But even if such a history were at our
disposal, the question would still be difficult to answer.
We must remember that the origins of economic organi-
zation can no more be discovered by referring to docu-
mentary evidence than the origins of legal institutions.
No form of organization or tendency in economic life can
be traced to a particular day or even a particular year.
It is all a matter of growth, and the most that the
economic historian can do is to show that in any given
period this or that characteristic is found in business life,
tlus or that organization dominates all economic activities.
Even for this the ludicrously inadequate sources ht ovkr
disposal are hardly sufficient. The historian will have to


64 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

turn to the general history of the period, or to that
of the particular group in which he happens to be
interested.,

To take an instance. The history of bills of exchange
can scarcely be written merely by referring to the few
mediaeval bills which chance has left to us. Such docu-
ments are certainly useful to supplement or correct*
general theories. But we must formulate the general
theories first. Let us take a case in point. The bill
which for a long time was held to be the oldest extant
was drawn by a Jew, Simon Rubens, in the year 1207 .
That is hardly sufficient evidence on which to base the
assertion that the Jews were the inventors of this form
of credit instrument. 1 54 Earlier bills have come to
light recently, drawn by non-Jews, but they do not
render testimony strong enough for the statement that ,
the Jews were not the inventors of bills. Do we know
how many thousands of bills circulated in Florence
or Bruges, and how can we be sure which section of the
population issued them? We do know, however, that
the Jews were occupied throughout the Middle Ages in
money-dealing, that they were settled in various parts of
Europe and that they carried on a continuous intercourse
with each other. From these facts we may draw the
tolerably certain conclusion that “the Jews, the inter-
mediaries in international trade, utilized on a large scale
the machinery of foreign exchanges, then traditionally
current in the Mediterranean, lands, and extended
it.” 155

That this method of reasoning requires great caution
is self-evident. Yet it may lead to useful conclusions
for all that. There are cases, as we shall see, where the
share of the Jews in the -extension of some economic
policy or machinery may be proved by a fund of docu-
mentary evidence. In other instances, and they are


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 65


numerous, we must content ourselves if it can be shown
that, at any particular time and in any given place, there
must have been some special reason for the utilization
by Jews of a form of economic organization then current.

Bearing this in mind, let us enquire into the genesis
of one or two t3rpes of credit instruments.

I. The Bill of Exchange.

Not merely the early history of the bill of exchange
but rather that of the modern endorsable bill is wh^t we
are concerned with most of all It is generally accepted
that the endorsing of bills of exchange had been folly
developed prior to the 17th century, and the first com-
plete legal recognition of such endorsement was found
in Holland (Proclamation in Amsterdam of January 24,
16.51). 156 Now, as we shall see presently, all develop-
ments in the money and credit systems of Holland in the
17th century were due more or less to Jewish influence.
Some authorities trace the origin of endorsable bills of
exchange to Venice, where they were made illegal by
a law of December 14, i593.’'S7 It is fairly certain
that the use of circulating endorsable bills in Venice must
have been first commenced by Jews, seeing that we
know that nearly all bill-broking in the Adriatic city
in the i6th century was in their hands. In the petition
of the Christian merchants of Venice of the year 1550
(to wHch reference has already been made) the passage
relating to the bill business of Jews reads as follows >^58 ; —

“We carry on the same 'commerce with them also in matters of
exchange, because they continually remit to us their money . . .
sending cash, in order that we may change it for them for Lyons,
Flanders and other parts of the world on our Exchange, or indeed that
we may buy for them silken cloths and other merchandise according
to their convenience, gaining our usual commission.

“That which we say of the inhabitants of Florence holds good also

6


66 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

of the other merchants of the same Spanish and Portuguese nation,
who dwell in Flanders, Lyons, Rome, Naples, Sicily and olfher
countries, who lay themselves out to do business with us, not only
in exchanges but in sending hither merchandise of' Flanders, selling
corn from Sicily and buying other merchandise to transport to other
countries.”

A further development in the endorsing of bill?
appears to have taken, place at the fairs of Genoa in
the 1 6th century. Who, we may ask, were the
“ Genoese,” met with everywhere throughout that
century, but especially at the famous fdrs of Besan^on,
dominating the money market, and who all of a sudden
showed a remarkable genius for business and gave an
impetus to the growth of new methods, hitherto .
unknown, for cancelling international indebtedness ?
It is true that the ancient wealthy families of Genoa
were the principal creditors of the Spanish Crown as
well as of other needy princes. But to imagine that *
the descendants of the Grimaldis, the Spinolas, the
‘Lercaras exlubited that extraordinary commercial ability
which gave a special character to the activity of the
Genoese in the i6th century ; to think that the old
nobility gadded about the fairs at Besangon or elsewhere,
or even sent their agents with never-faiUng, Regularity —
this appears to me an assumption hardly warranted with-
out some very good reason. Can the explanation be
that the Jews brought new blood into the decrepit
'economic body of Genoa? We •know^S 9 that
fugitives from Spain landed at Genoa, that some of the
settlers became Christians, that the rest were admitted
•into Novi, a small town near Genoa, and that the Jews
of Novi did busine^ with the capital; we know, too,
that the newcomers were “ for the most part intelligent
Jewish craftsmen, capitalists, physicians,!’ and that in the
short space of time between their arrival and 1550 .they


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 67

had becomd so unpopular in Genoa that they had aroused
the hatred of the dtizens ; we know, finally, that there
were constant communications between the Genoese
bankers and the Jewish, or rather Maranno, banldng
houses of the Spanish cities, e.g.^ vnth the Espinosas,
the leading bankers in Seville. 1®°

2. Securities {^tocks and Shares').

If we should wish to speak of securities in those cases
where the capital of a business concern is split up into
many parts, and where the liability of the capitalists is
linuted, we haVe ample justification for so doing in
the case of the Genoa Maones, in the 14th century,
the Casa di San Giorgio (1407) and the important
trading companies of the 17th century. But if stress
is laid on the standardization of the credit-relationship,
it vill not be before the 1 8th century that we shall find
instances of joint-stock enterprise and of securities. Eor
the early contributions to a joint-stock never lost their
personal character. The Italian Montes were impreg-
nated through and through with the personality of their
founders. In the case of the Maones, the personal factor
was no less important than the financial ; while at the
Bank of St. George in Genoa, the families concerned
jealously guarded the principle that each one should
obtain its proper share in the directing of the work
of the bank. The trading companies top had a strong
personal element. In the English East India Company,
for instance, it was not until 1650 that shares could
be transferred to strangers, but they had to become
members of the Company.

In all early instances the security was for unequal and
varying sums. The personal relationship thus showed
itself plainly enough. In some companies shares could
not be transferred at all extept by consent of all the other


68 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

members. In fact, the security was jiKt a certificate of
membership, and throughout the i8th century such'
securities as were made out in the name of a specified
person predominated, Even where there was freedom
of transfer from one person to another (as in the case
of the Dutch East India Company) the process' was
beset vdth innumerable obstacles and diflliculties.’^^S
The modern form of security can therefore not be
found, before the i8th century. If now it be asked
what share did the Jews have in the extension of this
form of credit in modern times, the reply is obvious
enough. During the last hundred and fifty or two
hundred years, Jews have been largely instrumental
in bringing about the standardization of what was before
a purdy personal relationship between the holder of
stock and the company in which he participated. 1
am boimd to admit, however, that I cannot ndduce direct
proofs in support of my thesis. But indirectly the*
evidence is fairly conclusive. Je'ws were great specu-
lators, and speculation must of necessity tend to sub9titute
for the security wherein the holder is specified one which
has no such limitation. A little reflection will show
therefore that Jews must have had no small influence
on the standardization of securities. In some cases it
may even be demonstrated that speculation was respon-
sible for the change from securities ,of differing amounts
to those of equal value. The Dutch East India Company
is a case in point. Originally its shares were of all
values ; later only 3000 florin shares were issued.^64

3 . Banknotes.

Many opinions prevail- as to the precise occasion when
banknotes first came into use. For my own part I lay
stress on the standardization here also. The first time
any banker issued a note without reference to- some


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 69 ,

specific deposit a new type of credit instrument, the
modern banknote, came into being. • There were bank-
notes in ejcistence long before that. ^65 But they bore
the depositor’s name and referred to his money. 166 i
believe that in all probability the personal -banknote
became a general (impersonal) one in Venice about the
beginning of the 15th century. There are on record
instances dating from that time of banks making written
promises to pay over and above the sums deposited with
them. An edict of the Venetian Senate as early as
1421 made it an offence to deal in such documents .^67
The first permission to establish a bank was granted to
two Jews' in- 1400, and their success was so great that
the nohili made haste to follow their example. The
question arises, may these two Jews be regarded as the
fathers of the modern (impersonal) banknote?

But perhaps no particular firm introduced the new
paper money. It may have come into existence in order
to satisfy the needs of some locality. Nevertheless,
if we take as the place of its origin the town where the
earliest banks reached a high degree of perfection> we
shall' surely be on the safe side. From this point of
view Venice is admirably qualified. Now Venice was
a dty of Jews, and that is wherein' its interest for us
lies in tlus connexion. According to a list dating from
the year 1152, there were no fewer than 1300 Jews in
Venice.169 In the 1 6th century their number was
estimated at 6000 ; and Je-wish manufacturers employed
4000 Christian workmen. 170 These figures, to be
sure, have no scientific value, but they do show that
the Jews must have been pretty numerous in Venice.
From other sources we are acquainted with some of thdr
activities. Thus, we find Jews among the leading
bankers — one of the most infiuential fanulies were the
Lipmans ; and in 1550, as we have already noted, the


70 THE JEWS ANI) MODERN CAPITALISM

Chnstian merchants of Venice stated that they might
as well emigrate if trade ■vidth the Marannos were
forbidden them.

It is possible that the Marannos -jnay have founded
the' business of banking even while they were yet in
Spain. We have, however, no satisfactory information,^
though many writers have dealt vdth the subject.* 7 i
There is a strong probability that at the time when
measmres were taken against them (i6th century) the
Jews were the leading bankers in the Pyrenean Peninsula.
If this be so, is not the presumption justifiable that before
then, , too, the Jews engaged in banidng ?

Furthermore, Jews were prominent and active figures
wherever in the 17th century banks were established.
They participated in the foundation of the three great
banks of that period — ^the Bank of Amsterdam, the Bank
of England and the Bank of Hamburg. But as none of
these owed its origin to purely commercial causes, I shall
not emphasize their importance in connexion with the
Jews. The facts, nevertheless, are interesting, and I
would therefore state that the experience which the
Jews gathered when the Bank of Amsterdam was founded
served them in good stead when in 1619 the Hamburg
Bank came into being. No less than forty Jewish
fiiinilies took shares in the new concern. As for, the
Bank of England, the latest authorities ^ 71 * on its
history are agreed that the suggestion for the Bank came
from Jewish immigrants from Holland.

'4. Public Debt EondsA 7 A~i 7 f>

The earliest bonds issued for public loans were
addressed to some individual lender, and it was long
before they changed thdir character and became “ general ”
instruments. In Austria, to take one example, it was
not until the Debt of 1761 was contracted that the bonds


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 71

had coupons attached which gave the bearer the right
to . receive interest . *73 Previous to that, the bond
was of the nature of a private agreement the Crown
or the Treasury was the debtor of some specific

lender. *72.

To what extent the Jews were responsible for .the
“ standardization ” of public credit it is difficult to
estimate. So much is certain, that William Ill’s
advisers were Jews ; that public borrowing in the
German States wm commenced on the model of Holland,
most probably through the influence of Dutch Jews who,
as we have already seen, were the chief financiers in
German and Austrian lands. Speaking generally, Dutch
Jews were most intimately concerned in European finance
in the l8th century. * 76 *

As for private loan-bonds or mortgage-deeds, we
know very little of their history, and it is almost im-
possible to compute the direct influence of the Jews
here. But indirectly the Jews were, in all likelihood,,
the originators of this species of credit instrument,
more especially of mortgage deeds. We have it on

• record that Dutch bankers, from abput the middle of
the 1 8th century onward, advanced money to colonial
planters- on the security of their plantations. Mortg^er
'deeds of this kind were bought and sold on the ^ock
Exchange, just like Public Debt bonds. The bankers
who dealt in them were called “ correspondentie ” of
“Directeurs van de negotiatie,” and the instruments

• themselves “ obfigatie.” Documents to the value of
no less than 100,000,000 gulden were in circulation
before the crash of the i77o’s.*77

I must confess that nowhere have I found, any
mention of Jewish bankers participating in these specu-,
lations. Yet even the most superficial acquaintance with
the Dutch money-market in the 1 8th century can scfircely


72 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

leave room for doubt that Jews must have been largely
interested in this business. It is a well-known, fact (as
I hope to show) that in those days anything in Holland
connected with money-lending, but especially with stocks
and shares and speculation, was characteristically Jewish.
We are strengthened in this Conclusion through knowing
that most of the business in mortgage-banking was carried
oh with the colony of Surinam. Of the 100,000,000
gulden of mortgage-deeds already mentioned, 60,000,000
worth was from Surinam. Now Surinam, as we noted
above, was the Jewish colony far excellence. The possi-
bility that the credit relationship at that time between
Surinam and the Motherland was maintrined by other
than Jewish houses is well-nigh excluded.

So much for the “ sources ” regarding the Jemsh share
in the development of modem credit instruments. The
sum-total is not much ; it is for subsequent research to fill
in the details and to add to them. Yet I believe the
evidence sufficient for the general conclusion that in the
standardization of modern credit the Jews took no in-
considerable share. This impression will only be deepened
if we think for a moment of the means by wWch' the st^-
dardization was brought about or, at any rate, facifitated.
I mean the legal form of the credit instruments, which in
all probability was of Jewish origin.

There is no complete agreement among authorities on
• the history of legal documents as to the origin of credit
' instruments.^78-187 But in my opinion the suggestion
that they owe their modem form to Jewish influence
has much to be said for it. Let it be remembered that
such documents first came into use among merchants, in
whose ranks the Jewish elemient was not insignificant.
The form that became current received recognition in
judicial decisions, and eventually was admitted into the
body of statute law, first of all presumably in Holland.


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 73

The only question is. Can we possibly deduce' modern
credit instruments from Rabbinic law ? I believe we can.

Ii;i the first place, the Bible and the Talmud are both
acquainted with credit instruments. The Biblical passage
is in the Book of Tobit, iv. 20 ; v. i, 2, 3 ; ix.. 1,5. •

The best known passage in the- Talmud is as follows
ifiaba Bathra, 172) : —

“In the court of R. Huna a document was once
produced to this effect : T, A. B., son of C. D., have
borrowed a sum of money from you.’ R. Huna decided
that * from you’ might mean ‘from the Exilarch or even
from the King himself.’ ”

Secondly, in later Jewish law, as well as in Jewish com-
mercial practice, the credit instrument is quite common.
As regards practice, special proof is hardly necessary ; and
as for theory, let me mention some Rabbis who dealt with

the problem.*88

First in importance was Rabbenu Asher (1250-1327),
who speaks of negotiable instruments in his Responsa
(Ixviii. 6, 8). “ If A sends money to B and C, and notes

in his bill * payable to bearer by B and C,’ payment must
be made accordingly.” So also R. Joseph Caro in his
Choshen Mishpat : " If in any bill no name is mentioned
but the direction is to ‘pay bearer,’ then whoever
presents the bill receives payment ” (Ixi. 10 ; cf. also 1. ; '
Ixi. 4, 10 ; Ixxi. 23). R. Shabbatai Cohen in his Shack.
( 1 . 7 ; Ixxi. 54) is of the same opinion. I

TWrdly, it is very likely that the Jews, in the course of
business, independently of Rabbinic law, developed a form
of credit instrument which was quite impersonal and
general in its wording. I refer to the Mamre {Mamram,
Mamraii).^^ It is claimed that this document first
appeared among the Polish Jews in the i'6th century, or
evea earlier. Its form was fixed, but a space was left for ‘
th6 name of the surety, sometimes, too, for the amount in


74 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

questibn. There is no doubt .that such documents were
in circulation during three centuries and were very
popular, circulating even between Christians and Jews.
Their value as evidence consists in that they already had
all the characteristics of modern instruments : (i) the
holder put the document in circulation by endorseme.pt ;
(2) there is no mention of the personal relationship of the*
debtor and the creditor ; (3) the debtor may not demand
proof of endorsement or transfer ; (4) if the debtor pays
his debt without the presentation of the Mamre having
been made to him, it is considered that he has not really
discharged his obligation ; and lastly (5) the cancellation
of the. document is almost the same as it is to-day — ^if it is
lost or stolen the holder of the document informs the
debtor ; public notice is given by a declaration posted up
for four weeks in the syriagogue, wherein the bearer of the
instrument is requested to come forward ; at the end of
four weeks, if nothing happens, the creditor demands pay-
ment of the debtor.

In the fourth place, it would appear that Jewish
influences were potent in the development of many
wdghty points of legal practice. Let me mention
some.

(i) During the i 6 th century there circulated 'in
different parts of Europe credit instruments \tith blanks
for filling in names. What was their origin ? Is there
not a possibility that they emanated from Jewish
commercial drcles, having been modelled on the
pattern of the Mamre ? They are met with in the
Netherlands, 190 in France and in Italy. ^ 9 ® In the
Netherlands they appeared towards the beginning of
the 1 6th century at the Antwerp fairs, just when the
J^ws began to take a prominent part in them. An
Ordinance of the year 1536 states expdicitly that “ at the
.^twerp fairs payment for commodities was made by


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE n

promissiory notes, which might be passed on to third
persons without special permission.” It would seem from
the wording that the practice of accepting notes in
payment for goods was a new one. What sort of docu-
ments were these notes Can they have been Christian
Mamrem} Even more Jewish were the documents in
vogue Jn Italy a century later.' I mean the first known,
“ open ” note, issued by the Jewish bill-brokers, Giudetti,
in Milan. The note was for 500 scudi, payable through
John Baptist Germanus at the next market day in Novi to
the personal order of Marcus Studendolus in "Venice for
value received. Studendolus sent the bill to de Zagnoni
Brothers in Bologna “with his signature, leaving a sufficient
blank space at the end for filling in the amount, and the
name of the person in whose favour the de Zagnonis
preferred payment to be made.” The recorder of this
instance remarks 192 that “Italian financial intercourse
could hardly have thought of a facility of this kind, had
there not been a model somewhere to imitate. Such
a model is found in France, where from the 17th century ■
onward bearer bonds were in general circulation.” The
question at once suggests itself, how did this document
arise in France ? Will the example of Holland account
,for it? Even in Italy it may be a case of Maranno
influence — Studendolo (?) in Venice, Giudetti in Milan !

(2) Of very great significance in the development
of modern credit instruments is the Antwerp Custom of
1582, wherein it is for the first time adnutted that the
holder of a note has the right of suing in a court of
laWi *93 This conception spr^ rapidly from Antwerp to
Holland — as rapidly, indeed, as the Jewish refugees from
Be%ium settled down among the Dutch. *94

(3) In Germ, any the first State to adopt credit instru-.
ments was Saxony. In the year 1747 an adventurer of
the name of Bischopfield suggested to the Minister of


76 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

Finance the plan '.of a Public Loan, and it seems that
Bischopheld was in communication ■vyith Dutch -Jews at
the time.i 9 S ’Further, an ordinancp of 20th Septem-
ber 1757 forbade Dutch Jews to speculate in Saxon
Government Stock. All of which points to Jewish
influence — on the one side of the Dutch Jews, and on the
other of Polish Jews, oTwng to the connexion of the
royal- houses of Saxony and Poland. So great was this
influence that one authority comes to the definite conclu-
sion that the Mamre became the model for credit
instruments. 196

(4) Among the instruments wherein the name of the
holder was inserted we must include marine insurance
policies. It is recorded that the Je^rish merchants of
Alexandria were the first to use the formulae “ 0 qual si
voglia altera personal quavis alia persona'' and
^'sive quamlibet aliam personam " (“ or to any other person
desired ").^97

Now why did the Je^rish merchants of Alexandria
adopt this legal form? The answer to this question
is of the -gravest import, more especially as I believe
that the causes for which we are seeking were inherent in
the conditions of Jewish life.

(5) That leads me to my fifth consideration. ‘ It was
to the interest of the Jews to a very hsrge degree — ^in some
respects even it was to the interest of the Jews alonfr — to
have a proper legal form for credit instruments. For
what was it that impelled the Jewish merchants of
Alexandria to make out their policies to bearer ? Amdety
as to the fate of their goods. Jewish ships ran the risk of
capture by Christian pirates and the fleets of Hjs Catholic
Majesty, who accounted the wares of Jews and Turks as
legitimate booty. Hence the Jewi^ merchants of Alex-
andria inserted in their, policies some fictitious Christian
name, Paul or Scipio, or what you mil, and tirhen


■ THE PREDOMINANCE OF- COMMERCE 77

the goods arrived, received them in virtue of the “bearer”
formula in their policies.

How often must the same cause have actuated Jews
throughout the Middle Ages ! How often must' they
have endeavoured to adopt some device which concealed
the fact that they were the recipients either of money or
* of commodities sent from a distance. What more natural
than that, they should welcome the legal form which gave
“.the bearer ” the right of claiming what the document he
held entitled him to. This formula made it possible for
fortunes to vanish if the Jews in any locality passed
through a storm of persecution. It enabled Jews to
deposit thdr money wherever they wanted, and if at any
time it became endangered, to remove it through the
agency of some fictitious person or to transfer their rights
in such a way as not to leave a trace of their former
possessions,i 98 It may seem inexplicable that while
throughout the Middle Ages the Jews were deprived of
their “ all ” at very short intervals, they mans^ed to
.become rich again very quickly. But regarded in the
light of our suggestion, this problem is easily explained.
The fact was that the Jews were never mulcted of their
“ all ” f a goodly portion of their wealth was transferred
to a fictitious owner whenever the kings squeezed too
tight.

Later, when the Jews commenced to speculate in
securities and commodities (as we shall see in due course)
it was only to be expected that they would extend the
use of this form of bond, more particularly in the
of securities.199 It is obvious that if a big loan is
subscribed by a large number of comparatively »mgll
contributors bearer bonds offer facilities of various

kinds.200

The remark of a Rabbi here and there demonstrates
this conclusively. One passage in the commentaries of


78 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

R. Sabbatai Cohen is distincdy typical. “ The purchaser
of a bond,” he says, “ may claim damages against the
debtor if he pays the debt without obtaining a receipt,
the reason being that as there is no publicity in the
transaction tiiis practice is detrimental to dealings in such
instruments. It is true that Rabbenu Asher and his
school expressed no view concerning Shetarot (instruments)'"
of all binds, which the Rabbis introduced in order to
extend commerce. That is because dealings in such
instruments were not very common, owing to the diffi-
culty of transfer. But the authorities were thinking
only of personal bonds. In the case of bearer bonds, the
cir(^ation of which at the present time the 17th
century) is greater far than that of commodities, all ordi-
nances laid down by the Rabbis for the extension of
commerce are to be observed.”

(6) Here again we touch a vital question. I believe
that if we were to examine the whole Jewish law con-
cerning bearer bonds and similar instruments we should
find — and this is my sixth point — that such documents
spring naturally from the innermost spirit of Jewish
law, just as they are alien to the spirit of Glerman and
Roman law.

It is a well-known fact that tfie specifically Roman con-
ception of indebtedness was a strictly personal one.2ooA
The obligatio was a bond between certain persons. Hence
the creditor could not transfer his claim to another, except
under exceedingly difficult conditions. True, in later
Roman law the theory of delegation and transnussion
was interpreted somewhat liberally, yet the root of the
matter, the personal relationship, remained unchanged.

In German law a contract was in the same way personal ;
nay, to a certain extent it was even more sd than in
Roman law. The German principle on the point was
clear enough. The debtor was not obliged to. reader


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 79


payment to any one but' the original creditor to whom
he had pledged his word. Thfire could in no wise- be
tratisference of claim — as was the case in English law
until 1873. It was only when Roman law obtained a
strong hold on Germany that the transfer of claims first
came into, vogue. The form it took was that of “ bearer
bonds” — the embochment of an impersonal credit rela-
tionship.

It is admitted that the legal notion underlying all.
“bearer” instruments — that the document represents a
valid claim for each successive holder — ^was not fully
developed either in the ancient world or in the Middle
Ages. 201 But the admission holds good only if Jewish law
be left out of account. Jewish law was certainly acquainted
with the impersonal dredit relationslup.202 Its under-
lying principle is that obligations may be towards unnamed
parties, that you may carry on buriness with Messrs.
Everybody. Let us examine this principle a little more
closely,

Jewish law has no term for obligation : it knows only
debt (“ Chov ”) and demand (“ Tvia ”). Each of these
was regarded as distinct from the other. That a demand
and a promise were necessarily boimd up vrith some
tangible object is .proved by the symbolic act of apqui-
sition. Consequently there could be no legal obstacles
to the transfer of demands or to the making of agree-
ments through agents. There was no necessity therefore
for the person against whom there was a claim to be
defined, the person in question became known by the
acquisition of certain commodities. In reality claims-
were against things and not against persons. It was only
to maintain a personal relationship that the possessor of
the things was made responsible. Hence the conception
that just as an obligation may refer to some specified
individual, so also it may refer to mankind as a whole. ■


8o THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

Therefore a transference of obligations is effected merely
by the transference of documents.

So niuch would appear from , the view held by Auerbach.
Jewish law is more abstract in this respect than dther
Roman or German law. Jewish law can conceive of an
impersonal, “ standardized ” legal relationship. It is not
too much to assume that a credit instrument such as the'
modern bearer bond should have grown out of .such a
legal system as the Jevnsh. Accorthngly, all the external
reasons which I have adduced in favour of my hypo-
thesis are supported by what may be termed an “inner”
reason.

And what is this hypothesis ? That instruments such
as modern bearer bonds owe their origin chiefly to Jemsh
influences.

IL Buying and Selling Securities.

I. The Evolution of a Legal Coae Regulating Exchange,

In modern securities we see the plainest expression of
the commercial aspect of our economic life. Securities are
intended to be circulated, and they have not served their
true purpose if they have not been bought and sold. Of
course it may be urged that many a security rests peace-
fully in a safe, yielding an income to its owner, for whom
it is a means to an end rather than a commodity for
trading, in. The objection has a good deal in it. A
security that does not circulate is in reality not a security
at all ; a promissory note might replace it equally well.
The characteristic mark of a security is the ease with
■ which it may be bought and sold.

Now if to pa^ easily from hand to hand is 'the real
raison ti^Stre of the security, everything whidi fadlitates'
that movement matters, and therefore a suitable I^;al
code most of all. But when is it suitable ? When it


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 8i


renders possible speedy changes in the relationship between
two people, or between a person and a conunodity.

In a society where every commodity continues as a rule
in the possession of one and the same person, the law will
strive all it can to fix every relationship between persons
and things . On the other hand, if a body of people depends
^or its existence on the continued acquisition of commodi-
ties, its legal system will safeguard intercourse and exchange.

In modern times our highly organized system of inter-
communication, and especially dealings in securities and
credit instruments of all kinds, has lacilitated the removal
of old and the rise of new legal relationships- But this
is contrary to the spirit of Roman and German law, both
of which placed obstacles in the way of commodities
changing hands. Indeed, under these systems any one
who has been deprived of a possession not strictly in
accordance with law may demand its return from the
present owner, without the need of any compensation,
even though his bona-Jides be established. In modern
law, on the other hand, the return of the possession can
be made only if the claimant pays the present owner the
price he gavQ for it— to say nothing of the possibility
that the original owner has no claim whatever against
the present holder.

If this be so, whence did the principle, so alien to the
older systems, enter into modern law ? The answer is
that in all probability it was from the Jewish legal code,
in which laws favouring exchange were an integral part
from of old.

Already in the Talmud we see how the present owner
of any object is protected against the previous owners.
“If any one,” we read in the “Mishna” {Baba Kama,
1143 and,ii 5 tf), “after it has become known that a
burglary took place at his house finds his books and
\itenrils in the possession of another, this other must


82 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


declare on oath- how much he paid for the goods, and
on his -receiving the amount returns them to the original
owner. But if no burglary has taken place, there is no
need for this procedure, for it is then assumed that the
owner sold the goods, to a second person and that
the present owner bought them.” In every case, there-
fore, the present owner obtains compensation, and in
certain given circumstances he retains the objects without
any further ado. The “Gamara,” it is true, wavers
somewhat in the discussion of the passage, but in general
it comes to the same conclusion. The present owner
must receive “ market protection,” and the previous
owner must pay him the price he gave.

The attitude of the Talmud, then, is a friendly one
towards exchange, and the Jews adopted it tluoughout
the Middle Ages. But more than that — and this is the
important point — they succeeded quite early in getting
the principle recognized by Christian law-courts in cases
where Jews were concerned. For centuries there was a
spedal enactment regulating the acquisition of moveables
by Jews ; it received official recognition for the first time
in the “ Privileges ’’.issued by King Henrjr IV to the Jews
of Speyers in 1090. “If a commodity that has been
stolen,” we read therein, “ is found in the possesion of
a Jew who declares that he bought it, let Mm swear
according to his law how much he paid for it, and if
the original owner pays him the price, the Jew may
restore the commodity to him.” Not only in Germany,
but ' in other lands too 203 (in France already about' the
middle of the 12th century), is this special ordinance for
Jews to be met -with. 304

2. The Stock Exchange.

But when all is smd, the principal tMng was to establish
a smtable market for credit instruments; The Stock


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 83


Exchange answered the purpose. And just as the com-
modities there to be bought and sold were impersonal,
embodiments of claims, so, too, was the dealing divested
of its personal character. Indeed, this is a. feature of
the Stock Exch ang e which differentiates it from other
markets. It is no longer the trustworAiness that a
merchant enjoys in the estimation of his fellow-mer-
chants, based upon personal experience, that underlies
business activities, but the general, abstract valuation of
credit, the dttta di Borsa. Prices are no longer formed
by the higgling of two or more traders talking over thdr'
transactions, but rather by a mechanical process, repre-
senting the average of a thousand and one units.2os~J*o6 '

As for the history of the Stock Exchange (in the
broadest connotation of the term), it may be divided into
two periods — (i) from its beginning in the 1 6th to the
end of the 1 8th century, an epoch of growth and develop-
ment, and (2) from the 19th century to the present
day, when the Stock Exchange dominates all economic
activities. '

It is now generally agreed that the origin of Stock
Exchange dealing most likely began with the associating
of bill-brokers. 207 The centres where the famous
exchanges first arose in the i6th and 17th centuries
were previously well known for a brisk trade in bills.

The important thing for us is, that just when the Stock
Exchanges came into being the Jews almost entirely
monopolized bill-broking. In many towns, indeed, this
business was regarded as a Jewish speciality. That such
was the case in' Venice we have already seen. 208 • It
was also true of Amsterdam, though we must add that'
the first mention of Jews in that capacity was not until
the ..end of the 17th century. 209 Despite this, how-
ever, I believe we shall be safe in assuming that 'previous
to that date also they were influential bill-brokers.


84 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


In Frankfort-on-the-Main we hear the same story.
Already in the 1 6th century a contemporary 210 says
of the Jews who came to the fairs that their presence was
“ hardly ornamental but certainly very useful, especially
in the bill-discounting business.” Again, in 1685, the
Christian merchants of Frankfort complained that the
Jews had captured the whole of the business of bill-
broldng .311 Lastly, Gluckel von Hameln states in her
Memoirs that friends of her family dealt in bills, “ as
was customary among Jews.” 212

As for Hamburg, Jews certainly introduced the busi-
ness of bill-broking there. A hundred years after the
event (1733) a document in the Archives of the Senate
expressed the opinion that ♦‘Jews were almost masters
of the situation in bill-broking and had quite beaten
our people at it.” 213 And even as late as the' end
of the 1 8th century the Jews were almost the only pur-
chasers of bills in Hamburg. Among other German
towns, it is recorded that in Fiirth bill-broking (in the
1 8th cenfury) was almost entirely in Jewish hands.214

The position in Vienna was no different. The Austrian
capital, as is well known, became a notable centre as a
stock market at the end of the i 8 th century, and the
State Chancellor Ludewig remarks concerning the
activities of the Jews under Leopold 1, 215 “chiefly
in Vienna by the influence and credit of the Jews
business of the greatest importance is often transacted.
Especially exchanges and negotiations of the first import
in the market.”

So in Bordeaux, where we are told 216 “ the chief
business activity is buying bills and introducing gold and'
silver into the realm.” Even from so far north as
Stockholm the same story reaches us.217 There also
the Jews dominated the bill-broking market in the early
19th century (1815).


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 85


As the principal bill-brokers of the period, the Jews
must have had much to do with the establishment of
the Stock Market. ' But more than that. They gave the
Stock Exchange and its dealings their peculiar features
in that they became the “originators of speculation in
futures,” and, indeed, of speculation generally.

When speculation in stocks first arose is as yet difficult
to determine. Some have held 2^8 that the Italian
cities furnish examples of this kind of dealing as early
as the 15th century. But to my mind this
has not yet been conclusively proved.219.

Not in Italy in the 15th, but in Amsterdam in the
17th century will the beginnings of modern speculation
have to be more correctly placed. It is almost certain
that the Dutch East India Company’s shares called stock-
jobbing into existence. The large number of shares of
equal value that were suddenly put into circulation at
that time, the strong speculative temper of the age, the
great interest taken in the Company ever since its founda-
tion, the changing rates of profit that its activities pro-
duced — all these must surely have given an impetus to
stock and share dealing on the Amsterdanx Exchange,®*®
then already a highly developed institution. In the
space of only eight years dealing in stock became
so general and so reckless that it was regarded as an,
evil by the authorities, who tried to abolish it. A pro-
clamation by the Government of the 26th February, 1610,
forbade merchants to sell more shares than they actually
possessed. Similar prohibitions were issued in 1621,
1623, 1677, 1700 and so on, all equally without effect.

Who 'were the speculators? The answer is, all those
irrespective of religion who had sufficient money to
enable them to participate. Nevertheless the assumption
will not be tcx) bold that the Jews were more prominent
than others in this activity. Theif contribution to the


86 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

growth of Stock Exchange business was their specializa-
tion in stockbroking and the device of dealing in futures.
We are not without evidence on both points. , Towards
the end of the 1 8th century it was a generally accepted
fact that Jews had “ discovered ” the stock and share
business.223 This belief does not necessarily prove
anything ; yet that it was without ’ any foundation is
hardly likely, especially as there are witnesses to give
it support. Nicolas Muys van Holy,- who has already
been mentioned, says that Jews were the principal stock-
holders — already in the second half of the 17th century.
Later they are found as large investors in both the
Dutch India Companies. De Pinto 224 is the authority
as regards the Dutch East India Company, and for the
West India Company there is the letter of the Directors
to Stuyvesant,22S the Governor of New Amsterdam, re-
questing him to allow the Jews to settle in the Company’s
colony, “ also because of the large amount of capital
which they have invested in shares of the Company,”
Referring to both companies, Manasseh ben Israel 226 re-
ported to Cromwell “ that the Jews were enjoying a good
part of the Dutch East and West India Company.”

Most significant of all, however, the book which for
the ' first time exhaustively treated of Stock Exchange
business in aU its branches was written by a Portuguese
Jew in Amsterdam, towards the end of the 17 th century.
I refer to Don Joseph de la Vega’s Confusion de con-^
fusiones, etc., which appeared in 1688,227 and which
a Stock Exchange specialist has described as “ being stiU
the best, description, both in form and substance, of
stock and share dealing even to-day.” The book bears
witness to the fact that a Jew was the first “theorist”
in the sphere of speculations in futures. De la V^a
.was -himiself eng^d in' commerce and his treatise clearly
reflects the atmosphere in which he lived.


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 87

De la Vega’s book in conjunction 'wnith the other
evidence quoted cannot but lead to the conclusion
that if the Je-s^ were not acti^lly the “ fathers ” of
Stock Exchange business they were certainly primarily
concerned in its genesis.

Should this view nevertheless be sceptically received
by some, I have a trump card in the way of direct
proof in support of it.

We possess a report, probably of the French Ambassa-
dor in The Hague, written for his Government in
the year 1698, wherein he distinctly states that the
Jews held the Stock Exchange business in their hands,
and shaped its development as they willed. The most
salient passages 228 here follow in fidl : —

“In this State (Holland) the Jews have a good deal 'of power
and according to the prognostications of these pretended political
speculators, themselves often unreliable, the prices of these stocks
. vary so considerably that they cause transactions to take place
several times a day, transactions which merit the term wager or bet
rather than business ; the more so, as the Jews who dominate this
kind of activity are up to all manner of tricks which take in people,
even if, they be ever so skilled.” . . . “Their Jewish brokers and
agents, the cleverest of their kind in all the world.” . . . “ Bonds
• and shares, of all of which they hold large amounts.”

The author, acquainted as he is with all th? secrets
of Stock Exchange activity, describes at length how,
the Jews succeeded in obtaining the influential position
they held on the Amsterdam Stock Exchange. I shall
refer to this in due course.

Mijch light is thrown oA the conditions of the Stock
Exchange in the Dutch capital when compared with .
■ those in’ other centres. Let us take London first, which
from the i8th century onward succeeded Amsterdsim
as the chief financial centre in Europe. The predomin-
ance of Jews in the Stock Exchange in' Liondon is


88 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


perhaps more apparent even than' in the case of
Amsterdam. The growing activity in the ILondon Stock
market towards the end of the 17th century may be
traced to the exertions of Amsterdam Jews, who at
that time began to settle in England. If this be so,
it is proof positive that the Jews were in large measure
responsible for the expansion of Stock Exchange deal-
ing in Amsterdam. Else how could they have been
so influential in the London Exchange, highly developed
as it then already was ?

One or two particulars in the story of the accession
to power of the Jews in the London Exchange may
be noted.

In 1657 Solomon Dormido applied for admission
as a member of the Exchange, from which Jews were
ofiicially excluded. The law which ordered this exclusion
seems to have been conveniently forgotten. Anyhow,
towards the end of the 17th century the Exchange (which
since 1698 had become known as ’Change Alley) was
full of Jews. So numerous did they become that a
spedal corner of die building was designated the “ Jews’
Walk.” “ The Alley throngs with Jews,” wrote a con-
tempotary .239

Whence these throngs ? 230 The answer is obvious.
They came in the train of William III from Amsterdam,
and brought with them the machinery of Stock Exchange
dealings in vc^ue there. The events, as related by Jolm
Francis, are regarded as a true presentation by many
authorities, even on the Jewish side.

The Stock Exchange was like Minerva : it appeared
on the scene ready armed. The principal participants
in the first English loan were Jews : they assisted William
III with their advice, and one of them, the wealthy
Medina, was Marlborough’s banker, giving the' General
an annual grant of ^6,000 and receiving in return


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 89

the advantage of being first in the field with news of
the wars. The victories of the English troops were
as profitable to Medina as they were honourable for
F-ngland. All the tricks bound up with rising and
falling prices, lying reports from the seat of war, the
pretended arrival of couriers, the formation of financial
‘cliques and cabals behind the scenes, the whole system
of Mammon’s wheels — they knew them all, the early
fathers of the Stock Exchange, and utilized them to the
full to their own advantage.

By the side of Sir Solomon Mechna (“the Jew
Medina,” as he was called), who may be regarded as
having originated speculation in the pubUc funds in
England, we may place a number of other wealthy Jews
of the reign of Anne, all of whom speculated on the
Stock Exchange. Manasseh Lopez was one. He
amassed a fortune in the panic which followed the false
news that the Queen was dead, buying up all Govern-
ment Stock which had fallen in price in consequence.
A similar story is told of Sampson Gideon, known among
the Gentiles as “ the great Jew broker.” ^ 3 ^ A notion
of the financial strength of the Jews in the London
of those days may be obtained when it is recalled
that at the beginning of the i8th century the number
of Jewish families with an annual income between ,£1000
and ,^2000 was put by Picciotto at 100 ; those with
an annual income of ,£300 at ,^1000 ; whilst some in-
dividual Jews, such as Mendes da Costa, Moses Hwt,
Aaron Frank, Baron d’ Aguilar, Moses Lopez Pereira,
Moses or Anthony da Costa (who towards the end of
the 17th century was a Director of the Bank of England)
and others were among the wealthiest merchants in
London.

It is evident then that the wealth of the Jews brought
about Stock Exchange speculation on a large scal^. But


90 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

more striking still, the business of stock-jobbing as a
spedalized profession was introduced into the London
Exchange by Jews, probably in the first half of the
i8th century. As far as I am aware this fact has
hitherto passed unnoticed. But there is abundant proof
in support of it.

, Postlethwayt, who is pretty reliable in matters of*
this kind, asserts 232 that “ Stock-jobbing . . . was
at first only the simple occasional transferring of interest
and shares from one to another as persons alienated
thdr estates ; but by the industry of the stockbrokers,
who got the business into their hands, it became a
trade ; and one, perhaps, which has been managed with
the greatest intrigue, artifice, and trick that ever any-
thing which appeared Trith a face of honesty could be
hs^ndled with ; for, while the brokers held the box, they
made the whole exchange the gamesters, and rdsed
and lowered the prices of stocks as they pleased and always
had both buyers and sellers, who stood ready, innocently
to commit their money to the mercy of their mercenary
tongues.”'

That Jews formed a considerable proportion of
brokers is well-known. As early as 1697, out of one
hundred sworn brokers on the London Exchange, no
fewer than twenty were Jews and aliens. Doubtless their
number increased in the centuries that followed. “ The
He 1 ?rews flocked to ’Change Allpy from every quarter
under heaven,” wrote Francis. Indeed, a reliable observer
of the 1730’s (that is to say, a generation after their
first appearance oh the London Exchange) remarks 233
that there were too many Jewish brokers for them all
to do business, consequently this “ has occasioned almost
one half of the Jew brokers to run into stock-jobbing.”
The same authority puts the number of Jews then in
London at 6000.


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 9?


This proce^ By which stock-jobbing was in a sense
the outcome of stockbroking, was not limited to
London. The same tendencies showed themselves- in
Frankfort. Towards the end of the 17th century the
Jews theye were in possession of the entire broking
business, 234 and gradually no doubt worked their
Way into’ stock-jobbing. In Hamburg 235 the Portu-
guese Jews had four brokers in '1617, whilst a little
later there were twenty.

Taking these facts into consideration, taking into con-
sideration also that public opinion regarded the Jews
as responable for. the growth of arbitrage busine'ss on
the London Exchange,236 and that Jews participated to
a great degree in the big speculations in Government
Stock towards the end of the i8th century, we shall
be forced to agree mth the view that has been expressed
by a first-rate auth 6 rity ,237 that if to-day Lond6n
is the chief financial centre of the world, it owes this
position in large measure to the Jews.

In the period of early capitalism, the Stock Exchanges
of other towns lagged far behind those of Amsterdam
and London. Even in Paris it was not until towards the
end of the i8th century that business became at all brisk.
The' beginnings of stock speculation (or Agiotage^ as it is
called in France) can be traced to the early i8th century ;
Ranke 238 discovered the term Agioteur in a letter of
Elisabeth Charlotte, dated i8th January, 17 ii. The
writer is of opinion that the term had some connexion
with the billets de momaye (bills) but that it was unknown
before. It would seem, therefore, that the Law pericJd.
left no lasting impression. For even in the 1730’s the
economic pre-eminence of England and Holland, both
more capitalistically advanced than their neighbour, was
,felt in France. One wfiter of the time 239. makes this
clear. “ The circtilation of stock is one of the sources of


92 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

great wealth, to our neighboiurs ; they have a bank, divi-
dends are pd.d,' and stocks aiid shares are sold.” Appar-
. ently then such was not the case in France. Even in
1785, an edict (7th August) proclaimed that “ the King
is informed that for some time past a new kind of com-
modity has been introduced into the capital” — ^viz.,
stocks and shares.

The condition of comparative unimportance which
Stock Exchange activities occupied in France during the
1 8 th century is a direct indication that the Jews had little
influence on the economic life of France (and especially of
Paris) in that period. The cities in which they resided,
such as Lyons or Bordeaux, were hardly favourable to the
development of stockbroking. In Lyons, however, there
was for a short space, in the i 6 th century, a fairly brisk
trade in what would to-day be called securities, but no
satisfactory reasons have as yet been offered to explain
it. 240 Anyhow, it had no after-effects.

But to return to Paris. What stockbroking it had it
probably owed to the Jews. The centre of this business
was in the Rue Quincampoix, which later became notori-
ous throi;igh the swindles connected with the name of
Law. Now in this particular street there lived, in the
words of a reUable authority, 24 i “ many Jews.” Be that
as it may, the man with whom the first stock speculations
in France were connected, one who was a greater master
of the art of manipulation than even Law, was Samuel
Bernard, the well-known financier of Lotus XIV. No
wonder then that the billets de monnaye, when they became
merely bits of valueless paper, were nicknamed Bernar-
dines?^ And as for John Law, his knowledge of the
mechanism of the Stock Exchange had been acquired in
Amsterdam.243 Whether he was himself a Jew (it has
been held 244 that Law =s Levy) I have been unable
to discover. It is, however, quite possible. Was not


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE, 93

his father a “ goldsmith ” (and banker) ? He was, it is
true, a Christian, but that is not necessarily a proof of
his non-Jewishness. The Jewish appearance of the man
in portrtits (for exampfe, in the German edition (1720) of
his Money and 'tirade Considered) rather supports the thesis
that he was a Jew. On the other hand, the peculiar mix-
ture of the lordlihg and the adventurer which characterized
his nature is agtinst the assumption.

In Germany the Exchanges of Frankfort and Hamburg,
the two Jewish towns par excellence^ alone reached a posi-
' tion of any importance. Illustrations of the Jewish influ-
ence have already been dealt with.

As for Berlin, it may be said that the Sto_^ Exchange
there was a Jewish institution from its very inception. At
the beginning of the last century, even before 1812, when
they were emancipated, the Jews predominated num^ically
on the Exchange. Of the four Pretidents, two were
Jews ; and the whole Stock Exchange Committee was
made up as follows : — 4 Presidents, 10 Wardens of the
two Gilds, I of the Elbe Seamen’s Gild, and 8 of the
. merchants of the Jewish nation, elected thereto.” Out of
a total of 23, therefore, 10 were Jews. That is to say,
professing Jews : it is impossible to determine whether,
and how many, baptized Jews and crypto-Jews ' were in
• the committee.

■ As it is, their number shows plainly, enough that stock-
broking had its large quota of Jews. Of six sworn bill-
brokers three were Jews. Further, of the two sworn
brokers in cotton and silk, one was a Jew, and his sub-
stitute was also a Jew. That is to say, of a total of
three, two were Jews. 24 S

Stockbroking so far as Germany in the i8th century
was concerned was carried on only in Hamburg and
Frankfort. Already at the. beginning of that century
trading in securities was forbidden. A prodamatioh of


94 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


.the Hamburg Council, dated 19th July, 1720, expresses
itself as follows : — “ The Council has heard to its abhor-
rence and great disgust, that certain private citizens, under
•the pretext of founding an assurance company, have on
their own authority commenced business as dealers in
shares. The Council fears that harmful consequences may
ensue therefrom as well to the public at large, as also
to the said private citizens.” *45^ It seems that the
powers that be were only voicing the general feeling in
the matter ; “ the dangerous and wickedly ruinous trade
in stocks and shares” a writer of the time24S® in-
dignantly called it.

Were Jews here also the originators ? So much at
least is certain, that the impetus to stock-dealing came
from the circles of the assurers, as is appafent from the
above-mentioned proclamation of 1720. Now, as a
matter of fact, it is known that Jews actively stimulated
the growth of marine insurance in ■Hamburg.246 Any
further evidence as to Stock Exchange influences is only
indirect. The same applies to Frankfort. The first
certjun trace dates from 1817, and refers to Augsburg.
There is on record the decision of a court of law in a bill
case of the 14th February in the year mentioned. A
tnotion to enforce payment of the difference in the price ’
of a credit-instrument which rose owing to the rise of
the market-rate was dismissed, on the ground' that it wa?
of the nature of a game of hazard. The sum in question
was 17,630 florins, and the original contract was' for
delivery of 90,000 florins’ worth of lottery tickets in the
Bavarian State Lottery. The plaintifFs name was Hey-
mann, the defendant’s H. E. UUmann ! This is the first
attested case of speculation in bonds in Germany.247
But with the year 1817 we reach a period whidi
differed from the preceding one, and which I consider as
.opening a new epoch in the history of Stock Exchange


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 95

transactions. Why new ? What were its special features
that it should be described by that dreadful word
“ moderh ” ?

Judgments on the Stock Exchange by contemporaries
then and now show how widely different a' position it
occupies to-day from what it did eyen a hundred
years ago.

Until well on in the 1 8th century, even in capitalistic
circles, speculation in the public funds was looked at
askance. The standard commerdal handbooks and dic-
tionaries in English, French, Italian and German, which
have come down to us from the 1 8th century, either make
no mention at all of dealings in stocks (espedally in the
economically “backward” countries), or if, like Postle-
thwayt, they do treat of the subject, they cannot suffia-
ently express their contempt for it. The view concerning
the Stock Exchange which is to-day held by the petty
trader, the small shopkeeper or the farmer was in the i8th
century that of the rich merchant. When in 1733 Sir
John Barnard’s Bill (to prevent the “ infamous practice of
stock-jobbing ”) was being discussed in the House of
Commons, aU the speakers were unanimous in their con-
demnation of the business. Half a generation later the
same harsh terms are to be found in the pages of Postle-
thw^yt, who refers to “ those mountebai^ks we very pro-
perly call stockbrokers.” Stock-jobbing he regards as a
“ public grievance,” which has become “ scandalous to
the nation.” *48 No wonder that the legislation of the
period completely forbade the business.

But the dislike of the Stock Exchange went deeper
still. It was boufld up with an aversion for what the
Exchange rested on — securities in general. Naturally
the interests of the State coincided with those who^
defended the trade in securities, so that Ruler arid Jobbw
were raided as a .lonely couple on one side, while every-


96 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


body dse' was on the other — save only those who indulged
in the purchase of securities. In truth, the National
Debt was looked upon as something of which States had
need to be ashamed, and the best men of their genera-
tion were agreed that its growth was an evil which
should be combated by all possible means. Thinkers
and practical men were united on this point. In com-
mercial circles the question was seriously discussed how
the public debt could be paid off, and it was even sug-
gested that the State should disavow its responsibilities in
connesdon vnth the debt, and so wipe it out. And this
in Eng l an d in the second half of the 1 8th century ! “49
Nor. were the theorists of the time differently minded.
The system of public borrowing is called by David Hiune
“ a practice . . . rmnous beyond all controversy ; ” 250
Adam Smith writes of “ the ruinous practice of fund-
ing," “ the ruinous expedient of perpetual fundit^ . , .
has gradually enfeebled every State wHch has adopted
it ”... “ the progress of the enormous debts, wHch at
present oppress and will in the long run probably rmn all
the great nations of Europe.” 251 In these opinions,
as always, Adam Smith is the mirror of the economic
conditions of lus age, a period of early capitalistic develop-
ment, and nothing distinguishes it from our own so well
as the fact that in the complete system pf Adam Snuth
there is no niche available for the study of securities, or
of the Stock Exchange and its business.

About the same time, however, a book appeared which
dealt only with credit and its blessings, with the Stock
Exchange and its significance ; a book which may be
justly termed the “Soi^ of Songs " of Public Debts and
share-dealing ; a book which looked to the Future, as
the Wealth of Nations looked to the Past. I refer to the
Traiti du cridit et de la circulation, published in 1771
from the pen of Joseph de Pinto. Now Pinto was a


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE ' 97

Portuguese Jew ; hence my special reference to him in
this connexion. In his pages may be found the very
arguments which have been put forward in the ijth
century in defence of public credit, of dealings in securi-
ties and of speculation in the public funds. If Adam
Smith in his system be said to stand at the end of the
period in which the Stock Exchange was in its infancy,
Pinto may be regarded as standing at the beginning of
the modem era with its theory of credit, in which stock
and share speculation have become the centre of economic
activity, and the Stock Exchange tlie heart of the body
economic.

Silently, but none the less surely, public opinion veered
round in favour of dealings in securities and of the recog-
nition 6 f the Stock Exchpige as a necessity. Public opinion
grew, as these grew, and, step by step, hostile legisla-
tion was removed, so that when the Napoleonic wars were
over and peace reigned once more, the Stock Exchange
began to take on enormous dimensions.

We see, then, that there is some justification for speak-
ing of a new period in the history of the Stock Exchange.
What were the actual changes.? And to what extent
were the Jews concerned in bringing about the new state
of afFrirs ?

There was not much modification in the mechanism of
the Stock Exchange ; that was complete as early as 1688,
when de la Vega published his book. Naturally, sub-
sidiary lands of business activities cropped up here and
there, and of these, too,- Jews were generally the Origina-
tors. Thus I have discovered “S* that the business of
insurance was established (in Germany) by W. Z. Wert-
hrimer in Frankfort, and that of the peculiar form of
sfiip chartaririg known as “ Beuergeschaft ” Jews were
the founders.

But the rise of subsidiary businesses was not the sajient

8


98 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

point in the development of Stock Exchange activities.
It was rather the extensive and intensive growth of the
volume of business.

The enormous increase in the number of ' securities
■vthich have appeared in the market since the beginning
of the 19th century, and the rapidity with which they
came before the public, are facts too well known to need
repetition. But with this increase came also an extension
of speculation. Until about the middle of the l8th
century, speculation in London and Amsterdam may
be compared to little ripples on the face of the water.
It was not till X763, as a reliable informant tells us,
that the first private loan was floated in Amsterdam.
Previously what speculation there was was limited to
public bonds, “but during the last war a vast ocean
of annuities flooded the market.” *53 Even so,
there were only forty-four different kinds of securities
‘ on the Amsterdam Exchange about the nuddle of the-
century. Of these, twenty-five were bonds of internal,
and six of German loans. When the centtiry closed, the
first category of bonds numbered eighty, and the second
. thirty .354 Then came a sudden upward movement,
especially after the defeat of Napoleon. From the first
establishment of the Amsterdam Exchange until the year
. 1770, a total debt of 250,000,000 Gulden had been dealt
in ; whereas in fourteen years (i 808-22) one London firm
alone issued a greater sum — 22,000,000 pounds. All
this is common knowledge ; and the identity of that one
London -firm, which in a decade floated so vast a sum on
the market, does not need further indication.

With the mention of this firm, and of its four branches,,
we have touched on the connexion between the extensive
growth of Stock Exchange activities and the Jewish
influence upon it. For the expansion of the share market
between 1800 and 1850 was also the expansion of the


THE PREDOMtNAHCE OF COMMERCE 99

house of, Rothschild and its appendages. The name
Rothschild refers to more than the firm : it stands for
the whole of Jewish influence on the Stock Exchange.
By the aid of that influence the Rothschilds were enabled
to attain to their powerful position — it may even be said
to their unique position — in the market for Government
securities. It was no exaggeration to assert that in many
a land the minister of finance who could not come to an
agreement with this firm might as well close the doors
of his exchequer. “There is only one power in Europe,”
was a dictum well-known about the middle of the 1 9th
century, " and that is Rothschild : a dozen other banks
are his underlings, his soldiers are all honest merchants
and workmen, and speculation is his sword ” (A. Weil).
Heine’s wit, in passages that are surely too well-known
to need quoting, has demonstrated the importance of
the family better far than any table of figures.

I luve not the least intention of writing here a history
of the Rothschilds, even in outline. The reader will find
ample material ^SS at his disposal should he wish to
acqdsunt himself with the fortunes of this remarkable
fanuly. All I shall do will be to point out one or two
characteristics which the modern Stock Exchange owes to
them, in order to make clear that not only quantitatively,
but also qualitatively, the Stock Exchange bears the
impress of the Rothschilds (and therefore of the Jew).

The first feature to be observed is that, since the
appearance of the Rothschilds, the stock market has
become international. This was only to be expected,
considering the enormous extension of Stock Exchange
activities, which necessitated the flow of vast sums from
all parts of the inhabited world to the borrowing centres.
To-day' the internationalization of the stock market is' an
accepted fact; at the commencement of the i9tli century
it y/m. regarded wth nothing short of amazement. When


1CX> THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

in 1808, during the Peninsd^ War, Nathan Rothschild
undertook in London to attend to the pay of the English
army in Spain, his action was regarded as a stupendous
acluevement, and, indeed, laid the foundation of all his
influence. Until 1798 only the Frankfort firm had been
in existence; in that year one of the sons of Mayer
Amschel established a branch in London, another son
settled in Paris in 1812, a third in Vienna in 1816, and
a fourth in Naples in 1820. The conditions were thus
given whereby a foreign loan might be treated as though
it were an internal loan, and gradually the public became
accustomed to investing their capital in foreign securities,
seeing that the interest could be paid at home in coins of
the realm. Writers of the early 19th century describe it
as a marvellous thing that “ every holder of Government
stock . . . can receive his dividends in various places at
his convenience without any difficulty. The Rothschilds
in Frankfort pay interest for many Governments; the
Paris house pays the dividends on the Austrian Metalliques,
the Neapolitan Rentes, the Anglo-Neapolitan Loan either
in London, Naples or Paris.” *56

The drde of possible investors was thus enlarged.
But the Rothschilds were also alive to the importance
of obtaining every available penny that could be
borrowed, and for this purpose they skilfully utilized
the machinery of the Stock Exchange for floating loans.

As far as can be judged from contemporary
records,2S7 the issue by the Rothschilds of the
Austrian bonds in 1820-1 was an epoch- making
event, both in public borrowing and in Stock Exchange
business. For the first time all the ropes were pulled
to create a demand for the shares, and speculations in
Government stocks may be stated to have begun on
this occasion, at least on the Continent.

“ To create a demand ” was hoiceforth the watchword


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE loi


of the Stock Exchange. “ To create a demand ” was the
object in vieW when, by means of systematic buying and
selling, changes were brought about in price ; and the
Rothschilds devoted themselves to the business from
the first. 2 S 8 In a sense, they carried on what the
French called agiotage^ and this was something quite
new for a great banking firm to do. In reality the
Rothschilds only adopted the methods of the Amsterdam
Jews for artificially influencing the market, but they
applied them to a new purpose — the placing of fresh
securities before the -public.

The changed relation of the banker to the Stock
Exchange on the one hand, and to the public on the
other, mil become more apparent when we have glanced
at the new activities which loomed on the horizon at this
period — ^the age of the Rothschilds — and began to play
an independent r61e. I mean the business of bringing
out loans.

III. The Creation of Securities.

The business of bringing out loans is an attempt to
obtain profit by means of the creation of securities. It
is important because it represents a capitalistic force
of exceedingly great power. Henceforth, stocks and
shares come into being not because of the needs of
those, who require money and depend on credit, but
qmte independently, as a form of capitalistic enterprise.
Hitherto the possible investor was waited for until he
came ; now he is sought out. The loan-floater becomes,
as it were, aggressive; he gives the impetus to the
borrowing movement. But this is hardly ever notice-
able. We see how it works, however, when small States
require loans ; we may imagine a kind of “ commerdal
traveller in loans.” “ Now we have wealthy firnui with
large machinery, whose time and staff are devoted to


102 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

hunting about the world for Powers for whom to bring
out loans.” ^59

Naturally, the . loan-floater’s relation to the Stock
Exchange and the public Changes. He must be
aggressive and pushful, now that his main work is
to get people to take up shares.

There is as yet no satisfactoty history of the business
of bringing out loans. We do not know, therefore, when
it first began ; its origins, however, no doubt reach back
into the i8th century, and probably there were three well
marked stages in its growth.

In the first of these, either a bank or a wealthy
individual (who, in the pre-Stock Exchange period
himself made the loan) was entrusted with the placing
of the debt in return for a commission. Such' was
the method adopted in Austria throughout the whole
of the 1 8th century : “ Loans of fairly large Sums,
especially those contracted abroad, were usually obtained
through the intervention of a bank or a group of
financiers. The firm in question arranged, by means
of public subscription, for the supply of the amount
needed ; handed over the sum to the borrower or his
agent ; undertook the payment of interest and portions
of the principal to the individual lenders— out of
their own funds if need be ; all, of course, for a
consideration.” 260

But about the middle of the 1 8th century there were
already “ dealers in loans.” In 1769 there were Italian
and Dutch firms who would willingly undertake the
floating of loans.261 Adam Smith’s description of
this business makes the matter plainer still. “ In
England ... the merchants are generally the people
who advance money to Government. But by advancing
it they do not mean to diminish, but, on the contrary,
to increase their mercantile capitals; and' unless. they


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 103

expected to sell with some profit their share in the
subscription for a new loan, they never would subscribe.”
In France, on- the other hand,' those concerned ijx the
finances were people of private means, who advanced

their own money.262

■Where did the specialists in this business come from ?
•Not from among the bankers, who in the i8th century
floated loans, but in all probability frdm among the
dealers in stocks and shares. Towards the end of the
1 8th century the charmed circle of London bankers
who had the monopoly of bringing out Government
loans was broken through by competition from the
ranks of the stockbrokers. Here, too, it was a
Jewish firm that took the initiative, and brought .the
emission of loans into connexion with the Stock
Exchange. I refer to the “ Rothschilds of the 1 8th
century,” the men who predominated in ’Change Alley
in those days — ^Abraham and Benjamin Goldsmid. In
1792 they came forward as the first members of the
Stock Exchange 263 to compete with the bankers
of London in the bringing out of the new loSn, and
from that date until the death of the second brother,
Abraham, which occurred in 1810, this firm controlled
the money market. Perhaps we may account them as
the first “loan specialists,” whom the Rothschilds
succeeded. But even if there is some doubt about
the Goldsmids’ claim, there can be no possible doubt
about the Rothschilds’, who were thus certainly the
. first in the field.

But it is obvious that only a few wealthy firms could
subsist by the business of issuing public loans. After all,
the demand was comparatively limited. . But as soon as
Opportunities offered themselves for the creation of
securities for private needs, a very wide field of activity
was i;eady fqr ploughing. All that was necessary, was


104 the jews and modern capitalism

to create a big demand artificially, and this tendency
gave birth to company-promoting and ' mortgage
business.

Company-promoting is carried on by firms “ whose
business it professedly is to make money by manufac-
turing stocks and shares wholesale and forcing them upon
■ the pubHc ” (Crump). The strength of the motive power
that thus began to actuate economic activities need
scarcely be described. It was now to the interest of
undertakers, some of no small importance, to create
fresh capital by the issue of new stock or by ex-
tending the old, vnthout any reference at all to the
question as to whether there was a demand for the
stock or not.

Who first started this form of business ? It will not
be difficult to show that even if the Jews did not
actually establish it, they certainly helped forward its
development. .

The first ray of light on this matter, as far as we can
make out, is once again the activity of the Rothschilds.
The railway boom of the 1 830’s made it possible to
carry on company-promoting on a large scale. The
Rothschilds, as well as other Jewish houses (the
d’Eichthals, the Foulds, etc.), were the first in the
field, and brought this branch of business to a flourish-
ir^ condition.

The extent of the participation may be gathered in
some degree from the length of the lines built, or the
amount of capital subscribed. But the actual share of
the individual firms cannot be estimated. Neverthe-
less, we know that the Rothschilds “ built ” the Northern-
Railway in France, the Northern Rmlway in Austria,
the Austro-Italian Railway, and many more.

Further, judging from the views of cQntemporaries,
it would appear that the Rothschilds were really the first


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE’ 105


“Railway Kings.” In 1843 the Augshurger Allgemeim
Zeitung wrote as follows : “ When in the last few years

speculation became rife in industrial midertakings, .and
railways grew to be a necessity for the Continent, the
Rothschilds took the plunge and placed themselves at the
head of the new .movement,” The house of Rothsdiild
set the fashion in railway building as it had done before
in public loans. “ Scarcely a company that was started
in Germany but looked to the goodwill of Rothschild.
Those in which he had no say were not very successful,
and little could be made out of them.” 2^4 State-
ments such as these, in which friend and foe agree, are
significant enough.

Ever since those days the activity of floating com-
panies has become a speciality of Jewish undertakers. In
the first place, the very biggest men, such as Baron
Hirsch or Dr. Strousberg, were Jews. But the rank and
file, too, have many Jews among them. A glance at the
figures on the next page concerning the prpmotion of
companies in Germany in the two years 1871—3 suffices
to show that an astoundingly large tjumber of Jews par-
ticipated in the work.265 But these figures do not tell the
whole story. In the first place, they form only a selection
of the whole, and refer (of set purpose) to the “ shaky ”
companies, from which the Jews will probably have kept
-away ; and secondly, in many cases, the Jews were behind
the scenes as controlling influences, and those in the fore-
ground were merely puppets. Even so the figures will
I serve a useful purpose.

The tendency is perhaps best seen where private
banking is still important, as it is in England. Here,
as 1 am told on the best authority, of the 63 banks in
^tEankers^ Almanack for 1904, 33 were Jewish firms,
or at least with a strong Jewish interest, and of these 33,
13 were first-class concerns.


io6 THE JEWS ANP' MODERN CAPITALISM


Nature of Establishment.

Total Number pf
Founders

Number of Jews.

Twenty-five firms of first-rate impor-


16

tance that floated companies

25

Two of the biggest mining syndicates 4..

. *3

5

Continental Railway Company (capital


million sterling)

6

4

Twelve Land-purchase Companies in

80


Berlin

27

Building Society, “Unter den


Linden”

8

4

Nine Building Banks

104.

37

Nine Berlin Breweries

S+

27

Twenty North German Machine


Building Companies

148

47

Ten North German Gasworks

49

18

Twenty Paper Factories

89

22

Twelve North German Chemical


Works

67

22

Twelve North German Textile


Factories

65

27


It is more difficult to determine the proportion of Jews
in this calling in countries {e.g.^ Germany) where' the
private banker has been displaced by the joint-stock
bank. But everything points to Jewish influence in the
tendency of the joint-stock banks to act as company
promoters.

• None of the decades of company-flotation, neither the

, fifties nor the seventies^ nor still less the nineties, would
have been conceivable without the co-operation of the
speculative bank. The stupendous undertakings in railway
construction owe their Very existence to the banks^ which
advanced capital to limited companies of their own
creation. Private, firms, it is true, did no little in the
same direction, but their means did not allow of rivalry
with the- great banks. In France, between 1842 and
1847, no less than 144 million francs were spent in rail-
way building ; in the following four years 1 30 nullions#


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 107

w&ile from 1852 to ,1854 the sum had reached 250
millions ; in 185^ alone it was 500 millions, and in 1856
520 millions. 266 It was the same in Germany. “ The
entire work of building our net of railways in this
period (1848-70) . . . was carried through . . . with
the assistance of banks.” 267

The reason for this is not far to seek. On the one
hand, the increase of available capital; which was due to
the rise of new joint-stock banks, paved the way for pro-
portionately larger undertakings. On the other hand,
since the joint-stock company in trying to obtain greater
profits strove harder than a private firm to add to its
activities, all possible opportunities that presented them-
selves were utilized to the full. 268

How did this special banking activity originate ? 269
I believe it may be traced to 1852, when the cridit^
mobiliers 270 were first established.

Th$ history of the cridit mobilier is well known.271
What interests us specially is that it owes its in^eptibn
to two Portuguese Jews, Isaac and Emil Pereire, and that
other Jews participated in it. The list of subscribers
showed that the two Pereires together held H>446 shares,
and Fould^Oppenheim 11,445, that among the other
large shareholders were Mallet Fr^res, Benjamin Fould,
Torlonia (of Rome), Solomon Heine (of Hamburg),
Oppenheim (of Cologne) — in other words, the chief
representatives of European Jewry. The Rothschilds
were not found in the list, for the cridit mobilier was
directed against them.

The French cridit mobilier produced in the years tluit
followed a number, of offshoots, legitimate and ille-
gitimate, all of Jewish blood. In Austria there was the
“ Kaiserlich-Koenigliche privilegierte oesterreichische
Kreditanstalt,” established in 1855 byS. M. Rothschild-
In Germany the first institution modelled on the new


io8 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

principle was the Bank fiir Handel und Industoie (Darm-
stadter Bank), founded in 1853, initiative of the

Oppenheims of Cologne. 272 One of the first directors
of this bank was Hess, who had been a high official in
the cridit mobilier. The Berliner Discontogesellschaft
was the second institution of the same kind. Its origin
was Christian, but its transformation into what it is
to-day is the work of David Hausemann. It was the
same with the third German instance — the Berliner
• Handelsgesellschaft, which was called into being by the
Cologne firms already mentioned in connexion with the
Darmstadter Bank, and by the best known Berlin
bankers, such as Mendelssohn & Co., S. Bleichrader,
Robert Warschauer & Co., Schickler Brothers, and
others. Finally, in the case of the Deutsche Bank
(1870) the Jewish element again predominated.

IV. .The Commercialization of Industry.

"With the speculative banks capitalistic development
reached its zenith, at any rate, for the time being. They
pushed the process of the commercialization of economic
fife as far forward as it could go. Themselves children
of the Stock Exchange, the speculative banks brought
Stoc^ Exchange activities (J.e., speculation) to their fullest
bloom. 273 Trade in securities was extended to
undreamt-of proportions. So much so, that the opinion
has been expressed that, in Germany at any rate, the
speci^tive joint-stock banks will replace the Stock
Exchange. 274 There may be a grain of truth in this,
provided the terms be properly understood. That the
Stock Exchange may cease to be an open market and
be dominated by la haute finance is possible ; but as an
egpnomic organization it is bound to gain, if anything,
by modern developments, seeing that its sphere is
continuously being widene^.


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE log

That is what 1 meain by the commercialization of-
industry. The Stock Exchange activities of the joint-
stock banks are becoming more and more the controlling
force in every department of economic life. Indeed,
all undertakings in the field of industry are now deter-
mined by the power of finance. Whether a new industrial
concern shall be established or an old one enlarged,
whether a “ universal provider ” shall receive an increase
of capital in order to extend his business — all this is now
decided in the private offices of banks or bankers. In
the 'same way the distribution of commodities is becoming
more and more a financial problem. It is not too much
to say that our chief industries are as much financial
as' industrial concerns. The Stock Exchange determines
the price of most international manufactured articles and
raw materials, and he .who hopes to survive the com-
petitive strain must be able to command the Stock
Exchange. In a word, it may be safely asserted that
all economic activities nowadays are tending to become
commercial dealings.

The electrical industry is the best example. From its
first foundations it represented a new type. Hitherto
the great capitalistic industries regarded their work as
finished when they had obtained and carried out their
orders. A particular factory would appoint an agfent in
every big town, who in most cases represented other
factories as well, and whose search for customers could
not be marked by any very striking initiative. In the
electrical industry all this was changed. Its organizers
were the first to see that one of the primary duties of an
industry was to create a market for itself. What did
they do ? They endeavoured to capture the customer.
On the one hand, they attempted to control buyers. Fot?
example, by purchasing shares either in tram companies
about to be turned into electric tramways, or in entirely


no THE JEWS AND .MOpERN CAPITALISM

new - undertaldngs, they could obt^n a dbminating in-
fluence over the • body which gave orders for the com-
modities they were manufacturing. In case of need, the
directors of electrical undertakings would themselves call
into being limited companies for such activities as would
create a demand for their goods. The most successful
electrical works have to-day become in an increasing
degree similar to banks for floating companies.

■ Nor is this all. Another policy they adopted was to
establish branches in all parts in order to seize upon as
much of the toarket as they could. Whereas formerly
reliance was placed on general agents, now, the work of
extending the connexion is delegated by each firm to a
special representative of its own. What is the result ?
The customer is seen at closer quarters ; his needs are
better understood and, therefore, better supplied ; his
wishes more easily met, and so forth.

It is well known that such was the system adopted by
the Allgemeine Elektriritats-Gesellschaft and that Felix
Deutsch was foremost in its extension. The older com-
panies have but slowly foUbwed suit. Siemens and
Halske long thought themselves “ too grand to run after
customers,” until Berliner, one. of their directors, accepted
■ the new plan to such good effect, that his company sooii
regained the lost ground from its rival.

This instance is typical, and we may say generally that
the comniercialization of industry was the gap in the
hedge through which the Jews could penetrate into the
field of rile production and transportation of commodities,
as they had done earlier in commerce and finance.

By this, we are not asserting that the history of the
Jews as industrialists commences here. Far from it. As
soon as modern capitalism diflfisrentiated between the
technical and cohamercial aspects of all economic pro-
cesses, so soon was the Jew found engaged in botfi. It is


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE ni


true that commerce attracted him more, but already in
the early capitalistic period Jews were among the ■ first
undertakers ,in one industry or another.

Here they established the tobacco industry (Mecklen-
berg, Austria) ; there, whisky distilling (Poland,
Bphemia) ; in some countries they were leather manu-
facturers (France, Austria), in others silk manufacturers
(Prussia, Italy and Austria) ; they made stockings in
Hamburg ; looking-glasses in Fiirth ; starch in France ;
cotton in Moravia, And almost everywhere they were
pioneers in the tailoring trade. I could show by
reference to the materials I have collected that in the
1 8th and early 19th centuries there were many other
instances of Jews as capitalistic indust:rialists.27S But I
hold that an account of this aspect of Jewish economic
history is useless, seeing that it contains nothing sped-,
fically Jewishj Jews were driven into an industry by
mere chance, and in all probability it would have thriven
without them equally well. Let us take an instance or
two. In Poland and Austria'the position of the Jews as
the stewards of the nobility brought it about that they
became whisky distillers. In other countries their enter-
prise in the tobacco industry was a direct result of their
status as Court Jews, in connexion with which they very
often held the tobacco monopoly. Iri the majority of
instances their commercial activities led to their stocking
manufactured articles, and eventually to their making of
them, as in the case of textiles. But the process is a
common one, and non-Jews passed through it equally
with Jews. There was, however, an exception in the
case of old do’ dealing. That was an essentially Jewish
business, anti led first to the sale of new clothes, and
eventually to tailoring.

But when all is Said, Jewish influence on industrial
undertakings wah not very great until their commerdali-,


H2 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM ^

zation came about ; that is, until in almost every modern
industry the work of directing and organizing has become
common to all, and a man may pass from one industry
to another without thereby diminishing his skill. The
technical side is now in all cases a subdivision by itself.
It is no uncommon thing therefore to find that a man
who started in the leather industry ends up as an iron-
master, after having been in turn (shall we say ?) a
manufacturer of alcoholic liquors and of sulphuric acid.
The capitalistic .undertaker of old bore a technical
impress, the modern undertaker is quite colourless. Can
you imagine Alfred ’Krupp manufacturing anything but
guns, Borsig anything but machines, Werner von Siemens
anything but electrical apparatus ? Can you . picture
H. H. Myer at the head of any other concern but the
Nord-deutscher Lloyd ? On the other hand, if Rathenau,
Deutsch, Berliner, Arnold, Friedlander, Ballin changed
positions to-morrow they would be no less successful
than in their present capacities. And what is the reason ?
They are all men of commerce, and the particular sphere
of their activity matters not in the least.

It has been put thus : the Christian makes his way up,
starting as technician ; the Jew as commercial traveller
or derk.

The extent of Jewish participation in industrial under-
takings .to-day would be very useful to know, but there
is little material to go upon. We shall have to be
content with an approximate estimate, based on’ the,
numbers of Jews who are directors of industrial concerns.
The method is unsatisfactory — naturally so. How is it
possible to say with certainty who is a Jew and who is
not ? How many people are aware, for example, that’
Hagen of Cologne, who holds more directorships than
g,ny other man in Germany, was originally called Levy ?
But apart from this, mere, numbers are no criterion of


THE PREDOMINANCE OF COMMERCE 113


the extent of influence. Moreover, in some companies
business ability alone does not determine the membership
of the Board of Directors ; in others there is an unwritten
law to exclude Jews from positions of trust. In any
case, therefore, the figures that have been obtained relate
only to a small portion of the Jewish influence.

MANAGING DIRECTORS.


BOARD OF DIRECTORS.


Industry.


Brewing
Metal ...


Cement, timber,
Potash ...


glass, china


Leather and rubber


Electrical


Mining ...
Chemicals


Machinery

Textiles


Total


9


1 14 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


For all that I quote them ; they have been com-
piled for me from the last edition of the Handbook of
German Joint-Stock Companies. In the case of the
electrical industries, only those vdth a capital of 6 million
mark have been noted ; in the chemical industries those
with 5 millions ; machinery and textiles with 4 millions,
and the remainder with 3 millions.

What do these figures suggest ? Is the Jewish in-
fluence in the industries named great or small ? I think
it is very large, at any rate quantitatively. Bear in mind
that the social group which occupies almost a seventh part
of all directorships, and nearly a quarter of all the boards
of directors, forms exactly only a hundredth part of the
entire population of the German Empire.


ii6 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


opinions to which we are about to refer looked on
the Jews as their worst enemies, and therefore we must
try to read between the lines, and deduce the truth from
statements which were meant to convey something very
different. The task is made the more easy because of the
uniformity in the opinions formulated — a uniformity due
by no means to thoughtless imitation, but rather to simi-
larity of conditions. Their very similarity adds to their
forcefulness as proofs.

In the first place, it must be noted that wherever Jews
appeared as business competitors, complaints were heard
that Christian traders suffered in consequence : their live-
lihood, we are told, was endangered, the Jews deprived
them of their profits, their chances of existence were
lessened because their customers went to Jews, and so
forth.

A few extracts from documents of the 17 th and i8th
centuries, the period which concerns us most, wiU illustrate
what has been mentioned. Let us turn first to Germany.
In 1672 the Estates of Brandenburg complain that the
Jews “ take the bread out of the mouths of the other
inhabitants.” 276 Almost the same phrase is found
in the petition of the merchants of Danzig, of
March 19th, 1717.277 In 1712 and 1717 the good
citizens of the old town of Magdeburg object to the
admission of Jews into their midst, “ because the welfare
of the city, and the success of traders, depends upon
the fact that ... no Jewish dealing is permitted

here.” 278

In 1740 Ettenheim made a communication to its
Bishop, wherein it was stated that “ as is well-known,
the Jews’ low ways make only for loss and undoing.”
The same idea is voiced in the proverb, “ All in that
dty doth decay, where Jews are plentiful as hay.” 279
In the preamble to the Prussian Edict of 1750, mention is


GROWTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW 117


made that “ the big merchants of our town complain . . .
that the Jews who deal in the same commodities as they
do, lessen their business considerably.” It was the same
in the South of Germany. In Nuremberg, for example,
the Christian traders had to sit by and see their customers
make purchases of Jews. In 1469 the Jews were expelled
from Nuremberg ; a very large number of them settled
in the neighbouring town of Fiirth, and their customers
from the first-named city, seeking the best advantage for
themselves as buyers, journeyed to Fiirth to do their shop-
ping.* No wonder that the City Fathers of Nuremberg
showered ordinances on the town throughout the 17th
and 1 8th centuries, forbidding dealings with Jews from

Furth.280

That Jews all through the i8th century were refused
admission to the merchant-gilds, no less than to the craft-
gilds, is too well-known to need further emphasis.281

Was it (Cerent in England ? By no means. Says
Josiah Child, “ The Jews are a subtil people . . . depriv-
ing the English merchant of that profit he would
otherwise grin ” ; they carry on their business “ to
the prejudice of the English merchants.” 283 When in
1753 the Jews’ Naturalization Bill became law, the ill-
will of the populace against the hated race was so great
that the Act had to be repealed the very next year. One
great fear was that if the Jews became English citizens they
would “ oust the natives from their employment.” *83

From Marseilles to Nantes the same tones were heard
in France. The merchants of the latter city in 1752
bewriled their fate in the following terms : “ The

prohibited trade carried on by these strangers . , . has

[* The first German railway was built between Nuremberg and
Furtb (1835). Whether the Jewish influence mentioned in the
text had anything to do with it ia difficult to say. But it is a
curious fact.]


ii8 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


caused considerable loss to the merchants of this town, so
much so, that if they are not favoured by the good-will of
these gentry, they are in the predicament of being able
neither to provide for their families nor to pay their
taxes.” 284 Seven years earlier, in 1745, the Christian
traders of Toulouse regretfully declared that “ everybody
runs to the Jewish traders.” 285 «« We beseech you to

bar the onward march of this nation, which otherwise will
assuredly destroy the entire trade of Languedoc ” — such
was the request of the Montpelier Chamber of Com-
merce.286 Their colleagues in Paris compared the
Jews to wasps who make their way into the hive only
to kill the bees, rip open their bodies and extract
the honey stored in their entrails.287

In Sweden ,289 in Poland, 29 o the same cry re-
sounded.288 In 1619 the civic authorities of Posen
complained, in an address to King Sigismund, that
“difficulties and stumbling-blocks are put in the way
of merchants and craftsmen by the competition ot
Jews.”

But all this does not suffice. We want to know more
than that the Jews endangered the livelihood of the
others. We want to find out the reason' for this. Why
were they able to become such keen competitors of the
Christian traders.? Only when this question has been
answered, will we understand the peculiar nature of
Jewish business methods, “ les secrets du negoce,” as
Savary calls them.

Let us refer to contemporary opinion, to the men who
were sufficiently in touch with everyday life to know the
reason. Here again the answer is pretty well unanimous.
And what is it ? The Jews were more successful because
of their dishonest dealing. “Jews . . . have one law
and custom whenever it pays them : it is called lying
and cheating,” you may read in the pages of Philander


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 1 19


von Sittewald.291 Equally complimentary is the
Comic Lexicon of Cheatingy compiled by George Paul
H6nn,®92 where under “Jews,” the only interpolation
in the whole book is made as follows : “ Jews are cheats,

collectively and individually. . . The article “ Jews,”
in the General Treasury for Merchants, is of the same
calibre, 293 while an anonymous writer on manners and
morals declares that the Jews of Berlin “ make their living
by robbing and cheating, which, in their opinion, are no
crimes.” *94

Similar views were current in France, “The Jews,”
says Savary, “ have the reputation of being good at busi-
ness, but they are supposed not to be able to carry it on
\nth strict honesty and trustworthiness.” *95

Now what do these accusations amount to ? Even if
the term “ cheating ” be given a very wide connotation,
the commercial practices of many Jews hardly came within
its scope. When it was asserted that Jews were cheats,
that was only an epithet to describe the fact that Jews in
their commercial dealings did not always pay regard to
the existing' laws or customs of trade, Jewish merchants
offended in neglecting certain traditions of their Christian
compeers, in (now and again) breaking the law, but above
all, in paying no heed to commercial etiquette. Look
closely into the specific accusations hurled against Jewish
traders, examine their innermost nature, and you shall find
that the conflict between Jewish and Christian merchants
was a struggle between two outlooks, between two
radically differing — nay, opposite — views on economic
life.

To imderstand this conflict in its entirety, it will be
necessary to obtain some idea of the spirit that domi-
nated economic activities, activities in which from the
1 6th century onwards the Jews were obtaining a surer
footing from day to day. So much did they seem to


120 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

be out of harmony with that spirit that everywhere
they were looked upon as a disturbing element.

During the whole of the period which I have described
as the " early capitalistic age,” and in which the Jews
began to make their influence felt, the same funda-
mental notions generally prevailed in regard to economic
life as characterized the Middle Ages — feudal relation-
ships, manual labour, three estates of the realm, and
so forth.

The centre of this whole was the individual man.
Whether as producer or as consumer, his interests
determined the attitude of the community as of its
units, determined the law regulating economic activities
and the practices of commercial life. Every such law
was personal in its intent; and all who contributed to
the life of the nation had a personal outlook. Not
that each person could do as he liked. On the con-
trary, a code of restrictions hedged about his activities
in every direction. But the point is that the restrictions
were born of the individualistic spirit. Commodities
were produced and bought and sold in order that
consumers might have their wants sufficiently satisfied.
On the other hand, producers and traders were to
receive fair wages and fair profits. What was fair,
and what sufficient for your need, tradition and custom
determined.

And so, producer and trader should receive as much
as was demanded by the standard of comfort in their
station in life. That was the mediaeval view ; it was
also the view current in the early capitalistic age, even
where business was carried on along more or less modem
lines. We find its expression in the industrial codes
of the day, and its justification in the commercial
literature. 296

Hence, to make profit was looked upon by most people


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 121


throughout the period as improper, as “ unchristian ” ;
the old economic teaching of Thomas Aquinas was
observed, 297 at least officially. The religious or
ethical rule was still supreme ; 298 there was as yet no
sign of the liberation of economic life from its religious
and ethical bonds. Every action, no matter in what
sphere, was done with a view to the Highest Tribunal —
the vill of God. Need it be pointed out that the attitude
of Mammon was as opposed to this as pole is to pole ?

Producer and trader should receive sufficient for their
need. One outstanding result of this principle was
strictly to circumscribe each man’s activity in his
locality. Competition was therefore quite out of the
question. In his own sphere a man might work as he
willed — when, how, where — in accordance with tradition
and custom. But to cast a look at his neighbour’s
sphere — that he was forbidden to do. Just as the
peasant received his holding — so much field, with
pasture and woodland, as would keep him and his
family, just as he never even dreamt of adding to his
possessions, so, too, the craftsman and the merchant
were to rest content wth their portions and never
covet their neighbour’s. The peasant had his land, the
town-dweller his customers : in either case they were
the source whence sprang his livelihood ; in either case
they were of a size sufficient for the purpose. Hence,
the trader had to be assured of his custom, and many
were the ordinances which guarded him against com-
petition. Besides, it was commercial etiquette. You did
not run after your customers. You waited until they
came, “ and then ” (in the words of De Foe’s sermon),
“with God’s blessing and his own care, he may expect
his share of trade with his neighbours.” 299 The
merchant who attended fairs did not do otherwise ;
“day and night he waits at his stall.” 3 «>


122 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


To take away your neighbour’s customers was con-
temptible, unchristian, and immoral. 3 °* A rule for
“ Merchants who trade in commodities ” was : “ Turn
no man’s customers away from ham, either by word
of mouth or by letter, and do not to another what
you would not have another do to you.” 302 It
was, however, more than a rule ; it became an ordinance,
and is met with over and over again. In Mayence its
wording was as follows : 303 “ No one shall prevent
another from buying, or by offering a higher price make
a commodity dearer, on pain of losing his purchase ; no
one shall interfere in another’s business undertaking, or
carry on lus own on so large a scale as to ruin other
traders.” In Saxony it was much the same.304
“No shopkeeper shall call away the customers from
another’s shop, nor shall he by signs or motions keep
them from buying.”

But to attract customers even without interfering with
your neighbour’s business was regarded as unworthy.
As late as the early i 8 th century in London itself it
was not considered proper for a shopkeeper to dress
his window tastefully, and so lure purchasers. De Foe,
no less than his later editors, did not mince words in
expressing his contempt for such a course, of which,
as he mentions apparently with some satisfaction, only
a few bakers and toymen were guilty. 3 os

To the things that were not pernutted belonged also
advertising your business and praising your wares. The
gentle art of advertising first appeared in Holland some-
time about the middle of the 17 th century, in England
towards its end, in France much later. The Ghentsche
Post-Tijdingen, founded in 1667, contsuned the first
business advertisement in its issue of October 3rd of
that year.306 At this time none of the London
news-sheets published advertisements; even after the


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 1 23


Great Fire not one business thought of advertising its
new address. It was not until 1682, when John
Houghton established The Collection for the Improvement
of Husbandry and Trade, that the merchant community of
London became accustomed to utilizing the Press as
a medium for advertising. 307 This had been pre-
ceded by the practice, in a small way, of distributing
bills in the streets to passers-by.

Two generations later Postlethwayt 3o8 gave currency
to the then existing views. “ Advertising in the news-
papers, in regard to matters of trade and business, is
now grown a pretty universal practice all over the
kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; . . . and
however mean and disgraceful it was looked upon a few
years since, by people of reputation in trade, to apply
to the public by advertisements in the papers ; at present
(1751) it seems to be esteemed quite otherwise ; persons
of great credit in trade experiencing it to be the best,
the easiest and the cheapest method of conveying what-
ever they have to offer to the knowledge of the whole
kingdom.”

They were not quite so far advanced in France at
that time. In his Dictionary (1726) Savary 309 says
nothing of the economic aspect of the term rklame.
Not until six years later — in 1732, when his supplement
was published — does he add : “ A poster exhibited in
public thoroughfares to make sometlying generally
known.” And what does he instance? The sale of
ships ; the time of sailing ; the announcement by the
big trading companies of the arrival of goods from
distant parts, but only in cases where they are to be
publicly sold ; the establishment of new factories ; change
of address. The business advertisement in its most
elementary form is lacking. It is lacking also in the
newspapers of the period until the second half of the


124 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


i8th century. Surprising as it may seem, the first
issue of the famous advertisement sheet, Les Petites
Affiches, which appeared on May 13, 1751, contained
no real business advertisement. 3 io In other words,
the simple announcement “I sell such-and-such wares
at such-and-such a place” did not become general in
England until the i8th century, and in France not till
much later. In Germany only one or two towns were
to the fore in this respect. Berlin and Hamburg may
be instanced, but even there the innovations are isolated,
the only exception being books, which were originally
much advertised.

To praise your goods or to point out wherein your
business was superior to others was equally nefarious.
But the last word in commercial impropriety was to
announce that your prices were lower than those of the
man opposite. “To undersell” was most ungentlemanly :
“No blessing will come from harming your neighbour
by underselling and cutting prices.” 3”

Bad as underselling itself was in the eyes of the people
of those days, it was beneath contempt to advertise it.
“Since the death of our author,” say the editors of
the fifth edition (1745) of De Foe’s Complete English
Tradesman^i^^ “ this underselling practice is grown
to such a shameful height that particular persons
pubUckly advertise that they undersell the rest of the
trade.” It may be asked, Why were the editors so
concerned about the matter? The reason is manifest
in a subsequent passage. " We have had grocers
advertising their underselling one another at a rate a
fair trader cannot sell for and live.” It is the old
cry : fixed profits, a fixed livelihood, a fixed production
and fixed prices.

We possess a French instance which shows even more
strikingly how heinous this offence was thought to be.


GROWTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW 125


even in Paris. An Ordinance of 1761 3 i 3 proclaimed
to all and sundry in the French capital that to advertise
that you are selling your goods at a price below the
customary one must be regarded as the last resource
of a merchant in difficulties, and that such action
deserved severe condemnation. The Ordinance pro-
ceeded to forbid the traders of Paris and its suburbs
“to run after one another trying to find customers,
and above all, to distribute hand-bills calling attention
to their wares.”

Like the producers, the consumers also received
attention. In a certain sense the consumer received
even more, for the naive conception that all production
was in the interests of consumption had not yet dis-
appeared. Hence the stress laid on good wares, on the
principle that commodities should really be what they
pretended ; and innumerable were the ordinances that
were everywhere promulgated to this intent, more
especially in the 17th and 18 th centuries.

It was long before the purely capitalistic notion gained
acceptance that the value in exchange of any commodity
was what influenced the undertaker most. We may see
how slow its progress was firom the conflicting opinions
on the subject in England in the i8th century. Sir
Josiah Child appears to have been in the minority on
this, as on most other questions, when he formulated
the demand that every manufacturer should be allowed
to judge for himself as to the kind of commodity,
and the quality, that he brought -into the market.
It is curious enough nowadays to read Child’s plea for
the right of the manufacturer to make shoddy goods.
“If we intend to have the trade of the world,” he
cries, 3 i 4 “we must imitate the Dutch, who make the
worst as well as the best of all manufactures, that we may
be in a capadty of serving all markets and all humours.”


126 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


In a world of economic ideas such as these, the theory
of “just price” was an organic element. Price was
not something in the formation of which the individual
had a say. Price was determined for him ; it wras as
subject to religious and ethical principles as everything
else in economic life. It was to be such as would make
for the common good, as well of the consumer as of
the producer. Different ages had their own standard
for determining it; in Luther’s day, for example, the
cost of production was the deciding factor. But as
commercial intercourse widened, the doctrine of the
just price was found to be more and more impossible,
and the view that price must be determined by the
factors in the market 3^5 found general acceptance.
But be that as it may, the point to accentuate is that
price was based on ethical and not (as was held to
be the case later) on natural principles. Then people
smd that the individual must not determine price at his
own wiU ; whereas later the view was that he could not
so determine it.

What manner of world was that in which opinions
such as these predominated ? If we had to describe it
in a word, we should say that it was “ slow.” Stability
was its bulwark and tradition its guide. The individual
never lost himself in the noise and whirl of business
activity. He still had complete control of himself ; he
was not yet devoid of that native dignity, which does
not make itself cheap for the sake of profit. Trade and
commerce were everywhere carried on wnth a dash of
personal pride. And all this to a greater extent in
the country than in the large towns, where advancing
capitalism made itself soonest felt. “The proud and
haughty demeanour of the country merchant” is noted
by a keen observer of his time.3i6 We can almost
see the type, in his knee-breeches and long coat, his head


GROWTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW 127


bewigged and his manner somewhat stiflF. Business with
him was an even process ; he got through it without
much thought or worry, serving his circle of customers
in the traditional way, knowing nothing of excitement,
and never complaining that the day was too short.

To-day one of the best ^gns of a flourishing trade
is a universal hurry and scurry, but towards the end
of the 1 8 th century that was regarded as a sure token
of idleness. The man of business was deliberately
slow of stride. “ In Paris people are in one continuous
haste — because there is nothing to do there ; here (in
Lyons, the centre of the silk industry, and a town
of some commercial importance) our walk is slow be-
cause every one is busy.” Such is the verdict of the
observer,3i7 already mentioned, in the year of grace 1788.

In this picture the Nonconformist, the Quaker, the
Methodist, is a fitting figure, even though we are
accustomed to think of him as one of the first to be
associated with capitalistic ideas. As his inner life, so
was his outward bearing to be. "Walk with a sober
pace, not tinkling vnth your feet,” was a canon of the
Puritan rule of life.3i8 “The believer hath, or at
least ought to have, and, if he be like himself, will have,
a well-ordered walk, and will be in his carriage stately
and princely.” 319

This was the world the Jews stormed. At every
step they oflFended against economic principles and the
economic order. That seems dear enough from the
unanimous complaints of the Christian traders every-
where.

But were the Jews the only sinners in this respect?
Was it fair to single out "Jewish dealing”' and to
stigmatize it as inclined to be dishonest, as contrary
to law and practice, as characterized by lying and
deception ? There can be Uttle doubt that the practices


128 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


of Christian manufacturers and traders were not always
blameless in the matter of being opposed to custom
and regulation. Human nature being what it is, this
was only to be expected. But apart from that, the
age with which we are concerned could not boast of
a very high standard of commercial morality. Else
why the necessity for the plethora of ordinances and
prohibitions which touched economic activities at every
point ? Contemporary evidence certainly leaves no
doubt on the subject.

We have already mentioned the Cheating Lexicon
which was published at the beginning of the 1 8 th century.
It must have been widely read, for in the space of a
few years several editions were issued. Turn to its
pages, and you will ask in amazement whether there
was any honesty left in the world. True, this impression
is created by the concentration within a small space of
very many instances and illustrations of cheating and
swindling. But even making allowance for this fact,
the impression cannot be eradicated that there must
have been a good deal of questionable conduct in those
days. And if any doubt still lurks on this point other
witnesses soon obliterate it. “ You can find but few
wares nowadays (1742) that have not been adulterated,”
is the plaint of one German writer.320 Numerous
are the prohibitions of the evil ; imperial edicts (such
as that of 1497), police regulations (such as that of
Augsburg, of 1548) and rules originating in merchant
circles (such as that of Liibeck, of 1607) all deal with
the practice. But falsification was by no means limited
to the production of commodities ; it was not unknown
in commerce too. Fraudulent bankruptcies must have
occurred very frequently in the 17th and i8th centuries,
and must have formed a problem difficult of solution.
Again and again there were complaints about thdr


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIU W 129

uninterrupted reappearance.321 Indeed, the loose com-
mercial morality of English merchants in the 17th
century was proverbiaL 323 Cheating and falsifying were
sdd to be “the besetting sin of English tradesmen.”
“Our merchants,” says a 17th-century writer, 323 “by
their infinite over-asking for commodities procldm
to the world that they would cheat all if it were in
their power.”

Such being the case, what reason was there for marking
out the Jews ? And can we really speak of something
spedally characteristic in the conduct of Jews over
against the established principles of the time ? I believe
we can. I believe that the specifically Jewish charac-
teristic consisted in that it was not an individual here
and there who offended against the prevailing economic
order, but the whole body of Jews. Jewish commercial
conduct reflected the accepted point of view among
Jewish traders. Hence Jews were never conscious of
doing wrong, of being guilty of commercial immorality ;
their policy was in accordance with a system, which for
them was the proper one. They were in the right ;
it was the other outlook that was wrong and stupid.
We are not here speaking of capital delinquencies
genially acknowledged to be wrong, and generally
condemned. For a distinction must be drawn between
the fundamental regulations of any legal institution
property), and those which vary with the progress
of society. Stealing will be looked upon as a capital
offence as long as property exists; but there will be
much difference of opinion from age to age on the'
question of taking interest. The first falls under the
former category ; the second under the latter.

No doubt, • in their peculiar commercial activity,
Jews were guilty of both sorts of misdemeanours. In
early times Jews committed wrongs which were uni-

10


130 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

versally regarded as such. They were constandy accused,
for example, of receiving deahng in stolen pro-
perty.324 But Jews, as a body, themselves condemned
practices of this kind ; and for that matter, there were
.honest and dishonest Jews as there were honest and
dishonest Christians. If any Jews were addicted to
systematic cheating, they in so far set themselves up
against the majority of Jews and Christians, both of
whom were agreed that such conduct was not in accord
with the accepted standards of right. We are not
without records that illustrate this very forcibly. The
history of the Jews in Hamburg is an instance. In the
17th century, the Portuguese Jews undertook to a
cert^n extent tp be responsible to the authoiities for
the proper commercial conduct of the newly arrived
German Jews. As soon as the Tedescos came into the
city, they had to promise their Portuguese brethren not,
to buy stolen property, nor otherwise to carry on shady
business. On one occasion the Elders of the German
Jews were summoned before the Mahamad* and warned
because several of them had broken their pledge ; on
another occasion because they had bought stolen goods
from soldiers.325

The point I , am emphasizing must be remembered
in considering the accusations hurled against the, Jews
in the early capitalistic age, accusations which, on the
whole, were not unfounded. Universally accepted
offences, such as stealing or receiving stolen property,
must not be included under this heading. Jews equally
with Christians abhorred such crimes. The practices,
howevfer, common to all Jews, which overstepped law
and custom, but which Jews did not feel as being wrong,
the practices which may be looked upon as being the

[* The governing body of the Portuguese Jewish congregation. The
term'is still used among the Spanish and Portuguese Jews in London.]


GROWTH OF capitalistic POINT OF VIEW i^v

result df a specifically Jewish outlook, these must coine
•withiri our ken; , And what do we find on examining
them?

We find that the Jew rises before us unmistakably
as more of a business-man than his ' neighbour ; he
follows business for its own sake ; he recognizes, in the
true capitalistic spirit, the supremacy of gain ovet all
other rims.

I know of no better illustration than the Memoirs of
Gluckel von Hameln, a mine of information, by the way,
about JeTOsh life and thought in the early capitalistic
age. Gliickel, the wife of a merchant in Hamburg, lived
between 1645 and 1724, the period when the Jewish
communities of Hamburg and Altona shot up to a
position of prosperity, and in almost every respect we
may regard this remarkable woman as a type of the Jew
of that day. Her narrative grips the reader because of
its natural simplicity and freshness. As I read these
Memoirs^ in . which a complete personality is revealed
to us in a life, rich in experience, I was again and a^in
reminded of the famous Frau Rat (Goethe’s mother).

If I cite just this splendid book in order to show the
predominating interest of money among Jews in those
days, it is because I believe that this characteristic must
have been general, seeing that even in so gifted a woman
as Gliickel it also stands out. In very truth, money is
the be-all and end-all vfith her, as with all the other
people of whom she has anything to say. Accounts of
•business enterprise occupy but a small space in the book,
but on no less than 609 occasions (in 313 pages) does
the authoress speak of money, riches, gain and so forth.
The 'characters and their doings are mentioned only in
some connexion or other with money. Above all, we are
told of good matches— good from the financial point of
view. To marry her children is in fact the chief object


132 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


of Gliickel’s business actmties. “ He also saw my son,
and they were almost on the point of coming" to 'terms,
but they could not close because of a thousand marks.”
Incidents of this kind abound in the book. Of her
second marriage she says, “ in the afternoon my husband
wedded me with a valuable gold ring an ounce in
weight.” I cannot help regarding the peculi^ con-
ception of marriage-making, which used to be current
among Jews, as symptomatic of the way they looked
upon money, and especially the tendency among them
of appraising even the most precious things in life from
a purely business point of view. Children, for example,
have their value. That was a matter of course among
Jews in those days. “ They are all my darling children,
and may they all be forgiven, as well those on whom
1 had to spend a lot of money as those on whom I spent
nothing,” writes Gliickel. It was as marriageable persons
that they had a price, which varied with the state of
the market. Scholars, or the children of scholars, were
much in demand. In one case we are told that a father
speculated in his cduldren. • The fortunes of Solomon
Maimon, as related by Graetz, are well known and fre-
cjuently cited in this connexion. “ At eleven years of age
he had so complete a mastery of the Talmud that he . . .
became much sought after as a possible husband., His
needy father, in a speculating spirit, provided him mth
two brides at once, without his being able to see . . .
either of them.” Similar incidents are abundant enough to
warrant the conclusion that they must have been typical.

But the objection may be urged that among Christians
also money was no less valued, only the fact was not
admitted ; people were hypocritical. There is perhaps
a certain dement of truA in this objection. In that
case I should say that what was specifically Jewish wsts
the naivete with which money was made the pivot of


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 1 33


life ; -it was a matter of course ; no attempt was made
to hide it..

What light does contemporary opinion in the 17th
and 1 8th centuries shed upon the characteristic to which
we have called attention ? There appears to be universal
agreement on the subject, which lends support to our
theory. The Jew in those days of undeveloped capit^ism
was regarded as the representative of an economic
outlook, wherein to obtain profit was the ultimate goal
of all commercial activity. Not his “ usury ” ’ differen-
tiated him from the Christian, not that he sought
gain, not that he amassed wealth ; only that he did
all this openly, not thinking it wrong, and that he
scrupulously and mercilessly looked after his business
interests. But more awful things are related of Christian
“usurers” who “are worse than Jews.” “The Jew
wears his soul on his sleeve and is not ashamed, but
these carry on their devil’s trade with hypocritical
Christian countenances.” 326

One or two more contemporary opinions must be
quoted. “These people have no other God but the
unrighteous Mammon, and no other -aim than to get
possession of Christian property . . . they . . . look
■ at everything for their profit.” 327 Such is the verdict
• of the Rev. John Megalopolis, who wrote on March
1 8th, 1655. Another judgment is harsher still. 328
“No trust should be put in the promises made
there (in Brazil) by the Jews, a race faithless and
pusillanimous, enemies to all the. world and especially
to all Christians, caring not whose house burns so long
as they may warm themselves at the coals, who would
rather see a hundred thousand Christians perish than
suffer the loss of a hundred crowns.” The statement
of Savary ,329 who was amicably disposed tpwsvds
the Jews, is also to the point. “ A usurious merchant


134 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


or one too keen,, who tries to get a mean advantage
and flays those. T^ho have dealings with him, is termed
‘a real Jew.’ People say ‘ he has fallen into the hands
of Jews ’ when those with whom a man does business are
hard, immovable and stingy.” It- is true, that a very
Christian merchant first coined the phrase “ Business
is business,” but Jews undoubtedly were the first to
mould their policy in accordance with it.

In this connejdon we ought to mention also that
the proverbs of all nations have always depicted the
Jew as the gain-seeker, who had a special love of money.
“ Even to the Jerw our Lady Mary is holy ” (Hungarian)
— ^in reference to the Kremnitzer gold ducats, “ Yellow
is the colour that sirits the Jew best” (Russian). “ Yellow
is the dearest colour for the Jew” (German).

TWs profit-seeking, which the Jew held to be legiti-
mate, will account for his business principles and
practices, of which complaints were so frequently made.
In the first place, he paid no attention to the strict
delinutation of one calling or of one handicraft from
another, so universally insisted on by law and custom.
Again and agrin we hear the cry that Jews did not
content themselves with one kind of activity ; they did
whatever they could, and so disturbed the order of
things which the gild system wished to see maintained.
Their aim was to seize upon all commerce and all pro-
duction ; they had an overpowering desire to expand
in. every direction. “The Jews strive to destroy
the English merchants by drawing all trade towards
themselves,” is a further complaint of the Rev. John
Megalopolis in 1655.330 “The Jews are a subtil
people prying into all kinds of trade,” srid Sir Josiah
Child.331 And Gluckel von Hameln thus describes her
father’s business.: “He dealt in precious stones, and in
other'^things — ^for every Jew is a Jack-of-all-trades.”


GkOWTH QF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 135


Innumerable •rt'ere the_ occasions when the German
gilds complained of this Jewish ubiquitousness in trade,
which paid no heed to the demarcation of all ecohomic
activities into Strictly separate categories. In 1685 ,
the city authorities of Frankforf-on-the-Main were
loud in thdr .cry that Jews had a share in all kinds
of business^ — e.g., in linen and silk retailing, in cloth
and book selling.332 In the other Frankfort (on the
Oder) 333 Jews were blamed for selling foreign braid to
the! detriment of the gold-lace makers, and so forth.

Perhaps the reason for this tendency to universal trading
may be found in that a large number of miscellaneous
articles, all forfeited pledges, brought together by mere
chance, collected in the shops of Jews, and their sale
would naturally enough interfere, with the special busittess
of all manner of dealers. The very existence of these
second-hand shops — the prototype of the stores in modern
times^was a menace to the prevailing order of commerce
and industry. A vivid picture of such a collection of •
second-hand goods is given in an old Ratisbon song,
dating from the 15 th century,334 and the details could
not but have become more well-marked as time went on.

“‘No handicraft however mean,

But the Jew would damage it i* the extreme.

For if any one had need of raiment
To the Jew heM hie with payment ;

Whether 'twas silver or linen or tin,

Or aught his house was lacking in,

Th^e Jew was ready to serve his need,

With pledges he held--^right many indeed.

For stolen goods and robbers’ plunder
They and the Jew were seldom asunder.

Mantle, hose or damsel’s veil,

The Jew he had them all for sale.

To the craftsman, then„ ther^ came but feiV,

For all the world dealt with the Jew.'’


136 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


Here an interesting question presents itself. Is there
any connexion between the breach of gild regulations
and the stress laid on pure budness ends on the part
of the Jews, and their hostile attitude to mercantilism ?
Was it their aim to establish the principle that trade
should be untrammelled, regardless of the commercial
theory which guided the mercantilist States ? It looks
like it. “ Jewish trade,” was the term applied to the
commerce of Frankfort in the i8th century, because
it was mostly import trade, “ which gives useful employ-
ment to but few German hands and flourishes only
by reason of home consumption.” 335 And when in
the early 19 th century Germany was flooded with the
cheap products of England, which were sold for the
most part at auctions, Jews were held to be the mainstay
of this import trade. The Jew almost monopolized the
auctions. “ Since dealing in manufactured articles is
to a great extent in the hands of Jews, the commerce
of England is for the most part with them.” The
Jew had “his shop full of foreign hats, shoes, stock-
ings, leather gloves, lead and copper ware, lacquer
work, utensils, ready-made clothing of all sorts — all
brought over by English ships.” 336 It was the same
story in France. 337 Nor was this all. The Jews were
guilty of another deadly sin in the mercantilist calendar :
they imported raw materials.337*

We see, then, that the Jews, in following thdir business
interests, gave as little heed to the barriers between States
as to those between industries. Still less did they have
regard to the prevailing code of etiquette in any industry.
We, have already seen how custom-chasing was looked upon
in the early capitalistic age. Here the Jews were continual
offenders. Everywhere they sought out sellers or buyers,
instead of waiting for them in their shops, as commercial
custom prescribed. Of this we have abundant proof.


GROWTH OF CAPITALISTIC POTNT OF VIEW 137

A compldnt was lodged by the furriers of KSnigs-
berg 338 in 1703 against the Jews Hirsch and Moses,
who with their agents are always first in the field in
buying raw material and selling the ready-njade-furs,
whereby they (the supplicants) suffer much loss.” In
1685 the jewellers and goldsmiths of Frankfort had
a similar e3cperience.339 They were forced to buy
all the old gold and silver they needed from Jews, who,
by means of their numerous “spies,” snapped it away
from under the very noses of the' Christians. A few
years previously the whole of the trading body of
that town had protested against Jews “ spying out the
business of Christian merchants.” Earlier still, in 1 647,
the tailors of Frankfort petitioned 34 ° that the Jews
should be forbidden to engage in the sale of new cloth-
ing. “A source of bitter weeping it is, that the Jews
may freely wander up and down the streets, laden
with all .manner of goods and cloth, like so many
camels and asses, running to meet every newcomer to
Frankfort, be he of high or low degree, and offering
to sell him what he wants ; and so deprive us of our
daily bread.” 34 o Still earlier even than this, in 1635,
was the petition of the silk merchants, who bemoaned
the fact that the Jews “ wait about in the city outside the
bounds of the Jewish quarter, in inns and wherever
opportunity offers; they run through many a street,
both openly and in secret, to meet the soldiers and their
officers, when these come to town. They have arranged
with certain master-tailors to give them facilities for
exhibiting their wares at their shops when troops march
past,” 340

In 1672 a complaint is heard from Brandenburg. 34 i
“ Jews go about as ' chapmen among the viU^es and
‘in the towns and force their wares on people.” A similar
story comes from Frankfort-on-the-Oder, 34 ^ wherein


138 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

the details are fuller. Jews run after custotners — ^the
travellers to their hotels, the nobility to their castles and
the students to their lodgings. And in Nikolsburg, in
Austria, we are told 342 that “ the Jews have drawn
to themselves all the trade, all the money, all, the
goods. They wait orjtside the city, try to strike up
an acquaintance with travellers while they are yet on
the road, and endeavour to take away their custom
from Christian citizens.”

How the Jews were ever on the look-out for new
customers is described by a well-informed writer of
the early 19 th century.343 It was a practice vnth them,
he says, “ to pay frequent visits to all and sundry places
of public resort where, by reading the many news-sheets,
they sought to obtain knowledge of possibilities for doing
business, and especially of noting what strangers were
expected to arrive ; and by listening to every conversa-
tion, to find out whose houses were in danger ih
order to make bargains or contracts vtith them.”

The streets in which the Jemsh old do* men lived
were the scenes of similar activities, the end in view
always being the same. In fact, the dealers sometimes
seized the passer-by by the arm and tried tO’ force him
to make purchases. This method of carrying on business
is not unknown in our modern cities ; it was known
in the Paris of the 1 8 th centiiry, where it was assodated
vtith' the fripiers, the old do’ dealers, who, as we are
informed, 344 were for the most part Jews. One
description of such a scene is too good not to be
quoted.34S “ The touts of these disorderly shops
call to you undvilly enough ; and when one of them
has invited you, all- the other shopkeepers on your road
repeat the deafening invitation. The wife, the daughter,
'the servant, the dog, all howl in your ears. . . . Some-
titnes these fdlows seize an honest man by the arm,


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC.POINT OF VIE W 139

or by his shoulder, and force him to entec in spite
of himself ; they make a pastime of. this unseemly
game. ...”

We hear the same tale from a traveller who journeyed
in .Western Germany about that time. “ To walk in
the streets of those places where there are many Jews
has become a nuisance. You are badgered by them every
minute and at every turn. You are constantly being
asked, Can I sell you anything? Won’t you buy
this, that or the other ? ” 346

Or they turn into wandering traders in» order to
sweep in custom. “ The Jew thinks nothing of turning
the seats in the porches into a shop counter, often extend-
ing them by means of planks ; he places a form or
table against the wall of any house he can get at, or
even makes the front passage into a shop ; or, he hires
•a cart wWch becomes his moving shop, and often
enough he has the bad manners to pull up in front of
a shop which sells the same wares as he.” 347

“ Get hold of the customers ” — that was ^ the end
and aim. Is it not the guiding principle of the big
industries of to-day? Is not the splendid organization
of a concern like the Allgemeine Elektricitats-Gesell-
sdiaft, for example, directed to the same object ?

The policy was first systemized when advertising
was resorted to. The “deafening invitation” which,
as we have just noted, came from the small fripier^
is now made by the million-voiced advertisements of our
business life. If the Jews are to be considered -the
originators of the system of "getting hold of the
customers,” their claim to be the fathers of modern
advertising is equally well established. I am, however,
unable to adduce conclusive evidence for this. What-
IS- needed is a careful study of the files of the earliest
newspapers, in order to discover the names of the people .


140 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

who advertised. As a matter of fact, the whole subject
of advertising has as yet beefi dealt with but scantily.
The only branch which has received adequate attention
is the history of business announcements. Nevertheless,
I am able to give one or two instances which show
the connexion of Jews with the practice of advertising.

The very earliest advertisement with which I am ac-
quainted is to be found in No. 63 of the Vossische
Zeitung, of May 28, 1711, whick is to this effect:
“ This is to inform all and sundry that a Dutch (Jewish ?)
merchant has arrived at Mr. Boltzen’s in the Jews’ Street,
with all kinds of tea of the finest quality, to be sold
cheap. Any one who may care to buy should come early,
as the visitor will not stay for more than eight days.”

The first known advertisement in the text of the paper
dates from 1753, and hails from Holland. The adver-
tiser was an eye-specialist of the name of Laazer. 348
A very old advertisement in the United States — ^whether
the oldest I cannot say — appeared on August 17, 1761,
in the New York Mercury, as follows 349 : — “ To be
sold by Hayman Levy, in Bayard Street, Camp Equip-
ages of all sorts, best soldiers’ English shoes . . . and
everything that goes to make up the pomp and circum-
stance of glorious war.”

Finally, the Jews are the founders of the modern
Press, i.e., the machinery for advertising, more especially
of the cheap newspapers.3So Polydore Millaud, who
established the Petit Journal, was the -fether of the “ half-
penny Press.”

- But to obtain likely addresses, to intercept travellers
on their .way, to sing the praises of your wares— r-that
Was only one ade of the game of catching customers.
It was supplemented by another, which consisted in so
decking-out the goods for sale as to attract people. In*
this art the Jews were great adepts. Nay more, there is


growth OF CAPITAUSTIC POINT OF VIEW 141

sufficient evidence that they were the first to stand up
for the general prindple, that it is the right (and the
duty) of every trader to carry on his business in such
a way as will obtdn for him as much of the available
custom as possible, or by creating new demands, will
increase the circle of buyers.

Now in a community where quality was regulated, the
only effective means of achieving this end was price-
cutting. We shall therefore not be surprised to find
the Jews avmling themselves of this weapon, and we
cliall see that it was just this that made them so dis-
1i'1i[pd among Christian traders, whose economic outlook
was all for maintaining prices. The Jew undersells ; the
Jew spoils prices ; the Jew tries to attract customers
by low prices — ^that was the burden of the complaints
heard in the 17th and i8th centuries wherever Jews did
business.

Our pages would be overloaded did we attempt to cite
all the proofs on this point. A few, therefore, will have
to suffice.

First for England where, in 1753, the storm burst
forth against the Jews on the passing of the Naturaliza-
tion Bill. One of the principal fears was that if they
became recognized citizens, they would oust the natives
from their means of livelihood by underselHng thera. 3 Si

Next for 'France. “The stuffs . . which the Jews
bring to the fmrs ... are worth more at the price at
which they sell them than those in the traders’ shops,”
is the reply 35^ of the Intendant of Languedoc to the
plaints of the merchants of Montpellier (May 31, 1740).
The merchants of Nantes 3 S 3 were of opinion that
the public, which dealt with Jews under the impression
that they were making a good bargain, were generally
duped. At. the same time, they admit that prices
at Jewish shops are lower than elsewhere. The same


142 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

admission is made by the Paris traders : the Jews sell’
even more cheaply than the factories .354 Concernifig
a Fiirth Jew, of the name of Abraham Oulman^sss
the bronze-dealers of Paris reported that “he sells the
same bronzes below the price for wMch they are sold
in this country,” In Lyons the master silk-weavers
passed a resolution (October 22, 1760) in which they
ascribed the bad times to the influence of the Jews, who
had cut prices, and thereby made themselves masters of
the silk industry in all the provinces. 3 S 6

The Swedish Parliament in 1815 debated the question
whether the Je^ys should be allowed entire liberty of trade,
and one of the chief reasons which prevailed against the
motion was that Jews lowered prices .357

From Poland the same strains reach us, Jews tell
Christian traders that if they (the latter) sold their
goods as cheaply as the Jews, they too would attract

customers, 3 S 8

It is no different in Germany. From Brandenburg
(1672)^359 from Frankfort (17th century), 36 o from
Magdeburg (1710) 361 the old story is repeated.
A Wallachian traveller in Germany 362 about the
same time reports the ubiquity of this accusation. The
General Prussian Edict of 1750 takes cognizance of it.
“ The merchants of our towns' . . . complain . . . that
the Jewish traders who sell the same goods do them
great harm, because they sell at a lower price.” Right
up to the 19th century it is still met with. In the
‘Supplication of the Augsburg wholesale merchants against
the admission of the Jews 3^3 (1803) we may read that
“the Jews understand how to derive • advantages from
the general depression of trade. They obtain goods
from people who need money badly at shameful prices,
and then spoil the market by selling them at a cheaper
rate.”


GROWTH. OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW 143

In’ many branches of industry Christian manufacturers
and merchants even to-day regard the cutting of prices
by Jews as a serious endangering of their trade.' That
this is an open secret and often enough discussed, is well
known. I hope to touch upon the matter again in' due
course.

One more instance from the history of Finance, as
showing that the Jews had the reputation of making
lower terms. When the Austrian Government early in
the 1 8th century determined on raising another loan,
as usual, in Holland, an order was issued (December' 9 ,
1701 ) to Baron Pechmann, who was negotiating the
matter, to make private enquiries whether, ia view of
the fact that the Hungarian Copper Mines were being
pledged to guarantee the loan, a greater sum might not
be raised. More especially was he to communicate with
the Portuguese Jews in Holland, tince the other subjects
of the United Provinces asked for an additional guarantee
beside the general one.364 In a report of the Court
Chancery of Vienna (May 12 , 1762 ) the view is ex-
pressed that “.it is advisable to come to terms with the
Jews in reference to contracts for the army . , . seeing
that they are prepared to quote lower prices than others.”

Here, then, was a problem for all the wiseacres to put
their heads together and try to solve. They did, asking
each other again and again, at their work and in their
shops, on Sunday afternoons in their walks outside the
city rampart, and in the evenings at the social pint of
beer : How is it possible ? How on earth is it done ?
How can the Jew carry through his “dirty trick” of
underselling ? What was the reason for it ?

The answer differed in accordance with the capacity
and, the prejudice of each enquirer. And so the number-
less explanations on record cannot be accepted without
tMting their value ; unlike the assertion that Jews lowered


144 the jews ahb, modern capitalism

prices, which, in view of its unanimity, there is no reason
to doubt. In any case, for the present only those
opinions will be of interest to us which give indication
of a special way of carrying on business, or of a special
commercial morality.

The commonest explanation is that of dishonesty, Jind
the conclusion was arrived at in some such way as this.
Seeing that the Jews have the same expenses, seeing that
the cost of production is also the same, if the price is
below the current one, everything is not quite above-
board. The Jews must have obtained possession of their
wares by dishonest means. They were doubtless stolen
goods. The bad reputation of the Jews generally must
have given probability to this explanation, and the low
prices must have lent support to the accusation levelled
against them that they were receivers.

I have no ‘ intention of citing instances where this line
of argument is taken, for in reality it is the least inter-
esting of any. In many cases, no doubt, it was correct.
But if that were the only reason forthconung to account
for low prices among Jewish traders, there would be no
need to mention the matter at all, for then it would not
have the significance which it actually possesses.

As a matter of fact, even the extremists among gild
members could not but cast about for other causes to
account for the underselling of Jewish traders, and they
found them dose at hand, not in actual breach of the
law, but in practices that were not all they shbuld be.
And what were these ? That the Jews dealt in pro-
hibited artides (contraband of war, etc.) ; in lapsed
pledges ; in goods that had been confiscated {e.g.^ by
customs . officials) ; in goods that had been bought for
a mere song from the owners, who were deep in debt
and whose necessity, therefore, was great, 36 s or from'
those who needed money badly ; 366 Jn goods,


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 145


bought for next to notHng at auctions ; in bankrupt
stoc^ ; 367 in goods the quality of wluch was not up
to the standard of the ordinances of the industrial
code ; 3^9 or, finally, that the Jew cut prices with the
intention of going into bankruptcy himself.368

To what extent instances such as these — “ the miserable
methods of the Jews ” as they were termed by the traders
of Metz 370 — were general or only sporadic, it is diffi-
cult to say. Nor does it much matter for our purpose.
As to their probability, it is hardly likely that they were
all pure inventions. The important thing to note, how-
ever, is that shady practices such as those enumerated
were laid to the Jews’ door. And even if only a minute
proportion were in accordance with actual fact,- that
would be enough to make them symptomatic, and- they
would be very useful as supporting the result obtained
in other ways. I shall return to this question later.
Here we will continue the catalogue of reasons which
wer 6 urged in explanation of the Jews’ lower prices;

Side by side with those already mentioned was the
accusation that the commodities sold by the Jews were
of an inferior quality. So frequently is this statement
met with that its correctness can hardly be doubted. An
official report from Magdeburg, a petition from Branden-
burg, a complaint from Frankfort 37 1 — all harp on
this same string. And the Traders^ Lexicon^ to
wluch I have already more than once referred as a re-
liable authority, states that Jews sold inferior goods
“which they know how to polish up, to colour anew,,
to show off at their best, to provide with a fresh cover,
smell and taste that even the greatest connmsseur is often
takeh iu.”

This is repeated almost verbally in the Report of
the merchants of Nantes, with which we are by this
time so well acquainted. The goods of the Jews are

II


146 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

really dear, despite th^ cheapness. For they sell things
that are out of fasluon or that rannot be used any
longer. • Silk stockings they re-dye, pass them through
a calender, and then sell them as new. But they
cannot be worn more than once. The silk weavers of
Lyons tell the same tale ; 372 the Jews have ruined the
»lk industry because, in order to be able to sell at low
prices, they order goods of second-rate quality only. So,
too, the Governor of Bohemia in 1 705 : 373 “ The

Jews have got hold of all manual occupations and all
commerce, but as for the most part they make only poor
stuff, there is no chance for a profitable export trade to
spring up.” The opinion of Wegelin in the Swedish
Parliament (1815), likewise referred to already, is only
in accord with the preceding. “ It is true,” he said,
“ that the Jews alone engaged in calico-printing, but they
have comjpletely spoiled this branch of industry because of
their low quality goods — ^the so called “ Jews’ Calico.”

• This complaint, which started in the early captalistic
period, has not yet ceased. The cry of the Christian
manufacturers that the Jews cut prices has been
followed by the corollary that, in order to maintain
low prices at all costs, Jews lowered the quality of
goods.

Summing up all the facts adduced, we shall per-
ceive that the Jews originated the principle of sub-
stitution.

What was called inferior quality in the wares of the
Jews was not in reality so. It was not as if the articles
were of the same sort as those of other traders, except
that they were worse in quality. It was rather that they
were new artides, intended for similar use as the old, but
made of a cheaper material, or by new processes which
lessened the cost of production. In other words, the.
principle of substitution was brought into play, and Jews


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 14;


may thus be regarded as the pioneers in its application.
The most frequent cases occurred in textile fabrics ; but
other instances are also on record — for example, substi-
tutes for coffee. In one sense, too, dyeing must be
mentioned in this connexion. Jewish influence aided its
^owth. Originally, the inventors of artificial alizarine
used expensive chemicals to mix with their red colouring
matter ; the Jews introduced cheaper materials, and thus
gave an impetus to the dyeing industry.

There is yet one other, though less frequent, accusation
levelled against the Jews. It was that the Jews could
sell more cheaply than Christians because they gave less
weight or short measure.374 They were taunted with this
in Avignon, where woollen articles were mentioned, and
in the case of German Jews an actual illustration is given.
“ The Jew is on the look-out for the least advantage. If
he measured 10 ells there were snly 9^. The Christian
(customer) is aware of this, but he says to himself, ‘ Jews’
measure is short, ten ells are never quite ten, but then the
Jew sells cheap.’ ” 375

In aU this the point for us to discover is whether, and if
so to what extent, the different courses, which were alleged
to have been taken by the Jevdsh traders in order to reduce
prices, may be traced to some general business principle
characteristic of the Jews. To my mind, the whole case
<an be summed up by saying that the Jew to a certain
extent held that in business the means justified the end.
His consideration for the other traders and his respect for
l^al enactments and social demands were not very great,
while on the other hand, the idea of value in exchange in
relation to goods, and the idea that all business activity
had reference to wealth and to that only — these became
keen. What I have elsewhere described as the inherent
tendency in capitalism to obtain profit, regardless of all
else, is here seen in its early ongin.


148 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

But we have not yet done with, the inventory of
methods adopted by Jews to lower prices. We now turn
to those which were of equal fundamental importance with
the others already mentioned, but wluch differed from them
materially. While the first brought about only apparent
reductions, or actual reductions at other people’s expense,
these produced lower prices really and absolutely. What
were they ? Innovations which decreased the total cost
of production in some way or other. Either the producer
or the dealer was content with less for himself, or the
actual expenses of production were reduced in that wages
were lowered or the manufacturing and distributing pro-
cesses made more effident.

That all these means of cheapening commodities were
adopted by Jews, and by them first, is amply evidenced by
records in our possession.

First, the Jew could sell more cheaply because he was
satisfied with less than the Christian trader. Unprejudiced
observers remarked this fact on many occasions, and even
the competitors of the Jews admitted its truth. Let us
once again quote the Magdeburg official report. The Jews
sell cheaply, “ whereby the merchants must suffer loss.
For they need more than the Jew, and, therefore,
must carry on their business in accordance with their
requirements.” 376 in another document it is also
stated that “ the Jew is satisfied with a smaller profit than
the Christian.” 377 And what did the Polish Jews tell
the Christian PoIm ? 378 That if they (the Poles) did
not live so extravagantly, they wotild be able to sell their
goods at the same prices as the Jews. A keen-eyed
traveller in Germany towards the end of the 1 8 ^h century
came to the same conclusion. “ The reason for t^e com-
plaint (that Jews sell cheaply) is apparent : it lies 'in the
extravagant pride of the haughty shopkeeper, who in his
dealings requires so much for mere show, that he cannot


GRO WTH' OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE W 149


possibly charge low prices. The Jew, therefore, deserves
the gratitxide of the public, to whom he brings gain by his
frugal habits, and forces the shopkeeper with his large
expenditure either to be more economical, or to go to the
wdl.” 379 The Report of the Vienna Court Chancery
(May 12, 1762) was of the same opinion. The Jews can
deliver at a lower rate than the Christians “ because they
are more thrifty and live more cheaply.” The tale was
repeated in a Hungarian document of January 9, 1756,
wherein the proposed reduction by Joseph II of Jewish
spirit-licences was discussed. It was there pointed out 380
that Jews were able to pay more for their licences because
of their cheap and poor living.

No less explicit on the point is Sir Josiah Child for the
England of his age. “They are a penurious people,
living miserably,” he says, 38i “ and therefore can, and
do afford to trade for less profit than the English.” By
the middle of the 1 8th century this belief was still current,
for the cry went up that the Jews by reason of their
extreme frugality were able to undersell the natives. 38 z
The identical view prevailed in France. “ It is my firm
belief,” stid the Intendant of Languedoc ,383 in reply
to the chronic complaints of the traders of Montpellier,
“ that Jewish commerce . . . does less harm to the mer-
chants of Montpellier than their own lack of attention to
the reqmrements of the pubUc, and their rigid determina-
tion to make as large profits as they can.”

But this is not all. There were people who asserted —
and they must have been gifted with no little insight —
that the Jews had discovered yet another trick, by means
of which they succeeded in obtaining as great, or even
greater, profits than their Christian neighbours despite
their comparatively low prices — they increased their turn-
over. As late as the early part of the 19th century this
was regarded as a specifically “Jewish practice ”384 —


ISO THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

“ small profits with a frequent turnover of your capital
pay incomparably better than big profits and a slow turn-
over.” This is no isolated opinion ; it occurs very fre-
quently indeed. 38 s

Small profits, quick returns — obviously this was a break-
ing away from the preconceived idea of an economic
organization of society, where one of the cardinal doc-
trines was to produce for subsistence only. And the Jews
were the fathers of this new business-principle. Profit
was considered as something fixed by tradition ; hence-
forward it was deternuned by each individual trader. That
was the great novelty, and again it emanated from Jews.
It was a Jemsh practice to settle the rate of profit as each
trader thought fit ; it was a Jewish practice to decide
whether to sell at a profit at all, or for a time to do
business without making profits in order to earn more

afterwards.386

Lastly, we have still to mention the taunt levelled
against Jews, that they sought to reduce the cost of pro-
duction, either by employing the cheapest labour, or by
utilizing more economical methods.

With regard to the first, numerous plaints abound.
The woollen manufacturers of Avignon ,387 the mer-
chants of Montpellier, 388 the civic authorities of
Frankfort-on-the-Oder 389 and the Tailors’ Craft of
the other Frankfort are a few cases in point. But none
of these disaffected people could realize that the Jews
.were the earliest undertakers in industries with capitalistic
organizations, and, consequently, utilized new forms of
production, just as they had utilized them in commerce.

And here we must not pass over another characteristic
of Jewish business methods, one, however, which is not
mentioned in the literature of the early capitalistic period,
probably because it was developed at a later date. I refer
to the conscious endeavour of attracting new customers by


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIEW x^x

some device or other — whether it wsis thepladng of goods
for sale in. a new juxtaposition, or a new system of pay-
ment, or a new combination of departments, or the organi-
zation of some new service. It would be a most fascinating
study to compile a list of all the inventions (exclusive, of
course, of tecWcal inventions) which trade and commerce
owe to the Jews. Let me refer to a few, about which we
are tolerably certain that they are of Jewish origin. I say
nothing as to whether Jews were merely the first to apply
them, or whether they were actually created by Jews.

First in order I would mention the trade in old and
damaged goods, the trade in remnants and rubbish —
the Jews were able “ here and there to maintain them-
selves and make a profit out of the commonest articles,
which before had no value whatever, such as rags,
rabbit-skins and gall-nuts.” 39° In short, we may
term the Jews the originators of the waste-product
business. Thus, in the i8th century in Berlin, Jews
were the first feather-cleaners, the first vermin-killers
and the inventors of the so-called- “ white beer.” 39^^

To what extent the general store owes its existence
to the Jew it is impossible to say. Anyhow, the- Jews,
in that they held pledges, were the first in whose shops
might be found a conglomeration of wares. And is
it not one of the distinguishing marks of a modern
store to have for sale articles of various kinds, intended
for various uses ? The result is that the owner of the
store is but little concerned with what he sells, so
long as he does sell. His aim is to do business, and
this policy is in acbordance with the Jewish spirit.
But apart firohi that, it is well-known that to-day
stores in the United States 39* and in Germany 393
are for the most part in the hands of Jews.

An innovation of no little importance in the orgamxa-
tion of retail trading at the time of its introduction


152 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

was the system of payment by instalments when goods
to a large amount or very costly goods were sold.
In Germany, at any rate, it is possible to say "mth
tolerable certainty, that in this, too, Jews were pioneers.
“ There is a class of shopkeeper among Jews,” we
may read in an early 19th-century writer, “ indispensable
to the ordinary man, and of exceeding great benefit
to trade. They are the people who sell clothes or
material for clothes to the ordinary customer, and
receive payment for it in small instalments.” 394

Of Jevdsh origin also are a number of innovations
in the catering business. Thus, the first coffee-house
in England (perhaps the first in the world) was opened
in Oxford in 1650, or 1651, by a Jew of the name
of Jacobs. 39 S It was not until 1652 that London
obtained its first coffee-house. And to come to a later
period, everybody knows that a new era dawned in
catering when Kempinsky * introduced the standard-
ization of consumption and of prices as the guiding
principles of the business.

In all these instances it is not so much the Inno-
yations themselves that interest us, as the tendency to
which they bear witness — that a new business ideal had
come into existence : the adoption of new tricks.
Hence my treatment of this subject in the present
chapter, which deals •vtith the Jewish spirit, Jewish
commercial morality and the specifically Jewish economic
outlook.

Reviewing the ground we have traversed, we see
clearly the strong contrast between the Jewish and the
non-Jewish outlooks in the early capitalistic period.
Tradition, the subsistence ideal, the overpowering in-
fluence of status — these were the fundamentals of the
latter. And the former — ^wherein lay its novelty ?

[* Kempinsky is the Lyons of Berlin.]


GRO WTH OF CAPITALISTIC POINT OF VIE JV 153'

How may it be characterized ? I believe one all-
comprehensive word will serve our purpose, and that
word is “ modern.” The Jewish outlook was the
“modern” outlook; the Jew was actuated in' his
economic activities in the same way as the modern
man. Look through the catalogue of “ sins ” laid at
the door of the Jews in the 17th and i8th centuries,
and you will find nothing in it that the trader' of
to-day does not regard as right and proper, nothing'
that is not taken as a matter of course in every
business. Throughout the centuries the Jews cham-
pioned the cause of individual liberty in economic
activities against the dominating views of the time.
The individual was not to be hampered by regulations
of any sort, neither as to the extent of his production
nor as to the strict division between one calling and
another : he was to be allowed to carve out a position
for himself at will, and be able to defend it against
all comers. He should have the right to push forward
at the expense of others, if he were so able ; and the
weapons in the struggle were to be cleverness, astute-
ness, artfulness ; in econonuc competition there should
be no other consideration but that of overstepping the
law; finally, all economic activities should be regulated
by the individual alone in the way he thinks best to
obtain the most efficient results. In other words, the
idea of free-trade and of free competition was here to
the fore ; the idea of economic rationalism ; in short,
the modern economic outlook, in the shaping of which
Jews' have had a great, if not a decisive influence.
And why ? It was they who introduced the new ideas
into a world organized on a totally different basis.

Here a pertinent question suggests itself. How are
. we to expljun that even before the era of modern
capitalism, Jews showed a capacity for adopting its


154 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


principles ? The question must be expanded into a
much larger one. What was it that enabled the Jew
to exercise so decisive an influence in the process that
made modern economic life what it is, an influence
such as we have observed in the foregoing enquiry?


PART II


THE APTITUDE OF THE JEWS FOR
MODERN CAPITALISM


CHAPTER VIII


THE PROBLEM

Before us lies a great problem. We are to explain
why the Jews .played just the part' they did in the
economic life of the last two or three centuries. That
this is a problem will be admitted with but few exceptions
by all. There are a few faddists who deny that the Jews
occupied any special position in modern economic life,
asserting as they do that there are no Jews. These will,
object. Then, too, there is that other small category of
people who hold that the Jews were economically of such
slight import that they were without any influence
whatever on modern economic life. But we shall pay
little heed to either class in our considerations, which
are for all those who think with me that the Jews'
had a decisive influence on the structure of modern
economic life.

I have spoken of the aptitude of the Jews for modern
capitalism. . If our researches are to be fruitful of results
we shall have |to make two things absolutely clear :
(i) their aptitudd — ^for what ? and (2) their aptitude —
how developed ?

Their aptitude for what? For everything which in
the first part of the book we have seen them striving to
achieve — founding and promoting international trade,
modern finance, the Stock Exchange and the com-
merdajization generally of all economic activities,;
supporting unrestricted intercourse and free competition,


158 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


and infusing the modern spirit into all economic life.
Now in my superscription of this part of our subject all
these activities are summed up in the word “ capitalism.”
In a special chapter (the ninth) we shall show that all the
’single facts that have been mentioned hang together,
and that they are kept together by means of capitalistic
organization. The essentials of the latter, at least in
their outline, vdll therefore also have to be dealt with,
in order to demonstrate the special functions of the
individual in the capitalistic system. This method will
give the death-blow to such vague conceptions, usually
met with in connexion with the Jewish problem, as
“ economic capacity,” “ aptitude for commerce and
haggling” or other equally dilettante phrases, which
have already done too much mischief.

As for the second point, how, by what means, is it
possible to achieve any result ? If any one rescues a
drowning man, it may be that it was because he
happened to be standing at the water’s edge, just where
a boat was tied, or on a bridge, where a life-belt was
ready to hand. In a word, his accidental presence in
a particular spot made it possible for him to do the deed,
by rowing out in the boat to the man in danger, or by
throwing the life-belt to him. Or he may have done it
because he was the only one among the crowd on the
shore who had the courage to jump into the water, swim
out to the sinking man and bring him safely to land.
In the first case we might term the circunistances
“ objective,” in the second “ subjective.” The same
distinction can be applied to the Jews in considering
their aptitude for capitalism : it may be due to objectivfc
or to subjective drcumstances.

My immediate business will be to deal with the first
set of causes, and for many reasons. To begin mth,
every explanation that is puti forward must be closely


THE PROBLEM


IS9

scrutinized, in order to make sure that no unproved
hypothesis is its basis, and that what has to be proved is
not a dogma. Dangerous in most cases, it is particularly
so in the problem before us, in which racial and religious
prejudices may work havoc, as, indeed, they have done
in the writings of the great majority of my precursors
on this question. I shall do my utmost to avoid their
error in this respect, and shall be at great pains to see
to it that my considerations are above criticism. My
aim is to discover the play of cause and effect as it really
was, without any preconceived idea influencing my
reasoning, and I shall adduce my proofs in such a way,
that they may be easily followed by all — ^by the assimila-
tionist Jew no less than by the Nationalist ; by him
who pins his faith to the influence of race as by the
warmest supporter of the doctrine of environment ; by
the anti-Semite as by his opponent. Hence my starting-
point will always have to be from i^cts admitted on all
hands. That will preclude any appeal to “ special race
characteristics” or arguments of that ilk.

Any one who does not admit that the Jews have special
gifts may demand that the part played by this people
in modern economic life should be explained without
any reference to national peculiarities, but rather from
the external drcumstances in which Jews were placed
by the accident of lustory. I shall endeavour to satisff
this demand in the tenth chapter.

Finally,- if it becomes apparent that the contribution
of the Jews to modern economic life cannot be entirely
explained by the conditions of their historic rituation,
then will be the time for looking to subjective causes,
and for conridering the Jews* special characteristics.
This sh^' be the purpose of the twelfth chapter.


CHAPTER IX


WHAT IS A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER?

Capitalism 396 is the name given to that economic
organization wherein regularly two distinct social groups
co-operate — ^the owners of the means of production,
who at the same time do the work of managing and
directing, and the great body of workers who possess
nothing but their labour. The co-operation is such,
that the representatives of capital are the subjective
agents, that is, they decide as to the “how” and the
“ how much ” in the process of production, and they
undertake all risks.

Now what are the mainsprings of the whole system ?
The first, and perhaps the chiefest, is the pursuit of gain
or profit. This being the case, there is a tendency
for undertakings to grow bigger and bigger. Arising
from that, all economic activities are strictly logical.
Whereas in the pre-capitalistic period quieta non movere
was the watchword and Tradition the guiding star, now
it is constant movement. 1 characterize the whole as
“economic rationalism,” and this I would term the
second mainspring of the capitalistic system.

Economic rationalism expresses itself in three Ways,
(i) There is a flan, in accordance with which all things
are ordered aright. And the plan covers activities in the
distant future, (z) Efficiency is the test applied in the
choice of ill the means of production. (3) Seeing that
the “cash nexus” r^ulates all economic activity, and

X6o


WHAT IS A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER? i6i

that everywhere and always a surplus is sought for,
exact calculations become necessary in every under-
taldng.

Everybody knows that a modern business is not
merely, say, the production of rails or cotton or electric
motors, or the transport of stones or of people. Every-
body knows that these are but parts in the organization
of the whole. And the characteristics of the under-
taker are not that he arranges for the carrying out of the
processes named. They are to be found elsewhere,
and for the present we may put it roughly that they
are . a constant buying and selling of the means of
production, of labour or of commodities. To var;^
the phrase somewhat, the undertaker makes contracts
concerning exchanges, wherein money is the measure
of value.

When do we speak of having accomplished a successful
piece of business .f Surely when the contract-making
has ended well. But what is meant precisely by
“ well ” ? It certainly has no reference to the quality
or to the quantity of the goods or services given or
received ; it refers solely and only to the return of the
sum of • mcmey expended, and to a surplus over and
above it (profit). It is the aim of the undertaker so
to manipulate the factors over which he has control as to
bring about this surplus.

Our next step must be to consider what functions the
capitalistic undertaker (the subjective economic factor)
has in the sphere of capitalism, seeing that our purpose
is to show the capacity of the Jews in this direction.
We shall try to discover what special skill is necessary
in order to be successful in the competitive strug g le
tn a word, we shall seek for the type.

. To my mind, the best picture of the modern capitalistic
undertaker is that which paints him as the comlnnation of


i 62 the JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

»

two radically different natures in one person. ■ Like
Faust, he ijaay say that two souls dwell mthin his
breast ; unlike Faust’s, however, the two souls do not
wish to be separated, but rather, on the contrary, desire
to work harmoniously together. What are these two
natures? The one is the undertaker (not in the more
limited sense of capitalistic undertaker, but quite
generally), and the other is the trader.

By the undertaker I mean a man who has an object
in view to which he devotes his life, an object which
requires the co-operation of others for its achievement,
sedng that its realization is in the world of men. The
undditaker must thus be diflFerentiated from the artist
or the prophet. Like them he has a mission; unlike
them he feels that he must bring it to realization. He
is a man, therefore, who peers into the distant future,
whose every action is planned and done only in so far
as it will help the great whole. As an instance of an
undertaker in this (non-capitalistic) sense we may
mention an African or a North Pole explorer. . The
undertaker becomes a capitalistic imdertaker when he
combines his original activities with those of the trader.

And what is a ixader? A man whose whole being
is set upon doing profitable business ; who appraises all
activities and all conditions with a view to' their money
value, who turns everything into its gold equivalent.
The world to such a man is one great market-place,
■vtith its supply and demand, its conjunctures— good and
its, profits and losses. The constant question
on his Ups is, “What does it cost? What can I
make out of it ? ” His last question would in all
probabiUty be, “ What is the price of the univerae ? ”
The circle of his thoughts is circumscribed by one
piece 'of business, to the successful issue of which
he devotes all his energies.


WHAT /S A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER? 163

In .the combination I have endeavoured to sketch,
• the undertaker is the constant factor, the trader the
variant one.

Constant the undertaker must be, for, haying set his
heart upon some far-distant goal, he is of necessity bound
to follow some plan in order to reach it. Change in his
policy is contrary to his nature. Constancy is the basis
of his character. But the trader is changeable, for his
conduct wavers with the conditions of the market. He
must be able to vary his policy and his aim from one
moment to another if the prevailing conjuncture so
demands it “ Busy-ness ” marks him out above all else.

This theory of the two souls in one body is intended
to clarify our conception of the capitalistic undertaker.
But we must analyse the conception still further, this
time into its actud component parts.

In the undertaker I perceive the following four
types : —

(1) The Inventor — not merely in the technical sense,
but in that of the organizer intr^ucing new forms which
bring greater economies into production, or transport, or
marketing.

(2) The Discoverer — of new means of selling his ctan-
modities, either ipten sively or extensivel y. If he finds a
new sphere for his activities — ^let m say he sells bathing-
drawers to Eskimos, or gramophones to negroes— we
have a case of extensive discovery ; if he creates new
demands in markets where he already has a footing, we
may speak of intensive discovery.

(3) The Conqueror. An undertaker of the right kind
is always a conqueror, with the determination and will-
power to overcome all the difficulties that beset his path.
He must also be able to risk much, to stake Ms all (thiu;
is. to say, his fortune, his good name, even his life), if
need be, to aclueve great results for his undertaking. It


164 the jews and modern capitalism

may be the adoption of new methods in manufacture, the
extension of his business though his credit is unstable,
and so on.

(4) The Organizer. Above all else the undertaker
must be an organizer; i.e.^ he must be able so to dispose
of large numbers of individuals as to bring about the
most successful result ; must be able to fit the round
man into the round hole and the square man into the
square ; must be able to give a man just the job for
which he is best equipped, so as to obtain the maximum
of efficiency. To do this satisfactorily demands many
gifts and much skill. For example, the organizer must
be able to tell at a glance what a man can do best, and
which man among many will best suit his purpose. He
must be able to let others do his work — f.f., to place in
positions of trust such persons as will be able to relieve
him of responsibility. Finally, he must be able to see to
it that the hmnan factors in fhe work of production are
sufficient for the purpose, both quantitatively and qualita-
tively, and that their relationship to each other is har-
monious. In short, the management of his business must
be the most efficient possible.

Now business organization means a good deal more
than the skilful choice of men and methods ; it means
taldng into consideration also geographical, ethnological
and accidental circumstances of all sorts. Ijet me iUus-
trate my point The Westinghouse Electric Company
is one of the best organized concerns in the United
States. When the Company decided to capture the
English market it set up a branch in this country, the
organization of which was modelled exactly on that of
the parent concern. After a few years, what was the
result,? The financial break-up of the English branch,
chiefly because sufficient allowance had not been made
for the difference in EngUsh conditions.


WHAT IS A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER? 165

This leads us to the acti\dties of the trader. A trader
has no definite calling ; he has only certain well-defined
functions in the body economic. But they are of a very
varied kind. For example : to provision ships and
supply them with men and ammunition, to conquer
wild lands in distant parts, to drive the natives from
hearth and home and seize their goods and chattels, to
load the ships with these latter and bring them home
in order to sell them at public auctions to the highest
bidder — all "this is a form of trading.

Or, it may be a different form — as when a dealer obtains
a pair of old trousers from a needy man of fashion, to
whose house he comes in vain five times in succession, and
then palms those same trousers off on a stupid yokel.

Or, again, it may take the form of arbitr^e dealing on
the Stock Exchange.

Clearly there are differences in these instances, as there
were between trading in modern and in mediaeval times.
In the pre-capitalistic period, to trade meant to trade on
a big scale, as the “ royal merchants ’* did in the Italian
and German cities, and the trader had to be an undertaker
(in the general, and not merely in the capitalistic sense).
“Each (of the citizens of Genoa) has a tower in his
house ; if civil war breaks out, the battlements of these
towers are the scenes of conflict. They are masters of
the sea ; they build them sWps, called galleys, and roam
for plunder in the most distant parts, bringing the spoil
back to Genoa. With Pisa they live in continual enmity.”
“ Royal merchants” these, if you like ; but not traders in
my sense.

I regard thos<f as traders who set out with the intention
of doing good business ; who combine within themselves
two activities— calculation and negotiation. In a word,
the trader must be (1) a speculating calculator, and (2) a
business man, a negotiator.


i66 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

As a speculating. calculator, he must buy in the cheapest
market and sell in the dearest. Which means that he
must obtain his labour and his raw material at as low a
rate as possible, and not waste anything in the process of
manufacture. And when the commodity is ready for
sale, he must part with it to the man whose credit is
sound, and so forth. For all this he must calculate, and
he must speculate. By speculation in this sense 1 mean
the drawing of several conclusions from particular instance?
— ^let us call it the power of economic diagnosis, the
complete survey of the market, the evaluation of all its
symptoms, the recognition of future possibilities and the
choice of ^at course wHch will have the greatest utility
in the long run.

To this end the dealer must have a hundred eyes, a
hundred ears and a hundred feelers in all directions.
Here he may have to search out a needy nobleman, or a
State bent on war, in order to offer them a loan at the
pychological moment ; there, to put his hand On a
labour group that is willing to work a few pence below
the prevmling rate of wages ; here he may have to form a
tight estimate of the chances that a new article is likely
to have with the public ; there, to appraise the true effect
of a political crisis on the Stock Exchange. In every case
the trader expresses the result in terms of money. That
is where the calculation comes in. “A wonderfully
shrewd caloilator” is a term common in the United
States for an^ adept in this direction.

’■ But a dimming eye for a profitable piece of buaness
is not sufficient : the trader must also possess the capacity
for doing business. In this, his negotiating powers will
come into play, and he will be doing something very
inuch more akin to the work of an arbitrator between
two litigants. He will talk to his opponent, urge reasons
and counter-reasons in order to induce him to embark on


WHAT IS A CAPITALIST UNDERTAKER? i6;

^ certain course. To negotiate is to fence with intellectual
weapons^

Trading, then, means to negotiate concerning the buy-
ing and selling of some commodity, be it a share, a loan,
or a concern. Trading must be the term applied to the
activity of the hawker at the back-door, trying to sell
the cook a “ fur ” collar, or to that of the Jewish old do’
man, who talks for an hour to the bucolic driver to
persuade him to purchase a pair of trousers. But it
' mjist be equally applied to the activities of a Nathan ■
Rothschild, who negotiated with the representative of
the Prussian Government for a loan of a million. The
difference is not one of kind, but of extent, for the
essence of all trading is n^otiation, which need not
, necessarily be by word of mouth. The shopkeeper who
recommends his goods to the public, be his method what
you will, is in reality negotiating. What is all advertise-
ment but “ dumb show ” negotiation ? The end in view
is always the same — to convince the possible buyer of the
superiority of a particular set of goods. The ideal of
the seller is realized when everybody purchases the article
he has recommended.

To create interest, to win confidence, to stir up a desire
to buy — such is the end and aim of the successful trader.
How he achieves it is of little moment. Sufficient that
he uses not outward force but inner forces, his customers
coming to him of their own free will. He wins by
suggestion, and one of the most effective is to arouse
in the heart of the buyer the feeling that to buy at once
will be most advantt^ous. ** We shall have snow, boys,
said the Finns, for they had Aander(a kind of snow-shoe)
to sell,” we read in the Magnus Barford Saga (1006 a.d.).
This is the prototype of all traders, and the suggesticm of
the Finns the prototype of all advertising-— the weapon
with which the trader, fights. No longer does he dwell


i68 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in fortified towers, as did his precursor in Genoa in the
days o'f Benjamin of Tiidela, nor does he wreck the houses
o/ the natives with his guns if they refuse to “ trade ”
vnth him, as did the early East India settlers in the 17th
century.


CHAPTER X


THE CEJECTIVE CIRCUMSTANCES IN THE JEWISH
APTITUDE FOR MODERN CAPITALISM

Now that we know what a capitalist undertaker is our
next question must be, What were the outward circum-
stances that made it possible for the Jews to do so much
in shaping the capitalistic system? To formulate an
answer we shall have to review the position of the Jews
of Western Europe and America from the end of the
1 5th century until the present time — the period, that is,
in which capitalism took form.

How can that position be best characterized ?

The Governor of Jamaica in a letter he wrote (Decem-
ber 17, 1671) to the Secretary of State was happy in
his phraseology .397 “He was of opinion,” he said,
“that His Majesty could not have more profitable
subjects than the Jews : thy had great stocks and corre^
spondenee.” These two reasons, indeed, will account in
large measure for the headway made by Jews. But we
must also bear in mind their peculiar status among the
peoples with whom they dwelt. They were looked upon
as strangers and were treated not as full, but as “ semi-
citizens.”

I would therefore assign four causes for the success
of the Jews : (i) their dispersion over a wide area,
(a) their treatment as strangers, (3) thdir semi-citiwsn-
ship, and (4) their wealth.


170 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


1. Jewish Dispersion over a wide Area.

•The of primary ^nificance -is that the Jews were
scattered aU over the world. Scatt^ed they had been
from the time of the first Exile ; they were scattered
anew after their expulsion from Spain and Portugal, and
again when great masses of them left Poland. We have
already accompanied them on their wanderings during
the last two or three centuries, and have noted how they
settled in Germany and France, in Italy and in England,
in the Near East and in the Far West, in Holland, in
Austria, in South Africa and in Eastern Asia.

One result of these wanderings was that off-shoots of
one and the same family took root in diflFerent centres
of economic Ufe and established great world-famed firms
with numerous branches in all parts. I^t us instance
a few cases.39^

The Lopez family had its seat in Bordeaux, and
branches in Spain, England, Antwerp and Toulouse.
The Mendes family, well-known bankers, also hsuled
from Bordeaux, and were to be found in Portugal,
France and Flanders. The, Gradis, relatives of the
Mendds, were also settled in all directions. So, top, the
Carceres in Hamburg, in England, in Austria, in the West
Indies, in Barbados and in Surinam. Other famous
families with world-wide branches were the Costas
(Acostas, D’Acostas),' the Coneglianos, the Alhadibs, the
Sassoons, the Pereires, the Rothschilds. We imght con-
tinue the list ad infinitum ; suffice it to say that Jewish
business concerns that had a footing in at least two
places on the face of the globe may be counted in
hundreds and in thousands.

What all this means is obvious enough. What
Christian buriness houses obtained only after much
effort, and even then only to a much less degree, the


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 171

Jews had at the very beginnitig-T-scatteted centres from
which to carry on international commerce and to utilize
international credit ; “ great correspondence ” in short,
the first necessity for all international organization.

Let us recall what I observed about the participation
of the Jews in Spanish and Portuguese trade, in the trade
of the Levant, and in the economic growth of America.
It was of great consequence that the great majority of
Jews settling in different parts hailed from Spain ; they
were thua agents in directing colonial trade, and to an
even greater extent the flow of silver, into the new
channels represented by Holland, England, France and
Germany.

Was it not significant that the Jews directed their
footsteps just to these countries, all on the eve of a great
economic revival, and were thus the means of allowing
them to benefit by Jewish international connexions ? It
is well known that Jews turned away the flow of trade
from the lands that expelled them to those that gave
them a hospitable reception.

Was it not significant that they were predominant in
Leghorn, which in the iSth century was spoken of as
“one of the great depots in Europe for the trade of
the Mediterranean,’* 399 significant that they forged a
commercial chain binding North and South America
t(gcther, which assured the North American Colonies of
their economic existence, significant above all, that by
their control of the Stock Exchanges in the great Euro-
pean centres they were the means of internationalizing,,
public credit?

It was thrir distribution over a wide area which
enabled them to do all this.

An admirable picture of the importance of the Jews
from this point of view was drawn by a clever obsorirer
who made a study of that people two hundred years


172 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

ago. The picture has lost none of its freshness ; it may
be found in the Spectator of September 27, 1712 4oo ; —

“They are so disseminated through all the trading Parts of the
World, that they are become the Instruments by which the most
distant Nations converse with one another and by which mankind
arc knit together in a general correspondence. They are like the
•pegs and nails in a great building, which though they are but little
valued in themselves, are absolutely necessary to keep the whole
frame together.**

How the Jews utilized for their own advantage the
special knowledge that their scattered position gave them,
how they regulated their activities on the Stock Exchange,
is related in all detail in a Report of the French Am-
b^sador in The Hague, written in the year 1698.4011
Our informant is of opinion that the dominance of the
Jews on tile Amsterdam Stock Exchange was due in a
large degree to thrir being so well-informed. This piece
of evidence is of such great value that I shall translate
the whole of the passage : —

•“They carry on a correspondence on both these subjects (news
and commerce) with those they call their brotherhoods (congregues).
Of these, Venice is considered to be the most important (although
neither the richest nor the most populous) because it is the link, by
way of the brotherhood of Salomca, between the East and the West
■as well as the South. Salonica is the governing centre for their
nation in these two parts of the world and is responsible for them to
Venice, which together with Amsterdam, rules the northern countries
(including the merely tolerated community of London, and the secret
brotJierhoods of France). The result of this association is that on the
two topics of news and commerce they receive, one might aj n i n st say,
the best information of all that goes on in the world, and oh this they
builJ up their system every week in their assemblies, wisely choosing
for this purpose the day after Saturday, U., the Sunday, when the
Christians of all denominations are engaged in their religious
These systems, which contain the minutest details of news received
daring the week, are, after having been carefully sifted by their rabbis
and the heads of their congregations, handed over on the Sunday


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM I73

afternoon to their Jewish stockbrokers and agents. These are men of
great cleverness, who after having arranged a preconcerted plan among
themselves, go out separately to spread news which should prove the
most useful for their own ends ; ready to start manipulations on the
morrow, the Monday morning, according to each individuars disposi-
tioh ; either selling, buying, or exchanging shares. As they always
hold a large reserve of these commodities, they can always judge of
the most propitious moment, taking advantage of the rise or fall of the
securities, or even sometimes of both, in order to carry out their
plans.’*

Equally beneficial was their dispersion for winning the
confidence of the great. Indeed, the progress of the Jews
to la haute finance was almost invariably as follows. In
the first instance their linguistic ability enabled them to
be of service to crowned heads as interpreters, then they
were sent as intermediaries or special negotiators to
foreign courts. Soon they were put in charge of their
employer’s fortunes, at the same time being honoured
through his graciousness in allowing them to become his
creditors. From this point it was no long step to the
control of the State finances, and in later years of the
Stock Exchanges.

It is no far-fetched assumption that already in ancient
times their knowledge of languages and their acquaintance
with foreign civilizations must have made them welcome
visitors at the courts of kings and won for them royal
confidence. Think of Joseph in Egypt ; of the Alaburch
Alexander (of whom Josephus tells), the intimate of
King Agrippa and of the mother of the Emperor
Clau<Uus ; think of the Jewish Treasurer of Queen
Candace of Ethiopia, of whom we may read in the Acts
of the Apostles (viii. 27).

As for the Court Jews in the Middle Ages, we have
definite information that they won their spurs in the
capacity of interpreters or n^otiators. We know it of.
the Jew Isaac, whom Charlemtgne sent to the court of


•174 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM

the Caliph Haroun al Rashid ; of Kalonymus, the Jewish
friend and fevourite of the Emperor Otto II ; of the
famous Chasdai Ibn Shaprut ' (915-70), who achieved
honour and renown as the ' diplomatic representative of
the Caliph Abdul-Rahman III in his negotiations with
the Christian courts of Northern Spain.402 Similarly
when the Christian princes of the Iberian Peninsula
required skilful negotiators they sought ■ out Jews.
Alphonso VI is a good example. Intent on playing oflF
the petty Mohammedan rulers against each other, he
chose Jewish agents, with their linguistic abilities and
th^ insight into foreign ways, to send to the courts of
Toledo, Seville and Granada. In the period which
followed, Jewish emissaries are met with at all the
Spanish courts, including those Jews, learned in ethno-
graphy, whom James II comnussioned to travel into
Asia in order to supply his spies with information and
who tried to discover the mythical country of Prester
John ; 403 including also the many interpreters and
confidential agents associated with the discovery of the
New World.404

Considering the importance of the Spanish period in
Jewish history not only from the general, but also from
the special economic point of view, these cases syre
worthy of note in that they clearly show the reason
for the rise of Jews to influential positions. But they
are not limited to the Spanish period ; they abound
in subsequent epochs also. Thus, Jewish diplomatists
were employed by the States-General in th«r inter-
course with ■ the Powers ; and names like Belmonte,
Mesquita 4 oS and others are wdl-fcnown. Equally famous
is the Seigneur Hebraeo, as Richelieu called the wealthy
Ildefonso Lopez, whom the French statesman sent on a
secret mission to Holland, and on his return bestowed
upon him the title of “Conseillcr d’Etat ordinaiie.” 4o6


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 175

Finally, the dispersion of . the Jews is noteworthy in
another way. Their dispersion internationally was, as
' we have seen, fruitful enough of results ; but their
being scattered in every part of some particular country
had consequences no less potent. To take one instance
— ^ihe Jews were army-purveyors (and their activities
as such date from the days of antiquity, for do we
not read that when Belisarius besieged Naples, the
Jewish inhabitants offered to supply the town with
provisions ?) 407 One reason was surely that they were
able to accumulate large quantities of commodities
much more easily than the Christians, thanks to their
connexions in the different centres. “ The Jewish
undertaker,” says one 18th-century writer, “is free
from these difficulties. All he need do is to stir up
his brethren in the right place, and at a moment’s
notice he has all the assistance he requires at his dis-
posal.” In truth, the Jew at that time never

carried on budness “as an isolated individual, but
always as a member of* the most extended trading
company in the world.” 409 In the words of a
petition of the merchants of Paris in the second half
of the .18th century, 4 «> “they are atoms of molten
money which flow and are scattered, but which at the
least incline reunite into one principal stream.”

IL The Jews as Aliens.

During the last century or two Jews were almost
everywhere strangers in the sense of being new-comers.
They were never old-established in the places where
their most successful activities were manifest ; nor did
they furive in such centres from the vicinity, but
rather from distant lands, differing in manners and
customs, and often in climate too, from the countries
of their settlements. To Holland, France and England


176 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

‘they came from Spjun and Portugal arid then from
Germ^y ; they journeyed to Hamburg and Frankfort
from other German cities ; later on they dispersed all
ov^r Germany from Russian Poland.

The Jews, then, were everywhere colonists, and as
such learned the lesson of speedy adaptation to their
new surroundings. In this they were ahead of the
European nations, who did not become masters of this
art until the settlements in America were founded.

New-comers must have an observant eye in order to
find a niche for themselves amid the new conditions ;
they must be very careful of their behaviour, so that
they may earn their livelihood without let or hindrance.
While the natives are still in their warm beds the
nexv-comers stand without in the sharp morning air of
dawn, and their energy is all the keener in consequence.
They must concentrate their thoughts to obtain a foot-
hold, and all their economic activities will be dictated
by this desire. They must of necessity determine how
best to regulate their undertakings, and what is the
shortest cut to their goal — ^what branches of manufac-
ture or commerce are likely to prove most profitable,
with what persons business connexions should be
established, and on what principles business itself
should be conducted. What is all this but the sub-
stitution of. economic rationalism for time-honoured
Tradition ? That the Jews did this we have already
observed ; why they were forced to do it becomes
apparent when we recall that everywhere they were
strangers in the land, new-comers, immigrants.

But the Jews were strangers among the nations
throughout many centuries in yet another sense, which
might be termed psychological and social. They were
strangers because of the inward contrast between them
and their hosts, because of their almost caste-like


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 177

separation from the peoples in whose midst they
dwelt. They, the Jews, looked upon themselves iis a
peculiar people ; and as a peculiar people the nations
regarded them. Hence, there was developed in the
Jews that conduct and that mental attitude which is
bound to show itself in dealings with “ strangers,”
especially in an age in which the conception of world-
citizenship was as yet non-existent. For in all periods
of history innocent of humanitarian considerations the
mere fact that a “stranger” was being dealt with was
sufficient to ease the conscience and loosen the bonds
of moral duty. In intercourse with strangers people
were never qmte so particular. Now the Jews were
always brought into contact with strangers, with
“others,” especially in their economic activities, seeing
that everywhere they were a small minority. And
whereas the “others” dealt with a stranger, say, once
in ten times or even in a hundred, it was just the
reverse with the Jews, whose intercourse with strangers
was nine out of the ten or ninety-nine out of the
hundred times. What was the consequence ^ The
Jew had recourse , to the “ ethics for strangers ” (if
I may use this term without being misunderstood) far
more frequently than the non-Jew; for the one it
was the rule, whilst for the other it was only the
exception. Jevrish business methods thus came to be
based on it. >

Closely interwoven with their status as strangers
was the special l(^al position which they occupied
everywhere. But this has an importance of its own, and
we shall therefore assign an independent section to it.

III. Jews as Semi-Citizeks.

At first glance the legal pc»ifron of the Jews would
appear to have had an immense influence on their

*3


1^8 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

economic actmties in that it limited the callings to
which they might devote .themselves, and generally
qlosed the avenues to a livelihood. But I believe that
the effect of these restrictions has been over-estimated.

I would even -go so far as to say that they were of
no moment whatever for the. economic growth of
Jewry. At least, I am not aware that any of the
traces left by Jews on the development of the modern
economic system were due to the restraining . regula-
tions. That these could not have left a very deep
• impress is obvious, seeing that during the period which ,
is. of most interest to us the laws affecting Jews
differed greatly according to locality. For all that we
note a remarkable similarity in Jemsh ipfiuence
throughout the whole range of the capitalistic sodal
order.

How varied the laws in restraint of Jews were is
not always sufficiently realized. To begin with, there
were broad differences between those of one country
and' of another. Thus, while the Jews in Holland
and England were in a position of almost complete
equality with their Christian neighbours so far k as their
economic life was concerned, they laboured under
great disabilities in other lands. But even in these
last their treatment was not uniform, for in certain
towns and districts they enjoyed entire economic free-
dom, as, for example, in the papal possestions in
France. 41 1 Moreover, even the disabilities varied in
munber and in kind in each country, and sometimes
in different parts of the same country. In most
instances they appeared to be quite arbitrary ; nowhere
was there any underlying principle visible. In one
place Jews might not be hawkers, and in another they
were ndt allowed to be shopkeepers. Here they
received pemussion to be craftsmen ; there this right


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 179

was denied them.. Here they might deal in wool,
there they might not. Here they might sell leather,
there it was forbidden them. Here the sale of alco-
holic liquors was farmed out to them, there such an
idea seemed preposterous. Here they were encouraged
to start factories, there they were strictly enjoined to
desist from all participation in capitalistic undertakings.
Such examples might be continued indefinitely.

Perhaps the best is furnished by Prussia’s treatment
of her Jews in the i8th century. Here in one and
the same country the restrictive legislation for one
locality was totally opposed to that of another. The
revised General Privileges of 1750 (Article a) forbade
Jews the exercise of handicrafts in many places ; yet
a royal order of May 21, 1790, permitted the Jews
in Breslau “ to exercise all manner of mechanical arts,”

' and went on to say that “it would be a source of
much pleasure to Us if Christian craftsmen of their
own free will took Jewish boys as apprentices and
eventually received them into their gilds.” A similar
enactment was made in the General Reglement for the
Jews of South-East Prussia, dated April 17, 1797
(Article lo).

Again, while the Jews of Berlin were forbidden (by
Articles 13 and 15 of the General Privileges of 1750)
to sell meat, beer and brandy to non-Jews, all the
native-born Jews of Silesia had complete freedom of
• trade in this respect (in accordance with an Order of
Febraary 13, 1769).

The list of commodities in which they were allowed
or forbidden to trade seems to have l^n drawn up
vnth an arbitrariness that passes comprehension.
Thus, the General Privileges of 1750 allowed the Jews
to deal in foarrign or home leather prepared though
undyed, but not in raw or dyed leather ; in raw calf


i8o THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

and sheep skins, but not in raw cow or horse .hides ;
in all manner of manufactured woollen and cotton
wares, but not in raw wool or woollen threads.

The picture becomes still more bemldering when •
we take into consideration the varying legal status of
the diiferent classes of Jews. The Jewish community
of Breslau, for instance, was (until the Order of
May 21, 1790, changed things) composed of four
groups : (i) those with “ general privileges,” (2) those
with “privileges,” (3) those who were only tolerated,
and (4) temporary residents.

The first class included those Jews who were on an
equal footing with Christians so far as trade and com-
merce were concerned, and whose rights in this respect
were hereditary. In the second were comprised such
Jews as had “special (limited) privileges” given them,
wherein they were allowed to trade in certain kinds of
goods specifically mentioned. But thrir rights did
not pass to their children, though the children received
preference when privileges of this kind were being
granted. The third class was composed of Jews who
had the right of living in Breslau, but whose economic
activities were even more limited than those in the
second class. As for the fourth, it contained the
Jews, who received permission to dwell in the town
for a temporary period only.

But even of such rights as they had they were never
sure. In 1769, for example, the Silesian Jews who
lived in country districts were allowed to receive in
farm the sale of beer, brandy and meat ; in 1780 the
permission was withdrawn; in 1787 tit was renewed.

Yet in all this it must not be forgotten that regulations
in restraint of industry and commerce during the last
two or three centuries were for the most part a dead
letter ; as a matter of fact, capitalistic interests found


TH& JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM i8i

ways and means of getting round them. The simplest
method was to overstep the law, a course to which
as time went on the bureaucratic State shut its eyes.
But there were lawful means too of circumventing
inconvenient paragraphs : concessions, privileges, patents,
and the whole collection of documents granting exceptional
treatment which princes were always willing to issue
if only an additional source of income accrued therefrom.
The Jews were not slow in obtaining such privileges.
The proviso mentioned in the Prussian Edicts of 1737
and 1750 — that all restraints referring to Jews might
be removed by a special royal order — ^was tacitly held
to apply in all cases. Some way out must have been
possible, else how could the Jews have engaged in
those trades leather, tobacco) which the law forbade
them?

At one point, however, industrial regulations made
themselves felt as very real checks to the prt^ress
of the Jew, and that was wherever economic activities
were organized on a corporate basis. The gilds were
closed to them; they were kept back by the crucifix
which hung in each gild-hall, and round which members
assembled. Accordingly, if they wished to engage
in any industry or trade monopolized by a gild, they
were forced to do so as “outsiders,” interlopers and
free traders.

But a still greater obstacle in their path were the
laws regulating their position in public life. In all
countries there was a remarkable uniformity in these;
everywhere the Jew was shut out from public offices,
central or local, from the Bar, from Parliament, from
the Army, from the Universities. This applied, to
the States of Western Europe — France, Holland,
England — and dso to America. But there is no need
to consider with any d<^ree of fullness the legal status


i 82 the jews and modern capitalism

of the Jew? in the pre-:emancipation ■ era, seeing that
it is fairly generally known. Only tins we would
mention here — that their concUtion of semi-citizenship
continued in most countries right into the 19th century.
The United States was the first land in which they
obtained dvil equality ; the prindple was there
promulgated iiv 1783. In France' the famous Eman-
dpation Law dates from 27th September 1791 ; in
Holland the Batavian National Assembly made the
Jews full dtizens in 1796, But in England it was
not until 1859 that they were granted complete
emandpation, while in the German States it took ten
years longer. On 3rd July 1869 the North German
Confederation finally set the seal on thdr civil equality ;
Austria had already done so in 1867, and Italy
followed suit in 1870.

Equally well-known is it that in many cases the
emancipation laws have become dead letters. Open
any Liberal paper in Germany (to take a good instance)
and day by day you will find complaints that Jews
are never given commissions in the Army, that they
are excluded from appointments to the Bench, and
so on.

This set-back which the Jews recdvcd in public
life was of great use to industry and commerce in that
the Jew concentrated all his ability and energy on them.
The most gifted minds from other social groups
. devoted themselves to the service of the State ; among
the Jews, in so far as they did not spend themselves
in the Beth Hamidrask [the Communal House of
Study], such spirits were forced into business. Now
the more economic life aimed at profit-making and
the more the moneyed’ interests acquired influence, the
more were the Jews driven to win for themselves by
means of commerce and industry what was denied


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 183

them by the kw — respect and power in the State.
It becomes apparent why gold (as we have seen) was
appraised so highly among Jews.

But if exclusion from public life was of benefit to
the economic position of the Jews in one direction,
giving them a pull over their Christian neighbours, it
was equally beneficial in another. It freed the Jews
firom political partisanship. Their attitude towards the
State, and the particular Government of the day, was
wholly unprejudiced. Thanks to this, their capacity
to become the standard-bearers of the international
capitalistic system was superior to that of other people.
For they supplied the different States with money, and
national conflicts were among the chief sources from
which Jews derived their profit Moreover, the political
colourlessness of their position made it possible for them
to serve successive dynasties or governments in countries
which, like France, were subjected to many political
changes. The Hstory of the Rothschilds illustrates the
point. Thus the Jews, through their inferior dvil
position, were enabled to facilitate the growth of the
indifference of capitalism to all interests but those of
gain. Again, therefore, they promoted and strengthened
the capitalistic spirit.

IV. The Wealth of the Jews.

Among the objective conditions which made possible
the economic mission of the Jews during the last three
or four centuries must be reckoned that at all times
and in all places where their rfile in economic life was
no mean one, they disposed of large sums of money.
But this assertion says nothing about the wealth of the
whole body of Jews, so that it is idle to urge the
objection that at all periods there were poor Jews,
and very many of them. Any one who hm ever set


i 84 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

foot in a Jewish congregation on the Eastern borders
of Germany, or is acquainted with the Je^nsh quarter
of New York, knows that well enough. But what I
maintain— a more limited proposition^ — is that much
wealth and great fortunes were to be found, and still
are to be found, among Jews ever since the i yth century.
Put in a slightly dilFerent way, there were always many
wealthy Jews, and certainly the Jews on an average
were richer than the Christians round them. It is beside
the mark to say that the richest man in Germany or
the three richest in America are not Jews.

A good many of the exiles from the Pyrenean
Peninsula mu$t have been very wealthy indeed, We
are informed that their flight brought with it an
“ ^odo de capitaes,” a flow of capital from the country.
However, in many instances they sold their property,
receiving foreign bills in exchange. 412 The richest
among the fugitives probably made for Holland. At
any rate it is recorded that the first settlers in that
country — Manuel Lopez Homen, Maria Nunez, Miguel
Lopez and others — ^had great possessions. 4 i 3 Whether
other wealthy Spaniards followed in the 17th century,
or whether those already resident added to their fortunes,
it is not easy to discover. But certain it is that the
Jews of Holland in the 17th and i8th centuries wire
famed for their riches. True, there are no statistics
to illustrate this, but an abundance of other weighty
evidence exists. Travellers could not sufiiciently admire
the splendour and the luxury of the houses of these
refuge^ who dwelt in what were really palaces. And
if you turn to a collection of engravings of that period,
do you not very soon discover that the most magnificent
mansions in, say, Amsterdam or The Hague were built
by Jews or inhabited by them— ‘those of Baron Belmonte,
of the noble Lord de Pinto, of the Lord d’Acoste and


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 185 '

others? (At the close of the 1,7th century de Pinto’s'
fortune was estimated at 8,000,000 florins.) Of the
princely luxury at a Jewish wedding in Amsterdam,
where one of her daughters married, Gliickel von
Hameln draws a vivid picture in her MemoirsA'^^

It was the same in other lands. For 17th and i8th
century France we have the generalization of Savary,
who knew most things. “ We say," these are his very
words, “we say that a tradesman is ‘as rich as a Jew’
when he has the reputation of having amassed a large
fortune."

As for England, actual figures are extant concerning
the wealth of the rich Sephardim soon after their arrival.
A crowd of rich Jews followed in the train of Catharine
of Braganza, Charles IPs bride, so that while in 1661
there were only 35 Jewish families in London, two
years later no less than 57 new-comers were added to
the list. In 1663, as appears from the books of
Alderman Blackwell, the following was the half-yearly
turnover of the wealthy Jewish merchants : 4 i 6 Jacob
Aboab, 1 3,085 ; Samuel de Vega, 18, 309; Duarte
da Sylva, ,^41,441; Francisco da Sylva, 14, 646;
Fernando Mendes da Costa, 30,490 ; Isaac Dazevedo,

1 3,(605 ; George and Domingo Francia, ,£35,759 ; and
Gomez Rodrigues, ,£13,124.

The centres of Jewish life in Germany in the 17th
and i8th centuries were, as we have already observed,
Hamburg and Frankfort-on-the-Main. For both cities
it is possible to compute the wealth of the resident
Jews by the aid of figures.

In Hamburg, too, it was Spanish and Portuguese Jews
who were the first settlers. It 1649, 40 of their families
participated in the foundation of the Hamburg Bank,
which shows that they must have been feirly comfortably
off. ■ Very soon complaints were made of the Increasing


i86 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

wealth and influence of the Jews. In 1649 they were
blamed for their ostentatious funerals and for riding in
carriages to take the air; in 1650 for building houses
like palaces. In the same year sumptuary laws forbade
them too great a show of magnificence. 4 i 7 Up to
the end of the 17th century the Sephardic Jews appear
to have possessed all the wealth ; about that time,
however, their Ashkenazi brethren also came quickly to
the fore. Gliickel von Hameln states that many German-
Jewish families which in her youth were in comparative
poverty later rose to a state of affluence. And Gliickel’s
observations are borne out by figures dating from the
'first quarter of the i8th century .4i8 In 1729 the
Jewish community in Altona was composed of 279
subscribing members, of whom 145 were wealthy,
possessing between them 5,434,300 mark [£271>715]>
that is, an average of more than 37,000 mark [,£1850]
per head. The Hamburg community had 160 sub-
scribing members, 16 of whom together were worth
501,500 mark [;£25,o75]. These figures appear to be
below the actual state of things, if we compare them with
the particulars concerning each individual. In 1725 the
foUovring wealthy Jews were resident in Hamburg,
Altona and Wandsbeck: Joel Solomon, 210,000 mark;
his son-in-law, 50,000 ; Elias Oppenheimer, 300,000 ;
Moses Goldschmidt, 60,000 ; Alex Papenheim, 60,000 ;
EliM Salomon, 200,000 ; Philip Elias, 50,000 ; Samuel
Sduesser, 60,000 ; Berend Heyman, 75,000 ; Samson
Nathan, 100,000 ; Moses Hamm, 75,000 ; Sam Abra-
ham’s widow, 60,000 ; Alexander Isaap, 60,000 ; Meyer
Berend, 400,000 ; Salomon Berens, 1,600,000 ; Isaac
Hertz, 150,000; Mangelus Heymann, 200,000; Nathan
Benfflx, 100,000 ; Philip Mangelus, 100,000 ; Jacob
Philip, .50,000 ; Abraham Oppenheimer’s widow, 60,000;
Zacharias Daniel’s widow and widowed daughter.


THE JEWISH APTITUDE FOR CAPITALISM 187

r 50,000 ; Simoa del Panco, 1 50,000 ; Mafx Castert,
2oo,o0o; Abraham Lazarus, 150,000; Carsten Marx,
60,000 ; Berend Salomon, 600,000 rthlr. ; Meyer Berens,
400,000 ; Abraham von Halle, 1 50,000 ; Abraham
Nathan, 150,000.

In view of this list it can scarcely be doubted that
there were many rich Jews in Hamburg.

Frankfort presents the same picture ; if anything the
colours are even brighter. The wealth of the Jews
begins to accumulate at the end of the i6th century,
and from then onwards it increases steadily. In 1593
there were 4 Jews and 54 Christians (making 7*4 per
cent.) in Frankfort who paid taxes on a fortune of over
15,000 florins ; in 1607 their number had reached 16
(compared with 90 Christians, *.<?., 17*7 per cent.).4*0
In 1618 the poorest Jew paid taxes on 100 florins, the
poorest Christian on 50. Again, 300 Jewish families
paid as garrison and fortification taxes no less than
100,900 florins in the years 1634 to 1650.4S0

The number of taxpayers in the Frankfort Jewish
community rose to 753 by the end of the i8th century,
and together they possessed at least 6,000,000 florins.
More than half of this was in the hands of the
twelve wealthiest families : 4»* Speyer, 604,000 florins ;
Reiss-Ellissen, 199,916; Haas, Kann, Stern, 256,500;
Schuster, Getz, Amschel, 253,075 ; Goldschmidt,

235,000; May, 211,000; Oppenheimer, 171,500;

Wertheimer, 138,600 ; Flfirsheim, 166,666 ; Rindskopf,
115,600; Rothschild, 109,375 ; Sichel, 107,000.

And in Berlin the Jews in the early i8th century

were not by any means poor beggars. Of the lao

Jewish families resident in the Prussian capital in 1737
only 10 owned less than 1000 thalers, the rest ail had
2000 to 20,000 thaler, and over.4aai

That the Jews were among the richest people in the


i88 THE JEWS .AND MODERN CAPITALISM '

land is thus attested, and this state of affairs has continued
through the last two or three hundred years right down
to our own day, except that to-day it is perhaps more
general and more -mdespread. And its consequence ?
It can scarcely be over-estimated for those countries
which offered a refuge to, the wanderers. The nations
that profited by the Jews* sojourn with them were well
eqmpped to help forward the development of capitalism.
Hence it should be specially noticed that the wanderings
of the Jews had the effect of shifting the centre where
the precious metals had accumulated. Obviously it could
,not but influence the trend of economic life that Spain
and Portv^al were emptied of their gold and England
and Holland enriched.

Nor is it difficult to prove that Jewish money called
into existence all the large undertakings .of the 17th
century and financed them. Just as the expedition of
Columbus would have been impossible had the rich Jews
left Spain a generation earlier, so the great India Com-
panies might never have been founded and the great
banks which were established in the 17 th century might
not so quickly have attained their stability had it not
been that the wealth of the Spanish exiles came to the aid
.of England, Holland and Hamburg ; in other words,
had the Jews been expelled from Spain a century later
than was actually the case.

. This in fact was why Jewish wealth was so influential.
In enabled capitalistic undertaldngs to be started, ■6r at
least facilitated the process. To establish banks, ware-
houses, stock and share broking — all ,this was earier
for die Jew than for the others because his pockets were
better lined. That, too, was why he became banker to
crowned heads. And finally, because he had money
he was ^ble to lend it This activity paved the way
for capitalism to a greater d^ree than anything else


igo THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

there not already a specific psychological element in
the work of the money-lender? But more than this.
It may be asked. Can the objective circumstances alone
entirely explain the economic r61e of the Jews? Are
there not perhs^ special Je^sh characteristics which
must be taken into account in our chdn of reasoning ?
Before proceeding to this chapter, however, we must
turn to an influence of extreme importance in this
connejdon — ^to the Jewish religion.


CHAPTER XI


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION
IN ECONOMIC LIFE

Intro DtTCTORY Note.

Three reasons have actuated me in devoting a special
chafer to the consideration of the religion of the
Jewish people and the demonstration of its enormous
influence on Jewish economic acti\dties. First, the
Jewish reli^on can be fully appreciated in all its
bearing from the economic standpoint Only when it
is studied in detail and by itself; secondly, it calls for
a special method of treatment ; and thirdly, it occupies
a position midway between the objective and the
subjective factors of Jewish development. For, in so
far ^ any religion is the expression of some particular
spiritual outlook, it has a subjective " aspect ; in so

far as the individual is born into it, it has an objective
aspect.


1. The Importance of Religion for the
Jewish People.

That the religion of a people, or of a group within
far-reaclung influences on its economic
life will not be disputed. Only recently Max Weber
demonstrated the connexion between Puritanism and
Capitalism. In ^t. Max Weber’s researches are
responsible for this book. For any one who followed

191


192 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


them could hot but ask himself whether all that Weber
ascribes to Puritanism might not with equal justice be
referred to Judaism, and probably in a greater degree ;
nay, it might well be suggested that that which is
called Puritanism is in reality Judaism. This relation-
ship will be (tiscussed in due course.

Now, if Puritanism has had an economic influence,
how much more so has Judaism, seeing that among
no other dvilized people has religion so impregnated
all national life. For the Jews religion was not an
affair of Sundays and Holy Days ; it touched everyday
life even in its minutest action, it regulated all human
activities. At every step the Jew asked himself. Will
this tend to the glory of God or will it profane His
name? Jewish law defines not merely the relation
between man and God, ^formulates not merely a meta-
physical conception ; it lays down rules of conduct for
all possible relationships, whether between man and
.man or between man and nature. Jewish law, in fact,
is as much part of the religious system as are Jewish
ethics. The Law is from God, *id moral law and
divine ordinances are inseparable in Judaism.423 Hence
in reality there are no spedal ethics of Judsusm.
Jewish ethics are the underlying prindples of the
Jewish religion. 424

No other people has been so careful as the Jews in
providing for the teaching of religion to even the
humblest As Josephus so well put it : Ask the first
Jew you meet concerning his “ laws ” and he will be able
to tell you them better even than his own name. The
reason for this may be found in the systematic religious
instruction given to every Jewish child, as well as in
the feet that divine service partly consists of the reading
and explanation of passages from Holy Writ. , In the
course of the year the Torah is read through from


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 193


beginning to end. Moreover, it is one of the primary
duties of the Jew to study the Torah. “ Thou shaJt
speak of them when thou sittest in thine house and
when thou walkest by the way and when thou liest
down and when thou risest up ” (Deut. vi. 5). 4^5

No other people, too, has walked in God’s wa3rs so
conscientiously as the Jews ; none has striven to carry
out its religious behests so thoroughly. It has indeed
been asserted that the Jews are the least religious of
peoples, I shall not stay to weigh the justice of this
remark. But certain it is that they are the most “ God-
fearing” people that ever were on the face of the
earth. They lived always in trembling awe, in awe
of God’s wrath. “ My flesh trembleth for fear of Thee,
and I am afraid of Thy judgments,” said the Psalmist
(Ps, cxix. 1 20), and the words ma,y be taken as applicable
to the Jews in every age. “Happy is the man that
feareth alway ” (Prov. xxviii. 14). “ The pious never put
away their fear” (Tanchuma Chukkath^ 24).426 One
can understand it when one thinks of the Jewish God —
fearful, awful, curse-uttering Jehovah, Never in all the
world’s literattire, either before or since, has humanity
been threatened with so much evil as Jehovah promises
(in the famous 28th chapter of Deuteronomy) to those
who will not keep His commandments.

But this mighty influence (the fear of God) did not
stand alone. Others combined with it, and together
they had the tendency of almost forcing the Jews to
obey the behests of their religion most scrupulously.
The first of these influences was their national fate.
When the Jewish State was destroyed the Pharisees
and Scribes — i.^., those who cherished the traditions of
Ezra and strove to make obedience to the Law the
end and dm of life — ^the Pharisees and Scribes came to
the head of affairs and naturally directed the course

14


194 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


of events into channels which they favoured. Without
a State, without their sanctuary, the Jews, under the
leadership of the Pharisees, flocked around the Law
(that “ portable Fatherland,” as Heine calls it), and
became a religious brotherhood, guided by a band of
pious Scribes, pretty much as the disciples of Loyola
might gather around them the scattered remnants of a
modern State. The Pharisees now led the way. Their
most distinguished Rabbis looked upon themselves as
the successors of the ancient Synhedrium, and were
indeed so regarded, becoming the supreme authority in
spiritual and temporal affairs for all the Jews in the
world .427 The power of the Rabbis originated in this
fashion, and the vicissitudes of the Jews in the Middle
Ages only helped to strengthen it. So oppressive did
it eventually become that the Jews themselves at times
complained of the burden. For the more the Jews
were shut off, or shut themselves off, from the people
among whom they dwelt, the more the authority of
the Rabbis increased, and the more easily could the
Jews be forced to be faithful to the Law. But the
fulfilment of the Law, which was urged upon them by
the Rabbis, must have been a necessity for the Jews
for inner reasons : it satisfied their heart’s desire, it
appeared the most precious gift that life had to offer.
And why ? Because amid all the persecution and
suffering which was meted out to the Jews on all sides,
that alone enabled them to retain their dignity, without
which life would have been valueless. For a very long
period religious teaching was enshrined in the Talmud,
and hence Jews through many centuries lived in it, for
it and through it. The Talmud was the most precious
possession of the Jew ; it was the breath of his nostrils,
it was his very soul. The Talmud became a family
history for generation after generation, with which


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 195


each was familiar. “The thinker lived in its thought,
the poet in its pure idealism. The outer world, the
world of nature and of man, the powerful ones of the
earth and the events of the times, were for the Jew
during a thousand years accidents, phantoms ; his only
reality was the Talmud.” 428 The Talmud has been
well compared (and the comparison to my mind applies
equally to all religious literature) to an outer shell
mth which the Jews of the Diaspora covered them-
selves ; it protected them against all influences from
vrithout and kept alive their strength within.429

We see, then, what forces were at work to make
the Jews right down to modern times a more God-
fearing pebple than any other, to make them religious
to their inmost core, or, if the word “religious” be
objected to, to keep alive among high and low a
general and strict observation of the precepts of their
religion. And for our purpose, we must regard this
characteristic as applicable to all sorts and conditions
of Jews, the Marannos of the i6th, 17th and i8th
centuries included. We must look upon these too as
orthodox Jews. Says the foremost authority on that
period of Jewish history, 43® “The great majority
of the Marannos were Jews to a much larger extent
than is commonly supposed. They submitted to force
of circumstance and were Christians only outwardly.
As a matter of fact they lived the Jewsh life and
observed the tenets of the Jewish religion. . . . This
admirable constancy will be appreciated to the full only
when the wealth of material in the Archives of Alcalia
de Henares, Simancas and other places has been sorted
and utilized.”

But among professing Jews the wealthiest were
often enough excellent Talmudic scholars. Was not a
knowledge of the Talmud a highway to honour, riches


196 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


and favour among Jews ? The most learned Talmudists
were also the cleverest financiers, medical men, jewellers,
merchants. We are told, for example, of some of the
Spanish Ministers of Finance, bankers and court
physicians that they devoted to the study of the Holy
Writ not only the Sabbath day but also two nights of
each week. In modern times old Amschel Rothschild,
who died in 1855, did the same. He lived strictly
according to Jewish law and ate no morsel at a
stranger’s table, even though it were the Emperor’s.
One who knew the Baron well says of him that “ he
was looked upon as the most pious Jew in all Frankfort.
Never have I seen a man so afflict himself — ^beating
his breast, and crying to Heaven — ^as Baron Rothschild
did in the synagogue on the Day of Atonement. The
continual praying weakens him so that he falls into a
faint. Odorous plants from his garden are held to his
nose to revive him.” 431 * His nephew William
Charles, who died in 1901 and who was the last of
the Frankfort Rothschilds, observed all the religious
prescriptions in their minutest detail. The pious Jew
is forbidden to touch any object which under certain
circumstances has become unclean by having been
already touched by some one else. And so a servant
always walked in front of this Rothschild and wiped
the door-handles. Moreover, he never touched paper
money that had been in use before ; the notes had to
be fresh from the press.

If this was how a Rothschild lived, it is not sur-
prising to come across Jewish commercial travellers
who do not touch meat ax months in the year
because they are not absolutely certain that the method

[* Sombait in the German text quotes this as an occurrence on the
Sabbath. It is obvious that the description refers to the Day of
Atonement.]


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 197


of slaughtering has been in accordance with Jewish
law.

However, if you want to study orthodox Judaism
you must go to Eastern Europe, where it is still without
disintegrating elements — ^you must go there personally
or read the books about it- In Western Europe the
orthodox Jews are a small minority. But when we
speak of the influence of the Jewish religion it is the
religion that held sway xmtil a generation ago that
we mean, the religion that led the Jews to so many
victories.

II. The Sources of the Jewish Religion.

Mohammed called the Jews “ the people of the Book.”
He was right. There is no other people that lived
so thoroughly according to a book. Their religion in
aU its stages was generally incorporated in a book, and
these books may be looked upon as the sources of the
Jewish religion. The following is a list of such books,
each originating at a particular time and supplementing
some other.

1. The Bible, i.e^ the Old Testament, until the destruction of

the Second Temple. It was read in Hebrew in Palestine
and in Greek (Septuagint) in the Diaspora.

2. The Talmud (more especially the Babylonian Talmud), from

the 2nd to the 6th century of the Common Era, the principal
depository of Jewish religious teaching.

3. The Code of Maimonides, compiled in the 12th century.

4. The Code (called the Turim) of Jacob ben Asher (124S-1340).

5. The Code of Joseph Caro — the Shulchan Aruck (i6th century).

These “ sources ” from which the Jewish religion
drew its life appear in a different light according as
they are regarded by scientific research or with the eyes
of the believing Jew. In the first case they are seen
as they really are ; in the second, they are idealized.


198 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


What are they in reality? The Bible, i.e.^ the Old
Testament, is the foundation upon which the entire
structure of Judaism was built up. It was written by
many hands at different periods, thus forming, as it
were, a piece of literary mosaic .432 The most important
portion of the whole is the Torah, i.e., the Pentateuch.
It received its present shape by the commingling of
two complete works some time in the period after
Ezra. The one was the old and the new (the
Deuteronomic) Law Book (650 b.c.) and the other,
Ezra’s Law Book (440 b.c.).* And its special character
the Torah owes to Ezra and Nehemiah, who introduced
a strict legal system. With Ezra and the school of
Soferim (scribes) that he founded, Judaism in the form
which it has to-day originated ; from that period to the
present it has remained unchanged.

Beside the Torah we must mention the so-called
Wisdom Literature — the Psalms, Job, Ecclesiastes,
Ecclesiasticus and the Proverbs. This section of
Jewish literature is wholly post-exilic ; only in that
period could it have arisen, assuming as it did the
existence of the Law, and the prevailing belief that
for obeying the Law God gave Life, for transgressing
it Death. The Wisdom Literature, unlike the Prophetic
Books, was concerned with practical life. Some of
the books contain the crystallized wisdom of many
generations and are of a comparatiyely early date.
The Book of Proverbs, for example, the most useful
for our pvurpose, dates from the year 180 b.c.433

Two streams flow from the Bible. The one, chiefly
by way of the Septuagint, ran partly into Hellenistic
philosophy and partly into Pauline Christianity. That
does not concern us further.

* I^. Deut. V. 45.-xxvi. 69 (about 650 b.c.) and Exod. xii. 25-31,
XXXV. to Lev. XV. ; Numb. i.-x. ; xv.-xix. ; xxvii.-xxxvi. (about 441; b.c.).


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 199

The other, chiefly by way of the Hebrew Bible
current in Palestine, ran into Jewish “Law,” and the
course of this we shall have to follow.

The specifically Jewish development of the Holy
Writ already began as early as Ezra’s day ; it was
due to the first schools of Soferim (scribes), and the
later schools of Hillel and Shammai only extended
and continued the work. The actual “ development ”
consisted of explanations and amplifications of the
Holy Writ, arrived at as the result of disputation, the
method in vogue in the Hellenistic World. The
development was really a tightening of the legal
formalism, with the view of protecting Judaism against
the inroads of Hellenistic Philosophy. Here, as always,
the Jewish religion was the expression of a reaction
against disintegrating forces. The Deuteronomic Law
was the reaction against Baal worship ; the Priestly
Code against Babylonian influences ; the later Codes
of Maimonides and Rabbenu Asher and Caro agsunst
Spanish culture ; and the teaching of the Tamaim [Tannai
— ^teacher] in the century preceding and that commencing
the Common Era against the enervating doctrines of

Hellenism. 434

The old oral tradition of the “ Wise ” was codified
about the year 200 a . d . by R. Judah Hanassi (the
Prince), usually called Rabbi. His work is the Mishna.
Following on the Mishna are further explanations
and additions which were collected and given a fixed
form in the 6th century (500-550 a . d .) by the Saboraim
[Saborai — those who give opinions]. Those portions
which had reference to the Mishna alone were termed
the Gemara^ the authors of which were the Amoraim
[Amorai — speaker]. Mishna and Gemara together form
the Talmud, of which there are two versions, the Palestinian
and the Babylonian. The latter is the more important. 43 S


20d THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


The Talmud, as edited by the Saboraira, has become
the chief depository of Jewish religious teaching, and
its universal authority resulted from the Mohammedan
conquests. To begin with, it became the legal and
constitutional foundation for Jewish communal Ufe in
Babylon, at the head of which stood the “ Prince of
the Captivity ” and the Presidents of the two Talmudic
colleges, the Gaonim [Gaon — Excellency]. As Islam
spread further and further afield the Jewish communities
in the lands that it conquered came into closer relation
■mth the Gaonate in Babylon ; they asked advice on
religious, ethical and common law questions and loyally
accepted the decisions, all of which were based on the
Taltfiud. Indeed, Babylonian Jewry came to be regarded
as the new centre of Jewish life.

As soon as the Gemara was written down, and so
received permanent form, the development of Judaism
ceased. Nevertheless we must mention the three codes
wHch in the post-Talmudic period embodied all the
substance of the religion, first, because they presented
it in a somewhat different garb, and secondly, because in
their regulation of the religious life they could not but
pay some heed to changed conditions. All the three
codes are recognized by Jews as authoritative side by
side with the Talmud, and the last, the Shulchan Aruch,
is looked upon to-day by the orthodox Jew as contain-
ing the olficial version of religious duties. What is of in-
terest to us in the case of all the codes is that they petrified
Jewish religious life still more. Of Maimonides even
Graetz asserts as much. “ A great deal of what in the
Talmud is still mutable, he changed into unmodifiable
law. ... By his codification he robbed Judaism of the
power of developing. . . . Without considering the age
in which the Talmudic regulations arose, he makes them
binding for aU ages and circumstances.” R. Jacob


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 201

ben A3her went beyond Maimonides, and Joseph Caro
beyond Jacob ben Asher, reaching the utmost limit.
His work tends to ultra-particularism and is full of
hair-splitting casuistry. The religious life of the Jews
“was rourided off and unified by the Shulchan Aruch,
but at the cost of inwardness and unfettered thought.
Caro gave Judaism the fixed form which it has retained
down to the present day.” 436

This, then, is the main stream of Jewish religious life ;
these the sources from which Judaism drew its ideas and
ideals. There were, of course, tributary streams, as, for
instance, that of the Apocalyptic literature of the pre-
Christian era, which stood for a heavenly, a universal,
an individualistic Judaism ; 437 or that of the Kabbala,
which busied itself mth symbols and arithmetical figures.
But these had small share in the general development
of Jewish life, and may be neglected so far as their effect
on historic Judaism is concerned. Nor were they ever
recognized by “official” Judaism as sources of the
Jewish religion.

So much for the realistic conception of these sources.
But what of that current in orthodox Jewish circles ?
In many respects the belief of the pious Jew touching
the origin of the Jewish system is of much more con-
sequence than its real origin. We must therefore try
and acqusunt ourselves with that belief.

The traditional view, which every orthodox Jew still
holds, is that the Jewish system has a twofold birth :
partly through Revelation and partly in the inspiration
of the “ Wise.” Revelation refers to the written and the
oral tradition. The former is contained in the holy books
of the Bible — ^the Canon as it was fixed by the members
of the Great Synagogue. It has three parts 438 ; —
the Torah or Pentateuch, the Prophetical Books and the
“ Writings ” (the rem^ing books). The Torah was


202 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


given to Moses on Sinai and he “gradually instructed
the people in it during their forty years’ wandering in the
wilderness. ... It was not until the end of his life that
he finished the written Torah, the five books of Moses,
and delivered them unto Israel, and we are in duty
bound to consider every letter, every word of the written
Torah as the Revelation of God.” 439 The remaining
books were also the outcome of divine revelation, or, at
any rate, were inspired by God. The attitude towards
the Prophetical literature and the Hagiographa, however,
is somewhat freer than that towards the Torah.

The Oral Tradition, or the Oral Torah, is the ex-
planation of the written one. I'his, too, was revealed
to Moses on Sinai, but for urgent reasons was not
allowed to be written down at once. That took place
at a much later date — only after the destruction of the
second Temple — and was embodied in Mishna and
Gemara, which thus contrin the only correct explana-
tion of the Torah, seeing that they were divinely re-
vealed. In the Talmud are included also rabbinic
ordinances and the Haggada, /.f., the interpretation of
those portions of Holy Writ other than the legal enact-
ments. The interpretation of the latter was called the
Halacha^ and Halacka and Haggada supplemented each
other. Beside these were placed the collection of de-
cisions, i.e., the three codes already referred to.

What was the significance of all this literature for the
religious life of the Jews ? What was it that the Jew
believed, what were the commands he obeyed ?

In the first place it must be premised that so far as I
am aware there is no system of dogmas in Judaism.44o
Wherever compilation of such a system has been at-
tempted it was invariably the work of non-Jews.44o*
The nature of the Jetrish reli^on and more especially
the construction of the Talmud, which is characterized


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 203


by its lack of order, is inconsistent with the formulation
of any dogmatic system. Nevertheless certain principles
may be discovered in Judaism, and its spirit will be found
expressed in Jewish practices. Indeed, it will not be
difficult to enumerate these principles, since they have
remained the same from the very beginning. What has
been termed the “ spirit of Ezekiel ” has been paramount
in Judaism from Ezra’s day to ours. It was only de-
veloped more and more, only taken to its logical conclu-
sions. And so to discover what this “spirit” is we
need only refer to the sources of the religion — ^the Bible,
the Talmud and the later Rabbinic literature.

It is a harder task to determine to what extent
this or that doctrine still finds acceptance. Does, for
example, the Talmudic adage, “Kill even the best of the
Gentiles,” still hold good ? Do the other terrible
aphorisms ferreted out in Jewish religious literature by
Pfefferkorn, Eisenmenger, Rbhling, Dr. Justus and the
rest of that fraternity, stiU find credence, or are they, as
the Rabbis of to-day indignantly protest, entirely obsolete ?
It is obvious, of course, that the single doctrines were
differently expressed in different ages, and if the whole
literature, but more especially the Talmud, is referred to
on particular points, opposite views, the “ pros ” and the
“ cons,” will be found. In other words, it is possible to
“prove” absolutely anything from the Talmud, and
hence the thrust and counter-thrust between the anti-
Semites and their Jewish and non-Jewish opponents from
time immemorial ; hence the fact that what the one
proved to be black by reference to the Talmud the
others proved to be white on the same authority. There
is nothing surprising in this when it is remembered that
to a great extent the Talmud is nothing else than a col-
lection of controversies of the different Rabbinical scholars.

To discover the religious ordinances which regulated


204 the jews and modern capitalism


actual life we must make a distinction which, to my
mind, is very real — ^the distinction between the man who
by personal study strives to find out the law for himself,
and the one who accepts it on the authority of another.
In the case of the first, the thing that matters is that
some opinion or other is found expressed. It is of no
consequence that its very opposite may also be there.
For the pious Jew who obttins edification by the study
of his literature the one view was enough. It may have
been the spur to a particular course of action ; or it may
have provided him with an additional reason for per-
sisting in a course upon which he had already entered.
The sanction of the book was sufficient in either event,
most of all if it was the Bible or, better still, the Torah.
Since all was of dmne origin, one passage was as binding
as another. This held good whether applied to the
Bible, to the Talmud or to the later Rabbinic writings.

The matter assumes a different aspect if the indi-
vidual does not, or cannot, study the sources himself
but relies on the direction of his spiritual adviser or on
books recommended by him. Such a- one is confronted
with only one opinion, arrived at by the proper inter-
pretation of contradictory texts. Obviously these views
must have varied from time to time, in accordance with
the Rabbinic traditions in each epoch. Hence, to find
the laws that in any period were binding we must search
for its Rabbinic traditions — no great task since the publi-
cation of the Rabbinic law-books. From the iith to the
14th century we have the Tad Hachazaka [“Strong
Hand*’] of Maimonides, from the 14th to the i6th the
Tur of R. Jacob ben Asher, and after the i6th the
Shulchan Aruch of Caro. Each of these gives the ac-
cepted teachings of the age, each is the decisive authority.
For the last three hundred years the Shulchan Aruch has
thus laid down the law wherever there were differences


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 205

of opinion. As the text-book I have already quoted says',
“ First and foremost the Shulchan Aruch of R. Joseph
Caro, together with the notes of R. Moses Isserlein and
the other glosses, is recognized by all Israel as the Code
on which we model our ritual observances.” The Law is
also summed up in the 613 precepts which Maimonides
derived from the Torah and which even to-day are stiU in
force. “ According to the tradition of our Teachers (of
blessed memory) God gave Israel by the hand of Moses
613 precepts, 248 positive and 365 negative. All these
are binding to all eternity ; only those which have refer-
ence to the Jewish State and agricultural life in Palestine
and to the Temple service in Jenisalem are excepted, as
they cannot be carried out by the Jews of the Diaspora.
We can obey 369 precepts, 126 positive and 243 nega-
tive ; and in addition the seven Rabbinic commands.” 44 i

The lives of Orthodox Jews were governed by these
manuals during the last century and still are so to-day,
in so far as the guidance of the Rabbinic law was followed
and opinions based on a personal study of the sources
were not formed. From the manuals we have mentioned,
therefore, we must gather the ordinances which were de-
cisive for each individual instance in religious life. Hence
Reformed Judaism is of no concern to us, and books
trimmed to suit modern ideas, such as the great majority
of the latest expositions of the “ Ethics of Judaism,”
are absolutely useless for our purpose — ^which is to show
the connexion between capitalism and genuine Jewsh
teaching, and its significance in modern economic life.

III. The Fundamental Ideas of the Jewish
Religion.

Let me avow it right away : I think that the Jewish
religion has the same leading ideas as Capitalism. 1 see
the same spirit in the one as in the other.


206 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


In trymg to understand the Jewish religion — ^which,
by the way, must not be confused with the religion of
Israel (the two are in a sense opposites) — we must never
forget that a Sofer was its author, a rigidly minded scribe,
whose work was completed by a band of scribes after
him. Not a prophet, mark you ; not a seer, nor a
visionary nor a mighty king ; a Sofer it was. Nor must
we forget kovo it came into being : not as an irresistible
force, not as the expression of the deepest needs of con-
trite souls, not as the embodiment of the feelings of
(Hvinely inspired votaries. No ; it came into being on
a deliberate plan, by clever deductions, and diplomatic
policy which was based on the cry “ Its religion must be
preserved for the people.” The same calm considera-
tion, the same attention to the ultimate goal were respon-
sible in the centuries that followed for the addition of
line to line and precept to precept. That which did not
fit in with the scheme of the Soferim from before the
days of Ezra and that which grew up afterwards, fell
away.

The traces of the peculiar circumstances which gave it
birth are still visible in the Jewish religion. In all its
reasoning it appeals to us as a creation of the intellect,
a thing of thought and purpose projected into the world
of organisms, mechanically and artfully wrought, destined
to destroy and to conquer Nature’s realm and to reign
itself in her stead. Just so does Capitalism appear on
the scene ; like the Jevdsh religion, an alien element
in the midst of the natural, created world ; like it, too,
something schemed and planned in the midst of teeming
life. This sheaf of salient features is bound together
in one word : Rationalism. Rationalism is the character-
istic trait of Judaism as of Capitalism ; Rationalism or
Intellectualism — both deadly foes alike to irresponsible
mysticism and to that creative power which draws


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 207


its artistic inspiration from the passion world of the
senses.

The Jemsh religion knows no mysteries, and is perhaps
the only religion on the face of the globe that does not
know them. It knows not the ecstatic condition wherein
the worshipper feels himself at one with the Godhead, the
condition which all other religions extol as the highest
and holiest. Think of the Soma libation among the
Hindoos, think of entranced Indra himself, of the
Homa sacrifice of the Persians, of Dionysus, the Oracle
of Greece and of the Sibylline books, to which even the
staid Romans went for advice, only because they were
written by women who in a state of frenzy prophesied
the future.

Down to the latest days of the Roman Empire the
characteristic of religious life which remained the same
in all aspects of heathenism continued to manifest itself —
the characteristic which spread far and wide and infected
large masses of people, of working yourself up by sheer
force to a pitch of bodily or mental excitement, often
becoming bacchanalian madness, and then regarding this
as the deity’s doing and as part of his service.'j^R was a
generally accepted belief that certain sudden impulses
or bursts of passion or resolutions were roused in the
soul of a man by some god or other ; and conduct of
which a man was ashamed or which he regretted, was
usually ascribed to the influence of a god.442 “It
was the god who drove me to it” — so, in Plautus’s
comedy, the young man who had seduced a maiden
excused himself to Ids father.

The same thing must have been experienced by
Mohammed in his morbid condition when his fits of
ecstasy were upon him, and there is a good deal of
mystidsm in Islam. At least Mohammedanism ^ has its
howling dervishes.


208 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

And in Christianity, too, so ftr as it was not Judaism,
room was found for emotional feeling — witness the
doctrine of the Trinity, the sweet cult of Mariolatry,
the use of incense, the communion. But Judaism looks
with proud disdrin on these fantastic, mystical elements,
condemning them all. When the faithful of other
religions hold converse with God in blissful convulsions,
in the Jewish synagogue, called a Shod p.^.. School] not
without significance, the Torah is publicly read. So
Ezra ordained, and so it is done most punctiliously.
“ Ever since the destruction of the State, study became
the soul of Judaism, and religious observances without
knowledge of the ordinances which enjoined them was
considered as being of little worth. The central feature
of public service on Sabbaths and Holy Days was
the lesson read from the Law and the Prophets, the
translation of the passages by the Targumists [Interpreters]
and the homiletic explanation of them by the Haggadisis
[Preachers].”

‘‘Radix stultiti®, cui frigida sabbata cotdi
Sed cor frigidus relligionc sua
Septima quaeque dies turpi damnato veterno
Tanquam lassati mollis imago dei»”

[“ The Sabbath — ^monstrous folly ! — fills the need
Of hearts still icier than their icy creed,

Each seventh day in shameful sloth they nod,

And ape the languor of their weary God**^]

Such was the Roman view. 443

Judaism then looked askance at mysteries. With no
different eye did it regard the holy enthusiasm for the
tiivine in the world of feeling. Astartc, Daphne, las
and Osiris, Aphrodite, Fricka and the Holy Virgin—
it would have none of them- It banished all pictorial
art from its cult. “And the Lord spake unto you


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 209

out of the midst of the fire : ye heard the sound of
Tirords but ye saw no form” (Deut. iv. 12). “Cursed
be the man that maketh ^ graven or molten image, an
abomination unto the Lord, the work of the hands of
the craftsman. . . (Deut. xxvii. 15). The command,
“Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image”
finds acceptance to-day, and the pious Jew has no statues
made, nor does he set them up in his house .444
The kinship between Judaism and Capitalism is further
illustrated by the legally regulated relationship — I had
almost said the businesdike connexion, except that the
term has a disagreeable connotation — between God and
Israel. The whole religious system is in reality nothing
but a contract between Jehovah and His chosen people,
a contract with all its consequences and all its duties.
God promises something and gives something, and the
righteous must give Him something in return. Indeed,
there was no community of interest between God and
man which could not be expressed in these terms — that
man performs some duty enjoined by the Torah and
receives from God a quid fro quo. Accordingly, no man
should approach God in prayer without bringing with
him something of his own or of his ancestors’ by way of
return for what he is about to ask. 44 S

The contract usually sets forth that man is rewarded
for duties perforitied and punished for duties neglected ;
the rewards and punishments being received partly in this
and partly in the next world. Two consequences must
of necessity follow : first, a constant weighing up of the
loss and gain which any action needs must bring, and
secondly, a complicated system of bookkeeping, as it
were, for each individual person.

The whole of this conception is excellently well
illustrated by the words of Rabbi [164-200 a.d.] ;
“Which is the right course for a man to choosy?

15


210 TBB JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

That which ' he feds to be honourable to himself and
which also brings him honour from mankind. Be
heedful of a light precept as of a grave one, for you
do not know what reward a precept brings. Reckon
the loss incurred by the fulfdment of a precept against
the reward secured by its observance, and the gain
gotten by a transgression against the loss it involves.
Reflect on three things and you will not come within the
power of sin. Know what is above thee — a seeing
eye, and a hearing ear, and all your deeds written
in a book.” 446 So that whether one is accounted
“righteous” or “mcked” depends on the balance of
commands performed against commands neglected.
Obviously this necessitates the keeping of accounts,
and each man therefore has his own, in which his
words and lus deeds, even the words spoken in jest,
are. all carefully registered. According to one authority
{JRuth ^Rabboy 33a) the prophet Elijah keeps these
accounts.; according to another {Esther Rabbet, S 6 a)
the duty is assigned to angels.

Every man has thus an account in heaven : Israel
a particularly large one (Sifra, 44^). And one of the
ways of preparing for death is to have your “ account ”
ready {Kohelet Rabba, yyr). Sometimes “ extracts” from
the accounts are forthcoming (by request). When the
angels brought an accusation against Ishmael, God asked,
“ What is his position at present ? Is he a righteous man
or a wicked?” (i.e., do the commands performed out-
weigh those neglected?) And the angels replied, “He
is a righteous nlian.” When Mar Ukba died, he asked
for a statement of his account (of the money he had given
to charity). It totalled 7000 zuzim. As he was afraid
tbit this would not suffice for his salvation he gave away
half of his fortune in order to be on the .safe side;
{Ketfikbothy 25 ; Baba Bathra, 7). The final decision as


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 21 1

I *

to the righteousness or wickedness of any man is. made
after his death. The account is then closed, and the
grand total drawn up. -The result is inserted in a
document {Shetar) which is handed to each individual
after it has been read out.447

It is not difficult to perceive that the keeping of these
accounts was no easy matter. In Biblical times, so long
as rewards and punishments were meted out in the life on
earth, the task was no great one. But in the period that
followed, when rewards and punishments were granted
partly in this life and partly in life everlasting, the
question grew to be troublesome, and in the Rabbinic
ffieology an intricate and artistic system of bookkeeping
was evolved. This distinguished between the cajutal
fiiim or the principal, and the fruits or the ■ interest,'
the former being reserved for the future world, the
latter for this. And in order that the reward wMch
•is laid up in heaven for the righteous may not be
dimin ished, God does not lessen the stock when He
grants him ordinary earthly benefits. Only when he
receives extraordinary! miraculous, benefits on earth'
does the righteous man suffer a diminution of his
heaveiily reward. Moreover, the righteous is pun-
ished for his sins at once on earth, as the. 'wicked is
rewarded for his good deeds, so that the one may
have only, rewards in heaven and the other only

chastisements.448

Another conception, is bound up with this of divine
bookkeeping and is closely akin to a second fundamental
trait of capitahsm — ^the conception of profit. Sin or
. goodness is regarded as something apart from the sinner.
Every sin, according to RabHnic theology, is considered
singly and by itself. “ Punishment is according to the
object and not the subject of the sin.” 449 The
'quantity of the broken commandments alone counts..


212 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

No consideration whatever is had for the personality
of the sinner 'or his ethical state, just as a sum of
money is separated hrom persons, just as it is capable
of being added to another abstract sum of money. The
ceaseless striving of the righteous after well-being in
this and the next world must needs therefore take the
form of a constant endeavour to increase his rewards.
Now, as he is never able to tell whe^er at a particular
state of his conscience he is worthy of God’s goodness
or whether in his “ account ” the rewards or the punish-
ments are more numerous, it must be his aim to add
reward after reward to his account by constantly doing
good deeds to the end of his days. The limited con-
ception of aU personal values thus finds no admission
into the world of his religious ideas and -its ,^lace is
taken by the endlessness of a pure quantitative ideal.

Parallel with this tendency there runs through Jewish
moral theology another which regards the getting of
money as a means to an end. The conception is
firequently found in books of religious edification, the
authors of which realizing but seldom that in their
warnings agunst the acquisition of too much wealth
they are glorifying this very practice. Usually the
treatment of the subject is under the heading
“covetousness,” forbidden by the tenth commandment.
“A true Israelite,’* remarks one of the most popular
of modern “ helps to faith,” 45° “ avoids covetousness.
He looks upon all his possessions only as a means of
doing what is pleating in the sight of God. For is
not the entire purpose of his life to use all his
possessions, all enjoyment as the means to this end ?
Indeed it is a duty ... to obtain possessions and to
increase one’s enjoyments, not as an end in themselves
but as a moans to do God’s will on earth.”

But if it is urged that this is no conclusive proof


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 213

of the connexion, between the religious idea and the
principle of getting gain, a glance', at the peculiar
ordering of divine service will soon be convincing.
At one stage in the service there is a veritable public
auction. The honorary offices connected mth the
reading of the law are given to the highest bidder.
Before the scrolls are taken from the Ark, the beadle
walks round the central platform (the Almemor) and
cries out : “ Who will buy Hazoa vehachnosa ? (i.e.,
the act of taking the scrolls from the Ark and of
replacing them). Who will buy Hagboha ? (the act
of rising the scroll in the sight of the people). Who
will buy Gelilah ? ” (the act of rolling up the scroll when
the reading is fimshed). These honours are knocked
down to the highest bidder, and the money given to the
synagogue poor-box. It need hardly be said that to-day
this practice has long been eliminated from synagogue
worship. In days of long ago it was quite general. 4 Si
Again, the words of some of the Talmudic doctors,
who at times dispute over the most difficult economic
questions with all the skill of experienced merchants,
cannot but have a curious connotation, and must needs
lead to the conclusion that they preached the getting
of gain. It would be fascinating to collect those
passages of the Talmud wherein the modern practice
of making profit is recommended by this or that
Rabbi, in many cases themselves great traders. I will
quote an instance or two. “ R. Isaac also taught that
a man should always have his money in circulation.”
It was R. Isaac, too, who gave this piece of good
advice. A man should divide his fortune into three
parts, investing one in landed property, one in move-
able goods, and holding the third as ready cash
{Baba Mesia^ 42a). “Rav once said to his son.
Come let me instruct thee in worldly matters. Sell


ii4 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

your goods even while the du^ is yet upon your feet.”
(What is this but a recommendation to have a quick
turnover ?) “ First open your purse and then unloose

the sack of wheat. . . . Have you got dates in the box ?
Hasten at once to the brewer” {Pesachim^ '

Whit is the meaning of this parallelism between the
Jemsh religion and capitalism? Is it a mere chance?
A stupid joke perpetrated by Fate? Is the one the
. effect of the other, or are both traceable to the
same causes ? Questions such as these naturally suggest
themselves to us, and I hope to answer them as we
proceed. Here it will suffice to have called attention
to them. Our next step will be the comparatively
simpler one of showing how individual customs, con-
ceptions, opinions and regulations of the Jewish religion
influenced the economic conduct of Jews, of showing
whether they facilitated the extension of capitalism by
the Jews, and, if so, to what degree. We shall limit
omrselves in this to primary psychological motives,
avoiding all speculative difficulties. Our first problem
will be to discover the goal set up by the Jevfish
religion and its influence on economic life, and the
next section is devoted to it.

IV. The Idea of Rewards ahd Punishments.

■ The idea of contract, which is part and parcel of the
underlying principles of Judaism, must perforce have
the corollary that whoever carries out the contract
receives reward, whoever breaks it receives punish-
ment. In other words, the legal and ethical assumption
.that the good prosper and the evil suffer pumshment
was in all ages a concept of the Jewish religion. All
that changed was the interpretation of prosperity and
punishment

The oldest form of Judaism knows nothing of another


SIGNIFICANCE OF <THB JEWISH RELIGION 215

world. So, weal and woe can come only in this world.
If .God desires to punish or to reward. He must do so
during man’s lifetime. The righteous therefore is pros-
perous here, and the Mncked here suffer punishment:
Obey my precepts, says the Lord, “ so that thou
mayest live long and prosper in the land which the
Lord thy God hath given unto thee.” Hence the
bitter cry of Job, “ Wherefore do the wicked live,
become old, yea, wax mighty. in power? . . . But my
way He hath fenced up, that I cannot pass . . . He
hath broken me down on every side . . . He hath
also kindled His wrath against me ” [Job xxi. 7 ;
xix. 8, 10, ii]. “Why hath all this evil come upon
me, seeing that I walked in His path continually ? ”

A little after Ezra’s time the idea of another world
{Olam Habo) finds currency in Judaism, the idea, too,
of the immortality of the soul and of the resurrection
of the body. These beliefs were of foreign origin,
coming probably from Persia. But like all other
alien elements in Judaism they, too, were given an
ethical meaning, in accordance with the genius of the
religion. The doctrine grew up that only the righteous
and the pious would rise up after death. The belief in
eternity was thus made by the Soferim to fit in with the
old teaching of rewards and pumshments, in order to
heighten the feeling of moral responsibility, i.^., of the
fear of tlie judgment of God. 4 S 2

The idea of prosperity on earth is now extended. It
is no longer the only reward of a good life, for a reward
in the world to come is added to it. Still, God’s blessing
in this world is no small part of the total reward. More-
over, the very fact that a man is prosperous here was
proof ppsitive that his life was pleasing to God, and that
therefore he might expect reward in the next world also.
Then, too, the idea of a blind fate is no longer trouble-


216 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

some. What appeared as such is now regarded as God’s
punishment on earth to the righteous for his trans-
gressions, so that his heavenly recompense may suffer
no diminution.

The “ doctrine of possession ” (if the term ma y be
allowed in connexion with the Jewish religion) received
some such shape as this, more especially through the
Wisdom Literature. The great aim of Ufe is to obey
God’s commandments. Earthly happiness apart from
God has no existence. Hepce it is folly to seek, to
obtain earthly possessions for their own sake. But to
obtain them in order to use them for divine ends, so
that they become at one and the same time the outward
symbols and guarantees of God’s pleasure, as signs of His
blessing — such a course is wise. Now earthly possessions
in this view of them include a well-appointed house and '
material well-being — ^in a word, wealth.

Look through Jewish literature, more especially
through the Holy Writ and the Talmud, and you will
■find, it is true, a few passages wherein poverty is lauded
as sometWng higher and nobler than riches. But on the
other hand you vdll come across hundreds of passages
in which riches are called the blessing of the Lord, and
only thdir misuse or their dangers warned against. Here'
and there, too, we may read that riches alone do not
necessarily bring happiness, other things are essential
in addition (such as health, for example), that there
are “goods” (in the broadest use of the word) more
valuable or as valuable as riches. But in all this
nothing is said against riches ; and never is it stated
that they are an abomination to the Lord.

I once gave expression to this view in a public lecture,-
and. it was severely criticized on all rides. Just this poiht
more than any other was controverted — ^the statement
that riches are in the Jewish religion accounted as a


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 217

valuable good. Many of my critics, among them
several distingmshed Jewish rabbis, went to the trouble
of compiling Usts of passages from the Bible and Talmud
which confuted my opinion. I admit that there are many
places in the Bible and the Talmud which regard wealth
as a 'danger to the righteous, and in which poverty is
extolled. There are some half-dozen of them in the
Bible ; the Talmud has rather more. But the important
thing is that each of these passages may be capped by ten
others, which breathe a totally different spirit. In such
disgs numbers surely count.

I put the question to myself in this way. Let us
imagine old Amschel Rothschild on a Friday evening,
after having “ earned ” a million on the Stock Exchange,
turning to lus Bible for edification. What will he find
there touching his earnings and their effect on the refine-
ment of his soul, an effect which the pious old Jew most
certainly derired on the eve of the Sabbath ? Will the
million burn his conscience ? Or will he not be able to
say, dnd rightly say, “ God’s blessing rested upon me this
week. I thank Thee, Lord, for having graciously granted
the light of Thy countenance to Thy servant. In order
to. find favour in Thy sight I shall give much to charity,
and keep Thy commandments even more strictly than
hitherto ” ? Such would be his words if he knew his
Bible, and he did know it.

For his eye would rest complacently on many a passage
in the Holy Writ. In his beloved Torah he would be
able to read again and again of the blessing of God.
“And He wiU love thee and bless thee and multiply
thee, He will also bless the fruit of thy body and the
fruit of thy ground, thy corn and thy wine and thine
oil . . . thou shalt be blessed above all peoples”
(Deut. viL 13-15). And how moved he would be
when he reached the words, “ For the Lord, thy God,


21 8 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM ,

will bless thee; as He promised thee : and thou shalt
lend unto ‘many nations, but thou shalt not borrow ’ ,
(peut. xy. 6). Then suppose he turns to the Psalms,
what would he find there ?

“ O fear the Lord, ye His saints : for there is no want to them' that
' fear Him ” (Psa. xxxiv. lo).

Blessed is the man thdt feareth the Lord. . . . Wealth and riches
are in his house ” (Psa. xc. 1-3).

“ Our garners arc full, affording all manner of store, our sheep bring
' forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields” (Psa. cxliv. 13).

He would rejoice with Job when on concluding the
story of his trials he found that his ■ latter end was more
blessed than his beginning, and that “ he had 14,000
sheep, 6000 camels, 1000 yoke of oxen and lood
she-asses ” and the rest. (Happily our friend Amsch^
knew nothing of modern Biblical criticism, and was not
aware therefore that this particular portion of Job is a
later interpolation in the story.)

The prophets also promised Israel earthly rewards if
he kept to God’s way and walked therein. If Amschel
turned to the 60th chapter of Isaiah he would find the
prophecy that one day the Gentiles should bring their
gold and tilver to Israel.

But perhaps Amschel’s favourite book would be
Proverbs, 453 “ which expresses in a most pregnant
form the ideas of life current in Israel ” (as a rabbi Wrote
to me who quoted this book in proof of my error,
Prov. xxii. i, 2 ; xxiii. 4; xxviii. 20, 21; xxx. 8).
Here he would be warned that riches alone do not bring
happiness (xxii. i, 2), that God must not be denied amid
great wealth (xxx. 8), that “he that maketh haste to h®'
rich shall not be unpunished ” (xxviii. 20). (Perhaps he
will say to himself that he does not “ hasten ” to be rich.)
The only verse that may disquieten him is when he reads


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 219

“ Weary not thyself, to be rich ; cease from thine own
wisdom” (jQciii. 4 ). But only for a moment,’ for his
mind will bft eased when he observes the connexion with
the preceding passage. Possibly these six little words
may not after all trouble him much when he remembers
the numerous passages in this very book which commend
riches. So numerous indeed that it may be said they give
the tone to the whole of Proverbs.4S4 A few only
shall be quoted : —

“ Length of days are in her right hand ; in her left are riches and
honour” (iii. 16).

“ Riches and honour are with me ; yea, durable riches and righteous-
ness” (viii. 18).

“ The rich man’s wealth is his strong city ” (x. ij).

“ Their riches are a crown unto the wise ” (xiv. 24). .

“The reward of humility and the fear of the Lord is riches and
honour and life ” (xxii. 4).

The Wisdom literature included Ecclesiastes and the
Wisdom of Solomon. The first 455 certainly does not
breathe a uniform spirit ; the many accretions of later •
times make it full of contradictions. Yet even here the
pious Jew found never a passage which taught him to
despise wealth. On the contrary, wealth is highly valued.

/“Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and
hath giveu him^ power to, eat thereof . . . this is the gift of God ”
(’’• > 9 )-

“ A fea$t is made for laughter and wine maketh glad the life : and
money answereth all things” (x. 19}.

The Wisdom of Solomon likewise praises riches. No
less does the Book of Jesus, the son of Sirach, that fund
of wise, saws, which old Amschel must have conned with
delight. If any Rabbi had told him that Ben Sirach’s
book regards the wealthy man almost as a sinner and
wealth as the ' source of evil, instancing chapters x.-xni.


220 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in proof, Amschel would have replied, “ My dear Rabbi,
you are mistaken. Those passages are a warning agdnst
the dangers of wealth. But a rich man who avoids the
dangers is thereby the more righteous. ‘ Blessed is the
rich that is found without blemish ... his goods shall
be established and the congregation shall declare his
alms ’ (xxxi, 8, 1 1). And why, my dear Rabbi ” (so

Amschel might continue), “ do you not mention the

passages which speak of the man who has amassed

millions, passages like the following?

“ * Better is he that laboureth and aboundeth in all things, than he
that boasteth himself and wanteth bread ’ (x. 27).

“ * The poor man is honoured for his skill, and the rich man is
honoured for his riches’ (x. 30).

“ ‘ Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches come
of the Lord ’ (xi. 14).

‘ Gold and silver make the foot stand sure ’ (xl. 25).

“ ‘ Riches and strength lift up the heart ’ (xl, 26).

“ ‘ Better it is to die than to beg’ (xl. 28).

“ Should I be ashamed of my millions, my dear Rabbi ”
(Amschel would conclude the imaginary conversation),
“ should I not rather look upon them as God’s blessing ?
Recall what the vdse Jesus ben Sirach said of great King
Solomon (xlvii. 18): ‘By the name of the Lord God,
which is called the Lord God of Israel, thou didst gather
gold as tin, and didst multiply silver as lead.’ I also
will go. Rabbi, and in the name of the Lord God will
gather gold as tin and silver as lead.”

In the Talmud the passages that express the same point
of view are frequent enough. Riches are a blessing if
only their owner walk in God’s ways, and poverty is a
curse. Hardly ever are riches despised. Let us quote
a few Talmudic sayings on the subject.

“ Seven characteristics are there which are ‘ comely to the righteous
?nd comely to the world.’ One of them is riches ” vi. 8). '


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 221

“ In prayer a man should tarn to Him who owns wealth and pos-
sessions. ... In reality both come not from business, but according
to merit” {KidusMnf lxxxii«).

“ R. Eleazer said, ‘ The righteous love their money more than their
bodies ’ ” {Soto, xiia).

“ Rabba honoured the wealthy, so did R. Akiba ” {Erubin, Ixxxvus).

“ In time of scarcity a man learns to value wealth best ” [^Abotk de
Rabbi Nation).


Doctrines concerning wealth such as these could not
but encourage a worldly view of life. This the Jewish
view was, despite the belief in another world. There
were indeed attempts at ascetic movements in Judaism
{e.g., in the 9th century the Karaites combined to live the
life of monks ;* in the nth century Bachja ibn Pakuda
preached asceticism in Spain), but none of them ever
took root. Judaism even in times of great affliction
was always optimistic. In this the Jews differ from the
Christians, whose religion has tried to rob them all it
could of earthly joys. As often as riches are lauded in
the Old Testament they are damned in the New, wherein
poverty is praised. The whole outlook of the Essenes,
turning its back upon the world and the flesh, was incor-
porated in the Gospels. One can easily recall passage
after pass^e to this effect. (Cf. Matt. vi. 24 ; x. 9, 10;
xix. 23, 24.) “It is easier for a camel to go through
a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into the.
Kingdom of God.” This is the keynote of Christianity!
on the point, and the difference between it and Judaism
is clear enough. There is no single' parallel to the saying
of Jesus in the whole of the Old Testament, and probably
also none in the entire body of Rabbinic literature.

There is no need to expatiate on the different attitude
of the good Jew and the good Christian towards economic


Sombart is mistaken in this, The characteristic of the Karaites
was that they accepted and lived by the letter of the Torah.]


222 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


activities. The Christian is forced by. all manner of mental
gymnastics to interpret away the Essene conception of
riches froni his Scriptures. And what anxious moments
must the rich Christian live through as he thinks of
heaven locked against him ! Compare with him the
position of the rich Jew, who, as we have seen, “ in the
name of the Lord God ” gathers gold as tin and silver
as lead.

It is well known that the religion of the Christians stood
in the way of their economic activities. It is equally wdl
known that the Jews were never faced with this hindrance. .
The more pious a Jew was and the more acquainted TOth
his religious literature, the more he was spurred by
the teachings of that literature to extend his economic
activities. A beautiful illustration of the way religion
and business were fused in the mind of pious Jews may
be found in the delightful Memoirs of Gliickel von Hameln,
to which we have already referred. “ Praise be to God,
who gives and takes, the faithful God, who always made
good our losses,” she says. And again, “ My husband
sent me a long, comforting letter, urging me to calm my
soul, for God, whose name be blessed, would restore to us
what we had lost. And so it was.”

V. The Rationalization of Life.

Since Judaism rests upon a contract between God and
His people, i.e., upon a two-sided legal agreement, each
party must have definite responsibilities. What were
those of the Jews ?

Again and again was the answer to this question given
by God through His servant Moses. Again and again ■
the Israelite was informed that two great duties were his.
He was to be holy and to obey God’s law. (Cf. Exod.
xix. 6 ; Deut. iv. 56.) -God did not require sacrifices of
him ; He demanded obedience (Jer. vii. 22, 23).


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 223 ,

Now it is genei^y known that in the course of evonts
the Jews came to regard righteousness as a minute fulfil-
ment of the Law. The inward holiness that- may have
existed in early days soon vanished before formalism and
legalism. Holiness and observation of the Law became
interchangeable terms. It is generally known, too, .that
this legalism was a device of the Rabbis to protect the
Jews against the influences first, of Hellenism, then of
Christianity, and finally, when the Second Temple was
destroyed, to maintain by its means the national con-
sciousness. The struggle with Hellenism resulted in
Pharisaism ; the struggle with Pauline Christianity which
aimed at replacing the Law by faith, transformed the
religion of the Pharisees into that of the Talmud, and
the old policy of the Scribes “ to encompass the whole of
life with regulation” made greater progress than ever.
In th«r political isolation the Jewish communities sub-
mitted entirely to the new hierarchy. They desired to
see 'the end attained and so accepted the means. The
school and the Law outlasted the Temple and the State,
and Pharisaic Rabbinism had unlimited sway. Righteous-
ness. henceforth meant living in strict accordance with the
Law. Piety, under the influence of the legally nunded
Scribes, was given a legal connotation. Religion became
the common law. In the Mishna all this finds admirable
expression. The commands of the Pentateuch and the
commands deduced from these are all divine ordinances
which must be obeyed without questioning. More and
more stress is laid on externals, and between important
and insignificant commands there is less and less
dilFerentiation.4S6

So it remained for two thousand years; so it is to-
day. Strict orthodoxy still holds fast to this formalism
and the principles of Judaism know no change. The
Toriah is as binding to-day in its every word as when


224 the jews and modern capitalism


it was given to Moses on Sinai.4S7 Its laws' and
ordinances must be observed by the faithful, whether
they be light or grave, whether they appear to have
rhyme or reason or no. And they must be strictly
observed, and only because God gave them. This
implicit obedience makes the righteous, makes the saint.
“ Srindy or holy in the Torah sense is he who is able
to fulfil the revealed will of God without any struggle
and with the same joy as carrying out his own will.
This holiness, this complete fusion of the will of man
with the divine will, is a lofty goal attainable in its
entirety by a few only. Hence the law of holiness
refers in the first instance to the striving towards- this
goal. The striving all can do ; it demands a constant
self-watchfulness and self-education, an endless strtiggle
against what is low and vulgar, what is sensual and
bestial. And obedience to the behests of the Torah
is the surest ladder on which to climb to higher and
higher degrees of holiness.” 4S8

These words show clearly enough how holiness and
legalism are connected ; they show that the highest
aim of Israel still is to be a kingdom of priests and a
holy nation ; and that the path to that end is a strict
obedience to God’s commandments. Once this becomes
apparent, we can imagine the importance the Jewish
religion has for the whole of life. In the long run,
external l^lism does not remain external ; it exercises
a constant influence on the inner life, which obtains
its peculiar character from the observance of the law.

The psychological process which led to the shaping
of Judaism appears to me to be this. At first God’s
behests were those that mattered, regardless of their
contents. But slowly the contents must needs make
themselves manifest to the observer, and a dearly
defined ideal of Life evolved itself from the word of


SIGNIFICANCE OP THE JEWISH RELIGION 225


God. To follow this ideal, to be righteous, to be holy
was the heart’s desire of each believer.

Before continuing, let us strive to- obtain some notion
of what the pious Jew meant, and means, by holiness
in the material sense.

Let us recall what was said in the last section about
the “ worldliness ” of the Jewish religion. In accordance
with tlus it can scarcely be holy to deny the natural
instincts or to crush them, as other religions teach —
e.g.^ Buddhism or Primitive Christianity. Other-worldly
asceticism was always antagonistic to Judaism. “The
soul which has been given thee — preserve it, never kill
it” — that is the Talmudic maxim on which to build
up the conduct of life and which found currency at
all times. 459

The negation of life cannot therefore be holiness.
Nor can the exercise of man’s passions and appetites
be holiness. For if it were, it could not be put as an
ideal before the righteous ; it would then be accessible
to everybody. There remains therefore only one other
possibility — to live your life of set purpose in accordance
with some ideal plan based on supernatural rules, and
either utilizing the desires within you or crushing them.
In fine, holiness is the rationalization of life. You
dedde to replace the natural existence with its desires
and inchnations by the moral life. To be holy is to
become refined, and to realize this is to overcome all
your natural tendencies by means of moral obedience. 460

A rugged Dualism — ^the terrible Dualism which is
part and parcel of our constitution— -characterizes the
Jewish conception of ethical worth. Nature is not
unholy, ndther is she holy. She is not yet holy. She
may become holy through us. All the seeds of sin are
in her ; the serpent still lurks in the grass as he did
long ago in the Garden of Eden. “ God certainly created

16


226 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the evil inclination, but he also created the Torah, the
moral law, as an antidote to it.” 461 The whole of
human life is one great warfare against the inimical forces
of Nature : that is the gmding principle' of Jewish moral
theology, and it is in accordance with it that the system of
rules and r^ulations was instituted by which life might be
rationalized, de-naturalized, refined and hallowed with-
out the necessity of renouncing or stifling it. In this
we see the marked difference between the Christian
(Essene) and the Jewish (Pharisaic) ideas of morality.
The former leads qmte logically away from the world
into the silent hermitage and the monastery (if not to
death) ; the latter binds its faithful adherent \rith a
thousand chains to the individual and social' life.
Christianity makes its devotee into a monk, Judaism
into a rationafist; the first ends in asceticism oiitside
the world ; the second in ascetidsm within it (taking
asceticism to mean the subjugation of what is natural
in man).

We shall gain a clearer insight of what Jewish Ethics
(and therefore also the Jewish religion) stands for if
we examine its regulations one by one.

The effect of Law is twofold Its very existence
has an influence ; so have its contents.

That there is a law at all, that it is a duty to obey
it, impels one to think about one’s actions and to ac-
complish them in harmony with the dictates of reason.
In front of every desire a warning finger-post is set ;
every natural impulse is nullified by the thousand and
one milestones and danger-signals in the shape of
directions to the pious. Now, since obedience to a
multifariousness of rules (the well-known commands
compiled by Maimonides numbered 365— of which 243
are still current— and his prohibitions 248) is well-
nigh impossible without a pretty good knowledge of


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH. RELIGIQN 227

what they are, the system indudes the command to study
the Holy Writ, and especially the Torah. This vdy
study itsdf is made a means of rendering life holy.
“ If the evil incUnation sdizes hold of you, march him
olF to the House of Study,” counsds the Talmud.

The view that all the enactments were for the purpo%
of ennobling the life of the faithful was accepted at all
times, and is still hdd to-day by many orthodox Jews.

“ God vnshed to refine Israel, therefore He increased the number
of the commandments” {Makkoth, 23^).

“The commandments were given by God to ennoble mankind”
{V<ytkra Rabba, 13).^

“It would have been better for a man never to have been born,
but once he is in the world let him continually examine his actions”
{Eritbin, i^b).

“Every night a man should critically examine his deeds of the
day” {Magen Abraham on Orach Cbajim, 239, § 7 ). 4®3

“‘Observd’ and ‘remember’ were ordained in a single utter-
ance.”


Hsum respice it cara 465-466 is stjU the motto of
the Jew. If he meets a king or sees a dwarf or a
negro, passes a ruined building or takes his medidne
or his bath, notes the coming storm or hears its roaring
thunder, rises in the morning and puts on his clothes
or eats his food, enters his house or leaves it, greets
a friaid.'OT meets a foe — for every emergency there
is an ordinance which must be . obeyed.

Now what of the contents of the ordinances? AU
of them aim at the subjugation of the merely animdl
instincts in man, at the bridling of his desires aud in-
clinations and at the replacing of impulses by thoughtful
action ; in -shmt, at the “ ethical tempering of man.”

You must think nothing, speak nothing, do nothing
without first considering what the law about it is, and
then apply it to ' the great purpose of sanctification.


228 THE JEW'S AND MODERN CAPITALISM

You must therefore do nothing merely for its own
sake, spontaneously, or from natural instinct.

You must not enjoy Nature for the sheer pleasure
of it. You may do so only if you think thereby of
the wisdom and the goodness of God. In the spring
when the trees put on their blossom the pious Jew
says, “ Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, . . . who
hast made Thy world lacking in nought, but hast pro-
vided therein goodly creatures and trees wherewith to
give delight to the children of men.” At the sight
of the rainbow he brings to mind the Covenant with
God. On high mountains, in vast deserts, beside mighty
rivers — ^in a word, wherever his heart is deeply moved
by Nature’s wonders — he expresses his feelings in the
benediction, “ Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, . . .
who hast made the Creation.”

You must not enjoy art for its own sake. Works of
plastic art should be avoided, for they may easily lead to
a breach of the second commandment. But even the
poet’s art is not looked upon with favour, except it refer
to God. All reading is good, provided it has some
practical end in view. “ It is best to read the books of
the Torah or such as refer to them. If we desire to read,
for recreation, let us choose books that are able to teach
us something useful. Among the books written for
amusement and to while away the time there are some
that may awake sinful wishes within us. The reading of
these books is forbidden.” 467

You must not indulge in harmless pleasures. “ The
seat of the scornful [Psa. i. i], — the theatres and circuses
of the heathen are meant.” Song, dance and wine, save
when they are connected with religious ceremonial, are
taboo. “ Rabbi Dosa ben Hyrkanus used to say.
Morning sleep and midday wine and chil dish tallc and
attending the houses where the ignorant foregather put


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 229

a man out of the world.” 468 “ He that loveth

pleasure shall be a poor man ; he that loveth wine and
oil shall not be rich” (Prov. xjd. 17),

If this be so, those qualities which m ^7 1 ^ ^
to “unseemly” conduct are useless or even harmful.
Such are enthusiasm (for while a man is in this state he
may do something useless), 469 kindness of heart (you
must exercise kindness only because the idea of benevo-
lence actuates you ; you must never let pity carry you
away, so that the nobility and dignity of the ideal law
may always be before you) ; 47 ® a sensual tempera-
ment (“the source of passion — and of sin — ^is in sen-
suality ”), 47 i ingenuousness, in short anything that marks
the natural (and therefore unholy) man.

The cardinal virtues of the pious are, on the other hand,
self-control and circumspection, a love of order and of
work, moderation and abstemiousness, chastity and sobriety.
Self-control and circumspection especially in regard
to your words is a constant theme of the moralists. “ In
the multitude of words there wanteth not transgression :
but he that refraineth his lips doth wisely” (Prov,
X. 19). 471*

No less insistent was the later tradition. “ Raba held
that whoso carries on an unnecessary conversation trans-
gresses a command ” (Joma, 1 9^). “ Our sanctifi-

cation,” says a modern book for popular edification,
“ depends to a large extent on the control of our tongues,
on the power of holding our peace. The gift of speech
, . . was given to man for holy purposes. Hence all
unnecessary talk is forbidden by our wise men.”472 •

But self-control and circumspection generally are urged
on the pious Jew.

“Who is the strongest of the strong? He who controls his
passions” {Aioti de K. Nathan, xxiii. i).


230 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

“ The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness : but
every one that is hasty hasteth only to want” (Prov. xxi. 5),

“He that hasteth with his feet sinneth” (Prov. xix. z).

And as for industry and thrift, innumerable are the
exhortations to that end.

The Jew must wake the day, not the day the Jew — so
taught the Rabbis, as a homily on Psalm Ivii. '9.473

It is just the strongest instincts of man that must be
curbed, directed into right channels, deprived of their
natural force and made to serve useful ends. In short,
they must be rationalized.

Take the instinct which detires to satisfy hunger. It
is forbidden to appease the appetite merely becairse it
happens to be there ; it should be appeased only for the
body’s sake. And when the good man sits down to
eat, let him do so according to the precepts of his Maker.
Hence the large number of rules concerning food ; hence
the command to be serious at meals — ^to begin and to
close with prayer ; hence the advice to be moderate and
the appeal to banish the pleasure of feeding. “ It is only
through God’s goodness that you are enabled to use His
creatures as food, and therefore if your entire eating and
drittlting is not to be beastly, it must be hallowed ; it
must be looked upon as the getting of strength for His
service.” 474 « The Jew should make the satisfaction

of his appetite for food a sacrament ; should regard
his table as an altar and the food thereon as •sacrifice,
which he enjoys only in order to obtain more strength
for the fulfilment of his duties. 475~476 (Jewish
cooking, by the way, is excellent.)

Finally — and this of course matters most-— just like
hunger. Love also must be rationalized, that is to say,
its natural expression must be held in ch^. Nowhere
naore than in the erotic sphere does the hard dualism


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 231

show itself so well. The world, and certdnly the
civilized nations, owes this conception of the sexual to
the Jews ■ (through the agency of Christianity, which was
infected with the idea). All earHer religions saw some-
thing’ divine in the expression of sex, and regarded sexual
intercourse as of the nature of a heavenly revdation.
All of them were acquainted with Phallus-worship in a
grosser or finer form. None of them condemned what is
sensuous, or looked upon women as a source of sin.
But the Jews from Ezra’s day to this held, and hold,
the opposite view.

To sanctify himself, to make himsdf worthy of his
converse with God, Moses “drew not nigh unto his
wife.” And Job mentions as being in his favour that he
made a covenant with his eyes not to look upon a
maid. The whole Wisdom Literature abounds in
warnings against women,* and the same spirit dominates
the' Talmud. “Better to die than to be guilty of
unchastity” {Sanhedrin, 75<*). Indeed, the three capital
crimes for which even death does not atone are murder,
idol-worship and adultery. “Hast thou business with
women ? See to it that thou art not with them alone ”

I {Kiddushin, i 2 a). This dread runs through all the
codes. The Ehen Ha-ezer condemns to death by stoning
any one who has had guilty intercourse with a woman
related to him within the prohibited degrees. The very
clothes or the fittle finger of a woman of such close
consanguimty must not be looked at “to get pleasure
from it.” It is forbidden a man to allow himself to
be waited on by a woman, or to embrace his aunt or
his grown-up sister. .■<.

Teachers of to-day are no less explicit. “ Guarcl
yourself against any contact with impurity,” says one

[* Sombart instances Prov. v. 3-4; But does not the passage clearly
refer to iad women ?]


232 THE JEWS- AND MODERN CAPITALISM


of -the most popular of them. “ Look at nothing, hear
nothing, read nothing, think of nothing which may in
any wise occupy your thoughts unchastely or make
you familiar with what is not clean. Do not ’walk in
the street behind a woman ; if you cannot help yourself,
look not at her with desire.* Do not let your eye
rest longingly on a woman’s hair, nor your ears on
her voice ; do not take pleasure in her form ; yea, a
woman’s very clothes should not be looked at if you
know who has worn them. In all things go out of
the way of Opportunity. . . . The two sexes should
not jest together. Even in make-believe little pressures
of the hand, winking of the eyes, embracing and kissing
are sinful.” 477

Warnings such as these were not neglected, as may
be seen from the autobiographies of pious Jews, some
of which may now be read in modern languages.478

But the point of it all must not be overlooked.
Other religions also show signs of bang terrified at
women. Ever since the notion became prevalent that
woman brought sin into the world there have always
been morbid souls who spent their lives exciting them-
selves with all manner of lascivious imaginings but
avoiding woman as though she were the devil incarnate.
In other reli^ons the man fled to the hermit’s cave in
the 'v^derness or to a monastery. In either case, his
religion forced “ chastity ” upon him, with all the horrid
resultants well known to students of monastic life.
Not so Judaism. Judmsm does not forbid sexual
intercourse ; it rationalizes it. Not that it does not
regard sexual intercourse as sinful. Sinful it must
always be, but its sinfulness may to some extent be
removed by sanctification. Hence Judaism advocates early

[* Cf. Robert Louis Stevenson : “ To remember tie faces of women
without desire, ... is not this to know both wisdom and virtue ? ”]


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 233


marriages and regulates the relationship between husband
and wife as something “ ever in the great Taskmaster’s eye.”

. “ A man should not be without a wife, nor a woman
■vnthout a husband ; but both shall see to it that God’s
spirit is in their union.” That is the motto, and in
accordance with it the Talmud and the later codes
have multiplied rules and regulations for the gmdance
of married couples. In the nth century (to mention
but a few) R. Eleazar ben Nathan compiled a special
code on the subject, the Eben Ha-ezer, and in the
13th century R. Nachman wrote a famous work on
the sanctification of marriage .479 The laws of the
Eben Ha-ezer were incorporated in the Shulchan Aruch
and together with the glosses upon them receive recogni-
tion to-day. The mmn ideas throughout are those we
have already considered : hallow thy body’s strength in
accordance with God’s will ; be careful of thy manhood ;
be God’s servant at all times. 480

Such was the Jewish view of marriage, which has
continued for more than two thousand years. It is
well illustrated by that touching story in the Book of
Tobit, which may form a fitting conclusion to our
considerations under this head.

“And after that they were both shut in together, Tobias rose out of
the bed, and said. Sister, arise, and let us pray that God would have
pity on us.

“ Then began Tobias to say. Blessed art Thou, O God of our fethers,
and blessed is Thy holy and glorious name for ever ; let the heavens
bless Thee, and all Thy creatures.

“Thou madest Adam, and gavest him Eve his wife for an helper and
stay : of them came mankind : Thou hast said, It is not good that man
should be alone ; let us make unto him an aid like unto himself.

“ And now, O Lord, 1 take not this my sister for lust, but uprightly '
therefore mercifully ordain that we may become aged together.

“ And she said with him. Amen.

“ So they slept both that night.” — Tobit vii. 4-9.


234 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


It may be asked, Why have I treated this aspect of
Jewish life at such great length ? My answer is simple.

I really believe that the rationalization of life, and
especially of the sexual life, which the Jewish religion
effects cannot be too highly estimated for its influence
on economic activities. If religion is at all to be
accounted a factor in Jewish economic life, then' certainly
the rationalization of conduct is its best expression.

To begin with, a number of good qualities or virtues
which are indispensable to any economic order owe
thdir eidstence to rationalization — e.g.^ industry, neat-
ness, thrift. But the whole of life, if lived in accord-
ance ^th the ordinances of the “Wise,” ministers
to the needs of wealth-getting. Sobriety, moderation
and piety are surely qualities which stand the business
man in good stead. In short, the whole ideal of conduct
preached in Holy Writ and in Rabbinic literature has
something of the morality of the small shopkeeper about
it — ^to be content with one wife, to pay your debts
punctually, to go to church or synagogue on Sunday
or Saturday (as the case may be) and to look down
with immeasurable scorn on the sinful world around.

But Jewish moral teaching did not spend itself in the
mere production of this type of the small respectable
shopkeeper. It may even be questioned whether the type
is altogether its work. At any rate, it is not of much
consequence for economic development. Middle-class
respectability as a matter of fact owes its origin to the'
narrow outlook of the petty trading class. Hence it can
have but little to do with capitalism, except in so far as
the qualities which that class possessed were the founda-
tion on which capitalism could be built up. But capitalism
did not grow out of the qualities, and therefore we must
search in other directions for the causes which made the
Jews pioneers of capitalism.


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 235

The first that suggests itself is the cultivation of family
life, among Jews, calling forth as it did energies so neces-
sary to economic growth/ The cultivation and refinement
of femily life was undoubtedly the woi'k of the Jewish'
Rabbis, assisted, it must be added, by the vicissitudes of
the Jewish people. In Judaism woman was first held in
that high esteem which is the prime postulate for the
ejdstence of a sound family life and all that it means for
man’s conduct. The Rabbis by their laws and regula-
tions affecting marriages, the marital relationship and the
education of children and the rest, did all that was
humanly possible in the way of outward limitation arid
influence to establish family life in all its purity. That
marriage is considered more sacred among pious Jews than
amoi^ people of other denonunations is demonstrated by
the statistics of illegitimate births. These are considerably
fewer among Jews than among Christians.481


Year.

Countcy.

XUegiiliinate Births per Thousand.

Of the General
Population.

Of the Jews.

1904

Prussia

2-51

0*66

1905

Wurtemberg

2'83

o‘i6

1907

Hesse

j

2*18

o“i3

1908

Bavaria

4-25

0*56

X901

Russia

X'2,9

0^X4


If the figures for Russia be looked into a little more
carefully it will be seen that illegitimate births among
Jews vary very much from those, among non- Jews. At
the same time it must not be forgotten that there is a


236 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


slight lowering of the standard in sexual morality among
Jews. Thus, in Russia, of every loo births there were
illegitimate —


Year.

Greek Orthodox.

Catholics

Protestants.

Jews.

1868

2-96

3 * 4 S

3*49

0'19

1878

3*13

3‘*9

3*85

0*25

1898

2*66

3*53

3-86

0-37

1901

2-49

3*57

376

0*46


Such then was one result of the family life current
among Jews and introduced by them. The man con-
tributed to it the best that was in him, and in return he
drew from it invigorating strength, courage, and an
inducement to maintain and to expand his position in life.
Faimly life of this kind generated centres for masculine
energy large enough to set in motion such a mighty
economic system as capitalism. For this system calls for
great energy, and we can scarcely imagine it being pro-
duced except through the agency of psychological influences
which appeal not only to the social instincts but also to the
family ideal.

It may perhaps be necessary to look below the psycho-
logical influences to the physical ones. How curiously
moulded must the constitution of the Jew have become
through the rationalization of his married life ! We see
this phenomenon — ^that a people mth strong sexual
inclinations (Tacitus speaks of it as projeetissima ad lihi-
dinem gens) is forced by its religion to hold them in
complete restraint. Extra-marital connexions are abso-
lutely forbidden ; every one must content himself with
one wife, but even with her intercourse is restricted.


SIGlSflFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 237

The result of all this is obvious. Enormous funds of
energy were prevented from finding an outlet in one
direction and they turned to others. Knowing as we do
the condition of the Jews throughout the Common Era,
we shall not be wrong in assuming that economic activities
were their chief channel. But we may go further. It is
possible to prove that, quite generally, restrained sexual
desires and the chase of profits go hand in hand. For the
present we have had but little scientific investigation of
this fact, so important for all modern sociological pro-
blems. 482 That a lordly way of life is usually accom-
panied by lavishness of money and of love, whereas such
qualities as niggardliness, avarice and a setting of much '
store by money are the ubiquitous partners of a stunted
sexual life — these are everyday experiences, and though
it would be presumptuous to attempt to solve this most
interesting problem with the aid of observations which
must perforce be limited, yet for the purpose of my
argument they ought not to be omitted, at least as an
hypothesis.

We see then that a good deal of capitalistic capacity
which the Jews possessed was due in large measure to the
sexual restraint put upon them by their religious teachers.
The effect of the rationalization of the whole of life on the
physical and intellectual powers of the Jew must still be
gone into by scientists ; 483 at present we have only
beginnings of such studies. I refer to the influence of
the very wise regulations of sexual intercourse, of eating
and drinking and so on. (Incidentally it is worthy of
note that Jewish law has long restricted the marriage of
the finfit.)

One other point in conclusion. The rationalization of
life accustomed the Jew to a mode of living contrary to
(or side by side with) Nature and therefore also to an
economic system like the capitalistic, wluch is likewise


238 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM,

conOrary to (or side by side with) Nature. ' WKat in
reality is the idea of maldng profit, what is economic
rationalism, but the application to economic activities of
the rules by which the Jewish religion shaped Jewish life ?
Befbrie capitalism could develop the natural man had to be
changed out of all recognition, and a rationalistically
minded mechanism introduced in his stead. There had •
to be a transvaluation of all economic values. And what
was the result ? The homo capitalisticus, who is closely
related to the homo Judauiy both belonging to the same
species^ homines radonalistici artificiales.

. And so the rationalization of Jewish life by the Jewish
rehgion, if it did not actually produce the Jewish capacity
for capitalism, certainly increased and heightened it.

VI. Israel and the Nations.

One of the canses to which the Jew owed lus economic
progress was, as the reader wiU remember, the fatct that
I^el was for generations a stranger and an ahen. If we
seek to account for this aloofness we shall find its roots in
the ordinances of the Jewish religion^ shall find that this
- religion alwa.ys maintained and broadened the line of
sep^tion. As Leroy-Beaulieu, who has studied this
aspect of Jewish history with great success, has so well
, said, “ La loi leur donnait I’esprit de clan.” The very
fiwt that they had their Law forced the JewS' to live apart
from the Gentiles. For if they dfesired to observe the
La^ they, needs must keep to themselves. The Jews
created the Ghetto, which from the non-Jewish pdint id '
view was.a concession and a privil^e and not the result
of enmity.’

But the Jew& wished to live s^arated from the test
because they, felt themselves superior to the comnao^i'
people round them. . They were the Chosen B»je^ »
People of Priests. The Rabbis (hd all. liibat was-


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGIOJI 239

reqtdred to fan the flame of pride — from Ezra, who
forbade intermarriage as a profanation of Jewish ptirity,
down to this very day, when the pious Jew ^ys every
morning, “ Blessed aft Thou, O Lord, King of the
Universe, who hast not' made me a Gentile (stranger).”

And so they lived separate and apart all through
the centuries of the Diaspora, despite the Diaspora and.
(thanks to the bands wMch the Law laid upon them)
because of the Diaspora — separate and apart, and there-
fore a group hy themselves, or, if you will, a group
by themselves and therefore separate and apartl

A group by themselves — they were that already at
the time of the Babylonian l^ile, which in reality
established the internationalism of the Jew. Many of
them, espedally the wealthier ones, renaained behind in
. Babylon of their own free vnll, but they retained
their Judaism and professed it zealously. They kept
Up a lively intercourse with their brethreh who h^
returnfed home, took a sympathetic interest in' their '■
flartunesj, rendered them assistance and sent them new
settlers from time to time.4&t

The bonds of union were in no wise relasced in the
Hdlieniatic Diaspora^ “ They kept closely together in
lift €3&eet and throughout the world. No matter where
they pitched their tents, thdr connmdoa with Zion
'was. uphdd. In the heart of the wildmrnoss they had
native , land, where they were at home . ^ . By hseaiae
of thec.Dia^ra they entered into the world. Ln'tfae
Lidko^tic dtasa they adopted the Greek tcmgtte

mannete even if only as- the outer ;

.t^jair Jteyashnese-” (WeUhauaen).

k onntimied th«ong^tent ceoturi^
eo^^,. If dte' ' became

^is : kncne'-howt :

tic^etheri” edes CtoectM^ So k wasr;,


240 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

“ All the Jewries in the Empire and beyond,” we read
of the rebellion of the 130 a.d., “were stirred

and more or less openly supported the insurgents on
the banks of the Jordan.” 486 is jt any different
to-day when a Jew is expelled from some Russian
town or other?

A group by themselves and therefore separate and
apart — ^this is true from earliest antiqiuty. All nations
were struck by their hatred of others, of which they
were for the first time accused by Hekateus of Abdera
(300 B.C.). Many other ancient writers repeat the
indictment, 487 almost always in the same words.
Perhaps the best known passage is in Tadtus : “ Apiid
eos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu. Sed adversus
omnes alios hostile odium. Separati epulis discreti cubili-
buSy proiectissima ad libidinem gens^ alienarum concubitu
abstinent" {Historia, V, i. 5). [Amongst themselves
they are doggedly faithful and quick to pity, but all
strangers they hate as enemies. They neither eat nor
intermarry with strangers ; they are a people of strong
passionsj yet they vnthhold themselves from other
men’s wives.]

Jewish apologetics never attempted to combat these
'views: 488 there must therefore have been some
foundation for them.

It is true that the Jews kept together so closely
and shut themselves off very often on account of the
unfriendly treatment they received at the hands of
•thdr hosts. But it was not so originally. The Jews
^antdl to live secluded from their neighbours because
of thdr rdigion. Thst this was so appears from their
attitude in those lands where they were well treattdi
Witness one or two instances in the andent v^orld, of
which I have just ^ven illustrations [Tacitus, ett;.]*
Witness the same tendency iu the Middle Ages. Take


SIGmFlCANQE OF THE /EWISJf .RELIGION-

I ' *

Arabia the- first century. The Jews there at ' the
period natn^ Jived according to the religion Which
the- Tanaim and Amoraim had formulated — ^keeping
the dietary laws, and festivals, the great White Fast
and the Sabbath. Although they could not comjplrin
of anything in this hospitable country they yet longed
for the return to the Holy Land and awaited the
advent of the Messiah every day. . . . They were in.
direct communication with the Jews of Palestine.” 489
Or ■ takp Modrish Spain. While the Christians who
lived among the Mohammedans forgot thrir mother
tong^ (Gothic Latin), no longer understood their
sacr^ books, and were rather ashamed of their
Christianity, the Spanish Jews were more and more
devoted to their national language, their Holy Writ
and thdir andent religion.49o Tins attitude was
dearly reflected in the Jewish poetry and philosophy
of the period, the greatest perhaps that mediasval
Jewry can boast In the nudst of an Arabic-SpaiMsh
wcwld in wHch they lived and enjoyed the respect of
their feUow-dtizens, they were strictly “national,” that
is rdigioiM ; they drew poetic inspiration from the
Niesdanic hopes and were filled vrith an tmconquerable
lodging for Zion.49i One need only mention tint
great Je^da Halevy, whose Odes to Zion are the
highest expression of the genius of neo-Heborew poetry.

. tike a cloud suling in the blue of the sky above,
Judaism rrinds its way through history, refried by
the /mempries of its hoary and holy past as by a sofr
, bpse^ l!'o. this ve»y day the pious Jew bksties lus;
child^n with the words, “The Lord make tW 0
mid ManasseL”

, ' Was the effect m . economic life 'Of >4^- •

and supcunetiou the J^sh social
the Jem stuped outtide the Gbmtei

t7


242 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


their intercourse was with strangers. We have already
dealt with the point elsewhere ; my reason for calling
attention to it again is to show that this attitude was
a direct consequence of the teaching • of Judaism, that
in treating the people aihong whom they lived as
“others,” the Jews were but obeying a divine behest.
Here, too, their conduct was hallowed, and it received
a sanction from the peculiar system of laws relating
to “ strangers.”

The most important and most frequently discussed
legal ordinance in this system was that affecting the
taking of interest. In the old Jewish theocracy, 492
as in every society in early dvilization, loans without
interest were the regular means of rendering assistance
by a man to his neighbour. But it may be observed
that even in the earliest collection of laws interest was
allowed to be taken from “strangers,”

The Jewish code was no exception. The best
example of this may be found in Deuteronomy xxiii.
20. Other passages in the Torah that have reference
to interest are Exodus x:rii. 25 and Leviticus xxv. 37.
They all form the theme of a lively discussion which
has been carried on from the days of the Tanaim
down to the present. The chief instance and at the
same time the crux of the matter is in the Talmud,
in Baha Mezia^ 'job, and my own feeling is that for
the most part it is an attempt to discount the very
dear statement of the Torah by all manner of sophis-
tnes. For what does the verse in Deuteronomy say ?
“ Unto a foreigner thou mayest lend upon usury ; but
unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury.”
The only doubt is in the wording of the original,
which may mean with equal grammatical exactitude,
“ thou mayest lend upon usury ” or “ thou shalt. lend
upon usury.” (It need hardly be added that “ustiry ”


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 243

with the translators was nothing more or less than
our “interest.”)

In either case, the pious Jew was allowed to take
interest from non-Jews — that is the significant thing
as far as we are concerned. Right through the Middle
Ages he was not oppressed by the burden of the anti-
usury prohibition which weighed upon the Christian.
The Jewish law on the subject was never to my know-
ledge questioned by the ' Rabbis.493 On the other
hand, there were periods when the “ mayest ” in the
Deuteronomic passage was read as “ shalt,” periods
when the Jew was urged to become a money-lender.

The authors who have dealt with this subject in
modern times appear to have overlooked the fact that
the Deuteronomic command has been received as one
of the laws that regulate the life of the Jew, and that
Tradition sanctions money-lending to a stranger on
payment of interest. Of the 613 commandments,
this is the 198th and may be found likewise in the
Shulchan Arnch. Modern Rabbis 494 to whom the
perfectly clear ordinance in Deuteronomy is somewhat
inconvenient (one cannot quite understand why),
attempt to explain it away by asserting that “strang«ts”
in the passage is intended not for all non-Jews but
only for heathens or idol-worsHppers. If this be so,
let it not be forgotten that there never was any very
distinct conception as to who was, and who was not,
an idol-worshipper. Besides, the pious Jew who has
committed the 198th command to memory is no^
likely to draw the fine distinction urged by the
learned Rabbis. Sufficient for him that the man to
whom he lent money was no Jew, no “ brother,” no
neighbour, but a Gentile.

Now think of the position in which the pious Jew
and the pious Christian respectively found themselves


244 the JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

in the period in which money-lending first became a
need in Europe, and which eventually gave birth td
capitalism. The good Christian who had been addicted
to usury was full of remorse as he lay a-dying, ready
at the eleventh hour to cast from him the ill-gotten
gains which scorched his soul. And the good Jew ?
In the evening of his days he gazed upon his well-
filled caskets and coffers, overflomng with sequins of
which he had relieved the miserable Christians or
Mohammedans. It was a sight which warmed his
heart, for every penny was almost like a sacrifice which
he had brought tp his Heavenly Father.

Apart from this particular question, the stranger was ^
accorded special consideration in the Jewish l^;al code.
Duties towards him were never as binding as towards
your “ neighbour,” your fellow- Jew. Only ignorance
or a desire to distort facts will assert the contrary.
.True, the conception of law and morality as it affected
the “ stranger ” varied from age to age. But there was
no change in the fundamental idea that you owed less
consideration to the stranger than to one of your own
people. That has remained the same from the day
when the Torah first became current to our own.
That is the impression that is conveyed by an unprqu-
diced study of the law concerning strangers in the
Holy Writ, the Talmud, the Codes and the Responsa
literature. There certainly are passages in the Torah
which breathe equality between the home-born aftd
the stranger (Exod. xii. 49, xxiii. 9 ; Lev. xix.
33, 34, XXV. 44-6; Dfeut. X. r8, 19). But in a
question of halacka (legal enactment) such as this is,
the oral tradition cannot be neglected. Secondly, the
passages instanced above all refer to the Giry tlie nmi-
Jew who had settled in Palestine, seeing that' the Jes^
knew the heart of a Ger^ “for ye were Gerim in the'


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 245

land of -Egypt.” [In the sentence about interest the
word used is Nachari, some one from another nation.]
As time went on it was but natural that there should
be an. increase of the cases in Jewish law in which the
non-Jew was at a disadvantage as compared with the
Jew. So much so that in the latest code they occupy
a" good deal of space.494*

What was the importance in economic life of the
laws concerning strangers ? It was twofold. First,
intercourse with strangers was bereft of all consider-
ations, and commercial morality (if I may put it so)
became elastic. I admit that there was no' absolute
.necessity for this to come about, but all the conditions
were, given for it to do so, and it must have been an
everyday occurrence in certain circles. “If a non-
Jew makes an error in a statement of account, the Jew
may use it to his own advantage ; it is not incuml^nt
upon him -to point it out.” So we may read in the
Tar, and thoi^h Joseph Caro did not include this in
his law-book, it crept in later as a gloss from the pen
of Isserlein. Is it not obvious that the good Jew must
needs diraw the conclusion that he wras not bound to be
so particular in his intercourse with non-Jews? With
Jews he will scrupulously see to it that he has just
weights and a just measure ; 495 but as for his
dealings with non-Jews, his conscience will be at ease
even though he may obtain an unfair advantage. It
is not to be denied that in some cases honesty towariis
n<io-Jews was ii^culcated.49S* But to think that
this should have been necessary ! Besides, this is the
actual wording of the law : “ It, is permissible to take
^vantage of a non- Jew, for it is written, Thou shalt
not take advantage of thy brother.” (The context refers
not to overreaching, but only to the asking of higher
prices from a non-Jew.)


246 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

This conception must have been firmly rooted in
those districts (j-g., in Eastern Europe) where the study
of the Talmud and the casuistry it engendered were
universal. The effect it had on the commerce of the
Jew has been described by Graetz, surely no prejudiced
witness. “To twist a phrase out of its meaning, to
use all the tricks of the clever advocate, to play upon
words, and to condemn what they did not know. . . such
were the characteristics of the Polish Jew. . . Honesty
and right-thinking he lost as completely as simplicity
and truthfulness. He made himself master of all the
gymnastics of the Schools and applied them to obtain
advantage over any one less cunning than himself. He
took a delight in cheating and overreaching, which
gave lum a sort of joy of victory. But his own
people he could not treat in this way : they were as
knowing as he. It was the non-Jew who, to his loss,
felt the consequences of the Talmudically trained mind
of the Polish Jew.” 496

In the second place, the differential treatment of
non-Jews in Jewish commercial law resulted in the
complete transformation of the idea of commerce and
industry generally in the direction of more freedom.
If we have called the Jews the Fathers of Free Trade,
and therefore the pioneers of capitalism, let us note
here that they were prepared for this role by the free-
trading spirit of the commercial and industrial law,
which received an enormous impetus towards a policy
of laissez-faire by its attitude towards strangers.
Clearly, intercourse vith strangers could not but loosen
the bonds of personal duties and replace them by
economic freedom. Let us glance at this in greater
detail.

The theory of price in the Talmud and the Codes,
in so fzT as it affected trade between Jew and Jew, is


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 247

, exacdy parallel to the scholastic doctrine of j’ustum
pretium which was prevalent in Europe throughout the
Middle Ages. But as between Jew and non-Jew, there
was no just price. Price was formed as it is to-day,
by “ the higgling of the market.” 496*

Be that as it may, the important thing to observe
is that already in the Talmud, and still more distinctly
in the Shulchan Aruch, conceptions of the freedom of
industry and enterprise, so entirely alien to the Christian
law of Mediaeval Europe, are met with. It is a subject
deserving of close study and should be taken up by
a specialist. For my part, I can do no more here than
refer to a few instances. But few though they be, they
seem to me to be conclusive evidence on the point in
question. ’ My first reference is to a passage in the Talmud
which fully recognizes free competition among sellers.

Mis/ma. — “R. Judah was of opinion that a shopkeeper should not
distribute nuts among children, because by so doing he gets them into
the habit of coming to him. But the Rabbis allow it. Moreover,
it is not lawful to spoil prices. But the Rabbis say, ‘Blessed be
his memory,’ ”

Gmara , — “The question at once arises, what was the reason for
the attitude of the Rabbis in the first case ? The answer is that the
shopkeeper may say to his competitor, ‘1 give the children nuts,
you can give them plums.’ And what is the reason of the Rabbis
in the second case i The Mishna forbids price alteration, and yet
they say, ‘ Blessed be his memory.’ The answer is, they bless his
memory because he reduces prices ” (Saia Mezia, 60a and ^).

In the Codes the reasons have been omitted, and the
dry statement of law only is found. “ A shopkeeper U
allowed to make presents of nuts and other tWngs to the
children who come to purchase in his shop, in order to
win their custom. Moreover, he may sell at a price
below the current one, and the competing tradesmen can
■ do nothing” {Choshen Mishpat^ 225, § 18).


248 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

Similarly, in the laws regulating the conduct of traders
who bring, their goods to the market town,' the following
may be read : “ Should the strangers sell more cheaply
than the native dealers, or should their goods be of a
better quality, the natives may not prevent them, for
the Jewish public derives benefit therefrom” {Choshen
Msshfaty 156 , § 7 ).

Once more. “ If a Jew is prepared to lend money to
a non-Jew at a lower rate of interest than some one eke,
the latter can do nothing gainst it” {Choshen Mishpaty
156, § 5 )-

Finally, Jewish law favours industrial laissez-faire. So
we find in the Shukhan Aruch : “ If any one commenced
a handicraft in his street and none of his neighbours
protested, and then one of the other residents in the
street wshes to carry on the same calling, the first may
not complain that the new-comer is taking the bread out
of his mouth, and try to prevent him ” {Choshen Mish-
156, § 5 )-

Clearly, then, free trade and industrial freedom were in
accordance with Jewish law, and therefore in accordance
with God’s mil. What a mighty motive power in
economic life !

VII. Judaism and Puritanism.

. I have already mentioned that Max Weber’s study of
the importance of Puritanism for the capitalistic system
was the impetus that sent me to consider the importance
of the Jew, especially as I felt that the dominating ideas
of Puritanism which were so powerful in capitalism were
more perfectly developed in Judaism, and were abo of
course of much earlier date.

A complete comparison of the two “isms” is not
within my province here. But I believe that if it w«e
made; it would be seen that there is an almost imique


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 249

identity of view between Judaism and Puritanism, at
least, on those points which we have investigated. In
both will be found the prepondeirance of religious
interests, the idea of divine rewards and punishments,
asceticism within the world, the close relationship between
reUgion and business, the arithmetical conception of sin,
and, above all, the rationalization of life.

Let me refer to an instance or two. Take the attitude
of Judaism and Puritanism to the problem of sex. In
one of the best hotels of Philadelphia I found a notice in
my room to this effect : “ Visitors who may have to
transact business with ladies are respectfully requested to
leave the door of their room open wWle the lady is with
them.” What is tlus but the old dictum of the Talmud
(Kiddushin, S2a), “ Hast thou business with women ?
See to it that thou art not vdth them alone”?

Again, is not the English Sunday the Jewish Sabbath ?

I would also recall the words of Heine, 49®* who
had a clear insight into most things. “ Are not,” he
asks in his Confessions^ “ Are not the Protestant Scots
Hebrews, with their Biblical names, their Jerusalem,
pharisaistic cant? And is not thdr religion a Judaism
which allows you to eat pork ? ”

Puritanism is Judaism.

Whether the first was influenced by the second, and if
so, how, are most difficult questions to answer. It is
well known, of course, that in the Reformation period
there was close intercourse between Jews and certain
Christian sects, that the study of Hebrew and the Hebrew
Scriptures became fashionable, and that the Jews in
England in the 17 th century were held in very high
esteem by the Puritans. Leading men in England like
Oliver Cromwell built up their religious views on the Old
Testament, and Cromwell himself dreamed of a recon-
ciliation between the Old and the New Testaments, and


250 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

of a confederation between the Chosen People of God
and the Puritan English. A Puritan preacher of the
day, Nathaniel Holmes by name, wished for nothing
better than, in accordance with the letter of the prophetic
message, to become a servant of God’s people and to
serve them on bended knee. Public life became Hebraic
in tone no less than the sermons in churches. And if
only speeches in Parliament had been in Hebrew, you
might have believed yourself in Palestine. The “ Level-
lers,” who called themselves “ Jews ” (in opposition to
their ' opponents whom they termed “ Amalekites ”),
advocated the adoption of the Torah as the norm of
English legislation. Cromwell’s officers suggested to
him to appoint seventy members of his Privy Council
according to the number of the members of the Synhe-
drin. To the Parliament of 1653 General Thomas
Harrison, the Anabaptist, was returned, and he and his
party clamoured for the introduction of the Mosaic
legislation into England. In 1649 it was moved in the
House of Commons that- the Lord’s Day should be
observed on Saturday instead of on Sunday. On the
banners of the victorious Puritans was inscribed “ The
Lion of Judah.” 497 It is significant that not only
the Bible, but the Rabbinical literature as well, was ex-
tensively read in Ia;ge circles of the clergy and laity.

Altogether, then, there appears to be sufficient evidence
for the deduction of Puritan doctrines from Jewish
sources. The specialists must decide. Here I have
been able to do no more than give a hint or two. And
in conclusion I would draw attention to a little humorous
publication, which appeared in the year 1608 and the
contents of which would seem to demonstrate the close
connexion between Judaism and Calvinism (which is only
Pmitanism). It is called, Der Cahinische Judenspiegel
(the Calvinistic Jewish Mirror), and on page 33 a com-


SIGNIFICANCE OF THE JEWISH RELIGION 251


parison is drawn between the two religions in the follow-
ing droll fashion. [The old German is delightful.] “ If
I am to say on my honour why I am become a Calvinist,
I shall have to confess that the one and only reason which
persuaded me was that among all the religions 1 could
find none which agreed so much with Judaism, and its
view of life and faith. (Here follow a number of
parallel statements, partly serious and partly satirical).
8. The Jews hate the name of Mary and tolerate her
only when she is made of gold and silver, or when her
image is impressed on coins. So do we. We too like
Mary farthings and crowns, to which we pay aU due
respect, for they are useful in business. 9. The Jews
everywhere are at pains to cheat the people. So are we.
For that very reason we left our country to wander in
other lands where we are not known in our true colours,
so that by our deceit and cunning ... we might lead
astray the ignorant yokels, cheat them and bring them


CHAPTER XII


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS
I. The Problem

The decision to deal in a work of a sdentific character
with the problem suggested by the title of the present
chapter has not been arrived at mthout a great effort.
For it has of late become the fashion to seize upon any^
thing even but faintly savouring of the psychology of
nations as the plaything for the lighter moods ot
dilettanti, whilst descriptions of the Jewish genius have
been haded as the newest form of political sport by
coarser spirits, whose rude instincts cannot but give
offence to all those who, in our gross age, have managed
to preserve a modicum of good t^ste and impartiality.
Unjustifiable juggling with categories in race psychology
has already led to the conclusion that it is impossible to
arrive at any scientific results in this field of study. Read
the books' of F. Hertz, Jean Finot and others 49 ® and
you will lay them down with the feeling that it is useless
to attempt to find common psychological characteristics
among any conglomeration of humans ; that French
esp-%t is a myth — ^in feet that there are no Frenchmen,
just as there are no Jews. But cross the street, and lo
and behold, you are face to face with a specific type ; 'read
a book or stand before a picture and almost unconsciously
you say. How very German, how thoroughly French !

Is this only the imagining of our fancy ? 499~5oo


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


253


Nay more. If we think for a moment of human
history* we must ’ needs construct for ourselves the hypo-
thesis of a sort ' of " collective soul.” When, for
example, we talk of the Jewish religion we are bound to
connect it mth the Jewish people whose genius gave it
birth. Or, when we say the Jews had an influence on
modern economic development, it follows surely that
there must have been something essentially Jewish that
brought it about. Otherwise we might as well assert
that it would have made no difference to the economic
history of Western Europe if Eskimos had taken the
place of Jews, or perhaps even gorillas would have
done equally well !

This reductio ad ahsurdum shows plainly enough that
there must be some specifically Jemsh characteristic. But
let us consider the matter from a slightly different point
of view. Let us glance at the objective circumstances in
the Jewbh aptitude for modern capitalism. There was
first, as we have seen, the dispersion of the Jews over a
vdde area. Now without recourse to subjective forces
the Diaspora can be as little explained as the effects of the
Diaspora. And one thing is evident^ The disperaon of
a people in itself does not necessarily have either eco-
nomic or cultural results ; nay, very often dispersion may
lead to fusion and ultimate disappearance.

. It has been claimed — and with truth — that it was
the dispersion of the Jews which fitted them to become
intermedianes. Granted, but did it also tend to make
of them negotiators and private advisers of princes,'
callings which have from time immemorial been the
stepping-stones of the interpreter to higher posts? Were
l^e capacities essential to these new offices not inherent
in the Jews themsdives?

We have admitted that the dispersion of the Jews was
rcsponrible for no little of their success in international


254 the jews and modern capitalism


commerce and credit. But is not the postulate to this
success the fact that the Jews everywhere kept together ?
What would have happened if, like so many other scattered
races, they had not maintained their bonds of umon ?

Lastly, let us not forget that the Jews came among
just those peoples who happened to be mature enough
to receive capitalism. But even so, if Jewish influence
was strong (and it is so still) in Holland, in England,
in Germany, in Austria-Hungary — stronger far than
their influence on the Spaniards, Italians, Greeks or
Arabs — it was in a large measure due to the contrasts
between them and their hosts. For it would seem that
the more slow-witted, the more thick-skulled, the more
ignorant of business a people is, the more effective is
Jewish influence on their economic life. And can this
be satisfactorily accounted for except through special
Jewish peculiarities ?

No matter what was the origin of their innate dis-
similarity from their hosts, the salient point is that this
strangeness should have obt^ned lasting influence in
economic life. Once more it is impossible to fathom
this without the assumption of inherent Jewish char-
acteristics. That a people or a tribe is hated and perse-
cuted does not furnish sufficient reason for spurring
them on to redoubled efforts in their activities. On the
contrary, in most cases this contempt and ill-treatment
but serve to destroy morals and initiative. Only where
man is possessed of exceptional qualities do these become,
under the stress of circumstance, the source of regenerated
energy.

Again, look at their semi-dtizenship. Does not the
identical argument hold good here also.? It is so
obvious as to become almost a truism. Nowhere did
the Jews enjoy the same advantages as their fellow-
dtizens, and yet everywhere they\ achieved economicdjy


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


255


much more than the rest of the population. There
can be but- one explanation for this — tjie specifically
Jewish characteristics.

On the other hand, the legal position of the Jews
varied in different countries and at difiFerent times. In
some States they were allowed to engage in certain
occupations j in others these same occupations were
forbidden them ; in others again, such as England, they
were on a perfectly equal footing with the rest of the
people in this respect. And yet they devoted themselves
almost everywhere to particular callings. In England
and -America they began their commercial mission by
becoming bullion-merchants or storekeepers. And can
this be accounted for in any other way than by once
more pointing to their peculiar characteristics?

As for the wealth of the Jews, that alone will hardly
suffice to explain their great achievements in the sphere
of economic activities. A man who possesses vast sums
must have a number of intellectual qualities in addition,
if his money is to be usefully employed in the capital-
istic sense. That surely requires no proof.

Jewish characteristics must therefore exist. It remains
only to discover what they are.

Qur first thought of the Jews as a unit will naturally
be associated with their religion. But before we proceed
another step I should like to premise that on the one
hand I shall limit the group lumped together under the
Jewish religion, and on the other hand, I shall enlarge
it. I shall limit it by only considering the Jews since
their expulsion from Spain and Portugal, that is, from the
end of the Middle Ages. I shall enkrge it by including
vfithin the drcle of my observations the descendants of
Jews, even if they themselves have left the faith.

Moreover, I should like to touch upon the arguments
urged agwnst the existence of Jewish peculiarities.


356 .THE- JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

(1) It has been rematked that the Jew;s of Western
Europe and America have to a large extent assimilated
with the peoples among whom they dwell. This need
not be denied, even if specifically Jewish characteristics
were as dear as daylight. Is it not possible for social
groups to intermingle? A man may be a German,
have all the characteristics of a German, and yet be an
individual in the group “ international proletariat ! ”
Or take another instance. Are not the German Swiss
at one and the same time Svnss and G^man?

(2) The Jews in the Diaspora, it is maintained, are
not a “nation” or a “people” in the commonly
accepted meaning of the term, 5 oi since they are not
a political, cultural or linguistic community. The
reply to this objection is that there are many other
qualifications besides those mentioned a common
coigin) which must be considered. But speaking
generally, it is as well not to press a definition too
dosely.

(3) The difiFerences between tiie Jews themselves have
been made much of. It has been said that there is no
homogendty among Jews, that one section is bitterly
opposed to the other. The Western Jews are diflFerent
from the Eastern Jews, the Sephardim from the Ash-
kenazim, the Orthodox from the liberals, the everyday
Jew from the Sabbath Jew (to use a phrase of Marx).
This also there is no need to deny. But it does not by
any means preclude the possibility' of common Jewish
characteristics. Is it so difficult to conceive of wheels
witlun wheds? Cannot a large group contain le^er
.groups side by side? Think of the many groups to
which an Englishsnan may belong. He may be a
Catholic or a Protestant, a farmer or a professor, a
northerner or a southerner and Heaven only knows what
dse besides. But he remdns an Englishman all the


257


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

caftift. So with the Jew. He may belong to one circle
within the whole, may possess certdn characteristics that
mark all individuals in that drcle, but he retains the
spedfically Jewish characteristics nevertheless.

Finally, I must make it plain that I have no intention
of outlining all Jewish characteristics. I propose to
deal with those only that have reference to economic
Ufe. I shall not content payself with the old-fashioned
expressions, such as the Jewish “commercialism,” the
“bartering spirit” and the like. I say nothing of the
practice of some to include the desire for profit as a
characteristic of a sodal group. The desire for profit
is human — all too human. In fact, I must reject all
previous analyses of the Jewish soul (in so far as they
touch economic life), and for the following reasons.
First, what the Jew was well-fitted for was never clearly
enough designated. “ For trade ” is much too vague a
term to be of the slightest use. I have therefore tried
to show, in a spedal chapter, the circle of economic
activities for which Jews are spedfically fitted. Secondly,
mere description is not explanation. If I wrant to prove
that a man has all the capabilities necessary to make him
an admirable speculator on the Stock Exchange, it will
not be enough if I say that he will make a fine jobber.
It is Uke saying indigence is due to poverty. Yet that
is how Jewish economic talents have been treated. Our
method will be different. We shall try to discover
cert^n properties of the soul which are congenial to the
exerdse of econoijuc functions in a capitalistic organism.

And now, having deared the wajf, I shall proceed to
denionstrate what the real Jewish peculiarities arc.

II. An Attempt at a Solution.

It is surprising to find that despite the enormity of
the problem there is yet a great degree of unammity in

x8


258 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

the different views about the Jews. In Uterature no
less than in actual life, unprgudiced observers agree on
one or other point of importance. Read Jellinek or
Fromer, Chamberlain or Marx, Heine or Goethe, Leroy-
Beaulieu or Picciotto — ^read the pious or the non-
conformity Jew, the anti-Semitic or the philo-Semitic
non-Jew — and you get the impression that aU of them
are consdous of the same peculiarities. This is com-
forting to one who is about to describe the Jewish
genius once more. At any rate, he will say nothing
that other people might not have said, even though his
standpoint be slightly different. In my own case I shall
attempt to show the coimexion between the characteristics
and the natural gifts of the Jews and the capitalistic
economic system. 1 shall first try to sketch a detailed
picture of Jewish qualities and then proceed to bring
them into relation with capitalism.

Unlike most other writers on the subject I will begin
by noting a Jewish quality which, though mentioned
often enough, never recdved the recognition which its
importance merited. I refer to the extreme intellectuality
of the Jew. Intellectual interests and intellectual sldll
are more strongly developed in him than physical
(manual) powers. Of the Jew it may certainly be said,
“ I’intelligence prime le corps.” Everyday experience
proves it again and agdn, and many a fact might be
dted in its support. No other people has valued the
learned man, the scholar, so highly as the Jews. ** The
wise man takes precedence of the king, and a bastard who
is a scholar of a high-priest who is an ignoramus.” So,
the Talmud has it. Any one who is acquainted with
Jewish students knows well enough that this over-rating
of mere knowledge is not yet a thing of the past. And
if you could not become “wise,” at least it was your
duty to be educated. At all times instruction was com-


259


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

pulsory iii Israel In truth, to learn was a religious
duty ; and in lEastern Europe the synagogue is still
called the Shool (Schule, School). Study and worship
went hand in hand ; nay, study was worship and igno-
rance was a deadly sin. A man who could not read
was a boor in this world and damned in the next. In
the popular sayings of the Ghetto, nothing had so much
scorn poured upon it as foolishness. “ Better injustice
than folly,” and “ Ein Narr ist ein Gezar ” (A fool is a
misfortune) are both well known .503

The most valuable individual is the intellectual indivi-
dual ; humanity at its best is intellectuality at its highest.
Listen to what a sensible Jew has to say when he pictures
the ideal man, the superman if you like, of the future.
He takes it all as a matter of course ; those who are
differently constituted must surely tremble at the pros-
pect. “ In the place of the blind instincts . . . civilized
man will possess intellect conscious of purpose. It should
be every one’s unswerving ideal to crush the instincts and
replace them by vdll-power, and to substitute reflection
for mere impulse. The individual only becomes a man
in the fullest sense of the word when his natural pre-
disposition is under the control of his reasoning powers.
And when the process of emancipation from the instincts
is complete we have the perfect genius wth his absolute
inner freedom from the domination of natural laws.
Civilization should have but one aim — to liberate man
from all that is mystic, from the vague impulsiveness of
all instinctive action, and to cultivate the purely rational
side of his bemg.” S03 Only think. Genius, the very
essence of instinctive expression, conceived as the highest
form of the rational and the intellectual !

One consequence of this high evaluation of the intellect
was fhe esteem in which callings were held according as
they demanded more “ headwork ” or more “ handwork.”


260 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

The former were almost in all ages placed higher than the
latter. It is true that there may have been, and still may
be, Jewish communities in which hard bodily labour is
done every day, but this hardly applies to the Jews of
Western Europe. Even in Talmud times Jews preferred
those callings which necessitated a lesser expen^ture of
physical energy. As Rabbi said, “ The world needs both
the seller of spices and the tanner, but happy he who is a
seller of spices.” pr again, “ R. Mar used to say, A
man should have Ids son taught a clean and easy handi-
craft” (Kidiushin, 82^).

The Jews were quite alive to their predominant quality
and always recognized that there was a great gulf between
their intellectuality and the brute force of their neigh-
bours. One or two sayings popular among Polish Jews
express the contrast with no little humour. “ God help
a man against Gentile hands and Jewish heads.” “ Heaven
protect us against -Jewish mooch (brains) and Gentile
Itoach (physical force).” Mooch v. Kooch — that is the
Jewsh problem in a nutshell. It ought to be the motto
of this book.

The predominance of intellectual interests could not
but lead in a people so gifted as the Jews to intellectual
skill. “ Say what you like about a Jew, you cannot say
he is a fool.” “A gallant Greek, a stupid Jew, an honest
Gipsy- — all are unthinkable ” is a popular saying among
Roumanians. And a Spanish proverb has it, “A hare
that is slow and a Jew who is a fool : both are equally
probable.” S04 Who that has had dealings vith Jews
but will not confirm that on an average tiiey possess a
greater degree of understanding, that they are more,
intelligent than other people? I might even call it
astuteness or sagacity, as was remarked by one of the
keenest observers of Jews Sos a century or more ^o,
who characterized them as “intellectual and endowed


. 26 i


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

with great genius for things of the present age,” though,
he added, “ to a less degree than in the past.”

“ The Jewish niind is an instrument of precision ; it
has the exactness of a pair of scales ” : most people will
agree mth this judgment of Leroy-Beaulieu. And when
H. S. Chamberlain speaks of the under-development of
Jewish “understanding” he must surely be using the
term in a special sense. He cannot possibly mean by it
quick thought, predse analysis, exact dissection, speedy
combination, the power of seeing the point at once, of
suggesting analogies, distinguishing between synonymous
things, of drawing final condusions. The Jew is able to
do ^ this, and Jellinek, who rightly lays stress So6 on
this side of the Jewish character, points out that Hebrew
is particularly rich in expressions for activities demanding
qualities of the mind. It has no fewer than eleven words
for seeking or researching, thirty-four for distinguishing
or separating, and fifteen for combining.

There is no doubt that these mental gifts make the
Jews prominent as chess-players, as mathematicians 5o7
and in all calculating work. These activities postulate a
strong capadty for abstract thought and also a spedal
kind of imagination, which Wundt has so happily chris-
tened the combinatory. Their skill as physidans (ability
at diagnosis) So8 nuy also be traced to their calculating,
dissecting and combing minds, which “ like lightning,
illuminate dark places in a flash.”

It is not unknown that often enough Jewish mental
ability degenerates into hair-splitting. (When the mill
has no corn to grind it grinds itself.) But this does not
matter so much as another fact. The intellectuality of
the Jew is so strong that it tends to develop af the
expense of other mental qualities, and the mind is apt to
become one-sided. Let us take a few instances. The
Jew lacks the quality of instinctive understanding ; he


262 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


responds less to feeling than to intellect. We can scarcely
think of a Jewish mystic like Jacob Bohme, and the con-
trast becomes still more striking when we remember the
sort of mysticism found in the Kabbala. In the same
way all romance is alien to this particular view of life ;
the Jew cannot well sympathize \rith losing oneself in the
world, in mankind or in nature. It is the difference
between frenzied enthxisiasm and sober, matter-of-fact
thought.

^in to. this characteristic is that of a certain lack of
impressionability, a certain lack of receptive and creative
genius. When I was in Breslau a Jewish student from
the far East of Siberia came to me one day “ to study
Karl Marx.” It took him nearly three weeks to readi
Breslau, and on the very day after his arrival he called on
me and borrowed one of Marx’s works. A few days
later he came again, discussed with me what he had read,
brought back the book and borrowed another. This
continued for a few months. Then he returned to his
native rillage. The young man had received absolutely
no impressions from his new surroundings ; he had made
no acquaintances, never taken a walk, hardly knew in
fact where it was that he was staying. The life of Breslau
passed him by completely. No doubt it was the same
before he came to Breslau, and will be the same through-
out the future. He will walk through the world vdthout
seeing it But he had made himself acquainted with
Marx. Is this a typical case ? I think so. You may
meet with it every day. Are we not continually Struck
by the Jew’s love for the inconcrete, his tendency away
from the sensuous, his constant abiding in a world of
abstractions P And is it only accidental that there are
far fewer Jewish painters than Hterary men or professors ?
Even in the case of Jewish artists is there not-something
intellectual about their work ? Never was, word more.


263


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

truly spoken than when Friedrich Naumann compared
Max Liebermann [the famous Jewish painter] with
Spinoza, saying, “He paints with his brain.”

The Jew certainly sees remarkably clearly, but he does
not see much. He does not think of his environment
as something alive, and that is why he has lost the true
conception of life, of its oneness, of its being an organism,
a natural growth. In short, he has lost the true concep-
tion of the personal side of life. General experience must
surely support this view ; but if other proofs are demanded
they will be found in the peculiarities of Jewish law,
which, as we have already seen, abolished personal rela^
tionships and replaced them by impersonal, abstract con-
nexions or activities or aims.

As a matter of fact, one may find among Jews an
extraordinary knowledge of men. They are able with
their keen intellects to probe, as it were, into every pore,
and to see the inside of a man as only RSntgen rays
would show him. They muster all his qualities and
abilities, they note his excellences and his weaknesses ;
they detect at once for what he is best fitted. But
seldom do they see the whole man, and thus they often
make the mistake of ascribing actions to him wMch are
an abomination to lus inmost soul. Moreover, they
seldom apprise a man according to his personality, but
rather according to some perceptible characteristic and
achievement.

Hence their lack of sympathy for every status
where the nexus is a personal one. The Jews* whole
being is opposed to all that is usually understood by
chivalry, to all sentimentality, knight-errantry, feudali^,
patriarchalism. Nor does he comprehend a social c»rder
based on relationships such as these. ** Estates the
' realm ” and craft organizations are a loathing to Htn.
Politically be is an individualist. A constitutional


264 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM

State in which all human intercourse is regulated by
clearly defined legal prindples suits him well.* He
is the born representative of a “liberal” view of life
in which there are no living men and women of flesh
and blood \nith distinct personalities, but only citizens
with rights and duties. And these do not differ in
different nations, but form part of mankind, which is
but the sum-total of an immense number of amorphous
units. Just as so many Jews do not see themselves —
do they not deny their obvious characteristics and assert
that there is no difference between them and Englishmen
or Germans or Frenchmen? — so they do not see other
people as living beings but only as subjects, citizens,
or some other such abstract conception. It comes to
this, that they behold the world not Ttith their “ soul ”
but with their intellect. The result is that they are easily
led to believe that whatever can be neatly set down on
paper and ordered aright by the aid of the intellect
must of necessity be capable of proper settlement in
actual life. How many Jews still hold that the Jewish
Question is only a political one, and are convinced
that a liberal regime is all that is required to remove the
differences between the Jew and his neighbour. It is
nothing short of astounding to read the opinion of
so soundly learned a man as the author of one of the
newest books on the Jewish Question that the whole
of the anti-Semitic movement during the last thirty
years was the result of the works of Mart and Diihring.
“The thousand victims of the pogroms and the million
sturdy workers who emigrated from their homes are
but a striking illustration of the power of — Eugen
Diihring” (!).S09 Is not this opposing ink and blood,
understanding and instinct, an abstraction and a reality ?

[* Is not this the general modem tendency f Cf. Sir H. Maine's
dictum : The progress of Society is ftom status to contract.]


265


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

The conception of the universe in the mind of such
an intellectual people must perforce have been that of
a structure well-ordered in accordance with reason. By
the aid of reason, therefore, they sought to understand
the world; they were rationalists, both in theory and
in practice.

Now as soon as a strong consciousness ot the ego
attaches itself to the predominating intellectuality in
the thinldng being, he will tend to group the world
round that ego. In other words, he will look at the
world from the point of view of end, or goal, or purpose.
His outlook win be teleolo^cal, or that of practical
rationalism. No peculiarity is so fully developed in
the Jew as this, and there is complete unanimity of
opinion on the subject. Most other observers start
out mth the teleology of the Jew ; I for my part
regard it as the result of his extreme intellectuality,
in which I believe all the other Jewish peculiarities
are rooted. In saying this, however, I do not in the
least wish to mininuze the very great importance of
this Jewish characteristic.

Take any expression of the Jewish genius and you
will be certjun to find in it this teleological tendency,
which has sometimes been called extreme subjectivity.
Whether or no the Indo-Germanic races are objective
and the Semitic subjective,®” certsun it is that the
Jews are the most subjective of [peoples. The Jew never
loses himself in the outer world, never sinks in the depth
of the cosmos, never soars in the endless realms of
thought, but, as JeUinek well puts it, dives below the
sur^ce to seek for pearls. He brings everything into
relation with his ego. He is for ever asking why, what
for, what will it bring ? Cut bono ? His greatest
interest is always in the result of a thing, not in the
thing itself. It is un-Jewish to regard any activity,


266 THE JEWS AND. MODERN CAPITALISM


be it what you will, as am end in itself ; un-Jewish to
live your life without having any purpose, to leave all
to chance ; un-Je\dsh to get harmless pleasure out of
Nature. The Jew has taken all that is in Nature and
made of it “ the loose p^es of a text-book of ethics
which shall advance the higher moral life.” The Jewish
religion, as we have already seen, is teleological in its
aim ; in each of its regulations it has the ethical norm
in view. The entire universe, in the Jew’s eyes, is some-
thing that, was made in accordance with a plan. This
is one of the differences between Judaism and heathenism,
as Heine saw; long ago. “ They (the heathens) all have
an endless, eternal ‘past,’ which is in the world and
develop with it by Ae laws of necessity ; but the God
of the Jews was outside the world, which He created
as an act of free-will.”

No term is more fanuliax to the ear of the Jew than
TachliSy which means purpose, dm, end or goal. If
you are to do anything it must have a tachlis ; life
itself, whether as a whole or in its single activities, must
have some tachlis^ and so must the universe. Those
who assert that the meaning of Life, of the World, is
not tachlis but tragedy, the Jew will reckon as foolish
visionaries.

How deeply the teleolc^cal view of things is em-
bedded in the nature of the Jew may be seen in the
case of those of them who, like the Chassidim, pay no
attention to the needs of practical life because “there
is no purpose in them.” There is no purpose in malting
a living, and so they let their wives and children starve,
and devote themselves to the study of their sacred books.
But we may see it also in all those Jews who, with a soul-
weariness within them and a faint smile on their counten-
ances, understai^ding and forgiving everything, stand and
gaze at life from their own heighte, far above this world.


267


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS

I have in my mind such choice spirits among the literary
men of our day as George Hirschfeld, Arthur Schnitzler
and George Hermann. The great charm of their work
Hes in this world-aloofness with which they look down
on our hustle and bustle, in the quiet melancholy pervad-
ing all their poetry, in their sentiment. Thdir very lack
of will-power is only strength of will in a kind of n^ative
form. Through all their ballads sounds the same soft
plaint of grief : how purposeless and therefore how sad
is the world ! Nature herself is tinged vdth this sorrow ;
autumn always lurks in ambush though wood and meadow
be bright with gay spring blossoms; the wind plays
among the fallen leaves and the sun’s golden glory, be
it never so beautiful, must go down at last. Subjectivity
and the conception that all things must have an aim (and
the two are the same) rob the poetry of Jewish writers
of naivete^ freshness and directness, because Jewish poets
are unable simply to enjoy the phenomena of this world,
whether it be human fate or Nature’s vagaries ; they must
needs cogitate upon it and turn it about and about.
Nowhere is the air scented with the primrose and the
violet, nowhere gleams the spray of the rivulet in the
wood. But to make up for lack of these they possess
the wonderful aroma of old wine and the magic charm
of a pair of beautiful eyes gazing sadly into the distance.

When this attitude of mind that seeks for a purpose in
all things is united with a strong will, with a large fund
of enei^y (as is generally the case with the Jew), it
ceases to be merely a pmnt of view ; it becomes a policy.
The man sets himself a goal and makes for it, allowing
nothing whatever to turn him aside from his course ; he
is determined, if you Uke, stiff-necked. Heine in
characterizing his people called it stubbornness, and
Goethe said that the essence of the Jewish character
was energy and the pursuit of direct ends.


268 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


My next point is mobility, but I am not quite sure
whether this can be ascribed to all Jews or only to
the Ashkenazi (German) Jews. Writers who have sung
the praises of the Sephardim (Spanish Jews) always lay
stress on a certain dignified air which they have, a
certain superciliousness of bearing.S^^ Their German
brethren, on the other hand, have always been described
as lively, active and somewhat excitable.5i2 Even
to-day you may meet with many Spanish Jews, espe-
cially in the Orient, who strike you as being dignified,
thoughtful and self-restrained, wKo do not in the least
appear to have that mobility, moral or physical, which
is so often noticeable in European Jews. But mobility
of mind — quick perception and mental versatility — all
Jews possess.

These four elements, intellectuality, teleology, energy
and mobility, are the corner-stones of Jewish character, so
complicated in its nature. 1 believe that all the qualities
of the Jew may be easily traced to one or more of these
elements. Take two which are of special import in
economic life — ^treme activity and adaptabiUty.

The Jew is active, or if you will, industrious. In the
words of Goethe, “ No Jew, not even the most insignifi-
cant, but is busy towards the achievement of some worldly,
temporary or momentary aim.” This activity often enough
d^enerates into restlessness. He must for ever be up
and doing, for ever managing something and carrying it
to fruition. He is always on the move, and does not
care much if he makes himself a nuisance to those who
would rest if they could. All musical and social
“ aifairs ” in our large towns are rim by Jews. The Jew
is the born trumpeter' of progress and of its manifold
blessings. And why ? Because of his practical-minded-
ness and his mobility combined vrith his intellectuality.
The last more especially, because it never strikes deep


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


269


root. All intellectuality is in the long run shallowness ;
never does it allow of probing to the very roots of a
matter, never of reaching down to the depths of ithe soul,
or of the universe. Hence intellectuality makes it easy to
go from one extreme to the other. That is why you find
among Jews fanatical orthodoxy and unenlightened doubt
side by side ; they both spring from one source.

But to this shallow intellectuality the Jew owes perhaps
the most valuable of his characteristics — his adaptability —
which is unique in history. The Jews were always a
stilFnfecked people, and their adaptability no less than
their capacity to maintain their national traits are both due
to the one cause. Their adaptability enabled them to
submit for the time being, if circumstances so demanded,
to the laws of necessity, only to hark back to their
wonted ways when better days came. From of old the
Jewish character was at one and the same time resistant
and submissive, and though these traits may appear
contradictory they only seem so. As Leroy-Beaulieu
well sjud, “ The Jew is at once the most stubborn and the
most pliant of men, the most self-willed and the most
malleable.”

The leaders and the “ wise ” men of the Jewish people
were in all ages fully alive to the importance, nay the
necessity, of this flexibility and elasticity, if Israel was to
continue, and they were therefore never tired of insisting
upon it. Jewish literature abounds in instances. “ Be
as pliant as the reed which the wind blows in this direc-
tion and in that, for the Torah can be observed only by
him that is of a contrite spirit. Why is the Torah
likened unto water? To tell you that just as water
never flows up to the he^hts but rather runs down to the
depths, so too the Torah does not abide with the haughty
but only with the lowly.” S*3 Or again, “ When the
fox is in authority bow down before him.” 5H Once


270 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


more, “ Bend before the wave and it passes over you ;
oppose it, and it will sweep you away.” SiS Finally, a
supplication from the Prayer Book runs as follows : “May
my soul be as the dust to every one.”

It was in this spirit that the Rabbis counselled their
flocks to pretend to accept the dominant faiths in those
countries where their eristence depended on the renuncia-
tion of their own. The advice was followed to a large
extent, and in the words of Fromer, “ The Jewish race,
by simulating death from time to time, was able to live on
and on.”

There are very few, if any, make-believe Christians or
Moslems to-day. Nevertheless, the remarkable pbwer of
the Jew to adapt himself to his environment has more
scope than ever. The Jew of Western Europe and
America to-day no longer wishes to maintain his religion
and his national character intact ; on the contrary, he
mshes, in so far as the nationalist spirit has not yet
awakened in him, to lose his characteristics and to
assinailate with the people in whose midst his lot happens
to be cast. And lo, tlus too he can successfully achieve.

Perhaps the clearest illustration of the way in which
Jewish traits manifest themselves is the fact that the Jew
in England becomes like an Englishman, in France like a
Frenchman, and so forth. And if he does not really
become like an Englishman or a Frenchman, he appears
to be like one. That a Felix Mendelssohn should write
German music, that a Jacques Offenbach French and a
Souza Yankee-doodle ; that Lord Beaconsfield should set
up .as an Englishman, Grambetta as a Frenchman, Lassalle
as a German ; in short, that Jewish talent should so often
have nothing Jewish about it, but be in accord with its
environment, has curiously enough again and again been
ui^ed as evidence that there are no specifically Jewish
characteristics, whereas in truth it proves the very opposite


JEWISH characteristics 27t

in a striking fashion. It proves that the Jews have the gift
of adaptability in an eminently high degree. The Jew
might go from one planet to another, but his strangeness
amid the new surroundings would not continue for long.
He quickly feels his way and adapts himself with ease. He
is German where he wants to be German, and Italian if that
suits him better. He does everything and dabbles in
everything, and with success. He can be a pure Magyar
in Hungary, he can belong to the Irredenta in Italy, and
be an anti-Semite in France (Drumont !), He is an adept
in srizing upon anything which is still germinating, and
bringing it with all speed to its full bloom. Si6 All
this his adaptability enables him to do.

I have already said that this pecuUar capadty for
adaptation is rooted in the four elements of the Jewish
character. But perhaps the rationalism of the Jew is
responsible for it to a greater d^ee than the other three.
Because of his rationalism he is able to look at everything
from without. If the Jew is anything, it is not because
he must but because he determines to be so. Any con-
victions he may have do not spring from his inmost soul ;
they are formulated by his intellect. His standpoint is
not on solid earth but an imaginary castle in the air. He
is not organically original but mechanically rational. He
lacks depth of feeling and strength of instinct. That is
why he is what he is, but he canj also be different. That
Lord Beaconsfidd was a Conservative was due to some
acddent ox other, or some poUtical conjuncture ; but
Stein and Bianarck and Carlyle were Conservatives
because they could not help it ; it was in their blood.
Had Marx or Lassalle been born in another age, or in
another ennronmeot, they might quite easily have become
Conservatives instead of Radicals. As a matter of fact,
Lassalle was already coquetting vdth the idea of becoming
a reactionary, and no doubt he would have played the


' 272 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


part of a Prussian Junker as brilliantly as that of socialist
a^tator.

The driving power in Jewish adaptability is of course
the idea of a purpose, or a goal, as the end of all things.
, Once the Jew has made up his mind what line he will
follow, the rest is comparatively easy, and his mobility only
makes his success more sure.

How mobile the Jew can be is positively astounding.
He is able to give himself the personal appearance
he most desires. As in days of old through simulating
death he was able to defend himself, so now by colour
adaptation or other forms of mimicry. The best
illustrations may be drawn from the United States,
where the Jew of the second or third generation is
with difficulty distinguished from the non-Jew. You
can tell the German after no matter how many
generations ; so with the Irish, the Swede, the Slav.
But the Jew, in so far as his racial physical features
allow of it, has been successful in imitating the Yankee
type, especially in regard to outward marks such as
clotiung, bearing and the peculiar method of hairdressing.

Easier still, on account of his mental and moral
mobifity, is it for the Jew to make the intellectual
atmosphere of his environment his own. His mental
mobility enables him quickly to seize upon the “ tone ”
of any circle, qmckly to notice what it is that matters,
quickly to feel lus way into things. And his moral
mobifity? That helps him to remove troublesome hin-
drances, either ethical or aesthetical, from his path. And
he can do this with all the more facility because he has
only to a small degree what may be termed personal dig-
nity. It means little to lum to be untrue to himself, if it
is a question of attaining the wished-for goaL

Is this picture faithful to fife ? The obvious adapta-
bility of the Jew to the changing conditions of the


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


273


struggle for existence is surely proof enough. But
there is further proof in some of the special gifts
which Jews possess. I refer to their undoubted talent
for journalism, for the Bar, for the stage, and all of it
is traceable to their adaptability.

Adolf Jellinek, in the book we have referred to more
than once, has drawn a clever little sketch showing^ the
connexion between the two. “ The journalist,” he says,
“must be quick, mobile, lively, enthusiastic, able to
analyze quickly and as quickly to put two and two
together; must be able to enter in medias res, to have
the gist of any question of the day or the central fact
of a debate in his mind’s eye ; must be able to deal with
his subject in dear and well-marked outlines, to describe
it epigrammatically, antithetically, sententiously, in short
arrestii^ sentences, to breathe life into it by means of a
certain amount of pathos, to ^ve it colour by means of
esprit, to make it spicy by means of seasoning.” Are
not all these Jewish traits ?

The actor’s calling, no less than the barrister’s, depends
for success on his ability to place himself quickly in a
strange world of ideas, to take a right view of men and
conditions without much difficulty, to form a correct
estimate of them and to use them for his own end.
The Jew’s gift of subjectivity stands him here in good
stead, for by its aid he can easily put himself in the posi-
tion of another, take thought for him and defend him.
To be sure, jurisprudence is the bulk of the contents of
Jewish literature !

III. Jewish Characteristics as Applied to
Capitalism.

Now comes the question, how and in what way did the
Jewish characteristics enable Jew^ to become ' financiers
and speculators, indeed, td engage as successfully in

19


274 '^HE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


economic activities within the framework of the capi-
talistic system as to be mathematicians, statisticians,
physicians, journalists, actors and advocates ? To what
extent, that is, does a spedal talent for capitalistic enter-
prise spring from the elements in the Jewish character ?

Speaking generally, we may say in this connexion
what we have already remarked about capitalism and
the Jewish religion, that the fundamental ideas of capi-
talism and those of the Jewish character show a singular
similarity. Hence we have the triple parallelism between
Jewish character, the Jevrish religion and capitalism. What
was it we found as the all-controlling trait of the Jevrish
people ? Was it not extreme intellectuality ? And is
not intellectuality the quality which differentiates the
capitalistic system from all others ? Organizing ability
springs from intellectuality, and in the capitalistic system
we find the separation between head and hands, between
the work of directing and that of manufacturing. “ For
the greatest work to be completely done, you need of
hands a thousand, of minds but only one.” That sums
up the capitalistic state of things.

The purest form of capitalism is that wherein abstract
ideas are most clearly expressed. That they are part and
parcel of the Jewish character we have already seen ;
there is no occasion to labour the dose kinship in tins
respect between capitalism and the Jew. Again, the
qudity of abstraction in capitalism manifests itself in
the substitution of all qualitative differences by merely
quantitative ones (value in exchange). Before capitalism
came, exchange was a many-sided, multi-coloured and
technical process ; now it is just one specialized act —
that of the dealer ; before there were many relationships
between buyer and seller ; there is only one now — the
commerdal. The tendency of capitalism has been to do
away with different manners, customs, pretty local and


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


27S


national contrasts, and to set up in their stead the dead
level of the cosmopolitan town. In short, there has been
a tendency towards uniformity, and in this capitalism and
Liberalism have much in common. Liberalism we have ■
already shown to be a near relative of Judaism, and so we
have the kindred trio of Capitalism, Liberalism, and Judaism.

How is the inner resemblance between the first and the
last best manifested ? Is it not through the agency of
money, by means of which capitalism succeeds so well in
its policy of bringing about a drab uniformity ? Money
is the common denominator, in terms of which all
values are expressed; at the same time it is the be-all
and end-all of economic activity in a capitalistic system.
Hence one of the conspicuous things in such a system
is success. Is it othervdse with the Jew ? Does he not
also make the increase of capital his chief aim ? And
not only because the abstractness of capital is congenial
to the soul of the Jew, but also because the great regard
in which (in the capitalistic system) money is held strikes
another sympathetic note in the Jewish character — its
teleology. Gold becomes the great means, and its value
arises from the fact that you can utilize it for many ends.
It needs but little skill to show that a nature intent on
working towards some goal should feel itself drawn to
something which has value only because it is a means
to an end. Moreover, the teleol<^y of the Jew brings
it about that he prizes success. (Another point of
similarity, therefore, with capitalism.) Because he rates
success so highly he sacrifices to-day for to-morrow, and
his mobility only helps him to do it all the better. Here
again we may observe a likeness to capitalism. Capitalism
is constantly on the look-out for something new, for some
way of expanding, for abstaining to-day for the sake of
to-morrow. Think of our whole system of credit. Does
not this characteristic show itself there clearly enough?


276 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


Now remember also that the Jews were very much at
home in the organization of credit — ^in which values
or services which may, or can, become effective some
time in the future are made available to-day. Human
thought can plainly picture future experiences and future
needs, and credit offers the opportunity through present
economic activities of producing future values. That
credit is extensively found in modern life scarcely
requires pointing out. The reason too is obvious : it
offers golden chances. True, we must giVe up the joys
that spring from “completely throwing ourselves into
the present.” Si7 But what of that ? The Jevish
character and capitalism have one more point in common
— practical .rationalism, by which I mean the shaping of
all activities in accordance vnth reason.

To make the whole parallelism even more plain, let me
illustrate it by concrete instances. The Jew is well fitted
for the part of undertaker because of his strength of will
and his habit of making for some goal or other. His
intellectual mobility is accountable for his readiness to
discover new methods of production and new possi-
bilities of marketing. He is an adept at forming new
organizations, and in these his peculiar capacity for
finding out what a man is best fitted for stands him in
good stead. And since in the world of capitalism there
is nothing organic or natural but only what is mechanical
or artificial, the Jew’s lack of understanding of the former
is of no consequence. Even undertaking on a large scale
is itself artificial and mechanical ; you may extend a
concern or contract it ; you may change it according
to circumstances. That is why Jews are so successful
as organizers of large capitalistic undertaldngs. Agtin,
the Jew can easily grasp impersonal relationships. We
have already noted that he has the feeling of personal
dependence only in a slight measure. Hence, he does


JEWISH CHARACTERISTICS


277


not care for your hoary “ patiiarchalism,” and pays little
attention to the dash of sentimentality which is still some-
times found in labour contracts. In all relations between
sellers and buyers, and between employers and employed,
he reduces everything to the legal and purely business
basis. In the struggle of the workers to obtain col-
lective agreements between themselves and the masters,
which shall regulate the conditions of their labour, the
Jew is almost invariably on the side of the first.

But if the Jew is well fitted to be an undertaker, still
more is he cut out for the part of the trader. His quali-
ties in this respect are almost innumerable.

The trader lives in figures, and in figures the Jew has
always been in his element. His love of the abstract
has made calculation easy for him ; it is his strong
point. Now a calculating talent combined with a
capadty for working always with some aim in view
has already won half the battle for the trader. He is
enabled to weigh aright the chances, the possibilities
and the advantages of any given situation, to eliminate
everything that is useless, and to appraise the whole in
terms of figures. Give this sober calculator a strong
dose of imagination and you have the perfect speculator
before you. To take stock of any given state of things
with lightning speed, to see a thousand eventualities, to
seize upon the most valuable and to act in accordance
mth that — such, as we have already pointed out, is
the aim of the dealer. For all this the Jew has the
necessary gifts of mind. I should like expressly to
emphasize the dose kinship between the activities of the
clever speculator and those of the clever physician who
can successfully diagnose a disease. The Jew, because ot
his qualities, is eminently fitted for both.

A good dealer must be a good negotiator. What
deverer negotiators are there than the Jews, whose ability


278 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in this direction has long been recognized and utilized ?
To adapt yourself to the needs of a market, to meet any
spedfied form of demand, is the one prime essential for the
dealer. That the Jew with his adaptability can do this as
well as any other is obvious. The second is the power of
suggestion, and in this also the Jew is well qualified by
his ability to think himself into the situation of another.

Wherever we look the conclusion forces itself upon
us that the combination of no other set of qualities is
so well fitted, as are those of the Jew, for realizing the
best capitalistic results. There is no need for me to
take the parallelism further ; the intelligent reader can
easily do so for himself. I would only direct his atten-
Von to one point more before leaving the subject — ^the
parallel between the feverish restlessness of Stock Exchange
business, always intent on upsetting the tendency towards
an equilibrium, and the restless nature of the Jew.

In another place I have sought to characterize the ideal
undertaker in three words — ^he must be wide-awake, clever
and resourceful. Wide-awake : that is to say, quick of
comprehension, sure in judgment, must think twice before
speaking once, and be able to seize upon the right moment.

Clever : that is to say, he must possess a knowledge of
the world, must be certmn of himself in his judgment
and in his treatment of men, certain in his judgment on a
given conjuncture ; and above all, acquainted with the
weaknesses and mistakes of those around him.

Resourceful : that is to say, full of ideas.

The capitalistic undertaker must have three additional
qualities : he must be active, sober and thorough. By
sober, I mean free from passion, from sentiment, from
unpractical idealism. By thorough, I mean reliable, con-
scientious, orderly, neat and frugal.

1 believe this rough sketch will, in broad outline, stand
for the capitalistic undertaker no less than for the Jew.


PART m


THE ORIGIN OF THE JEWISH GENIUS


CHAPTER XIlI


THE RACE PROBLEM
Prefatory Note

Strictly speaking the task I had set myself has now
been completed. I have tried to show the importance of
the Jews in modern economic life in all its aspects, and
the connexion between Capitalism and “ Jevrishness.” In
other words, I have endeavoured to point out why it was
that the Jews have been able to play, and still continue to
play, so significant a part in economic life ; endeavoured
to show that their great achievements were due partly
to objective circumstances, and partly to their inherent
characteristics.

But here new questions crop up in plenty, and I must
not pass them by unanswered, if I desire my most valued
readers may not lay aride my book with a feeling of dis-
satisfaction. It is obvious that any one who has accom-
panied me to the point where I mrintain that specifically
Jewish characteristics exist, and that they will account for
the great influence of the Jews in the body economic, must
be bound to ask. What is the true nature of these charac-
teristics ? How have they come about ? What will their
ultimate effect be?

The answers to these questions may vary considerably.
The Jewish characteristics we have noted may be nothing
else but, as it were, a function without a corresponding
organism ; may be only surface phenomena, sltin-deep,
without any root at all in the human beings that give


282 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


expression to them ; may be but as a feather on a coat —
easily blown away ; something which vanishes with the
disappearance of the person.

Or they may become hardened into a habit and be
deep-seated, but yet not sufficiently powerful to be
hereditary. Contrariwise, they may be so marked as to
pass from one generation to another. In this case, the
question presents itself, when did they arise? Were
these characteristics always in the Jew, were they in his
blood, or have they only been acquired in the course of
his history — ather in what is termed ancient times, or
later ? Again, all hereditary qualities may last for ever,
or be only of a temporary nature — may be, that is, per-
manent or only transient. Seeing that we are dealing
with a social group, it will be necessary here, too, to
answer the question. Is the group a racial entity ? In a
word, are the Jews a subdivision of mankind, differing
by blood-kinship from other people ? Finally, in a
problem of this sort we must deal with the possibility
' that the peculiar characteristics of the group may be due
to admixtures vuth other groups, or to selection within the
group itself.

The problem is many-sided : of that there can be
little doubt. . And the worst of it is that modern science
can give no certain replies to the questions propounded.
Attempts have of course been made, but they are not
Ttithout prgudice, and any one even only superficially
acquainted with the subject will be faced by more
problems and puzzles than by solutions.

The most pressing need of the moment, so it seems to
me— one which alone will be able to withdraw the Jewish
Problem from the semi-darkness in wWch it is enshrouded
— is to obtain a clear conception of the questions at issue,
and to bring some order into the abundant material at
hand. It is almost as though at the point where the


THE RACE PROBLEM


283


general Jewish Question intersects the race problem, a
thousand devils had been let loose to confuse the minds
of men. As one authority 5^8 recently urged with
regard to the doctrines of heredity : what is most needed
is an exact precision concerning elementals. The same is
the case to an enormous extent with the question of
whether the Jews are a race or not, and perhaps an
outsider may contribute something to this end, just
because he stands apart from the specialists. This
thought emboldens me to attempt to give a resume of
all that is current to-day regarding Jews as a race — of all
that is certain, and of the thousand and one theories, to
say nothing of the numerous false hypotheses.

I. The Anthropology of the Jews.

Touching the origin of the Jews and their anthropology
and ethnology, opinions at the present day are pretty
well agreed as to the essential facts. It is generally
assumed Si 9 that Israel, like Judah, arose from the
admixture of different Oriental peoples. When, in the
15th century B.c., the Hebrews, then a Bedouin tribe,
wished to setde in Palestine they found there an old
population long since established — Canaanites, who were
probably hegemonic, Hittites, Perizites, Hivites and
Jebusites (Judg. iii. 5). Recent research has come to
the conclusion, opposed to the older view, that the
Israelitish clans largely intermarried with these peoples.

Later, when a portion of the population went into the
Babylonian Exile, the admixture of races continued in
Palestine. And as for the exiles (whose history in this
connexion is of vital importance), we learn much from
the latest cuneiform inscriptions concerning their attitude
towards intermarriage. The inscriptions show, without
doubt,” that there was a gradual fusion between the Jews
and the Babylonians. The immigrants called their


284 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


children by Babylonian names, and the Babylonians theirs
by Persian, Hebrew and Aramaic names.S2o

Nothing like so dear are the views as to the relation-
ship to each other of the peoples and clans of which the
Jews were composed ; still less as to how they can be
distinguished from other similar groups ; and least of all
how they are to be called. A very heated controversy
has recently raged about the term “Semites,” with the
result that in anthropological drcles the word is no
longer used. The Semite controversy, like that on the
Aryans, only shows how vidous it is to allow linguistic
concepts to interfere in the anthropological divisions of
mankind. It is generally accepted that the Semites are
all those peoples whose speech is Semitic, but that
anthropologically they bdong to different and differing
groups. 52 1

My own view is that the controversy as to the exact
demarcation of the dvilized Oriental peoples is a little
futile. Nor does our ignorance on this point much
matter. One thing however is certdn — ^that all of them,
the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Assyrians, the
Phoenicians and the Jews, by virtue of their origin and
earliest history, belong to one class, which may perhaps
be termed “Desert” or “Desert-edge” Peoples. The
assumption that a fair, blue-eyed tribe from the North
intermingled with these is now almost unanimously
regarded as a fable. The theory of the ubiquity of the
Germans S22 'jyill have to be but coldly entertained as
long as no more convindng proofs are forthcoming thitn
the reddish hair of Saul, or the dolichocephalic skull of
the mummy of Rameses II.

What, then, was the anthropological history of the
group of peoples in which the Jews originated? A
common answer as regards the Jews was that they
continueJ to mix with their non-Jevrish neighbours in


THE RACE PROBLEM


285


the Diaspora as they had done before. Renan,
Loeb, Neubauer and others believe that the modern
Jews are in large measure the descendants of heathen
proselytes in the Hellenistic Age, or of marriages
between Jews and non-Jews in the early centuries of the
Common Era. The ejdstence of fair Jews (to the extent
of 13 per cent.), especially in Eastern Europe, lent
probability to this opinion. But to-day, so fer as I can
make out, the entirely opposite view generally prevails —
that from the days of Ezra to these the Jews have kept
strictly apart. For more than two thousand years they
have been untouched by other peoples; they have
remained ethnically pure. That drops of alien blood
came into the Jewish body corporate through the lorg
centuries of their dispersion no one vdll deny. But so
small have these outside elements been that they have not
influenced to any appreciable degree the ethnical purity
of the Jewish people.

It seems pretty clear now that in the past the number
of proselytes admitted into Judaism was considerably
over-estimated. There is no doubt that in the Hellenistic
and early Christian periods Judaism won adherents among
the heathen peoples. (The subsequent centuries were of
no consequence at all, with the exception of one case
only.) Bioth the Roman and the Jevdsh Law made
provision for such converts. But we may assume with
certainty that all of them were the so-called Proselytes
of the Gate ” — ^that is, they worshipped God in accord-
ance with Jewish teaching, but they were not circumdsed,
nor were they allowed to marry Jewesses. Nearly all of
them eventually drifted into Christianity. As a matter
of fact, in the time of Pius circumcision was again allowed
to the Jews, but the rite was expressly forbidden to be
performed on proselytes. In this way conversion to
Judaism was made a punishable offence. This in all


286 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


probability was not the intention of the framers of the
prohibition, but its effect was soon recognized, and it
was extended.S23 For Severus “ forbade conversion to
Judaism on pain of grave penalties.”

But even if we allow foreign admixtures among the
Jews in the early Christian Age, it could never have
amounted to very much when we think of the millions
of Jews who presumably existed at the time, and anyhow
the stranger elements came from peoples closely akin to
the Jews.

As for the centuries that followed the entry ot the
Jews into European history, we may take it that
proselytizing ceased almost entirely. Throughout the
Middle Ages therefore the Jews received but little of
non-Jewish blood. The remarkable conversion of the
Chozars in the 8 th century cannot be regarded as an
exception to this statement, for their realm was never
very extensive. In the loth century it was limited to a
very small area in the western part of the Crimea, and in
the nth the tiny Jewish State disappeared altogether.
Only a small remnant of the Chozars live in Kieff as
Karaites. Hence, even if the whole of the Chozars
professed Judaism, the ethnical purity of the Jews could
have been affected but little. As a matter of fact,
however, it is very doubtful whether any others than the
ruling family, or the upper classes, became Jews.S24

Mixed marriages thus remain as the only possible
source whence Jewish blood might be made impure.
Certainly marriages between Jews and non-Jews must
have occurred in some periods of Jewish history. Mixed
marriages were probably numerous— a not extravagant
assumption — in those epochs in which the band of Jewish
solidarity was somewhat loosened — say, the last pre-
Christian century, or the izth and 13 th in Spain. Even
so, such relaxations never lasted for any considerable


THE RACE PROBLEM


287


time ; Jemsh orthodoxy soon regained the upper hand,
to the exclusion of non-Jews, What the Pharisees
achieved in the first-named period resulted in the second
from the Maimonides schism, and this had such re-
actionary consequenoes that marriages with Christian and
Mohammedan women were annulled. S25

But there are indications that such marriages were to
be found. They were expressly forbidden at the early
Spanish Councils. For instance, the i6th Canon of the
Council of Elovia (304) provides that “ the daughters of
Catholics shall not be given in marriage to heretics, except
they return to the Church. The same applies to Jews
and schismatics.” The 64th Canon of the Third Council
of Toledo (589) forbids Jews to have Christian women
dther as wives or mistresses ; and if any children spring
from such unions they must be baptized. Once more,
the 63rd Canon of the Fourth Council of Toledo (633)
makes it incumbent upon Jews who have Christian wives
to accept Christianity if they wfish to continue to live
with them. 526 It seems hardly likely, however, that
marriages against which these canons were issued were
very numerous. And anyhow, as the children of such
marriages were lost to Judaism, Jevrish racial purity could
not have suiFered much by them.

Similarly, it is improbable that there was any admixture
of Jews with the Northern peoples. There was an
opinion current that the Jews in Germany up to the time
of the Crusades lived among their Christian neighbours,
and had free intercourse with them in every direction.
■ But this view is hardly credible, and Brann, one of the
best authorities on German Jewish history, has declared
the assumption of even the least degree of assimilation
at this period to be “ an airy fancy, which must vanish
into nothingness when the inner life of the Jews of those
days is understood.” S27


388 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


There remain the fair Jews. They have been regarded
as a proof of Jewish admixture with the fair races of the
North. But no scholar of repute looks upon these as the
outcome of legitimate unions between Jews and their Slav
neighbours. On the other hand, one hypothesis S 28 has
found credence — that the fair Jews are the children of
illegitimate unions between Jews and Russians, either in
the ordinary way or forcibly on the occasion of pogroms.
But the weakness of this assumption is obvious. Even
if it did explain the existence of fair Jews in Russia, it
would be of no use at all for accounting for fair Jews
in Germany, in Southern lands, in^ North Africa and in
Palestine.

There is really no necessity to look for an explanation
of the fair Jews in the admixture of races. All dark
peoples produce a number of variants, and this is a case
in point. S 29

We come back then to the fact that for some twenty
centuries the Jews have kept themselves ethnically pure.
One proof of this is found in the similarity of the anthro-
pological characteristics of the Jews all over the globe,
and, moreover, in that the similarity has been remarkably
constant through the centuries. “ Differences in treat-
ment or environment have not been able to blur a
common type, and the Jews more than any other race
stand as a proof that the influence of heredity is much
more powerful than that of environment ” (E. Auerbach).

The anthropological homogeneity of the Jewish stock
at the present time has been established by numerous
anatomical experiments and measurements.S3o The
only doubtful question is whether the ancient contrast
between Ashkenazim [German Jews] and Sephardim
[Spanish Jews] extends to their anthropology. There
are two conflicting opinions on the subject,S3i but
I believe the basis of either is not sufficiently conclusive


THE RACE PROBLEM 289

to justify an independent judgment. It must be added,
though, that personal observation would seem to warrant
the belief that there was some anthropological difference
between the two. Look at your spare, elegant Spanish
Jew, with his small hands and feet and his thin, hooked
nose, and then at his German brother, stout and bow-
legged, with his broad, fleshy Hittite nose. Do they not
appear as two distinct types to the ordinary observer ?
There is as yet no scientific ground to explain the
difference.

Another controversial argument is whether the Jews
of to-day are a separate entity, distinct from their neigh-
bours physiologically and pathologically. There can be
no doubt that from this point of view Jews do exhibit
certain peculiarities in many respects — early puberty,
little liability to cancer, especially cancer of the womb,
strong disposition for diabetes, insanity, and so forth.
There are people, however, who cannot look upon these
things as physiological and pathological Jewish traits, but
explain them as resultants of the social position of the
Jews, of their reli^ous practices, and so on. S3* Here
also the ground has not been sufficiently prepared to war-
rant a definite statement.

It is different with the physiognomy of the Jew.
Physiegnomy, as is well known, is the outcome of two
causes — of certain facial forms and of their particular
expression. You cannot weigh or measure either, and
therefore this is a matter that must be left entirely to
common observation. Now, just as the colour-blind
distinguish no colours, so those who cannot see differences
in men’s faces know nothing of physiognomy. When,
therefore, some writers 533 say that in the case of three-
quarters of cultivated and wealthy Jews they cannot with
certainty tell that they are Jews merely from their faces,
then there is nothing to urge in reply. But a keen

20


290 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

observer will most decidedly be able to tell. Jewish
physiognomy is still a reality, and few will deny it.
Undoubtedly there are individuals among Jews who do
not look one whit Jewish. But there are also very many
individuals among Gentiles who look very Jewish, I
should not like to go so far as some do, 534 and say
<that the Hapsburgs because of their heavy lips, or the
Louis of France because of their hooked noses, were
Jewish-looking. But among Oriental peoples (including
possibly the Japanese) we do come across Jewish types.
This in no wise detracts from the anthropological unity
of the Jews. If it proves anything, it only points to a
common origin of the Jews and the Oriental peoples.
(It might be mentioned, by the w^y, that the lost Ten
Tribes have been located in Japan — a somewhat fantastic
conjecture, but having something in its favour in the
striking similarity of the Japanese and Jewish types.) To
consider the Jewish physiognomy as an expression of
decadence, or to account for it, as Ripley does, as a result
of Ghetto life, is not very conclusive in face of the
undeniable Jewish types depicted on the monuments of
ancient Egypt and Babylonia. Look at the picture* of
Jewish captives in the epoch of Shishak (973 b.c.), or of
the Jewish ambassadors at the court of Salmanasar S3S
(884 B.c,), and you will be convinced that from those
days to our own, a period of nearly three thousand
years, few changes have marked the Jewish type of
countenance. This is but another proof of the proposi-
tion that the Jewish stock is an anthropological entity,
and that its characteristics have been constant through
the ages in a most extraordinary fashdon.

II. The Jewish “Race.”

In view of all this, may we speak of a Jewish race ?
The answer would depend on Ac connotation of Ae


THE RACE PROBLEM 291

word “race.” But to define it is not easy, for there
. are probably as many definitions as there are writers on
it.S 36 ~S 37 It is, of course, open to any one to say.
Such and such things I look upon as the mark of race,
and if I apply niy standard the Jews are or are not a race,
as the caM may be. But a procedure of this kind is more
of the nature of a game. What is needed is a scientific
definition. But how ? Many methods have been tried —
anthropological differences, skull measurements, biolo-
gical experiments and their application — but all with no
absolute result. It would, however, be a fallacy to con-
clude that because hitherto no satisfactory classification of
the human species has been achieved, therefore no anthro-
pological differences really exist. An Eskimo is different
from a negro, and the South Italian from the Norwegian.
We do not require anthropology to tell us that.

■ So with the Jews. It may be difficult to class them, but
anthropological peculiarities of their own they surely have.
When therefore one distinguished scholar 538 writes : “ I
recognize only a Jewish religious community ; of a Jewish
race I know nothing,” we must regard it as a hasty ex-
pression uttered in the heat of the moment. The objec-
tion to it is that we can easily place a “ Jewish national
community ” with a common history beside the “ Jewish
religious community.”

So with anthropological characteristics which mark off
the Jew from the non-Jew. I am firmly of opinion that
the Jews, no matter where they may be found, are an
anthropolc^ical group differing from, let us say, the
Swede or the negro. “ A religious community " will not
suffice.

Aftinr all, is it not a controversy about words ? Some
will have it that there is no Jewish race. Well and good.
But they admit Jewish anthropological peculiarities. ' It
is a thousand pities that there is no satisfrctory term by


292 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

which to describe them. “ A people will not serve, for
the definitions of “ people ” are no less numerous than
those of “ race.” But what does the name matter ? The
thing certainly is there, and I should have no hesitation
in speaking of the Jewish race, or, if you will, of the
Jewish “race.”

Let me conclude this section with one or two wise
words written by Arthur Ruppm,S39 that excellent
authority on the Jew, words that appear to me to be
among the best that have been uttered on the subject :
“ The term ‘ race ’ should not be stretched too far. If
we include in it such groups as developed their special
anthropological characteristics in prehistoric times, and
have since kept themselves without admixture with other
groups, then in reaUty there are no ‘ races ’ among white-
skinned peoples, seeing that all of them have intermingled
over and over again. As for the Jews, whether they had
common racial features in prehistoric times and have
preserved them through the centuries, is a detail of no
great significance. What does matter is this — that it
is certsun that those who professed the Jewish religion
formed a well-defined group distinct from their sur-
roundings, even as late as the end of the 1 8th century,
after many generations of strict avoidance of marriage
with non-Jews, The community which has descended
from this group may be called, for lack of a better name,
a race, more particularly, * the Jewish race.’ ”

III. How THE Jewish Genius remained Constant.

The question of greatest interest in these anthropo-
logical considerations is to discover whether any conneaion
exists between the somatic characteristics of the Jew and
his intellectual qualities. We want to make sure whether
the latter are in his blood, so to say, i.e.^ whether they are
racial or no. To discover this it will be necessary to see


THE RACE PROBLEM


293


whether the characteristics we have observed in modern
Jews were to be found among Jews in ancient times also j
whether they reach back to their earliest history, or
whether they appeared at a later date, and if so, when.

The result will be that we shall observe that Jewish
‘intellectual qualities have remained constant, that certain
characteristics, certain peculiar features of the Jewish soul
may be traced as far back as the formation of the Jewish
ethnical group. We cannot prove all this directly, because
we have no reliable accounts of the Jewish popular
character dating from early times. What we do po®ess
are brief and scanty expressions of opinions, valuable,
however, as far as they go. It is of great interest, for
example, to note that the Pentateuch (in four places —
Exod. xxxii. 9, xxxiv. 9; Deut. ix. 13 and 27) asserts
of the Jews what Tacitus said of them later — that they
are a stiffnecked people. No less interesting is Cicero’s
statement that they hang together most fraternally, or
Marcus Aurelius’s that they are a restless people, to whom
he cries, “ O ye Marcomanni, O ye ^uadi, O ye Sarmat«,
at length have I found a race more restless than you I ” ;
or finally Juan de la Huarte’s that their intellect is keen
and well fitted for worldly things.

The first point to note is : —

(i) The attitude of the Jews to the peoples among
whom they dwelt all through the Diaspora. In the last
century or so we have seen this to be one of aloofness.
Before capitalism came and set them free, Jews were
looked upon as strangers,” as semi-citizens.” They
were hated and persecuted in all lands, but everywhere
they knew how to preserve and maintun themselves.

How was it in antiquity ? How later ? The same
spectacle confronts us, ever since the Jews came into
contact with other people. Everywhere there was
opposition, persecution and ill-treatment. To bi^in with


294 the, jews ‘and MODERN CAPITALISM

the Eg3rpti4ns-: “ They abhorred the children of Israel”
(Exod. i. 12). Paul of Tarsus went so far as^ to' say that
the. Jews “were contrary to all men” (i Thess. ii. 15). -
In the Hellenistic period,' in Imperial Rome — the same
story of hate and plunder and death. Philo and .Josephus
both record dreadful' Jewish pogroms in' Alexandria in'
the first century of our era. “ Hatred of the Jew and
ill-treatment of hini arfc as old as the Diaspora itself”

' (Mommsen).

Under' the Cassars their lot was no, different'; “I am
just sick of these filthy, noisy Jews,” said Marcus
.Aurelius. Then, in the time of Thebdoric, massacres
afid wholesale plundering were the order of the day, as
kter in the 7th century under the Longobards. And the
East was like the West ; the 6th century in Babylon was
as dark as -the 7th in Northern Italy. Even in the
Pyrenean Peninsula, where they enjoyed much that was
good, the end was bitter : Christian and Moslem both
laid hands upon them.

These instances might be multiplied. They are all
expresaons of hatred of the Jew in Christian and nbh-
Christian environments alike. Can the phenomenon be
explained without the assumption of the existence of
Jewish characteristics, which remained constant no matter
where the Jew was placed ? The answer' must' surely be
in the afiEirmative. The hatred of the Jew. coidd' not
have been the result of a passing mood on the part of all
these peoples.

Then again, everywhere and at all times the Jews were
semi-citizens. Sometimes indeed they. were not in. this
category' because the law placed them there. On the,
contrary. There were many cases in antiquity where
Jews were assigned privileged positions, by virtue of
which they were excused certain duties of the citizen
military service), or had exceptional advantages in regard


THE RACE PROBLEM


295


to legal enactments. Nevertheless they took no full
share in the life of the State in which they were domiciled.
The Greek inhabitants of Caesarea, a city on Jewish soil
and built under Jewish rule, denied citizen rights to
the Jews, and Burnus, Nero’s minister, upheld their
■dedrion.S4o There was little change in this respect
during the Middle Ages.

How are we to account for this generally prevailing
treatment ? Differing States adopted a similar policy
towards the Jew : does it not seem dear that it was due
to some special characteristic of his ? If you like, say it
was the strict adherence to the letter of the Jewish religion.
But something it must have been.

And yet, despite • all oppression, the Jew was not
crushed. He knew how to maintain himself from the
oldest times onward. Perhaps it was because of the
curious mixture of stubbornness and elasticity which we
have noted in Jews of modern days. They might be
crushed never so relentlessly, but like a Jack-in-the-box
they were soon up again. How they withstood the
onslaught of the Roman Emperors, who used all the
weapons at their command to stamp them out ! Despite
their efforts, there was again in the 3 rd century a Patriarch
at Jerusalem recognized by the government, with a juris-
diction of his own. In antiquity, in the Middle Ages, in
this our own time, the peoples have summed up their
judgment of the Jew in the one word — stubborn :
“ ostimto come un ehreo'’’

The peculiar mixture of determination and elasticity is
most wonderfully exhibited by the Jews in their bearing
towards governments, where their religion was concerned.
To it they owed most of their enemies ; because of it
they suflFered hardships untold. Yet they would not give
up their beloved faith. And when pressure was severe,
many Jews pretended to have forsworn thdir religion only


296 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


to be able to carry out its precepts in secret. We know
of this conduct in connexion with the Marannos, but it
is as old as the Diaspora itself. When you read of the
thousands of crypto- Jewish heathens, crypto- Jewish
Mohammedans, crypto-Jewish Christians, you are as-
tounded at this unique event in human history. The'
more so as it was the most religious Jews, teachers and
leaders, who had recourse to the sham conversions in
order to save their lives. Recall the case of R. Eleazar
ben Parta, who was active under Hadrian as a pretended
heathen ; S4i that of Ismael ibn Negrela, who, as R.
Samuel, held discourses on the Talmud and answered
questions of religious practice, and as Vizier of the
Mohammedan King Habus, began his master’s ordinances
with the formula Chamdu-l-Illahi and ended them with
urging those to whom they were addressed to live accord-
ing to the laws of Islam ; S 42 that of the great Maimonides,
who sought to ^ve excellent reasons for his pretended
conversion to Mohammedanism ; S43 that of Sabbatti
Zevi, the false Messiah, who though he acknowledged
Mahomet yet did not lose the respect of his followers ;
that of the Neapolitan Jew Basilus, who made a pretence
of having his sons baptized in order to be able to carry
on the trade in slaves under their name,544 since this
branch of commerce was forbidden the Jews ; that of the
'thousands and thousands of Marannos who, after the
expulsion of the Jews from the Pyrenean Penins ula,
appeared to all the world as Christians and returned to the
faith of their fathers at the very first opportunity that
presented itself. What remarkable people must these
have been who combined such determination with such
elasticity !

We have thus noted that many Jewish characteristics
developed to their fullest in the Diaspora. But

( 2 ) Is the Diaspora itself explicable as a result of only


THE RACE PROBLEM


297


outward circumstances? Does it not itself rather bear
witness to special characteristics ? Or to put the question
somewhat differently, would it have been possible to scatter
any other people over the face of the earth as the Jews
were scattered ?

■ The experience of exile the Jews tasted in quite early
days. Most people have heard of Tiglath-Pileser, who
dragged a part of the Jewish population to Media and
Assyria ; of the later Babylonian Exile ; of Ptolemy
Lagi, who forced very many Jews to settle in Egypt and
planted a Jewish colony in Gyrene ; of Antiochus the
Great, who brought two thousand Jewish families from
Babylon and peopled with them the centre of Asia Minor,
Phrygia and Lydia. Mommsen calls the settlement of
Jews outside Palestine “ an invention of Alexander or of
his generals.”

In all these cases the temptation is strong to ascribe
the dispersion of the Jews to outward circumstances,
seeing that in most of the cases the Jews were carried
away from their homes against their will. There appears
to be nothing therefore in these dispersions that would
point to inherent Jewish characteristics. Such a conclu-
sion would be hasty. Is there not this possibility — that
if the Jews had not possessed certain qualities they might
never have been transplanted ? The enforced settlements
must have had some purpose, blither they were bene-
ficial to the land from which the Jews were taken, or
(what was more probable) to the land or the town where
they were settled. Either they were feared in their own
country as firebrands of sedition, or they were accounted
such valuable citizens for their wealth or their industry
that they were made the nucleus of new settlements, or
they were held to be so trusty that they were utilized
by rulers to strengthen their hold on turbulent centres
(as was done by Ptolemy Ls^i in Gyrene).


298 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

■But many Jews may have forsaken Palestine for what
might be termed economic reasons : there was not suffi-
cient room' for the rahintenance of an increasing population.
Considering 'the size and the productiveness of Palestine,
emigration on these grounds must have been of frequent
occurrence. But this points to a national characteristic-^
viz., an increasing population due, as is known, to physio-
logical and psychol(^ical causes alike. Furthermore, that
economic pressure led to emigration was traceable to
another national peculiarity. In this respect the Jews
have been compared to the Swiss. They, too, leave their
homes because the country is unable efficiently to main-
tain them all. But they only emigrate because they have
the energy and the determination to do better for them-
selves. The Hindoo does not emigrate. If the population
increases, he is content with his smaller portion of rice.

< But to regard all Jewish dispersion as enforced is
probably one-sided. We cannot possibly explain so
general a phenomenon, which moreover remains the
same through the ages, without assuming a voluntary
migration. What precisely this was due to — ^whether
to a migrative instinct, or to inability to remain on
one piece of soil for long — does not much matter. But
some special characteristic will have to be associated
with this people to account for their travelling so easily
from land to land, no less than for their settlement in
large cities, a proclivity shown by the Jews already in
very early times. Herzfeld, who has compiled probably
the most complete list of Jewish settlements in the
Hellenistic Age, draws attention to the strildng fact
that of the settlements 52 are in towns, and of these 39
were wealthy commercial centres. 545

It would appear from all this that Jewish character-
istics were by no means developed in the Diaspora, or,
as ^he Jewish historians assume, in'the Middle Ages, but


THE RACE PROBLEM 299

that the Diaspora itself was the' result of these .charactcr-
istics. The characteristics were there first, at least in
embryo. . • ■■

(3) So, too, with their religion. When it is asserted
that the Jew of to-day is a product of his religion, that
he has been made what he is, almost artificially, by means
of a well thought-out policy of some man or group of
men, and not organically, I am ready to adniit the
statement. My own presentation of this very subject
in a previous chapter attempted to show what enormous
influence the Jewish religion had, more especially on the
economic activity of the Jew. But I want to oppose
the view promulgated by H. S. Chamberlain with all
my power. I want to make it clear that the religion
of the Jew would have been impossible but for the
special characteristics of the Jew. The fact that some
man, or group of men, was able to give expression to
such wonderful thoughts necessarily postulates that the
individual or the group was specially gifted. Again, that
. the whole people should accept their teachings not merely
by way of lip-service, but with deep and sincere inward-
ness — can we explain this except by the supposition of
special national characteristics ? To-day we can no longer
free ourselves from the opinion that every people has, in
the long run, the religion best suited for it, and that if it
adopts another religion it keeps on changing it to suit it
to its needs.

I believe, therefore, that we may deduce the special
characteristics of the Jewish people from the special char-
acteristics of the Jewish religion. From this standpoint
many traits of the Jewish character adduced from Jewish
legends may be placed very far back, certainly as <Mrly as
the Babyloniain Exile. That I shall proceed in this as the
authors of anti-Semitic catechisms do, and infer from the
somewhat questionable story of Isaac, Jacob and Esau,


300 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

and their cheating of each other, a tendency on the part
of the Jews for swindling, need not be feared. No one,
I hope, will think so badly of me. Cheating is an ele-
ment foimd in all mythologies. We need only cast our
eyes on Olympus or Valhalla to see the gods cheating
and swindling each other in the most shameless fashion.
No. What I mean is that the fundamental characteristics
of the Jewish religious system which we have already
examined — Intellectuality, Rationalism, Teleology — are
also the characteristics of the Jewish people, and they
must have been in ejdstence (I would repeat, at least in
embryo) even before the religion was developed.

(4) My next point is the remarkable similarity in the
economic activities of the Jews throughout almost all
the centuries of history. In asserting that this is a
proof that Jemsh characteristics were constant, I am
setting myself in opposition to the prevailing views. I
differ not only from those who believe that the economic
activities of the Jews have changed in the course of time,
but also from those who agree with me that it was a
constant factor in their development. From the latter
I differ because we do not agree as to what those
activities were.

What is the generally accepted view of Jewish economic
history ? I believe it may be traced to Heine, and is
something to this effect. Originally the Jews were an
agricultural people. Even in the Diaspora, it is said, the
Jews tilled the soil, avoiding all other pursuits. But in
the 6th and 7th centuries of our era they were forced
to sell their holdings and had, willy-nilly, to look out
for other means of livelihood. What did they do?
They devoted themselves to trade, and for something
like five centuries continued in this calling. Again Fate
pressed heavily upon them, for the Crusades engendered
much anti-Jewish feeling in commercial circles, and the


THE RACE PROBLEM


301


growing trading class in each country organized them-
selves into gilds, and excluded the Jews from the markets,
which they retained as the exclusive preserves of members
of their corporations. Once more the Jews had to cast
about for new occupations. All channels were closed to
them; the only possibility left was to become money-
lenders. So they became money-lenders, and before long
enjoyed privileges as such because the usury laws meted
out special treatment to them.

Such is the almost semi-official view prevalent in Jevnsh
circles, certainly among assimilationists, but also among a
goodly number of Jewish nationalists.

There is another view to which some historians, Jewish
and Gentile (among the former Herzfeld), have given
currency. It is that the Jews have always been a com-
mercial people, from the age of King Solomon onwards,
throughout the Diaspora, down to our own times.

I r^ard both views as wrong, certainly as one-sided,
and I hope to give my reasons in a sketch of the economic
history of the Jews which I shall furnish.

From the period of the Kings to the end of the
national independence — we may even say up to the
codification of the Talmud — the Jewish people were a
self-contained, self-sufficing economic unit. Its surplus
commodities it sent to foreign lands, and its constituent
units produced all they needed, or at best, supplemented
their own work by ample bartering with their neighbours.
We should describe the whole by saying that we had here
single economic units satisfying their own wants, with
which was connected a certain amount of hired labour ;
there was something of the nature of the manorial system,
and there were some handicrafts. Where these are found,
little trade is possible. But how about the numerous
merchants in Palestine, of whom we read in the time
of the Kings? How account for them? To speak of


302 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

merchants in the ordinary interpretation of the. term is
to misunderstand the nature of the economic organization
of .the' country in Solomon’s day. It was nothing but
an extensive manorial system, something like that of
Charkmagne, and obviously required the distribution .of
commodities. But this was not commerce. “ The chief,
officers (they corresponded to the villici) that were over
Solomon’s work were 550. . . . And King Solomon
made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber. . . . And 'Hiram
sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge
of the sea, with the servants of Solomon. And they
came to Ophir and they fetched from thence gold, four
hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to King
Solomon” (i Kings ix. 23, 26-28).

. This and similar passages have been taken to denote
a flourishing international commercial intercourse, even
a monopoly of trade. But there is no need of this
explanation at all. It is perfectly simple when we think
of the royal household as a manor on a large, scale,
from which the servants, in company with those from
another large manor, were sent forth to distant lands
in order to bring back commodities that were needed
at the King’s court. The economic independence of
the royal household further appears in the story of the,
binlding of the Temple. Solomon asks Hiram to send
him “a man cunning to work in gold, and in silver
and in brass, and in iron and in purple, and, in crimson
and in blue, and that can skill to grave all mawww of
gravings, to be with the cunning men that are with
me. . . ' . Send me also cedar-trees, fir-trees and algumr-
trees, out of Lebanon: for. I know that thy servants
can skill to cut timber in Lebanon ; and behold my
seryMts will be with thy servants. . . . And behold
■I will give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber,
twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty


THE RACE PROBLEM 303

thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand
baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil ”
(2 Chron. ii. 7 ff.). The same applies to a later passage
in the same book (2 Chron. viii. 4), “ And Solomon
built Tadmor in the wilderness and all the store cities
which he built in Hamath.” Store cities tell of -the
manor and its wealth in kind rather than of commerce.

The other passages on which the theory is based
that an extensive trade was carried on in later times
hardly warrant this deduction.S 4 S* True, we learn
that the Babylonian exiles were wealthy (Ezra i. 46 ;
Zech. vi. 10, ii), but no indication is given of their
callings. There is not one iota of evidence in the
Bible for the contention of Graetz that they had
obtained their riches in commerce. Perhaps the cunei-
form inscriptions brought from Nippur may sup-
port such an assumption. But to refer the prophecy of
Ezekiel about the destruction of Tyre (Ezek. xxvi. ?)
to jealousy of the Phoenicians, and then on that basis
to establish the suggestion that even in the pre-ExUic
period Palestine was largely a trading country, appears
to me to be somewhat bold.

That we cannot be too careful in reasoning of this
kind is made abundantly manifest by the interpretation
put upon the famous passage in Proverbs (vii. 19,, 20),
where the wiles of the adulteress are described. “For
the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey ;
he hath taken a bag of money with him ; he will come
back at the full moon.” Was the husband a merchant ?
Perhaps, but he may have been a farmer who had
left home to pay his rent to the baililf in a distant
town, and at the same time to buy a couple of oxen there.

There is no dear proof, therefore, for the existence
of commerce as a spedalized calling. On the other
hand, there are passages which support my view that


304 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the manorial system was prevalent even at a later period.
Take, for example, Nehemiah ii. 8, where the letter is
mentioned in which Asaph, the keeper of the King’s
forest, is asked to give timber to make beams for the
gate of the castle. The injunction in Leviticus (xix.
35, 36) about just weights and measures does not in
itself militate against this theory.

But this does not mean that there were no traders.
There must have been, even in the period of the Kings,
but they were only retail dealers. Do we not read
of them in the Book of Kings (i Kings xx. 34), where
the defeated Ben-hadad, King of Syria, offers Ahab
to build streets for bazaars in Damascus as his father
had done in Samaria? Or in Nehemiah (iii. 32), where
we are told that the goldsmiths and the merchants
built their shops in a particular quarter ? How this last
statement can be construed to mean that there must
have been highly respected merchant gilds (Bertholet)
1 cannot understand. You can almost see the small
shopkeepers at the Sheep Gate.

That there was an international exchange of com-
modities, even in the earliest times, cannot of course
be denied. There must have been extensive trade and
great merchants, who exchanged the surplus produce
of Palestine for the articles of luxury which they
brought -vtith them.546 « Judah, and the land of Israel,
they were thy (Tyre’s) traffickers : they traded for
thy merchandise wheat of Minnith and pannag [a kind
of confection] and honey and oil and balm” [Ezek.
xxvii. 17]. But the extraordinary thing is that these
great merchants were never Jews, but always foreigners.
The caravans that crossed the country were led by
Midiamtes, Sabaeans, Dedanites, men of Keder, but not
by Jews.547 Even retail trade, when the Proverbs
were written, was in the hands of Canaanites. Ousted


THE RACE PROBLEM


305


from trade in their own land, the Jews were hardly likely
to have had any influence in the international trade
of those times. The great international merchants were
Phoenicians, Syrians or Greeks.S 48 “ Absolute proofs
that Jewish emigration was chiefly for commercial ends
are wanting entirely.” 549 In view of all this I
see no reason for regarding the passage in Josephus,
which describes the position of the Jews in his days,
as prejudiced and one-sided. It was in all probability
true to fact. What does he say? “As for ourselves,
therefore, we neither inhabit a maritime country, nor
do we delight in merchandise” (Contra Apion^ i. 12).

The centuries that followed brought little change in
these conditions. In the Talmud those sayings pre-
dominate that would point to the prevalence among
Jews, at least in the East, of small independent economic
units, each sufficient for its own needs. It would be
a mistake to speak of commercial activity. Granted
we hearSSo that man accounted blessed who is able
to become a spice-seller, and need not do laborious
work. But surely the retail trader is meant, and not
the great merchant. In fact trade, and more particularly
over-sea trade, found little favour with the Rabbis.
Some even go so far as to damn all manner of markets,
pinning their faith to that economic organization where
there is no need for the exchange of commodities.
“R. Achai ben Joshia used to say, Unto whom may
he be likened who buys fruit in the market? Unto
a little child whose mother has died, which, when taken
to the houses of other mothers who feed their own
babes, yet remains unsatisfled. Whoso buys bread in
the market is like to a man who digs the grave in wWch
he will be buried.” 55 » Rab (175-247) constantly
impressed upon his second son that “ tetter was a small
measure from the field than a large one from the vat ”

21


306 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


(i.f., warehoiise).SS2 Or again, “ The Rabbis taught :
four kinds of grain bring no blessing — ^the payment
of a scribe, the fee of an interpreter, the earnings that
flow from orphans’ property and the profits derived
from over-sea trade.” Why the latter ? “ Because

miracles do not happen every day.” SS3

So much for the East. What of the West ? Here,
too, the Jews were not great merchants. Throughout
the Imperial period and the succeeding early Middle
Ages the Jew, like the Syrian, if he were a “trader”
was only a poor chapman, a mere grasshopper who
got entangled between the feet of the royal merchants
of Rome, just like the small Polish dealer of the 17th
and 1 8th centuries, who made himself a nuisance to
the merchants of that day. All that we can discover
regarding Jewish trade in the early mediaeval period
fits beautifully into the picture. The Jews, in short,
were never merchants so long as commerce, and espedally
intermunicipal and international commerce, remained
partly a robbing expedition and partly an adventure —
that is to say, until modern times.

If this is so — if the Jews never were a trading people
from of old — are those correct who hold that they
were agriculturists? Certainly, in so far as their eco-
nomic organization was the manorial one. But that is
not all. The occupation to which Jews devoted them-
selves in later times and which, in the view of Jewish
historians, was forced upon them against their will,
was well-known and practised even in the earliest periods.
I refer to money-lending, and I attach the greatest
importance to the establishment of this fact. The
economic history of the Jews throughout the centuries
makes it appear that money-lending always played a
very great, nay, an extraordinarily great, part in the
economic life of the people. We meet with it in all


THE RACE PROBLEM


307


phases of Jewish history, in the age of national in-
dependence as in the Diaspora. Indeed, a community
of peasant proprietors is fine game for money-lenders.
Always the creditors are Jews, anyhow after the Exodus.
In Egypt it appears the Jews were the debtors, and
when they left, as the official report narrates, they carried
away what had been lent to them. “And I will give
this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, and
it shall come to pass when ye go, ye • shall not go
empty” (Exod. iii. 21). “And the Lord gave the
people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that
they let them have what they asked . . (Exod. xii.
36). Thereafter the position changed. Israel became
the creditor and other peoples became his debtors. Thus
the promise made by God was fulfilled, the promise
that may rightly be called the motto of Jewish economic
history, the promise which indeed expresses the fortunes
of the Jewish people in one sentence ; “ The Lord thy
God mil bless thee as He promised thee : and thou
shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not borrow ”
(Deut. XV. 6).SS4

The oldest passage which points to a highly developed
system of borrowing in ancient Israel is that in Nehemiah
(Vi. IS) :~


“Then there arose a great cry or the people and of their wives
against their brethren the Jews. For there were that said. We,
our sons and our daughters, are many ; let us get corit, that we
may eat and live. Some also there were that said, We are mortgaging
our fields, and our vineyards and our houses : let us get corn because
of the dearth. There were also that said, We have borrowed money
for the king’s tribute upon our fields and our vineyards. Vet now
our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children :
and lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be
servants, and some of our daughters are brought into bondage already :
neither is it in our power to help it, for other men have our fields
and our vineyards. And I was very angry when 1 heard their cry


3o8 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


and these words. Then I consulted with myself and contended
with the nobles and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury,
every one of his brother. . . . Restore^ I pray you, to them even
this day their fields, their vineyards, their ohve-yards and their
houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the corn,
the wine and the oil, that ye exact of them.”


The picture here drawn is clear enough. The people
were divided into two sections, an upper wealthy class,
which became rich by money-lending, and the great
mass of agricultural labourers whom they exploited. This
state of affiurs must have continued, in despite of
Nehemiah and other reformers, throughout the whole
history of the Jews in Palestine and Babylon. We need
only refer to the Talmud for proof. In some of the
Tractates, after the study of the Torah nothing occupies
so much space as money-lending. The world of ideas
which the Rabbis had was crammed full with money
business. A dedsion of Rabina (488-556), one of
the last of the Amoraim {Baba Mezia, yob), sounds
almost like the creation of a money-lending monopoly
for the Rabbis. Throughout the three Tractates called
Baba, there are numerous examples from the business
of money-lending and from the rise and fall of interest,
and numerous discussions about money and problems of
money-lending. The unprejudiced reader of the Talmud
cannot but come to this condusion : in the Talmudic
world there must have been a good deal of money-lending.

With the Diaspora the business only extended. How
far money-lending was regulated among the Jews in
the Egyptian Diaspora, four or five centuries before
the Common Era, may be seen from the Oxford Papyrus
(MS. Aram. cl. P) 5S5 : —

“ . . . Son of Jatma . . . you gave me money . . . looo segel of
silver. And I am ready to pay by way of interest 2 hallur of silver /


THE RACE PROBLEM


309


per month for each segel until the day whereon I repay the money
to you. The interest / for your money is thus to amount to 2000
hallur every month. And if in any month I pay you no / interest,
then the amount of interest shall be added to the principal and shall
bear interest itself. I undertake to pay you month by month / out
of my salary which I receive from the Treasury, and you will give
’me a receipt (?) for the whole / sum and for the interest that 1
will pay you. And if I have not repaid the whole of your / money
by the month of Roth in the year . . , then your money shall be
doubled (?) / and also the interest I have yet to pay, and month
by month I must be made to pay the same / until the day T repay you
the whole / Witness, etc,”

In the Hellenistic and Imperial periods rich Jews
were found supplying crowned heads mth money, and
the poorer Jews lent to the lower classes. The Romans
were not unacquainted with Jewish business.SSS It was
the same in the pre-lslamic period among the Arabs,
to whom the Jews lent money at interest, and who
regarded this business as being natural to the Jew,
as being in his blood. 557

When the Jews first appeared on the scene in Western
Europe it was as money-lenders. We have already
noted that they acted as financiers to the Merovingians,
which means, of course, mainly as creditors.SS8 They
went further in Spain ; there, where they had complete
freedom of movement, the common people were soon
in their debt. Long before there was a Jewish
money-lending) question in other States, the legislative
authorities in Castile were dealing with the problem of
debts owing to Jews, and dealing with it in such a way as
to show that it was of no small practical importance.5S9
That money-lending became the principal calling of the
Jews after the Crusades will be admitt«l on all hands.

We dome, then, to this conclusion, that from the
earliest times money-lending was a prime fiwtor in the
economic history of the Jews.


310 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

The time has really arrived when the myth that
the Jews were forced to have recourse to money-lending
in mediaeval Europe, chiefly after the Crusades, because
they were debarred from any other means of livelihood,
should be finally disposed of. The history of Jewish
money-lending in the two thousand years before the Cru-
sades ought surely to set this fable at rest once and for all.
The official version that Jews could not devote themselves
to anything but money-lending, even if they would, is
incorrect. The door was by no means always shut in
their faces ; the fact is they preferred to engage in money-
lending. This has been proved by Professor Bucher for
Frankfort-on-the-Main, and the same may be done for
other towns as well. The Jews had a natural tendency
towards tlus particular business, and both in the Middle
Ages and after rulers were at pains to induce Jews to
enter into other callings, but in vdn. Edward I made
the attempt in England ; s6o it was also tried in the
1 8th century in the Province of Posen,s6i where the
authorities sought to direct the Jews to change their
means of livelihood by ofiering them bounties if they
would. Despite this, and despite the possibility of being
able to become handicraftsmen and peasants like all
others, there were, in 1797, in the southern towns of
Prussia, 4164 Jewish craftsmen side by side with 11,000
to 12,000 Jewish traders. The significance of these
figures is borne in upon us when we note that though
the Jewish population formed some 5 or 6 per cent, of
the whole, the Christian traders totalled 17,000 or
18,000.

It may be urged, however, that the practice of usury,
even when it is carried on quite voluntarily, need not
be accounted for by special racial attributes. Human
inclinations of a general kind will amply explain it.
Wherever in the midst of a people a group of moneyed


THE RACE PROBLEM 31 1

men dwell side by side with others who need cash, be
it for consumption, be it for production, it soon comes
about, espedally where the legal conditions governing
money-lending are of a primitive kind, that the one class
becomes the debtors and the other the creditors.

True. Wherever rich and poor lived together, the
latter borrowed from the former, even when there was
as yet no money in existence — in which case the debts
were in kind. In the earliest stages of civilization, when
the two classes felt themselves members of the same
brotherhood, the lending was without interest. Later,
especially when some intercourse with strangers sprang
up, the borrower paid the lender a certain quantity of
corn or oil or (where a money economy had already esta-
blished itself) gold over and above the principal, and the
custom of giving interest gradually became universal.

In this there is no difference between the ancient,
the mediaeval or the modern world. All three were
acquainted with money-lending and “ usury,” which was
never confined to the members of any one race or
religion. Think of the agrarian reforms in Greece and
Rome, which prove conclusively that the economic
conditions in these countries at certain times were exactly
like those in Palestine in the days of Nehemiah.* In
the ancient world the temples were the centres of the
money-lending business, for in them were stored vast
quantities of treasure. If at the Jerusalem Temple money-
lending was carried on — ^what is by no means established :
the Talmudic tractate (Shekalim) which deals with Temple
taxes clearly forbids the utilization of what remained over
from certain sacrifices for purposes of business — I say if
such were the case, then there was nothing extraordinary
in this ; all temples in antiquity lent money. The
temples of Babylonia, we are informed, were like
[* Cf. A. E. Zimmem, The Greek Cemmenmalth^ p. i n ff.]


312 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


90 many great business houses. The temples at Delphi,
at Delos, at Ephesus, at Samos were no different. S63
And in the Middle Ages the churches, the monasteries,
the houses of the various Knights and other religious
orders took the place of the ancient temples in this
respect. Despite the prohibitions of the Church against'
usury, they were the centres of a brisk trade in money.
Is it any different to-day ? The German peasant on the
marshes of the North Sea coast who has managed to make
a little money knows of nothing better to do with it than
to lend it at interest to a needy neighbour.

To increase one’s fortune by means of interest on
loans is so easy and pleasant, that everybody who is able
makes the attempt. Every period wherein the demand
for money is great gives opportunity enough (the
periods, that is, of the so-called credit crises — regularly
followed, by the way, in recent European history by
Jewish persecutions).

Everybody, then, does it — gladly does it. The desire
to take interest on money is pretty generally prevalent.
But is the ability to do so ? This leads me to my next
proof in support of the view that Jewish characteristics
have remained constant —

(5) The capacity of the Jew for money-dealing.

It is well-known that in the Middle Ages many
authorities, whether individual rulers or corporations,
almost begged the Jews to come to their city in order to
carry on money-lending. All sorts of privileges were
held out to them. The Bishop of Speyer is a case in
point. He thought it would give his city a certrin cachet
to count a number of rich Jews among its inhabitants.
Some of the cities of Italy in the 15th and i6th cen-
turies actually made agreements with the wealthiest
Jemsh money-lenders that they should come and
establish loan-banks and pawnshops. S63*


THE RACE- PROBLEM


313


Why should these requests have been made, and these
privileges offered? Why should just Jews and no
others have been invited to found money-lending
concerns ? No doubt to some extent it was because
good Christian men were not willing to soil their souls
by the nefarious trade, and Jews were called in to stand
between them and damnation. But was this all ? Does
it not appear rather that the Jews had a special capacity
for the business ? They were the cleverest, the most
gifted money-lenders, and that is why they were in
demand. How else should we be able to account
for their success, which for centuries brought them
so much riches ? Anybody can be a lender, but not
everybody can be a successful lender. For that special
capacities and attributes are necessary.

Turn to the pages of the Talmud and you will find
* that money-lending was no mere dilettante business
with the Jews. They made an art of it ; they probably
invented (certainly they utilized) the highly organized
machinery of lending.

The time has come, it seems to me, for a trained
economist to deal thoroughly with the economic side
of the Talmud and of Rabbinic literature generally.
I hope this book may act as some spur to this end.
All I can do here is to point the way, so that some
successor of mine may find it the more easily. 1 shall
briefly note some of the passages which appear to me
to bear witness to an extensive acquaintance with
economic problems, and more particularly those bearing
on credit. When we recall the period in which the
Talmud came into being (200 b.c. to 500 a.d.) and
compare what it contains in the field of economics with
all the economic ideas and conceptions that the ancient
and the mediaeval worlds have handed down to us, it
seems nothing short of marvellous, Some of the Rabbis


314 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


speak as though they had mastered Ricardo and Marx, or,
to say the least, had been brokers on the Stock Exchange
for several years, or counsel in many an important money-
lending case. Let me cite an instance or two.

{a) A profound acquaintance with the nature of
the precious metals. “ R. Chisda said. There are seven
kinds of gold : ordinary gold, best gold, gold of Ophir
(i Kings X. ii), fine gold (i Kings v. i8), drawn gold,
heavy gold and Parvayin gold” {Jorna, 45a).

( 5 ) The idea that money is a common denominator
in terms of which commo^ties are exchanged is fully
developed. The best proof of this is the legal decision
that the act of purchasing becomes complete not as
soon as the price has been paid, but when the commodity
is deUvered. The whole of the 4th section of Baha
Mezia is illustrative of this point,

(c) There is a clear conception of the difference
between credit for production and for consumption.
In the case of the first, interest is permitted ; not so,
from a Jew, in the case of the second. “ If A rents a
field from B at a rental of 10 measures of wheat and
then requests B to lend him 200 zuz for the improve-
ment of the field, promising a total payment of 12
measures of wheat — that is permissible. But may you
offer to give more in renting a shop or hiring a ship ?
Rab Nachman (235~320), on the authority of Rabba
bar Abuha, was of opinion that sometimes it was
permissible to ^ve more for a shop in order to be
able to hang pictures up in it, and for a ship too,
in order to place a mast on it. The pictures in the
shop mil attract many people and so increase profits,
and the mast on the ship will enhance the ship’s value ”
{Baba Mezia, 69^).

(i) Law and rules of practice point to an extra-
ordinarily developed system of credit agreements. After


THE RACE PROBLEM


31s


reading the 4th and 5th sections of Baha Me^ia you
feel as though you had just Idd down the report of
an Enquiry into Money-lending in Hesse twenty or
thirty years ago, where a thousand and one gins and
traps were introduced into money-lending compacts.
The Prosbol^ too (by means of which it was possible
to ensure the existence of a debt even over the year
of release), is a sign of a highly organized system of
lending (Section 10 of Sheviith).

(e) The treatment of deposits is handled in a way
which shows practical knowledge of the subject. “If
any one deposits moneys with a banker, the latter may
not make any use of them if they are in one bundle.
If, however, they are loose, he may, and if they are
lost he is held responsible. But if the moneys are
deposited with a private individual, whether they are
in one bundle or loose, he may make no use of them
whatever; and if they should be lost he is not bound
to replace them. R. Meir (100-160) held that a
shopkeeper was regarded as a private individual in
this respect ; but R. Judah (136-aoo) was of the contrary
opinion, and said that the shopkeeper was like the
banker. ...” {Baba Mezia^ 43a).

(/) Finally I would mention the Jewish gift for
figures. The Talmudists all had it, but it was to be
found in earlier ages also. The exact statistical lists
in the Bible and the later literature must have struck
every one. One French writer remarks on the topic ;
“The race possessed a singular capacity for calculation
— a genius, so to say, for numbers.” S63®

Apart from all these considerations, the very success
of the Jews in their money-lending activities effectively
demonstrates a special capacity for the business. And
the success was manifested in
(6) Jewish wealth.


3i6 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM

That ever since the race began some Jews amassed
huge fortunes can be easily shown, nor can it be doubted
that the average wealth of all Jews was fairly high. In
all ages and in all lands Jewish riches were proverbial.

We may begin with King Solomon, whose wealth was
renowned even among wealthy Oriental potentates —
although he did not acquire it by successful trading
(though you never can tell !). Later we read that some
of the Jewish exiles in Babylon were in a short time able
to send gold and silver to Jerusalem (Zech. vi. lo, ii).
That Jews played a great part in the economic life of
the Euphrates country during the Exile appears from the
commerdal contracts dug up at Nippur. 5^4 Those
who returned with Ezra brought great opulence with
them (Ezra i. 6-ii), and in the subsequent period the
wealth of the priests was notorious.S^S Noticeable
are the large number of rich men, some of them very
rich, among the Talmudic Rabbis. It would not be
difficult to compile quite a respectable list of such of them
as were renowned for their wealth. Certainly, in my
view, the rich Rabbis were in the majority. 5^6

In the Hellenistic Diaspora likewise the impression
cannot be avoided that the standard of wealth among
Jews was pretty high. Wherever Jews and Greeks lived
side by side, as in Caesarea,s67 the former were the
more opulent. There must have been a specially great
number of wealthy Jews among those of Alexandria.
Of very rich Alabarchs we are actually told, and we have
already mentioned the position of the Alexandrian Jews
as financiers of crowned heads.

It was not- one whit otherwise in the early Middle
Ages. We have it on record that many Jews in those
days were blessed vrith the good things of the world
in abundance. In Spain they offered money to .Reccared
if he would annul anti-Jewish legislation, s68 and in


THE RACE PROBLEM 317

the early period of Mohammedan rule we learn that the
Arabs envied them their wealth.s69 Cordova, in the
9th century, had “several thousand (?) Jewish families
who were well ofF,”®^“ And more to the same efFect.S7i

There is no need to labour the statement that in the
later Middle Ages the Jews were wealthy. It is a generally
accepted fact.S72 And for what is called the modern
period I have myself adduced proofs enough in this book.

We shall be justified in the conclusion, therefore, that
from King Solomon to Barney Barnato Jewish opulence
runs through history like a golden thread, without ever
once snapping. Is this merely accidental ? If not, what
was it due to — subjective or objective causes ?

Objective factors, /.<?., outward forces, have certainly
been hinted at to explain Jewish wealth. In the first
place, the Jews were early taught to look for their chief
. happiness in the possession of money ; in the second, the
insecurity of their position forced them to accumulate
their wealth in easily movable forms — -in gold or
ornaments, which they could take about with them,
which they could hide or carry off without much
difficulty. These causes undoubtedly go a good way
to account for the growth of Jewish wealth, but they
by no means suffice to explain it completely. We must
not forget that the outward forces referred to above, in
order to produce the result they did, could not but have
influenced a people possessing certain special gifts. But
let that pass. Again, the facfs instanced could only have
been of any effect in the Diaspora. Let that also pass.
The great weakness of this explanation is that .it tells
us merely why the Jews had any desire to become
wealthy, and, incidentally, that their wealth took a
particular form. The desire in this case is of little
moment; it does not make dear why it was realized.
Hence we must look for other causes. Besides, the


3i8 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


desire to become rich has been universal ever since
Alberich robbed the Maidens of the Rhine-gold.

Another explanation has therefore been suggested for
Jewish wealth. The Jews, it has been rightly pointed
out, for centuries occupied a position of inequality with
their Christian neighbours, and therefore had less occasion’
to spend as much as the latter. The conception of social
status, with varying standards of comfort for each, was
unknown among them, and therefore also the thousand
and one artificial wants that were associated with the idea.
“ It is certain,” remarks a writer who has dealt with this
aspect of the problem in a most delicate fashion, S73
“that a Jew, compared with a Christian of the same
income, was bound to become the richer of the two,
seeing that the Christian had very many opportunities
of spending money which were denied to the Jew, for
the simple reason that the former belonged to the ruling
class, and the latter was' only tolerated. As for the rich
Jew, his circumstances were different from those of the
Christian, for he had no need to consider what was de-
manded in his social class. Thus, any luxuries he cared to
enjoy were not necessarily in accordance with his status.”

Doubtless this is one explanation of the wealth of the
Jews, and will account also for the specifically Jewish
economic standpoint, which we have noted above- To it
were due such ideas as that of free competition, that your
expenses should be limited by your income — a conception
utterly foreign to a feudal society — and that saving,
associated with Jews from earliest times, was good. Let
me recall an old German proverb: —


“ Selten sind sieben Dinge :
Bine Nonne, die nicht singe,
Bin Madchen ohne Liebe,
Bin Jahrmarkt ohne Diebe,


THE RACE PROBLEM


319


Bin Geissbock ohne Bart,

Ein Jude der nicht spart,

Ein Kornhaus ohne Mause,

Und ein Kosak ohne Lause.*’

[“Rare are seven things :

A nun who never sings,

A maid without a lover,

A fair without a robber,

A goat of beard bereft,

A Jew that knows no thrift,

A granary without mice,

And a Cossack without lice.”]

To the saving habit of the Jews may be traced the
tendency to accumulate capital. One sometimes hears
it said that Jewish money remains in a business longer
than Christian money, and increases more quickly to
boot. In olden times the Jew could not enter the
charmed circle of the feudal landed gentry, and so his
money was not spent in keeping up the appearances
demanded by his status. If he saved, his money had
perforce to be invested in commercial enterprise, vmless,
of course, he lent it out directly at interest, as the Jews
of Hamburg of the 17th century were in the habit of
doing. Gliickel von Hameln and her friends, whenever
they had any surplus, always lent it out on security. The
money fructified and increased.

All these considerations are valuable as far as they
go. But th^y do not go far enough satisfactorily to
explain the phenomenon of Jewish wealth. It is all
very well pointing to objective forces in any problem.
We must not forget, however, that those forces might
not effect the particular result they did if the men and
women whom they influenced were not constituted in
a particular way, A people does not become thrifty
because of the stress of outward circumstances alone.


320 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


The merest tyro knows that. Besides, nowadays, when
the Ghetto walls have long since fallen, and the Jew
enjoys perfect equality ; when he may become a landed
proprietor and regulate his life in accordance with the
most ri^d requirements — nowadays, too, I say, Jews are
thriftier than Christians. Look at a few statistics. Itr
Baden, in the years 1895 to 1903, capital increased in the
case of Protestants from 100 to 128*3 per cent., in the
case of Jews from 100 to 138*2 per cent. This is
striking enough, but it becomes even more so when
we remember that during the same period the incomes
of Protestants grew from 100 to 146*6 per cent., those
of Jews from 100 to 144*5

When all is s^d the possible causes hitherto mentioned
would only explain why already existing wealth was in-
creased. Not one can satisfactorily answer the question,
How was it in the first place obtained ? There is only .
one answer. Wealth is got by those who have a talent
for it. From the wealth of the Jews, therefore, may be
deduced special Jewish characteristics or attributes.

IV. Is THE Jewish Genius Natural or
Artificial ?

What is the result of all our considerations in the
previous section ? That in all probability the anthropo-
logical character of the Jews, no less than their intel-
lectual attributes, has remained constant for thousands
of years.

What does this prove ? Are we to conclude that the
Jewish genius is rooted in race? Those who have a
dogmatic faith in race unhesitatingly say yes. We,
however, who are trying to proceed scientifically, must
say no. Nothing as yet has been proved.

A brief reference to the methods of some of the
believers in the race-theory 574-585 will show how


THE RACE PROBLEM


321


unreliable their conclusions are. They start out with
the assumption that the Jews are a race. Since every
race must have specific characteristics, Jews have theirs.
In other words, their specific characteristics are rooted
in their race. But for this there is no actuil proof. If
the truth must be told, we know nothing whatever
of the connexion between somatic or anthropological
features and intellectual capacities.

What the race-theorists have produced is a new sort
of religion to replace the old Jewish or Christian reli-
gion. What else is the theory of an Aryan, or German,
“ mission ” in the world but a modern form of the
“chosen people” belief? All well and good, but let
no one be deceived into imagining that this is science.
It is faith, and faith and science had best be kept
apart.

As we have said, there is no certain connexion between
somatic attributes and intellectual capacities. The con-
stancy of each may be purely accidental ; it may arise
anew in every generation or may be carried on by the
aid of tradition. And among a people who were attached
to tradition as the Jews were, this assumption seems
likely enough. The Jews were shut off from others,
they possessed a strong love of family, their religious
practices were scrupulously observed, the Talmud was
energetically studied in every generation — all these
supplied, as it were, the machinery for carrying on
certain' peculiarities from one generation to another
merely by education alone.

This is one view. Yet Jewish characteristics may
spring from the blood. Again, there are those who
would trace them to environment. The Jewish religion,
Ghetto life, the dealing in money for so many centuries
have all three been instanced to account for the specifi-
cally Jewish type of character. There may be something

22


322 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in this. Only possibly, as I have tried to show, these
influences instead of being causes naay be results.

I propose in the next chapter to analyse thd Jewish
genius, laying special stress on the following points in
the order given : (i) The original aptitudes of those

races from which the Jews sprang as exhibited in their
mode of life. (2) How the various elements mingled.
(3) Which of these aptitudes survived' under the in-
fluences of Jewish history. Finally, if these considera-
tions should prove insuflicient, we shall venture the
hypothesis : (4) that certain characteristics grew up in
the course of history. We shall see, however, that there
will be no need to have recourse to this hypothesis, since
the Jewish genius can be adequately explained along the
first three lines. If this be so, then one result will have
been established : that the Jewish characteristics are
rooted in the blood of the race, and are not in any wise
due to educative processes.


CHAPTER XIV


THE VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE

If any one wished in a sentence to account for the im-
portance of the Jews in the world’s civilization, and more
particularly in economic life, he could do so by saying
that it was due to the transplanting of an Oriental people
among Northern races, and the culture union of the two.
A similar assertion has been made regarding the civiliza-
tions of the classical world, of the Greek more especially,
and also of that of the Italian Renaissance. It has been
suggested that they resulted from the mixture of Northern
peoples, who had wandered into a Southern environment,
with the autochthonous inhabitants — z brilliant hypothesis,
not without an element of truth in it.

But the statement concerning the Jews is no hypo-
thesis: it is an established fact, capable of abundant
proof. The capitalistic civilization of our age is the
fruit of the union between the Jews, a Southern people
pushing into the North, and the Northern tribes, in-
digenous there. The Jews contributed an extraordinary
capacity for commerce, and the Northern peoples, above
all the Germans, an equally remarkable ability for
technical inventions.

It is clear, therefore, what we must have in view in
our considerations of the Jewish genius and its enormous
influence. Not whether the Jews were Semites, or
HGttites, or of some other stock, not whether they are
“pure,” or “mixed,” is the important thing, but that

333


324 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


they are an Oriental folk transplanted into an environ-
ment both climatically and ethnically strange, wherein
their best powers come to fruition.

They are an Oriental people — that is to say, one of
those peoples whose habitat was in that part of the globe
lying between the Atlas Mountains in the West, and the
Persian Gulf in the East ; one of those races baked by
the sun in the dry, burning climate of the great
deserts of North Africa, Arabia and Asia Minor, or of
their border-lands ; the races which brought their special
characteristics to maturity amid their peculiar environ-
ment which had never altered since the Ice Age, a period
of some twelve or sixteen thousand years.

The whole of this region, from which the Jews also
hailed, is an extensive sandy desert, with here and there
an oasis where man and beast can dwell. In the larger
of these watered valleys arose, as is well known, the
earliest civilizations of the world — in Egypt, in Mesopo--
tamia and in Palestine. All three are comparatively
small fertile patches ; all are true oases in the desert,
and theirs was an essentially oasis civilization. The cultiv-
able area of Egypt was about as large as the Prussian
Province of Saxony is to-day [about 5,500,000 acres,
according to the Statesman's Tear Book] ; Mesopotamia
at its widest extent was only about half the size of
the Plain of Lombardy [about 4500 square miles,
according to the same authority] ; Palestine, the land
of the whole people of Israel, was smaller still, being
no larger than perhaps Baden [about 5000 square miles] ;
while Judaea, the Southern Kingdom, and therefore the
home of the Jews, was as extensive as the Duchies of
Anhalt and Saxe-Coburg and Gotha together [about
1600 square miles]. But these oases, and Palestine more
especially, were themselves broken by deserts, Judaea being
particularly badly treated by Nature. Its southern end


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 325


extended past Hebron and Beersheba, right into the
modern sandy waste.

All agriculture in these countries was the tillage of
oases. What does this mean? It means that the soil
collected by almost artificial means, and that the great
aim of the farmer was to gather the water necessary
for the growth of vegetation. This was the case in
Palestine, where the cultivation of the soil depended on
the water-supply. Drought is the scourge that the
farmer fears most. Every year he trembles lest the
arid waste should stretch its arms and embrace his strip
of land, tended with so much care and tribulation.
Every moment he is in dread lest the desert send him
its scorching winds, or its locust-swarms. And above
all, he fears the desert wastes because of the marauding
bands who may fall upon him, robbing, killing, pillaging
as they cross the country, sometimes even taking
possession of his holding if the fancy seize them. These
children of the desert, whom we now call Bedouins,
and of whom the oasis-dwellers were once themselves
a part, were nomadic shepherds. Their raids hastened
the rise of strong cities with stout walls, behind which
the inhabitants of the plain could take refuge. Some-
times the desert crept right into them, and so at all
times they were filled with the spirit of the sandy
wastes.

Such a tribe of restless wandering Bedouins were the
Hebrews, when about the year 1200 b.c. they fell upon
Canaan, plundering and killing as they went, and
finally deciding to settle there, and rest from all their
wanderings. Which meant, that if possible they would
do nothing, but that the natives would work for them
— ^the aim of every conquering people. Such was
Jehovah’s promise : “ I will lead you unto the land
which I promised you, a land of great and goodly cities


326 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all good
tMngs which thou filledst not, and cisterns hewn out
which thou hewedst not, and vineyards and olive-trees
which thou plantedst not, and thou shalt eat and be
full” (Deut. vi. lo, ii).

Once there, what did the Hebrews do in this promised
land ? What sort of economic organization did they estab-
lish ? We cannot, of course, speak as to the details,S86
but one or two things we may imagine. Probably, as
we have seen, the powerful and mighty among them
after having conquered large tracts of land instituted a
sort of feudal society. Part of the produce of the land
they took for themselves, either by way of rent in kind,
by farming it out to tax-collectors, or by means of the
credit nexus. In any case, a large number of Hebrews
lived in the towns, receiving rent or interest from the
subject population who worked on the soil, either as
“ colonists,” or “ free peasants,” or whatever term was
used in the Orient for this class. Some of the con-
quering tribes may have become impoverished and
themselves sunk to the level of unfree farmers, but
they were hardly the influential ones. This position
was held by those who inhabited the West Jordan lands,
principally Judah, sections of Simeon and Levi and
others. In those districts cattle farming only was
possible; “Judah’s teeth are white mth milk.” Other
tribes, such as Reuben and Gad, remained east of the
Jordan as semi-nomads, rearing cattle, and half the
tribe of Manasseh crossed the Jordan to return thither.
But all the tribes alike must have been impregnated
with the nomadic spirit. Were this not the case, it
would be exceedingly difficult to understand the rise
and growth of the Jewish religious system.

It should not be forgotten that the Holy Scriptures
of the Jews in which their religion is embodied, especially


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 327


the Pentateuch, is the literature of a nomadic people.
Their God, who triumphs over the false gods, is a
desert and pastoral divinity. The traditions of the
nomad state were maintained by Ezra and Nehemiah
in the conscious re-establishment of the Jehovah cult.
In doing which they paid no heed to the intervening
period of agriculture. The Priestly Code “takes care
not to mention the settled life in Canaan. . . it strictly
limits itself to the wanderings in the wilderness, and
in all seriousness wants to be regarded as a desert
Code,” 587 Open the historical books or the majority
of the Prophets, that desert choir, include the Psalms
also, and you everywhere find metaphors and similes
taken from shepherd life. Only occasionally do you
meet with the peasant “ sitting contentedly at the door
of his house in the shade of the fig-tree.” Jehovah is
the good Shepherd (Psa, 23) who will gather the remnants
of Israel “ as a flock in the midst of their pasture ”
(Micah ii. 12). And what does the Sabbatical year mean
but that you cease being a peasant for the time being,
and become an Israelite of the old sort? Israel never
quite gave up its division into families and clans; it
was always composed of tribes, Uke most shepherd
peoples. There seems to be little doubt that even as
late as the 5th century b.c. there must have been
a strong dash of the nomads, certrinly in the ruling
classes, but probably also in the great mass of the
people. Else how would it have been possible to
saddle them for any length of time with a nomadic
religion ? ‘

It may be asked. Were not the nomad tendencies of
those days perchance a harking back to an earlier state ?
Did not perhaps the old wandering instincts, which in
the previous centuries had been lulled to sleep, awake
again under the influences of the Exile? It is quite


328 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM,

Ukely, and what is more, the vicissitudes of the Jewish
people since the Babylonian Exile could not but arouse
any slumbering desert and nomad feelings within them.
On this point I would lay especial stress. Hence, even
if we were inclined to assume that the Children of Israel
lived a settled life for five hundred years after the con-
quest of Canaan, it is perfectly clear that all the powers
on earth seemed to have conspired together not to allow
this state to become permanent. Scarcely had the plant
taken root (so far as it could in so hot a country) than
it was pulled up. The Jew’s inherent “ Nomadism ”
or “ Saharaism ” (if 1 may coin the words) was always
kept alive through selection or adaptation. Throughout
the centuries, therefore, Israel has remained a desert
and nomadic people.

There is nothing new in this conclusion. But one
does not establish it without some scruple of conscience.
Why Because anti-Semkic pamphleteers rudely pounce
upon it and make capital out of it for their abuse. '
That, of course, can be no reason for doubting its
truth, or neglecting to take cognizance of^ it as an
explanation of Jewish characteristics. What should be
done to oppose the prejudiced scribblers is to analyse
the problem most carefully, and present an illuminating
view of its importance. Up to the present littte has
been achieved in this direction ; what has been done
has been childish and spitefully distorted. No wonder
that the idea that the Jew has always been a nomad
has been received with scorn and jest by some people.
It would have been much more to the point if these
same people had been able to prove that it was wrong.
This has never yet been seriously attempted. The chain
of reasoning which runs : Agriculture was practised in
Palestine in olden times ; the Jews lived in Palestine
then ; therefore the Jews were agriculturists, is on the


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 329

face of it a little weak. _ * And another point. The term
nomad is not meant to imply obloquy or disgrace. At
most, objection may be taken to the robbing. But
why should there be any dishonour attached to a brave
Bedouin tribe which, under such a doughty leader as,
say. King David, lived on plunder ? Why should they
appear less worthy, or call forth less sympathy, than an
agricultural tribe of negroes somewhere in the wilds
of Africa ? It is obvious, of course, that when I use
the term “ nomad ” as applied to later Jewish history, I
want it to bear not its secondary meaning, which it
has acquired in the lapse of time, but its original
connotation in all its pristine strength.

Having cleared the air a little, let us now attempt
to prove that our conclusion is true. Throughout the
centuries Israel has remained a desert and nomadic people,
either by the process of selection or of adaptation.

We have dready mentioned the possible effect of
the Edle in calling forth slumbering nomadic instincts.
In reality, if the truth be told, we can form no clear
conception of what the Exile meant, neither of the
journey into it, nor of the return home. It only seems
possible on the assumption that the Jews then were
still nomads or semi-nomads. One can scarcely conceive
the Conquest of an agricultural people ; whereas the
forcible transplanting of nomad tribes is not unknown
to-day.588 Moreover, the assumption seems to be
supported by the story of the Captivity. “ And he
carried away all Jerusalem and all the princes and all
the mighty men of valour, even ten thousand captives,
and all the craftsmen and the smiths ; none renuuned
save the poorest sort of the people of the land.” And
after the second expedition of the Babylonians, “the
captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land
to be vine-dressers and husbandmen” (2 Kings xxiv.


330 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


14 and XXV. la). Jeremiah’s version of the story agrees
with this (Jer. xxxix. 10).

Whoever the exiles may have been, it is pretty certMn
that the actual agriculturists were not among them
These remained behind even after the second batch of
exiles had been carried away captive. The passage in
Jeremiah would seem to lend probability to my view
that the soil was tilled by unfree villeins who, when
thdr lords were led to Babylon, became independent
husbandmen. It is not assuming too much to regard
these men as the descendants of the original inhabitants
whom the Hebrews had conquered. From the age of
the Captivity, therefore, the population of Judaea had
a thinner stream of Jewish blood in their veins than
the Babylonian exiles, who were more or less the Jewish
aristocracy, the cream of the people, as it were. This
was indeed the view that obtained currency in later times.
Even in Judaea itself it was admitted that the Babylonian
Jews were of the very best stock, and an old Jewish
saying helped to confirm the belief. “ The Jews in the
Roman Diaspora compared as to their descent with
those in Judaea are like the mixed dough to the pure
flour, but Judaea itself is only dough compared with
Babylon.” 589 And R. Ezekiel (220-299) excuses that
good man, Ezra, for having returned to Palestine by
saying that he took the femilies of doubtful origin
away mth him, and so left those that remained free
from the danger of mixing with them(!).S 9 o

We come then to this conclusion. The Exile was
a kind of selective process whereby the best elements
of Jewry, never favourable to an economy of settled
life, were forced to revive the inherent nomad instincts
within them, and to gain their livelihood as townsmen,
i.e.^ traders. This does not mean that none of them
became husbandmen. Far from it. The Babylonian


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 331


Talmud certainly makes it appear that some devoted
themselves to agriculture, but the conditions must have
been those prevalent in Palestine, where an aristocracy of
wealth lived in the towns on the work of (non-Jewish ?)
peasants. Such at any rate is the impression of the
typical state of affairs. But there were exceptions too.
Do we not read of many an ancient Rabbi who himself
walked behind the plough? What is of consequence,
however, is that the prevailing conditions in the Exile
were by no means exceptional. On the contrary, they
were normal. Even before the Exile many Jews had
settled in Egypt and other lands in a kind of voluntary
Diaspora. Those who left Palestine were no doubt the
men in whom the old nomadic instincts were not yet
quite dead, and their self-imposed exile only called
them forth the more. We never find these wandering
Jews, be their origin Judaea or Palestine, establishing
agricultural colonies or independent settlements of any
sort, as most other emigrants did. But what do we
find ? That Jewish settlers scattered themselves in all
corners of the inhabited globe among foreign nations,
preferably in the large towns, where they sought their
livelihood. 59 1 We never hear of their return to their
native hearth after having saved up sufficient money
to keep them in affluence, as the Smss, Hungarian or
Italian emigrants do to-day. The only bonds that
bound them with home were religious. If they ever do
go back, it is only at the annual Passover pilgrimage,
like real nomads that they are.

Little by little Palestine ceased to be the centre of
Jewish life, and Jews became more and more scattelred.
Even as late as the destruction of the Second Temple
(70 A.D.), the Jews in the Diaspora outnumbered those in
Judaea. Perhaps there was some reason for this. That
the country, even when it was most densely populated,


332 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


could maintain more than a million, or a million and
a half souls is scarcely likely. (To-day the inhabitants
number at most 650,000.) As for Judaea, it had no
more than 225,000 inhabitants, and Jerusalem no
more than 25,000.592 There certainly was a larger
number outside Palestine already at the commencement
of the Common Era. In the Egypt of the Ptolemies
it is said that out of a total population of seven
or eight millions, one million were Jews. 593 Nor
was Egypt unique in this respect. It would have
been difficult indeed to name one spot which, in the
words of Strabo quoted by Josephus, was not inhabited
and dominated (!) by Jews. Philo gives a list of
countries that had a Jewish population in his day, and
adds that they were settled in numerous cities of Europe,
Asia, Lybia, on the mainland and on islands, on the
coast and inland. We hear the same thing from a
Sibylline Oracle, composed towards the end of the
2nd century, 594 while Jerome informs us that they
were to be found “from sea to sea, from the British
to the Atlantic Oceans, from the West to the South,
from the North to the East, the world through.” 595
How densely packed they were in the Rome of the
early Empire may be gathered from the account of
the visit of King Herod to the capital of the Cassars,
wherein we are told that no less than 8000 Jews
resident in Rome accompanied him to Augustus. Again,
in the year 19 a.d., 4000 freedmen of nulitary age
who “professed the Egyptian and Jewish superstition”
were sentenced to be deported to Sardinia .596

But enough. No matter how many Jews were in
the Diaspora in the pre-Christian age, so much is certain,
that when the Second Temple fell, Israel was already
•scattered over the face of the earth.S 97 Nor did
the ant-heap become quiescent in the Middle Ages ;


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 333


for Jewish wanderings continued apace. That, too, is
certain.

What direction did the wanderings take ? About the
end of the 5th century Babylon was emptied, at first
slowly and then with speed, the Jews migrating to all
points of the globe — to Arabia, India and Europe.
Again in the 13th century streams of emigrants from
England, France and Germany journeyed partly to the
Pyrenean Peninsula, where there was already a large
number of Jews from Palestine and Babylon, and partly
to the kingdoms of Eastern Europe, which were likewise
not without their Je^dsh inhabitants, who had settled
there as far back as the 8 th century, having arrived
from the Byzantine Empire via the Black Sea. Then,
towards the end of the Middle Ages, Spain and Portugal
on the one hand and Russia and Poland on the other
were the two great basins outside the Orient wherein
the Jews had settled. From each of these the wandering
commenced afresh ; we have already seen what course
it took. The Spanish Jews first, then, after the Cossack
pogroms in the 17th century, the Russian Jews began
to disperse over the earth. This process of emigration
from Russia and Poland was a steady one, until towards
the end of the 19th century there was a volcanic
eruption and hundreds of thousands sought a refuge
in the New World.S98

So this people was driven from place to place — tribe
of the wandering foot whose fate has been so touchingly
expressed in the legend of the Wandering Jew .599
The constant insecurity of their position made it
impossible for them to think of settHng down on the
soil. As a matter of fact, however, they seldom had
any inclination that way. All that we know of Jewish
life in the Diaspora points to the conclusion that only
an insignificant number of Jews devoted themselves to


334 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


agriculture even in those lands where no difficulties were
placed in their path. Perhaps Poland in the i6th
century is the best instance. There they appear to
have taken up farming. But even in Poland they
showed a preference for city life. For every 500
Christian merchants in the Polish towns of the period
there were to be found 3200 Jewish merchants.600

Yes, they became town-dwellers — whether voluntarily
or by stress of circumstance is of no consequence — and
town-dwellers they have remained. More than half the
Jews of the world to-day are to be found in cities
with over 50,000 inhabitants. In Germany this applies
to about 43*6 per cent, of the Jews (1900), in Italy,
Switzerland, Holland and Denmark to about four-
fifths, and to all the Jews of England and the United
States.

Now the modern city is nothing else but a great
desert, as far removed from the warm earth as the desert
is, and like it forcing its inhabitants to become nomads.
The old nomadic instincts have thus through the centuries
been called forth in the Jew by the process of adapting
himself to his environment, while the principle of
selection has only tended to strengthen those instincts.
It is dear that in the constant changes to which the Jews
were subjected, not those among them that had an
inclinatioiji to the comfortable, settled life of the farmer
were the ones likely to survive, but rather those in whom
the nomadic instincts were strong.

This hot-blooded, restless people that had wandered not
forty, but four thousand years in the wilderness came
at last to its Canaan, to its promised land, where it
should be able to repose from all its travels — it came
to the Northern countries, meeting nations there who,
while the Jews were hurrying from one oasis to another,
had dwelt on their soil and smelt of the earth, who


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 335

difFered from the Jews as a horse of the Ardennes differs
from a fiery Arab charger.

It will soon be of Httle moment whether the nations of
Northern, Central and Eastern Europe are called Aryans
or by some other name. The latest researches, it is true,
would make it appear that most of them were indeed
Aryans.^* But the name tells us nothing. What is
of importance is that they were all peoples from the cold
North, and never able to acclimatize themselves in the
warm lands of the South.602 Xo consider them as
Aryans is misleading. For then we shall have to include
the dark Indian too, and obviously the fair, blue-eyed
Europeans have little in common with him, except
perhaps their language. In other respects they have
peculiarities all their own. What these are may easily
be seen by looking at those peoples as they are to-day,
and if we had to characterize them in one word which
should be in contrast to desert it would be forest
Forest and desert are indeed the two great opposites
which sum up differences in countries and their
inhabitants. Forests are of the North — those Northern
forests with the murmur of their brooks, where the
mist clings fast to the tree-trunks and the toads have
their habitation ‘^in the dank moss and the wet stones,”
where in winter the faint sunhght glistens on the rirpe
and in summer the song of birds is everywhere. To
be sure, there were forests on Lebanon’s height, as there
are forests to-day in the South of Italy. But who that
has set foot in a Southern forest will not at once perceive
that it has small affinity with the forests of the North,
will not at once realize that “even in Italy the forest
tells the heart and the eye something very different from
the Alpine forest, or that on the Baltic shore? The
South Italian forest is full of harmonies, permeated with
dear light and ineffable blue, pliant and yet vigorous


336 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


in its aiming skyward and in its bending before the
moaning wind.; it seems a sacred grove ” (Hehn). But
our Northern forests — they have a charm and a mystery
about them at once intimate and fearful. Desert and
forest, sand and marsh — those are the great opposites,
depending in the long run on differences in the moisture ■
of the air, and so creating dissimilar environments for
the activities of man. In the one case the Fata Morgana
is Nature’s symbol, in the other the cloud of mist.

In olden times the characteristics of the Northern
climes were even more strongly marked than to-day.
The Romans’ picture of Germany shows us a rude land,
covered with bogs and dense forests, a land of leaden
sides, with a misty and moist atmosphere, whose winters
are long and wildly stormy. For thousands of years
peoples and races (our ancestors) dwelt in the damp
woods, the bogs, the mists, the ice and the snow and
the rain. They hewed down the woods, made the land
habitable and pitched their tents where axe and plough
had gained for them a strip of the wilds. From the very
first they seemed to be rooted in the soil ; from the very
first it would seem that tillage was never quite absent.
But even if we try to imagine these Northern folk as
“nomads,” theirs is a very different kind of life from
that of a Bedouin tribe. We feel that they are more tied
to the hearth than even an agricultural people in an
oasis-land. The Northerners are settlers even when they
only breed cattle ; the Bedouins are always nomads, even
though they till the soil.

This is so because man is brought into closer touch
with Nature in the North than in the hot countries.
Man is part and parcel of Nature even if he only beats
the woods as a huntsman, or as a shepherd breaks a path
through the thickets for his flocks. I am inclined to
say, even at the risk of being ridiculed as a modern


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 337

mystic, that in the North there are between Nature
and even the most prosaic of men tender bonds of love
and friendship, unknown to the Southerner. In the
South, as has been rightly observed, man regards Nature
only as an instrument in the work of civilization. Even
when he is a tiller of the soil, he is a stranger to Nature.
In the South there is no country life, no living in
and with Nature, no attachment to bush and tree, heath
and meadow, wild creature and free bird.

Is it not clear that these varying and varied environ-
ments must produce different results, must influence
men in different ways ? Would it be too much to
assume that the Jewish characteristics as we have seen
them have been affected by, nay, have even received their
peculiar impress from the thousands of years of wandering
in the wilderness ? The answer of course is yes, and
if in the follovdng pages I try to prove it, I must
nevertheless admit that the present state of our know-
ledge of biology is inadequate to show how environment
has bearing on the anatomical and physiological character
of man, and therefore also on his psychical disposition.
The direction which our inquiries under this head should
take has been laid down by Juan Huarte de San Juan,
that wise old 16th-century Spanish physician whom I have
already mentioned, in his splendid book, Examen de ingenios^
in which he makes a serious attempt (the first of its
kind) to give a biological and psychological explanation
of Jewish characteristics by referring to the vicissitudes
of the Jewish people. The ideas of this profound thinker,
who treated of some of the problems of human selection
in a manner which for that period was certainly
remarkable, appear to me to be worth saving from
an undeserved oblivion, and I shall here give them
in outline. 6®3

Huarte mentions four causes which contributed to make

23


338 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


the Jews what they are : (i) A hot climate. (2) An
unfruitful soil.» (3) The peculiar food of the people
during their forty years’ wandering in the wilderness :
they subsisted on Manna ; the water they drank was
exceedingly pure, and the air they breathed very rare.
In such circumstances there was a tendency (as Aristotle
had already pointed out) for children to be born who
were keen of intellect {Jiombre de muy agudo ingenio).
(4) “ When the Children of Israel entered into possession
of the Promised Land they were faced with so many
difficulties, scarcity, hostile raids, conquests and tribula-
tions of all sorts, that the misery of it had the effect
of adding to their intellectual genius a fiery, dry and
parched temperament. . . . Continual melancholy and a
never-ending wretchedness together resulted in collecting
the blood in the brain, the liver and the heart, and a
process of blood consuming and burning ensued. . . .
This produced much burnt black gall {melancolia for
admtton). Of this almost all the Jews still have a great
deal and it results ... in craft, cunning and spite
{solerciay astucia, versacia, malidd)." The author then
proceeds to answer the objection, that in the three
thousand years since their feeding on Manna the Jews
very probably lost the characteristics they then acquired,
by saying that once certain tendencies enter into the
system they become second nature and are passed on
for many generations. He is ready to admit, however,
that possibly the Jews are not quite as sagacious as
they used to be.

Into the depths to which the Madrid physician
descends I cannot take the reader. We should not find
anything but unproved theories there. We shall there-
fore remain above ground and content ourselves with
noting the connexion between Jewish psychological
qualities and the vicissitudes of th^ Jewish people.


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 339 '

The intellectuality of the Jew, we saw, was his most
striking attribute, the one which embraced many others.
It can be very easily accounted for when we recall that
from the very earliest period of their history, when
they tended their flocks beside the still waters, the Jews
never had to perform hard manual labour. The curse
that fell on Adam and Eve when they were expelled
from the Garden of Eden, that man should eat bread
in the sweat of his face, did not at any time bear heavily
on the Jew — that is, if we take the words in their literal
meaning and exclude mental worry and anxiety.
Shepherd life calls for care, combination and organiza-
tion, and all subsequent vocations which the Jews
adopted (whether voluntarily or forcibly is of no con-
sequence) demanded but little bodily work, though much
mental effort. The family history of most of us leads
through two or three generations to the plough or the
anvil or the spinning-wheel. Not so with the Jews.
For centuries and more they were for the most part
never peasants or craftsmen, never makers of anything,
but only thinkers — brain-workers. It was therefore
only to be' expected that certain gifts and capacities
should be developed in them in the course of time,
Oven the Jewish mode of life, an exceptional intellectu-
ality cannot but be deduced from it.

But more than this : the special Jewish intellectuality
is of a kind associated with sandy or stony deserts.
The Jews are rational, are fond of abstraction. Once
more we are reminded of the contrast between desert
and forest, between North and South. The sharp out-
lines of the landscape in hot, dry coimtries, their brilliant
sunshine and their deep shadows, their clear, starlit
nights and their stunted vegetation — cannot all these
be summed up in the one word abstraction ? The
opposite to this is surely what is concrete, as all things


340 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


of the North are, where the water flows abundantly,
where the landscape is as varied as it is rich, where
Nature is prolific in wood and field, and the earth sends
up its fragrance. Is it accidental that astronomy and
the art of reckoning first arose in the hot lands where
the nights are ever brilliant, and was developed among
peoples whose pastoral pursuits taught them to count ?
Can we think of the Sumerians who invented the cunei-
form script ^4 as a Northern people ? Or, on the
other hand, can we imagine the peasant of the misty
North as he follows his plough, or the huntsman chasing
deer in the forest, as either of them able to conceive
the abstract idea of numbers.^

So vdth rational thinking and searching after causes.
That also leads us into the world of the South with
its artificially produced, never natural vegetation, with
the eternal insecurity of Bedouin life as the donunating
factor of existence. And contrariwise, tradition is asso-
ciated with the comfortable, secure and peaceful existence
of the Northern farmer and with his misty and mysteri-
ous surroundings. That the appreciation of life and
growth should be able to develop, or at least to develop
more freely, among the luxuriant Nature of the North
than among the dead vegetation of the South is not at
all unlikely. And as the desert, so the town, in de-
priving man of his piece of fruitful mother earth destroys
in him the feeling of communion with all living things,
breaks the bond of fellowship between him and animals
and plants, and so deadens all true understanding of
organic Nature. On the other hand, the city sharpens
his intellectual capacities, enabling him to search, to
spy-out, to organize, to arrange. To be constantly on
the alert is the nature of the nomad; to have to be
constantly on the alert was what their fate forced on
the Jews — to be constantly alive to new possibilities.


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 341


new goals, new combinations of events ; in a word, to
order life with some end in view.

The Jew is adaptable and mobile. Adaptability and
mobility are the principal qualities the nomad must
possess if he is to survive the struggle for esdstence.
Your settled peasant could not make any use of these
virtues. “The law of desert life prescribes the greatest
mobility both of person and of property. Camel and
steed must be able to carry the nomad and all his
substance speedily from one halting-place to the next,
for his stock of provisions is not great and is soon
exhausted, and besides he must be able to flee from
the onslaughts of his foe vdth the rapidity of a lightning
flash. . . This mobility even in ordinary circumstances
necessitates a certain measure of organizing talent on
the part of the tribal leaders.” (The soil tiller
has no need of this.) “The plough and the ox seem
lazy things enough when compared with the lance, the
arrow and the horse of the nomad.” ^ So too the
country when compared with the town. Turn to the
history of the Jews, and observe how from the moment
they crossed the Jordan until this very day towns
have engendered in them a high degree of mobility.

Always then we have the contrast between the nomad
and the dweller by the hearth, the contrast to which
may be ascribed, on the one hand determination to
reach some goal, on the other, joy in work for what
it is worth. In the case of the Jews their thousand
years’ wanderings only developed this nomad virtue in
them. The promised land throughout their journeyings
was always before them ; it was always something to
be reached, something to be achieved, something to which
they looked forward, like a traveller who has no delight
in his wandering. The more hopeless the present be-
came, the richer were the blessings which the future


342 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


held out ; everything that was was accounted as a bubble,
all reality as vdthout content, all action as senseless ;
only the result of action — success, the end in view —
had a value. In this chain of tendencies the stress
lad on results was to a large extent responsible for
the utilization of money for lending purposes, and,
indeed, for the whole of the capitalistic nexus. The
importance attached by the Jew to results of action
may have been cause and effect at once of their
capitalistic undertakings.

Now, for the attainment of some given end, no less
than for mobility, a large measure of physical and
intellectual energy is essential. The first ancestors of
the Jews must have been possessed of a great deal,
and the sojourn of the Jews amid Northern peoples only
served to increase it still more. It is plainly manifest
that the contact with the North perfected the inherent
powers of the Jew. One need but compare his achieve-
ments here with those in Southern lands to see the truth
of this statement. The process of selection, by weeding
out the unfit, only made bodily and mental energy
still more the possession of a people whose Southern
origin already inclined them to it.

As the spirits of the two types of peoples differed,
so also their respective expressions. Water, wood and
fragrant earth have their fairy tales, their myths, their
songs ; so have desert and oasis. Delightful as it would
be to follow this side-issue, we can here only call atten-
tion to it and perforce pass on to the consideration of
the different economic system associated with each
type of people.

The economic differences may be traced, at bottom,
to the contrast between the nomadic and the agricultural
life, between Sahaimsm and “Sylvanism.” From the
wood which is cleared, from the marsh which is drained,


VICISSITUDES OF T^B JEWISH PEOPLE 343


from the soil which the ploughshare turns up arose
that economic organization of society which was dominant
in Europe before Capitalism came — ^the feudal, manorial
system, resting on the ideas that production should be
only for consumption, that every man should have his
niche to work in, and that every society should have
differences in status. The peasant’s holding, strictly
marked off as it was from his neighbour’s, gave pro-
minence to the idea of each man’s limited sphere of
activities, of “the estate to which it had pleased God
to call him ” ; there he was to remain and work in
the traditional way.

From the endless wastes of sand, from the pastoral
pursuits, springs the opposite way of life — Capitalism.
Economic activities here are not circumscribed for each
man, but are those of the breeder (shepherd) with his
boundless outlook, where to-morrow may undo the work
of to-day, but where also in a few years’ time stock
may increase tenfold. Sheep and kine multiply quickly,
but as quickly they may be decimated by hunger or
disease. Hence, only in the shepherd’s calling, never
in the farmer’s, could the idea of gain have taken root,
and the conception of unlimited production have become
a reality. Only in the shepherd’s calling could the
view have become dominant that in economic activities
the abstract quantity of commodities matters, not whether
they are fit or sufficient for use. Only in the shepherd’s
calling was counting a prime necessity. Moreover, the
rationalism which, as we have seen, is inseparable from
nomadic life, here entered into play, and it is not too
much to say that “ Nomadism ” is the progenitor of
Capitalism. The relation between Capitalism and Judaism
thus becomes more clear.

Now desert and wandering, though they influenced
the Jevnsh character in no small degree, were not the


344 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


only forces which moulded the Jewish spirit. There
were others, not as effective as the first, but supplementary
to them.

The first was money, of which the Jews were the
guardians. This left its mark on their nature, but
at the same time it was in consonance with it. For
in money, the two factors that go to make up the Jewish
spirit are united — desert and wandering, Saharaism and
Nomadism. Money is as little concrete as the land
from which the Jews sprang; money is only a mass,
a lump, like the flock ; it is mobile ; it is seldom rooted
in fruitful soil like the flower or the tree. Their constant
concern with money distracted the attention of the Jews
from a qualitative, natural view of life to a quantitative,
abstract conception. The Jews fathomed all the secrets
that lay hid in money, and found out its magic powers.
They became lords of money, and, through it, lords
of the world — as I tried to describe in the first chapter
of this book.

Did they go in search of money, or was it first forced
upon them and did they then gradually accustom them-
selves to the stranger ? Both explanations, it would
seem, have much in their favour.

In the beginning it looks as though a great deal of
money flowed into their possession almost naturally — or
more correctly stated, the precious metals, which they
afterwards turned into coin. I believe it has never
yet been pointed out that large quantities of gold and
silver must have accumulated in Palestine in the period
of the Kings. We are told of David that he brought
back from his tmding expeditions much of both metals,
not to mention the tribute he received in gold and
silver. “ And Joram brought with him vessels of silver
and vessels of gold and vessels of brass ; these also did
King David dedigate unto the Lord with the silver


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 345

and gold that he dedicated of all the nations which he
subdued” (2 Sam. viii. lo-ii).

The stories we read of the use of gold and silver,
both in the making of the Tabernacle and in the building
of the Temple, border on the fabulous, and apparently
it was no exaggeration to say that “ the King made
silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones ” (2 Chron.
i. 1 5) — certainly not when we remember the exact statis-
tical information on the subject. The voyages of King
Solomon’s ships to Ophir must have ^opened up a
veritable California in those days. No wonder that
the prophet Isaiah lamented that “ their land is full
of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their
treasures” (Isa. ii. 7).

What happened to all these quantities of the precious
metals? The Rabbis of the Talmud considered this
question and came to the conclusion that it remained
with Israel. “ This is what R. Alexandra! taught. Three
things returned whence they came : Israel, Egypt’s
money (cf. Exod. xii. 35 and i Kings xiv. 25) and
the tablets of the Ark.” 6 o 7 But of course a more
convincing proof will hardly be adducible. Be that as
it may, the important thing is that an enormous supply
of the precious metals had accumulated in Israel at an
early stage in its history. To this was added the moneys
obtained through the centuries in all parts of the world.
Nor must we overlook the streams of treasure that were
directed to Palestine, partly as Temple taxes and partly
as the offerings of pious pilgrims. Cicero (pro Flacco^
c. 28) deplored the large sums that were annually taken
to Jerusalem from Italy and all the provinces. Both
channels must have given no small yield, as would
appear from several interesting incidents. Mithridates,
for instance, seized 800 talents of the Temple taxes
and deposited them in the island of Cos, Cicero relates


346 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


that Flaccus captured while on its way to Jerusalem
the money which the Jews of four cities of Asia Minor
(Apamea, Laodicea, Pergamum and Adramyttium) had
sent, and that the spoil from the first-named dty
alone amounted to a hundred pounds of gold. And
then the pilgrims ! Their number must have been ex-
ceedingly large, though it was not quite 2,700,000, as
Josephus reports, and though there were not quite 380
synagogues in Jerusalem for the convenience of the
visitors. Certain it is, however, that the pilgrim bands
were like reservoirs from which money flowed in all
directions, and many a man must have become wealthy
and therefore able to lend money at interest. Perhaps
the priests may be instanced ; we are told that they
generally obtained large dowries and were not disinclined
for a little money-lending business.608

The next question of importance is whether the Jews
themselves discovered the secret power of money, whether
it was they who instituted the mechanism of lending, or
whether they learnt it from the Babylonians. It seems
pretty well established now that money circulated freely
in Babylon prior to the arrival of the Jews, though we
have no dettils of any value as to the extent to which
money-lending was developed. Possibly the seeds of
Jewish monetary activities may have been germinating
with their cousins, the Babylonians. It does not matter
much which of these kindred peoples first grew golden
fruit. The main thing is that later events forced money-
lending upon the Jews, and so made them specialists in
it. For their constant wanderings necessitated their
having their wealth in a form easily portable, and what
more adaptable for this than money and jewellery ?
Money was their sole companion when they were thrust
naked into the street, and their sole protector when the
hand of the oppressor was heavy upon them. So they


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 347

learned to love it, seeing that by its aid alone they could
subdue the mighty ones of the earth. Money became
the means whereby they — and through them all mankind
— ^might wield power without themselves being strong.
With the fine threads of money-lending a people who
were socially of little moment were able to bind the
feudal giant, much as the Lilliputians did to Gulliver.

So much then for money as one factor in Jewish de-
velopment. I come now to another, which some regard
as of even greater import. I refer to the Ghetto.

The Ghetto undoubtedly influenced the social status of
the Jews in a very peculiar way : it made of them de-
spised pariahs. Even to-day the greater portion of Ghetto
Jews belong socially to the lower classes, and are so con-
sidered by their brethren in faith. At one time in their
history the contrast between the Ghetto Jew and his
liberated brother found tangible expression in the attitude
of the Sephardim (Spanish Jews) towards the Ashkenazim
(German Jews). The former looked down on the latter
with contempt, regarding them as importunate beggars
who were a nuisance. This is the vein of bitter sarcasm
in which a German Jew wrote to a Portuguese co-reli-
gionist about the middle of the 1 8 th century (when the
relation between the two sections was most strained) ^ :
“I am aware, Sir, that the Portuguese Jews have
nothing in common with those of Germany except
a religious rite, and that their upbringing and their
manners utterly differentiate between them as far as
social life is concerned. I am also aware that the affinity
between the two is a tradition of very ancient date, and
that Vercingentorix, the Gaul, and Arminius, the German,
were nearer relatives to Herod’s father-in-law than you
are to the Son of Ephraim.” Pinto, the Sephardi Jew,
expresses himself in a similar tone in his well-known
reply to the attacks which Voltaire made on the Jews as


348 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


a whole.fiio Pinto is anxious that the Spanish Jews
should not be put in the same boat as the German Jews ;
they are two distinct nations. “ A Jew of London,” he
says, “ as little resembles a Jew of Constantinople as the
latter does a Chinese Mandarin. A Portuguese Jew of
Bordeaux and a German Jew of Metz have nothing in
common.” “ Mons. de Voltaire cannot ignore the deli-
cate scruples of the Portuguese and Spanish Jews in not
mixing with the Jews of other nations, either by marriage
or otherwise.” Pinto proceeds to say that if a Sephardi
Jew in Holland or England were to make a German
Jewess his wife, his relatives would disown him and he
would not even be given burial in their cemetery.

This opposition very often found practical expression,
more especially on the part of the Sephardim, who in
their own eyes were the aristocracy of Jewry and who
were afraid lest their social position should be endangered
by the arrival of Jews from more easterly countries.
Thus, in 1761 the Portuguese Jews (or Marannos) of
Bordeaux were able to get an order passed to the effect
that within fourteen days all alien Jews were to leave
the city. Pinto and Pereira were the prime movers in
the matter, and they used every endeavour to rid them-
selves of the “ vagabonds ” — their own co-religionists
from Germany and France.^” In Hamburg the
Sephardim occupied a position of official superiority over
the German Jews ; the latter having to give under-
takings to the former that no shady commercial practices
would be carried on.

The reason for the dislike between the Sephardim and
the Ashkenazim, more especially of the former towards
the latter, may be found in the different social posi-
tions occupied by each. But no doubt the feeling was
strengthened by the distinctly marked aristocratic con-
sciousness of the Sephardim, who held that they were


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 349


of purer origin than the Ashkenazim, that their blood
was bluer, that their family pride had always been a spur
to them as long as they lived in the Pyrenean Peninsida
to do noble deeds, and had thus been a protection against
all things base.612

We have here possibly touched on a chord which will
help us to apprize at its true worth the influence of
the Ghetto for Jewish life. Perhaps the conception of
noblesse oblige held by the Spanish and Portuguese Jews —
thdr aim to make the highest virtues theirs — may ex-
plain why they had no Ghettos, and will not need to be
regarded as an effect of Ghetto life. In other words,
perhaps a section of the Jews lived the Ghetto life because
they were by nature inclined that way. It is diflicult to
say why some continued in the Ghetto while others soon
freed themselves. We have not sufficient information
for the decision. Nor can we assert without hesitation
(though much would seem to point to it) that the
Sephardim represented the result of a process of social
selection among Jews. But it is not assuming too much
to say that differences in their vicissitudes are traceable
to differences in their natures. These differences must
not, however, be made too much of. Their Jewishness
was little influenced by them. Jews they were all, whether
Sephardim or Ashkenazim. But in the case of the latter.
Ghetto life produced certain habits, certain mannerisms
which always clung to the Ghetto Jew, and often affected
his economic activities. In part they were the habits, of
low social grades generally, but in Jews, vith their peculiar
temperament, they assumed curious features — a tendency,
for instance, to petty cheating, obtrusiveness, lack of
personal dignity, tactlessness and so on. These things
must have played some part in the Jewish conquest of the
feudal economic strongholds ; in what way precisely we
have already had occasion to see.


3SO THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


But these mere externals must not be exaggerated. In
social intercourse with Jews they may appear of some
importance to this or that person ; but we doubt whether
any great weight should be attached to them in consider-
ing Jewish economic achievements. Without question
the Jews could not have won their dominant position in
the world by the aid of these mannerisms alone.

Another aspect of Ghetto life is of more consequence.
I refer to its influence in making the inherent Jevdsh
characteristics more marked and more one-sided. If, as
we have already observed, these characteristics sprang
from a want of settledness on the part of the Jew, it is
obvious that the Ghetto only intensified it. But it was
already there, already innate in the Jew.

The Ghetto had the same eflPect in another direction
by giving prominence to, and emphasizing the twin
forces which were responsible for the constancy in
Jewish peculiarities — religion and pure breeding.

The religion of a people is, of course, the expression
of its soul : that has been the view that we have taken
in this book. But all the same, an exclusive formalistic
religion like Judaism must in its turn strongly influence
its adherents, more especially in the direction of unifying
their life and giving it a common stamp. How this ex-
pressed itself we have also considered I wovdd here
only remind the rbader of its rationalizing tendencies.

And as with religion so with the physiological side of
life, which is so closely akin to it. That also intensified
the inbreeding of the Jews, which they had practised for
hundreds of years.

I have just remarked that with the Jews inbreeding is
closely akin to religion. One may go even further and
say that it is a direct consequence of the central idea of
the reli^on, the idea of election. Tins has been demon-
strated recently in a series of studies, one of the best


VICISSITUDES OF THE JEWISH PEOPLE 351


of which perhaps is by Alfred Nossig, who writes as
follows : 613 “ A strildng biological result of the idea of
election is the existence of the Jews, and their power of
reproduction, not yet abated. The Mosaic conception
of ‘ an everlasting people ’ would seem to be realizing
itself.” Dietary and marriage laws are safeguards for
the continuance of the race. “ These ethical treasures
of highest worth were of course shielded against destruc-
tion through intermixture with less carefully reared races.
The result of the prohibition of mixed marriages was that
the factor which is supreme in race culture — ^heredity —
was maintained in its pristine strength, and the advan-
tages that have been mentioned not merely remained
constant but increased from generation to generation.”
“ Inbreeding has thus resulted in making Jewish inherited
characteristics more and more marked and intense, so that
it becomes exceedingly difficult to oust them by inter-
mixture. For it has been proved that the intentity of
heredity, like all other organic functions, has become
strengthened by constant practice.” 614

Religion and inbreeding were the two iron hoops that
bound the Jewish people and kept them as one body
through the centuries. Suppose that the hoops were to
become loose, what then ? To answer this very difficult
question was not the task 1 set myself. For as long as
we find the Jews exercising their particular influence on
economic life — and they still do so — ^we may take it that
the hoops are yet strong. I did not in this book intend
to go beyond considering that influence, and showing the
genesis of the Jewish genius which made it possible —
that influence which has been so fateful in economic life
and for modern culture as a whole.


NOTES AND REFERENCES


24


ABBREVIATIONS


Monaischnft^Monatschfift fUr Geschichte und Wissemchaft des
Judentums.

= Jewish Quarterly Review,

Z,D.S,J, =: ZeitschnftfUrDemographie und StaiisHk der Juden,
R,E,J. = Revue des ttudes Jmves,

[The numbers of the notes correspond to those in the German
edition, save only that those marked by “a'* (7a, 9A, etc.) are
passages which in the original are in the text, but which from their
nature it has been deemed better to transfer to the Notes.]


CHAPTER I


1. Jakob Fromer, Das Wesen des Judentums (1905), p* 144,
No authority cited.

2. Zeitschrift filr Demographie und Statistik der Juden

iii., 140, 145.

3. J. Thon, “ Tauf bewegung der Juden in Oesterreich,” in

iv., 6.

4. Th6ophile Malvezin, Histoire des yuifi i Bordeaux (1875),
p. 105.

5. E,g^ Lucien Wolf, ** Jessurun Family *’ in yewish

Quarterly Review *• (*889), 439.

6. E.g,y B. C. Weiss, Histoire des rifugiis pretest. y i. (1853),
pp. 164, 377, 379, 383; ii., s.

7. Sigmund Mayer, Die ohnomische Entwkkbmg der ff^iener
Juderiy p. 7.


CHAPTER II

7A. To give the numbers of Jews who were scattered in
different lands is impossible. Attempts to do this have indeed
been made, but the results were nothing more than conjectures.
Perhaps the best of these is I. Loeb, Le nombre des yuifi de
Castile et d^Espagne au moyen Age^ in Revue des Etudes yuivesy xiv.
(1887), p. 161. Loeb bases a good many of his calculations on
the number of Jews resident in the different localities to-day.
Nevertheless 1 shall give the results of his researches. He be-
lieves there were about 235,000 Jews in Spain and Portugal in
1492. The number had remained pretty constant for some two
hundred years. Of the total, 1 60,000 lived in Castile (Anda-
lusia, Granada, etc.) and 30,000 in Navarre. What happened
to all these Jews ? Loeb maintains that 50,000 were haptirHl,
20,000 perished as a result of the expulsion, and 165,000 emi-
grated as follows: 90,000 to Turkey, 2000 to Egypt and

355


3 S6 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


Tripoli, 10,000 to Algiers, 20,000 to Morocco, 3000 to France,
9000 to Italy, 25,000 to Holland, Hamburg, England and
Scandinavia, 5000 to America, and looo to various other
countries.

Supplementary to these figures let me quote the report of the
well-informed Venetian Ambassador, who says, ‘‘Si giudica in
Castilia ed in altre province di Spagna il terzo esser Marrani un
terzo dico di coloro che sono cittadini e mercanti perche il populo
minuto e vero cristiano, e cosi la maggior parte delli grandi.”
Vicenzo Querini (1506) in Alberi, ReL degli Amb,^ Series I,
voL i., p. 29.

8. For the fate of the Marannos in Portugal see M. Kay-
serling, Geschichte der Juden in Portugal (1867), pp. 84, 167.
Further particulars may be found in J. H. Grottheil’s The Jews
and the Spanish Inquisition^ in J.Q^R^y xv. (1903), p. 182 ; in
Elkan Adler’s Auto da FI and JeWy ib., xiii., xiv., xv. (recently
issued in book form).

9. Cf. B. Sieveking, Genueser Firanzweseny ii. (1899), p. 167,

with Schudt, Merkwurdigkeiteny i, (1714), p. 128.

9A, Frankfort (Main) was the goal of the Jews expelled
from the other South-German towns in the 15th and l6th cen-
turies. But Holland must also have contributed its quota, as
would appear from the close commercial relations between Frank-
fort and Amsterdam in the 17th and i8th centuries. According
to F. Bothe, Beitrdge %ur Wirtschafts- und Socialgeschichte der
ReicJ^stadt Frankfurt (1906), p. 70, the number of Jews in
Frankfort increased twenty-fold. In 1612 there were about
2800 5 in 1709 the official census gives 3019, out of a total
population of 18,000. We are tolerably well informed as to the
origin of the Jews in Frankfort, thanks to the assiduous in-
dustry of A. Dietz in his Stammhuch der Frankfurter Juden :
Geschichtliche Mitteilungen fiber die Frankfurter judischen Familien
1549-1849 (1907). For the period prior to 1500 sec Karl
Bucher, Bevolkerungvon Frankfurt am Main ( 1886), pp. 526-601.

In Hamburg the Jews first settled (ostensibly as Catholics) in
1577 ^ 5 ^ 3 - They came from Flanders, Italy, Holland, Spain

and Portugal, and it was not until the 17th century that immi-
grants from the East (Germany especially) began to arrive.
According to Count Galeazzo Gualdo Priorato there were some
40 or 50 German- Jewish houses in Hamburg in 1663 side by


NOTES AND REFERENCES


357


side with the 120 of Portuguese Jews. See Zeitschrijt fUr
Hamburgische Geschichte^ iii., p. 140. For a general account of
the Jews of Hamburg, see A. Feilchenfeld, Die Ulteste Geschichte
der deutschen Juden tn Hamburg^ in the Monatsschrift fur Ge-
schichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums^ vol. 43 (1899) ; also
M. Grunwald, Portugiesengrdber auf deutscher Erde (1902) and
Hamburgs deutsche fuden (1904).

From the end of the 17th century onward the Jews increased
rapidly in Hamburg. About the middle of the i8th century we
hear of a ‘‘terrible crowd of Jews,” estimated (much too highly,
of course) at between twenty and thirty thousand. Cf. C, L.
von Griesheim, Die Stadt Hamburg (1760), p. 47.

10. Risbeck, Brief e eines reisenden Franzosen Uber Deutschland

an seinen Bruder in Paris (1780). Quoted in H. Scheubbe, Aus
den Tagen unserer (1873), pp. 382 flF.

11, We have a wealth of information about the Jews in Bor-
deaux in the fine work of Malvezin (quoted in note 4), which is
really invaluable. Of the Jews in Marseilles we are told much in
Jonas WeyFs “Les juifsprot6g& fran^ais aux 6chelles du Levant
et en Barbarie,” in Ren), des Etudes Juives^ vol. xii. (1886). For the
Jews of Rouen see Gosselin, “ Documents in^dites pour servir a
Thistoire de la marine normande et du commerce rouennais
pendant les xvi et xvii siecles” (1876). Pigeonneau, who
quotes this book in his Histoire du cummer ce^ ii., p. 123, speaks of
course of “ the naturalized Spaniards and Portuguese.”

We ought to mention also Maignial, La Question juive en
France en 1789 (1903), a book based on an extensive acquaintance
with sources, written with skill and judgment. Not only does
it present a good account of the Jewish Question in France in
1789, but it also shows how that problem developed.

In Paris there were not many Jews before the 19th century,
though some of them were very influential. A good deal of in-
formation will be found concerning the Jews of Paris in the i8th
century in the books of Lion Kahn, Les juifs h Paris depuis k vi
sikle (1889) ; Les juifs sous Louis XF (1892), and Les juifs h Paris
au xviii sikle (1894). Good as these books are, they do not
deal with every aspect of the question.

Much valuable material dealing with the history of the Jews
in France will be found scattered in the Revue des Jitudes Juives
(from 1880 onwards).


358 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


12, The history of the Jews in Holland has been treated by
H. J. Koenen, Geschtedenes der Joden in Nederland (1843),
which has not been surpassed. Also worth mentioning are the
following : M. Henriques Pimentel, Geschiedkundige Aanteeken-
ingen betreffende de Portugesche Israeliten in den Haag (1876);
S. Back, Die Entstehungsgeschichte der portugiesischen Gemeinde in
Amsterdam (1883) 5 Italic, Geschiedenes der Israelitischen
Gemeente te Rotterdam (1907).

13, Ranke, Franzbsische Geschichte^ voL iii., p. 350,

14, Schudt, yudische Merkwurdigkeiten^ i. (1714), p. 271 ;
cf. also p. 277.

15, In addition to the literature mentioned in note ii, see
also Carmoly in the Revue Orientale (1841) i., 42, 168, 174, and
Graetz, Geschichte der Juden^ vol. 9, pp. 292, 354, 490.

16, See L. Guiccardino, Totius Belgi Descriptio (1652),
p. 129, and cf. R. Ehrenberg, Zeihalter der Fugger^ ii. (1896),
P- 3 -

17* Cf. Macaulay’s [History] iv., p. 320, and Ehrenberg,
op. cit, ii., p. 303.

18. The history of the Jews in England has been abundantly
and ejficiently dealt with. A mine of information (though it
must be used with care) will be found in Anglia Judaica^ or the
History and Antiquities of the Jews in England^ by D’Blossiers
Tovey (1738). Among later works the pioneer was that of
James Picciotto, Sketches of Angb-yewish History (1875), which
is deficient in that it does not always mention authorities,
H. S. Q. Henriques in his Return of the fews to England (1905)
has written on this subject from the legal point of view.

A complete account of the history of the Jews in England will
be found in Albert M.Hyamson’s admirable A History of the fetus
in England (1908). The author has skilfully utilized the material
at his disposal in special articles and papers, and has presented
a rounded oflF study of the whole subject The f.Q.R. (first
appeared in 1889) contains much miscellaneous material. Also
the publications of the Anglo- Jewish Historical Exhibition (1888).

For the Cromwellian period the following may be mentioned :
Lucien Wolf, The Middle Age of Angloffewish History^
1290-1656, in the Publications of the Anglo- Jewish Historical
Exhibition, No. i. Significant for the position of the Jews in
England at the end of the 15th century is the fact that a Jew


NOTES AND REFERENCES


359


commenced legal proceedings quite openly and was confident of
winning his case. A century later there were Jewish industrial
undertakers in England, cf. Calendar of State Papers^ 1581-90,
p. 49 (quoted in L. Wolf’s paper). There must have been quite
a number of Jews in England at the beginning of the 17th
century. A publication of 1625, The Wandering Jew telling
fortunes to Englishmen (also quoted in Mr. Wolf’s paper), says:
‘‘A store of Jews we have in England ; a few in Court ; many
i’ the city ; more in the country.”

19. Anglia Judaica^ p. 302, ‘‘as I have been well inform’d,”
writes Tovey.

20. A good instance is that of J. F. Richter, who works out
the thesis for Nuremberg. For the old Jewish community in
Nuremberg, see Allgemeine Juden%eitungy 1842, No. 24. Cf. also
the Eighth Report of the Historische Verein fur Mittelfranken,
and M. Brann, “Eine Sammlung Further Grabschriften,” in
Gedenkbuch %ur Erinnerung an David Kaufmann (1900).

21. A most interesting document in support is given by

D. Kaufmann in his “Die Vcrtreibung der Marranen aus
Venedig im Jahre I 5 S 0 >” ^3

p. 520.

22. Hyamson’s History of the Jews in England^ p. 174.

23. M. Bloch, Les juifs et la prospiriti publique it travers
Vhistoire (1899), p. II. The Ordinance contains the following
remarkable words, “ Vous devez bien prendre garde que la jalousie
du commerce portera toujours les marchands a 6tre d’avis de les
chasser.”

24. Malvezin, Les juifs d Bordeaux^ p. 132.

25. Malvezin, p. 175.

26. S. Ullmann, Studien zur Geschichte des Juden in Belgien
bis zum 18. Jahrhundert (1909), p. 34.

27. ]£mile Ouverlcaux, “ Notes et documents sur les juife de
Belgique,” in RM.J.^ vol. 7, p. 262.

28. Thurloe, Collection of State Papers^ iv, p. 333- Cf. also
the letter of Whalley, p. 308.

29. J. Muller in his anti- Jewish book, Judaismus (1644).
Cf. also Reils, “ Bcitrage zur altercn Geschichte der Juden in
Hamburg, in the Zeitschrift des F ereins fur Hamburgische
Geschichte^ vol. 2, p« 412.

30. Ehrenberg, Grosse Fermgen^ p. 146.


360 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


31. M, Grunwald, Hamburgs deutsche Juden bis zur Auflosung
der Dreigemeinden^ 18 1 1 (1904), p. ai.

32. Arnold Kiesselbach, Die wirtschafis- und rechtsgeschichtliche
Entwicklung der Seeversicherung in Hamburg (1901), p, 24.


CHAPTER III

33. Hyamson, p. 178.

34. Anglia Judaica^ p. 292.

35. Thanks to the work of R. Markgraf, Zur Geschichte der
Juden auf den Messen in Leipzig vom 1664-1839 (a doctoral
dissertation, 1894), from which the figures in the text have
been taken. For the short period 1675-99 Max Freudenthal,
‘‘Leipziger Messg^te*’ in Monatschrifty voL 45 (1901), p. 460,
is even better than Markgraf, for he draws from the actual Fair
Books, where Markgraf depends on the documents in the Leipzig
archives, which are of later date. Freudenthal shows that
between 1671 and 1699, 18,182 Jews visited the fairs, apart
from those who had special permits. Markgraf, however, for
the same period has traced only 14,705. Freudenthars study
appeared in book form in X902 under the title of Die judischen
Besucher der Leipziger Messe,

36. Markgraf, p. 93; Freudenthal, p. 465. Cf. R, Funke,
Die Leipziger Messen (1897), p. 41,

37- See, for example, No. 21 of the Judenreglements of the
year 1710 in C, L, von Griesheim, Die Stadi Hamburgy Anmer^
kungen und Zugaben (1759), p. 95.

38. E. Baasch, Hamburgs Seeschiffahrt und Warcnhandel **
in the Zeitschrifi des Ver.fur Hamburg. Geschichtey vol. 9 (1894),
pp. 316, 324. Cf. A. Feilchenfcld, Anfang und Bliitezeit der
Portugiesengemeinden,*' in Hambg. Ztschrifty vol 10 (1899),
p. 199.

39. Encyelopidie methodique. Manufactures,^* i., 403-4.

40. Cf. H. J. Koenen, Geschiedenes der Joden in Nederland
(1843), P* 176 ff* Also H. Sommershauscn, *<Die Geschichte
der Niederlassung der Juden in Holland und den hollandischen
Kolonien," in Monatschrifty voL ii.

41. For jewellery and pearls, sec for Hamburg Griesheim,
op. city p. 1 19 ; for North Germany I am indebted to Dr. Bernfeld,


NOTES AND REFERENCES 361

of Berlin, for information ; for Holland, see Jewish Encyclopaedia^
article ‘^Netherlands”; E. E. Danekamp, Die Amsterdamer
Diamantindustruy quoted by N. W. Goldstein in his article in
the Z.D.S.J, (vol. iii., p. 178) on Die Juden in der Amsterdamer
Diamantindustrie ; for Italy, see D. Kaufmann, “ Die Vertreibung
der Marranen aus Venedig,” in the J.Q,R,

As for silks, the Jews were for centuries engaged in this
industry, which they transplanted from Greece into Sicily and
later to France and Spain. Cf. Graetz v.®, p. 244. In the
1 6th century they dominated the silk trade in Italy (cf. David
Kaufmann, loc, cit,)j and in the i8th century in France. In 1760
the wardens of the Lyons Silkweavers’ Guild termed the Jewish
nation “ la maitresse du commerce de toutes les provinces.” See
J. Godard, VOworier en Soie (1899), p. 224. In 1755 there were
14 and in 1759, 22 Jewish silk merchants in Paris. See Kahn,
Juifs des Paris sous Louis XF^ p. 63. It was the same tale in
Berlin.

42. How the Jews developed the wholesale textile trade in
Vienna may be seen from the personal experiences of S. Mayer in
his Die dkonomische Entstehung der Wiener Juden^ p. 8 ff.

An ordinance of the City Council of Nuremberg, bearing date
December 28, 1780, calls silk, velvet and wool “ Judenware.”
Cf* H. Barbeck, Geschichte der Juden in Niirnberg und Fiirth
(1878), p. 71.

43. For the sugar trade with the Levant, see Lippmann,
Geschichte des Zuckers (1890), p. 206 ; D. Kaufmann, lec. cit. j
for sugar trade with America, see M. Grunwald, Pertugiesengrdber
auf ieutscher Erde (1902), p. 6 ff. ; A. Feilchenfeld, “ Anfang und
Bliitezeit der Portugiesengemeinde in Hamburg,” in the Zeitschrift
des Fereins f Hr Hamburg. GeschichtSy vol. lO (1899), p. 211.
Cf. also Risbeck [see note 10].

44. “Controlling the Cotton Trade.” See art. “America,
U.S. of,” in yewish Eneyclepadia (i. 495).

45. More especially for Hamburg, sec Feilchenfeld, be. cit.

46. Moses Lindo, the principal pioneer in the indigo trade,
arrived in South Carolina in 1756 and invested ,^120,000 in
indigo. Between 1756 and 1776 the production of indigo
increased fivefold. Cf. B- A. Elgas, The yews of South Carotvm
(1903), see also art. “ South Carolina,” in yewish Encyebpadia.

47. Risbeck [cf. note 10], vol. ii., under Frankfort.


362 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


48. Quoted by Bloch [cf. note 23], p. 36.

49. See Richard Markgraf [cf. note 35], p. 93.

50. Cf. Hyamson, pp. 174, 178. Also the report sent by
the rulers of Antwerp to the Bishop of Arras, quoted by Ullmann
[see note 26], p. 35, ‘‘they have brought much wealth with
them, especially silver, jewels and many ducats.”


CHAPTER IV

51. When Don Isaac Abarbanel was writing his commentary
on the Book of Jeremiah (1504) he saw a document brought
from India by Portuguese spice merchants wherein it was reported
that they had met many Jews in that country. Quoted by
M. Kayserling, Christopher Columbus (1894), p. 105. Cf. also
Bloch [see note 23], p. i5>

52. As Manasseh ben Israel mentions in his “ Humble
Address ” to Cromwell For this document, see Jemish
Chronicle^ November and December, 1859. Cf. also de Barrios,
Hist, universal Judayea, p. 4.

53. G. C. Klerk de Reus, Geschichtlicher Uberblick der . . .
niederlandisch-ostindischen Compagnie (1894), xix. For Coen, see
p. xiv.

54. J. P. J. Du Bois, Vie des Gouverneurs giniraux . . . omee
de leurs portraits en vignettes au naturel (1763).

55. E.g.y Francis Salvador. Cf. art. “Salvador,” in Jewish
Encycl., also Hyamson, p. 264.

56. In 1569 wealthy Amsterdam Jews furnished the Barents
Expedition. Cf. M. Grunwald, Hamburgs deutsche Juden (1904),
p. 215.

57. See art. “ South Africa,” in the Jewish Encycl.

58. Dr. J. H. Hertz, The Jew in South Africa (1905).

59. Art. “ Commerce ” in Jewish Encycl.

60. The literature concerning Jews and America is pretty
extensive. I can only mention the most important works here.
To begin with, there is the Jewish Encytlopeedia (an American
publication), which has s«>me excellent articles relating to
American conditions. Then I must mention tiie Transactions
of the Jewish Historical Society of America (begun in 1895),
a veritable mine of information on American Jewish (also


NOTES AND REFERENCES


363


economic) history, more especially in the colonies in North
and South America in the 17th and i8th centuries. There are
some valuable speeches in The aso/A Anniversary of the Settlement
of the yews in the U^S.A. (1905).

Further, see Markeus, The Hebrews in America i C, P. Daly,
History of the Settlement of the fews in North America (1893) »
M. C. Peters, The Jews in America (1906). The first two books
appear to be out of print.

61. In connexion with the 400th anniversary of the discovery

of America, a number of works have made their appearance show-
ing to what extent Jews participated in the actual discovery. The
best of these is M. Kayserling, Christopher Columbus und der
Anteil der Juden^ etc. (1894). Some others are: F. Rivas Puiq-
cerver, Los Judios y el nuevo mundo (1891) ; L. Modona, Gli Ebrei
e la scoperta deW America (1893), ‘‘Discovery of

America,” in Jewish EncycLy and address by Oscar Strauss in
the 7,SQth Anniversary^ etc., p. 69.

62. M. Kayserling, loc. p. 112; Juan Sanchez, of Sara-
gossa, the first trader. Cf. also Kayserling’s ‘‘ The Colonization
of America by the Jews,” in the Transactions of the Jewish
Historical Society of America, vol. 2, p. 73.

63. G* F. Knapp, ^^Ursprung der Sklaverei in den Colonien,”
in the ArchivfUr Soziale Polittky ii., p. 129.

64. Oscar Strauss, loc. ciUy p, 71.

65. Ritter, Uber die geographische Verbreitung des Zucker-
rohrs,” in the Berichten der Berliner Akademie (1839), quoted by
Lippmann, Geschichte des Zuckers (1890), p. 249.

66. According to Max J. Kohler, Phases of Jewish Life in
New York before 1800,” in the Transactions of the Jewish Hist.
Soc. of America, vol. ii., p. 94,

67. Art. America,” in Jewish EncycL Cf. G. A. Kohut,

Les juifs dans les colonies hollandaises,” in the R.E.J. (1895),

vol. 31, p. 293.

68. H. Handelmann, Geschichte von Brasilien (i860), p. 41 2.

69. P. M. Netscher, Les Hollandais au Brkil (1853), p. I.
For the wealthy Jewish family of Souza, cf. M. Kayserling,
Geschichte der Juden in Portugal (1867), \x 307 ; M. Grunwald,
Portugiesengrdber {1902), p. 123.

70. M. J. Kohler, Phases,” etc. [see note 66].

71. Art. America,” in Jewish EncycL


364 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


72. Transactions of Jewish Hist, Society of America, ii. 95.
Cf. also Netscher, p. 103.

73. There was no actual expulsion ; in fact the treaty of
peace of 1654 granted Jews an amnesty. But the fateful words
were added, ** Jews and other non-Catholics shall receive the same
treatment as in Portugal,” That was suflScicnt, For the treaty,
see Aitzema, Historiay etc. (1626), quoted by Netscher [see note
69], p. 163.

74. H. Handelmann, loc, ctt.y pp. 412-13.

75. For Jews in Barbados, see John Camden Hatten, The
Original Lists^ etc. (1874), p. 449 ; Ligon, History of Barbados
(1657), quoted by Lippmann [see note 43], p. 301 ; Reed, The
History of Sugar and Sugar-^yielding Plants (1866), p, 7 ; M’Cul-
loch, Dictionary of Commerce^ ii., p. 1087. Cf. also C. P. Lucas,
J Historical Geography of the British Colonies^ e.g, ii. (1905), 121,
274, 277,

76. For Jews in Jamaica, see M. Kayserling, The Jews in

Jamaica,” etc., in the vol. 12 (1900), 708 fE ; Hyam-

son, loc. cit.f chapter xxvi. Numerous extracts from contemporary
records will be found in Kohler’s Jewish Activity in American
Colonial Commerce,” in Transactions of Jewish Hist, Society of
America, vol. 10, p. 59. Cf. also the same writer’s paper in the
Transactions^ vol. 2, p. 98,

77. The letter of the Governor to Secretary of State Lord

Arlington, quoted by Kayserling in vol. 12, p. 710.

78. Monumental inscriptions of the British West Indies,
collected by Captain J, H. Lawrence Archer, quoted by Kohler,

Phases of Jewish Life ” [see note 66], p. 98.

79. For Jews in Surinam the most important authority is the
Essai sur la colonie de Surinam avec Ihistoire de la Nation Juive
Portugaise y itablie^ etc., 2 vols., Paramaribo (1788). Koencn, in
his Geschiedenes der Joden in Nederland (1843), p. 313, speaks of
this work as de hoofdbron . , . voor de geschiedenes der Joden
in die gewesten.” I have not been able to see a copy. Newer
treatises on the subject have brought to light a good deal of fresh
material. We may mention R. Gottheil, Contributions to the
History of the Jews in Surinam,” in Transactions of Jewish Hist,
Society of America, vol. 9, p. 1 29 j J. S. Roos, “ Additional
Notes on the History of the Jews of Surinam,” Transactions,
vol. 13, p, 127 ; P. A. Hilfman, ‘‘Some Further Notes on the


NOTES AND REFERENCES 365

History of the Jews in Surinam,” Transactions^ vol. 16, p, 7,
For the connexion between Surinam and Guiana see Samuel
Oppenheimer, An Early Jewish Colony in Western Guiana,
1658-1666, and its relation to the Jews in Surinam,” in Transac-
tions^ vol. 16, pp. 95-186. Cf. also Hyamson, ch. xxvi, and Lucas.

80. For Jews in Martinique, Guadeloupe, and Santo Domingo,

see Lippmann [note 43], p. 301 ; A. Cahen, “Les Juifs de la
Martinique au xvii sc.,” in voL 2 ; Cahen, ‘‘ Les Juifs

dans les Colonies franjaises au xviii sc.,” in vols. 4 and

5 ; Handelmann, Geschichte der Insel Hayti (1856).

81. Lucien Wolf in the Jeuuish Chronicle^ Nov. 30, 1894,
quoted by Kohler in Transactions^ vol. 10, p. 60.

82. The Q^SOth Anniversary of the Settlement of the fews in the
U.S. (1905), p. 18.

83. The 2 S 0 th Anniversary^ etc.

84. John Moody, The Truth about the Trusts (1905), pp- 45,
96, etc.

85. Art. ^‘California,” in Jewish EncycL (which is a par-
ticularly good one).

86. There are others who maintain that even before the
Brazilian refugees arrived a number of wealthy Jewish traders
from Amsterdam settled in the colony of the Hudson. Cf.
Albion Morris Dyer, “ Points in the First Chapter of New York
Jewish History,” in Transactions of Jewish Hist. Soc. of America,
vol. 3, p. 41.

87. The letter is quoted in full by Kohler, “Beginnings or
New York Jewish History,” in Transactions^ vol. i, p. 47.

88. See Transactions^ vol. i, p. 41 5 vol. 2, p. 78 ; vol. xo,
p. 63 ; Kohler, “ Jews in Newport,” Transactions^ vol. 6, p. 69.
Kohler often quotes Judge Daly, Settlement of the Jews in North
America (1893).

89. Address by Governor Pardell, of California, in The %$oth
Anniversary^ etc., p. 173.

90. See art, “ Alabama,” in Jewish EncycL

91. See art. “ Albany,” in Jewish EncycL

92. B- Felsenthal, “ On the History of the Jews in Chicago,”
in Transactions^ vol. 2, p. 2i ; H. Eliassof, “The Jews of
Chicago,” in Transactionsy vol. 2, p. 1x7.

93. Lewis N. Dembitz, “Jewish Beginnings in Kentucky,”
in Transactions voL i, p. 99.


366 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

94. J. H. Hollander, Some Unpublished Material relating to
Dr. Jacob Lumbrozo of Maryland,” in Transactions^ vol. i.

95. D. E. Heinemann, ‘‘Jewish Beginnings in Michigan
before 1850,” in Transactions^ vol. 13, p. 47.

96. D. Philipson, “The Jewish Pioneers of the Ohio Valley,”
in Transactionsy vol. 8, p. 43.

97. Henry Necarsulmer, “The Early Jewish Settlement at
Lancaster, Pa.,” in TransactionSy vol. 3, p. 27.

98. Henry Cohen, “The Jews in Texas,” in Transactionsy
vol. 4, p. 9 5 Henry Cohen, “ Henry Castro, Pioneer and
Colonist,” in Transactionsy vol. S, p. 39. Cf. also H. Frieden-
wald, “ Some Newspaper Advertisements in the i8th Century,”
in Transactionsy vol. 6.

99. “Einiges aus dem Leben der amerikanisch-jiidischen
Familie Seligman aus Bayersdorf in Bayern,” in BriilPs Monats^
blUttem (1906), p. 141.

100. Leon Hiihner, “The Jews of Georgia in Colonial
Times,” in Transactionsy vol, lo, p. 65 5 Hiihner, “ The Jews of
South Carolina from the Earliest Settlement to the End of the
American Revolution,” in Transactionsy vol. 12, p. 39 ; Chas. C.
Jones, “The Settlement of the Jews in Georgia,” in Transactionsy
vol. I, p. 12.

101. B. A. Elzas, The Jews of South Carolina (1903).

102. L. Hiihner, “Asser Levy, a noted Jewish Burgher of
New Amsterdam,” in Transactionsy vol. 8, p. 13. Cf. also
Hiihner, ^ Whence came the First Jewish Settlers of New York ?”
in Transactionsy vol. 9, p. 75 5 M. J. Kohler, “ Civil Status of
the Jews in Colonial New York,” in Transactionsy vol. 6,
p. 81.

103. For Jews who in the i8th century carried on business
in their own tongue in New York cf. J. A. Doyle, The Colonies
under the House of Hanover (1907), p. 31.

104. Chas. C. Jones, “ The Settlement of the Jews in
Georgia,” in Transactionsy vol. i, pp. 6, 9.

105. M. Jafifi, “Die Stadt Posen,” in Schriften des Vereins fUr
S. P., vol. 1 19, ii. 151.

X06. Simon Wolf, “The American Jew as Soldier and
Patriot,” in Transactionsy vol. 3, p. 39.

107, According to Dr. FischelPs Chromlo^cal Notes of the
History of the Jews in America.,


NOTES AND REFERENCES


367


CHAPTER V

107A. Perhaps our conclusion would have to be a different one
if we were to recall the feet that the elements of the modern
State were already developed in the later decades of the Middle
Ages, chiefly in Italy and Spain, and that Jewish statesmen
occupied influential positions in both these countries. It is to be
regretted that the history of modern States has never (so fer as I
am aware) been written from this point of view ; I believe much
that is profitable would result. Of course there is little in
common between the writers on the history of the Jews in
Spain and Portugal, say Lindo, de los Rios, Kayserling, Mendes
dos Remedios, and those who treat of the rise of the State in the
Pyrenean Peninsida, say Ranke or Baumgarten,

108. Lucien Wolf, ‘‘The First English Jewry,” in Transactions
of the Jewish Historical Society of England, voL 2. Cf. Hyamson,
pp. 171^3.

109. Hyamson, p. 269 5 Picciotto, Sketches of Anglo-^Jewish
History (1875), p. 58.

no. “Und bedient sich Frankreich jederzeit ihrer HulfFe,bey
Krieges-Zeiten seine Reuterey beritten zu machen.” T, L. Lau,
Einrichtung der Intraden und EinkUnfie der Souverdne^ etc. (1719),
p. 258.

HI. Quoted by Liebe, Das Judentum (1903), p. 75.

112. Art. “Banking,” in Jewish EncycL

1 13. Mimoire of the Jews of Metz of the 24 Marchy 1733,
given in part by Bloch [see note 23], p. 35.

1 14. Quoted by Bloch [sec note 23), p. 23.

1 15. Extracts from the Lettres patentesfin Bloch [see note 23],
p. 24.

1 16. For the Gradis, see T. Malvezin [note 4], p. 241 5 Graetz,
“Die Familie Gradis,” in Monatschrifty vol, 24 (1875), 25 (1875),

Il7f M. Capefigue, Banquiersy fournisseursy etc. (1856),
pp. 68, 214, etc.

118. Quoted in Revue de la Rholution franfaise (1892), 16, I.

1 19. Historische Nachlese zu den Nachrichten der Stadt Leipzsgy
edited by M. Heinrich Engelbert Schwartze (1744), p. 122,
quoted by Alphonse Levy, Geschichte der Juden in Stuksen
(X900), p. $8.


368 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

120. Bondy, Zur Geschichte der yuden in Bohmeny vol. i., p. 388.

12 1. I quote this from Liebe, Das yudentum (1903), pp.
43, 70, who mentions the facts without giving his authorities.

122. Konig, Annalen der Juden in den preussischen Staaten^
besonders in der Mark Brandenburg (1790), pp. 93-4.

123- The document of 28 June, 1777, given by A. Levy
[see note 119], p. 74; also S. Haenle, Geschichte der yuden im
ehmaligen FUrstentum Ansbach (1867), p. 70.

124. Geschichte Philanders von Sittewaldt das ist Straffs-
Schriften Hanss Wilhelm Moscherosch von WilstUtt (1677), p. 779,

125. F. von Mensi, Die Finanzen Osterreichs von 1701-1740
(1890), p. 132. Samuel Oppenheimer, “ Kaiserlicher Kriegs-
oberfektor und Jud ” (as he was officially styled and as he called
himself), saw to the needs of the armies in all the campaigns
of Prince Eugene (p. 133).

126. Cf. for instance the petition of the Vienna Court
Chancery of May I2, 1762, given by Wolf, Geschichte der yuden
in Wien (1894), p. 70 5 KomitUtsarchiv Neutra Iratoky
(according to information supplied by Mr. Jos. Reizman) ;
Verproviantierung der Festungen Raaby Ofen und Komorn durch
Breslauer yuden (1716), see Wolf> loc^ city p. 61.

127. H. Friedenwald, Jews mentioned in the Journal of the
Continental Congress/' in Transactions of the Jewish Hist. Soc,
of America, vol. i., pp. 65-89.

128. I have already mentioned the more important works on
the history (not excepting the economic history) of the Jews in
England, France, Holland and America (see notes ii, 12, 18
and 60) ; here I would refer to those dealing with the same
subject for Germany and for Spain. There is no complete study
of the history of the Jews in Germany, and we arc forced there-
fore to go to local monographs and essays in learned periodicals.
In any case the economic history of the German Jews has been
treated in a somewhat stepmotherly way, and we find little that is
useful in such works as L. Geyer's Die Geschichte der yuden
in Berliny% vols. (1870-71). Recently Mr. Ludwig Davidsohn,
a pupil of mine, went carefully through the Berliner Staatsarchiv
for the purpose of establishing the economic position of the Jews.
The results of his labours have not yet been printed, but I have
been able to use some of them. A good deal may be found

Grunwald's Portugiesengrdber auf deutscher Erde and his Ham-^


NOTES AND REFERENCES


369


hurgs deutsche Juden bis %ur Aufiosing der Dreigemeinde (1904).
For a particular here and there one may turn (but care is needed)
to Konig’s Annalen [see note 122], as also to Die Juden in
Osterreichy 2 vols. (1842).

As for learned journals, they are not of much use for economic
history. The chief of them is the Monatschrift fur Geschichte
und Wissenschaft des fudentums (begun 1851). Others are the
Allgemeine Zeitung des yudentums (begun 1837) and BriilFs
Populdrwissenschaftliche Monatsbldtter (begun 1888), both with
more or less propagandist ends in view. The Zeitschrift filr
Demographie und Statistik des yudentums (begun 1905) deals with
questions of economic history only occasionally.

Sometimes one comes across papers in the general historic
reviews or in local journals which shed a flood of light on Jewish
economic history. But a complete list of these it would be
impossible to give here.

The history of the Jews in Spain has been sufficiently dealt
with. But unfortunately its economic aspect has been almost
entirely neglected. I know of no more needful thing than
an economic history of the Jews in the Pyrenean Peninsula,
and I wish that some economic historian would undertake to
write it. It would most certainly illuminate the general economic
history of Europe in a most surprising fashion. For the present,
however, we must perforce consult general histories of the Jews in
Spain, and of these perhaps the best is M. Kayserling^s Geschichte
der yuden in Spanien und Portugal^ 2 vols. (1861-7), The
principal work in Spanish is D. Josi Amador de Los Rios, Historia
social^ politica y religiosa de los yudios de EspafLa y Portugal^ 3 vols*
(1875-8), but for our purpose it is of little use, A book of
a different kind is E. H. Lindo’s The History of the fews of Spain
and Portugal (1848). It contains extracts from the legal enact-
ments affecting Jews and the decisions of the Cortes, and thus has
a special value of its own.

For Portugal the most important work is now by J. Mendes dos
Remedios, Os fudeus em Portugal^ vol- i. (1895) up to the expulsion.

It ought to be mentioned also that the volumes of Graetz,
Geschichte der fuden^ which treat of the Spanish period
(7 and 8) are of great use, because of the abundance of material
which they contain. So fer as my experience goes they have not
been surpassed by any later work

25


370 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


With regard to monographic studies on the position of the Jews
in the economic life of the Pyrenean Peninsula, I do not know of
any. But this may be due to my ignorance. Anyhow, the Jewish
libraries of Breslau and Berlin contain nothing under this head.
The work of Bento Carqueja, O capitalismo moderno & as suas
arigens em Portugal (1908), only just touches the problem so
far as the Jews are concerned.

129. H. J. Koenen [see note 12), p. 206.

130. Cf. art. “ Banking” in Jewish EncycL

131. For the position of the Jews in English finance during
the 17th and i8th centuries we have many records. Cfi Picciotto,
p. 58 ; Hyamson, pp. 171, 217, 240, 264, etc. ; Lucicn Wolf,
The Re--settlemmt of the Jews in England (1888) ; the same author’s
^ Crypto-Jews under the Commonwealth,” in Transactions of the
Jewish Historical Society of England, vol. 1. (1895) ; likewise his
*‘The Jewry of the Restoration (1660-1664),” reprinted from
The Jewish Chronicle (1902).

132. L. Wolf, The Jewry of the Restoration^ p. il*

133. G. Martin, La grande Industrie sous Louis XIV (1899),
P- 351 -

134. Victor de Swarte, Vn hanquier du Trisor royal au xviii
siecley Samuel Barnard — sa vie — sa correspondancey 1651-1739
(^893).

135. Kahn, Les juifs de Paris au xviii sc* (1894), p, 60.

136. Graetz, Geschichte derjudeuy voL 10, p. 40,

137. Wolf, Ferdinand //, Appendix 4, quoted by Graetz,
voL xo, p. 41.

X 28. The actual wording from Die Juden in OsterreicK vol. 2
(1842), p. 41.

139. DU Juden in Osterreic/j, vol. 2, p. 64 ; F. von Mens!
[see note 125], p. 132. In the i8th century the most important
creditors of the State were (in succession) Oppenheimer, Wert-
heimer, Sinzheimer; the last-named had owing to him in 1739
no less than five million gulden. F. von Mensi, p. 685. Cf. also
David Kaufinann, XJrhtndlithes aus dem Leben Samson Wortheimers
(1892). For the earlier period, see G. Wolf, Ferdinand II and dit
Juden (1859).

140. F. von Mensi, p. 148.

141. G. Liebe [see note 121], p. 84.

142. Art. “ Abensur Daniel,” in Jewish Encyei.


NOTES AND REFERENCES m

143. A. Levy, ‘‘Notes sur Thistoire des Juifs en Saxe,” in
RE.% vol. 26 (1898), p. 259. For Berend (Behrend)
Lehmann, alias Jisachar Berman, see B. H. Auerbach, Geschichte
der israelitischen Gemeinde Halberstadt (1866), p. 43 5
Lehmann Berend, see p* 85.

144. Auerbach, he. cit.^ p. 82 (for Hanover) ; see also S. Haenle
[note 123], pp. 64, 70, 89; for more cases of HoQuden, see
L. Muller, “ Aus fiinf Jahrhunderten,” in the Zeitschrlft des his-
torischen Vereins f Ur Schwaben und Neuburg^ vol. 26 (1899), p. 14^*

145. F. von Mensi, p. 409.

146. Memoiren der GlUckel von Hameln [published in the original
Yiddish by D. Kauftnann (1896)], German translation (privately
printed) in 1910, p. 240.

147. M. Zimmermann, Oppenheimer^ein Ftnanzmann

des 18^ yahrhunderis (1874).

148. Address by Louis Marshall in The %SOth Anniversary of
the Settlement of the Jews in the TJ.S.y p. 102.

149. H. Friedenwald [note 127], p. 63.

150. W. Graham Sumner, The Financiers and the Finances of the
American Revolution^ 2 vols. (1891).


CHAPTER VI

15 1. For a legal consideration of the question, see Brunner,

Endemanns Handbuch^ vol. 2, p. 147, and Goldschmidt, Universal-
geschichte des Handelsrechts (1891), p. 3 ®^* Knies, Der

Credit (1876), p. 190.

152. I give the “credit relationship” its most extended mean-
ing in the sense that you create duties between persons by the one
giving an economic value to the other and the second promising
a quid pro quo in the future.

153. Cf. F. A. Biencr, Wechselrechtliche Abhandlungen (1859),

p. 145*

154. The view of Kuntze and others. See Goldschmidt [note

151], p- 408- ^ ....

155. Goldschmidt, At. aV.,p. 4x0, who puts the question in the
form of a query, leaying the answer vague. See on the other
band A.’ Wahl, Traiii thior. et proiijue des titres cm pertrur
(1891), vol. I, p. 15.


372 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

156. Cf. Kuntze, ^*Zur Geschichte der Staatspapiere auf den
Inhabcr,” in the Xeitschrift fUr das ges, Handelsrecht^ vol. 5 i
p, 198 ; the same writer’s Inhaber Papiere (1857), pp. 58, 63;
Goldschmidt [note 15 1], pp. 448-9; Sieveking in Schmollers
yahrbuch (1902) ; and above all, G. Schaps, Zur Geschichte des
W echselindossaments (1892), p. 86. Cf. also Biener [note I 53 ]>
pp. 121, 137.

157. Goldschmidt, p. 452 ; Schaps, p. 92.

158. The text is given in D. Kaufmann’s article in the

vol. 13 (1901), p. 320, ‘^Dic Vertreibung der Marrancn aus
Venedig im Jahrc iS 50 *”

159. Graetz, vol. 8, p. 354 ; vol. 9, p. 328.

160. So far as I am aware, this question has never yet been
asked : What part did the Jews play in the Genoese fairs ? It
will be most difficult to give a satisfactory answer, because the
Jews in Genoa were forced, especially after the Edict of Expulsion
in 1550, to keep secret their identity. Probably also they changed
their names and made a pretence of accepting Christianity.
Nevertheless, it would be worth while to make the attempt.
Anyhow, we have here one instance where in the post-mediaeval
period a great financial and credit system was developed without
the clear proof of Jewish influence. It may be, of course, that
the proof has slipped my observation ; in that case 1 should be
glad to have my attention drawn to it.

The best account of the Genoese fairs will be found in
Ehrenberg’s Zeitalter der Fugger^ vol. 2, p. 222, and Endemann,
Studien in der remisch^kanonischen Wirtschafts- und Rechtslehre^
vol. I (1874), p. 156. Endemann bases his conclusions chiefly
on Scaccia and R. de Turris, while Ehrcnberg also relied on
documents in the Fugger archives.

161. Possibly earlier, in the case of the Company of the
Pairiers, to whom was transferred in the 12th century the
mill in Toulouse, du Basacle, by means of securities {uchaux
or saches). Cf. Edmund Guillard, Les operations de Bourse (1875),
p. 15.

162. Cf. K. Lehmann, Die geschkhtliche Entwickelung des
Aktienrechts (1895).

163. J. P. Ricard, Le Nigoce d^ Amsterdam (1723), pp. 397-400.

164. This is the conclusion arrived at by Andr6 E. Sayous,

Le fractionnement du capital social de la Compagnie n^erland


NOTES AND REFERENCES 373

des Indes orientales,” in Nouv. Rev» Historique du droit franf^ et
itrangersy voL 25 (1901), pp. 621, 625.

165. Cf. Endemann, Studien [note 160], vol. i, p. 457.

166. See instances — 1422 in Palermo and 1606 in Bologna — in
Goldschmidt, p. 322.

167. The most important collection of documents concerning
the history of banking in Venice is still Elia Lattes* La liherth
della banche e Venezia dal secolo xiii al xvii secondo i documenti inediu
del R, Archivio dei Frari ec. (1869). The subject has been dealt
with by Ferrara, ^^Gli antichi banchi di Venezia** in Nuova
Antologia^ vol. xvi, ; E. Nasse, Das venetianische Bankwesen in
14, 15,und 16 Jahrhundert,** in the yahrbuch fiir NationalokonomUy
vol. 34, pp. 329, 338. To show the share of the Jews in Venetian
banking would be a welcome piece of work. But it would be
most difficult of accomplishment because, so far as I can judge, the
Jews in Venice already in the 15th century were the most part New
Christians, often holding high offices and having Christian names.

168. Dictionary of Political Economyy art. ‘‘Bank of
Venice** (? authorities), quoted by A. Andrdades, History of the
Bank of England (1909), p. 28.

169. “Gallicioli Memorie Venete,** ii., No. 874, in Graetz,
vol. 6, p. 284.

170. S. Luzzato, Dis, circa ilstato degli Hebrei in Venezia (1638),
ch, I, and pp. 9^, 29a. The figures need not be taken too
seriously ; they are only an estimate.

1 7 1. See, for instance, D, Manuel Calmeiro, Historia de la
economia politica en EspaHa^ vol. i, p. 411 5 vol. 2, p. 497.

1 7 1 A. See A. Andreades, History of the Bank of England ( 1 909),
p. 28. That will certainly have to be the conclusion if importance
is attached to the scheme (1658) of Samuel Lambe (printed in
Somer‘s Tracts^ vol. vi), Andr&des actually dates the first idea
of the Bank from Lambe*s scheme. There was a scheme previous
to that — Balthasar Gerbier*sin 1651, and between that year and
1658 Cromwell had allowed the Jews to settle in this country.
For my own part I cannot admit “ the superiority ** of Lambe*s
scheme. But other writers also lay stress on the very great
share of the Jews in the establishment of the Bank of England.

172. Cf. F. von Mensi [note 125], p. 34.

173. Ad. Beer, Das Staatsschuldenwesen und die Ordnung de
Staatshaushalts unter Maria Theresia (1894), p. 13.


374 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


174. For instances of public debt bonds, see Walter Dabritz,
Die Staatsschulden Sachsens in der Zeit von 1763 bis 1837, Doctoral
Dissertation (1906), pp. 14, 55.

175. Also, E. von Philippovich, Die Bank von England (1885),
p. 26.

176. Also, Ehrenberg, Fugger [note 160], vol. 2, pp. 141, 299.

1 76 A, Witness a pamphlet little known generally (even Dabritz

[note 174] has overlooked it), to which I should like to call
attention. It has a very long tide: Ephraim justifiS, Mimoire
historique et raisonn^ sur PEtat pass^, pr&ent et futur des finances
de Saxe. Avec le parallele de TOcconomie prussienne et de
I’Oeconomie saxonne. Ouvrage utile aux Cr&nciers et Corre-
spondans, aux Amis et aux Ennemis de la Prusse et de la Saxe,
Adress^ par le Juif Ephraim de Berlin a son Cousin Manass&
d’Amsterdam. Erlangen. A Penseigne de ‘Tout est dit/”
1785.

177. Cf. (Luzac) Richessede la Hollander vol, 2 (1778), p. 200.
Also vol, I, p. 366. Luzac, besides his own personal experiences,
must have also used Fermin, Tableau de Surinam {1778).

178. Chief among them Kuntze, Die Lehre von den Inhaberpa^
pieren (1857), p. 48, which is still unsurpassed. We may mention
besides, Albert Wahl, Traiti thlorique et pratique des titres au
porteur frangais et Itr angers^ 2 vols, (1891).

179-180. The best history of mediaeval credit instruments is
that of H. Brunner, Das frans&bsische Inhaberpapier (1879). Cf.
also his “Zur Geschichte des Inhaberpapiers in Deutschland,” in
the Zeitschrift fUr das gesammte Handekrecht^ vols, 21 and 23.

18 1. For Holland, see F- Hecht, Geschichte der Inhaberpapier in
den Niederlanden (1869), p, 4,

182. By the way, it is interesting to note that credit instru-
ments have been said to be of Hellenic origin. Cf. Goldschmidt,
“Inhaber- Order- und exekutorische Urkunden im Klassischen
Altertum,” in Zeitschrift fUr Rechtsgeschichte Roms^ voL lO
(1889), p. 352,

183. But Goldschmidt’^s view is not generally accepted. Cfi
Benedict Frese, Aus dent grUko-dgyptischen Rechtsleben (1909),
p. 26.

1 84. Another criticism of Goldschmidt’s theory may be found in
H. Brunner, “Forschungen zur Geschichte des deutschea und
franzbsischen Rechts,” in his Gesammelte Aufs&tze (1894), p, 604,


NOTES AND REFERENCES


375

185. Brunner also deals with the same problem in his FranTHs-
ische Inhaberpapier, pp. 28, 57.

186. Made casually by Kuntze, but rejected by Goldschmidt
in the Zeitschrift fUr Rechtsgeschichfey vol. lO, p. 355,

187. Also rejected by Salvioli, 7 titoli al portatore nella storia
del diritto italiam (1883).

188. Cf. L. Auerbach, Da% judische Obligationenrecht, vol. i
(1871), p. 270. Other passages from rabbinic literature are given
in Hirsch B. Fassel, Das mosaisch-rabbinische Zivilrethty vol. 2,
Part 3 (1854), § 1390 ; Frankel, Der gerichtliche Beweis nach
mosaischem Recht (1846), p, 386; Saalschutz, Mosaisches Recht,
2 vols. (1848), p. 862.

189. For the Mamre, cf, L. L’Estocq, Exercitatio de indale
et jure instrumenti Judeeis usitati cut nomen Mamre” est (i755)j
§vii5 J. M. G. Besekes, Thes. jur. Camb., Part II (1783),
pp. 1169, 1176; P. Bloch, Der Mamrany der judisch-polnische
Wechselbrief,

190. Ehrenberg’s Fugger [note i6o], vol. 2, p. 141.

19 1. Brunner [note 180], p. 69.

192. Schaps [note 156], p. 121.

193. Cf. F. Hecht [note r8i], p. 44,

194. Hecht, p. 96.

195. Dabritz [note 174], p, 53.

196. Kuntze [note 178], p. 85.

197. Straccha, Trad, de assicur, (1568).

198. A. Wahl [note 155], vol. i, pp. 15, 84.

199. Hecht [note 181], p. 37.

200. Cf. J. H. Bender, Der Verkehr mi Btaatspapieren (2 ed.,
1830), p. 167.

200A. Ex diversis animi motibus in unum consentiunt, id est
in unam sententiam decurrunt” (Ulp., L. I, § 3, D. de pact,,
2, 14).

201. Cf. Goldschmidt [note 151], p. 393.

202. I am indebted for what follows above all to L. Auerbach
[note 188], vol. I, pp. 163, 251, 513. This work (unlbrtunately
uncompleted) is written in a most suggestive fashion and deserves
to be widely known. For it is one of the best accounts of
Talmudic law in existence. Of much less importance, yet use-
ful nevertheless, are the works of Saalschutz [note 188] ; H. B.
Fassel [note 188] ; J. J. M. Rabbinowicz, Hgishtim du Tabaud,


376 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


vol. 3 (1878); Frankel [note i88]. On the basis of Gold-
schmidt’s translation of the Talmud, J. Kohler attempted a
Darstellung des talmudischen Rechts ” in Zeitschrift fur vergUU
chende Rechtswissenschaft^ vol. 20 (1908), pp. 161-264. Cf. the
criticism of V. Aptowitzer in the Monatschrift (1908), pp. 37-56.

203. Otto Stobbe, DU Juden in Deutschland wdhrend des miu
telalters (1866), pp. 119, 242 ; Sachsenspiegel, III, 7, § 4.

204. Goldschmidt [note 151], p. ill.

205. (Isaac de Pm to) Traiti de la circulation du cridit (!*]•] i)^
pp. 64, 67-68. Cf. also E. Guillard [note 161], p. 534.

206. See also Dabritz [note 174], p. 18, for illustrations.

207. Ehrenberg, lugger^ vol. 2, p. 244. We owe most of
what we know about the history of the Stock Exchanges to
Ehrenberg.

208. Cf. note 21.

209. Van Hemert, Lectuur voor het ontbijt en de Theetafel^
VII^. Stuk, p. 1 1 8, quoted by Koenen [note 12], p. 212.

210. H. Stephanus, Francofordiense Emporium sive Francth
fordienses Nundina (i 574 )> P- 2 ^ 4 *

211. Quoted by Ehrenberg, Fugger^ vol. 2, p. 248.

212. Memoirs^ p. 297.

213. Given by M. Grunwald [note 31], p. 21.

214. S. Haenle[note 123], p. 173.

215. Die Juden in Osterreich^ vol. 2 (1842), p. 41.

216. In a report of the Sous-Intendant, M. de Courson, dated
II June, 1718, quoted by Malvezin [note 4].

217. E. Meyer, ‘‘Die Literatur fiir und wider die Juden in
Schweden im Jahre 1815,” in Monatschrift^ vol. 57 (1907), p. 522.

218. H. Sieveking, “Die Kapitalistische Entwickelung in
den italienischen Stadtcn des Mittelalters,*’ in the Vierteljahrs^
schrift fUr So%iale>- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte^ voU 7, p. 85.

219. H. Sieveking, Genueser FinanTSwesen^vol. i. (1898), pp. 82,
I 7 S-

220. Saravia della Calle, “ Institutionc de* Mercanti,** in Com^
pendio utilissimo di quelle cose le quali a Nohili e Christiani mercanti
appartengono (1561), p. 42*

221. Art. “ Borsenwesen” in Handworterbuch der Staatswissen->
schafien.

222. The most reliable sources for the history of Stock
Exchange dealing in Amsterdam in the first decades of the


NOTES AND REFERENCES


377


17th century are the Plakate of the States General, which
prohibit this sort of business. Reference should also be made
to the controversial pamphlets of the period on this topic, more
especially those written by the opponent of stock and share
dealing, Nicolas Muys van Holy, See Laspeyres, Geschichte der
volhwirtschaftlichen Amchauungm (1863). Not to be omitted
is also de la Vega’s book, about which more in due course. For
the subsequent period there is much valuable material in books
on Commerce, notably J. P. Ricard, Le negoce Amsterdam (1723),
from whom later writers quote. The works of Joseph de Pinto
dating from the second half of the i8th century [note 205],
are also very useful. Of recent books the following may be
mentioned : G. C. Klerk de Reus [note 53], S, van Brakel,
De Holland, Hand. Comp, der xviu eeuv (1908).

223. In the periodical De Koopman^ vol. 2, pp. 429, 439,
quoted by Ehrenberg, Fugger^ vol. 2, p- 333.

224. De la Circulation [note 205], p. 84.

225. [See note 87.]

226. [See note 52.]

227. Ehrenberg, Fugger^ vol. 2, p. 336, gives a fairly lengthy
extract from this remarkable book.

228. Extrait d^un mimoire prisenti en 1698, from the Archives
of the French Foreign Office, published in the Revue historique^
vol. 44 (1895). I am indebted to my friend Andr6 £• Sayous,
of Paris, for having called my attention to this article,

229. ‘‘The Anatomy of Exchange Alley, or a System of
Stock-jobbing” (1719)* Printed in J. Francis’s Stock Exchange
(1849), Appendix.

230. Art. “Brokers” in Jewish EncycL

231. J. Picciotto [note t8], p. 58,

232. Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce^ vol. 2 (i7S5),
P* SS+-

233. Tovey, Anglia Judaica^ p. 297,

234. As would appear from a complaint of the Christian
merchants, of the year 1685, mentioned by Ehrenberg, Fugger^
vol 2, p. 248.

235. M. Grunwald [note 69], p. 6.

236. Postlethwayt, Dictionary^ vol. i, p. 95.

237. Joseph Jacobs, “Typical Character of Anglo-Jcwish

History,” in vol 10 (1898), p. 230.


378 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


238. Ranke, Franzdsische Geschkhte^ vol. 4® , p. 399.

239. M 61 on, Essai pol sur le commerce (1734), Davie,
p. 685.

240. See Ehrenberg, Fugger^ vol. 2, p, 142,

241. (Du Hautchamp) Histoire du systeme des Finances sous la
minoriti de Louis XV^ vol. i (i 739 )> P* ^ ^ 4 *

242. Oscar de Vallfe, Les Manieurs d^argent (1858), p. 41,

243. P. A. Cochut, Law^ son systlme et son ipoque (1853), P* 33 -

244. E. Drumont, La France Juive (1904), vol. i, p. 259.

245. All the figures are from Fon den Gilde-Dienern Friedrich
Wilhelm Arendt und Abraham Charles Rousset herausgegebenen
Ferzeichnissen . . . der gegenwdrtigen Aelter^ManneTj etc. (1801).

245A. In the Hamburger Munzi- und Medaillenvergnugen(j,y% 2 \
p. 143, No* 4, there is a coin struck in commemoration of the
trade in stocks and shares.

245B, Raumburger, in the preface to his Justitia selecta Gent,
Eur, in Cambiisj etc*

246. Kiesselbech [note 32], p. 24.

247. The case is mentioned and discussed von Gonner,
Fon Staatsschuldenj deren Tilgungsanstalten und vom Handel mit
Staatspapieren (1826), § 30,

248. Dictionary^ vol, 2, p. 553. Cf. also the very informing
article, ‘‘ Monied Interest,” p. 284.

249. See articles Monied Interest” and “Paper Credit”
in Postlethwayt, vol. 2, pp. 284 and 404.

250. D. Hume, Essays^ vol. 2 (1793), p. no.

251. Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations^ ch* 3.

252. Von Gonner [note 247], § 31.

253. Pinto [note 205], pp. 310-11.

254. Ehrenberg, Fugger^ voL 2, p. 299.

255. I must content myself with mentioning the following
three works which appear to me to be the best : Das Haus
Rothschild, Seine Geschichte und seine Geschdfte^ 2 Parts (1857);
John Reeves, The Rothschilds : the Financial Rulers of Nations
(1887); R. Ehrenberg, Grosse FerwSgen^ etc., vol. i, ‘^Die
Fugger-Rothschild-Krupp” (2nd ed., 1905).

256. J. H. Bender, Der Ferkehr mit Staatspapieren (2nd ed.,
1830), p. 145.

257. E.g^y von Gonner [note 247], p, 60 ; Bender, p. 142.

258. Das Haus Rothschildy vol. 2, p. 216,


NOTES AND REFERENCES 379

259. A. Crump, The Theory of Stock Exchange (1873). Reprinted
1903, p. 100.

260. Von Mensi [note 125], p. 54,

261. Ad. Beer [note 173], p. 43-

262. J. H. Bender [note 256], p. 5.

263. J. Francis, Stock Exchange^ p. 161.

264. Das Haus Rothschild^ vol. 2 (1857), p. 85.

265. The best books on this period in Germany are, despite
their prejudice and one-sidedness, Otto Glagau’s Der Bdrsen-^ und
GrUndungsschwindel in Berlin (1876) and Der Bdrsen- und Grllnd--
ungsschwindel in Deutschland (1877). 'These books are particu-
larly useful for the short historical sketches of the different
companies^ giving the names of the founders and the first directors,
Cf. also the annual issues of Saling’s Bdrsenpapieren^ and Rudolf
Meyer, Die Aktiengesellschafienj 1872-3 (which, however, deal
only with banks). The figures given in the text were supplied
by Mr. Arthur Loewenstein, at my request.

266. M, Wirth, Geschichte der Handelskrisen (3rd ed., 1883),
p. 184.

267. Riesser, Entwicklungsgeschichte der deutschen Grossbanken
(1905), p. 48.

268. For a glorification of this policy see J. £. Kuntze [note
178], p. 23.

269. A. Beer [note 173], p. 35.

270. C. Hegemann^ De Entwichbmgdes franiiSsischen Grossbank-
betriebes (1908), p. 9,

271. Books of reference are given fully in J. Plenge, Grftndung
und Geschichte des Cridit mobilier (1903).

272. Model-Loeb, Die Grossen Berliner Effectenbanken (1895),
p. 43 — an excellent book, from which the information in
the text is taken in so far as it is not my own personal
knowledge.

273 « Cf. R. Fhrenberg, Fondsspekulatim (1883), and Adolf
Weber, Depesitenbanken und Spekulationsbanken (1902).

274. See for instance A. Gomoll, Die Kapitatistische Mause-
faUe (1908). Despite its curious title the book deals seriously
with Stock Exchange speculations and is one of the best pieces
of work recently published.

275. Mostly from local histories, too numerous to mention
here.


380 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


CHAPTER VII

276. Konig [see note 122], p. 97.

277. “ Zur Geschichte der Juden in Danzig,” m Monatschrift^
vol. 6 (1857), p. 243.

278. M. Gudemann, Zur Geschichte der Juden in Magde-
burg,” in Monatschrifiy voL 14 (1865), p. 370.

279. Quoted by Liebe [note 121], pp. 91-2-

280. Regesten, in Hugo Barbeck’s Geschichte der Juden in
NUrnhergund FUrth (1878), p. 68.

281. See, for instance, the conduct of the Berlin Retailers’
Gild as related in Greiger’s Geschichte der Juden in Berlin^ vol. 2
(1871), pp. 24, 31.

282. Josiah Child, Discourse on Trade^ 4th ed,, p. 152. Child
reports the prevailing opinion without saying one word by way
of criticism. But he does make it clear that the accusation
levelled against the Jews is no crime at all.

283. See extracts from the polemical pamphlets of the period
in Hyamson, p. 274.

284. Given in L6on Brunschvicg, Les Juife en Bretagne au
18 sc.,” in R.jE'.y,, vol. 33 (1876), pp, 88, in.

285. ‘‘ Les Juife et les Communaut& d’Arts et Metiers,” in
R.E.J.J vol. 36, p. 75.

286. M. Maignial, La question juive en France en 1789 (1903),
contains a great deal of material from which the prevailing feeling
among French merchants against the Jews in the 17th and i8th
centuries becomes apparent.

287. ‘^L’admission de cette espece d’hommes ne peut etre que
trh dangereuse. On peut les comparer a des guepes qui ne s’intro-
duisent dans les ruches que pour tuer les abeilles, leur ouvrir le
ventre et en tirer le miel qui est dans leurs entrailles : tels sont les
juife.” — Requete des marchands et n^gociants de Paris centre Tad-
mission des Juife (1777), p. 14, quoted by Maignial [note 1 1], p. 92.

288. Maignial, p. 92.

289. The opinion of Wegelin is given by Ernst Meyer,
[note 217], pp. 513, 522.

290. Czacki^ Rosprava 0 Zydachy p. 82 ; cf. Graetz, vol. 9,
p, 443. Almost word for word the same cry is heard from
Rumania, cf. Verax, La Roumanie et les Juifs (1903).


NOTES AND REFERENCES


381


291. Philander von Sittewaldt [see note 124].

292. Georg Paul Honn, Betrugs-Lexicoriy worinnen die meisten
Betr&gereyen in alien StSnden nebst denen darwider guten Theils
aienenden Mitteln endeckt, Dritte Edition (1724).

293. Allgemeine Schatzkammer der Kaufmannschetfi oder voll-
st&ndiges Lexikon aller Handhngen und Gewerbey vol. 2 (1741),
p. 1158.

294. Charakteristik von Berlin. Stimme eines Kosmepeliten in
der WUste (1784), p. 203.

295. J. &vary (CEuvre posthume, continue ... par Phil-Louis
Savary), Didionnaire universel de Cammercey vol. 2 (1726), p. 447.

296. Allgemeine Schatzkammer [note 293], vol. i (1741), p. 17.

297. Allgemeine SchatzkamnuTy vol. 3 (1742), p. 1325.

298. This is only the expression of the mediaeval view. It
is excellently well discussed in R. Eberstadt, FranzSsische Gewer-
berecht (1899), p. 378.

299. D. Defoe, The Complete English Tradesmany ist ed.,
1726. I have used the 2nd edition in i vol. (1727), and the
5 th edition in 2 vols. (1745), published after the author’s death.
The passage cited in the text is from the 1st ed., p. 82.

300. Allgemeine Sehatzkammer [note 293], vol. 3, p. 148.

301. Ditto, vol. 4, p. 677.

302. Ditto, vol. 3, p. 1325.

303. Ditto, vol. 3, p. 1326.

304. Ditto, vol. I, p. 1392—“ Sachsischen Ki^er-Ordnun-
gen ” of 1672, 1682, and 1692, § 18.

305. See the highly instructive Letter (No. 19 in the 2nd ed.,
corresponding to No. 22 in the 5th) “Of fine shops and fine shews.”

306. Jules de Bock, Le Journal i trovers les dges (1907), p. 30,
quoted in F. Kellen, StuSen Uber das Zieittmgswesen (1907), p. 253.

307. Much useful infornoation, especially as regards England,
will be found in Henry Sampson’s History of Advertising from the
Earliest Times (1875), pp. 76, 83.

308. M. Postlethwayt, A Universal Dictionary of Trade and
Commercoy 2 vols. (1741), 2nd ed. (1757), vol. i, p. 22. Postle-
thwayt calls his work a translation of Savary’s Lexiamy but
in reality there are so many additions in it that it may be
regarded as original. It should be mentioned by the way that
the work is an invaluable source of information concerning
economic conditions in England in the i8th century.


382 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


309. Savary, DtcU du Commerce (1726), SuppL 1732.

310. P. Datz, Histoire de la Publiciti (1894), p. 161, contains
a facsimile of the whole of the first issue of Les Petites Affiches.

31 1. Allgemeine Schatzkammer [note 293], vol, 4, p. 677.

312. The Complete English Tradesman [note 299], vol. 53,
p. 163.

313. Cf. G. Martin, La grande Industrie sous Louis XF
p. 247,

314. Josiah Child, A New Discourse of Trade^ 4th ed., p. 159.

315. Such teaching is met with as early as the later i6th
century. Saravia della Calle, whom I regard as of supreme
importance in the history of the theory of just price, goes so
far as to deduce it from the relationship of supply and demand.
His work, together with those of Venuti and Fabiano, is printed
in the Compendio utilissimo [note a2o].

316. (Mercier) Tableau de Paris^ vol. ii (1788), p. 40,

317. “A Paris on court, on se presse parce qu*on y est oisif;
ici Ton marche posement, parce que Ton y est occupe.” Quoted
by J. Godard, DOuvrier en SmV, vol. i (1899), PP* 38“9-

318. Memoirs of the Rev. James Fraser, written by himself.
Selected Biographies^ vol. 2, p. 280 ; Durham’s Law Unsealed^
p. 324, quoted by Buckle, Hist&ry of Civilization^ voL 2, p. 377.

319. Durham’s Exposition of the Song of Solomon^ quoted by
Buckle, loc, ciu

320. Allgemeine Schatziammer [note 293], voL 4 (1742),

p. 666.

321. See, for instance, Mercier, Tableau de Parisy vol. 2, p. 71.

322. Samuel Lambe, in his scheme for a national bank [see
note 1 71 a] speaks of the low commercial morality of English
merchants as compared with the reliability of (say) the Dutch.

323. Owen Felltham in his Observations (1652), quoted by
Douglas Campbell, The Puritan in Hollandy Englandy and Americay
vol. 2 (1892), p. 327.

324. This accusation was levelled against the Jews from the
early mediaeval period down almost to this very day. Cf. G. Caro,
SoziaU und WirUchaftsgeschichte der Judeny vol. I (1908), p. 222;
Bloch [note 23], p. 12; article ‘‘Juden,” in Allgemeine
Schatzkammer [note 293] 5 von Justi, Staatswirtschafty vol. i
(1758), p. isa For Germany more especially, see Licbe, Das
Judenthum in der deutschen V ergangenheit (1903).


NOTES AND REFERENCES


383


325. According to a Minute Book of the Portuguese com-
munity in Hamburg — A. Feilchenfeld, Die alteste Geschichte
der deutschen Juden in Hamburg,” in Monatschrift^ voL 43
(1899), p. 279.

326. Geyler von Kaiserberg’s sermon on the 93rd “ Narren-
geschwarm,” in S. Brandt’s Narrenschiff (to be found in the
collection called Das Kloster^ vol. i, p- 722, published by J.
Scheible). Cf. Oskar Franke, Der Jude in den deutschen Dichtungen
des 15, 1 6, und 17 Jahrhunderts (1905), especially section 4,

327. Quoted by A. M. Dyer [note 86], p. 44.

328. Will. Ussellinx, quoted by Jameson, in Transactions of the
Jewish Historical Society of America, vol. i, p, 42. For Usselinx,
see E. Laspeyres, Volkswirtschaftliche Ansichten der Niederknde
(1863), p. 59.

329. Savary [note 295], vol. 2, p. 449.

330. See Transactions of the Jewish Historical Society of
America, vol. 3, p.'44.

331. Josiah Child, Discourse on Trade^ 4th ed., p. 152.

332. Cf. R. Ehrenberg, Grasse Vermogen^ 2nd ed., p. X47.

333. Annalen der Juden [note 122], pp. 106-17.

334. Liebe,. Das Judentum^ p. 34.

335. Risbeck [note 10]. Cf. also Scheube [note 10], p. 393.

336. Tiber das FerhSltniss der Juden den Christen in den
deutschen Handelsst&dten (1818), pp. 171, 252, 270, 272.

337 * 8ce REmJn^ vol. 33 > P*

337A. H. Bodemeyer, Die Juden. Ein Beitrag zur Hanno^
verschen Rechtsgeschichte (1855), P- 68.

338. See Albert Wolf, ^^Etwas iiber jiidische Kunst und
altere jiidische Kiinstler,” in Mitteilungen zur jUdischen Volks*
kunde^ edited by M. Grunwald, vol. i (1905), p. 34.

339. See Ehrenberg, Grosse Verrndgen^ p. 147.

340. The documents are printed in Kracauer’s Beitrage zur
Geschichte der Frankfurter Juden im 30 jahrigen Kriege,” in
Zeitschrift fUr die Geschichte der Juden in Deutschland^ vol. 3
(1899), p. 147. Cf. Schudt [note 14], vol, 2, p. 164.

341. Annalen der Juden [note 122], pp, 97, 106-17.

342. Versuch Tiber die jUdischen Beuoohmr der osterreichischen
Manarchie (1804), p. 83. Contains much valuable material.

343. L. Holst, Judentum in alien dessen Jeilen aus einem
staatswissenschaftlichen Standpunkte betrachtet (1821 pp. 293^4.


384 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


344. ^‘Les fripiers de Paris qui sont a la plus part Juifs,” Noel
du Fail, Contes d^Eutrapel^ xxiv, quoted by G- Fagniez, Ueconomie
SQciale de la France sous Henry 7/^(1897), p. 217.

345. Mercier, Tableau de Paris^ vol. 2, p. 253. In Breslau
this method of attracting custom is not unknown, and is called

Armelausreissgeschafte.”

346. Romani, Fines edlen Wallachen landwirtschafiliche Reise
durch verschiedene Landschaften Europas, Zweyter Theil (1776),
p. 150. Cf. Schudt, vol. 2, p. 164.

347. Tiber das Ferhaltniss^ etc. [note 336], p. 184.

348. Jules de Bock [note 306], p. 30.

349. Max J. Kohler [note 66].

350. Bloch [note 23], p. 30.

351. Hyamson, in England^ p. 274.

352. S. Kahn, ‘‘Les Juifs de Montpellier au 18 siecle,” in
R,E,y.y vol. 33 (1896), p. 290.

353. Leon Brunschvicg [note 284], p. iii.

354. ^^Requete des marchands,” etc. [note 287], p. 234.

355. L. Kahn, Les Juifs de Paris au XVIII sc, [note 1 1], p. 71.

356. Justin Godard, DOuvrier en Soie (1899), p. 224.

357. For Wegelin’s view, see note 289 (p. 522).

358. See note 290.

359. Annalen [note 122], p. 97.

360. F. Bothe, Beitr&ge zur Wirtschafts-’Und SozialGeschichte
der Reichstadt Frankfurt (1906), p. 74.

361. Bericht der Kriegs- und Dom&nenkammer Uber den wirU
schaftlichen Niedergang des Herzogtums Magdeburg (1710), quoted
by Liebe, Das Judentum^ P-91-

362. Romani [note 346], p. 147.

363. In Geschichte der Jud^n in der Reichstadt Augsburg

(1803), p. 42.

364. Von Mensi [note 125], p. 367.

365. Ailgemeine Schatzkammer [note 293], vol. 2, p. 1158.

366. See note 328.

367. See note 321.

368. See note 322.

369. R.EJ.y vol. 33, p. Ill [cf. note 352].

370. Le cri du citoyen contre les juifs de Metz {iS sc,)y quoted
by Maignial [note 11].

371. See Bothe [note 360], p. 74.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 385

372. See note 323. Cette nation ne fait fkbriqucr que des
ctofFes infdrieures et de mauvaise qualitd.”

373. Quoted by Liebe, Das yudentum^ p. 91.

374. N. Roubin, ‘^La vie commerciale des juife contadines en

Languedoc,” in vols. 34, 35, and 36,

375. [See note 336] p, 254.

376. Note 361.

377. yuden^ Sind sie der Handlung schddlkh? (1803), p. 25.

378. Graetz, vol. 9, p. 445.

379. Romani [note 346], p. 148,

380. I am indebted to Mr. Josef Reizman for kindly calling
my attention to this passage.

381. Child, Discourse on Trade^ p. 152.

382. Hysamson, p. 274.

383* RmE,y voL 333 P* 290.

384. L. Holst [note 343], p. 290.

385. See note 336, p. 239.

386. Holst [note 343], p. 288.

387. R.E:y,, voL 36.

38k R^E.y.y vol. 33, p. 289.

389. Annalen [note 122], p. 90.

390. From a Memorandum, dated January 9, 1786, of the
Hungarian Court Chancery ; again I am indebted to Mr. Josef
Reizman.

391. Koniglichen Staatsarchiv (Mr. Ludwig Davidsohn in-
formed me of it).

392. ^‘In the U.S.A. the most striking characteristic of Jewish
commerce is found in the large number of department stores
held by Jewish firms.” Art, Commerce,” in yewish EncycL
(vol. 4, p. 192).

393. See the lists of firms in J, Hirsch, Das Warenhaus in
Westdeutschland (1910).

394. See note 377, p. 33.

395. Henry Sampson, A History cf Advertising p. 68.

CHAPTER IX

396. For a fuller account of the subject of this chapter, see an
article of mine, “ Der Kapitalistische Unternehmer,” in Archiv
fUr saziale Wissenschafi und Saziale Politiky vol, 29.

26


386 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


CHAPTER X

397. M. Kayserling [note 76], p, 708.

398. An account of the Jewish world-famed firms of his time
is given by Manasseh ben Israel in his Humble Address to Crom-
well [note 52]. The story of the single families may be found in
the Jewuh Encyclopedia^ which is specially good for biographies.

399. ‘^Lettres &rites de la Suisse, d’ltalie,” etc., in EncycL
mith. Manuf, [note 39], vol. i, p. 407. Cf. the opinion of
Jovet, quoted by Schudt, Jtidische Merkwurdigkeiten^ vol. i,
p. 228.

400. The Spectator^ No. 495.

401. Revue Historique^ vol. 44 (1890).

402. Graetz, vol. 5, p. 323.

403. These instances of Jewish diplomatists are generallyknown.
The number could easily be added to. Any one specially in-
terested in this question should refer to Graetz, where abundant
material will be Wnd voL 6, pp. 8$, 224 5 vol. 8. ch, 9, etc.).

404. M. Kayserling, Christopher Columbus (1894), p. 106.

405. H. J. Koenen [note 12], p. 206.

406. Edmund BonafFe, Dictionnaire des amateurs fran^ais au
XVII Steele (1881), p. 191,

407. Friedlander, Sittengeschichte RomSy vol. 3, p. 577.

408. (v. Kortum) XJfber Judentum und Juden (1795), p. 165,

409. Ditto, p. 90.

410. R.EJ.y vol. 23 (1891), p. 90.

411. M. de Maulde, Les juifs dans les Etats fr an fats du Saint-
Siige (1886). The legal position of the Jews generally is
treated fully in the current Jewish histories, most of which are
in reality nothing more than the history of the legal position
of the Jews. Indeed, a goodly number of their authors imagine
they are writing economic history when all the time it is just
legal history they are dealing with. For records, consult the
article Juden ” in Kriinitz (vol. 31) and Schudt, Judische
Merkwurdigkeiten (specially for Frankfort). For France, see
Halphen, Recueil des loisy etc,y concernant les Isra'ilites (1851) ; for
Prussia, L. von Ronne and Heinrich Simon, Die fruheren und
gegenwhrtigen Verhdltnisse der Juden in den sUmtlichen Landes-
teilen des preussischen Staates (1843). All the laws quoted in


NOTES AND REFERENCES 387

the text I have taken from this collection. A- Michaelis, Die
Rechtsverhdltnisse der Juden in Preussen seit dem Beginn des
19 yahrhunderts : Gesetxe^ Erlasse^ Verordnungen^ Entscheidungen
(1910).

412. Cf. B. Bento Carqueja [note 128], pp. 73, 82, 91.

413. Wagenaar, Beschrijving van Amsterdam^ quoted by
Koenen [note 12], p. 142. Further, for the wealth of the
Dutch Jews (greatly exaggerated) see Schudt, vol. i (1714),
p. 277 ; vol. 4 (1717), p. 208. Cf. M. Mission, Reisenach Italien
(1713), p. 43. Of newer books, M. Henriquez Pimentel [note

12], p. 34.

414. Memoirenj p. 134.

415. Savary, DicU^ vol. 2 (1726), p. 448.

416. Lucien Wolf, The Jewry of the Restoration^ 1660-1664,
p. II.

417. See H. Reils, “Beitrage zur altesten Geschichte der
Juden in Hamburg,” in Zeitschrift des Vereins fur hamburgische
Geschichte^ vol. 2 (1847), pp. 357, 380, 405 ; and M. Grun-
wald [note 43], pp. 16, 26, 35.

418. In M. Grunwald’s Hamburgs deutsche Juden^ pp. 20, 19 1.
419* F* Bothe, Die Entwickelung der direkten Besteuerung der

Reichsstadt Frankfurt (1906), p, 166, Tables 10 and 15.

420. Kracauer [note 340], p. 341.

421. Alexander Dietz, Stammbuch der Frankfurter Juden

(1907), P-408;

422. L. Geiger, Geschichte der Juden in Berlin (1871), vol. i,
P- 43 -


CHAPTER XI

423. M. Lazarus, Ethik des Judentums (1904), pp. 67, 85, etc.
[There is an English edition of this book issued by the Jewish
Publication Society of America.]

424. Hermann Cohen, ‘<Das Problem der jiidischen Sitten-
lehre. Eine Kritik (adverse) von Lazarus* Ethik des Juden-
tums,” in Monatschrifiy vol. 43, p. 385.

425. Orach Chajiniy § 8.

426. Quoted by F. Weber, Altsynagogale Theologie (1880),'
P- 273.

427. J. Wellhausen, Israelitische und jUdische GeschichtCy p. 340,


388 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


428. Graetz, vol. 4, p. 41 1. Graetz also has an excellent
appreciation of the Talmud (one-sided of course, and optimistic),
and its influence in Judaism.

429. J. Fromer, Vom Ghetto %ur modernen Kultur (1906),
p. 247.

430. M. Kayserling, Columbus (1894), ch. vi.

431. Das Haus Rothschild^ vol, i (1857), P*

432. This is not the place to enter into an account of the
results of Biblical criticism. All I can do here is to mention
a few books that may serve as an introduction to the subject :
Zittel, Die Entstehung der Bibel (5th ed., 1891) ; for the history
of the Pentateuch, Adalbert Merx, Die Bucher Moses und Josua
(1907), and Ed. Meyer, Die Entstehung des Judentums (1896).

433- W. Frankenberg, Die Spriiche, ubersetzt und erlautert,”
in Handkommentar %um Alten Testament y herausgegeben von D. W.
Nowack. On p. 16 there is a list of books for the Wisdom
Literature. See also Henri Traband, La lot mosatquey ses origines
et son developpement (1903), p. 77.

434. Cf. M. Friedlander, Geschichte der jUdischen Apologetik

(1903)-

435, Books about the Talmud form a small library in them-
selves. I can only mention one or two to serve as an intro-
duction to the subject. The best is H. L, Strack’s Einleitung
in den Talmud (4th ed., 1908), which also contains a pretty full
bibliography. For Talmudic Ethics, see Salo Stein's Materialien
%ur Ethik des Talmud (1904). Talmudic scholars, however, do
not apprize this book very highly. A more recent book is by
J. Fromer, who has occupied himself with Talmudic and later
Jewish literature. See his Die Organization des Judentums

1908), which is intended to serve as an Introduction to a big
Encyclopedic Dictionary of the Talmud, which Fronxer has
planned. Another book which deals with the sources is E.
Schiirer, Geschichte des jUdischen Volkes im Zeitalter Jesu Christiy
in 3 vols. The first (and ed., 1890) in §3 contains an extensive
bibliography. In addition, the standard Jewish histories, especially
Graetz, deal with this aspect of Jewish literature.

To comprehend the spirit of the Talmud it is necessary to
read the text itself. There is a German translation (almost com-
plete) by Lazarus Goldschmidt. The Talmud has this charac-
teristic : that although the sections follow each other in some


NOTES AND REFERENCES


389


fixed order, yet not one of them is strictly limited as regards its
subject matter. They all deal with practically the whole field
of Talmudic subjects. Hence by studying one or more of the
(63) Tractates, it is comparatively easy to obtain a fair notion ot
the contents of the whole, and certainly, to find one’s way about
in the great sea. Specially to be recommended is the Tractate
Baba Mezia and its two sister tractates \^Baba Kama and Baba
Bathra"], There is a good edition of Baba Mezia^ with an
introduction and a translation by Dr. Sammter (1876).

A special branch of Talmudic literature is composed of the
so-called “Minor Tractates,” usually found in an appendix to
the Talmud, though often published separately. These are Derech
Erez Rabba (3rd century), Aboth^ Aboth de R^ Nathan^ Derech
Erez Zutta (9th century, according to Zunz). Zunz calls them
Ethical Hagadoth because of their obvious intention of teaching
practical wisdom. They have had no small influence on the
development of the Jewish people and are therefore of great
interest to us here. Next to the Bible, these tractates enjoyed
a widespread popularity. They formed the principal reading of
the layman, unacquainted with the Talmud. They were (are)
found in Prayer Books and devotional literature. Some of them
have been issued in German translations, R, Nathan^s System der
Ethik und Morale translated by Kaim Pollock (1905). Derech
Erez ZuttUy translated by A. Tawrogi (1885). Derech Erez
Rabba^ translated by M. Goldberg (i888). We must also
mention the Tosephta^ which contains the teaching not included
in the Mishna, This also dates from the period of the Tanaim
and is arranged like the Mtshna.

Finally, a word as to the Rabbinical commentaries or Mid-
rashim^ which are partly halachic [/.^., legal] and partly hagadic
moral and edifying]. The oldest of them, mostly halachic^
are Mechilta (on Exodus), Siphra (on Leviticus), and Siphre (on
Numbers and Deuteronomy),

The Targumim are the Aramaic translations of the O.T.

436. There is no good translation of the Shulchan Aruch.
The only available one is by Lowe (1837), which is incom-
plete and one-sided. On the other hand, the Orach Chafm
and the Jore Deah have been published in a German dress by
Rabbi P. Lederer (1906 and 1900), but not in a complete
form.


390 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


As for works on the Shulchan Aruch^ they are mostly of the
nature of apologetic ^pamphlets. Anti-Semites have turned
to the S. A. for material to attack Jews and Judaism ; and
Jewish scholars have naturally replied. We may mention, for
instance, A. Lewin, Der Judenspiegel des Dr. Justus (1884),
and D. Hoffmann, Der Schulchan Aruch und die Rabbiner uber
das VerhHltniss der Juden zu Andersgl&ubigen (1885). Thus there
is no subjective treatment of the Shulchan Aruch^ though it deserves
as thorough a consideration as the Talmud. The only strictly
scientific book with which I am acquainted and which should be
mentioned in this connexion is S. Back’s Die reli^onsgeschichtliche
Literatur der Juden in dem Zeitraume vom 15—18 Jahrhundert
(1893), reprinted from Winter and Wunsche, Die judische
Literatur seit Abschluss des Kanonsy vol, 2. But Back’s book is
not big and his treatment therefore can only be of the nature
of a sketch.

437. Paul Volz, Judische Eschatologie von Daniel bis Aktba

(1903)-

438. Fiirst, Untersuchungen Uber den Kanon des Alten Testaments
nach deH Uberlieferungen in Talmud und Midrasch (1868).

439. L. Stern, Die Vorschriften der Thoray welche Israel in
der Zerstreuung zu beobachten hat Ein Lehrbuch der Religion fur
Schule und Familie (4th ed., 1904), p. 28. This book, which may
be looked upon as a type, gives the view current in strictly ortho-
dox circles.

440. Cf. Rabbi S. Mandl, Das Wesen des Judentums (1904),
p. 14, Mandl relies on J. Gutmann, Uber Dogmenbildung und Ju~
dentum (1894). Cf. also S. Schechter, ‘‘ The Dogmas of Judaism,”
in J.Q.R.y vol. I (1889), pp. 48, 1 15. As is well known, Moses
Mendelssohn was the first to express (in his Jerusalem') the idea
that Judaism has no dogmas, with some degree of insistence.

44OA. The best that I am acquainted with is Ferdinand Weber’s
System der altsynagogalen pal&stinensischen Theologie aus Targumy
Midrash und Talmud (1880). [Cf. note 426.]

441. Stern [note 439], p- 5.

44?2t. Dollinger, Heidentum und Judentum (1857), p- 634.

443. Rutilius Namatianus, De reditu suo,” in Reinach’s Tesetes
d^ auteurs grecs et romains relatifs au judaismey vol. I (1895), p. 358.

444. Stern [note 439], p. 49 ; S. R. Hirsch, Versuche Uber
Jissro^ls Pflichten in der Zerstreuung (4th ed., 1909), § 71 1,


NOTES AND REFERENCES


391


445. Cf. Weber [note 440A], p. 49. Weber has worked out

this idea of contract in Judaism better than any other writer.
The treatment in the text owes much to him, as will be apparent.
I have also utilized his references. In this particular instance,
cf. Sifre^ I2i, Wajjikra Rabba^ c. 31* '

446. Aboth^ II, near the beginning.

447. Cf. Weber [note 440A], pp. 270, 272.

448. Ditto, p. 292.

449. R. Joseph Albo, Ikkarim^ 2. book on the principles ot
Judaism, dating from the 15th century. W. and L. Schlesinger
have issued a German translation [of the Hebrew] (1844). This
particular problem is dealt with in ch. 46.

450. S. R. Hirsch [note 444], ch. 13, especially §§ 100 and 105.

451. J, F. Schroder, Talmudisch^rabbinisches Judentum (1851),
p. 47.

452. Graetz, vol. 2, p. 203 and note 14 5 J. Bergmznn^yicdtsche
Apologetik im neutestamentlichen Zieitalter (1908), p. 120. For the
spirit of ancient Judaism, see Wellhausen [note 427], ch. 15.

453. H, Deutsch, Die SprUche Salomons nach der Auffassung in
Talmud und Midrasch (1885).

454. J. F. Bruch, Weisheitskhre der HebrUer p. 135.

455. Rabbi S. SchifFer, Das Buck Kohelet, Nach der Auffassung
der Weisen des Talmud und Midrasch (1884).

456. Cf. Graetz, vol. 4, p. 2335 Wellhausen [note 427],
pp, 250, 339 5 and also the well-known works of Muller, Schurer,
and Marti.

457. Mandl [note 440], p. 14.

458. S. R. Hirsch [note 444], § 448.

459. A number of similar extracts from Talmudic literature
will be found in S. SchaiFer, Das Recht und seine Stellung zur Moral
nach talmudischer Sitten-- und Rechtslehre (1889), p. 28.

460. M. Lazarus [note 423], p. 22. Lazarus has worked out the
idea that to be holy means to overcome your passions, exceedingly
well, though he approaches very closely to Kant's system of Ethics.

461. Kiddushiny 30^, Baba Bathra^ 1 6a.

462. Cf. SchaflFer [note 459], p. 54-

463. Cf. Fassel, Tugend-^ und Rechtslehre des Talmud (1848), p. 38.

464. Albo's Ikkarim [note 449], ch. 24, deals fully with this.

465. Cf. S. Back [note 436], Prefece.

466. Cf. also M. Lazarus [note 423], p. 20.


392 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


467. Stern [note 439], p. 126.

468. Aboth de R. Nathan^ xxi. 5 [also Abothy III, 14].

469. G. F. Oehler, Theologie des AIT. (3rded,, 1891), p. 878.

470. Lazarus [note 423], p. 40.

471. Aboth de R. Nathatiy xvi. 6.

47IA. Cf. Eccles. I, 8 ; Prov. x. 8 ; x. 10 ; x. 31 ; xiv. 23 ;
xvii. 27, 28 ; xviii. 7, 2I ; xxi. 23 ; Ecclus. iv. 34 (29) ; v. 15
(13) ; ix. 25 (18) ; xix. 20, 22.

472. Stern [note 439], No. i 2 ya.

473. Cf, also Prov. xii. 27 ; xiii. ii ; xviii. 19 ; xxi. 20. For
further passages in praise of labour, cf. L. K. Amitai, La sociologie
selon la Ugislation jutve (1905), p. 90.

474. Hirsch [note 444], § 448.

475. Ditto, § 463.

476. Stern [note 439], p. 239.

477. Hirsch [note 444], §443, almost identically expressed by
Stern [note 439], Nos. 125, 126,

478. J. Fromer [note 429], p. 25.

479. Iggeret ha-Kodesh^ first published in 1556 ; translated into
Latin by Gafi&reli 5 cf. Graetz, vol. 7, p. 46.

480. Hirsch [note 444], § 263. Cf. also § 264, § 267.

481. The figures are taken from Hugo Nathansohn, ‘‘Die
unehelichen Geburten bei den Juden,” in Z,D,S.y.y vol. 6,
(1910), p. 102.

482. We may mention as one of the foremost authorities
S. Freud. See his Sammlung kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre
(2nd scries, 1909).

483. See Dr. Hoppe, “Die Kriminalitat der Juden und der
Alkohol,” in Z.D.S.y., vol. 3 (1907), p. 38 ; H. L. Eisenstadt,
“Die Renaissance der jiidischen Sozialhygiene,” in Archiv fUr
Rasseti'- und Geselhchaftshiologiey vol. 5 (1908), p. 714 ; L. Cheinisse,
“Die Rassen pathologic und der Alkoholismus bei den Juden,”
in Z.D.S.y., vol. 6 (1910), p. I. It can be proved with great
certainty that the Jew’s freedom from the evil effects of alcohol
(as also from syphilis) is due to his religion.

484. Wellhausen [note 427], p. 119.

485. Cicero, Pro Flaccoy ch. 28.

486. Mommsen, Rdmische GeschichtOy vol. 5, p. 545.

487. The passages may be found in Felix Stahelin, Der
Antisemitismus des Altertums (1905). Cf. Reinach [note 443].


NOTES AND REFERENCES


395


488. J. Bergmann [note 452], p. 157.

489. Graetz, vol. 5, p. 73.

490. Graetz, vol. 5, p. 321.

491. Graetz, vol. 6, pp. 140, 161.

492. A comprehensive account of laws on interest in the old
Jewish legal system will be found in J. Heicl, Das alttestamentlkhe
Tiinsverbat [Biblische Studien^ herausgegeben von O. Bardenhewer,
vol. 12, No. 4, 1907).

493. Cf. a collection of “Responsa” by Hoifmann, in Schmelhrs
Forschungen^ vol. 152.

494. Cf. Fassel [note 463], p. 193 ; E. Griinebaum, Die
Sittenlehre der Juden andern Bekenntnissen gegenuber (2nd ed., 1878),
p. 414; the same writer’s “Der Fremdc nach rabbinischen
Begriffen,” in Geigers judische Zeitschrifi^ vols. 9 and 10 ; D.
Hofimann [note 436], p. 129 ; Lazarus [note 423], § 144.
Lazarus is curiously incomplete. What he says in his third
chapter about the duty of Israel towards non-Jews does his
heart all credit, but it is hardly in accord with historic truth.

494A. Cf. Choshen Mishpat^ §§ 188, 194, 227, 231, 259, 266,
272, 283, 348, 389, etc.

495. “ When he appears before the divine J udge, the first question
that man is asked is, Have you been straightforward and honest
in business ?” Sabbath, 31 <7. This Talmudic quotation is the motto
of a little book (privately printed) dealing with passages concerning
honesty. Das Biblisch-rabbinische Handelsgesetsi, by Rabbi Stark.

495a. Choshen Mishpat, § 231. The passage given in the text
is from § 227.

496. Graetz, vol. 10, pp. 62, 81.

496A. Choshen Mishpat, § 227 ; Baba Mezia, 49^.

496B. In addition, see John G. Dow, “ Hebrew and Puritan,”
in 7.0.R., vol. 3 (1891), p. 52.

497. Graetz, vol. 9, pp. 86, 213 ; vol. 10, p. 87 ; Hyamson,
p. 164 ; y.g.R., vol. 3, p. 61.


CHAPTER XII

498. Cf. also R. S. Woodworth, “Racial Difierences in Mental
Traits,” in Bulletin mensuel des Institut Solvay (1910), No. 21.

499. Anatole Leroy-£eaulieu,/rr<;^/rA«z les nations{iZ<)'^, p.289.


394 the jews and MODERN CAPITALISM


500. Cf. H. St, Chamberlain, Die Grundlagen des 19 Jahrhun-
derts (3rd ed,, 1901), p. 457. [An English edition of this book is
now to be had.]

501. I cannot here enter into a disquisition of the various
meanings attached to the terms People, Nation, Nationality.
The reader will find all that he needs in that excellent study of
F. J. Neumann, Folk und Nation (1888). See, too, Otto Bauer,
Die Nationalitdtenfrage und die Sozialdemokratie (1907) ; F.
Rosenbluth, Zur Begriffsbestimmung von Folk und Nation (1910).

502. A. Jellinek, Der judische Stamm in SprichwMern (2nd
series, 1882), pp. 18, 91.

503. J. Zollschan, Das Rassenproblem unter besonderer Beruck-

sichtigung der theoretischen Grundlagen der jUdischen Rassenfrage
(1910), p. 298. ^

504. Jellinek [note 502], (3fd series, 1885), p. 39.

505. Juan Huarte de San Juan, Examen de ingenios para las
Sciencias. Pomplona (1575), (Biblioteca de autores Espanoles, Ixv,
p. 469).

506. Jellinek [note 502]. This book by the well-known
Rabbi of Vienna is one of the very best that has been written on
the Jewish spirit. Good, too, is the booklet of D. Chwolson,
Die semitischen Fylker (1872), which criticizes Renan’s Histoire
ginlrale et systime compari de longues Slmitique (1855). A third
writer who in my opinion has looked deep into the Jewish soul
is Karl Marx, in his Judenfrage (1844), What has been said
about the Jewish spirit since these men (all Jews !) wrote is either
a repetition of what they said or a distortion of the truth.

507. For Jews as mathematicians, see M. Steinschneider in
Monatschrift^ vols. 49-51 (1905— 7).

508. For Jews as physicians, see M. Kayserling, ‘‘Zur
Geschichte der jiidischen Aerzte,” in Monatschrift^ vols. 8 (1859)
and 17 (1868).

509. Zollschan [note 503], p. 159.

510. C, Lassen, Indische Altertumskunde^ vol. i (1847), p. 414.

51 1. “Une certaine gravite orgueilleuse et un fierti noble fait
le caractere distinctif de cette nation,” Pinto, “ Reflexions,” etc.,
in the Lettres de quelques juijs^ vol. i, p. 19.

512. J. M. Jost, Geschichte des Judentums und seiner Sekten^
vol. 3 (1859), p. 207.

513. Derech Em Zutta^ ch. viiL


NOTES AND REFERENCES


39 S


514. Megilla^ 1 6.

515. Mtdrash Rabha to Genesis, i, 44.

516. “D^velopper une chose qui existe en germe, perfectionner
ce qui est, exprimer tout ce qui tient dans une id^e qu’il n’aurait
pas trouvfe seul.” — M. Murel, JJ esprit /«//■( 1901), p. 40.

517. K. Knies, Credit^ vol. 1, p. 240 ; vol. 2, p. 169.


CHAPTER XIII

518. F. Martius, “Die Bedeutung der Vererbung fiir
Krankheitsenstehung und Rassenerhaltung,” in Jrchiv fUr Rass.
und Ges. Biohgie, vol. 7 (1910), p. 477.

519. Some of the most important of recent works on the
ethnology and anthropology of *the Jews are the following :
von Luschan, “Die anthropologische Stellung der Juden,” in
Korrespondenseiflatt f&r Anthropobgie^ vol. 23 (1892) ; Judt, Die
Juden ah (1903). On the historic side, much light has been
thrown on the problem by Ed. Meyer, Die Israeliten und ihre
NachbarstSmme (1906). Side by side with this excellent book
may be placed one somewhat older, A. Bertholet, Die Stellung
der Israeliten und der Juden %u den Fremden (1896). That the
whole literature on Babylonia must be mentioned here goes
without saying, the works of Winkler, Jercmias, and others.
Recently there appeared a book by W. Erbt, Die HebrSer.
Kanaan im Zeitalter der hebraischen Wanderung und hebraischen
Staatengriindung (1906).

520. H. V. Hilprecht, The Babylonian Expedition of the
University of Pennsylvania. Series A, Cuneiform Texts, vol. 9
(1898), p. 28; the same author’s Explorations in Bibb Lands
during the i^th Century (1903), p. 409.

521. Cf. von Luschan, “Zur phjrs. Anthropologic der Juden,”
in Z.D.S.J., vol. I (1905), p. I.

522. The chief exponent of this theory is Ludwig Wilser, who
has set forth his view in numerous articles, and at great length
in his book. Die Germanen (1903). His chief opponent is
Zollschan [note 503], p, 24.

523. Mommsen, Rsmische Geschichte, vol. 5, p. 549 *

524. Graetz, vol. 5, pp. 188, 330, 370.

525. Graetz, vol. 7, p. 63.


396 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


526. All these instances in Lindo [see note 128], p. lo,

527. In his criticism of Hoeniger, who holds the view ex-
pressed in the text as applicable to Cologne. Others who have
supported Brann are Lau, Keussen, and A. Kober, Studle zur
mitulalterlichen Geschkhte der Juden in Kbln am Rhine (1903), p. 13.

528. Maurice Fishberg,/‘Zur Frage der Herkunft desblonden
Elements im Judentum” in Z. 2 ). 5 .y., vol. 3 (1907), pp. 7, 25.
A contrary view in the same journal, vol. 3, p, 92, is Elias Auer-
bach’s “ Bemerkungen zu Fishbergs Theorie,” etc.

529. Cf. F. Sofer, ‘‘Uber die Plastizitat der menschlichen
Rassen,” in Archiv fitr Rass» und Ges, Biologie^ vol. 5 (1908),
p. 666 ; E. Auerbach, “ Die jiidische Rassenfrage,” in the
same journal, vol. 4, p. 359 ; also vol. 4, p. 370, where von
Luschan expounds an almost identical view. Cf. also Zollschan
[note 503], pp. 125, 134, etc.

530. See the results in Judt [note 519]. Cf. also A. D.
Elkind, Die Juden. Eine vergleichend-anthropologische Untersuchung
(1903). I know the book only from the review by Weinberg
in Archiv fUr Rass. und Ges. Biologie^ vol. i (1904), p, 915. Cf.
also Elkind’s Anthropologische Untersuchungen uber die russ.-
polnischen Juden,” in Z,S.D.J.^ voL 2 (1906), pp. 49, 65, and
his other essay in vol. 4 (1908), p. 28 ; Leo Sofer, “ Zur Anthro-
pologische Stellung der Juden,” in PoL anthrop. Revue^ vol. 7 (cf.
review of this in Z.S.D.F,, vol. 4, p. 160). Cf. E, Auerbach
[note 529], p. 332 5 Aron Sandler, Anthropologie und Zionismus
(1904), though his results are not first-hand; Zollschan [note
503], pp. 125, 134, etc.

531. The theory of ^‘racial differences” between Ashkena-
zim and Sephardim is supported by S. Weissenberg, ^‘Das
jiidische Rassenproblem,” in Z.D.iS.^., vol. i (1905) ; M.
Fishberg, ‘‘Beitrage zur phys. Anthropologie der nordafrikan-
ischen Juden,” ditto. Opponents of the view are most of the
authors mentioned in note 530.

532. For an all-round consideration of this question see Leo
Sofer, “Zur Biologic und Pathologic der judischen Rasse,” in
Z.jD.S.y., vol. 2 (1906), p. 85. For further views, see the issues
of this learned journal. Cf. also Archiv fur Rass. und Ges.
BiologkyVoL 4 (1907), pp. 47, 149: Siegfried Rosenfeld, “ Die
Sterblichkeit der Juden in Wien und die Ursachen der judischen
Mindersterblichkeit”


NOTES AND REFERENCES


197


533. F. Hertz, Modeme Rassen-Theorie (1904), p. 56.

534. C, H. Stratz, tFas sind Juden ? Eine ethnographuch^
anthropologische Studie (1903), p. 26.

535. Illustrations in Judt [note 5 ^ 9 ] elsewhere. Cf.
also L. Messerschmidt, Die Hettiter (1903).

536. Cf. Hans Friedenthal, Uber einen experimentalen Nachweis
von Blutsverwandtschaft (1900). Also appeared in the author’s
Jrbeiten aus dem Gebiete der experimentellen Physiologie (1908).

537. Carl Bruck, “Die biologische DifiFerenzierung von
AfiFenarten und menschlichen Rassen durch spezifische Blutreak-
tion,” reprinted from the Berliner Klinischen Wochenschrift^ vol. 4
(1907)3 P* 371-

538. Von Luschan, “ OfFener Brief an Herrn Dr. Elias
Auerbach,” in Archiv fUr Rassen und Ges. BiologUy vol. 4
(1907)3 P- 371 -

539. A. Ruppin, “ Die Mischehe,” in Z. 2 ).S. 7 -> vol. 4, p. 18.

540. Mommsen, RSmische Geschichte^ vol. 5, p. 529.

541. M. Braunschweiger, Die Lehrer der Mischna (1890),
p. 27.

542. Graetz, vol. 6, p. 22.

543. Gi-aetz, vol. 6, p. 320.

544. Gregor. Ep. ix. 36, in Schipper, p. 16. .

545. Herzfeld [note S91], p. 204.

545A. Herzfeld has perhaps dealt most fully with these
questions. But besides many errors of textual interpretation
he is also wrong as regards the dates of documents. He still
maintains the chronology current before the age of criticism, and
therefore places most of his sources in the pre-exilic period.

546. For the Talmudic period, see Herzfeld [note S91], p. n8,
where over a hundred imports into Palestine are given.

547. A. Bertholet [see note 519], p. 2.

548. Cf. Biichsenschiitz, B^sitx und Ervoerb im grmhischen
Altertum (1869), p. 443.

549. Friedlander [note 594], vol. 3, p. 571.

550. Kiddushiny 82^.

551. Aboth de R, Nathan^ xxx. 6.

552. Pesachinty 113^7.

553. Pesachimy 50^. Cf. also the articles “ Welt handel ” and
“ Handel ” in J. Hamburger’s ReaUEncyklopddie des yudentums
(1883, 1886) for more material under this heading.


398 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

554. A. Bertholet, Deuteronomium ” (1899), Marti’s
Kur%. Handkommentar %um A.T. On the passage in the text,
Bertholet remarks that it refers to a period in which Israel is
scattered all over the globe as a people of traders, and is a force
in the world because of its wealth. Bertholet informs me that
he regards the passage xv. ^-6 as a later addition to the text, and
because the words appear to point to an extensive distribution
of Israel he would incline to assign them to the Greek period
after Alexander.

But for myself I cannot believe that the Jews were then a
scattered commercial people. In order to make quite sure that
I had not overlooked important passages I wrote to Professor
Bertholet to ask him on what grounds he based his opinion. In
his reply he referred me to Prov. vii. 19; xii. ii ; xiii. ii;
XX. 21 ; xxiii. 4 5 xxiv. 27 ; xxviii. 19, 20, 22 5 Ecclus. xxvi. 29-
xxvii. 2. These passages deal with the dangers of wealth, and I
have already discussed them in another connexion. None of
them, however, appear to me to point to trade on a large scale.
Certainly Prov. vii. 19 may have reference to a travelling trader,
but not necessarily. And when we are told of Tobit (to whom
also Professor Bertholet referred) that he was King Enemessar’s
‘‘ agorastes ” and as such , had a comfortable income, does not
that rather point to a feudal state of society ? Again, Ananias,
a merchant at the court of Adiabene (of whom Josephus tells),
may have been a Hoijude. Of course, I do not deny that Jews
participated in international trade. But I contend that this was not
characteristic of them. What was characteristic was the business
of lending, and of this it may be said, as Bertholet does, that Israel
was then (in the period after Alexander) a power in the earth.

555. I am indebted to Professor Bertholet for calling my atten-
tion to this document.

556. E. Renan, Les ApStres (1866), p. 289.

557. J. Wellhausen, Medina vor dem Islam (1S89), p. 4.

558. Cf. Aronius, Regesten zur Geschichte der Juden im firdnk^ *
ischen und deutschen Reiche bis zum Jahre 1273 (^9^2), Nos. 45, 62.

559. Cf. Lindo [note 128], p. 73.

560. Statutes of Jewry, in Cunningham, Growth of English
Industry and Commerce, vol. i (1905), p. 204.

561. Wassermann, ‘‘Die Entwickelung der jiidischen Bevolker-
ung in d. Provin, Posen,** in Z.D.S.J., vol. 6 (1910), p. 37.


NOTES AND REFERENCES


399


562. F. Delitzsch, Handel und Wandel in Altbahylon (1910),
p. 33. Cf. Heicl, AhtestamentUches Zinsverbot (1907), p, 32, and
especially p. 54.

563. Weber, article Agrargeschichte im Altertum,” in Hand--

wMerbuch der Staatswissenschaften, Cf. also Marquardt, RSmische
Staatsverwaltung^ vol. 2, p. 55. *

563A. In the years 1436 and 1437 a number of Jewish pawn-
brokers were invited to Florence by the city council, in order to
assist the poor who were in need of cash. Cf. M. Ciardemi,
Banchieri ebrei in Firenze nel secolo XV e XVI (1907),

When the city of Ravenna was about to join itself to the
Republic of Venice, one of the conditions of its adhesion was that
wealthy Jews should be sent there to open a loan bank, so that
the poverty of the population might be lessened. Cf. Graetz,
vol, 8, p. 235.

‘‘We have seen that the business of finance in the period up to
1420 was gradually increasing in the hands of the Jews of Rome ;
from 1420 to 1550 circumstances were even more favourable, and
hence we find a still greater growth. Indeed, it became customary
for the Italian communes to make regular agreements with Jews
concerning money-lending.^’ Cf. Theiner, Cod. dipl. 3, 335, in
Paul Rieger’s Geschichte der Juden in Rom (1895), p. 14.

563B. A. Moreau de Jonn&, Statistique despeupks de Fantiquiti^
vol. I (1851), p. 98. For censuses in the Bible, cf. Max Wald-
stein in Statistische Monatschrift^ Vienna (1881).

564. A. jeremias, Das alte Testament im Lichte des alten Orients
(2nd ed., 1906), p. 534.

565. F. Buhl, Dte sozialen Verhdltnisse der Israeliten (1899),
pp. 88, 128.

566. Biographies of the Talmudic Rabbis are frequent enough.
Cf. Strack [note 435] ; Graetz, in vol. 4 5 A. Sammter in the
Appendix to his translation of Baba Mezia (1876) and M. Braun-
schweiger, Die Lehrer der Mishna (1890).

567. Mommsen, RSmische Geschichte^ vol. 5, p. 529,

568. The 58th Canon of the 4th Council of Toledo (633),
quoted by Lindo [note 128], p. 14.

569. J. Wellhausen [note 557], vol. 4, p. 14,

570. Cf. Graetz, vol. 5, p. 345.

571. Cf. Graetz, vol. 5, pp. ii, 39, 50 5 also the passages in
Schipper [note 544], pp, 20, 35 ; Aronius [note 558], Nos. 45, 62,


400 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM


173, 206, 227, etc. How Caro [note 324], p. 83, arrives at the
contrary conclusion it is not easy to perceive.

572, For the period up to the 12th century, see the refer-
ences in Schipper [note 544], also my Moderne Kapitalismus^
vol. I,

573. K. F. W. Freiheij&von Diebitsch, Kosmopolitische^ unparteU
ische Gedanken fiber Jud^ dfid Christen (1804), p. 29.

574-585. I cannot give a complete bibliography of all the
works on biology, anthropology, ethnology, etc. Only a few will
be mentioned for the guidance of the reader.

The works of Moritz Wagner appear to me to be of great
value : Die Darwinsche Theorie und das Migraiionsgesetz (1868) ;
tiber den Einfluss der geographischen Isolierung und Kolonienbildung
aufdie morpholo^sche VerUnderung der Organismen (1871); Die
Enstehung der Arten durch rdumliche Sonderung (1889).

Ludwig Gumplovicz, Der Rassenkampf{i%%'^) ; Die soziologische
Staatsidee (2nd ed., 1901); Ward, Reine Soziologiey vol. i; L.
Woltmann, Politische Anthropologie (1903).

For the question of heredity, see H. E. Ziegler, Die Verer^
bungslehre in der Biologie (1905) 5 W, Schallmeyer, Vererbung und
Auslese (2nd ed., 1910) ; R. Sommer, Familienforschung und Perer^
bungslehre (1907) ; F. Marti us. Das pathologische Vererhungsproblem
(1909) ; J. Schultz, Die Maschinentheorie des Lebens (1909) ; W,
Bolsche, Dai Liehedeben in der Natur (1909).


CHAPTER XIV

586. For the social and economic conditions in ancient Pales-
tine there are not many books to hand. Perhaps the best is F.
BuhPs work [note 565]. A more recent book is Max Lohr’s
Israels Kulturentivickelung ( 1 9 1 1 ) .

587. Wellhausen, Proleg,, p. 10 : cf, Budde, The Nomadic Ideal
in the O.T. (1895).

588. F. Ratzel, VUkerkundey vol. 3, p. 47.

589. Kiddushin^ 71/2. Cf. Graetz, vol. 4, p. 273.

590. Graetz, vol. 4, p. 321.

591. For a list of Biblical passages in support, see Herzfeld,
Handelsgeschichte der Juden des AltertumSy note 9.

592. For this estimation, see Buhl [note 565], p. 52.


401


NOTES AND REFERENCES


593. Philo, in Flaccumy 6 (II, S 23 > Mangey), in Stahelin

[note 487], p. 33, „ ,

594. L: Friedlander, Stttengeschichte Roms^vol. 3,p. 570.

595. Cassel, in the article “Juden” in Ersch and Gruber,


p. 24.

596. Tacitus, Annal., II, 85 5 Suetonius and Josephus mention
only Jews.

597. The best accounts of the Diaspora will be found in
Graete, vol. 3, p. 90 ; Frankel, “ Die Diaspora zur Zeit des
zweitenTempels,” mMonaUchrifty vol. 2, p. 309 ; Herzfeld [note
591], p. 200, and note 34.

598. An excellent example of Jewish migration within one
particular country is furnished by the history of the Jews in the
province of Posen. In 1849 there were 21 localities (out of a
total of 131) with a population of 30 to 40 per cent, of Jews
while in 4 there were 41 to 50 per cent. Jews, in 3 over 50 per
cent. But in the last half century the Jewish population of the
Posen province has shrunk considerably. Cf. E. von Bergmann,
Zur GeschichU der deuUchmy folnischen und jOdischen BevVlkerung in
der PreviUz Posen (1883) ; Zwanzig Jahre deutscher Kulturarbeit
(1906) } Bk Breslauer, Die Abwanderung der Juden aus der Provinz
Posen (1909). For the expulsion of the Jews from Vienna at the
close of the 17th century cf. David Kaufinann, DU letzte Ver-
treihung der Juden aus Wien und Niederdsterreich } ihre Vorgeschichte
(1625-1670) und ihre Opfer (1889).

599. L. Neubaur, Die Sagevom ewigen Juden (2nd ed., 1893).

600. According to Gratian, Fita Joh. Commendoniy II, c. 15 ;
Victor von Karben,-Dtf Fita et Morihus Judaorum (1504) ; Graetz,
vol. 9, p. 62.

6 01. J. Ranke, Der Mensch, vol. 2, p. 533.

602. Ratzel, Fslkerkundey vol. 3, p. 743.

603. Juan Huarte de San Juan [note 505], p. 409*

604. F. Delitzsch [note 562], p. 12.

605. A. Wahrmund, Das Gesetz des Nomadentums (1887),
p. 16,

606. Ratzel [note 602], vol. 3, p. 56.

607. Pesdchim, Syb, Cf. also 119^.

608. W. Erbt, Die HebrSer (1906), p. 166.

609. Ephraim justifii (1758). L’dditeur ^ Mr. Andr6 de Pinto,
Juif Portugais, Citoyen et ndgociant d’Amsterdam.

27


402 THE JEWS AND MODERN CAPITALISM

6 10. Pinto, “Reflex, critiques sur le premier chap, du vii tome
des oeuvres de M. Voltaire (1762),” in the Lettres de qu'elques juifsj
5th ed., 1781), p. Ip.

6ji. Graetz, vol. ii, p* 54.

612. “If’id^e, oil ilssont aslez g6n6ralement, d’^etre issus de la
Tribe de Juda, dont ils tiennetit que les principales families furent
envoy6es en Espagne du* temps de la captiviti de Babylonc, ne
peut que les porter a ces distinctions et contribuer a cette 616 vation
de sentimehs qu’on remarque en eux.” — Pinto [note 610], p. 17,

613. A. Nossig, Die Auserwahltheit der Juden im Lichte der
Biologic,” in Z.D.S.J., voL i. Cf. in same volume essay of
Curt Michaelis ; also his Prinzipien der natiirlichen und sozialen
Entwicklungsgeschichte der Menschheit ” [Natur und Staat^
vol, 5) (1904), p. 63.

614. A, Sandler [note S30], p. 24.


Zbe 0te«bam t>te00»

