The Quintessence of Capitalism
Werner Sombart (M. Epstein, trans.) (1915)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Werner Sombart's 'Der Bourgeois' in M. Epstein's English translation, from the 1915 E. P. Dutton & Company edition (New York) titled 'The Quintessence of Capitalism: A Study of the History and Psychology of the Modern Business Man'. Scan via Internet Archive (New York Society Library). Digitizer boilerplate, library stamps and scan artifacts trimmed from beginning and end. This 1915 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE QUINTESSENCE
or CAPT TALISM


A STUDY OF THE HISTORY
AND PSYCHOLOGY OF THE
MODERN BUSINESS MAN


By WERNER SOMBART


TRANSLATED AND EDITED BY
M. EPSTEIN, M.A., Pu.D.


NEW YORK
E, P. DUTTON & COMPANY
681 FIFTH AVENUE
1Q1S


PROPERTY


» tig Ke


NEW YORK


SOCIE tT} Y Lit BRA RY


(All rights reserved)


NOV


CONTENTS


PAGE
TranstaTor’s InrRopucTION.. : F : Soe 9


CHAPTER
T. Tre Pre-Caprratisr Economic Ourioox : ene


BOOK I


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CAPITALIST
SPIRIT


SECTION I


THE SPIRIT OF ENTERPRISE
Il. Tue Greev or Gotp . ; ‘ : es.


III. Ways anp Means or Money-Getrinec . ; «3h
1. Acquisition by Force (p. 36).
2. Acquisition by Magic (p. 37).
3. Acquisition by Scheming and Invention (p. 40).
4. Acquisition by Money (p. 44).


IV. Tue Spreir or Unpertaxinc ’ ' eet
1. The Conqueror (p. §2).
2. The Organiser (p. 53).
4. Tne. Trader (py 54).


V. Tue Becinnincs or UNDERTAKING i ; ea
1. Martial Undertakings (p. 57).


2. The Manorial System (p. 59).
5


6 CONTENTS


CHAPTER PAGE


3. The State (p. 60).
4. The Church (p 62).


VI. Funpamentat Types or Caprratist UnpERTAKINGS Pia
1. The Freebooter (p. 66).

The Landlord (p. 76).

The Civil Servant (p. 83).

The Speculator (p. 87).

The Trader (p. 93).

. The Craftsman (p. 101).


Antes


SECTION II
THE MIDDLE-CLASS OUTLOOK


VIT. Mrpvre-crass Virtuzs . : ‘ : 2 103
1. Holy Economy (p. 105).
2. Business Morality (p. 121).


VU. Tue Arr or Catcuration : ; ; - 025


SECTION III


THE NATIONAL EXPRESSIONS OF THE CAPITALIST


SPIRIT
IX. Tue Dirrerenr Possipiitigs oF Expression. «130
X. Devetopments in Dirrerent Countries : i Ea2


E. healy iG. .132),

. The Iberian Peninsula (p. 134).

. France (p. 136).

Germany (p. 141).

. Holland (p. 144).

. Great Britain (p. 147).

. The United States of America (p. 151).


Ow Org St


CONTENTS 7
SECTION IV


THE BOURGEOIS—PAST AND PRESENT


CHAPTER PAGE
XI. Tue Bourceots—O.p Sryte . : : Ba i
XII. THe Mopern Business Man . F : . 168

BOOK II
THE ORIGINS OF THE CAPITALIST
SPIRIT
XII. Tue Prosiem. : : ‘ ; Ce
SECTION I


THE BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS


XIV. THe Bourcesors TEMPERAMENT . ; . 200
1. Undertaking Natures (p. 202).
2. ‘* Middle-Class”’ Natures (p. 205).


XV. Narionat Traits : , : ‘ . 210


SECTION II


MORAL FORCES


XVI. PuiLosopHy . A ; 3 ; . 222


XVII. Tue Inrtuence or ReLicion oN THE AGE oF EarLy
CaPITALISM . : . ! : Bex.
1. The Catholics (p. 228).
2. The Protestants (p. 231).
3. The Jews (p. 232).


8 CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
XVIII. Caruoticism 236
XIX. ProresTantisM 251
XX, Jupaism 263
XXI. Morar Inrtuences anp THE CapiraLisr SpPrRIT 267
SECTION III
THE SOCIAL CONDITIONS
XXII. Tue Strate e276
XXIII. Micrations : : ; 2G2
1. Jewish Migrations (p. 294).
2. The Migration of Persecuted Christians, more
especially Protestants (p. 295).
3. Colonizing Movements, particularly the Settle-
ments in America (p. 301).
XXIV. Tue Precious Merats anp THEIR Discovery 308
XXV. THe Ivetuence or Tecunicat Inventions . 319
XXVI. Tue Inrtuence or Pre-Capitrauisr CaLiincs i 33%
XXVIII. Tue Inrirvence or Cariratism IrseLr < S42
CONCLUSION
XXVIII. Rerrospecr anp Prospect Ro ae)
Notes anD REFERENCES . + 364


InpEx


~ 393


TRANSLATOR’S INTRODUCTION


Tuts is the Book of the Modern Business Man. Never
before has an attempt been made to describe him in
detail or to discover when he was born. Recent novels,
such as Mr. H. G. Wells’s Wife of Sir Isaac Harman,
have depicted his activities and suggested the mental
traits that governed them. Certain well-known carica-
tures have no doubt succeeded in giving his supposed
outward appearance a measure of permanence. But a
balanced and scientific analysis we have not hitherto had
until the author of this book gave us the results of his
researches into history and psychology.

The book is no dull treatise.* It presents a living
picture, the work of a scholar who is also a literary
man and esthete, whose nature (to use his own termin-
ology) is a seigniorial one (see p. 205), who is a dreamer
and an artist, ‘‘ many coloured in all he says and does.”

The history of the modern business man is interesting
enough. He is a comparative newcomer in modern life.
A moment’s thought will show that economic activities
through the ages, while springing from one unchangeable
need—human wants—have not always had the same end.
Man goeth forth unto his work—in order to produce
what he requires. In a broad way this statement sums
up the economic history of mankind. But only in a
broad way. Economic history plainly shows that the


* [See the review of the original by the present writer in the
Economic Fournal for September 1914, p. 403.]
9


fe) TRANSLATORS INTRODUCTION


thing was done variously in different ages, and differently
among different peoples even in one and the same age.
The medieval craftsman, for example, went about his
business in a different way from the modern American
captain of industry. Their ideals were dissimilar, so was
their outlook, despite the fact that both produced in
order to satisfy human wants. What is apparent here is
equally manifest if we look at life as a whole. Though
human nature is human nature, the same to-day and
for ever, though the fundamentals of life have always
remained constant—birth and death, love and hate, honour
and treason, truth and falsehood, hunger and thirst, riches
and poverty—yet the panorama of human life has taken
on manifold aspects in successive ages. To account for
these varying results we speak of a distinctive spirit in
each. The medieval spirit, for example, was nothing
like that of modern times. So in man’s efforts to satisfy
his wants. A different spirit actuated him at different
periods. It may be difficult to realize this all at once.
It may seem, for instance, that profit-making, in which
the great majority of business men to-day is engaged,
is surely as old as the hills. In a measure this is true.
But it must be remembered that differences in degree
may be so great as to be virtually differences in kind.
After all, the diversity between a giant and a dwarf,
between heat and cold, between age and youth, between
a thickly-peopled and a sparse settlement, between large
and small towns, between “forte” and “‘ piano,” is merely
one of degree. Yet will anyone assert that these things
are the same?

In every age, therefore, human activities that had
reference to wealth were directed, first, by certain ideals,
that is to say, certain desires of the mind ; and, secondly,
by certain given external circumstances. The latter may
be compared to the body, the former to the soul. Now


TRANSLATORS INTRODUCTION II


the expressions of the soul that are brought to bear on
the everyday business of life are all included when we
speak of some economic spirit—say, the capitalist spirit.

This book will consider the different economic spirits
that were influential at various periods of European
history, and inquire into the origins of the capitalist
spirit which practically alone sways our economic activities
to-day. It will show that during the history of Europe,
from the appearance of the Germans, Slavs, and Celts
to our own time, the economic outlook has changed
root and branch. Capitalism has succeeded that for
which no good term is available; let us call it pre-
capitalism. This modern capitalist spirit, beginning in
the early Middle Ages, was something new in the history
of Europe. But it does not follow that a similar
economic spirit may not have been operative in the
ancient world, nor yet that this spirit, if it existed,
was not one of the contributory forces that produced
modern capitalism. Be that as it may, this book will
provide a clear and interesting analysis of an expression
which is to-day perhaps more used and less understood
than any other—capitalism.


A few notes have been appended in the hope that
they may help to a better understanding of the book.
These, as all other additions by the Translator, are in
square brackets.

It only remains for me to express my best thanks
to my wife for many valuable suggestions in the final
revision of the work.


M. E.
Lonpon, Fume 1, 1915.


CHAPTER I
THE PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC OUTLOOK


THE pre-capitalist man was a natural man, man as God
made him, man who did not stand on his head or run
on all fours (as is the case to-day in economic activities).
The pre-capitalist man stood firmly on his two legs, by
the aid of which alone he moved about. His economic
outlook is therefore not difficult to ascertain ; it springs
quite easily from human nature.

In that outlook man is the centre of all effort and all
care ; man is the “‘meteyard of all things ””—mensura
omnium rerum homo. Consequently all economic activities
take thought only of man’s needs.'_ This principle is
fundamental. Economic activities provide such com-
modities as will satisfy man’s natural wants. The amount
of commodities produced must equal the amount required
for consumption ; a man’s expenditure must balance his
income. Indeed, the expenditure determines the income.
An economic order of this kind may be properly termed
an “expenditure system”; and all pre-capitalist and
pre-middle-class economies were “ expenditure systems ”
in this use of the term.

Now man’s needs were not settled by the mere caprice
of the individual. Their measure and quality grew up
in the process of time for each social group separately,
and gradually became customary. Hence the idea of a


sufficient livelihood for each class in accordance with
3


id) THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPTTALISI


its needs became the governing conception of all pre-
capitalist economic activities. What experience had
slowly evolved as needful, that received the approval
of legal and moral authority, and came to be regarded
as the norm. One of the fundamental teachings in the
system of Thomas Aquinas was this conception of a
sufficient livelihood. The relation between man and
the world’s goods requires, according to St. Thomas,
some limiting influence, some canon or rule ; and it is
to be found in his needs according to his station in life.?
Consequently, every station or condition had its own
standards, both of quality and of quantity. Broadly
speaking, two groups soon appeared in the pre-capitalist
system: the lords and the common people ; the rich and
the poor ; the nobility and the peasants ; craftsmen and
traders ; those who lived an untrammelled, independent
life, doing no useful work, and those who earned their
bread in the sweat of their brow.

And what was the lordly way of life? To enjoy
abundance and to employ others to work for you; to
spend your days in warlike undertakings and hunting in
the wilds, and your nights in the revelry of a merry dicing
throng or in the arms of beauteous ladies; to build
castles and churches; to show off your fineries at
tournaments or jousts; to indulge in luxuries whether
your means allowed or not. Expenditure always ex-
ceeded income, and therefore the latter had to be
constantly increased. So the steward had perforce to
augment the dues paid by the villagers, and the bailiff
to raise the rents; or else recourse was had (as we shall
see presently) to other than economic methods in order to
cover the deficit. In any case, your lordling despised
gold ; he turned his nose up at filthy lucre, just as he
regarded all economic activities as low and coarse. As
Aquinas has it: usus pecunie est in emissione ipsius.3


PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 15


Such was the life of the lords temporal ; such, too,
for a considerable period, that of the lords spiritual. A
picture which may be taken as typical of the lives of all
the wealthy in the pre-capitalist age is the description by
L. B. Alberti of the seigniorial existence of the clergy in
Florence in the 14th century. “The clergy,” he says,
“desire to surpass all others in splendour and ostentation ;
they wish to possess a great number of fine horses beauti-
fully groomed, wish to appear in public with a large band
of retainers ; from day to day their idleness grows apace
and their conduct more impudently immoral. Although
Fate has provided them with ample fortunes they are
yet discontented with their lot, and without thought of
economy or thrift, all their energies are devoted to
discovering new means of gratifying their lusts. Their
incomes are always too small for them; their expenses
are constantly on the increase. ‘Thus they are ever on
the alert to make good the deficit.’ 4

Is it not obvious that living on such lines as these must
inevitably lead to ruin? Indeed, history shows that
numbers of families of ancient lineage in all lands have
suffered economic shipwreck on account of their riotous
living.

So much, then, for the one kind of life. What of the
other, the life of the great mass of the people? For these
throughout the pre-capitalist age it was a dire necessity,
seeing that the family incomes were never very large, to
balance spending and earnings, wants and that’ which
satisfied them. Of course, here too the norm of the
wants was that of the social class, and was fixed by tradi-
tion. Consequently the idea of a sufficiency for existence
slowly became paramount in all pre-capitalist economic
legislation and organization.

For the origin of this idea we must turn to the youth-
ful races who were cradled in the primeval forests of


16 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Europe. They held that to each peasant family should
be given just so much manorial land, so much plough
land, so much of the common woods and pastures as
would suffice to maintain it. The village communi-
ties of the Germanic tribes were the units incorporating
this means of production ; but the conception was to be
found also among the Celts and Slavs. In actual practice
it meant that the quality and quantity of the economic
activities of the individual household were determined by
the quality and quantity of its needs. In a word, the
whole object of economic activities was merely to satisfy
certain given needs; these activities were (in the termin-
ology I have adopted) subject to the principle of a
sufficiency for existence.

The peasant’s conception of providing for his livelihood
slowly crept into handicrafts, commerce, and intercourse,
and ruled men’s outlooks so long as these were organized
as callings or mysteries. It was merely the organization
of the village community applied to trade and industry ;
the ideal of the village community and that of the gild
were one and the same. Compare the two, and the simi-
larity is striking. Both start out with the conception of
limited and well-defined wants to be satisfied, and conse-
quently can prescribe how much work may be done;
both direct their attention to a sufficiency for existence.
The dominating thought of every craftsman was that his
craft should provide him with sustenance in accordance
with the needs of his station. He would work only so
much as would yield him his living, for, like the manual
labourer of Jena of whom Goethe speaks, he “had the
healthy instinct not to produce more than was necessary
to lead a jolly life.” 5

What a sufficiency for existence was differed, and could
not but differ, between individual and individual, between
calling and calling, between the peasant and the crafts-


Oe a ee


PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 17


man. What was the peasant’s ideal? To establish him-
self as owner of his holding, and so himself provide for
his own needs. But the craftsman was dependent on the
sale of what he made, on the utilization of his services by
others. The peasant must have a sufficiently large hold-
ing, the craftsman a sufficiently large clientele. But the
underlying idea in both cases was the same. In a word,
economic activities in the pre-capitalist period were regu-
lated solely in accordance with the principle of a suf-
ficiency for existence ; and peasant and crafts man looked
to their economic activities to provide them with their
livelihood and nothing more.

To understand the spirit that actuated the economic
activities of the peasant and the craftsman, it is needful
only to picture to ourselves what manner of men they
were that did all the necessary work—directing, organ-
izing, and carrying out—either by themselves or with
the help of a few assistants. Were they other than
simple, average folk, with strong passions and strong
feelings, but with little intellectual development? Small
wonder that unclear thinking, no very distinctive mental
energy, and weak intellectual discipline are all found
among the people of those days, not only in the country-
side, but also in the towns, which for centuries and more
continued to be large organic villages. We meet the
same folk with their limited intellectual outlook in other
spheres too. As one writer cleverly remarked of the
growth of law in the Middle Ages, ‘“ We notice in all the
old laws a certain lack of mental nimbleness, due to
the fact that they were formulated by men unused to
clear thinking.” ® It is the same in the economic world.
Take as an instance exact measurements. There was
small comprehension of these ; and the handling of figures
was very primitive. his applies even to traders. But,
as a matter of fact, little stress was laid on the need of

Z


13 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


being exact. To be exact, to make calculations balance,
is something modern. In all previous ages numerical
statements were always only approximate. Any one who
is at all acquainted with calculations in the Middle Ages
knows that if you check the columns the general thing is
to find the totals quite incorrect. Mistakes in arithmetic
were common occurrences.? So was careless usage of
figures in calculating prices. But then to think of
numbers, to retain them in the memory even for a
brief minute, was difficult enough for the people of
those days. In that respect they were like children of
to-day.

All these errors are clearly seen in the so-called book-
keeping of the Middle Ages. If you look through the
books of a Télner, a Viko von Geldersen, a Wittenborg,
or an Ott Ruhland, you will find it exceedingly difficult
to believe that the writers were great merchants in their
generation. All their calculations amount to this: they
just note down the sums paid and received, without
any attempt at order, much like the small country trader
does to-day. These documents can hardly be called
“books”; they are merely rough jottings, taking the
place of the knots in the kerchief made by the peasant
going to market. ‘here is no conception of exact state-
ment, nor any effort to make clear how much is owed or
owing. “Item, a box of gloves—but I do not know
how much they were.” Or, “Item, one owes me
19 gulden .. . but his name I have forgotten.”

If the quantitative aspect of commodities was thus
neglected, the qualitative aspect was laid stress on. In
modern phrase, not values in exchange were made but
only values in use.

As for work itself, for the peasant and the craftsman
alike it was lonely, patient effort. Man lost himself in his
work. He lived in it, as the artist does ; he loved it so,


PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 19


that he would much rather not have parted with his
handiwork. When the dappled cow was led from the
stables to the shambles, the old peasant woman’s eyes
were wet ; the potter strove hard not to be tempted by
the trader’s offers for his pipe. But if it had to be sold,
then the commodity was to be worthy of its maker.
The peasant, like the craftsman, had put something of
himself into his product ; and in its making the rules of
art were obeyed. Can we not understand, therefore, that
the craft ideal looked with scorn on scamped work, and
on the substitution of bad for good materials ?

Moreover, economic activities moved at a slow pace,
and every excuse was welcomed to cease from them. An
occasion for holiday-making was seized upon with avidity,
for men’s attitude to work was like that of the schoolboy
to his school : he goes because he must. There is not
one sign of love for economic activities. Throughout
the whole pre-capitalist period highdays and holydays
were very numerous. A _ writer,? dealing with the
Bavarian mining industry in the 16th century, shows
that, in one case, out of a total of 203 days only 123 were
working days; in another, out of 161 days 99 were
working days; in a third, out of 287 days 193
were working days.

In addition to this, work itself was slow. There was
no occasion to finish a commodity in a short time or
produce a great deal in any given space. Speed was
regulated by two considerations. The first was the
length of time needful to produce good and reliable
commodities ; the second was the elementary require-
ments of the worker himself. The work of production
in the Middle Ages was a work for living, human beings,
whose lives were devoted to it. Hence the laws govern-
ing it were thoroughly natural, comparable to the growth
of a tree or the singing of a bird. Here, as in all things


20. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CALPLIALION


relating to production, the rule was mensura omnium
rerum homo.

Empiricism or, as it has recently been called, Tradi-
tionalism governed economic activities of the type
described. Economic life was arranged traditionally ;
that is to say, as you were taught, as it was handed down
from past generations, as you were accustomed to. In
any rule or decision you did not look to the future, and
ask what its result might be, or what purpose it would
serve, but only to the past, to the models, to the accepted
usages and experiences. Man in his natural state is
always a traditionalist in this sense ; and every civilization
was in its earliest stages dominated by tradition because of
reasons rooted in human nature and traceable ultimately
to the strong tendency in the soul of man to remain
stationary. From our very birth, possibly even before,
we are forced into a certain groove by our environment ;
we accept unquestioningly all the teaching and instruction,
the actions and feelings and prejudices of parents and
teachers. ‘‘ The less developed a human being is, the
more subject is he to the power of example, tradition,
authority, and suggestion,” 1°

The influence of tradition is helped by habit, which
inclines man to do that which he has already done, and
therefore knows how to do. This likewise tends to keep
him in the old grooves. Habit has been well defined !!
as will-power or desire engendered by experience. Ideas
that were originally indifferent or unpleasant become
pleasant by mere association and fusion with ideas that
were originally pleasing. Experience is practice, and
practice produces habit. Practice, at first difficult,
become easy by repetition, and makes uncertain actions
certain, trains particular organs and energy centres,
Thus, man in his activities is more and more inclined
to repeat what has become easy; in other words, to


PRE-CAPITALIST ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 21


abide by what he has learned, unconcerned with, nay,
hostile to, anything new. In a word, he becomes
traditionalistic.

Another point must not be lost sight of. The
individual is a member of a group, and in striving to
be a worthy unit in the whole pays special attention
to the needs of the group. Consequently the individual
will care little for what is new, but will do all he can to
perfect the old. Thus, manifold influences forced man
into the ruts of existing civilization, and gave his mind
a certain direction. ‘Spontaneity, initiative, indepen-
dence, weak enough in all conscience, are further
weakened in accordance with the rule that capacities and
powers can develop only if they be exercised, and cease
if neglected.” 12

All these characteristics of the economic activities of
the pre-capitalist age, as indeed of the whole life of that
age, were rooted in the fundamental conception of a
stationary society. The highest ideal of those days, as
manifested in the final form of the wonderful system of
Aquinas, is the individual, introspective soul, endeavouring
to become more and more perfect. All the demands of
life, as all its forms, were so arranged as to aid that ideal.
Hence the rigid system of dividing up men into callings
and estates, all regarded as of equal worth for the entire
social organism, all providing rules and regulations for
the individual, by the help of which he might direct his
life aright. Hence, too, the guiding principles of
economic life—sufficiency for livelihood and_ tradi-
tionalism, both static principles. Life in the pre-capitalist
age was characterized by assured restfulness. To show
how this restfulness became unrest and_ restlessness,
how from its static state society became dynamic, is our
next business.

The spirit that was responsible for the change, that


22 THE QUINTESSENCE OF ‘CAPITALISM


shattered the old world into ruins, was the spirit of
capitalism (so called from the system in which it has its
being). It is the spirit of our time; the spirit which
moves every American dollar-king and every aviator ;
the spirit that rules our life and directs the fate of the
universe. It is the purpose of this book to follow up
this spirit from its é@arliest appearance down to the
present day, and even beyond.

Our task will be twofold. First we must trace the
origin and growth of the capitalist spirit. That is done
in the first book. ‘There we dissect the whole into its
component parts, and we shall turn our attention chiefly
to two, the spirit of enterprise and the bourgeois spirit,
which when united generated the capitalist spirit. Each
of these is in its turn a complex of contributory forces.
The spirit of enterprise is a synthesis of the greed of
gold, the desire for adventure, the love of exploration,
to mention but a few elements. The bourgeois spirit
is composed of calculation, careful policy, reasonableness,
and economy. We may say that in the fabric of the
capitalist spirit the bourgeois spirit is the cotton warp,
and the spirit of enterprise the silken woof, Secondly,
we shall have to consider in systematic form the causes
and circumstances that made possible the rise and growth
of the capitalist spirit. This we do in the second book.
The first book shows how the capitalist spirit arose ; the
second, why it arose.


BOOK I


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE
CAPITALIST SPIRIT


SECTION I


THE SPIRIT OF ENTERPRISE


CHAPTER II
THE GREED OF GOLD


Ir not the whole of European history, then surely at least
the history of the capitalist spirit, must begin with the
struggle between Gods and men for the possession of
that accursed thing, gold.

The Véluspa relates how all conflict and crime came
into the world through the union of the primeval King-
dom of Water, wherein dwelt the Wanes, and the
Kingdom of Light, inhabited by the Anses ; and that
gold was the cause of it all. For the yellow metal
belonged to the Water Realm, but the dwellers in the
Realm of Light obtained possession of it by the aid of
the dwarfs who lived in the deep caverns of the Earth,
enjoying the reputation of gold-thieves and goldsmiths.
Gold is the symbol of the earth, which glitters in the
light with its yellow fruits and seeds, the objects of all
envy and strife; but the place also of sin and atonement.
Indeed, gold is the symbol of pomp and power, two
things all men covet.13 The striving for gold is put by
the Edda in the forefront of human history.

The Saga but reflects reality. Everything points to an


early appearance of a desire for gold and its possession
25


26 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


among the European peoples in their prime, certainly at
least among the upper classes. The origins of the desire,
to be sure, are lost in dim antiquity ; but we are justified
in assuming that the stages of growth were the same as in
the case of other peoples. The first stage was that of the
pleasure of adornment, which the precious metals with
their glitter engender. Next came the pleasure of much
adornment, Then the desire to possess the glittering
things; then the joy of possession; and finally, the
delight of owning much gold, no matter in what form.

We thus reach the epoch of treasure-hoarding, through
which the Germanic tribes were passing when we first
learn of their attitude to gold and silver. Treasure-
hoarding is soimportant a fact in the history of European
peoples that we shall dwell at some length upon it.
Readers are recommended to turn to one or two pen-
pictures of Gustav Freytag’s,* who has so vividly por-
trayed the early Middle Ages.'4 He tells us that when
the Germanic races first broke in upon the Roman
Empire, they had then no money economy. When,
therefore, they first saw gold it attracted them. They
desired, however, not golden coins, but ornaments and
vessels of gold. For the warrior these were objects of
pride and glory. For his overlord they meant even
more. His largess was sure to be praised at the min-
strel’s board, and he would lack no following. Therefore
to the overlord treasures spelt power. Accordingly,
among the nomadic peoples the princely families sought
to lay up a store of gold. About the year 568, Leuvi-
gild, King of the Visigoths, exhibited his treasure as he
sat on his throne in royal robes; he was the first to do


* [Gustav Freytag, 1816-95, German novelist. Between 1859
and 1867 he published five volumes of Pictures of the German
Past, a most valuable work on popular lines, illustrating the history
and manners of the early Germans. ]


THE GREED OF GOLD 27


so, for his predecessors had neither throne nor royal
apparel. But from his day onwards the bulwarks of
kingly power were realm, people, and treasure.

In ancient times the last-named consisted of gold and
silver ornaments and utensils, such as chains and brace-
lets, drinking horns, ewers, and the like. It was not
until much later that coins began to be collected,
especially if they were large in size; and later still,
gold in bars was valued too. Most of these things were
gifts on great occasions, such as a royal visit or a treaty ;
others were obtained as tribute from subjugated peoples ;
others, again, were the spoils of predatory expeditions or
the income from domains.

Not merely kings, but whoever was able to do so,
gathered treasure. For baby princes treasure hoards
were started at their birth ; and we are told that when,
in §84, the two-year-old son of Fredegunde died, his
treasures of gold and silver, jewels and silk raiment, filled
four wagons. Kings’ daughters likewise received a store of
treasure as their dowries, and it frequently came to pass
that, for the sake of the spoil, they were attacked on their
journey to their new homes. Often enough these bridal
gifts were raised by so-called free contributions, but in
many instances the kings were exorbitant in their demands.
What the kings did, the lesser nobles imitated ; and
sometimes the lesser nobles were so many sponges for
the kings to squeeze dry.

Cathedrals and monasteries were like the secular nobility
in this respect. They, too, accumulated treasure ; they
possessed silver cups, and flagons, and Bibles bound in
gold and studded with gems.

What Freytag depicts as a characteristic of the earliest
Middle Ages continued right through the medieval
period. Asa matter of fact, the accumulation of treasure
was not unknown in the Ancient World ; nor has it yet


28 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


completely disappeared from among primitive races. In
any event it gave birth to the love of money.

As for the Middle Ages themselves, we come across
large quantities of silver in the oth and rith
centuries, from Silesia in the east to the shores of the
Baltic in the west. Not only was silver in bars found,
but also clipped coins, which would seem to show that
what was valued in those days was the metal.!5 About
the same period we read of the existence in Germany,!5*
in France,!6 even in Italy,!7 of the treasure chambers of
the wealthy, filled with gold and silver vessels. In some
countries, such as Spain, the habit of treasure collecting
continued until right into the modern period. When the
Duke of Frias died, he left 600,000 scudi in cash. ‘This
was placed in three boxes, destined for the dowry of each
of his three daughters. Even in the 16th and 17th
centuries it was still usual in Spain for people to
stuff their houses with all manner of gold and silver
ornaments. To weigh the gold and silver vessels of the
Duke of Alberquerque after his death, and to make an
inventory of them, took no less than six weeks. Among
other things he possessed 1,400 dozen plates, 50 large
and 100 small dishes, and 40 silver ladders for reaching
up to the sideboards. The Duke of Alba, who was not
considered wealthy, left no less than 600 dozen plates and
800 silver dishes.18 So widespread was the fashion in
Spain of laying up treasure, that Philip III, in 1600, had
to issue an ordinance requisitioning all the gold and silver
vessels in the land in order to have them melted down
and coined.!9

This peculiar mental state of the Spaniards in relation
to gold, in the 16th century, was an anachronism; in
the rest of Europe the general attitude with regard to
the precious metals had advanced far beyond the period
of treasure gathering, which closed in the 12th century.


THE GREED OF GOLD 29


From that time on, people indeed continued to value the
precious metals, but their form was now different.
Before it was the precious metals in the lump that were
desired ; now it was the precious metals in the form of
money; that is to say, in their commonest form—in
their aspect as a medium of exchange.

The greed of gold was succeeded by the love for money.
Curiously enough, it would seem that the desire ot
gain, or, as it began to be termed, /ucri rabies, first became
most marked (if we exempt the Jews) among the clergy.
Anyhow, we have references dating from quite early
times to the shameful greed of the clerics. As early as
the gth century there were frequent complaints at the
Councils concerning the usury of the clergy ; 2° and it is
a. well-known fact that money was a mighty influence in
ecclesiastical appointments all through the Middle Ages.
Alberti, usually a calm observer, would make it appear
that the pecuniary greed of the clergy of his time was a
universal phenomenon. Of Pope John XXII he says on
one occasion, “‘ He had his faults, and above all that
which, as everybody knows, is found in all our clerics—
he was avaricious even to venality.” 2!

When Alberti wrote this, the love of money was no
longer limited to the Jews and the clergy (if indeed it
ever was a characteristic of these two classes alone).
It had seized upon pretty nearly all sections of the
population. The line of demarcation was probably the
13th century ; at least, for the more advanced countries,
Germany, France, and Italy. Isay probably, for obviously
it is impossible to date exactly tendencies or movements
of this sort. At any rate, in the 13th century, more
particularly for Germany, we find an accumulation
of complaints that the love of money had become a
general evil.22, The poets of the time were full Ole tt:
among them Walter von der Végelweide; but the


30 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


bitterest reproaches came from the preachers of morality,
such as the anonymous author of the Carmina Burana,?3
or the popular orator, Berthold of Regensburg.?4

About the same time, Dante was thundering his
denunciations against the greed of the nobles and the
middle classes of the Italian cities, which must have been
unbridled in the 13th century. ‘ They think too much of
gain ; indeed, it may almost be said of them, their desire
for worldly possessions is like a consuming fire within
them.” So we read in the Description of Florence,25 of
the year 1339. Another writer of the period is Beato
Dominici,25* who complains that ‘“‘ money is much beloved
of high and low, of the laity and the clergy, of rich and
poor, of monks and prelates ; in fact, everything is subject
to money—pecunie obediunt omnia. ‘The cursed gold-
hunger leads the crazy souls to all manner of evil ; it
dims the intellect, blots out the conscience, weakens the
memory, misguides the will, knows no friendship, loves
no relation, has no fear of God nor shame _ before
man.”

It was the same in Florence as early as the 14th
century. Descriptions and reflections such as those in
the family records preserved by Alberti would tend to
demonstrate that a strongly-marked worship of mammon
breathed through the life of the city on the Arno. Riches
is praised as a good thing, necessary to all civiliza-
tion; profit-hunting was regarded as a general and
ordinary activity of the population. ‘“ All think of gain
and riches”; “my every thought is occupied with
business” ; “unto riches almost everyone aspires.” 26

Fifteenth and sixteenth century voices sing the same
song. Not a place in Western Europe but gold was in a
position of pre-eminence there. Pecunie obediunt omnia
is the lament of Erasmus, and Hans Sachs mourns that


Gelt 1st auff erden der irdisch gott [Money is the god


THE GREED OF GOLD 31


of the earth]. We need only add Colon’s eloquent praise
of the excellencies of money, in his famous letter to
Queen Isabella.27

Besides these expressions of opinion there is much
evidence of the increasing influence of money and of the
cash nexus in the whole of life. Offices under the
crown were purchasable ; the nobility married into city
families ; the policy of states was to obtain large supplies
of bullion (mercantile system) ; the ways and means of
money-making (to be treated in the next chapter) became
more numerous and cunning.

In the 17th century, which we are apt to picture
to ourselves as dismal and solemn, the love of money
grew apace. Jeremiads still continued ; they came from
Italy,28 from Germany,29 from Holland. In the last-
named country there appeared, towards the end of the
17th century, a little book, quickly translated into
German, which, despite or rather because of its satire, is a
source of much illumination on the general acquisitiveness
current in the society of the day. As I have never come
across a reference to this important publication I shall say
a word or two about its lively contents. The title of the
German translation runs as follows: Das Lob der Geld-
sucht. Satyre. Aus dem Hollandischen des Herrn von
Deckers... . Bet Benjamin Schillen in Hamburg und
F’. Groschuff in Leipzig zu finden. Im Jahre 1703.
[In praise of money getting. A satire. ‘Translated from
the Dutch of Mr. von Decker. . . . To be obtained at
Benjamin Schillen’s in Hamburg and F. Groschuff’s in
Leipzig. 1703.] The motto of the book? Quid
vides? Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur.

The author appears to have been a man of the world
with an eye for the weaknesses of his age. His book
may be put in the same category as Mandeville’s Fad/es
of the Bees, though it cannot compare with the latter for


32. THE QUINTESSENCE (OF CAPITALISM:


point and wit. I have only seen the translation, and it
is as likely as not that there is no Dutch original at all,
although the translator in some cases gives the original
text. The story is in rhymed verses, numbering no less
than 4,113. Money-getting is personified, and tells its
life-story. Caution was its father, and its mother
Superfluity. Then follows a laudation of gold, ‘“ appraised
more than the arts, more than health, yea, more than life
itself.” Nor is this high approval in anywise undeserved.
For the love of money is one of the founders of human
society ; it arranges marriages, produces treaties, sets up
states and cities, provides honour and renown, gives joy
and pleasure, advances the sciences and arts, stimulates
commerce, alchemy, and medicine. And does not money-
getting give an impetus to philosophy, painting, the
drama, the printer’s craft? Nor yet the printer’s craft
only; the art of war is likewise sustained by money-
getting ; and the discovery of new lands too, as Madame
Isabella and King Ferdinand, no less than Columbus,
found out. Finally, love of money aids in obtaining
everlasting salvation; money-love is not heretical, but
good Lutheran; nay, money-love is herself a Goddess.

What the Dutch experienced about the year 1634, the
English and the French went through for the first time in
the early decades of the 18th century—a feverish, greedy
money madness, which since then has reappeared from
time to time, though its onslaughts may have become less
elemental. But so widespread has been its influence that
the greed for gold may legitimately be regarded as consti-
tutional in the soul of modern men and women. I shall
refer in due course, in connection with the rise of specula-
tion, to the ravages of the fever, as exemplified in Holland
by the tulip madness, in France by the Law swindles, and
in England by the bubble companies. For the moment
we turn to the ways and means which human ingenuity


¢


THE GREED OF GOLD 33


discovered, whereby to obtain possession of gold, the
object of universal desire. In our consideration of this
problem it will be necessary to discriminate between those
methods which contributed to the growth of the capitalist
economic outlook and those which soon died away, drop-
ping like a useless branch from the tree-trunk.


CHAPTER III
WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING


Ir would be childish to imagine that the greed of gold
and the love of money had so direct and immediate an
influence on economic life that the capitalist spirit and
capitalist enterprise came into being almost at once. The
genesis of modern capitalism cannot be traced so speedily.
It took time. In all probability the increasing acquisi-
tiveness made little actual difference in economic life.
People sought to obtain possession of gold and of coin in
all sorts of ways, but none of them had anything to
do with economic activities. Indeed, many a time and
oft their economic activities were neglected in the pursuit
of the golden will-o’-the-wisp. It never once entered the
head of the simple peasant or shoemaker, nor necessarily
that of the merchant, that he could amass riches and accu-
mulate treasures by his ordinary everyday avocations.
Even Alberti, who had no little commercial experience
and who may be said to have been dominated by the capi-
talist spirit, gives a list of no less than four ways, in
addition to wholesale trading, by which to acquire
money.3° They are these: to seek for treasure-trove ;
to ingratiate yourself with rich folk with a view of
becoming their legatee—a course of conduct affected,
says Alberti, by not a few; usury; and to let out
pastures or horses and the like.


Advice of this kind sounds curious enough to modern
34


WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 35


ears ; but no less so than that of a 17th-century writer 3!
who mentions three roads to wealth: the royal service,
soldiering, and alchemy. Yet strange as this may appear
to-day, it was actually what acute observers saw in their
own time. Asa matter of fact, all the methods enumer-
ated above were resorted to, and were, indeed, of far
greater significance in the minds of those who were bent
on the acquisition of riches than industry or commerce or
agriculture. Nor were they the only ones. As however
we are here principally concerned with those that aided
the rise of a capitalist economic order, I will briefly
mention those that had no such influence, reserving for
fuller consideration the capitalistically important ones.

1. First on the list I place official careers, which were
looked upon with favour as a means of attaining to riches,
because of the opportunity they offered for small em-
bezzlements, bribes, and such-like additional sources of
income. I shall have occasion in a subsequent chapter to
deal a little more fully with details on this point.

2. Closely akin to the first-named method was the
purchase of appointments, which was in reality a species
of investment. You paid down a lump sum and obtained
in return the right to receive the dues and levies of the
office. Often enough, however, the expected returns did
not repay the original sum expended.

3. A third way was to become some rich man’s retainer,
a form of service met with frequently in the 17th and
18th centuries, and one that brought great wealth to
quite poor folk.

4. Finally I would include the loans made to states,
which began to be numerous from the 17th century
onwards.

All these methods of earning money contributed
nothing to the development of the capitalist spirit ;
on the contrary, they were stumbling-blocks in its path.


36 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


It is for the same reason that I omit any reference
to the old-fashioned haute finance, as we know it in
England and France in the 17th and 18th centuries. The
participants were very wealthy folk, most of them of
middle-class origin, who made money as tax-farmers or
money-lenders to the state, and represented, as it were,
grease spots on the soup surface. These men were far
removed from economic activities. They were the
fermiers généraux, partisans or traitans of France, where
they were nicknamed Turcarets, from a character in one
of Le Sage’s comedies of the year 1709, wherein is
described the social advance of a former lackey named
Turcaret, “le financier dont l’esprit et education ne sont
pas a la hauteur de sa fortune’”’; they were the stock-
holders, or the moneyed interest of England, where, about
the middle of the 18th century, it was said that there
were no less than 17,000 of them.

But in the other methods of acquiring riches we shall
find the seeds of capitalist enterprise. These, therefore,
demand a somewhat ampler consideration, and for the
sake of clearness we shall arrange them under four heads,
according as (1) force was the dominant factor in them,
or (2) magic, or (3) scheming and invention, or (4) money.


1. ACQUISITION BY Force.


I am not here thinking of all manner of unlawful
pressure exercised by the authorities for the purpose of
obtaining taxes and dues, but rather of highway robbery,
a form of economic activity much beloved and practised
for centuries by knights and barons everywhere. This
was no mere occasional adventure on the part of the
gentry in the Middle Ages and beyond, but a social
institution, and it was known in France, Germany, and
England, as a good deal of contemporary evidence would


WAYVS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 37


show. “In those days,” writes Zorn in his Worms
Chronicle (14th century), “it was a common thing in
Germany, and more especially in the Rhineland, for the
strong to bag what they could from the weak; the
knights and esquires, when they met, fought and killed
each other, and were the terror of those whose business
took them through the highways and byways of the
land.” This may be paralleled by the advice of one
poet 32 to young noblemen as to how they should earn
their living. Let them prowl about the forest, and lie in
wait for the burgher with his well-lined purse. As a
matter of fact, is it not well known that highway robbery
as a trade was learned in the same way as weaving or
shoemaking? It is the same story in France. ‘ Les
seigneurs ne laissent pas d’aller a la proie,” says Jacques
de Vitry.

In Italy and England the robber knights turned their
attention, not to the king’s highway, but to the sea.
Their activities, however, were mostly organized enter-
_ prises, and we shall have something to say about them
elsewhere.


2. Acquisition By Masic.


Very different was the utilization of magic for the
attainment of riches. Belief in spirits and demons was
necessary, and faith in the possibility of getting into
touch with them, of making them subservient to the
desires of man. A vivid imagination, which but too
often was the child of a mind diseased, soon discovered
propitious times and places for this superhuman inter-
course. Men wanted gold, and two ways were possible
for its attainment: they had either to find it or to make
it. So we must deal in turn with searches for treasure-
trove and with alchemy.

The first was known in very early times. ‘‘ From the


38° THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


barbarian invasions to the present day the Germanic
peoples have always included the finding of treasure-trove
among their secret desires; during fifteen centuries we
meet with the same formule and superstitions.” 33 It
must be confessed that in those early periods attempts to
dig up hidden treasure were not by any means foolish.
Everybody knows that large quantities of coin and gold
and silver ornaments and jewellery were often hidden in
the earth, especially when war ravaged the land. Many
were the magic formule which should indicate the
wished-for spot ; and the night was more propitious for
the expeditions than the light of day. People with little
love for work and little diligence, but with strong
passions, constant readiness to turn to something new,
persistent manias, and unlimited gullibility, dug for
treasure again and again throughout their lives. Later,
when in the great days a rumour spread throughout the
land that an abundance of gold and silver had been dis-
covered in new countries, it was the same type of person
that left wife and child to follow the will-o’-the-wisp that
beckoned, the while their bench was covered with dust,
their shop became a wilderness, or their ploughshare stuck
useless in the furrow. The medieval records abound in
information as to the magnetic influence of this digging
craze ; the fever for gold-shovelling broke out constantly
afresh, and what happened in Klondike at the end of the
last century, or in California in the eighteen-fifties, must
also have come about at Rammelsberg in the 13th century,
in Freiburg in the 14th, in the Inntal in the 15th, in
Peru in the 16th, and in Brazil in the 17th. Possibly we
are calmer in the 20th century. Fairy tales of wondrous
golden princes, or of the Sun’s golden palace, no longer
attract the gold-digger ; but the inwardness of our present-
day efforts differs in no wise from those of long ago,


Gold-digging may be good, but gold-making is surely


WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 39


better. To this end men gave themselves up to the
magic arts and practised alchemy, not as a common every-
day affair, but as a species of divine service, over which
hung a cloud of mystery. In its earliest stages alchemy
may have had attractions for various reasons ; but there
is no doubt that in the process of time the great goal of
this pseudo-science was the making of gold.34 This
certainly holds good from the 15th century onward ;
every Tom, Dick, and Harry sought his fortune 35 by
attempting to master the craft, to the great disgust of
the specialists.36 The fever reached its height in the
16th century, when all classes of the population were
seized with it. Lout and lord alike believed devoutly in
the truth of alchemy, and the longing to get rich quickly
drove both to its practice. You could find laboratories
in the palace and the cottage, in the poor craftsman’s
dwelling no less than in the wealthy burgher’s comfort-
able home, where for long years men sought for the
philosopher’s stone. Even the monasteries were not
immune from the epidemic ; not one of them but had a
furnace for gold-making.37

Many of the professional alchemists, as is known,
won for themselves high positions at royal courts, and
profited by them all they could. These court alchemists,
who were also, in many cases, astrologers royal, were
quite common in the 16th and 17th centuries, from
Cornelius Agrippa, the “magician” of Cologne, to the
mercury quacks of Venice, who became notorious at the
court of Vienna.38 John Joachim Becher mentions a
long list of them: “among the alchemists of these days
who are looked upon as public swindlers and charlatans
may be noted Rochefort, Marsini, Croneman, Marsali,
Gasner, Gasman, to say nothing of Jacobi de la Porte,
who professes to dig for treasures with the aid of the
‘claviculam Salomonis.’”’


40 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


These royal specialists were near cousins of another
curious type, which in those ages of twilight began to
play a rdle of some importance. I refer to the ‘ pro-
jectors,” who were, as it were, the connecting link
between the witches’ kitchen and the board-rooms of
modern banks.


3. AcQuisITION BY SCHEMING AND INVENTION.


In a study of mine 39 on the part played by technical
knowledge in the early capitalist age, I showed how the
period of the Renaissance abounded in inventive geniuses,
how, in consequence, there was a shower of technical
inventions in those days, to which all classes contributed.
But the sphere of technical science was not the only one
affected by the flights of human imagination ; pretty well
all activities were influenced, and in some cases reforms
were suggested, notably in public finance. Here, how-
ever, these things do not specially concern us. What
we have to note is the fact that, for centuries, there were
scores of people whose calling it was to live by their wits.
Scheming, as we may term it, became a business; the
man with ideas was ready to sell them to whomsoever
chose to pay his price. These professional gentry set
about winning the interest of princes and nobles and the
wealthy generally in their schemes and projects. Wher-
ever the influential folk forgathered—in Parliament, at
courts—there you were certain to meet the project-
mongers. But you found them in the market-place too,
offering their ideas for sale.

There can be no doubt as to the importance of this
phenomenon in economic history, and as it has to my
knowledge received but little attention hitherto, I propose
saying a word or two about its characteristics and extent.

Project-mongers are met with as early as the 16th


WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 41


century—at the courts of the Spanish kings. Ranke 4°
has something to say of one of these adventurers,
Benevento, by name, who demanded a mere 5 per cent.
of the profits which should accrue when his plans had
been carried out. The Emperor Ferdinand had dealings
with him ; so had Philip of Spain. It was in the 17th
century, however, that the tribe became most prominent,
and for its appearance in England we have the evidence
of Daniel Defoe, whose Essay on Projects was published
in 1697. ‘ About the year 1680,” he tells us, ‘‘ began
the art and mystery of projecting to creep into the
world.” He calls his time “the Projecting Age,” and
this is how he describes the projectors [pp. 31-35].


They are men who—


being masters of more cunning than their neighbours, turn their
thought to private methods of trick and cheat, a modern way of
thieving . . . by which honest men are gulled with fair pretences to
part from their money... .

Others yet, urged by the same necessity, turn their thoughts to
honest invention, founded upon the platform of ingenuity and
integrity.

These two last sorts are those we call projectors ; and as there are
always more geese than swans, the number of the latter are very
inconsiderable in comparison of the former; and as the greater
number dominates the less, the just contempt we have of the former
sort bespatters the other... .

A mere projector then is a contemptible thing, driven by his own
desperate fortune to such a strait that he must be delivered by a
miracle or starve. And when he has beat his brain for some such
miracle in vain, he finds no remedy but to paint up some bauble or
other, as players make puppets talk big, to show like a strange thing,
and then cry it up for a new invention, gets a patent for it, divides
it into shares and they must be sold. Ways and means are not wanting
to swell the new whim to a vast magnitude ; thousands and hundreds
of thousands are the least of his discourse, and sometimes millions ;
till the ambitions of some honest coxcomb is wheedled to part with
his money for it, and then mascitur ridiculus mus,


Defoe is of opinion that the F rench were not so fertile


42° THE QUINTESSENGE “OF CAPTLALTS


in projections as the English. He was mistaken. If
anything, they were far superior, and France may be
termed the classical land of projecting. From about the
middle, or the close, of the 17th century until well into
the 18th, the same tendencies manifested themselves there
as in England ; the only difference being that in France,
as we should expect from the temper of its people,
the schemes were more brilliant and dramatic. Some
authorities would even assign to the beginning of the
17th century that feverish inventive activity which was
speedily to enrich its authors.41 These were called
donneurs davis or brasseurs d affaires .42

In the 17th century these gentry crowded the streets
in Paris. You could meet them in the Place du Change
as early as 10 a.m., jabbering away without intermission.
Most of them knew what hunger was; and if they had
no greatcoats, they possessed boundless faith. When-
ever you came across them they offered some marvellous
suggestion for your consideration. They lurked about
the antechambers of the great, frequented the offices of
state officials, and had secret meetings with the fair ladies
of society. Their To-day was always pitiful : so much
the more promising and brilliant was their To-morrow, for
should they not then rake in their hoped-for millions? A
certain amount of understanding cannot be denied them,
but their imagination was more powerful than their
judgment. So it came about that, more often than not,
their ideas were childish, or curious, or grotesque, or
utterly impossible. Nevertheless, they were able to
prove to you, almost mathematically, that the results
they promised were assured. For their advice (avis),
which was the flash of the moment, they received a fee,
the droit d’avis. Some, it must be confessed, like Tonti,
the inventor of Tontine, made some very useful sugges-
tions which brought them opulence ; others wasted their


WAVS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 43


energy or were exploited by those with less brain-power
but more worldly wisdom, or by those who had greater
influence and knew how to get at money. Their true
nature has been described as being restless, watchful,
penetrating, greedy, and acquisitive. In their ranks you
might have found misunderstood inventive geniuses ; Don
Quixotes of all degrees; feverish minds of delicate
texture ; bankrupts with their scarecrow hats ; Bohemian
stragglers, who had once been respectable and were
anxious to be so again; and bold adventurers of more
than average intelligence, who dined in the lowest chop-
house if their expected loot was not forthcoming, and
who ended their days either in the gutter or as financial
magnates.

That the type must have been pretty numerous in the
France of that period is evident from the part assigned
to the projector by Moliére in his Facheux. He is there
made to appear as a recognized element in Parisian
society. The descriptions of Paris at the end of the
18th century make it quite clear that the scheming
projector had not disappeared even then.43

Other lands, too, were acquainted with the type.
We may mention Austria as an instance. About the
middle of the 18th century a certain Caratto was a
prominent scheme-monger at the court of Vienna, and
on the 25th of January, 1765, he provided the authori-
ties with a scheme concerning the profitableness of
certain commercial ventures. He has been “ carrying on
the business of projecting for more than forty years,”
we read; 44 “his suggestions are good and attractive,
but the results he promises are exaggerated.”

Finally, we need only mention Cagliostro for a definite
conception of what projecting was. It is true that in this
notorious character there was a strong admixture of the
adventurer and the swindler. Nevertheless, the root of


44 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


the matter was the same. Cagliostro, who was known
the world over, and welcomed in all the capitals and at
half the courts of Europe, was, when all is said, a true
projector, his end to make money easily (chiefly by the
aid of fair ladies), his means to interest the great and the
wealthy in his bold, unheard-of schemes, the while he sold
elixirs of life, universal panaceas, and beauty lotions.

What was the position of these schemers and projectors
in the genesis of the capitalist spirit? It is not difficult
to see. Were they not the ancestors of men like Law,
Pereire, Lesseps, Strousberg, Saccard, and a host of lesser
company-promoters who are so prominent in these days?
What the projectors lacked was a definite sphere of
activity. They were not yet undertakers; they stood
without ; they were not in business. But theirs were the
ideas that were to generate capitalism, a consummation
which came about so soon as the ideas were united with
enterprise. How that happened we shall see later. For
the present, we have yet one more method of money-
making to consider.


4. Acquisition By Money.


The mere possession of money placed its owner in an
advantageous position. No need of robbery for him,
nor yet recourse to magic. With the aid of money he
could get more, in various ways. If he were of a cold,
calculating nature, there was money-lending ; and if he
were hot-blooded and careless, there were games of chance.
In any event, he had no occasion to associate himself
with others for common action ; he could sit at home in
cloistered ease, the sole pilot of his fortune.

The tremendous influence of money-lending throughout
the Middle Ages and down to our day has already been
fully set forth in my Modern Capitalism. ‘There is there-


WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 45


fore all the less reason for me to go into it again here. I
would only like to say, in passing, that the rdle of money-
lending in moulding the capitalist spirit was a double one.
In the first place, it produced in the minds of those who
engaged in it professionally certain special tendencies of
great importance in the growth of the capitalist spirit ;
and secondly, it was one of the starting-points of
capitalist enterprise.

No less significant has been the contribution of Hazard
in the history of the capitalist spirit; that is to say,
leaving out games of dice and cards, which rather tended
away from it. ‘The same may be added about lotteries,45
which, since the end of the 17th century, have become
universal. But stock-exchange gambles, which first
gathered strength some time in the 17th century, and
became fully developed in the 18th, certainly did contri-
bute to the expansion of capitalism. Not that stock-
exchange activities were, as has been often assumed, a
direct expression of the capitalist spirit. As a matter of
fact, those activities are no more of a really economic
character than card-playing or lotteries. It was their
indirect influence, however, that was considerable.

Let us acquaint ourselves with the psychology of stock-
exchange gambling. Nothing will serve our purpose so
well as an abridged sketch of the tulip mania, prevalent
in the Netherlands.4¢ This manifested in their pristine
purity all the characteristics which marked the later ages
of speculation.

In 1534 Busbeck, the famous scientist, introduced the
tulip from Adrianople into Western Europe. For some
unaccountable reason the flower, about the year 1630,
enjoyed a tremendous popularity in Holland. Every-
body wanted to own tulip bulbs. And before long the
mere pleasure of possession gave way to the desire to
obtain profit out of them by advantageous sales. What


46 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


more natural than that this should produce an organized
speculative business, upon which all classes of the popula-
tion seized? An old book, published in Amsterdam,
and entitled De opkomst en ondergang van Flora, relates
how knights and squires, merchants and craftsmen, sailors
and peasants, peat-diggers and chimney-sweeps, men-
servants and maids all were afflicted with the same
craze—tulips. In every town you would find some
public-house serving as the exchange, where high and low,
rich and poor, forgathered to deal in tulips. So much
did the nuisance spread, that in 1634, according to
John Francis, not an important city in the Netherlands
but its legitimate trade was threatened by the speculation
engendered by the tulip trafic. There was temptation
for the greed of the rich and the need of the poor, and
the price of a flower rose far above its weight in gold.
As in all such cases, the bubble burst and brought
devastation and wild panic in its train. Many were
utterly ruined ; only a very few made a fortune. But
the point to notice is that in 1634 tulips were in as much
demand as railway shares in 1844. It was the same kind
of speculation. Deals were closed for the delivery of
certain sorts of tulip bulbs; and if, as in one instance,
two specimens only were available, some one had to sell
his all, lock, stock, and barrel—land and houses, horses
and oxen—in order to pay the difference. Contracts
were signed, and many thousand gulden paid for tulips
that neither the middlemen, the buyers, nor the sellers had
ever set eyes upon. For a while, of course, as we should
expect, everybody did well, and nobody lost money.
Poor people became rich. Rich and poor alike were
tulip dealers. The legal profession made fortunes ; and
the Dutchman, sober-souled though he was, began to
dream of a golden age. Everybody’s head appeared to


be turned. People of the most varying occupations


WAVS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING 47


changed their possessions into ready cash, and houses and
machinery were offered at ridiculous prices. The whole
country gave itself up to the deceitful hope that the
passion for tulips would endure for ever. When the
news spread that in other lands, too, the fever had caught
on, men’s imaginations ran away with them; and they
believed that the wealth of the universe would be con-
centrated on the shores of the Zuyder Zee, and that
poverty in Holland would be but a traveller’s tale. The
prices that were paid for tulip bulbs prove how earnestly
such things were credited. Estates valued at 2,500
florins were given away in return for one special kind of
bulb, 2,000 florins were offered for a second species, and
a brand-new carriage and pair, with harness, for a third.
The records of the town of Alkmar show that in 1637,
120 tulip bulbs were publicly sold for the benefit of the
city orphanage, and fetched 90,000 florins.

In 1637 the pendulum began to swing back. Confi-
dence disappeared ; contracts were broken ; bankruptcies
were the order of the day. The visions of wealth beyond
the dreams of avarice vanished like a mist, and those who
a week ago rejoiced in the possession of a few tulips in
the expectation that they would bring certain fortune,
looked sadly at the miserable onion-like bulbs, which were
inherently of no value whatever, and for which nobody
would now offer a farthing.

This tulip speculation is interesting from many points
of view. To begin with, because it was the first swindle
of its kind on anything like a large scale ; secondly,
because of the commodity that all men desired. Later
on it would seem that securities alone were the objects of
speculation, as was the case shortly after the tulip craze in
the two greatest speculation epidemics that had afflicted
mankind until then—the foundation of Law’s bank in
France, and the South Sea Company in England (1719-21).


48: THE QUINTESSENCE OF (CAPITALISM


But to understand the inwardness of these speculation
manias we must leave securities out of account. For
what is asecurity? It sets forth the right to a portion
of the profit of some particular enterprise. Now at first
sight it may seem that the hoped-for profits influence the
price of the security. This in reality is not so; the
expected profits are but another bait to attract attention
to the security. What is at the root of the whole pro-
cess is an instinctive hazard. Consider for a moment,
that in a rising market the price of shares is out of all
proportion to the profits expected. Let me give an
illustration. On the 30th September, 1719, the statutory
meeting of Law’s bank took place. Before that a divi-
dend of 12 per cent. on the nominal capital had been
promised. That worked out at 4 per cent. on the real
capital. Law was afraid that, if this became known, his
whole edifice would collapse like a pack of cards. So he
promised 4o per cent., which was equivalent to 12 per
cent. on the real capital. Did the public see through the
trick? On the contrary, after the general meeting, the
price of the shares began to rise, until eight days later it
reached the highest point ever attained—18,000 florins.
The truth is that in such cases it is a question of crowd
psychology : men are seized by a fever, an intoxication, a
longing desire which silences any reasonable consideration.
By a process of reflex suggestion, some object or other |
(the classical case is that of the tulip) is assigned a fabu-
lous value, and so its price tends to rise upwards with all
rapidity. High prices are thus the bait which the passion
for speculation seizes. This latter in its turn then
becomes so strong that it dominates all the factors in the
situation.

The speculative passion as seen on the Stock Exchange,
however, whether it appears in the high temperature of a
rising market, or the low temperature of everyday deal-


WAYS AND MEANS OF MONEY-GETTING a9


ing, has inherently as much to do with the development
of the capitalist spirit as a quiet game of bridge or poker.
In reality, economic activities, inspired by the spirit of
capitalism, are rather deadened by this sort of gambling.
Is it not now generally admitted that in periods when
speculation is rife, trade and commerce tend to decline,
because those who should be engaged in them neglect
their business, wasting their time in public-houses on the
look out for news of stocks and shares, or entering into
speculative. transactions ?

If this is so, how does stock-exchange speculation come
into contact with the capitalist spirit? The answer is
twofold. To begin with, stock-exchange hazards even-
tually developed into the enterprise of the capitalist
undertaker. The gaming passion and the pleasure of
Winning naturally turned to such emprises as were
capitalist in their character. As a matter of fact, every
modern capitalist undertaking (as we shall see in due
course) has in it a goodly dash of the gamester’s energy
and passion. In the next place, the progress of stock-
exchange activities has exercised and developed just those
habits of mind that were needful for the growth of the
capitalist spirit. Think of projecting, which, when the
17th century closed, was known all over Europe. And
did not projecting create the habit of company forming ?
It could not, however, have done this by itself ; it had to
co-operate with stock-exchange activities. The latter
provided the necessary channels for the realization of the
schemes ; it also prepared men’s minds for the reception
of the baits held out by the projectors.

That the two were necessarily interwoven we learn
from Daniel Defoe, one of the cleverest observers of the
period, whose testimony is exceedingly valuable. He
is speaking of the period, about the end of the 17th
century, when Dutch Jews were very influential

4


so LHE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


on the London Stock Exchange.47 This is what he
says :—


But here began the forming of publick joint stocks which .. .
begot a new trade, which we call by a new name, stock-jobbing, which
was at first only the simple occasional transferring of interest and
shares from one to another, as persons alienated their estates. But by
the industry of the exchange-brokers, who got the business into their
hands, it became a trade; and one perhaps managed with the greatest
intrigue, artifice, and trick, that ever anything that appeared with a
face of honesty could be handled with. For while the brokers held
the box, they made the whole exchange the gamesters, and raised and
lowered the prices of stock as they pleased, and always had both
buyers and sellers who stood ready innocently to commit their money
to the mercy of their mercenary tongues. ‘This upstart of a trade
having tasted the sweetness of success which generally attends a novel
proposal, introduces the illegitimate wandering object I speak of
[projects], as a proper engine to find work for the brokers. Thus,
stock-jobbing nursed projecting, and projecting in turn has very dili-
gently pimped for its foster-parent, till both are arrived to be public
grievances ; and indeed are now almost grown scandalous.4®


But with this we have already touched upon capitalist
undertaking, which is the subject of the next chapters.
The various methods of making money, which we have
considered up to this point, had nothing of undertaking
in them. But in process of time the love of money
united with enterprise, and the capitalist spirit was the
result.


CHAPTER IV
THE SPIRIT OF UNDERTAKING#


UNDERTAKING in its broadest conception means the
realization of a well considered plan, for the carrying out
of which it is needful to have the continued co-operation
of many individuals under the guidance of a single
will,

The plan must be well defined. Hence sudden
instinctive actions are excluded. You don’t talk of an
“undertaking ’’ when a few tramps quickly resolve there
and then to set upon and rob a passing traveller. On the
other hand, it is distinctly an ‘ undertaking” when a
gang of desperadoes calmly decide on a burglary on a
certain day, and resolve to meet to do the job.

Item, the plan must needs be realized. It is not enough
merely to conceive the idea, or even to decide upon its
realization. The action must be consummated.

Item, it must be a plan, “‘ for the carrying out of which
it is needful to have the continued co-operation of many
individuals.” Your plan may be ever so well considered,
but if only a single person carries it out, it is not an
“undertaking.” Accordingly, every artistic effort and
every handicraft production is thus excluded from the
conception.

And the plan must be carried out under the guidance
of a single will, which may be embodied in more than


one person. If a number of friends plan to take a walk,
51


s2 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


that is not an “undertaking.” But an African expedi-
tion, or a Cook’s tour, undoubtedly is.

Note that the possibilities of undertaking. are co-
extensive with all human activities, and are not by any
means limited to those only that have reference to wealth.
Undertaking in the economic sense is merely a sub-
division of undertaking as a whole ; and capitalist under-
taking is a branch of undertaking in the economic sense.

And how shall we describe the spirit of enterprise ?
It is the resultant of the combination of all the
qualities of the soul necessary for the successful consum-
mation of an undertaking. These qualities may be
divided, on the one hand, according to the different
functions an undertaker has to carry out; and on the
other, according to their importance, which varies with
the varying work of the undertaker. But in every case,
the successful undertaker must be a trinity composed of
(1) conqueror, (2) organizer, and (3) trader.


1. THe ConqQuERor.


What are the psychological qualities necessary for
carrying out an enterprise? I should say they are three
in number. (1) To make plans is one. Which is to
say, that you must have ideas. The undertaker must
thus possess a certain measure of intellectual freedom.
(2) The will to carry out the plan—the will to do. The
inventor does not possess this characteristic. For him the
discovery or invention suffices. But the undertaker must
needs reproduce the invention, must duplicate and
multiply it. His one thought is the realization of his
plan. What he needs above all is intellectual energy.
(3) But he must also have the capacity to carry his
scheme through. In other words, he must _ possess
diligent application, turning from his goal neither to the


THE SPIRIT OF UNDERTAKING 53


right nor to the left. Your true undertaker, who is a
conqueror, will have sufficient determination and strength
to break down any obstacle that stands in his way. But
he must be a conquerer also in his ability to take high
risks, and to stake his all in order to achieve greatly. In
this he is akin to the gambler.

Sum it all up, and what is his mental outfit? Intel-
lectual elasticity, mental energy, and intensity and
constancy of will.


2. THe ORGANIZER.


Seeing that the work on which an undertaker is
engaged always requires other people to work with him
and be subservient to his will, it follows that the under-
taker must above all be a successful organizer. And
organizing means so to dovetail the work of many persons
as to produce the most efficient results; so to dispose of
human beings and commodities as to effect the desired crea-
tion of utilities. Now, obviously, this requires a complex
of qualities for its achievement. For one thing, your
successful organizer must have the knack of taking exact
stock of people, that is, he must be able to pick out of a
crowd just those individuals that are going to serve his
purpose. For another, he must have the capacity of
letting others do his work, putting each one in the place
best suited for him, in order to obtain the maximum
possible result, and also of getting the most from each.
Thirdly, and lastly, it is the organizer’s business to see to
it that the co-operating individual units form a productive
whole, that the complex relationships are properly co-
related. As Clausewitz says of the ideal military
commander, what he needs is to gather his forces in
the right place, and to have them ready at the right
time.


54 LHE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


3. THe TRabDeEr.


But organizing ability does not complete the under-
taker’s outfit. His contact with human beings calls for
much besides. In the first place, he must obtain the
services of his employees. Next, he must by peaceful
means influence masses of people whom he does not
know, so to shape their conduct that he will derive
benefits from it. That is precisely what is done by the
leader of an expedition, who obtains leave to pass through
a strange territory, or gets provisions for his party ; or
by a capitalist undertaker who disposes of his goods ;
or by a statesman who arranges a commercial treaty. In
all these cases negotiation is necessary, and negotiation
means to confer with another, and, by making the best of
your own case and demonstrating the weakness of his, get
him to adopt what you propose. Negotiation is but an
intellectual sparring match.

Thus, the undertaker must be a skilful negotiator and
dealer ; and a dealer in the broadest economic sense is
a trader.49 ‘Trading, then, means negotiating concerning
the buying and selling of commodities, shares, capital, or
businesses. The rag-and-bone man at the backdoor, hig-
gling with cook for a rabbit-skin ; the old-clo’ dealer who
spends his eloquence for hours together in order to get the
country yokel to buy a pair of his trousers ; a Rothschild
conferring with an agent of some South American
Republic in order to arrange for the floating of a
large loan ; the representative of the Standard Oil Trust
obtaining special freight rates from all the railways in the
States ; Carnegie and his associates discussing with J.
Pierpont Morgan a plan for the taking over by the latter
of the Carnegie Works, at a price that ran into thousands
of millions, and of which the historian of the United
States Steel Corporation remarks, “it was the most


THE SPIRIT OF UNDERTAKING 55


masterly piece of diplomacy in the history of American
industry ”’ ;—-all these are instances of trading. The
difference between them is merely quantitative ; the thing
is the same in each case. For the essence of all modern
trading is negotiating, though not necessarily face to face.
It may even be achieved impersonally, as when a shop-
keeper resorts to all manner of tricks in order to try and
induce the public to buy his wares. What else is
advertising ?

In every case, the end in view is to convince buyer or
seller of the advantage of the contract. And when the
populace is convinced, and hastens in crowds to some
particular shop, the shopkeeper’s ideal has been realized.
To arouse interest, to win confidence, to stir up the
desire to purchase—such is the goal of the successful
trader. How he reaches it is immaterial, so long as he
does reach it by any method except the appeal to force.
He must make the other party eager to complete the
bargain. The trader must work by suggestion; and one
of the most effective suggestions is to convey to the mind
the vital importance of closing with the deal at once.
*«<Tt looks like snow, boys,’ said the Finns, for they had
Aander (a kind of snow-shoe) to sell.” So we read in
the Magnus Barford Saga (1006 a.p.), and the story
summarizes all trading, and is an instance of one of the
earliest advertisements—that weapon of every modern
trader, who no longer dwells in a strongly fortified house,
as did his predecessors in Genoa in the days of Benjamin
of Tudela ; nor does he use cannon to force the natives
of some newly discovered territory to trade with him, as
-did the East India merchants in the 17th century (of
whom more anon).

That every enterprise may be affected by unforeseen
circumstances goes without saying. Hence the undertaker
must be capable of accommodating himself to changing


66 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


conditions, must keep his nerve, must be able to do the
right thing at the right time. Coup d’wil Frederick the
Great called the quality, which he regarded as an essential
in his generals (and a general, remember, is also an
undertaker in the broad sense); and its realization is
assured by determination.

If you wish for an instance of a classical undertaker,
turn to Dr. Faustus :—


What I have thought I hasten to fulfil ;

The master’s bidding, that alone has might.

Up vassals, from your lairs! Give me to scan
The glad fulfilment of my daring plan.

Up, to your tools. Ply shovel, pick, and spade!
Straight must the work be done, so long delayed.
Stern discipline and toil intense

Shall have the amplest recompense.

And that a mighty work completed stands,

One mind suffices for a thousand hands.*


There you have the essence of all undertaking.


* [Goethe’s Faust, Part II, Act 5, Scene 3 (towards the end). The
translation is by Sir Theodore Martin, save the two last lines, which
are from the version of Bayard Taylor, who seems to have got nearer
the original than Sir Theodore. ]


CHAPTER V
THE BEGINNINGS OF UNDERTAKING


SucH, then, is the spirit of undertaking. When did it
first manifest itself? What were the earliest under-
takings ?

To my mind, there were four distinct forms of under-
taking in European history, and each was not without
influence on the future. They were (1) Martial under-
takings ; (2) The Manorial System ; (3) The State; and
(4) The Church.

Clearly, we cannot in this book consider each of these
organizations in all its complexity, nor can we attempt to
write their history. These aspects, in so far as they are
necessary for a complete understanding of economic
development, will, I hope, be dealt with in the revised
edition of my Modern Capitalism. What is desirable
here is to note the connection between the four organized
forms above mentioned and the idea of undertaking. To
that I shall briefly address the reader’s attention.


1. MartiaL UNDERTAKINGS.


These were no doubt the first kind of undertakings,
and no doubt, too, the other three mentioned were
possible only when this, the first, had been carried out.

What is a martial undertaking ? When a leader (or it


may be a small group of leaders) decides upon a plan of
37


58° LZHE QUINTESSENCE: OF TCALTT ALISI


campaign, which he carries out with the aid of a number
of fighting men chosen and led by himself, we may speak
of a martial undertaking. It was not a martial under-
taking, therefore, when the Germanic tribes united for
defence against the Roman onslaughts. On the other
hand, it certainly was when a band of them marched out
on a raiding expedition, especially when they crossed the
sea. This last must have been schemed and planned,
must have been the result of a process of reasoning in the
mind of a leader. Recall the expedition of Beowulf for
the rescuing of Rodgar.* There we have an excellent
instance of martial undertaking, even though it be free
from the desire for spoil. Observe that the heroic age is
about to dawn. In other words, that men with the spirit
of enterprise and undertaking in them have arisen, stand-
ing head and shoulders above the great indolent mass,
and that they were able to force their will upon the rest.
This is essential, for in every undertaking we needs must
have the contrast between leader and followers, between
the director and his myrmidons, between subject and
object, between mind and body.

Martial undertakings retained their true character so
long as there was this personal element in them, and the
most perfect form of the martial undertaker is found in
the leader of hireling soldiers, so well known in the later
Middle Ages. It is not the fact that soldiering becomes
a profession that is pertinent (that only gives this sort of
undertaking a capitalist touch); it is that the leader is
all-powerful. These generals are described by one
authority 49° as wicked and cruel, but, he adds, “‘in the
process of time many a one developed his capacities to a
very high degree, so that he won his soldiers’ admiration.
The first armies of modern history were held together

* (Cf. W. Morris and A, J. Wyatt’s translation of the Beowulf,
Pa 120]


THE BEGINNINGS OF UNDERTAKING 59


solely by the personal influence of their leaders. One of
the best instances is that of Francesco Sforza. His popu-
larity among his men was general, and he knew how to
utilize it to the full.”

One other characteristic of these trained-band leaders
stamped them as true undertakers: they bore the risk of
the enterprise, and had to provide all that was necessary
for a military campaign—the men and their equipment,
the daily commissariat, and suitable accommodation.

It is not difficult to realize that the qualities of the
good general are those needed by the successful under-
taker. To see how closely akin the two are, turn to the
fascinating chapter in Clausewitz which is headed “The
Military Genius.” 5°


2. THe ManoriaAL System.


It is pretty generally admitted now that the manorial
system was common to all European peoples throughout
the Middle Ages, and that its influence on the develop-
ment of each was enormous. Everywhere the system in
its organization presents the same picture—whether you
look at the monastic institutions (say, Bobbio or Farsa),
or the domains of the Patriarch of Grado or the Arch-
bishop of Ravenna, or the benefices of Worcester or
Peterborough. ‘The reasons for this similarity need not
be considered here ; suffice it to say that Roman tradi-
tion, the levelling influence of the Church, and the general
trend of things, must all have contributed to bring about
this result. Asa matter of fact, tendencies towards the
manorial system seemed to be manifest among the
Germanic races in the time of Tacitus.

What manner of organization was the manorial system?
It was an economic order by which the wealthy class, who
were the landowners, had their wants supplied, chiefly if


60 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


not entirely in kind, through the labour of others.
Accordingly, the chief point of interest to us is the
necessity there was of organizing a large number of
workers for a common purpose. That made the manorial
system an undertaking. The guiding principle of this
undertaking was to produce just so much as was necessary
for consumption, and no more.

For the realization of this end there was not a sufh-
cient supply of free labourers. Consequently, enforced
labour had to be employed. The peasants were adscriptiz
terre, bound to the soil; and service dues or payments
in kind were exacted from them. So it came about that
the organism became a sort of mosaic of varying rela-
tionships between landowner and land-tiller. But the
details need not detain us. The root of the matter is
this: in the manorial system a group of people was
organized for regular work in accordance with a pre-
arranged plan, under the direction of some one individual.
In the course of centuries an artificial organization was
thus created, which could be utilized now for this end,
now for that; and not necessarily for production sufficient
to satisfy wants. Its spirit helped the growth of the
capitalist spirit.

The manors then were undertakings (often on a great
scale), in the midst of a world which was innocent of the
undertaking spirit. They thus contained the seeds of
future growth.


3. THe Strate.


May it not be said that the modern state is an under-
taking for peace and war alike? Not indeed every state ;
but undoubtedly the state that was evolved when the
Middle Ages passed away. Its true nature may be
perceived from the spirit that gave it birth. What was
that spirit ?


THE BEGINNINGS OF UNDERTAKING 61


Recall that the centralized, absolute states of Europe
about the beginning of the 16th century were organisms
in which a very large number of people—that is to say,
larger than the inhabitants of a mere city or even a
country district—were subject to the will of one man,
the ruler or his representative, for his own interests.

The logical consequences of such an organization
are not difficult to see. In the first place, in order to
make the people serve the interests of the monarch, a
scheme was necessary for their government, and often
enough this had vital effects on the lives of the subjects.
The scheme provided for the accumulation of forces,
regulated what actions were permissible and what
forbidden, organized a governing machine of vast pro-
portions, the influence of which was exceedingly extensive.
Moreover, the scheme served as a model for smaller
organizations.

In the second place, the whole life of the subject was
circumscribed by the interests of the state. The state
interfered with his private affairs, and so got the average
citizen accustomed to the idea of undertaking. By
constantly striking at the stone, the state, as it were,
produced sparks which gradually formed into a flame.
How the spirit of enterprise must have been nurtured by
the needs of the state for centuries and centuries! How
much of it must have run over and seized upon the
individual !

The idea of the modern state, I imagine, was born in
the Italian tyrannies of the 13th and 14th centuries.
Both rational planning and “over-government”” were
fully developed in them. ‘‘ The conscious valuation of
all possible influences, whereof princes beyond the borders
of Italy had not the faintest notion, and an absolutism
which was almost boundless in power, produced in the
Italian states special types of men and organization.”


62 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


States such as these may surely be classed as private under-
takings of the rulers. The prince in each case took up
the reins of government, much like an adventurous
undertaker ; fully aware that every moment he is running
the danger of riding to a fall; and therefore on the
lookout for the proper instruments and methods that are
to serve his end. In a word, he was an organizer on a
very large scale, and success came to him because of his
daring, his skill, determination, and tenacity.5!

From the Italian tyrannies these ideas passed into the
larger states of Europe, and continued there so long as
they remained absolute monarchies.


4. THe CuHurcu.


I include the Church in my list because, next to the
state, it was the largest organization of human beings.
Moreover, it was characterized, as are all undertakings,
by rational planning ; and history shows that many a
skilful undertaker sprang from among its leaders. And
no wonder, seeing how much organizing talent was called
for in its midst. The establishment of a monastery or
the carving out of a bishopric called, in effect, for the
same activity as the founding of a cotton-spinning
business or the organization of a banking concern.


CHAPTER VI


FUNDAMENTAL TYPES OF CAPITALIST
UNDERTAKINGS


Tuis chapter is to tell the tale of the extraordinary unions
into which the greed of gold and the spirit of enterprise
entered, and it will unfold the history of their offspring,
the spirit of capitalist undertaking. We shall hear that
the unions were of exceeding great variety, so that the
resultant types of capitalist undertakers were perforce of
a tremendously varying character. All former attempts
at the reconstruction of the genesis of Capitalism, it
appears to me, have not laid nearly sufficient stress on
this particular point.

To understand the spirit that pervades all capitalist
economies, we must strip them of their mechanical devices,
their outer trappings, as it were. And these devices have
always been the same, from the earliest dawn of capitalism
down to this very day. A large sum of money is neces-
sary for the production of marketable commodities ; we
call it capital. Some one has to provide this money ; has
to advance it, as it used to be called ; perchance to enable
a weaver to buy his raw material, perchance to provide the
wherewithal to install a new pump in a mine; or, indeed,
for any and every industrial or commercial purpose. The
money with which banks worked was from a very early
period provided by deposits ; the capital for commercial
and shipping companies was forthcoming either by the


underwriting of stock or through partnership contribu-
63


64 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


tions. Or, it might have been, that an individual had
sufficient spare cash of his own with which to start a
capitalist concern. But the different ways of collecting
the capital had no influence on the spirit of the enterprise
itself. The men who financed the scheme did not deter-
mine its spirit ; that was done by the man who utilized
the capital. More often than not the former were a very
mixed multitude.

An instance or two must suffice. When the Peruzzi
and Bardi became bankrupt (in the 14th century) the
clergy alone were creditors to the extent of §50,000
florins. About the year 1328 the Scali and Amieri
could not meet their liabilities, and more than 400,000
florins were lost—‘‘everybody in Florence who had
any money was affected,” writes Villani.52 Again, we
read of Ambrosius Hiéchstetter (towards the close of
the 15th century) how “princes, earls, and knights,
burghers, peasants, menservants, and maids all deposited
their money with him, and he paid them five per centum.
Even many a farmer’s lad, who had no more than 10
florins, invested those in his concern. . . . Thus for a
long time he was paying interest on a million gulden.
With this he bought up stocks of wares and increased
prices all round.” 53

From the 15th century onward the mining industry
especially was maintained by moneys that flowed in
from all manner of social groups from the four quarters
of the globe. In the mining works at Goslar, between
1478 and 1487, contracts for gallery extensions were
made with Johannes Thurzo, citizen and senator of
Cracow, and with burghers of Nuremburg, Chemnitz,
and Leipzig.54 This same Thurzo had also invested
some of his money in Hungarian mines, and a number
of his fellow-citizens joined him.55 In the 17th and
18th centuries the Dutch creditors of the Austrian court


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 65


were the financiers of the Schmdlnitz and other copper
mines.5° Foreign noblemen and merchants were finan-
cially interested in the quicksilver mines of Idria ; 57
the same applies to the salt-mines of Wieliczka in the
16th century,57* the mines in the Schlackenthal,58 and
the tin works of Cornwall.59 Again, we hear of an
archbishop who advanced money to enable the mining of
gold to be continued in the Province of Salzburg ; 6° or
of iron dealers who provided the wherewithal for the
further extension of the iron foundries of Carinthia; 6! or
of the King of Bohemia who opened a fund to assist
mining in Joachimstal.62

The same story is heard in the textile industries, where
the money was advanced now by journeymen grown
wealthy, now by rich traders or “wholesalers”’ [‘‘clothiers”’],
as they were called.63 Nor must it be forgotten that
people from the upper classes, at a time when stocks
and shares were not very numerous, put their money
into commercial concerns much more than they do to-
day.o4 When the Compagnie des Indes orientales [the
French East India Company] was founded in 1664, its
capital was to a large extent subscribed outside the rank
of the merchant class.65 Or, take the case of the
Compagnie de l’Orient. The principal shareholder was
the Duc de la Melleraye.®

Let me now return to my point. I was saying that we
should not discover the spirit of the earliest capitalist
undertakings by referring to the people who provided the
necessary capital. As well attempt to characterize modern
capitalist enterprises by considering the social origins of
the shareholders of the various companies.

In order to find out their true spirit we must go to their
very heart ; in other words, to those who gave them form
and shape. It is true that we may thus stumble across
the financiers, but in that case it will be the financiers

5


66 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


who are at the same time organizers, creative artists in
undertaking ; and it is in this capacity that they will
count for the spirit of enterprise.

To facilitate our search let us commence with the three
earliest kinds of undertakings (treated in the previous
chapter), and observe how gradually they were filled with
the spirit of capitalism. In other words, we shall dis-
cover that these undertakings, which as such were not
at first concerned with money, were gradually utilized
for the purpose of money-making. Three types were
evolved, corresponding to the three forms dealt with
in the fifth chapter. These were (1) the Freebooter,
(2) the Landlord, and (3) the Civil Servant. [Three
other types will then be considered : (4) the Speculator,
(5) the Trader, and (6) the Craftsman. ]


1. THe FREEBOOTER.


A military expedition is not in itself necessarily an
undertaking for monetary profit, despite the fact that
money generally is its strongest motive force. It is true
that in the ancient world the wars of the Phoenicians, the
Carthaginians and the Romans for the conquest of Spain
were primarily enterprises for the possession of its stores
of gold. It is equally true of the wars of the Middle
Ages for the possession of Bohemia, and in the modern
period of history of the wars against Spain.67 But we
feel somehow that it would be a mistake to see in these
enterprises very early instances of capitalist undertakings.

There are other military undertakings, however, which
appear in a different light. These, ostensibly and from
the first, aimed at providing profit ; apart from this they
had no meaning. Think of the maritime adventures.
What else were they but undertakings in which military
skill and organization were utilized for the pursuit of
gain?


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 67


Piracy as an institution already existed in the Italian
seaports in the Middle Ages, Amalfi, Genoa, Pisa,
Venice, all alike were centres of organized sea-robbery
(often enough combined with highway robbery). All
these cities drew a very large proportion of their wealth
from this source, and their piratical expeditions were the
first forms of capitalist undertaking. Of Genoa, for
instance, we are told 68 that “the real corsairs were
difficult to distinguish from the burghers who took part
in the raids and battles for their own profit under the
supervision of the state. As a matter of fact, the two
classes were but two types of the same species. That is
why it is not easy to explain the different shades of
meaning in the terms cursales, predones and pyrate. More-
over, the term corsar, which is a technical expression in
the Genoese documents, had nothing blameworthy or
discreditable about it. ... Nor was there anything
dishonorable in the calling itself, in the pyraticam ariem
exercens. The fitting out of pirate vessels, or participation
in the same, could only take place with the consent of the
government. . . . Indeed, any one who did so without
the necessary official authority could not sue for the
return of his capital.’’

Or again: ‘ Many an Italian merchant who had a
claim against a Greek and could not get his money . . .
became a corsair in order to make good his loss. It
would seem that not a few traders of Genoa or Pisa
devoted themselves to piracy in Greek waters. The
wretched state of the Byzantine navy made it possible to
carry on this calling on a very large scale.” 9 For the
most part the corsairs came in flotillas, such as, for
example, that of 1194, which was composed of five ships
from Pisa, and robbed round about Abydos.

In the first centuries of the modern period in history
all the Powers of Western Kurope condoned the-practice

PROPERTY
OF THE


~~ oF


3 *
PL te


68 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


of organized sea-robbery as a calling. ‘The constant
wars of the 16th and 17th centuries gave it an impetus ;
besides, the capture of enemy vessels in those days played
a very important réle in maritime law. But capturing
legitimate prizes developed before long into piracy pure
and simple. The privateer became a pirate, and the
pirate was frequently taken into the service of the state.
In France, in the 16th century, we learn that “the lesser
nobility, chiefly the Protestants, continually supplied from
among its ranks that dauntless army of corsairs who,
from time to time, avenged on Spanish and Portuguese
trade the butcheries of Fort Coligny and La Caroline.’’ 694
In the 17th century French corsairing had reached a high
state of development. Of its extent and condition there
is ample information in the two reports 7° on the capitaines
corsaires, made for Colbert, when he formed the plan of
joining the Dunkirk pirate ships into a fleet, under the
command of Jean Bart, for the service of the crown.
The reports deal with 33 captains commanding 15
frigates and 12 large barques. Of French origin also
were the notorious buccaneers or filibusters who plied
their nefarious trade in the waters of the Spanish colonies,
round Jamaica and Haiti. 7!

But the classical instances of sea-robbery in the 16th
and 17th centuries were to be found in England and the
New England States in America. About the middle of
the 16th century the coasts of England and Scotland
fairly swarmed with those maritime highwaymen, the
privateers. According to a report of Sir Thomas
Chaloner, there were no less than 400 of these lawless
adventurers in the Channel during the summer of 1563,
and they captured between six and seven hundred French
prizes in the course of a few months.72__ In this connection,
it is interesting to recall what Erasmus wrote in his
Naufragium concerning the dangers of corsairing in these


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 60


waters. English historians trace the sudden outburst of
piracy to the Marian persecutions, as a result of which
many members of the best families took to sea-robbery,
and continued in it even after the accession of Elizabeth,
having been joined by unemployed fishermen. ‘‘ Almost
every gentleman on the West coast participated in the
business,’ we are told by Campbell, whose judgment is, as
a rule, very cautious. His expression is the right one ;
for an organized business it was. The ships were fitted
out by wealthy folk, who were termed gentlemen adven-
turers; often enough they were but the agents of
others who advanced the necessary cash at a high rate of
interest. Even the highest nobility did not scorn to be
associated with these concerns. The Earl of Bothwell 73 in
the days of Mary Queen of Scots, and the Earl of Derby
and other royalists74 in the Stuart period, are cases in
point.

The American colonies became apt pupils of the
mother country. The extent of sea-robbery, especially
in the state of New York, would appear to have been
incredible, except that evidence of it is supported by
numerous reliable witnesses. According to the testimony
of James Logan, Secretary of State in Pennsylvania, no
less than 1,500 pirates cruised along the shores of
Carolina alone in the year 1717; and of the total, 800
had their base in New Providence.75 Inthe 17th century
almost every colony had some connection with sea-
robbery in one form or another.7®

One species of the business was the voyages of
discovery which had become so numerous since the rsth
century. It is true that in the majority of cases all sorts
of non-material motives were responsible for the enter-
prises—science, religion, glory, or pure adventure ; yet
the strongest, and often enough the only moving influence
was the desire for gain. In reality these voyages were


70 THE QUINTESSENCE: OF CAPITALISM


nothing more than well-organized raiding expeditions to
plunder lands beyond the sea; more especially after the
reports of Columbus, that on his voyages of discovery he
had come across veritable gold-dust. El Dorado hence-
forth became the avowed or implied goal of all the
expeditions.77_ Digging for treasure and gold-making,
these superstitions were now united to a third—the search
for a new land where gold could be gathered in spade-
fulls, 78

What manner of men led these expeditions? They
were strong, healthy adventurers, sure of victory, brutal
and greedy, conquering all before them. Common as
they were in those days, they have more and more ceased
to exist in our own. These attractive, ruthless sea-dogs,
who abounded more especially in England in the 16th
century, were made of the same stuff as the leaders of
hired bands in Italy of the type of Francesco Sforza and
Cesar Borgia, only they were more intent on the acquisi-
tion of gold and goods. They were thus more akin to
the capitalist undertaker than their Italian predecessors.
They were men who combined within themselves an
adventurous imagination with great energy in action ;
who were full of romance and yet possessed a keen eye
for realities ; who commanded a fleet of buccaneers one
day and held high offices of state the next; who with
itching palm dug for treasure to-day, and to-morrow
began writing a universal history ; who, though their joy
of life was hot and passionate and their love of pomp
and luxury intense, were yet nevertheless able to bear for
months together all the privations of a sea-voyage with
an uncertain goal. They were men with the greatest
capacity for organizing, and yet full of childish
superstition, And they were the forerunners of the
capitalist undertakers of to-day. Their names? History
has recorded them in plenty. The place of honour must


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 71


be given to Sir Walter Raleigh, “great Raleigh,” as he
has been termed,79 whose motto might well be applied to
the whole group—Tam Marti quam Mercurio (To Mars
and Mammon equally subject). Next to him may be
named Sir Francis Drake, the “noble pirate,’ as
Hentzner, who saw his ships in 1598, called him; Sir
Martin Frobisher, who combined the spirit of a filibuster
with that of a scholar ; Sir Richard Grenville, of whom
John Smith in his History of Virginia speaks as “ the
valiant ’’ ; Cavendish, who came home with the “ richest
prize that ever was brought at any time into England.” 8°
There were many others, as readers of Hakluyt’s third
volume of Voyages are aware.

It may be asked, what is my reason for bringing these
conquerors and robbers into connection with capitalism ?
The answer issimple enough. Not so much because they
themselves were a sort of capitalist undertaker, but
principally because the spirit within them was identical
with that in all trade and colony planting right down to
the middle of the 18th century. The two were equally
expeditions of adventure and conquest. Adventurer,
Sea-robber, and Merchant (a man was a merchant when
his argosies crossed the ocean) are but three impercep-
tible stages in development.

Benjamin of Tudela tells us 8! of the citizens of Genoa,
that ‘‘each of them has a tower in his house; if civil war
breaks out, the battlements of these towers are the scenes
of conflict. They are masters of the sea; they build
them ships, called galleys, and roam for plunder in the
most distant parts, bringing the spoil back to Genoa.
With Pisa they live in continual enmity.” To whom 1s
he referring? Does he mean the sea-robbers or the
“royal merchants”? Obviously both are implicated.
Or, again, take the Levant trade. What was it for the
most part but strife and war? Any one who wanted to


72 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


carve out a position for himself in a foreign land had to
be a fighter, or be able to call in a fighter’s aid, and be
supported by the organized power of the state.8!* Ship-
ping merchants in England in the 16th and 17th centuries
are as good an instance as any.82. Consider the Hawkins,
especially John and William. Their careers were very
chequered. Now they were discoverers, now in the
service of the state ; one day they were sea-robbers, the
next they were captains of merchant vessels doing legiti-
mate trade. John Hawkins, “a wonderful hater of the
Spaniards’ (as his contemporaries called him), was as
famous as a doughty champion against Spain as he was as
a trader. It is pretty much the same tale with others
of this type, such as the Middletons. Their “ traffic”
consisted of fighting with the East African natives, of
being taken captive by them, and of negotiating with
them.

Traffickers of this sort were not unknown in Germany.
The Welser expedition to Venezuela®3 was a case in
point. At first sight it is not clear whether it was a
voyage of discovery, or a colonial plantation, or merely a
raiding enterprise or a commercial undertaking. Who
shall say? And what of Ulrich Krafft, who made
voyages for the Manlichs? His adventurous career reads
like a fairy-tale.84 Was he a trader, or just an adven-
turer? We should have to say that he was both.

It is the same story in France, where the word armateur
means a shipper as well as a pirate. And why? The
reason is clear. ‘The men who in the 16th century sent
their argosies from Dieppe, Havre, Rouen, or La Rochelle
to Africa and America were shippers and pirates in one.84*

It is not until we come to the great trading and colonial
companies that we see how much of that early commerce
was freebooting, pure and simple.

The Italian trading companies of the Middle Ages


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 73


already showed signs of this. The Maone of Genoa
were the best known among them. The most famous
Maona, that of Chios, was established in 1347, and for
two centuries owned the dominium utile not only of that
island, but also of Phocea, Samos, Niczea, and some others.
Truth to tell, it was nothing more than a privileged and
consolidated robber band. Its origin is interesting. A
fleet of private merchantmen took Chios. When the
armada returned to Genoa, the owners demanded
203,000 lire from the government as compensation for
their trouble. But as the government was not in a posi-
tion to pay, this debt was converted, on February 26,
1347, into the Compera or Maona of Chios. That
island, and its neighbour Phocea, were handed over to the
creditors as security.85

The great trading companies of the 16th and 17th
centuries were not unlike their Genoese forerunners.
They may be described as semi-warlike, conquering
undertakings, to whom sovereignty rights, backed by the
forces of the state, had been granted. Put it a little
differently, and you may call them permanently organized
bands of freebooters. Sea-robbery in the old style was,
until well into the 17th century, a most important branch
of the business of these companies. Take as an instance
the Dutch West India Company. Between 1623 and
1636 it fitted out no less than 800 ships at a total cost of
44 million lire. But the outlay was more than recovered
by the prize ships which it took, 540 in number, with
goods to the value of 6 million lire. To this sum must
be added another 3 million lire seized from the Portu-
guese.86 Jt was a common thing to find in the balance-
sheets of, these trading companies the item “ Privateering
profits (or losses) ”’ !

As for trade with native races, was that aught else but
thinly veneered thieving? Forced trading is the proper


74 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


term to apply to all barter between uncivilized peoples
and Europeans in those days. You can see its true
nature in the state of mind which it produced in the
natives—either despair or fierce anger, according to the
temper of the race. The inhabitants of the Molucca
Islands themselves destroyed the spice-trees, which they
looked upon as the cause of their cruel sufferings. But
their vengeance was not always aimed at the trees of the
field ; often enough it burst on the heads of their
oppressors, who had to shelter behind their citadels. “If
the gates of the forts were not carefully closed at night,
it might well be that the Indians with whom ‘ peaceful
trafic’ had been carried on in the day would break in,
and murder the traders.’ This is a cameo picture from
among the records of the Hudson Bay Company ; 87 it
may be taken as typical for the beginnings of all colonial
trade. The warlike preparations which all the companies
found it necessary to make only go to support this view.
And these preparations, which were intended to assist
trade, were by no means insignificant. Those of the
Italians in the Levant set the pace. Giovanni Bembo’s
account of the Venetian “factories” in Tana tells of
fortifications and towers, castles and drawbridges, and
similar evidence of strong defences.88 Almost identical
were the pictures of the settlements of the commercial
companies in the 16th and 17th centuries. Thus, we are
told of the Dutch “ factory” in Bengal, “It looks more
like a castle, surrounded as it is by deep moats full of
water, high walls and bastions bristling with cannon.’ 89
As for the military strength of the English colonies
during the 18th century, we have a series of reports 9° of
the year 1734, which show that Jamaica had 6 forts and
3,000 men, out of a total of 7,644 white inhabitants ;
Barbadoes 21 forts, 26 batteries of 463 cannon, and 4,812
militia out of a total of 18,295 white inhabitants ; the


LVYRES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 75


Leeward Islands, 3,772 militia out of a total of 10,262
white men.

The warlike and freebooting spirit, which characterized
all maritime trade in those days, was also in the men who
stood at the head of the great trading enterprises. A
goodly number of them were noblemen, who thus found
an outlet for their military ardour, which the army at
home was not sufficiently able to utilize. It was not
until much later that the English East India Company
adopted a resolution “not to employ any gentleman in
any place of charge or commandment in the said voyage.
. . . They wished to sort their business with men of their
own quality.” 91

Even the Dutch companies could not escape this ten-
dency. Their leaders likewise were heroes and adven-
turers. If we were to arrange a portrait gallery of the
Governor-Generals of the Dutch East India Company,9?
we should find that most of them had the appearance,
especially those of the 17th century, not of linen-drapers
but of hard, enterprising, military commanders. Curiously
enough, the military touch was general in Holland at the
time.93

To carry on great trade, then, meant to fit out ships
and arm them, engage the services of fighting men, con-
quer new lands, have dealings with the natives with a gun
in one hand and a sword in the other, rob them of their
possessions, carry back the spoil in the ships to the mother-
land and sell it there at auction to the highest bidder.
Besides all this, it meant seizing by force as legiti-
mate prize as many ships of foreigners as opportunity
allowed. Are we not justified, therefore, in saying that
the spirit of all trade and colonial undertakings (in so
far as the latter had not for their object the planta-
tion of new colonies) was the spirit of freebooting and
privateering ? Let me once again quote Goethe’s lines,


76 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


which sum up epigrammatically the inwardness of my


thesis :—
War, traffic, and piracy
Are an indivisible trinity.


Capitalism is a complex of many contributory spirits,
and it is one of the principal aims of this book to estab-
lish this view. We have examined the plant that sprang
from the warlike root. We now turn to another.


2. THe LANDLORD.


There is nothing in landlordism that is inherently
capitalistic, any more than there is in warlike under-
takings. The manorial system, as such, does not aim at
gain ; for a very long period it remained an economic
organization for the satisfying of wants, no more and
no less.

But in the process of time a change set in. The
domestic economy of the landlord was narrowed, and,
side by side with it, there sprang up an economic order
bent on profit, which slowly but surely became capitalistic
in its nature. What happened was that the overlord
organized the labour at his disposal for the purpose of
getting gain. The land was his and he became a corn-
grower ; the treasures of the earth—its minerals and
metals—were his also; he claimed the ownership of
woodlands and meadows ; and he disposed of the labour
of the human beings on his estates. He combined all
these factors in production, and the result was varying
forms of capitalist undertakings, all of them filled with
the spirit of their master-mind, and therefore all of them
semi-feudal in their nature.

Semi-feudal ? I mean that all these undertakings had
not yet thrown off the character of enterprises for the pro-
duction of just so much wealth as would satisfy the wants


Piero Ur CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 97


of the community. One reason for this was their limited
scope. They were bounded by the property of the land-
lord. This has been recognized as a check on the free
expansion of capitalist undertakings. Thus, we are told
of the Silesian mines at the beginning of the 19th century,
“The landlord owns the iron ore ; he mines annually no
more than will use up his surplus timber, which he cannot
utilize in any other profitable way.” %4

These undertakings were semi-feudal also in the means
they chose for their end. The conception still prevailed
in them that the power of the state was the almighty
influence that was to be looked to for one’s interests,
whether for the disposal of men or commodities ; or an
indirect influence which aided in a sale or a bargain—say,
the granting of a concession, privilege, or monopoly.
This gave birth to an important sub-species of under-
taking, partly capitalistic, partly feudal. Influential
members of the nobility associated themselves with the
moneyed sections of the middle classes, or with im-
poverished inventors, for the purpose of common gain.
The lordling provided the necessary privileges or liberties,
the other partner the money or the brains. Partnerships
of this sort abounded in scores, both in France and
England, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries.9%

But the undertakings of the landlords, and of the
nobility and gentry generally, played a more important
réle in the early capitalist age than has been commonly
assumed. Their influence in the development of capitalist
undertaking cannot of course be exactly demonstrated,
lacking as we do any statistical information on the point.
But a general notion of their influence is undoubtedly
possible, if we glance at some of the cases of capitalist
enterprise in which the nobility took part.

Let us begin with capitalist farming, which certainly in
its earliest forms was carried on by the landed interests.


78 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


From the 16th to the 18th centuries, England 9 and
Germany 97 both have numerous instances.

But industry was by no means neglected. Mining was
a favourite undertaking in which the nobility engaged.
They not merely received the royalties from others ; they
participated in the industries themselves. As royalty-
receivers they do not interest us in this place ; what we
are concerned with is their activity as undertakers ; and
it is surprising to find how extended that was. A com-
prehensive consideration of this strongly marked aspect
of capitalist enterprise is undoubtedly a desideratum.
Here we can touch on but a few examples.

In England, in the 15th century, we have information
of the Bishop of Durham’s forge at Bedburn, in Wear-
dale. This appears to have been organized on a capitalist
basis ; certainly the number of employees seems great.98
In 1616, a courtier entered into an agreement with the
pen-makers’ company to supply them with wire, which,
seemingly, he produced on his estates.99 Again, in 1627,
Lord Dacre received a patent granting him the monopoly
of steel production, according to new methods.10° Or,
to take yet another instance. From the 16th century
landlords set up tin-works on their estates, the so-called
clash mills, for the preparation of the tin from their own
mines,1°! In 1690 a number of lords and gentlemen
helped in the foundation of the Mine Adventurers’
Company.1°2 It was the same with the earliest enter-
prises for coal-mining ; many a nobleman was interested
in this industry likewise, and the conditions of labour in
English, and especially in Scottish, mines in the 18th
century smacked of feudalism.1°2*

If we turn from this country to France, the same
phenomenon may be observed. The mines in the pro-
vince of Nevers, one of the centres of the industry, were
owned by the local landed gentry until well into the 18th


OVE ESOP CAPITALIST-UNDERTARINGS 79


century. Villemenant was in the hands of the Arnault
de Langes; their neighbour, the Seigneur de Bizy,
conducted on his estate not only mining operations, but
smelting as well. All these establishments passed in the
18th century into the possession of the rich Paris banker
Masson.!°3_ In the Franche-Comté likewise there were
numerous mines, all owned by the ancient nobility.104

Of the manufacture of iron the same story may be
told. The landowners participated in iron-making. The
cases were numerous, and we need only mention two.
Seigneur F. E. de Blumenstein erected an ironworks near
his castle, in 17153195 and the Duc de Choiseul about the
same time was manufacturing steel.1°7 But it was the
coal industry that specially interested the French nobility. 18
Henry II had granted the sole right to exploit coal-mines
to Frangois de la Rocque, Seigneur de Roberval; it passed
from him to Claude Grizon de Guillien, Seigneur de
St. Julien, and another nobleman. At a later date
Louis XIV granted a monopoly of 4o years’ duration to
the Duke of Montauzier for the sole working of all coal-
mines in France, excepting only those of Nevers, In the
following reign, the Regent issued a similar privilege to a
company which included, among others, the names of
Jean Gobelin and Sieur de Joncquier. But the nobility
possessed not only the right of working mines; the
actual work was carried out under their direction. ‘Thus,
in Louis XIV’s reign, the Duc de Noailles opened a mine in
the Duchy of Bournonville ; the Duc d’Aumont another ;
the Count d’Uzés a third; 1°99 and the Duc de la Meilleraye
a fourth.!11° Instances of this kind, where the nobility
obtained monopolies to work coal, either on their own
estates or elsewhere, became more and more abundant in
the second half of the 18th century.

The same tale comes from Germany and Austria. In
both these countries the earliest mining undertakings were


80 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


conducted by the nobility. In a document entitled
“Masters and Establishments on the Imperial Estate of
St. Kathrein”’ (the mercury-mines of Idria) for the period
1520-26, we come across an exceptionally large number
of names of noblemen, e.g. Gabriel Count Ortenburg,
Bernard von Cles, the Lord Cardinal-Bishop of Trent, to
name but three.. The lists of the years 1536, 15575
1559 and 1574 1! bear the same character.

Gradually the names of traders crept in too. But it
must be remembered that, often enough, even though no
nobleman was mentioned in connection with the under-
takings, these were still dominated by the feudal spirit,
and the influence of the landlord made itself felt in a
thousand ways.!!2

The iron industry in Germany had likewise to thank
the nobility for its capitalist spirit. Count Stolberg
became famous in the 16th century for his interest in iron-
works; Count Wolfgang established the foundry of
Koenigshof, made Ilseburg a centre for iron-casting, and
erected the first brass-works there. His neighbour,
Count Julius von Braunschweig-Luneburg, was a strong
competitor. In the case of another iron-foundry, that of
Gitteld, in the Harz Mountains, the income and expendi-
ture accounts from 1573 to 1848 are extant, and from
these it is evident how strongly marked was the influence
of the nobility here also.1!3 The same was true of the
iron industry in Styria ;!!4 and as for the Silesian mines,
have they not remained in the hands of the local
landowners down to this very day?

Finally, let me instance Sweden, where iron-mining
was a subsidiary industry of agriculture. The lords of
the land employed miners as well as their agricultural
labourers on the work, And to-day, when mining and
agriculture are independent industries, the old conditions
still continue in Dannemora.!!5 |


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 81


So much for mining. In the textile trades the influence
of the noble families was no less marked. The most
competent historian of the woollen industry in England
sums up the position there by saying that the great sheep
farmers were very often cloth-weavers, using the wool
they themselves grew.!16 Silk-making likewise was in
their hands. Thus, in 1689, we find “a grant to Walter,
Lord Ashton, of the keeping of the garden, mulberry-
trees, and silkworms near St. James in the county of
Middlesex.” 117 Again it wasthe same in France. There
also the landowners had spinning-wheels on their estates
for wool or silk.1!8 In the 18th century the Marquis de
Coulaincourt erected a factory for muslin and silk veil-
ings; the Marquis de Louvencourt one for linen; the
Duchesse de Choiseul-Gouffier a cotton-spinning establish-
ment, and so forth.119 Indeed, the number of noblemen
-engaged in the textile industry in France in the 18th
century was very large indeed.120

Bohemia serves as an excellent instance of the influence
of the aristocracy, on industrial development in the 18th
century. Fired by the example of Duke Josef Kinsky, a
number of them established factories on their estates.
By 1762 Kinsky was able to report to the Empress the
“joyful news” that many a nobleman in Bohemia,
including among others Count Waldstein, Prince Lobko-
witz and Earl Bolza, was inclined to aid the growth of
manufactures on his lands.!2!. “But the majority of
these nobles’ establishments,” such was the view of a man
of the people, “lacked the necessary energy and vitality.
Things changed, however, with the appearance of John
Josef Leitenberger (1730-1802), the son of a small
Bohemian master dyer.” 122

Another industry much favoured bv the nobility and
gentry was glass-making, probably because it provided
such excellent opportunities for the utilization of the


82 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


abundant supplies of timber on the estates. In France
the nobility practically held a monopoly of glass-blowing,
hence the term verriers gentilshommes.123 Commoners
might erect glass factories only by special permission, or
they were allowed to participate in the existing establish-
ments, What applied to France held good equally for
other countries also.

Finally, the manufacture of porcelain, corn and paper
mills, and such industries as gave opportunities for burn-
ing peat, must also be mentioned.!24 In a word, there
are many points in the economic history of Europe where
the landed gentry may be seen contributing to the
development of capitalism. We are justified in regarding
the landlord, therefore, as a type of an early capitalist
undertaker. And our conviction of this can only be
strengthened as we remember that capitalism in colonial
foundations was for the most part of a feudal nature.
The Italians in their settlements in the Levant established
an economic order modelled on the feudal system. In
many cases the change was merely a change of masters; the
Turkish landlord was replaced by a “Frank.” As for
the towns, they were expropriated just like the country
districts ; the Italian conquerors divided the craftsmen
among themselves like so many serfs. The whole
structure rested on enslaved labour.

The Spaniards and Portuguese did exactly the same
in their treatment of the American Indians. The
newcomers regarded themselves as feudal landlords, with
sway over the inhabitants. The Spaniard spoke of
Encomiendas and repartiementos; the Portuguese of
Kapitanien and Sesmarias. Labour, at first on a feudal
basis, later developed into slavery. The mine-owners
and planters who worked their possessions in a capitalist
spirit were feudal lords of the old type.!25

The same may be asserted of the earliest undertakers


IYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 83


in the Southern States of the American Union. We
need only call to mind Lord Delaware, the principal
participant in the Virginia Company of London,
established in 1606 ; or Lord Baltimore, the “ founder”
of Maryland, whose desire for profits is no longer
doubted ; or of the eight landowners, among whom we
find the Duke of Albemarle, the Earl of Clarendon,
Sir William Berkeley and Lord Shaftesbury, who in 1663
took possession of the land between Virginia and
Florida—Carolina.!26 All of these founded feudal
undertakings based; on slave labour, and the semi-feudal
character of the capitalist plantations in the “ Negro”’
States right down to the Civil War bore testimony to the
fact. Only after the war did the commercial spirit carry
the day over “the Southern gentlemen” ; only then was
ended the attempt to found, “in an environment of
farmers and traders, industrialists and free wage-earners,
a plantation system of grands seigneurs and their petty
imitators, based on force and customary dues.” 1264


3. Tue Civit Servant.


It is possible to conceive the modern state as a huge
capitalist undertaking, seeing that its aim is more and
more to get gold and money. Such indeed has been the
case ever since the discoveries and conquests of the
Spaniards cultivated in ruling princes the taste for a share
of the booty, and when India also came within their
horizon, that taste became even more marked.

But even when conquering expeditions in the Dorado
were not uppermost in their minds, statesmen were
constantly occupied with the problem of amassing gold.
How to get money ?—that was the alpha and omega of
their thoughts. Sometimes it was for the expenses of
the state; sometimes for economic progress. But the


84 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


problem was the same. Recall Colbert’s reason for
the policy of Mercantilism. ‘I believe,” he said,1?7
“that most people would be agreed that the quantity
of gold in a state alone determines the degree of its
greatness and power.”” Put “ profits” instead of “ gold”
in this dictum, and you have the first principle of
every capitalist undertaking.

But in calling the civil servant an early type of the
capitalist undertaker, I am thinking neither of the goal
which mercantilism set itself nor of the policy which
modern states pursued to reach it. We shall have
occasion to refer to both, when we deal with the sources
of the capitalist spirit; and we shall then observe
that many a regulation of the Mercantile system nurtured
the seeds of the capitalist spirit in the average citizen.

My object here is to call attention to the fact that
ruling princes and their servants, the state officials, were
among those who kept alive the spirit of capitalist
undertaking ; and that both played a réle of no small
significance among the earliest representatives of the
modern economic outlook.

What a reliable authority says of Gustavus Vasa holds
good for all the important princes of the ancien régime.
‘“‘Fie was the chief undertaker of his nation. Not only did
he know how to discover and utilize for the crown the
mineral wealth of Sweden, but by commercial treaties
and protective duties, and last but not least, by engaging
himself in foreign trade on a large scale, he acted as
an example to his merchants. Everything was due to
his initiative,” 128

It would require a whole treatise were we to attempt to
chronicle all those activities of monarchs in modern times
that stamped them as founders of capitalist industries,
There is the less need to do so, seeing that the facts are
pretty generally known. The mere reference to them


IYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 8s


‘must therefore suffice. But what I will do is to consider
the peculiar importance of these state enterprises, and
demonstrate the special qualities of civil servants which
mark them as capitalist undertakers.

First and foremost, state enterprises appeared as
activities on a large scale where before there had been no
activities whatsoever. Often enough it was the initiative
of the monarch himself that was responsible for the
undertakings. Consequently, in many cases it may be
said that the monarch was the fount wherein the first
beginnings of the undertaking spirit lay hidden. A
German mercantilist writer points out what is appropriate
for private initiative and what for public; and the
opinion may be regarded as classical. To improve manu-
factures, says this worthy, you need cleverness, thought,
and money ; and he concludes, ‘‘ These things are for the
state ; the merchant continues in his work just as he
learned it and is accustomed to it. The general advantage
of his native land is no concern of his.” 129 These simple
words speak volumes. True, they were written down in
a Germany which was as yet in a backward condition.
They hold good nevertheless (possibly in a weaker form)
for all cases of early capitalist economic activities. How,
for instance, would mining have fared, in more places
than one, if the ruling prince had not stepped in at the
right moment and dragged the disused carts out of the
mire? You need only refer to the history of the mining
industry in what is to-day the Ruhr district. ‘“ With a
system of mining that was without plan (and such it had
been for centuries, until about the middle of the 18th), it
was hardly possible to expect a far-sighted policy. In the
mining regulations issued in the Mark of Cleves in 1766,
the state took over the technical and commercial manage-
ment of the concern. The guardians brought up the neg-
lected child.” 13° It was the same ina thousand other cases.


86 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Now while the undertakings of the state were of great
importance for the development of capitalism, their
quality was of no less significance. State enterprises
were always on a large scale; there was something big
about them. In an age when the accumulation of capital
was not extensive, the state was able to devote consider-
able sums of money to its undertakings, and often enough
the state was the only agency with sufficient means to
commence an undertaking. As illustrations we need
only recall the transport enterprises both by land and sea,
which even into the 19th century were made possible
because the state was behind them.

Similarly, the state had at its disposal the necessary
organization for these undertakings. To appreciate the
full value of the civil service let us call to mind that
earlier ages lacked trained intelligence for administra-
tive work of all sorts. The advantage in this respect
which the state possessed over the private undertaker
goes without saying. The state had the administrative
machine ready ; the private undertaker had first to pro-
vide it.

Nor is this all. State undertakings had a large pro-
spectiveness about them. Who so well as a reigning
monarch could make plans for the future? And so, the
characteristic marks of all capitalist undertaking, that
your schemes should be far-sighted and your energy con-
tinuously active, both sprang from the very nature of
state enterprise. In the same way, for creative ideas,
extensive knowledge, and scientific training, who so well
situated as the ruler of the state? Where else could you
find so much capacity as in the council chamber? In
those days, gifted citizens placed their capabilities at the
disposal of the state. Of course, a good many princes
were nonentities. But I am thinking rather of the com-
petent ones, and of them and of their equally competent


TYPES OF “CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 87


ministers, history has a fairly long list. Was any one
more capable as a capitalist undertaker, in the France of
those days, than Colbert ?!3! And in the Prussia of
Frederick the Great, who was more distinguished in the
same way than Freiherr von Heinitz, the founder of the
state’s mining works in Upper Silesia ?

In the process of time, state undertakings began to
manifest certain weaknesses—slow and cautious move-
ment, red-tape, and so on. But these things were not
yet in the earliest stages of capitalist development. On
the contrary, in those days the civil servant represented a
most important type of subsidiary capitalist undertaker,
who by his special gifts made a lasting impression on the
history of capitalism.


4. THE SPECULATOR.


How does the speculator come in as a type of capitalist
undertaker? The answer is simple—as soon as he
appears as the organizer of a speculative undertaking.
A case in point is when a “projector” obtains the
necessary means for putting his idea into execution ;
when, as I have already said, projecting unites with
undertaking. This must have been the case towards the
end of the 17th century. We are told that the projectors
at that time were beginning to find favourable considera-
tion at the hands of the financiers, and that in conse-
quence “ flotations”’ of all kinds made their appearance.
Speculative undertakings these are best called ; and Defoe
informs us about them in his own inimitable fashion [Ox


Projecting (1697), pp. 12-14] :—


There are, and that too many, fair pretences of fine discoveries,
new inventions, engines and I know not what, which being advanced
in notion, and talked up to great things to be performed when such
and such sums shall be advanced, and such and such engines are made,
have raised the fancies of credulous people to such a height, that


88 THE QUINTESSENCE OF) CAPITALISM,


merely on the shadow of expectation they have formed companies,
chose committees, appointed officers, shares, and books, raised great
stocks, and cried up an empty notion to that degree, that people have
been betrayed to part with their money for shares in a New-nothing ;
and when the inventors have carried on the jest till they have sold all
their own interest, they leave the cloud to vanish of itself, and the
poor purchasers to quarrel with one another and go to law about
settlements, transferrings, and some bone or other thrown among ’em
by the subtlety of the author, to lay the blame of the miscarriage
upon themselves. Thus the shares at first begin to fall by degrees,
and happy is he that sells in time, till like brass money it will go at
last for nothing at all. So have I seen shares in joint-stocks, patents,
engines, and undertakings blown up by the air of great words, and the
name of some man of credit concerned, to £100 for a 5ooth part, or
share, some more, and at last dwindle away till it has been stock-
jobbed down to £12, £10, £9 or £8 a share, and at last no buyer ;
that is, in short, the fine new word for Nothing-worth, and many
families ruined by the purchase. If I should name linen manufac-
tures, saltpetre works, copper-mines, diving engines, dipping, and the
like for instances of this, I should, I believe, do no wrong to truth, or
to some persons too visibly guilty.


There is in reality no need to appeal to the evidence of
so excellent an authority as Defoe in order to characterize
that age, and more especially the first decade in the 18th
century, as a period of company promotion on a large
scale. So far as I am aware, it was the first of its kind
in which the desire to establish capitalist undertakings
became a veritable epidemic, particularly in England and
France. It was the time of the South Sea Bubble and of
Law’s Financial Scheme, both of which so dominated the
period that we are apt to forget that around each of these
giant enterprises hundreds of lesser ones were clustered.
Together they present the true picture of the age.

A new world burst upon the horizon of mankind in
those days. Some idea of it may be conveyed by a
bird’s-eye view of the extent and ramifications of the
company promotions of the period—not only the first in ’
history, but models for the future. The contemporary


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 89


official inquiries furnish a mine of information in their
reports, to say nothing of Anderson’s treatise.132 In this,
speaking of the year 1720, he says it was “a year remark-
able beyond any other which can be pitched upon by
historians for extraordinary and romantic projects, pro-
posals, and undertakings, both private and national; .. .
and which therefore ought to be held in perpetual remem-
brance, not only as being what never had its parallel, nor,
it is to be hoped, ever will hereafter ; but, likewise, as it
may serve for a perpetual memento to the legislators and
ministers of our own nation, never to leave it in the
power of any hereafter to hoodwink mankind into so
shameful and baneful an imposition on the credulity of
the people.”

A few illustrations from Anderson may therefore not
be out of place.

The centre of greatest attraction in England was, of
course, the South Sea Company. In its origin it was
no more than one of the numerous colonial companies
established long before. Its charter provided for a
monopoly of trade on the eastern coast of America from
the river “ Aronoca”’ to the southernmost part of Tierra
del Fuego, and on the west coast from Cape Horn north-
wards. Like its prototypes, the South Sea Company
was granted sovereign rights over the regions wherein
its activities were to lie.

But the significance of the South Sea Company lay
not in its own speculative undertaking, but rather in
its serving as a concern which lent itself to speculative
activities. It achieved this by being mixed up with the
national finances. According to the custom of the
time, the company took over a considerable portion of
the National Debt, gradually having over 31 millions
incorporated in its stock. Which means, and this is the
important point, that a large part of the national capital,


90 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


hitherto invested in gilt-edged securities the interest on
which was fixed, was now an investment subject to varia-
tions in dividend. In 1720 the directors were allowed to
carry out their scheme of absorbing the National Debt by
purchase or subscription. So frenzied was the speculative
fever among the wealthy classes that the stock rose to
£1,000 for every £100 subscribed. Once the gambling
rage had become acute, crafty projectors utilized it to
float innumerable new undertakings. It would be tiresome
to give a complete list of these bubbles, but some among
them may be of interest. [The details are from
Anderson. |


Original Money | Highest Prices
paid in or due, |sold for in 1720.
La Sala L
Million Bank.. bae En | LOOmmOmEO 440
York Buildings Company as8 wee its) Ch © 305
Lustring Company ... a tr Fata 120
English Copper Company ... a. 5.0759 105
Welsh Copper Company... oe An 2° 96 95
Royal Fishery Company ha he FO 1 Oto 25
Company for making the River
Douglas navigable br 0, 0 70
Company for fresh water to be brought
to Liverpool LOPLOL ZO 20
Temple Mills Brass Works ... ae 10 0 Oo 250
Hamburg Company ... corn gcOwnG 120
The Orkney Fishery Company ail) 2 ben OLO 250
Fire Insurance Company... ets Cui2et6


There were besides 12 companies for fishing, 4 for
salt-mining, 8 for insurance, 2 for remittances of money,
4 water companies, 2 sugar companies, 11 for trade or
settlements in different parts of America, 2 building
companies, 13 for agriculture, 6 oil bubbles, 4 for
improving harbours and rivers, 4 for supplies for London,
6 for manufacture of hemp and flax, § for cotton, 15 for
metals, mines, and minerals, to say nothing of others of a


LYPES-OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 91


miscellaneous character, including one for cleaning and
paving London streets (with a capital of two millions
sterling), for trading in human hair, for employing the
poor, for a grand dispensary (three millions), for the
discovery of perpetual motion, for paper manufacture,
and many more.

Altogether 200 companies (bubbles) were promoted
in that one year, 1720. The figure is for a year of
average business in our own time, neither particularly
good nor particularly bad. But for the England of
those days it was tremendous, Moreover, the list we
have enumerated bears testimony to flourishing imagina-
tions in the promoters themselves.

What was the “ spirit ”’ of these enterprises, the spirit that
gave them birth? In other words, what are we to under-
stand by speculation (not generally, but in so far as it
affected capitalist undertakings)? We shall find a reply
in the analysis of the speculator’s soul.

Speculative capitalist undertakings differ from the
three already mentioned in that both for their conception
and execution they call for far different qualities. In the
three previous instances, we saw a common basis of
outward force or pressure. The directors of these under-
takings are able to carry out their schemes by the aid of
their might, In the case of the freebooter, might comes
to the fore very much ; in the case of the landlord and
the civil servant it takes a secondary place. But the
speculator depends on a new power, which is within
himself—the power of suggestion; and this alone
enables him to realize his schemes. Instead of outward
force he looks to an inner force ; in place of fear he
sets hope.

And this is how he accomplishes his task. He him-
self, with all the passionate intensity he is capable of,
dreams the dream of the successful issue of his under-


92 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


taking. He sees himself already rich and influential, the
idol of his neighbours, the hero of famous deeds which
his fancy so magnifies that they become like elongated
shadows on a wall. Let him but have completed the
work in hand and others will be added unto it, until the
two hemispheres resound with the praise of his enter-
prises. He sees visions of giant undertakings ; his pulse
beats quickly like a person’s in a fever. The exaggera-
tion of his own ideas grows by reason of its own momen-
tum. His soul may be said to be in a condition of
lyrical enthusiasm. And the result of all this? He
carries others along with him, who help him to realize
his plan. If he is a specially able type of speculating
undertaker, he may possibly possess the poet’s gift of
calling up to the minds of his audience ravishing pictures
of realms of gold, in order to show the marvels he is
capable of producing and the blessings his enterprise will
shower on the world, as well as on those who co-operate
with him. He promises the treasures of Midas, and
knows how to make his words sound plausible. He
stirs up the imagination ; he arouses faith.133 He thus
awakes mighty instincts, and contrives to make them
subservient to his ends. Above all, he tickles the
gaming propensities, utilizing them to his advantage.
In short, there is no speculative undertaking on any large
scale without stock-exchange gambling. The gamble is
the soul of the business, or the flame that glows right
through it. ‘Eh bien!” cries Saccard, ‘‘ no speculation,
no business. Why on earth do you expect me to fork
out my money, to risk my future, when you make no
promise of an extraordinarily tempting return, of some
unlooked-for happiness, or that the heavens will open to
my gaze? Legitimate and moderate payment for work
done, rational equilibrium of everyday activities—bah !
Life with these only is an extensive waste of deadly dull-


FYPES Of CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 93


ness ; a morass in which man’s powers and capacities go
to sleep, and then waste away. But let a dream picture
of a sudden appear on the horizon, proclaim that with a
single sow you can get a hundred, hold out to the sleepy
souls the probability of chasing the impossible, show
them the millions to be earned in a short hour . . . and
the race commences at break-neck speed, energies are
whipped to boiling-point, and the crowd is so dense that
though everybody is working for his own selfish ends,
they produce living things magnificent in their beauty.”

In a word, you must stir up desire. Never mind what
means you adopt, if only the end is achieved. Attract
people’s attention, appeal to their curiosity, make them
want to buy. For all this, the louder you shout the
better. The speculator’s work is done, he has reached
his desired haven, when large numbers of people are
thrown into a state of feverish restlessness, ready to
provide the wherewithal for the completion of the specu-
lator’s undertaking. And the less simple the plan of any
undertaking is, the more difficult for the mind to grasp
it in its entirety, the better fitted it becomes for the
speculator’s purpose, and the more marvellous the results
he can promise. Accordingly, immense undertakings,
whether they be in banking or oversea commerce or
transport (the Suez and Panama Canals at once spring to
the mind), lend themselves best of all for the exercise of
the speculative spirit. Such has been the case from the
very first, and it has continued so to this day.


5. Tue TRADER.


Whenever a trader, from plain money-dealing or the
selling of wares, developed a true capitalist undertaking,
he also may be regarded as a type of undertaker. The
earliest businesses had something of the handicraft about


94 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


them ; bit by bit they were extended, until ultimately and
imperceptibly there was a transition from one economic
order to another. Whereas before quality had been the
main determinant factor, now quantity has taken its
place. This must have been quite a common process.
The early negotiatores developed into capitalist under-
takers, whether we turn to the Florentine wool merchants,
the English tradesmen, or the French marchands.
Obviously, a series of auspicious circumstances must have
contributed to enable this metamorphosis to take place.
The nature of these circumstances does not for the
moment concern us; it is sufficient to observe that the
metamorphosis was a frequently occurring phenomenon.
How frequent it is impossible to say ; but certainly
frequent enough.

Traders turned capitalist undertakers in yet another
way: they became manufacturers. A very important
process, this, whereby craftsmen, and sometimes even
agricultural labourers, were financed by the wealthy, until
they sank down to the position of wage-earners in a
capitalist undertaking. The “ clothiers” in England in
the 18th century are a case in point. We have already
seen that the middlemen who supplied the necessary cash
hailed from all manner of social groups. Of course, these
became capitalist undertakers only when they themselves
engaged in commerce. Often, too, the richer craftsmen
employed their less favoured brethren in this fashion.

Let us glance at a few of the early instances. The
Arte della Lana di Pisa, in the 14th century, forbade its
members to entrust to any of their workmen more than
25 pounds of wool, if they lived in a town, or 50 pounds
if they lived in the country. No Lanaiulo of the city of
Pisa might erect more than one weaving shed in which
work was done for wages (ad pregio).


In England, in 1537, we are told that in the gild of


IYPELS ‘OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 95


sheep-shearers the richer masters had lent their poorer
colleagues two sums of £100 and £50 respectively. There
was some disagreement about these debts, and it would
seem that the borrowers had been obliged to work them
off. ‘Davy Ellys had commandment to work with
Humphrey Hitchcock or with Thomas Saunders until
such time as they be both satisfied of their debts which is
due to them by the said Ellys.” '34 Again, a law of 1548
forbade the rich leather-sellers to provide their poorer
brethren with leather ; next year the law was repealed,
because ‘“‘ most of the artificers are poor men and unable
to provide such store of material as would serve their
turn.” 135 About the same time a similar tale came from
France. !36

Despite these instances, however, the ranks of the
middlemen or ‘‘clothiers’’ were recruited for the most
part from among traders ; so much so that this tendency
may be regarded as having been the general rule. The
process has not escaped the observation of historians,
Marx among them, who, reducing it to a simple formula,
speak of a gradual application of commercial capital to
the work of production. It was not quite so simple as
all that, as we have already seen. Nevertheless, cases
of plain traders who became directors of manufac-
turing enterprises occurred in great abundance, and in
some industries more than in others. Here are a few
illustrations.

The textile trade stands first. From the 14th century
onward, and possibly even earlier, clothsellers (and often,
too, silk-mercers) in almost every land gave out work to
craftsmen in their homes. The “clothiers” in England,
marchands drapiers in France, the members of the
“‘Calimala”’ gild—all were middlemen of tnis kind.
Mining must be assigned the second place. The third

is occupied by articles de luxe, while the fourth must


96 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


be accorded to tailoring, in which, certainly in the
17th century, the sellers of clothes (mostly Jews)
blossomed out into tailors on a large scale.137

Now, what manner of men were these newcomers,
creeping in silently to conquer the world? We shall be
in a position to answer this question if we direct our
attention to the then prevailing method of trade and
traffic, as well as to undertakings generally, among the
three peoples in whom the commercial spirit manifested
itself, not only earlier than elsewhere, but also in a more
perfect form. I refer to the Florentines, the Scotch, and
the Jews. Let us glance at each in turn.

It isa striking fact that the method of the Florentines!37*
in the Levant, certainly from the 13th century, differed
considerably from that of the Venetians, Pisans, or
Genoese. These fought; Florence traded. The former
looked to their mighty armies and their fleets; the
Florentines, even in the most flourishing period of their
commerce, had no navy, and not even any mercantile
marine to speak of. Their goods were carried by foreign
vessels chartered for the purpose, and if these required
protection the Florentines engaged the Provengal or
Genoese galleys. But they avoided dangerous routes if
they could, selecting land routes wherever possible, or
making long detours, in order to escape the pirates that
infested the Archipelago or the ships of neighbouring
states. Their success in foreign countries was due to
three things—money, treaties, and special knowledge, both
commercial and general. From the first the Florentines
were more financiers than ordinary traders, money-dealers
rather than dealers in commodities. As for their treaties,
whole lists are extant of advantageous agreements. But
their knowledge was, perhaps, of most importance.
For this the books of Balducci (Pegolotti) and Uzzano
are eloquent witnesses; the merchants of Florence


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 97


obtained their knowledge of commerce, of geography,
and other useful subjects from these sources. Pagnini
adduced these writers as a proof of the experience of the
Florentine merchants (prova della perizia de’ nostri mer-
canti). They were the camp-followers of the warlike
nations; when these were exhausted they took their
place; when these by their rude conduct lost the favour
of sultans and rulers, the Florentines knew how to
ingratiate themselves into their confidence by gifts and
fair promises. ‘That Venice should bleed to death by
fighting the Turks single-handed was the silent hope of
the Florentines. Accordingly they manceuvred so that the
war should not be made the common cause of the West
(1463). And when Pope Pius II invited the Florentines
to participate in it, they excused themselves by saying
that their merchants and ships could not be recalled
from Turkey in time,’ All the while they were angling
for the Sultan’s favour, ‘“‘they sat in his council, celebrated
his victories, and knew so well how to derive the greatest
possible advantage for themselves as traders, that the
Genoese in Pera and all other Italians in the Levant were
bursting with jealousy and anger.” No wonder, then,
that when the Venetians made a request to the Florentines
to join them against the Turks, the Signoria replied that
‘“‘the invitation had come just too late, seeing that a great
deal of cloth had already been made, and other commodities
purchased for export to Turkey.” A policy such as this
often brought with it the sacrifice of personal dignity, but
there was no need to shrink from that if commercial
advantage ensued. Thus, in the island of Cyprus, the
Florentines were not among the privileged nations. In
order to enjoy the discount of 2 per cent. on customs dues
which the Pisans had obtained, the Florentines pretended
they were Pisans, even though the latter made them pay
dearly for the ruse by the contempt with which they
7


98 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


treated them. But what is contempt when profit is
assured? Similarly, the Florentines thought nothing of
purchasing two harbours from the Doge of Genoa, who
required ready cash in order to keep his enemies at a
distance. The Florentines provided the 100,000 florins,
and took over the harbours on June 24, 1421. But the
transaction apparently brought them little joy, for in 1500
their goods were once more carried in foreign bottoms.
Drapers and bankers, it would seem, are spoiled for shipping.
For in all shipping enterprises, then even more than now,
there is a goodly dash of the freebooter. Freebooters,
however, the Florentines were not. ‘That is just wherein
their trade differed from that of their neighbours.

And as with trade, so with industry. Florentine
cloth-making, perhaps the first capitalistically organized
industry in the world, was an offspring of the trade in
wool. Once again, therefore, we meet with the com-
mercial spirit. Indeed, this spirit was reflected in the
public life of the city. Recall how it allowed its
great men to suffer, and behaved in a niggardly way
to its artists. What else could you expect, seeing that
ever since the 14th century the city had been governed
by bankers and drapers! It was only the finishing touch,
when, appropriately enough, a family of money-dealers
became the princes of the state.

So much for the Florentines. We turn now to the
Scotch, who may be called the Florentines of the
North, despite the many characteristics that differen-
tiated the two types. As the rise of the Medicis was
probably the only case in history of a family of bankers
becoming ruling princes, so, too, it must have been a
unique historical fact for one people to sell their king to
another for a lump sum, as did the Scotch with Charles.
I ought to add that in speaking of the Scotch I mean the
Lowlanders ; the Highlanders are an essentially different


TYPES OF CAPITALIST UNDERTAKINGS 99


type of folk. Indeed, the two are as opposed as the
poles.

Like the Florentines, the Scotch Lowlanders had little
love for a seafaring life, though the ocean washed their
coasts on both sides. The Scotch were never what might
be termed a maritime people on a large scale. About
the middle of the 17th century, the English East India
Company owned some 15,000 tons of shipping ; as early
as 1628 there sailed on the Thames estuary 7 Indiamen
of 4,200 tons, and 34 other craft with a tonnage of
7,850. How did the largest Scottish harbour, Leith,
compare with this? It had 12 ships, of a total tonnage
of 1,000 ; while Glasgow had 12 ships likewise, totalling
together 830 tons; Dundee had 10 ships of 498
tons.138 Until well into the 18th century the Scotch
possessed no fleet to speak of; before that their goods
were carried in English bottoms.

Their principal commerce was inland. They were the
middlemen between the Highlands and London. In so
far as they adventured abroad, they took fish, coal, or
plaiding to Ireland, Holland, Norway, and France,
bringing back hops, corn, flour, and butter. But
throughout their trafficking a mighty desire for gain
burned within them. During the 16th and 17th
centuries it was covered by an unparalleled bigotry ;
towards the end of the 17th century it burst out into
flame, so that the Scotch at home and abroad became
successful undertakers. The spirit of their enterprises
is illustrated by a proverb of theirs, which Karl Marx
quotes somewhere, “If you have made a little profit it
cannot be difficult to make a lot. The difficulty lies
in making a little.’ [‘‘Many a mickle makes a
muckle.’”|

In a word, the commercial spirit dominated Scotch
trading activities. A clever observer wrote as follows


100 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


about the Florentine-Scotch commercial attitude at the
beginning of the 19th century, contrasting it with that of
the Irish.1384 “Were it possible for the Irish by a
sudden coup de main to attain to the enjoyment of wealth,
they would seize upon it with alacrity. But ask them
to get rich slowly by cultivating double-entry, sitting over
miserable accounts until they are round-shouldered, and
they cannot do it. But the Scotchman can. His desire
to climb to the top of the tree is keen enough in all
conscience, but he can wait. He may not have the
momentary outburst of passion, but he does possess the
staying power that succeeds in the end.” ‘The Irishman
jumps about like a squirrel ; the Scotchman 1s content to
climb from branch to branch. ‘ This admirable trait in
the Scotchman, his extraordinary capacity of submission
to his superiors, and the speed with which he unfurls his
sail to every favourable breeze, have resulted not only
in filling London commercial houses with Scotch clerks,
but also in providing many an undertaking with a Scotch
partner.”

Put Florentine in place of Scotchman, and does not
the statement continue to hold good? It will hold good
also if in place of Scotchman you put Jew. I would refer
to my book on the Jews * for an elaborate study of the
Jewish commercial spirit. Besides, I should only be
repeating myself, were I to go into it here, seeing
that Florentine, Scotchman, and Jew are interchangeable
terms. Marti, in his commentary on Ezekiel, asserts of
the Jews in the Roman Empire that “ right down to this
very day the Syrians (Jews) still possess such a strongly
marked talent for commerce, that they traverse the two
hemispheres in search of gain. So great is their desire to
be constantly trafficking, that everywhere in the Roman
Empire they are on the look-out to draw their profits

* (The Jews and Modern Capitalism. T. Fisher Unwin.]


IYPES OF CAPITALIST “UNDERTAKINGS | 101


from war, murder, or assassination.” How apposite for
the position of the Jews in the world! They derive their
profits from war, murder, or assassination ; while other
peoples seek to derive it dy means of war, murder,
or assassination. Without a navy, without an army, the
Jews work their way up to the position of being
the mighty ones of the earth, using as their weapons
those of the Florentines—money, treaties (i.e. contracts),
and knowledge. All undertakings that they establish are
born of the commercial spirit; all Jews who become
capitalist undertakers are types of the trader. Hence our
mention of them here.


6. THe CRAFTSMAN.


One last type of undertaker remains. At first sight,
it may seem contradictory to class the craftsman as an
undertaker. What I mean by craftsman, however, is
what is termed in English ‘“ manufacturer,” and in
French fabricant (in contradistinction to the extrepreneur,
who is a child of commerce).!39 I have in my mind the
‘‘ manu-facturer,” the man who works with his hands,
striving hard to extend his concern, until ultimately it
becomes a capitalist undertaking. You know the type:
his hands are toil-scarred; his head is almost four-
square; his manners are a bit rough; until his silver
wedding-day he lives in the old house amid the old
furniture, and then, at the wish of his only daughter,
whom he worships, and who has had the education which
he so painfully lacks, he engages an architect to put up
a mansion for him. It is our old friend, the self-made
man. His commercial aptitudes are limited; but he is
the father of the big capitalist undertakers.

In some important industries, such as machine-building,
this type was the rule in all the earliest capitalist under-


102 .THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


takings. But he is to be found scattered over all the
industries. In the development of the woollen manufac-
ture his part was no small one.!39* All countries are
acquainted with him, and it was in the large towns that
he was most frequently met.14° To estimate his influence
by reference to statistics is of course quite impossible ;
just as it is in the case of the other types.

The craftsman as an undertaker bears the mark of the
trader ; both have much in common. And though a
whole world separates them from the speculative under-
taker, they do share with him their abhorrence of appeals
to force, or reliance on anything approaching seigniorial
rights—which is the characteristic of the three first types
of undertakers on our list. It is clear that the craftsman
who has won for himself the position of a capitalist
undertaker must be a negotiator or dealer, carving out
his way by peaceful efforts, by silver-tongued oratory, by
skilful contracts with those who supply his raw materials,
with his employees and with his customers. But he must
be more than this. He must possess certain moral
qualities to a greater degree than is required by the other
types of undertakers. Put into two words, he must be
able to calculate and to save. Thus a new spirit must
dominate him—him first, and the other types of
capitalist undertakers later ; until it becomes a component
part of the spirit of capitalism. What is the nature of
this new spirit? The following chapters will give the
answer.


SECTION II
THE MIDDLE-CLASS OUTLOOK


CHAPTER VII
MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES


Wuat to-day is called the capitalist spirit comprises
within itself, besides the spirit of enterprise and the desire
for gain, a complexity of certain qualities, to which I
shall apply the term ‘middle-class virtues.” These
include all the views and convictions (and, of course, the
actions and conduct based upon them) of a respectable
citizen and head of a family, no less than of an honest
tradesman. Expressed a little differently, it merely
means that in every perfect capitalist undertaker you will
find a respectable citizen. And this respectable citizen—
what manner of man is he? Where did he first appear ?

To the best of my knowledge we make the acquaintance
of the citizen—the ‘ Compleat citizen ”’—for the first
time in Florence, at the close of the 14th century ;
undoubtedly he is the child of the Trecento. And by
this statement it at once becomes apparent that by citizen
I do not mean every town-dweller, nor yet every trader
or craftsman. I apply the term to a peculiar complex
which developed from all these groups of pseudo-citizens,
to a being with a psychology all his own. And to
describe him I can find no better word than that which,


103


104 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


when in inverted commas, we take to represent a type
and not a social class, i.e. the ‘ bourgeois.”

Now, why do I suggest Florence as the cradle of this
type? Only because the evidence for his existence there
already in the 15th century is remarkably abundant.'41
A whole list of tradesmen and others intimately acquainted
with trade (and who was not in the New York of the
Quattrocento ?) have bequeathed to us their views, set
down in valuable memoirs or books of edification, from
the pages of which there steps a perfect picture of
Benjamin Franklin, the incarnation of the spirit of
respectable citizenship. The maxims that should govern
life, the rules that make for respectability (which we
usually first associate with the 17th and 18th centuries),
meet us here in the pages of the Florentine money-
changers and cloth merchants, in whose lives they became
a dominating influence already as early as the year 1450.

L. B. Alberti was the most perfect type of the “‘ bour-
geois”” of those days, and his works provide a mine of
information for obtaining an insight into the outlook
of that generation of middle-class folk. De/ governo
della famiglia (“On the government of a family’’) is
from his pen, and you may find in it the same opinions
which in a later age were expressed by Daniel Defoe and
Benjamin Franklin. Alberti’s book is of still greater
value because, as we know, it was already a classic in its
own time. It was much admired and widely read ; and
other wise fathers of families quoted it either in full or
in a shortened version,

We are justified, therefore, in assuming that Alberti’s
views were generally shared by a large number of people ;
and that they express the outlook on life then current in
tradesmen’s circles. What those views were I shall record
in outline, supplementing them by those of some of the
contemporaries of Alberti. Of course, we shall deal only


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 105


with such of his opinions and maxims as have any bearing,
direct or indirect, on economic activities.

The views fall naturally into two groups, one dealing
with the internal organization of business, and the other
with the relationship between shopkeepers and customers
and shopkeepers and the greater world beyond. I have
labelled the first group “ Holy Economy,” and the second
*“‘ Business Morality.”


1. Hoty Economy.


Alberti speaks of thrift as being “ holy ”’—sancta cosa la
masserizia. What exactly he means by massertzia he
does not say in any one place. But scattered up and
down his book are references to it. If we sum them all
up we shall find a more or less complete conception.

A wise economy, according to Alberti, calls for certain
fundamental things.

1. It calls first for thought. A good manager always
carefully thinks out what it is he has to do. He con-
cerns himself with ways and means; devotes himself
entirely to the task before him ; is not ashamed to speak
of it, in no wise deeming it low or menial ; indeed, he is
rather proud of it. What was new about all this was
that it received general recognition, even by the rich and
the great. The chapman had always to be careful of the
pennies, and the small shopkeeper’s life was taken up with
making both ends meet. That was only to be expected.
But the wealthy man and the man of influence, the man
who had as much as a feudal lord of old—that he, too,
should give a thought to balancing income and expendi-
ture, that was the novelty!

The mere statement of this already implies that a new
standpoint had been reached. The maxims of the old
seigniorial way of life were now utterly rejected. Expen-


1066 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


diture had dominated the feudal economy, as we have
already observed. The feudal lord needed so much to live
on or to spend ; consequently, that amount had to be forth-
coming. But now income was the governing factor in all
economic activities. ‘‘ Be mindful, O my sons, never to let
your expenditure exceed your income. 142 That is the
last word of wisdom in the third volume of Alberti’s
work, as, indeed, it is the conclusion of Pandolfini’s
treatise ; it is the alpha and omega of all successful
domestic economy, the credo of every good “ bourgeois,”
the motto of the new age, the quintessence of the worldly
philosophy of all worthy folk.

2. All middle-class capitalist economic activities rested
on this foundation, so that the thought that was called
for as the first fundamental need was given an objective—
thrift, which became the second.

Not enforced thrift, mind you, but thrift exercised
willingly. Poor folk knew the first kind of thrift from
bitter experience. But now rich men became thrifty, and
this was the unheard-of thing. Before long, the original
doctrine of not spending more than you were earning
gave rise to its corollary of actually spending less than you
were earning. The idea of saving thus came into the
world ; of saving not as a necessity but as a virtue. To
manage economically now became the ideal even of the
rich, in so far as they belonged to the middle class. A
man like Giovanni Ruccellai, who owned thousands,
adopted the maxims of a country yokel, that “to save
one penny is more honourable than to spend a hundred.” 143
Seigniorial conduct was no longer regarded as the ideal
to aim at; a well-ordered economy was what mattered
most.!44 Thrift was loved ; thrift was elevated to the
position of being the one virtue of economic activities.
A passage or two from Alberti’s writings will illustrate
how much it was held in reverence.


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 107


In a thousand variations you will find the doctrine
expressed that the way to riches is not merely to earn
much but also to spend little ; the way to poverty to
be wasteful and extravagant.145 “ Beware of unnecessary
expenditure as of a deadly foe”; “it is madness to
spend one penny more than is absolutely essential” ;
“just as being a spendthrift is bad, so to be economical
is good, useful and praiseworthy”; “thrift hurts no
one, while it is useful to the family”; “thrift is holy.”
**Do you know in whom my soul finds most pleasure ?
In those who spend their money on just what they
need and no more, laying by the surplus; these I call
thrifty, successful managers.” 146 Or once more : ‘* Who
is a good manager? One who can hold the balance
evenly between Too-much and Too-little. But what is
Too-much, and what Too-little ? It is not difficult to say.
No expenditure should surpass what is absolutely needful,
nor should it fall below what is required for decent
living.” 147

Alberti actually has a table of different kinds of
expenditure. Those for food and clothing he regards as
necessary; any others he divided into three categories.
First, those that are desirable, because without them your
credit, or the good name of your family, might be
endangered. Of this sort is expenditure on your house,
or your country residence, or your warehouse. Then
comes that expenditure which is not really essential, but
at the same time not blameworthy. If you incur it, you
derive pleasure; if you don’t, there is no harm done.
Expenditure of this sort is that for livery stables, or books,
or mural paintings. Finally, the third class of expendi-
ture is to be condemned, for it is madness. Such is the
upkeep of retainers, who are worse than wild beasts.148
(Note the hatred of anything smacking of feudalism.)


Moreover, necessary expenditure should be incurred


108 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


at once; unnecessary should be put off as long as
possible. “Why?” ask the disciples of their master.
‘“‘ We should like to hear your reasons, for we know you
do nothing without careful consideration.” ‘I will tell
you,” replies Gianozzo. “If I postpone spending, the
desire may possibly vanish, and I shall thus save what I
had intended spending. If, however, the desire remains,
at any rate I have sufficient time to look around for the
cheapest way of getting what I want.” 149

For a perfect economy in business (and in life) you
require not only thrift (which may be termed economy
of matter) but also the proper co-ordinating of actions,
and the profitable employment of time (what may be
termed the economy of mind). This the master preaches
insistently and incessantly. We are to be scrupulously
careful in the management of three things—our soul,
our body, and, most of all, our time. How? By being
usefully and properly occupied. ‘ Throughout the
whole of my life I have striven to do useful and honour-
able things.” 149° But occupation in itself suffices. “I
use my body, my soul, and my time in as reasonable
a way as may be. I try to save as much as I can of
each, and to lose as little as possible.” 15° Therefore,
avoid idleness, Idleness and extravagance are the two
deadly sins. Idleness corrupts the body no less than
the mind ;15! it breeds dishonour and shame. Ever
since the world began the heart of the idler has been
the fount of all evil. There is nothing so hurtful
and noxious to public and private life as idle citizens.
Idleness leads to luxuriousness, and luxuriousness to
breaking the law.152

Once the disciples protested that they could not possibly
remember and obey all the wise teachings of the master.
Whereupon he replied, the remedy lay close at hand : let


them but economize their time. ‘‘ Whoso loses no time can


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 109


accomplish almost everything ; and he who has the gift
of employing his time wisely will very soon be master of
every circumstance.” 153 Gianozzo then proceeds to give
directions as to how time may be most usefully employed.
“To lose not even one iota of that most precious good,
Time, I follow this rule. I am never idle; sleep I flee
from, and I lay me down only when weariness overcomes
me. . . . How I:flee from sleep and idleness? I make it
my business always to have some occupation. And to
achieve my aim successfully, I provide myself every
morning with a time-table for the day. I enumerate my
duties, assigning to each a definite time. This shail be
done in the morning, that in the afternoon, the other in
the evening. In this wise I accomplish my tasks with
perfect smoothness, almost without any effort... . In
the evening before I retire to rest I recall everything I
have done. . . . I had much liefer lose sleep than time.” 154

Sermonizing in this strain continues with endless
repetition (which, by the way, does not say much for
his economy of words).

But the main thing for the business man to remember
is this: Diligence and application are the sources of
wealth. <‘‘ Profit increases with the extension of business,
because the extension of business increases our diligence
and work.”’ 155

If there are any details still wanting in this sketch of
the spirit that filled the soul of the respectable, middle-
class Florentine citizen of the 15th century, they will be
completed by reference to the description, from the pen
of a gifted writer,!5° of the relations of Leonardo da
Vinci.

Leonardo’s brother Lorenzo was much distressed at
the rumours current as to Leonardo’s lack of religion.
This Lorenzo, scarcely out of his teens, was a diligent
disciple of Savonarola, had a business of his own, and


110 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


belonged to the wool-combers’ craft in Florence. Many
a time and oft in the presence of his father he would
turn the conversation with Leonardo to the Christian
religion, and the necessity for penitence and humility,
warning him against the heterodox opinions of certain of
the newer philosophers, and once he presented him with
a book on the soul’s salvation, of which he himself was
the author.

Leonardo, seated at the fire in the family sitting-room,
drew out the carefully written volume. Tavola de confes-
sionario descripto per me, Lorenzo di Ser Pierro da Vinci,
Fiorentino, mandata alla Nanna, mia cognata—such was its
title. (A book of confessions, written by me, Lorenzo
di Ser Pierro da Vinci, a Florentine, and dedicated to my
sister-in-law Nanna.) Then followed the legend written
in smaller script : ‘ An exceedingly useful handbook for
all those who desire to confess their sins. Take up the
book and read therein. And when you come across your
sins in the table of contents, be sure and mark the
passage. But about those sins of which you feel yourself
guiltless, you need not read. Such passages as these,
however, will no doubt be of service to others. For, rest
assured, a thousand tongues would be unable to complete
the entire list.”

Then came an inventory of sins most scrupulously
compiled by this wool-comber, with all the precision of a
linendraper.

Leonardo directed his attention to the allegorical
description of the four cardinal Christian virtues— Wisdom,
with its three countenances in token of its insight into
the Present, the Past, andthe Future ; Justice, with sword
and scales; Strength, resting on a pillar; and Modera-
tion, a circle in one hand and in the other a pair of
scissors, “with which to cut off every superfluity.”
Leonardo seemed to recognize the spirit that breathed in


MIDDLE-CLASS, VIRTUES ii!


the leaves of the volume. It was the old fear of God he
knew so well in the days of his childhood, the fear of God
which had been passed on from one generation of his
family to another.

Already a hundred years before he was born, his ances-
tors had been just such honourable, thrifty, God-fearing
officials of the Florentine municipality as was his own
father, Ser Pierro. As early as 1339, there was mentioned
for the first time in the city records the artist’s great-
. grandfather, a certain Ser Guido di Ser Michele da Vinci,
who appears to have been WNosajo to the government.
Quite easily the artist recalled the picture of his grand-
father, Antonio, with his wise saws, that were but the
duplicates of those of his own brother, Lorenzo. The old
man taught his children never to aim too high, neither
at glory, nor honours, positions in the state or in the
army, nor yet at great riches or great learning. ‘ The
surest way of life,” he used to assert, “is to keep to the
proper mean.”

Leonardo could almost persuade himself that he heard
the gentle, insistent voice of the old man laying down the
life-maxim of the golden mean. ‘My children,” he
would say, “take as your model the ants, who to-day
already have a care for the needs of the morrow. Be
thrifty and moderate. To whom shall 1 compare a prcs-
perous householder, or a good paterfamilias? I will
liken him to a spider, sitting in the centre of her wide-
spread web, yet ever on the alert to strengthen and repair
if any one thread tremble never so lightly.”” He expected
of his family that all its members should assemble every
evening at the sound of the Ave-Maria bell. He him-
self went the round of the house, shut the gates, took the
keys to his bed-chamber, and placed them under his
pillow. Not the smallest detail of the household escaped
his attention. He knew whether the cattle had had too


m2 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


little hay or not, whether the maid turned up the lamp
wick too high, and so used too much oil. His eye was
everywhere, but withal he was not miserly. The best cloth
money could buy was furnished for his attire, and he
counselled his children to do likewise. The high prices
did not frighten him, for, as he remarked, you did not
have to replace clothing of excellent material so frequently.
And was not this cheapest in the end?

According to the old man’s conception, the family was
to live united under one roof, ‘for,’ so he reasoned,
“‘ when all eat at one table, one tablecloth and one light
suffice. But if there are two groups, they require two
tablecloths and two lights. Moreover, one fire can warm
the whole company. For two, however, you need two
fires. And so in all things.”

Towards women he was somewhat  supercilious.
«Their sphere was cooking and children; they should
never interfere in their husbands’ concerns; Whoso
relies On a woman’s wisdom is a fool.”

Now and again the old sage became subtle. ‘‘ Children
dear,” he exclaimed, “be charitable as our Holy Church
ordains. Nevertheless, cultivate rather your fortunate
than your unfortunate friends, and the rich rather than
the poor. The highest art in life is to appear charitable,
and to use craft to overcome the crafty.”

It would seem that he was rather inclined to craftiness.
He directed his children to plant their fruit trees on the
extreme boundary of their field, so that the shade might
fall on the neighbouring domain. He taught them to
refuse an appeal for a loan with polite excuses, adding,
“You have then a twofold superiority—you retain your
money, and you can mock at the man who schemed to
cheat you. But if he who asked the favour was an
educated man, he will understand you, and will only
appreciate you the more for the courtesy with which you


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES hig


said him nay. A knave takes; but he who gives is a
fool. But if it be a question of helping relatives or
members of the household, your policy is clear. Put at
their disposal not only your money but your very life,
your work, your honour. For the family a man should
sacrifice his all. It is more honourable and profitable
to help your kith and kin rather than strangers.”

And now, as after an absence of thirty years Leonardo
sat once more under his grandfather’s roof, while the
wind moaned without, and the fire burned brightly on the
hearth, he realized to the full how his whole life
had been one long contradiction of the wisdom of his
ancestor. It had overflowed with abundance and super-
fluity, that superfluity which, according to his brother
Lorenzo, should be clipped off by the iron shears of the
Goddess of Moderation.


If we trace the development of the middle-class virtues
through the centuries, we shall have to take stock of
their intensive and extensive growth alike ; that is to say,
of the enlargement of the sum-total of the virtues them-
selves, and of their acceptance by the great body of
the people. The first is not difficult, seeing that we are
well informed as to the details by a number of treatises
still extant ; but as for the latter, we shall be able only to
make deductions from certain given circumstances.

An intensive growth of the middle-class virtues from
the stage in which the Italian writers of the 14th century
left them never, as a matter of fact, really took place.
Later generations of tradesmen were taught nothing
different from that which Alberti asked his disciples to
lay to heart. Between the mode of life of Leonardo’s
grandfather and that of Benjamin Franklin there is not
the least divergence. The fundamental doctrines are the
same, reappearing in later centuries almost in the

8


114 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


identical wording ; and the standard authorities on the
subject in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries sound
almost as though they were translations of Alberti and no
more. A reference to one or two representative treatises
will prove this right up to the hilt.

Thus we find that in the 16th century the charac-
teristic books were those on husbandry, and they
abounded in every country.

The Spaniard Herrera had little sympathy tor trade.
But the virtues he counsels the husbandman to acquire
are none other than those which Alberti laid down
for the prosperous draper. The farmer should carefully
plan out his course of action; he should avoid idleness
like the very Devil; he is to be thoroughly acquainted
with all branches of his business.!57

And what says Etienne, the Frenchman? The good
husbandman should spend his spare time in thinking over
his concerns, not neglecting them for the chase, or
conviviality, or the entertainment of friends. Above all,
he is to map out every minute of his time ; and as for his
expenditure, it should never exceed his incomings.
Industry will enable the patient farmer to win produce
from even the least fertile soil. Moreover, as the old
proverb hath it, the skilful husbandman is more
concerned with profits and making things go as far as
possible, than with the satisfaction of momentary wants
and immediate use.!58

Our Italian instance is Tanara,!59 whose principal
watchword is Utility. He advised the farmer never to
plant in his garden those flowers that yielded no return.
The farmer should occupy himself with marketable
produce alone. Was it not the goodly appearance of
Eden that brought Adam to sin, and with him, all of us
likewise? Riches cannot be obtained by service at court,
or in the army, or even by alchemy. There is only one
sovereign method : to be thrifty.


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 115


The 17th century produced numerous “Books for
Merchants” and “Commercial Dictionaries,” wherein
business-men, young and old, were admonished to order
their lives and their affairs in accordance with reason and
virtue. The same doctrines again! Think over every-
thing ; arrange everything carefully, be sober, industrious,
and thrifty, and the good things of the earth shall be yours.
You will become an honoured citizen and a wealthy man.

One of the best known of these text-books is Savary’s
Le parfait négociant, dedicated to Colbert. It is mainly
concerned with the art of commerce, but commercial
morality is not omitted either. The tradesman’s success,
according to Savary, depends on five things—perfect
knowledge, orderly arrangement, industry, and economy
(de Pépargne et de l’economie de leur maison), and com-
mercial morality.16°

Commercial morality occupies an even more important
place in Daniel Defoe’s Complete English Tradesman.*®1
** Diligence and application in business ” is the title of his
fifth epistle, and the author lays an immense amount of
stress on both. “Let the man have the most perfect
knowledge of his trade, and the best situation for his
shop, yet without application nothing will go on.” The
tradesman should also avoid all pleasures and diversions,
even of the most harmless kind; they are a cause of
disaster. ‘‘ Of innocentjdiversions, as they are called, how
fatal to the tradesman, especially to the younger sort,”
is the heading of the ninth chapter, in the fourth edition
of the book. But sporting and seigniorial amusements
he denounces most of all. ‘When I see a young shop-
keeper keep horses, ride a-hunting, learn dog language
and keep the sportman’s brogue upon their tongues, I
will not say I read their destiny, for I am no fortune-
teller, but I do say I am always afraid of them.” As for
expensive living, “it is a kind of slow fever . . . a secret
enemy that feeds upon the vitals . . . it feeds upon the


116 .7HE QUINTESSENCE’ OF CAPITALISM


life and blood of the tradesman ’”’—and more in the same
strain. The wise tradesman avoids “ (1) expensive house-
keeping or family extravagance, (2) expensive dressing or
the extravagance of fine clothes, (3) expensive company
or keeping company above himself, and (4) expensive
equipages, making a show and ostentation in the world.”
The merchant should remember that “trade is not a ball
where people appear in masque and act a part to make
sport... but ‘tis a plain, visible scene of honest
life . . . supported by prudence and frugality.” And
the end of the matter ? That ‘ prudent management and
frugal living will increase any fortune to any degree,” and
that “if the expense is kept under the revenue, the man
will always grow; if not, I need not say what will follow.”

The numerous editions of the writings of Savary and
Defoe lead us on well into the 18th century. The thread
they had spun was taken up and continued by men like
Benjamin Franklin. Indeed, Defoe was one of Franklin’s
favourite authors.

In Benjamin Franklin, the man who (according to
Balzac) was the inventor of the lightning rod, the hoax,
and the Republic, the middle-class view of life reached
its zenith. The sobriety and exactness of this American
almost take one’s breath away. Everything with him
became a rule, and was measured by the proper standard,
and his every action was governed by economy. Indeed,
he worshipped economy. He relates how on one occasion
he was present at a social gathering where a new lamp was
being admired. The guests inquired whether the new
lamp cost more than the one it had replaced, for it was
eminently desirable to make the illuminating of rooms as
cheap as possible. ‘I was delighted,” says Franklin, “to
note this general tendency to economy, which I specially
love.” 162, That was the high-water mark of his
philosophy and his life.


His insistence on the value of time is universally


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 117


known; as is also the oft-quoted dictum that “Time is
money,” which is from his pen.'63  “ But dost thou love
life, then do not squander time, for that’s the stuff life
is made of. . . . How much more than is necessary do
we spend in sleep, forgetting that the sleeping fox catches
no poultry, and that there will be sleeping enough in the
grave. .. . If time be of all things the most precious,
wasting time must be . . . the greatest prodigality.” 164

Economy of time is only paralleled by economy of
money. ‘If you would be wealthy . . . think of saving
as well as of getting. The Indies have not made Spain
rich because her outgoes are greater than her incomes.
Away then with your expensive follies.


‘Get what you can, and what you get, hold;
*Tis the stone that will turn all your lead into Gold ! *6


In short, the way to wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the way
to market. It depends chiefly on two words, industry and frugality ;
that is, waste neither time nor money, but make the best use of both.
Without industry and frugality nothing will do, and with them
everything, He that gets all he can honestly, and saves all he gets
(necessary expenses excepted, cf. Alberti), will certainly become rich,
if that Being who governs the world, to whom all should look fora
blessing on their honest endeavours, doth not, in His wise providence,
otherwise determine.*


Franklin’s whole life was one long worship of “ holy
economy.” In his memoirs he set forth what virtues
were the best, and how he educated himself to be a
“virtuous” man in the light of these virtues. In his
scheme the “bourgeois” view of life received its final
and highest expression. The following passage from his
Autobiography %®7 is more than usually instructive.


It was about this time I conceived the bold and arduous project
of arriving at moral perfection. I wished to live without committing
any fault at any time ; I would conquer all that either natural inclina-
tion, custom, or company might lead me into, . . . I concluded at
length that the mere speculative conviction that it was our interest to
be completely virtuous, was not sufficient to prevent our slipping ;


118 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


and that the contrary habits must be broken, and good ones acquired
and established, before we can have any dependence on a steady,
uniform rectitude of conduct. For this purpose I therefore contrived
the following method.

In the various enumeration of the moral virtues I had met with in
my reading, I found the catalogue more or less numerous, as different
writers included more or fewer ideas under the same name... . I
proposed to myself, for the sake of clearness, to use rather more
names, with fewer ideas annexed to each, than a few names with
more ideas ; and I included under thirteen names of virtues all that at
that time occurred to me as necessary or desirable, and annexed to each
a short precept, which fully expressed the extent I gave toits meaning.

The names of the virtues, with their precepts, were :

1. Temperance.—Eat not to dullness, drink not to elevation.

2. Silence.—Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself ;
avoid trifling conversation.

3. Order.—Let all your things have their places ; let each part
of your business have its time.

4. Resolution.—Resolve to perform what you ought; perform
without fail what you resolve.

5. Frugality—Make no expense but to do good to others or
yourself, i.e, waste nothing.

6. Industry.—Lose no time ; be always employed in something
useful ; cut off all unnecessary actions.

7. Sincerity. —Use no hurtful deceit ; think innocently and justly,
and if you speak, speak accordingly.

8. Fustice—Wrong none by doing injuries, or omitting the
benefits that are your duty.

9. Moderation.—Avoid extremes; forbear resenting injuries so
much as you think they deserve.

10. Cleanliness—Tolerate no uncleanness in body, clothes, or
habitation.

11. Tranquillity —Be not disturbed at trifles, or at accidents
common or unavoidable.

12. Chastity—Rarely use venery but for health or offspring,
never to dullness, or the injury of your own or another’s
peace or reputation,

13. Humility—Imitate Jesus and Socrates.


These virtues Franklin, as he tells us, attempted to
acquire one by one. Then—


Conceiving that, agreeably to the advice or Pythagoras in his


‘


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 119


Golden Verses, daily examination would be necessary, I contrived the
following method for conducting that examination,

I made a little book, in which I allotted a page for each of the
virtues [this “little book ” is dated July 1, 1733]. I ruled each page
with red ink, so as to have seven columns, one for each day of the
week, marking each column with a letter for the day. I crossed these
columns with thirteen red lines, marking the beginning of each line
with the first letter of one of the virtues, on which line, and in its
proper column, I might mark, by a little black spot, every fault I
found upon examination to have been committed respecting that virtue
upon that day.

Form of the page.


TEMPERANCE


Eat not to dullness.
Drink not to elevation.


S. M. Te WwW. as F. S.
i:
S ® C) @ ®
: O ® @ ® J ® LM ® cS)
Ie © e , : G . ®
Bey °
I hi ae ° eae
e S. lett eine


ata a ONS he


120 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


He determined to give a week’s attention to each of
the virtues in succession, so that after thirteen weeks’
daily examination he hoped that the clean pages would
set forth the story of his final achievement.

Observe the verisimilitude in the outlook of Leonardo’s
grandfather and the father of the American Republic.
There is an interval of four hundred years between them,
but how little has changed. They are “ bourgeois ”’
both.

But the important question at this stage is, Did the
multitude live up to the high standard of the wise
preceptors? Did every tradesman model his life in
accordance with Benjamin Franklin’s scheme of virtue?

From the complaints of the wise preceptors themselves,
it rather looks as though they were prophets crying in
the wilderness. Savary and Defoe, for example, lash the
wickedness of their generation, more especially its luxury
and good living. Nevertheless, things were not quite so
black as might at first sight appear. I am inclined to
believe that the spirit of industry, thrift, and moderation,
in a word, the spirit of those virtues that made the good
“bourgeois,” slowly settled upon the capitalist under-
takers of modern times, anyhow upon those who sprang
from the trading and craftsman class (types 4, 5 and 6 in
the last chapter). There may have been variations in
different lands in the degree of the intensity of this spirit.
Perhaps the French of the 17th and 18th centuries were
less under its influence than the Dutch or the Americans.
Certainly, there is evidence to that effect.168 But on the
whole it was spreading, and the “ bourgeois” spirit came
to be acomponent part of the capitalist spirit. Were
this not so, how comes it that the earliest representatives
of Capitalism spoke with the voice of the “ bourgeois” ?
Does it not follow that it was only in the nature of things
that they should have done so? The books which set


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 121


forth the middle-class virtues were amongst the most
popular of the day. Consequently, a very large number
of people must have been acquainted with the “ bourgeois ”
spirit. ‘ Frugality, Industry, Moderation” was the motto
that might have been observed hung up in letters of gold
in many a warehouse and shop. This is not surprising, if
we remember that Alberti became a classic, Defoe was
read in two continents, and as for Benjamin Franklin’s
teaching, was there ever a literary man whose works
were so scattered over the globe? The quintessence
of Franklin’s teaching is to be found in Poor Richara’s
Almanac, which he published annually for quite a
number of years. ‘Father Abraham’s Speech to the
American People at an Auction,” which appeared in the
Almanac for 1758, is the best sermon ever preached upon
industry and frugality. Reprinted as The Way to
Wealth, it became at once familiar to the world. It was
copied into all the newspapers of the Continent and
scattered broadcast over the face of the earth. ‘‘ Seventy
editions of it have been printed in English, fifty-six in
French, eleven in German, and nine in Italian. It has
been translated into Spanish, Danish, Swedish, Welsh,
Polish, Gaelic, Russian, Bohemian, Dutch, Catalan,
Chinese, modern Greek, and phonetic writing. It has
been printed at least four hundred times, and 1s to-day as
popular as ever.” 169

Does not this tend to prove that the author’s influence
was widely extended ?


2. Business Moratity.


To be a successful tradesman it is essential not only to
arrange one’s business most economically internally, but
also to have a proper relationship to the world beyond.
The rules and regulations that govern the nature of this


122 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


relationship, I term business morality; and I use the
second word in a double sense—morality in carrying on
business, and personal morality as a business man. We
may say morality im business, and morality for business.

In the first sense of the word, I am thinking of such
things as making contracts, or one’s relation to one’s
customers. Commercial honesty it has sometimes been
called ; meaning thereby trustworthiness, making your
word your bond, serving customers with consideration,
punctuality in payments, and so on. Only as capitalist
undertakings have grown up has this form of morality
become more and more necessary. It is thus included
in the entity middle-class virtues. For, can you imagine
‘“‘honesty ” (using the word in the sense here indicated)
as applied to a peasant farmer or a craftsman? Hardly.
You could only use the word when status had given place
to contract, when economic relationships had lost the
personal touch that was theirs in the earliest times. Call
it “contract morality”’ and the meaning is apparent.

In its earliest form this, too, was a personal virtue.
Those same Florentine drapers who, as we have already
noted, were the fathers of middle-class virtues, cultivated
this one likewise. ‘¢ There was never (!) any one in our
family who at any time broke his word,” says Alberti.
“We kept our promises simply and truthfully, and so we
became known in Italy and in foreign parts as great
merchants.” 17°

The principle was preached by all the subsequent
mentors of tradesmen ; the wording is almost identical
in each case.

But the degree of “commercial honesty ”’ was not the
same among all nations at all times. As a general rule,
it may be observed that it increased in strength with the
development of capitalism. It is interesting to note in
this connection how Englishmen, who in later centuries


MIDDLE-CLASS VIRTUES 123


were looked upon as the model of commercial honesty,
had a poor reputation in this respect in the 17th century.
A mass of evidence would go to show that the Dutch
were regarded as superior to the English, so far as this
point was concerned.!7!

As for the second sense in the usage of the term
‘‘ business morality,” I have in mind the personal morality
of the business man. This likewise became an integral
part of the middle-class virtues with the rise of capitalism.
From that time onwards it appeared advantageous, from
a business point of view, to cultivate certain virtues; at
any rate, to appear to possess them. Their sum total
comprises middle-class respectability. You must live in
accordance with the moral code of your class—that
became the first commandment of the successful business
man. In essence this meant—eschew all irregularities ;
appear in respectable society ; avoid drinking, gambling,
and women ; go to church regularly ; in a word, always
wear the aspect of true respectability, and all for the sake
of your business. Such a moral rule of life will assure
your credit.

Alberti calls this middle-class respectability onesta, and
itis the backbone of his moral code. All other virtues
branch off from this ; they derive their significance from
it. Onesta, in Alberti’s view, should always accompany
us as a public, righteous, practical and wise middleman,
weighing, measuring, valuing our every act, our every
thought, our every wish. Ovesta gives the final polish to
all our conduct. From of old she has been and remains
the best teacher of virtue, a true companion of morality,
the admirable mother of a peaceful and happy existence.
Besides, and this is the main point, onesta is of exceeding
great use to us. Hence, if we cultivate her, we shall
attain to riches, fame, popularity, and honour.!72

It is the same story through the ages. Italian onesta


124. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


becomes French honnéteté and English honesty. In all
three instances the meaning is clear—the totality of all
that is respectable. Often enough an air of sanctimonious-
ness accompanies it, seeing that for business purposes the
mere appearance of respectability is sufficient. As a
matter of fact, it does not by any means suffice actually
to de respectable. You must be regarded as such. Hence
Benjamin Franklin resolved that ‘in order to secure my
credit and character as a tradesman, I took care not only
to be in reality industrious and frugal, but to avoid the
appearance to the contrary. I dressed plain, and was
seen at no places of idle diversion; I never went out
a-fishing or shooting.” 173


CHAPTER VIII


THE ART OF CALCULATION


A GReaT part of capitalist economy is taken up with
the making of contracts and agreements concerning
commodities and services that have a money value
(as, the purchase of the means of production, the sale
of the finished products, the engaging of labour, and so
forth). Moreover, the beginning and the end of
capitalist economic activities is a sum of money. Conse-
quently, calculation forms an important element in the
capitalist spirit, and this was recognized quite early in the
history of capitalism.!74 By calculation I mean the
tendency, the habit, perhaps more—the capacity, to think
of the universe in terms of figures, and to transform
these figures into a well-knit system of income and
expenditure. The figures, I need hardly add, always
express a value, and the whole system is intended to
demonstrate whether a plus or a minus is the resultant,
thus showing whether the undertaking is likely to bring
profit or loss,

The mechanism of calculation rests on two branches
of study, commercial arithmetic and book-keeping.

Three ways are open to us for the study of the rise and
growth of the calculating habit. We may trace its
history by directing our attention to stages in the
development of technical apparatus ; or we may see from
extant ledgers, day-books and kindred memoranda how


125


126° THE OUINTESSENCEL (CP UCALI TALS


people in any period calculated; or, finally, we may
judge of the progress of the calculating habit from the
opinions on it expressed by the men who lived in
successive epochs.

The history of the calculating habit since the Middle
Ages has already been sketched in my Modern Capitalism.
I shall therefore merely summarize it here, adding one or
two conclusions that have since been established.175

The cradle of commercial arithmetic was in Italy ; or,
to be more precise, in Florence. The appearance of
Leonardo Pisano’s Liber Abbaci, in 1202, laid the founda-
tions of correct calculation. But the foundations only,
for the true art of calculating was learned but slowly.
It was not until the 13th century that the Arabic
numerals became acclimatized in Italy, and every one
can see how without them quick and exact calculation
would be well-nigh impossible. Yet as late as 1299
the use of Arabic numerals was forbidden the brethren of
the Calimala gild. That the process of their adoption,
even in Italy, was a slow one is plain from the manuscript
of the Introductorius liber qui et pulveris dicitur in
mathematicam disciplinam, which dates from the second
half of the 14th century. Its author used Arabic and
Roman numerals promiscuously.

But from the 14th century in Italy, and from the
15th and 16th in northern lands, the art of reckoning
made swift progress. Calculations with figures supplanted
the unwieldy method of calculating by tallies. Obviously
this was an advance, and in the words of Simon Jacob,
teacher of arithmetic in Coburg, “just as a pedestrian
walking without any burden is at an advantage, compared
with one who is bent under a load, so a calculator
operating with numerals is so much better off than
one who uses tallies.”’

Long before Tartaglia, the mathematical genius of the


THE ART OF CALCULATION 127


16th century, who perfected the art of commercial
arithmetic, a new kind of “total” calculation in respect
of goods had become popular among Italian tradesmen.
It was spoken of as the “ welsh” [foreign] practice, and,
indeed, its origin was in France and Germany, whence
it had been brought to Italy at the beginning of the
16th century. Its first German exponent was Heinrich
Grammateus, who set it forth in his Arithmetic (1518).
In the 15th century the decimal fractions were “ dis-
covered,” and from 1585 they became more and more
generally used through the influence of Simon Stevin.
Furthermore, 1615 is the birth-year of the reckoning
machine.

As books on arithmetic came to be increasingly printed,
commercial arithmetic was gradually simplified. Then
the arithmetic schools, which had been growing up since
the 14th century, more especially in trading cities,
helped to spread the knowledge far and wide. In the
14th century Florence (Florence again!) had six such
schools, which, as Villani informs us, were regularly
attended by 1,200 boys, who were taught “the abacus
and the elements of commercial arithmetic.” Luebeck
was the first town in Germany to have schools of this
kind ; in Hamburg the need for them arose about the
year 1400.

The beginnings of well-ordered book-keeping stretch
back into the 13th century. The accounts of Pope
Nicholas III, of the year 1279-80, and the expenditure
book of the city of Florence of the year 1303, alike bear
witness to the fact that simple book-keeping was practi-
cally perfected at that time. Nor was double entry
of a much later date. It is doubtful whether it was being
applied in the 13th century, but the researches of
Cornelio Desimonis have proved that, anyhow in the year
1340, the government of the city of Genoa kept its


128 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


books on a system of partita doppia, the perfection ot
which was so complete as to lead to the conclusion that it
must have been pretty well established for a long time.
Evidence of its use in the 15th century, both for private
and public accounts, we possess in plenty. The com-
pletest and most instructive instance is the extant ledgers
of Soranzo Brothers, of Venice (1406). The first
theoretic treatise on double entry was that of Fra Luca
Paciuoli, in the ninth section of the first part of his
Summa arithmetica.

And so we see that in those centuries of budding
capitalism people in Italy calculated more or less
exactly. Commercial arithmetic and book-keeping were
both well known among middle-class undertakers, who in
those days of beginnings must have themselves done much
of what is now assigned to paid book-keepers.

Messer Benedotto Alberti used to say that it was
becoming in the keen tradesman constantly to have ink-
stained hands. Indeed, he held it to be nothing less than
the duty of every merchant and tradesman who came into
contact with many people always to jot down everything—
every contract, every item of income and expenditure ;
and revise everything so frequently, that his pen will
be but seldom out of his hand.176

Certainly, Italy was first in the field as the land where
commercial arithmetic was in vogue. Its place was taken
by Holland in the succeeding centuries. Not only
was Holland the model for all middle-class virtues,
but for exact calculations also. Even as late as the 18th
century the contrast in this respect between Holland and
America was noted. Benjamin Franklin relates 177 how a
partner of his, an American, living at a distance, would
send him no accounts of their business ; it was only after
his decease that his widow, who was a Dutchwoman, pro-
vided him with a clear statement of all transactions.


THE ART OF CALCULATION 129


“The knowledge of accounts, as I have been informed,
makes a part of female education in Holland,” Franklin
adds. Certainly that held good for the 1730's,

England caught up the Netherlands in so far as this
matter was concerned, and at the beginning of the
19th century German tradesmen pointed to England and
Holland as the lands which had an advanced commercial
education. In Germany itself Hamburg was pre-eminent
in this respect.178

It goes without saying that even in the less developed
countries calculation was a strengthening element in the
capitalist spirit.


The last few points in the story of the middle-class
virtues have already touched upon national differences as
they come to light in the gradual growth of capitalism.
In the next section we shall give these more attention.


SECTION III


THE NATIONAL EXPRESSIONS OF THE
CAPITALIST, SPIRIT


CHAPTER IX
THE DIFFERENT POSSIBILITIES OF EXPRESSION


Tue rise and growth of the capitalist spirit are pheno-
mena common to all the European and American peoples
of modern times. Evidence for this has already been
adduced in abundance in the preceding pages, where our
illustrations have been drawn from the history of all
countries,

But not all lands show the same tendencies in the
growth and development. Naturally, there were varia-
tions, first in different localities, and then also in different
periods. Our business here will be with the first category
of variations, and to begin with we shall examine the
different possibilities of development.

1. Not all nations were caught in the stream of capi-
talist growth at the same time. Consequently, the date
of the genesis of the “ bourgeois” will vary. (I use the
word “nation” broadly to represent any group. In the
following chapter I shall consider the great national
entities of history.)

2. The duration of the influence of the capitalist
spirit in a nation may vary in length. Consequently,


130


POSSIBILITIES OF EXPRESSION 131


there would be differences in the time capitalism took
to develop.

3. The intensiveness of the capitalist spirit may be
different in different lands. Consequently, the expansion
of the spirit of enterprise, the desire for gain, the degree
of middle-class respectability, would all vary.

4. The extensiveness may also be different. I mean
that there may be differences in the degree in which
the various social groups were influenced by the capitalist
spirit.

5. The relationship of the component parts of that
spirit may vary in different lands. Some may have the
spirit of enterprise in a more marked degree than others ;
others again may possess larger portions of the “ bour-
geois””’ spirit. And so forth.

6. The component parts of the capitalist spirit may have
different capacities for development in different lands, and
may need varying lengths of time in which to come to
full bloom. Some of the parts may develop at the same
pace, others separately.

In view of all these possibilities it is apparent how
complex in different countries may be the development of
the “‘ bourgeois” outlook as a whole. The most impor-
tant differences in national development depended,
however, on the following conditions :—whether a
country was strong or weak capitalistically ; whether all
or only some (in that case, which) of the component
parts of capitalism reached maturity ; whether the develop-
ment commenced early or late in history ; and whether it
was temporary, intermittent, or permanent.

The manner in which these possibilities actually
occurred in different countries and the specific charac-
teristics which the capitalist spirit took on in each in
consequence, will form the subject matter briefly (and no
doubt imperfectly) sketched in the next chapter.


CHAPTER CX


DEVELOPMENTS IN DIFFERENT COUNTRIES


1. ITa.y.


Tue capitalist spirit first manifested itself in Italy. From
the 13th century onward it extended over all the trading
republics of Lombardy ; by the 14th century it was fully
developed there ; and throughout the Middle Ages its
intensive growth in Italy was unparalleled in Europe. As
we have already observed, the evidence that is available
for Italy for this period is abundant enough. It was just
that state of mind which I have termed the “ bourgeois
spirit” that was found in the Italian cities earlier than
elsewhere, and it reached its highest development in the
Tuscan Republics.

We have already taken note of the differences which
distinguished the undertaking spirit of the Tuscan from
that of the other towns, especially the two great seaports
of Venice and Genoa. But here I would once more like
to emphasize the fact that it was from Florence that the
strongest impulse for the development of the “ bourgeois”
outlook came. As early as the 14th century the Floren-
tines were filled with a feverish (I had almost said an
American) desire for gain, and a devotion to business
that almost amounted to a passionate love. Florence was
that state ‘“‘ which was requested by dying fathers in their
last wills and testaments to fine their sons one thousand


florins if they had no regular occupation ”’
132


3179 it was


DE NCAPIPALTIST SPIRIT IN-ITALY — 133


here that affairs were first conducted on a thoroughly
business-like basis; here that men like Alberti first
taught and cultivated the middle-class virtues ; here that
the art of calculation received its final form in the treatises
of Fibonaccio and Paciouli; and here statistical surveys
were first in vogue and greatly extended. Burckhardt
somewhere reviews a statistical table compiled by a Floren-
tine and one by a Venetian, both dating from about the
same year, 1442. The latter undoubtedly referred to a
much greater fortune, greater profits, and a larger scene of
activities, but, says Burckhardt, ‘“‘ who will not admit the
superior intelligence displayed in the work of the Floren-
tine ?’’ And it is in this connection that he speaks of
“the inborn talent of the Florentine in adapting calcula-
tions to all the varied needs of existence.”’

But all this capitalist splendour came to a speedy end.
True, the calculating gift and the practice of thrift
remained unchanged ; indeed, as we may gather from
1th and 16th century writers, they became more strongly
marked than ever. But the spirit of enterprise decayed.
It is possible to trace its decline in Southern Italy from
the end of the 15th century, elsewhere in the country
from about the 16th. The joy of acquisitiveness and the
devotion to business made way for a comfortable mode of
life, partly that of the aristocrat, partly that of the man
of independent means.

Of one South Italian town—La Cava—we hear the
general complaint even before 1500, that the place had
been proverbially rich so long as it was inhabited by
builders and weavers. But now that the demand for
building materials and cloth had been replaced by that
for spurs and gilded belts, seeing that every citizen
aspired to be either a doctor, a lawyer, an officer or a
knight, the direst poverty was experienced there.18°

The same inclination towards a feudal state of society


134 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


became conspicuous in Florence. It was spoken of as the
“Spanish way of life’; its chief characteristic was to
despise work and to seek after titles of nobility. The
change set in under the first Duke Cosimo; and he it
was who made all those young men who despised trade
and industry members of the Order of Stephen. But
the Florentine wealthy classes generally strove to obtain
patents of knighthood, which were coveted so much
because they alone enabled the holders to participate in
tournaments. And just then tournaments were revived
in good earnest in Florence. With real middle-class
frailty, the Florentines invented a less dangerous kind of
tournament, to which everybody was passionately devoted
without being in the least conscious of the caricature
presented by the medley of middle-class and aristocratic
elements. ‘The first of the Medici patronized this craze
with a zeal that can only be explained by their desire to
prove to the world that they, though commoners, had a
court life not one whit inferior to that of princes of the
most ancient lineage.181

It was the same in other Lombard towns ; the period
of the change was the beginning of the 16th century.
Just as the most cherished ideal of the middle classes who
had become opulent was to be dubbed knights, so for
those beneath them in the social scale the goal most
diligently sought for was to live on their incomes, to live
a life free from work, if possible in a country house of
their own. The vita temperata, the stato pacifico, were
pointed to as Nirvana, principally in the numerous books
on husbandry with which extracts have already made us
familiar. 182


2. Tue Ipertan PENINSULA.


It would seem that capitalism blossomed early in several
towns in the Iberian Peninsula) We do not_ know


PREV CAPITALIST SPIRIT IN SPAIN 13%


much about Barcelona in the Middle Ages, nor of its
commercial and maritime law. But what little has come
down to us tends to strengthen the conviction that there
was a broad streak of the capitalist spirit in the commerce
of Barcelona, certainly in the 14th century. Besides, look
at the many voyages of discovery that started from Spain
and Portugal in the 1sth century, culminating at the
century’s end in the two well-known splendid geographical
finds. Is it not certain that an unquenchable thirst for
gold, together with a bold spirit eager for adventure, were
to be found among the people in the coast towns? It
was the combination of the two that brought about,
in the 16th century, conquests in America and colony
plantations. Nor did the capitalist spirit of the Spanish
and Portuguese exhaust itself in these enterprises. Lisbon
merchants began to trade with the new lands in the West
and in the East, and the volume of this commerce far
surpassed that of the Italians ; while the traders of Seville
loaded the silver-ships with wares for their return journey
to America. Industry, too, appears to have flourished ;
its aspect leads to the belief that it was permeated
with the spirit of capitalism. Seville boasted 16,000
looms, which gave employment to 130,000 people.!83_ In
Toledo no less than 430,000 pounds of silk were spun
by 38,484 workers. Segovia likewise had important
silk and woollen industries. 194

Then came total paralysis in the 17th century, of which
every schoolboy has heard. ‘The spirit of enterprise
faded away, and all interest in business vanished. Instead,
the nation turned from economic activities to religion,
court life, or knightly exercises. Business had now the
same low taint that appertained to agriculture ; a man of
noble birth was contemptuous of both. This is just
what foreign observers—Italians, Dutchmen, French, or
English—could not understand; they spoke of it as


136 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Spanish indolence. “Everybody,” so Guicciardini relates,
“everybody imagines he is a nobleman. In 1523 the
Cortes petitioned the King to allow every Spaniard to
wear a sword; two years later the same body laid it
down that the Hidalgos were far superior to the tax-
payers.” 185 “The Hidalgos,” as Ranke 186 informs his
readers, ‘were regarded as the core of the nation; they
were appointed to the offices of state . . . and enjoyed
universal popularity. Every one aspired to a life like
theirs—with much honour and no work. Many were the
claimants of real or imaginary rights of the Hidalgia, and
so numerous did these pretensions become that the law
courts sat specially on Saturdays to decide them. It was
only natural that gradually a distinct disinclination for
work and business, and a contempt for industry and
frugality, should be the result.” ‘* Material interests are
much like other human affairs,” continues the same
writer. ‘What is not deeply rooted in a nation’s life
cannot thrive in its midst. The Spaniards’ whole outlook
was coloured by the religious practices of Catholicism and
by the conception of a hierarchy; their mission in life,
they seem to have thought, was to get as much as they
could from both; it was their pride to hold fast to the
attitude which enabled them to do this ; and apart from
that they sought to live a life of ease in a constant round
of sunny days.” 187

Their way of life, then, was totally opposed to the
capitalist spirit. And wherever Spaniards and Portuguese
established themselves in colonies the ideals of the mother
country accompanied them,188


3. France.


France has at all times been blessed with great and
gifted undertakers, especially endowed for speculation:


PEN CALAIS? “SPIRIT IN-FRANCE “839


men who formed their plans with lightning speed
and made them comprehensive ; men of quick action and
vivid imagination ; boastful sometimes, but energetic and
high-spirited ; running grave risks of failure or possibly
also of ending their days behind prison walls, unless
mental or physical decline intervened. Such a type was
Jacques Coeur in the 15th century, who by his natural
gifts brought French commerce to a high pitch of
perfection for a brief space of years. He owned seven
galleys, employed 300 factors, and was in communication
with all the great seaports of the world. “He was
Charles VII’s Treasurer, and the royal favour he enjoyed
was of considerable assistance to him in his commercial
enterprises ; so much so, that no other French trader was
able to compete with him. His counting-house was the
centre of a mighty commerce, rivalling that of the
Venetians, the Genoese, and the Catalonians.” The money
he acquired in trade, and also, it must be added, in
financial manipulations not altogether of an unquestion-
able kind, he lent to needy courtiers, making them his
debtors, and subsequently his enemies. His end is well-
known ; accused of high-treason, coining, and much else,
he was arrested, deprived of all his property, and banished.

The career of Fouquet in the age of Louis XIV, which
is famous enough, is almost parallel. Nor were these
alone. A whole series of them continued right down
almost to this very day ; some of them were adventurers
who speculated in a large way, others were merely small
fry. Think of Lesseps and Boncourt and Rochefort and
the Humberts and the Deperdussins and the Saccards!
Quite a French speciality.

Montaigne may have been a little hard on his country-
men in his characterization of this somewhat “ gassy”’
sort of undertaking, but he certainly hit the mark. These
are his words: “I am afraid that our eyes are bigger


136, THE QUINTESSENCE OF _CAPITALISM


than our stomachs ; and (in conquering a new land) we
possess more curiosity than perseverance; we embrace
everything, but we retain nothing but wind.” 189

At the same time complaints have been loud in France,
from Colbert’s days to these, that the French tradesman
is deficient in the spirit of enterprise. There is no contra-
diction here. The plaints clearly refer to the great body
of middle-class business men and to sound undertakings.
“Our merchants,” wailed Colbert, “ have not the capacity to
take up any matter with which they are unacquainted.,’’ 19°
He spoke from bitter experience. It is generally known
that the enterprising statesman had the greatest difficulty
in combating the indolence of his compatriots, when it
was a question (say) of founding an oversea trading
company, such as the East India Company. There were
meetings and conferences (no less than three took place
between the 21st and the 26th of May, 1664) at which
wealthy merchants and manufacturers had to be persuaded
to take up shares.!9! (It reminds one almost of what
happens to-day when moneyed men have to be wheedled
into providing the necessary financial assistance for
establishing learned academies, Oriential societies or
similar institutions. )

Nor was Colbert the only one who diagnosed this
weakness. Turn to the pages of Sayous, Blondel, or any
other authority who was acquainted with French economic
life, and the same jeremiad will meet you everywhere.
The French tradesman of an earlier age was accounted
indolent, if not altogether lazy. The Patriotic
Merchant (about the middle of the 18th century)
complained that in French businesses there was so little
work done. ‘The writer wished his son to work “ night
and day, and not the paltry two hours that had become
the custom in France,” 192 This very book is testimony
enough that Franklin’s spirit was not universal among the


THE CAPITALIST StTRIT IN-FPRANCE 3539


French tradesmen of that period. Despite its manifest
longings for American conditions it is yet full of romance,
flights of imagination, and chivalrous notions.

This under-development of capitalist tendencies in the
French people was only in accord with its positive ideals
(and one may add, is so still, for, during the last hundred
years or so, the national spirit in this respect has,
remarkable to relate, remained fairly constant). What
were these ideals? To begin with, there was a strongly
marked inclination towards the aristocratic way of life.
Does not the author of The Patriotic Merchant vent
his spleen on his countrymen for their extravagance?
He blames them for wasting their substance on un-
necessary expenditure on luxuries instead of investing it
in capitalist undertakings. As a result, you could not
obtain money in France for trade and industry under
between 5 and 6 per cent., whereas in England and
Holland the rate varied between 24 and 3. Whereupon
he moralized thus : business investments at 3 per cent.
are much more profitable and sane than the purchase
of beautiful country estates that bring in nothing.!93

Secondly, the French have a strong preference for the
assured (and respected) position of the official. This
may be observed throughout the whole economic history
of the country, like a red thread in the fabric ; it was a
tremendous obstacle in the path of capitalism. ‘“ This
plague of bureaucracy,” as one critic 194 termed it ; “this
French civil-service mania’? to use the words of
another,!95 began in the 16th century and has not
yet disappeared. It was accompanied by a disdainful
attitude towards commerce and industry, and so bore
witness to the constant weakness of the capitalist spirit in
France. Whoever was able to do so retired from business
or avoided entering it, using what fortune he had to
procure an office for himself, and this was quite usual


140 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


until well on into the 18th century. The history of
France shows that this ideal was common to all sections
of the population.

This disdainful attitude towards commerce and
industry has just been enlarged upon. Regarded as
cause or effect, it prevailed until the July Revolution.
I am not thinking so much of the desire of the
rich to be ennobled, or of the accepted practice of
considering the nobility as the most privileged class.
These things were to be found in England too, and it
is doubtful whether even there they have wholly dis-
appeared. No. What I have in mind is the supercilious,
almost insulting, attitude towards commercial and indus-
trial avocations, and the contemptuous utterances con-
cerning their social value, which even as late as the 18th
century were found broadcast nowhere else (if we except
Spain) so much as in France.

“If there is contempt in the world, it is reserved
for the tradesman.” Thus a reliable witness 19® to the
prevailing opinion of the upper classes in France in the
16th century remarked. The hard saying might have
held good for the Germany of the time; but it could
not possibly apply to England. Montesquieu’s dictum,
however, dating from the middle of the 18th century
(and it was by no means unique), would have been incon-
ceivable even in the Germany of those days. What was
it? “All is lost when the profitable calling of the
financier begins to be an honourable one. All other
professions are disgusted, Honour loses its value, the
slow and natural ways of winning distinction have no
further attraction, and the government is attacked at its
very foundations.” 197


THE CAPITALIST SPIRIT IN GERMANY 141


4. GERMANY.


There can be no doubt that the capitalist spirit began
to develop and extend in Germany in the “age of the
Fuggers’’; here and there even earlier. Bold under-
takings may be observed in that period, side by side with
careful trading.

Nevertheless, it is well to sound a note of warning.
Let no one imagine that the capitalist spirit in Germany,
even in the 16th century, could compare for influence and
intensity with what prevailed (say) in the Italian city
states in the 14th. To form a true estimate of its extent
in Germany in the 16th century when, as is generally
acknowledged, it reached its zenith, it is necessary to
observe certain facts.

1. Those undertakings in which the capitalist spirit was
expressed were special cases, and limited in number.
Public opinion, the judgment of the learned, and the
views of the nation’s leaders were all alike and
unmistakably opposed to the new spirit. Luther’s
strong language on ‘“‘ Fuggering”’ is a good instance, and
coincides with that of Ulrich von Hutten and Erasmus of
Rotterdam.198 Do not imagine, however, that only the
learned shared these views. They had the masses with
them. Sebastian Franck translated Erasmus into the
vernacular 199 and his work enjoyed great popularity.
“The stinking merchant class”—so Franck spoke of
them. Even more in vogue was Cicero’s tractate on
Duty, which was available in many translations, and
became a sort of household guide to conduct. This
contained Cicero’s well-known description of trade as a
low kind of occupation (though he was probably thinking
of higgling).20° In view of all this, it is just to conclude
that if there was anything of the capitalist. spirit in the
Germany of those days it had not penetrated very deeply.


142 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


2. Now it may be urged that the strong criticism
of capitalism by contemporary thinkers can be taken
as evidence that capitalism was maturing rapidly. The
objection is not altogether invalid. There certainly were
large undertakings at that time; to cut prices was a
common practice ; and monopolies were being sought for
in all directions. Capitalism thus seemed to have reached
a fairly high degree of development. But recall the other
component parts of the capitalist spirit. These were
as yet in their infancy in Germany. ake the art
of calculation. It was only just beginning to be known in
Germany in the 16th century, as I have already indicated.
Ledgers such as those of Ott Ruland (15th century),
trade reports such as those of Lucas Rem (16th century),
can hardly bear comparison with similar Italian docu-
ments of the 14th and 15th centuries. And even in the
18th century, Germany was far behind England and
Holland in this respect.

3. It is clear, therefore, that what development of the
capitalist spirit there was lasted for only a brief space.
A feudalizing process soon made itself felt in Germany
even before the end of the 16th century; it was much
like what had happened in Italy, and before long it caught
up in its onrush all the famous families of undertakers.
Successors they had none, or very few ; the “ bourgeois ”
stream was a thin one. It was not until the 18th century
that a pulsating industrial and commercial life made itself
noticeable, and, even so, it seems to have spent itself
by the beginning of the following century. It is no
exaggeration to assert that the capitalist spirit awoke in
Germany once more only after 1850. ‘To-day it has
grown so mighty that, as no one can deny, Germany
is catching up the United States of America as the land
wherein that spirit has reached its utmost development.
The characteristics of modern capitalist undertakings in


THE CAPITALIST SPIRIT IN GERMANY 143


Germany are thus those that mark the modern type
of undertaker generally, and these you will find set forth
in the twelfth chapter of this book. The German
undertaker (together with the American, whom he is
approaching very closely) represents to-day the most
perfect type of this species of the human race. He
is distinguished from other modern types possibly in the
following ways 20! :—

(a) His adaptability. German dominance in the world-
markets owes much to the German’s capacity of adapting
himself to the wishes and peculiarities of his customers.
Numerous observers have noted this fact many a time and
oft. The quality is also exercised in his quick under-
standing of any set of conditions and in accommodating
himself to them.

(6) His great organizing talent. See what this has
done for German shipping, banking, and electrical works.
No other nation has it in so great a measure, not even
the Americans.

(c) His attitude to science. This too is universally
admitted—that Germany’s great industries, especially the
electrical and chemical industries, have become so mighty
because of their careful attention to the results of natural
science, and the utilization of those results in their
methods of production.

The attitude of the German undertaker to economic
science is on the point of being determined. For the
moment it seems that it is going to be another charac-
teristic of the German undertaker that he will recognize
as a condition for success the need to organize his
business in accordance with the results of economic
teaching. his much can even be asserted now : method
in business enterprise, or, in other words, commercial
calculations, have reached their most complete form in
the German schools for capitalist undertakers.


144 THE QUINTESSENCE ‘OF CAPITALISM


5. Ho.vianp.


In all probability the United Provinces were the land
in which the capitalist spirit for the first time attained
its fullest maturity ; where this maturity related to all its
aspects, which were equally developed ; and where this
development had never been so comprehensive before.
Moreover, in the Netherlands an entire people became
imbued with the capitalist spirit ; so much so, that in
the 17th century Holland was universally regarded as
the land of capitalism par excellence ; it was envied by all
other nations, who put forth their keenest endeavours in
their desire to emulate it ; it was the high school of every
art of the tradesman, and the well-watered garden
wherein the middle-class virtues throve. The Dutch
were a maritime and bellicose people, yet at the same
time unmatched in their knowledge of the trader’s entire
bag of tricks ; now and again (as we have already had
occasion to observe) they were completely carried away
by some speculating madness ; later on they became the
centre of international stock-exchange activities, All
these facts are well known ; they need only be recalled.

It will be giving my readers a treat to quote at this
juncture the fairly brief and comprehensive description
from Ranke’s pen of the commercial prosperity enjoyed
by Holland in the 17th century.

‘Henceforth Holland levied tribute on the products
of the universe. It was first the middleman between the
eastern and western coasts of the neighbouring seas.
The timber and the corn of the former it exchanged for
the salt and the wine of the latter. It sent out its ships
into the northern waters to catch herrings, and distributed
the harvest of the deep in the estuaries of all the rivers,
from the Vistula to the Seine, that flowed through
southern lands. Down the Rhine, the Maas, and the


Pme MCA TALIS) SPIRIT IN:HOLLAND ‘14s


Scheldt it carried the fish itself. It shipped it to Cyprus
and brought back wool, to Naples and brought back silk,
and thus the coastlands of the ancient Phoenicians paid
tribute to a distant Germanic people whose home their
own early navigators had never been able to reach.
Marketable wares of all sorts accumulated in Holland.
In 1610 Contarini found in its granaries 100,000 sacks
of good wheat and a similar quantity of corn; while
Raleigh is positive that the Dutch were never without
a minimum supply of 700,000 quarters of corn, so that
if their neighbours were in need they could hasten to
relieve them. Naturally, not without drawing some
advantage to themselves. Indeed, one year of scarcity
brought them as much profit as seven of plenty. Nor
were they content to distribute commodities in their raw
state; they usually added their own labour. Thus they
imported annually from England 80,000 pieces of cloth,
but these were undyed. The Dutch saw to this them-
selves, and thereby increased their gains.

“‘Great as was their participation in European commerce,
their greatest trading achievements, which yielded them
profit no less than fame, were those connected with their
ventures in East Indian waters. Of all their attacks on
Spain, their expeditions to India were what king and people
alike most dreaded ; their effects were twofold: they hit
the Spaniards very hard and widely extended Dutch
activity. Contarini marvelled at the perfect arrangements
for sending annually to India some 10 or 14 ships. This
was about 1610. He estimated the capital of the Dutch
East India Company at about 6,600,000 florins, This
magnificent and all-embracing business led them further
afield to unknown lands.

** And in Holland itself every harbour and creek, every
inlet of the sea, was filled with ships, and every canal with
barges. There was significance in the popular saying that

10


146 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


in Holland as many people lived on the water as on the
land. It was estimated that the country possessed no less
than 200 large ships and 3,000 of moderate size, and
Amsterdam was their main port. Their masts looked
almost like a forest in the city’s vicinity. Was it sur-
prising, then, that Amsterdam expanded? Within the
short space of thirty years its boundaries were consider-
ably enlarged on two occasions. In 1601, 600 new
houses were erected. Contarini reported that a foot of
land cost as much as a scudo. For the year 1610,
according to the same authority, there were 50,000
inhabitants in the Dutch capital.

“Industry throve, and the quality of the work done was
splendid. The rich continued to be moderate in their
habits and thrifty ; and many a one who sold fine cloth
to others was content himself with a rougher material.
The poor had their needs provided for, and idleness was a
deadly sin which merited and received condign punishment.
To export to India was a common affair, and every wind
that blew was made subservient to shipping. Indeed,
there was no house but was a maritime training school, no
habitation but had its map of the ocean. Need they fear
an enemy when they had conquered the sea? Dutch
sailors were famed for their policy of burning their ships
with their own hands rather than surrender to the foe.”

To this picturesque narrative I would only add that
Holland became classical likewise for its cultivation of the
middle-class virtues, and the extension and elaboration of
the art of calculation. Evidence for this we have already
noted above.

Now what became of this highly developed capitalist
spirit? Parts of it, especially those last mentioned, have
continued to exist ; others either fell into decay or totally
disappeared. Even before the 17th century had drawn
to a close, we may observe a diminution of that military


Tee CAPITALIST (SPIRIT IN: BRITAIN 147


ardour which from the earliest times had given a special
colouring to all oversea undertakings. In the 18th
century the spirit of enterprise itself dwindled away ; and
the “bourgeois”? did not, as in some other countries,
become feudalized. Here he waxed fat. He lived on his
income, which, like a stream flowing gently and regularly,
was derived either from the colonies or from invested
capital. Is it not generally known that in the 18th century
Holland became the money-lender of all Europe? Even
the smallest interest in capitalist undertakings was no
longer to be met with. ‘The Dutch have ceased to be
merchants; they have become commission agents; and
then from being commission agents they have finally taken
on the role of financiers”” (Luzac). Whether the credit
was that of the state or only of bill-accepting is of little
moment. The point is that whenever bill-discounting
becomes the principal occupation of the “ bourgeois,” the
spirit of undertaking is broken.


6. GREAT BRITAIN.


The fate of the capitalist spirit has been very different
in each of the three component parts or the United
Kingdom.

Ireland as a country with a capitalist civilization
may be almost entirely neglected. Down to this very
day there is scarcely another land which has been so
little affected by the capitalist spirit. Ireland, there-
fore, does not come within the purview of our con-
siderations.

Of England we have already said a good deal in these
pages. We noted that the heroic age of capitalism began
in the 16th century, when the land was filled with a
mighty spirit of undertaking, born of the love of
adventure and the impulse for conquest. We saw how


148 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


the landowning class transformed themselves into capitalist
undertakers. We observed the stormy period, towards
the end of the 17th century and the beginning of the
18th, when all manner of speculative enterprises were
floated. We perceived how until the end of the 18th
century middle-class virtues and the art of calculation
both attained a very high degree of perfection, so much
so that England became the model for less developed
countries, like Germany and France. Finally, we are
aware that England was the birthplace of modern
industrialism.

From the end of the 17th century onwards, but more
especially since the union with Scotland, the course of
capitalist development in England was greatly influenced
by the fortunes of the capitalist spirit in the Northern
kingdom.

Nowhere else in the world did the birth of capitalism
come about in so curious a fashion as in Scotland. Nothing
is more surprising than the suddenness of its appearance.
It is as though a pistol-shot had given the signal for the
capitalist spirit, fully grown, to come into the land and
dominate it. You cannot help thinking of the Victoria
Regia, which blooms overnight.

Until the 17th century the Scotch, as we have already
seen, carried on trade of a sort with neighbouring countries,
not even having any ships of their own to speak of. As
for the capitalist spirit, they were completely untouched
by it. The 17th century brought few changes into this
state of things. The only marked changes were in
religion, and here a vast spiritual wave swept over the
land, in the wake of the Reformation. It was towards the
end of the 17th century that the sudden emergence of
capitalism to which we have alluded came about. Every-
where you might have observed an unbridled desire for
gain and undertakings innumerable. There is abundant


MAEGCALILALISd “SPIRTLT IN BRITAIN - 140


evidence in proof of this, and we shall here review one or
two expressions of opinion,2°2

«Soon after the establishment of the Revolution settle-
ment, the ardent feelings of the Scottish people were
turned out of their old channels of religious controversy
and war in the direction of commercial enterprise,” writes
Burton in his Criminal Trials in Scotland. And under
the year 1695 Burnet’s History of his own Time records
that ‘the lords and commons of Scotland were then
desirous of getting into trade.” In 1698, Fletcher of
Saltoun writes: ‘‘ By no contrivance of any man, but by
an unforeseen and unexpected change of the genius of
this nation, all their thoughts and inclinations, as if
united and directed by a higher power, seemed to be
turned upon trade, and to conspire together for its ad-
vancement.”” At this the Puritan clergy became uneasy.
They stood like a duck on the river brink that sees its
little ones swimming off. In 1709 the Rev. Robert
Woodrow expressed an opinion in one of his letters that
“the sin of our too great fondness for trade, to the
neglecting of our more valuable interests, I humbly think
will be written upon our judgment.” In the same year
some ships were taken by the French and part of the loss
fell upon Glasgow. Thereupon Woodrow wrote express-
ing the view that this was Heaven’s punishment. “Iam
sure the Lord is remarkably frouning upon our trade . .
since it was put in the room of religion.”

The inwardness of the new spirit we have already dis-
cussed. There can be no doubt that it contributed in
large measure to the high state of capitalist development
which has been manifest in England and Scotland since
the middle of the 18th century. What has been the
course of that development? What is the position
to-day, comparing England with other lands, say with
Germany ?


130 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


All reliable and authoritative observers appear to agree
that to-day a condition of “capitalist decline” 203 has
made its appearance in England. You may observe it in
several ways.

1. Clear thinking has ceased to be an active and com-
pelling influence in economic activities. The English
undertaker, unlike the German, has not kept pace with
progress; he has not taken technical science into his
service. Indeed, in the field of technology he is miles
behind. The Englishman declares the adoption of the
newest methods to be impossible. When raw material is
delivered to him he would never dream of testing its
quality in his laboratory ; the name of the supplying firm
sufices him. As for his machines, they are ancient
models of which he is proud ; whereas in reality they are
only fit to be thrown on the scrap-heap.

You will find a similar instance of traditionalism in
commerce reported in a Blue Book of 1897. ‘The
Germans take their goods to the customers ; the English
tradesman waits for the customers to come to him.”
British agents and commercial travellers live in too grand
a style. Then, English packing cases are too heavy; the
foreigner packs his wares lightly and according to require-
ment. The Englishman neglects the finish of his com-
modities, which is quite independent of the quality, and
he does this principally with the cheaper goods. He
demands cash payments and gives little attention to the
genuine credit needs of his customers. He does not
cultivate advertisement. English goods are frequently of
too high a quality, and therefore too expensive. The
Englishman forces his tastes upon the market ; he will
deliver goods in the way he thinks best or not at all.

A certain rigidity in the English banking system
has also been observed.

2. The spirit of enterprise, interest in business, and


MEE OAPI PALIST OSFERIT IN AMERICA 352


love of industry are all declining. The old business ideal
is disappearing and a new outlook on life is taking its
place. The Englishman finds pleasure in luxury, in an
aristocratic manner of living, and above all in sport.
All these are spreading, and as they spread they weaken
the energies needed for economic activities. “ Among
members of the Idle Rich class the German bookworm
is looked upon with the same pitiful contempt as the
~ American Dollar-king, who at least may be useful as a
father-in-law. Though differing from each other widely,
they yet are both of the kingdom of fools, for they work.
This opinion, hitherto the speciality of the aristocracy, is
now also beginning to be shared by the upper middle
classes in England. . . . It is significant that the most
popular forms of the national sports have a strong pluto-
cratic taint. ‘They presuppose an aristocratic race that
lives upon Negro, Chinese, and Hindoo labour, and draws
dividends and economic rent from every country under
the sun; while the soil of their own land they regard
(and value) solely as an article of luxury.” 24


7. THe Unitep States or AMERICA.


In this book I shall say little about the United States
of America, although they are of the utmost importance
for the development of the capitalist spirit. That little
may be placed under three headings.

1. The elements of the capitalist spirit have had a
niche in the American national character ever since the
foundation of the colonies, and even before that spirit
took form and substance, i.e. before ever there was an
economic order inspired by it.

2. The early stages of the capitalist spirit changed
into the later and fully perfect stages sooner and more
completely in America than anywhere else. There is


152 LHE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


conclusive evidence 2°5 showing that the ideas of modern
Americanism had already taken root at the beginning of
the 19th century, and had even as far back as that day
commenced to shape life according to their own liking.
The peculiarities of this perfected capitalist spirit I shall
deal with in Chapter XII.

3. Whatever the results of the capitalist spirit may be,
you will find them developed to their utmost in the
United States to-day. There the strength of that spirit
is as yet unbroken; there the whirlwind still rages.


SECTION IV
THE BOURGEOIS—PAST AND PRESENT


CHAPTER XI
THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE


By now we have come to know the component parts
of the undertaker’s soul as it aspires to perfection.
Acquisitiveness and enterprise, middle-class respectability
and calculation all go to compose the complex entity,
though various combinations are possible owing to the
variety of shade in each element, or owing to the
way the elements are combined. That is why we have
reviewed the different resultant types of capitalist under-
taker. Moreover, we have also observed that in different
countries the development of the capitalist spirit varied
considerably. There remains one further question. Is
the capitalist spirit constant ? Does the bourgeois remain
immutably the same? In other words, is there anything
common to all the types that have come under our notice,
and to all the national expressions of capitalism, so that
it may be possible to sketch the picture of the bourgeois
from them?

With one qualification the answer is in the affirmative.
And the qualification is that we should be allowed to
divide one age of capitalist growth from another according


to its characteristic spirit, for it was this that marked off
153


154 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


one type of bourgeois or undertaker from another. This
means that there was not one persistent type of under-
taker at all times, but different sorts at different times.
Now, so far as I can judge, capitalist undertakers from
the first dawn of capitalism to about the middle of the
18th century—the period which I have christened that of
early capitalism—had, with all their variation in details,


a good many characteristics in common. These were so


| definite that they form a clear dividing line between the
_ undertaker of the early capitalist period and his prototype
in modern times. What manner of man, then, was he,
this bourgeois of old?

To begin with, he also was a capitalist undertaker.
Profit was his end, undertakings his means; he speculated
and calculated ; and ultimately he cultivated the middle-
class virtues, though not all in the same degree. What,
then, was his distinguishing mark, you ask ? How did he
differ from his modern brother? You may sum it up in
a sentence: in all his thoughts and actions, in all that
he did or left undone, he was actuated by the weal or
woe of the living, breathing human being. The central
doctrine of the pre-capitalist period had not lost its
efficacy. Omnium rerum mensura homo; man still con-
tinued to be the measure of all things. Life was still
natural. Even the bourgeois as yet walked bolt-upright
on his two feet ; he did not yet run about on all fours.

Of course, only fragments remained of the pre-capitalist
man who was still met with in the first faint beginnings
of capitalism, when the Genoese noble merchants built
them towers, or when Sir Walter Raleigh sallied forth in
search of El Dorado. These fragments you may come
across in Defoe or Benjamin Franklin. But the remainder
of that early natural man with his healthy appetites has
disappeared ; he has been forced to accustom himself to
the strait-waistcoat of middle-class respectability and


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 155


the tyranny of the calculating habit. His claws have
been trimmed, his carnivorous teeth blunted, and _ his
horns encased in leather.

But all those who bowed the knee to capitalism—the
rich landowner and the great oversea trader, the banker
and the speculator, the manufacturer and the draper—all
these never ceased to accommodate their economic activi-
ties to the healthy demands of life; for all of them
business was but a means of livelihood. Their own
interests and those of their fellow-men, for whom and
with whom they laboured, determined the extent and
direction of what they did. In support of this, you need
only examine the views of these old-fashioned bourgeois.

1. First and foremost, consider their conception of
riches and their attitude towards profit. Wealth was
undoubtedly prized, and to obtain it was the passionate
desire of every heart. But wealth was not an end in
itself. Its only virtue lay in the creation or preservation
of life-values. This is the tune on which all our
informants harp, from Alberti to Defoe and Franklin.

The true value of money, says Alberti, can be
appreciated only by him who has at any time been
obliged to say to another “that bitter word, which all
free spirits hate—‘I pray thee.’”’ 206 Riches should bring
you independence and liberty, should get you friends,
should make you honoured and renowned.2°7. On the
other hand, “What you cannot make use of is but a
heavy burden.” 2°

It will suffice to add to these expressions of opinion,
dating from the childhood of capitalism, others that were
current in the latest period of this early capitalist era.
The similarity in sentiment will be apparent.

Our first witness shall be Benjamin Franklin. A man,
he says, who has been granted wealth and a soul to use
it aright has received a special and splendid gift of grace.


166° 7HE QUINTESSENCE OF CATALTALT OM


Once in possession of riches it is a paramount duty to use
them well. ‘A wise man will desire no more than what
he may get justly, use soberly, distribute cheerfully, and
live upon contentedly.” 209 Riches must be constantly
increasing through industry and skilful application, They
should never be allowed to lie fallow, but always be
adding to their owner’s wealth and spreading happiness
allaround. It is sensible to accumulate goods and money ;
but to use them well is wise. It is not riches that give
happiness, but rather their proper utilization.2!° Riches
bring fame, guarantee security, and provide means for
many an honourable and useful undertaking. Moreover,
wealth must be acquired in just and right ways,?!! for
only those riches bring joy that are gotten honestly, or
onestamente, as Alberti says.2!2 If you are selling any-
thing for profit, hearken to the still, small voice of
conscience, and be content with fair gain; and take no
advantage of the buyer’s ignorance.213

Now, it may quite rightly be objected that this wise
counsel is easily given. In all probability it is the leisure-
thought of the writers; possibly the voice of conscience
heard in the quiet of the study but neglected in the stress
and heat of the day. Consequently, it is evidence that
must be ruled out of court.

2. To see that such an objection would be invalid,
observe (and this is the second point) the attitude of
all our authorities to business itself, their conduct as
business men, the way they carried on their affairs; in a
word, their “style’’ (as it may be called), and you
shall find the same spirit in it as that in their attitude
towards wealth.

Their business pace was as yet slow; their whole
activity was calm and unruffed. There was no stormy
whirlwind in their work. Recall Franklin’s decision
to spend his time as profitably as possible and his view


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 157


that industry was the prime virtue. His working-day
was mapped out thus: six full hours were devoted to
his business; seven to sleep; the rest he gave up to
prayer, reading, and social diversions. And this was the
type of the diligent undertaker, though Franklin was
then only in a small way of business. His own words
are worth recording.?13*


The precept of order requiring that every part of my business
should have its allotted time, one page in my little book [cf. p. 119
above] contained the following scheme of employment for the
twenty-four hours of a natural day.

Rise, wash, and address Power-

Tue Morninc. ful Goodness. Contrive

day’s business, and take

the resolution of the day ;

prosecute the present study
and breakfast.


5
Question. What good shall | 6
I do this day ? 7


Read, or overlook my ac-
counts, and dine.


|
|
|
oe
|
|


Noon. 12


aa


2
3
4
5
EVENING. 6 \ Put things in their places.
y Supper. Music or diversion,
Question. What good have 8 or conversation, Examina-
I done to-day? 9 tion of the day.
Nicur. 10
II
12
1 > Sleep.
2


138 THE. QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Or take the case of the wholesale traders of Bozen.
They closed their businesses for the whole summer and
spent the time in the health resort of the highlands
near.

Leisure was thus appreciated. And just the same
as you left yourself an abundance of it during the
day and during the year, so, too, you sought to
obtain the maximum amount of leisure for life as a whole.
It was a common practice for people who had amassed
a fortune in business or in industry (even though it were
not of great proportions) to retire in middle age, and
if possible purchase a country seat where they might end
their days in contemplative ease. Jacob Fugger with his
“‘ Let me earn so long as I am able ’—a dictum typically
characteristic for a full-blown capitalist economic out-
look—was undoubtedly far in advance of his age.
It was for holding such a view that Anthony Fugger
described him as a queer fish. He was regarded as
abnormal. And so he was, judged from the standpoint
of those who in their demands on life placed the ideal of
the retired private gentleman first and foremost.

This yearning for a peaceful existence in a country
house may be found in all the Italian books on trade ; in
the German Renaissance there was the same tendency
to feudalize the traders; and in the 18th century the
English commercial world still continued to look
longingly at this end-all of business. The ideal of the
retired private gentleman may thus be regarded as
an article of faith in the early capitalist economic creed
everywhere. ‘That it had yet another significance we
shall see presently.

The domination of this ideal in England in the first
half of the 18th century is attested by Defoe’s
remarks ?!3® on the common English practice to retire
from business comparatively early. When a man _ has


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 159


amassed £20,000, “why should he trade any farther?
and what need he desire any more, that has such a bank?
"Tis time to leave off and have done; ’tis time to leave
labouring for the world, when he has the world, as they
call it, on a string.” Such a one “changes his situation
in the world, that is to say, he lays down the tradesman
and takes up the gentleman with a £1,000 a year estate.”’
Defoe gives him two “seasonable hints.”” Let him live
within the compass of his income. Of his £1,000 a year
he should spend half and lay up the remainder, thus
ensuring ‘“‘a rising family under him.” Secondly, he
should keep far from speculation, for has he not retired
from business to enjoy what he has got? Why then
adventure it? All he has to do isto be “quiet when he
is arrived at this station of life.’’ After all, “if a trades-
‘man is leaving off, it is with the usual saying of the rich
men that withdraw from the world—That he may enjoy
himself ; that he may live in quiet and peace at the latter
end of his days, without noise and without hurry.”
That was all very well when they had made their
fortune. But while making it, what of their work ?
Let it be said at once that it was slow. Business
methods were such that in any given time you accom-
plished the least possible transactions. The extensive
development of commerce was small; its intensive
development was only in accord with it. The spirit
in which business was carried on appears to me to be
exemplified in the ancient saw to demand as high prices as
possible so as to obtain a great rate of profit on a small
capital. Small turnover, large profits, seems to have been
the ruling principle of the undertakers of those days.
And not merely of the lesser men, some of whom had
not yet thrown off entirely the shackles of the gild
system ; the very big trading companies had it too.
Thus it was the policy of the Dutch East India Company


160 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


to carry on “small transactions that brought in a great
deal.” That was why it always destroyed spice plants,
burned rich harvests and the like ; though another motive
was to deprive the poor of the opportunity of enjoying
colonial products.

Quite generally it was the aim of all business to satisfy
the demands of the wealthy, which is always easier than
to deal with demand on a large scale.2!14 This was quite
justifiable according to the economic theory of the 17th
and 18th centuries, which made out a good case for high
prices.215

The dignified aspect of the old-fashioned bourgeois,
his stiff and pedantic bearing, were only the outward garb
of his inward calm. Can you imagine a man in the long
fur cloak of the Renaissance, or in the knee-breeches and
powdered wig of the subsequent centuries, as ever being
in a hurry? Reliable authorities, indeed, describe the
old-fashioned tradesman as one who walks with careful
step and slow, who is never in haste just because he is
occupied, Messer Alberti, himself a very busy man, tells
us that he had never observed a busy person walking
otherwise than at a slow pace,?!6 and this applied to 1 5th-
century Florence. Of 18th-century Lyons a contem-
porary tells the same tale. ‘‘ Here,” he says, “our walk
is slow because every one is busy; in Paris people are in
one continuous haste—because there is nothing to do
there.” 217 So in Glasgow about the same time. We read
of its merchants ‘‘ how in scarlet coats, cocked hats, and
powdered wigs, they strutted up and down the Planistanes,
the only bit of pavement then in Glasgow, covering three
or four hundred yards of road in front of the Town Hall
and the adjoining offices, talking grandly to one another
and nodding haughtily to the humbler folk who came to
do them homage.” 218

3. The attitude of the old-fashioned traders towards


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 161


competition and to their customers sprang naturally from
their business style. Above all else they wanted quiet.
This ‘static principle,” which had dominated the whole
of pre-capitalist economic activities, had not yet lost all
its influence in the early capitalist period. And the circle
of your customers was like a fenced-off preserve ; it was
wholly yours—to be compared to the territory assigned
to the trading company in lands beyond the sea for its
exclusive exploitation.

With this point I have dealt fully in another book ; 219
it must here suffice, therefore, to indicate its importance
briefly. Let me refer to one or two business principles,
all of them naturally resulting from a static economic
order, all of them included in the economic outlook of
the old-fashioned bourgeois.

All “custom hunting ”’ was looked at askance; to take
away your neighbour’s customers was contemptible, un-
christian, and immoral. A rule for “ Merchants who
traded in commodities”? was: ‘* Turn no man’s customers
away from him, either by word of mouth or by letter,
and do not to another what you would not have another
do to you.” It was, however, more than a rule; it
became an ordinance, and is met with over and over
again. In Mayence its wording was as follows: “‘ No
one shall prevent another from buying, or by offering a
higher price make a commodity dearer, on pain of losing
his purchase ; no one shall interfere in another’s business
undertaking or carry on his own on so large a scale as to
ruin other traders,” In Saxony it was much the same.
In the Ordinances of 1672, 1682, and 1692, paragraph 18
reads: ‘No shopkeeper shall call away the customers
from another’s shop, nor shall he by signs or motions
keep them from buying.” 22°

It followed from this that all tricks to increase your
custom, of whatever sort they were, were rather despised.

II


162 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Right into the 19th century there was still a certain
prejudice in many a high-class firm against even the
simplest form of advertisement. Some houses in New York
had not got rid of the prejudice by the middle of the
century. “No respectable house would overdo the
thing. There was a sort of self-respect about the articles
advertised.” 22!

But even in an advertising age it was for long considered
nefarious to praise your goods or to point out wherein
your business was superior to others. The last word in
commercial impropriety was to announce that your prices
were lower than those of the man opposite. ‘ ‘To under-
sell’? was most ungentlemanly: ‘‘ No blessing will come
from harming your neighbour by underselling and cutting
prices.”

Bad as underselling itself was, it was beneath contempt
to advertise it. ‘Since the days of our author,” remark
the editors of the fifth edition (1745) of Defoe’s
Complete English Tradesman (Defoe died in 1731), “this
underselling practice is grown to such a shameful height
that particular persons publicly advertise that they under-
sell the rest of the trade.”

For France there is extant a particularly valuable
document, dating from the second half of the 18th
century, which proves even more strikingly how heinous
this offence was thought to be, even in Paris. It is an
ordinance of the year 1761, and it proclaims to all and
sundry in the French capital that to advertise that you
are selling your goods at a price below the customary one
must be regarded as the last resource of a merchant in
difficulties, and that such action deserved severe con-
demnation. The ordinance proceeded to forbid the
wholesale and retail traders of Paris and its suburbs “to
run after one another” trying to find customers, and above
all to distribute handbills calling attention to their wares.


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 163


Other methods of drawing advantages for yourself at
the expense of your neighbours or of poaching on others’
preserves were equally disreputable. The author of the
Complete English Tradesman has some reflections on this
manner of competition which help us exceedingly in
gaining a true estimate of the business ethics of those
days. ‘They prove that economic activities were still in a
static state and that tradition and custom ruled them.
Remember that Defoe was not unskilled as a trader, and
that generally he is filled with the capitalist spirit.

This is his story.222 Before Wiltshire broadcloth
reaches Northampton, where it is retailed, four people
find employment. ‘The clothier, when it is finished,
sends it up by the carrier to London to Mr. A, the
Blackwell Hall factor, to be sold. Mr. A, the factor,
sells it to Mr. B, the woollen-draper; Mr. B, the
woollen-draper, sells it to Mr. C, the shopkeeper at
Northampton, and he cuts it out in his shop and sells
it to the country gentlemen about him . . . also ’tis sent
down by the carrier from London to Northampton.”

Now in Northampton is another shopkeeper, “ perhaps
an Alderman, a rich overgrown Tradesman,” who has
more money than his neighbours and therefore wants
no credit. “‘Prying about into all the secrets of the
trade,” he discovers where the cloth comes from, com-
municates with the clothier in Wiltshire, and buys his
goods direct, then has them brought by horse-packs
to Northampton. Possibly by tempting the clothier
with ready money he obtains the cloth a penny per yard
cheaper than the factor in London sold it to the woollen-
draper. What is the result? The overgrown trades-
man will save in cost of transport, so much so that his
cloth will cost him half-a-crown per yard less than his
neighbour. Hence he will be able to undersell, and
thus obtain his neighbour’s custom. Not only that, but


1644 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


he will have taken away the occupation of several people :
the carrier who brought the goods to London from
Wiltshire, the carrier who took them from London to
Northampton, and finally Mr. A, the Blackwell Hall
factor, who “also loses his employment and may sit and
blow his fingers for want of trade.” Mr. B likewise is
ruined by the loss of his wholesale trade. ‘‘ And what
is all the benefit which is made by this spoil upon trade ?
Only this, that Squire D. E. of Northamptonshire buys
his suits half-a-crown a yard cheaper,” and a covetous
man has been made richer. And the moral? ‘‘ This is
cutting off the circulation of trade; this is managing
trade with a few hands; and if this practice, which is
indeed evidently begun, was to come to be universal,
a million of people in England that now live handsomely
by trade would be destitute of employment and their
families in time might want bread.”

This passage speaks volumes. How utterly incon-
ceivable must the line of thought appear to a modern
business man !

Like the producers, the consumers also received
attention. In a certain sense the consumer received even
more, for the conception that all production was in the
interests of consumption had not yet disappeared. It
was the old “natural”’ view ; production for use was still
the rule of all economic activities. Hence the stress
laid throughout the whole of the early capitalist period
on good wares, and on the principle that commodities
should really be what they pretended. Innumerable
were the ordinances that were everywhere promulgated
to this intent, more especially in the 17th and 18th
centuries ; and the state deemed it part of its work itself
to regulate the quality of wares. It is idle to assert that
this very state control is evidence of the decline of the
“natural” view; in other words, that the custom


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 165


of producing for use was on the decline. Such was
not the case. The interference of the state was intended
to check the conduct of some few unscrupulous manufac-
turers. For the rest, the old tradition prevailed that
you should make good and genuine commodities ; it
was the tradition of the gild system, and industry in the
early capitalist period continued to be tinged with it.

It was long before the purely capitalist notion gained
acceptance that the exchange value of any commodity was
what influenced the undertaker most. We may observe
how slow its progress was from the conflicting opinions
on the subject in the 18th century. Sir Josiah Child
appears to have been in the minority on this, as on most
other questions, when he formulated the demand that
every manufacturer should be allowed to judge for®
himself as to the kind of commodity, and the quality,
that he brought into the market. It is curious enough
now-a-days to read Child’s plea for the right of the
manufacturer to make shoddy goods. ‘If we intend to
have the trade of the world,” he cries,223 ‘“‘we must
imitate the Dutch, who make the worst as well as the
best of all manufactures, that we may be in a capacity of
serving all markets and all humours.”

4. Finally, the attitude of the old-fashioned bourgeois
to technical inventions is significant for the spirit within
him. The old view of life appears once more: technical
improvements are to be welcomed if only they do not
overthrow man’s happiness. True, they may cheapen
commodities ; but the odd pence thus gained are too high
a price for the tears and the sufferings of the families
of the workmen who are thrown out of employment.
Once more, then, human welfare is the pivot of the
whole economic organism, even though this time it be
but the welfare of the wage-earning class. The interests
of this class were by no means absent from men’s thoughts


166 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


in those days, although the reason for this may have been
a selfish one.

There is abundant testimony to the dislike of labour-
saving machinery in the early capitalist period. Let us
glance at one or two instances.

In the second year of Elizabeth’s reign a Venetian
inventor (a type whose acquaintance we have already
made) offered a labour-saving machine to the Court of the
London Clothworkers’ Company (whose industry by that
time was already capitalistic in its organization). The
Court carefully considered the offer and decided to refuse
it, for the new invention would probably have deprived
many a workman of his living. ‘It wolde be a grete
decay unto the companye, whereupon the Master and
Wardens gave the said stranger grete thanks and also
Xxs. in money towards his charge, and so parted.” 224

In 1684 the knitting-frame for stockings was forbidden
to be used (again in a capitalistically organized industry),
and once more the reason was that it might reduce
the wages of the craftsmen.225 Even a professional
“projector”? and inventor like John Joachim Becher
shared this view. ‘I should certainly advise no one to
invent instruments that might do away with human
labour or reduce wages ; but there can be no objection to
such as are of advantage and utility, especially in those
places where there is more work than workers can
accomplish.” 226 Colbert’s language is stronger still ;
the inventor of time-saving devices is a “foe of work.”
And these are the sentiments of Frederick the Great: “It
is not by any means my intention that the spinning
machine should be generally used. . . . If it were, a large
number of people who depended for their livelihood
on spinning would be thrown out of employment into
starvation—which cannot possibly be tolerated.’’ 2264
After all this we shall not be surprised to find that a man


THE BOURGEOIS—OLD STYLE 167


of such noble sentiments and good taste as Montesquieu
should be conservative in this respect. He believed that
machines, even including water-mills, were not an
unmixed blessing.227_ Finally, so thorough a business
man as Postlethwayt is very reserved in his judgment on
new inventions. A people without commerce may safely
refuse to admit machines, but commercial states should
only allow them after careful scrutiny and should anyhow
exclude such as manufacture goods for home consumption.
‘** What we gain in expedition, we lose in strength.” 228

What comes to the fore throughout ? The old con-
ception of producing in order to satisfy wants, no move
aid no less, the traditional way of life, or moral scruples.
But be the reason what it may, it is always a stumbling-
block to the unfettered development of acquisitiveness, of
the undertaking spirit, and of economic rationalism.

With the dawn of the rgth century all this changed, at
first slowly, then with a rush. The results of the change
will form the subject of the succeeding chapter.


CHAPTER XII
THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN


How has the economic outlook changed in the last
century? What characterizes the capitalist spirit of our
own day—the zenith of capitalism; and how does that
spirit differ from the one which filled the old-fashioned
bourgeois?

Before attempting to answer these questions, let us
realize that there is no one single type of undertaker to-
day, any more than in earlier epochs; that, as in the
early capitalist period, a different spirit moves different |
capitalist undertakers. Let us, then, place the various
types in groups. Surprising as it may seem, they are the
types we already know as having existed in the past.
To-day, too, we find the freebooter, the ground landlord,
the bureaucrat, the speculator, the trader and the
manufacturer.

Recall the career of a Cecil Rhodes. Does it not
remind you of the Genoese merchants on their towers, or
possibly even more of Sir Walter Raleigh and Sir Francis
Drake? Cecil Rhodes was of the stuff that robber-
knights were made of. He was a discoverer and a con-
queror whom no stumbling-blocks could retard ; beside
the sword and the rifle he wielded another mighty weapon
—modern stock-exchange gambling. He was partly
politician, partly capitalist undertaker ; rather more of a


diplomat,than a trader ; he recognized no other power than
168


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 169


brute force. It is strange to find in him even one iota of
the Puritan spirit. And if we are to compare him with
earlier generations, he must be placed alongside the men
of the Renaissance.

How different from Cecil Rhodes’s world is that of
(say) Stumm, or some Silesian mine-owner! Here we
are in the atmosphere of the old feudal landed nobility ;
the ancient relationship between master and man is still
met with; the staff of the establishments are arranged
in a kind of hierarchy, and business is deliberate and
cumbersome. Such are a few of the characteristics
of these concerns, the directors of which have much
in common with the capitalist landed proprietor of days
gone by.

Then there is a third kind of undertaker nowadays
who reminds us of the bureaucrat of old—exact in his
work, methodical to a degree, nicely balanced in his judg-
ments, highly gifted as an organizer, very careful before
committing himself, an excellent executive official, who
to-day may be town clerk of a large town and to-morrow
manager of a bank, who frequently enough gives up the
control of a Government department for that of a trust.*
You will find him at the head of state and municipal
enterprises.

Different from all these is the speculator of our time,
who appears to be twin-brother to the 18th-century
projector. Recently the daily papers reported the exploits
of a French speculator, and the story is worth recalling.
Rochette was the man’s name; his age scarcely thirty.
Yet he had allowed millions to slip between his fingers.


* [This is a type common in Germany. Perhaps Bernard Dernburg
is the best known. He was irector of the Darmstadter Bank from
1901 to 1906, and German Minister for the Colonies from 1907 to
1910. On his resigning his portfolio he again became a banking
magnate. |


170 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


He started life as an under-waiter in a railway station
restaurant ; before long he was a full-fledged waiter in a
café in Melun. Coming to Paris, he made himself
acquainted with book-keeping, and entered the service of
Berger, the financial swindler. On his master’s bank-
ruptcy Rochette took over the business with the 5,000
francs dowry brought him by a typist whom he married.
He then began to float companies, and in the space of
four years no less than 13 came into existence. ‘There
was the Crédit Minier, with a capital of 500,000 francs ;
the Laviana Coal Mines, with 2 millions; the Liat Coal
Mines, with the same amount; the Banque Franco-
Espagnole, with 20 millions; the Minier Trust, with
10 millions ; the Union Franco-Belge, with 2} millions ;
the financial paper Le Financier, with 2 millions; a
number of copper and tin companies; a Moroccan
Fishery Company; an incandescent lamp company, with
44 millions; and many more. He issued altogether
some 60 million francs’ worth of shares, which by skilful
manipulation rose to 200 millions, though a tenth of that
figure was more nearly their true value. He had opened
no less than 57 branch establishments in France ; and the
total number of people who participated in his scheme
was close upon 40,000. Most of them were ruined, their
total losses amounting to more than 150 millions. Why,
it may be asked, was Rochette able to take in so many
people? ‘The explanation will be found in his marvellous
power of surrounding himself with “solid,” respectable
folk. Just to show how cunning he was in blinding his
victims, it may be mentioned that he founded a large
factory for utilizing a filament lamp patent. Everybody
rushed to get shares in the company; the huge factory
was the talk of the town ; its tall chimneys belched forth
smoke day and night, to the great satisfaction of the
shareholders. In reality, however, there was only one


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 171


solitary individual working in the building, and he was
the stoker!

Does not this story read like a report of doings in
England in the 1720's?

How different is the persevering tradesman who makes
a fortune because of his sure eye for the right conjuncture,
or by clever calculations and advantageous agreements with
his wholesale house, his customers, and his employees.
What has such a man, say a Berlin draper, in common
with Cecil Rhodes? What the director of a multiple
shop with a gold-mine speculator? And what all these
with the manufacturer who runs his factory as was
done 100 or 200 years ago, in Bradford or Sedan?

These old friends are still among us, and seemingly their
form is unchanged. Nor are they the only types of the
modern undertaker. Others have joined the group, which
thus becomes quite picturesque. A very common one,
usually found in America, may be termed the master-
undertaker (since super-undertaker is an ugly word). His
great characteristic is that he unites within himself several
independent types. He may be freebooter, unscrupulous
calculator, landlord, and speculator all in one. Any trust-
magnate will serve as an illustration.

Finally, a phenomenon of our age is the collective
undertaker, who is not an individual at all, but a group of
capitalist undertakers at the head of a giant enterprise.
They form a kind of syndicated undertaker, each of them
exercising special functions, and in their corporate capacity
they represent undertaking in all its comprehensiveness.
We need only think of such industrial organizations as
our electrical concerns, our iron foundries, our cannon
factories.

In short, modern undertaking in all its types presents
a variegated picture. But in our own days, as in those of
long ago, all the types have certain features in common,


172. LHE QUINTESSENCE OF (CAPITALISE,


all are filled with the same spirit. It is only a difference
of degree that distinguishes the one from the other. In
olden times, as we saw, the undertakers were children of
the early capitalist spirit ; in modern times, they are the
children of the perfected capitalist spirit.

What manner of thing is this perfected capitalist spirit?
And what have all the types of the modern capitalist
undertaker in common ?

1. The ideal of both must be our first consideration.
What is it? What are the life-values that govern the
latter-day business man? What strikes us here is that
there has been a peculiar change of perspective in the
evaluation of man, a change of perspective which seems
to have affected the whole of the rest of life. Man, the
flesh-and-blood man, with his joys and sorrows, with his
needs and demands, has been forced from his place as
the centre round which all economic activities rotate ;
his throne is now occupied by a few abstractions, such as
Acquisitiveness and Business. Man has ceased to be what
he was until the end of the early capitalist period—the
measure of all things. The economic subjective agent
now aims at as high a profit as he can, and strives to
make his business flourish exceedingly. The two aims
are closely intertwined, as we shall presently observe.
Their relationship may be expressed thus: The under-
takers wish to see business thriving ; as for acquisitiveness,
it is forced upon them, even though they may never have
set out with that as their goal.

The real interest of undertaking does not always lie in
mere gain, certainly not for the dominating personalities
who determine the type. Walter Rathenau was, as I
think, perfectly right when he once said: “I have never
yet met with a business man whose chief aim was to
acquire wealth. I will even go so far as to assert that he
who is out to make money cannot possibly be a great


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 173


business man.” 229 Something very different occupies the
thoughts of the undertaker. His heart is set on seeing
his business thrive. Once more Walter Rathenau has
expressed it well. ‘The object of the business man’s
work, of his worries, his pride and his aspirations is just
his undertaking, be it a commercial company, factory,
bank, shipping concern, theatre or railway. The under-
taking seems to take on form and substance, and to be
ever with him, having, as it were, by virtue of his book-
keeping, his organization, and his branches, an independent
economic existence. The business man is wholly devoted
to making his business a flourishing, healthy, living
organism.” 230 This view is shared by all the capitalist
undertakers of the day in so far as they have expressed
themselves on the inner meaning of their activity.

Now, what is really meant by making a business, that
is, a capitalist undertaking, flourish? Observe that a
business begins with a sum of money and ends with the
same, and that therefore its existence is bound up with
the realization of a surplus. Success in business can only
mean success in realizing this surplus. No profits, no
business success. A factory may make very dear or very
cheap goods, and their quality may establish their maker’s
name as a household word throughout the globe, but if
the business continues to show a deficit from year to
year, it is a failure from the capitalist point of view.
To flourish, a concern must be profitable ; to prosper, it
must pay.?3!

You see now what I meant when I made the statement
that the undertakers wish to see business thriving, and as
for acquisitiveness, it is forced upon them.

Such being the goal of the capitalist undertaker, the
end of his activities is necessarily projected into infinity.
In earlier times, when the needs of the community deter-
mined economic’ activities, these had natural boundaries


174 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


or limits. There can be no such limits when economic
activities are determined by acquisitiveness and by flourish-
ing businesses. There is never a point in the future when
the total profits are sufficiently great for the undertaker
to say: It is enough. Should the development of a
business be such that its prosperity ceases to increase, the
many-sidedness of modern enterprise will see to it that
before long a second, and possibly a third, business is
added to the original one. Thus it is that in modern
days two equally strong tendencies show themselves—
expansion of one and the same business, and the branching
out into subsidiary or additional businesses. ‘This very
often leads to a kind of inner pressure in the mind of the
undertaker. It frequently happens that he really does not
want to expand further, but he must. Many a captain of
industry has confessed as much. We were always hoping,
says Andrew Carnegie in his Autobiography, that there
would come a time when extension of business would no
longer be necessary; but we invariably found that to put off
expanding would mean retrogression.?32_ Rockefeller tells
the same tale. The first reason for starting his trusts was
the desire to unite his capital and his capacities “ to carry
on a business of some magnitude and importance in place
of the small business that each separately had heretofore
carried on. After sore time, when the possibilities of the
new conditions became apparent, we found that more
capital was necessary. This we provided, as also the
people, and founded the Standard Oil Company with a
capital of a million dollars. Later we discovered that
even more money could be profitably invested, and we
raised our capital to 34 millions. The more the business
grew the more capital we put into it, the object being
always the same: to extend our business by furnishing
the best and cheapest products.’’233 A kind of mono-
mania this ; capital is piled on capital because the business


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 175


grows. Extension of business is the end; furnishing
cheap and good products the means. A famous German
undertaker—Strousberg—says exactly the same thing.
“The first wedge calls as a rule for a second, and so the
great railway I was building made further demands upon
me. To satisfy these J extended my activities, departed
more and more from my original intention, and, finding
so much promise in the new prospect, I devoted myself
wholly to my business.” 234

Most capitalist undertakers think of nothing else but
this constant desire for extension and expansion, which
to the outside observer appears so meaningless. If you
ask them what purpose the expansion is intended to
serve, they will regard you with a kind of mild surprise
and reply a little testily that the purpose is self-evident ;
it is to make economic life more vigorous, and, more-
over, is demanded by economic progress. ;

But what is meant by “economic progress” in this
quite general and fairly stereotyped answer? What
is the association of ideas in the minds of the people
who give it? Examine carefully and you shall find
that it means an expansion in what may be called
the “economic apparatus’—the production of largely
increased quantities at the cheapest possible price ;
enormous output ; enormous extent of communications ;
the quickest transportation of goods, people, and news.

But the answer, like the phenomena that prompted
the question, sounds meaningless too. It is therefore
unsatisfactory. There must be method in all this mad-
ness ; it must surely be explicable. The people con-
cerned in the activities do not seem to be alive to any
life-values at their base. But life-values in them there
must be, or you would not find whole generations of
men intellectually sound and strong engaged in the
activities mentioned. An analysis of the soul of the


176 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


modern capitalist undertaker therefore repays the trouble,
and at the very outset you stumble across—the child.
In very truth, the psychology of the modern undertaker
appears to me to resemble greatly that of the child.
Understand the one and you will understand the other.
For all the processes in the mind of the undertaker
(and indeed of modern man generally), if reduced to
their simplest elements, show a kind of relapse into the
days of childhood.

Let us consider the matter more in detail.

The child possesses four elementary ‘“ values”’ ; four
ideals dominate its existence. They are—

(z) Physical bigness, as seen in grown-ups and
imagined in giants ;

(4) Quick movement—in running, bowling a hoop,
riding on a roundabout.

(c) Novelty—it changes its toys very quickly; it
begins something and never completes it because another
occupation attracts it ; and

(d) Sense of power—that is why it pulls out the legs
of a fly, makes Towzer stand on his hind legs and beg
nicely, and flies its kite as high as it can.

Curious as it may sound, these ideals, and these
only, will be found in all modern “values.” Let us
take them in turn.

(2) We attach importance to quantities, to mere size.
It is what interests us, what we admire most. That, I
fancy, will be generally admitted. There is a universal
tendency (to use the words of Lord Bryce) “to mistake
bigness for greatness.” It matters not wherein the
bigness consists: it may be the population of a town
or a country, the height of a monument, the breadth
of a river, the frequency of suicide, the passengers carried
by a railway, the size of a ship, the number of players
in an orchestra, or what not. Of course our greatest


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 177


admiration is reserved for a huge sum of money.
Besides, money makes it possible to measure the size of
otherwise unmeasurable things and to compare them.
It is a natural and easy step from this to the belief
that that is valuable which costs much. We say this
picture or this jewellery is twice as valuable as that. In
America, where this modern tendency may be studied
better than anywhere else because there it has reached
its greatest perfection, people come to the point at
once, and prefix to every commodity its monetary value.
‘“*Ffave you seen the 50,000-dollar Rembrandt at Mr.
A’s house?” is a not unusual question. ‘To-day
Mr. Carnegie’s 500,000-dollar yacht entered the harbour
of” (say) Boston—so you may read in the daily paper.

Get into the habit of looking at the mere quantity
of things and you will naturally tend to compare any
two phenomena that may come under your notice ; you
will weigh the one against the other and pronounce
the larger to be the more valuable. Again, if of two
things the one becomes larger than the other in a given
space of time, it is said to have been successful. So that
the inclination towards what is measurably big brings
with it necessarily another tendency—worship of success.
The modern business man is appraised only in accordance
with his success. Now success means to overtake others ;
to do more, to achieve more, to possess more than others;
in a word, to be great. The pursuit of success holds
out the same unlimited possibilities as the chase of profits ;
the one complements the other.

To illustrate the influence on the inner workings of
the mind of this quantitative valuation of things, so
characteristic of our day, let us refer to the attitude
of people to sport. What is invariably the main question
of interest? Is it not, who will win? Who will score
most? A match is but a quantitative balance between

12


178 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


two results. Imagine such a standpoint in an ancient
Greek wrestling school! Imagine it at a Spanish bull-
fight! The thing is impossible. In both these cases
qualitative values were looked for, e.g. the highest
personal artistic skill.

(4) Speed is of almost the same consequence to the
modern man as massivity. To rush on in a 100-h.p.
motor-car is one of the supremest ideals of our age;
and he who cannot speed madly along contents himself
with reading of record-breaking velocity. Perhaps the
express between Hamburg and Berlin was ten minutes
in advance of its scheduled time; perhaps the latest ocean-
liner reached New York three hours earlier than it was
expected ; perhaps the postman now comes at 7.30
instead of at the customary 8 o'clock ; perhaps one news-
paper published a declaration of war (probably a fictitious
one) an hour before its competitor—all these things
are of tremendous interest to the queerly constituted
folk of our day; they seem to be of vital importance
to them.

Moreover, a curious concept has sprung into existence,
that of “‘beating the record.” In terms of record-
breaking you impress on your memory the speediest
achievements as the most valuable ones. In its fullest
meaning the new concept refers to great size and great
speed combined. All the megalomania, all the mad
hurry of our time, is expressed in record-beating. I
think it most likely that the future historian of our time
will speak of it as “‘ The Age of Record-breaking.”’

(c) Whatever is new nowadays attracts merely because
it is a novelty. It attracts most when the assurance is
possible, “There never has been anything like it.”
Sensational we call its effect on the mind. That the love
of sensation is a marked feature of the age requires no
expatiation. Modern journalism is perhaps the best proof.


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 179


But recall also how fashions in dances, no less than in
clothes, change from season to season. Is it not because
nothing is so attractive as what is new ?

(d) The sense of power is the fourth characteristic of
the modern spirit; it is felt in the consciousness of
superiority over others. But in reality it is only an
expression of weakness; hence its importance in the
child’s world. For, after all, any one gifted with true
greatness, which is usually inward, will be hardly likely
to estimate the outward semblance of power at all highly.
Power has no temptation for Siegfried ; only a Mime
thirsts for it. Bismarck in all probability did not bother
much about the power he exercised ; but in Lassalle the
desire for power must have been tremendous. A king
possesses power ; it is therefore of small moment in his
sight. But the financier of humble origin, who keeps a
kingly borrower waiting in his ante-chamber for some
little time, suns himself in this power because his soul has
none of it. An undertaker who employs 10,000 men and
experiences a sense of power in consequence 1s like a little
boy who makes his doggie bring back the stick he keeps
on throwing from him. Moreover, when neither by
money nor any other outward force power over mankind
is given us, we talk of the conquest of nature. That is
why our age is so childishly delighted with epoch-making
discoveries—say, the mastery of the air, and such-like
achievements. The truly great man, however, will be
comparatively unmoved at the sight of a biplane in the
air. A truly great generation concerned with the deepest
problems of life will not be enraptured because it
made some discoveries in technical science. Power of
this sort it will assuredly regard as “‘superficial.” Our
own age lacks true greatness ; accordingly, like a child
it admires the power which new inventions bestow,
and it overrates those who possess it. Hence the high


180 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


esteem in which the populace holds inventors and
millionaires.

It is just possible that these visions float before the gaze
of the undertaker more or less clearly. But certain it is
that they take form and substance in his goal—the
expansion and growth of his business. Acquisitiveness
and interest in his enterprise thus direct his activities as
a capitalist undertaker.

2. His ideal we have reviewed. It remains now to
review these activities as influenced by the ideal. In
essence the activities of the modern capitalist undertaker
remain the same as before. He must conquer, organize,
deal, speculate, and calculate. But the extent of each of
these factors varies, and consequently the resultant whole
is not quite like that of an earlier age.

In modern times the trading function has become of
more and more significance. I use the word “ trading”
in the sense indicated earlier in the book of dealing
or negotiating. It is on this that commercial success
now increasingly depends; on the skill and strength
of suggestion in making contracts of all kinds. In
olden days knots were cut; to-day they must be
unravelled.

Next in importance to dealing comes skilful specula-
tion—by which I mean stock-exchange manipulations.
Modern undertakings are drawn more and more into the
vortex of stock-exchange activities. Trust development
such as we find in the United States is in reality only the
transformation of manufacturing and commercial enter-
prises into purely stock-exchange speculative concerns.
Consequently the directors and managers of such businesses
have new problems to solve, and this opens up new
activities for them.

As for calculation, it becomes more and more delicate
as well as increasingly difficult, both because of the need


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 181


for absolute exactitude and also because it has become so
extensive.

Finally, the activities of the capitalist undertaker have
become much more many-sided ; that is to say, in so far
as specialization has not set in. Economic activities have
branched out in all directions; what wonder then that
those who direct them should be called upon to be many-
sided ?

So much for the nature of the activity itself. What is
new is its boundlessness. So long as the needs of the
living human being governed economic activities, so long
did these have a limit. But with the disappearance of
the governing factor, the natural limit fell away.
Accordingly the activities of the capitalist undertaker
have no bounds. Non sunt certi denique fines. Which
means that the expenditure of human energy in modern
economic activities, extensively and intensively, is strained
to the uttermost. Every minute of the day, of the year,
nay, of life itself, is devoted to work ; and during this
working period every power is occupied at highest pressure.
Everybody is acquainted with the hard-worked man of
to-day. Whether employer or employed, he is constantly
on the verge of a breakdown owing to overwork. That
he tends to be excited, that he is always on the move,
is generally known too. Speed and yet more speed—
such is the cry of the age. It rushes onward in one
mad race.

The influence of such a life on body and soul is not
difficult to gauge. It corrodes the former and dries
up the latter. Everything is sacrificed to the Moloch
of work ; all the higher instincts of heart and mind are
crushed out by devotion to business) How much the
inner life of modern man has been shattered is best seen
if we cast a glance at the kernel of all natural life—the
relationship to women. ‘These men have no time for


182 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


the enjoyment of delicate passions, nor even for gallant
flirtations. They seem to be quite incapable of deep
erotic emotions. Either they are wholly apathetic so
far as love is concerned, or they are content with a brief
sensual intoxication. They either do not bother about
women at all, or they buy what they require in this respect.

3. Business principles likewise have undergone a
change. That was only to be expected when the goal
of enterprise has become different. To-day, it may be
said, five main rules regulate economic activities.

(2) Absolute rationalism is the first. Economic
activities are ruled by cold reason, by thought. As we
have already seen, that has always been the case; it
showed itself in the making of plans, in considering
whether any policy was likely to be successful or no,
and in calculation generally. The modern capitalist
spirit differs from its predecessors only in the degree in
which this rule is obeyed. To-day the rule is strictly,
one might almost say sternly, enforced. The last trace
of traditionalism has vanished. The man of to-day
(and the American undertaker may stand as the most
perfect type) is filled with the will to apply cold reason
to economic activities ; moreover, he possesses the deter-
mination to make the will effective. Accordingly, he
is ever ready to adopt a newer method if it is more
rational, whether in the sphere of organization, of pro-
duction, or of calculation. This naturally implies that,
no matter what the cost may be, he is able to leave the
old methods the moment the newer ones are available.

(2) Production for exchange (as opposed to produc-
tion for use) is the motto of economic activities. As
much profit as possible is their ideal ; consequently what
matters is not the goodness or the kind of commodities
produced but their saleability. How they are sold is
secondary, so long as they are sold. Consequently the


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 183


undertaker is wholly indifferent to the quality of his
wares ; he will make shoddy goods or cheap substitutes,
if only it pays. If cheap and nasty boots yield more
profit than good ones, it would be a deadly sin against
the holy spirit of capitalism to manufacture good ones.
It is no argument against the truth of this to point
to a movement in certain industries (the chemical industry
is one), the object of which is to improve quality. As
well say that the bonuses which the general store offers
to its employees on the sale of more expensive articles
proves the same thing. What both instances do prove
is that they are cases where there is more profit from
high-class goods than from inferior articles. The
greatest gain is the only criterion in these matters, and
an undertaker will make now cheap goods, now dearer,
according as the one or the other yields more profit.
From the capitalist’s standpoint that is only natural.

What follows from this is plain. Since it is inherent
in acquisitiveness to enlarge incomings to the uttermost ;
and since, again, the greater the sale the larger the
profits, it is only to be expected that the undertaker
will try all he can to increase his sales. Apart from the
greater gain, more extended sales will give him certain
advantages over competitors. Hence it is by no means
remarkable that the desire for greater sales, for new
markets, for more customers, is one of the mightiest
motive powers in modern capitalism. It is directly
responsible for a number of business principles, all of
which have one end in view—to make the public buy.
The more important of these principles deserve to be
mentioned.

(c) The first (and the third in the general scheme)
may be enunciated as follows : Search out the customer
and attack him. That is to-day as self-evident a maxim
in all branches of business as it was strange and wrong


184 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


in the age of early capitalism. In practice it means that
you set out to attract the customer’s attention and to
stir up within him the desire to purchase. You attract
his attention by shouting in his ears, or catching his
eye by loud, coloured indicators; you strive to make
him purchase by suggestion ; you seek to convince him
that the articles for sale are extraordinarily good or
valuable. Advertisement serves both ends—as every one
knows ; and advertisements, as every one knows also,
shatter all sense of propriety, of taste, of good manners,
and of dignity. Is it not true to say that modern
advertising in its extreme forms is both unesthetic
and immoral ?

(d) Secondly, sell as cheaply as you can; reduce price
to the lowest possible figure so as to attract the public.
In the early capitalist age low prices were an abomination.
The motto then was (as we have already noted) little
business but great profits. To-day we are at the
opposite extreme : as much business as possible but
smal] profits. Small profits, quick returns—is not this
nowadays the universal motto?

(e) Elbow-room is demanded in order to arrive at
the wished-for goal. Which means, first, that you
require freedom of action, liberty to enter upon or to
abstain from any course, as seems best to you. It means
emancipation from the trammels of law or morality ;
it means that you should be allowed to poach on your
neighbour’s preserves just as he may be allowed to
poach on yours; it means that you should be allowed
to oust him if you can; it means that you object to
interference either from the state or from working
men’s organizations in making your contracts. You
want none of the restraints of an earlier age. The free
exercise of your powers shall alone determine economic
success or failure.


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 185


And in the second place it means—what follows quite
naturally—unrestricted competition. If acquisition is
the first consideration, unrestricted -competition is a
matter of course. You need no longer be bound by
considerations of any kind, whether moral, esthetic or
social. Unscrupulous is the adjective for your actions.

Look at the extensive American trusts and you will see
what unrestricted competition means. The recent doings
of the American Tobacco Company are a case in point;
they outdistanced the accepted practices of Europe and
illustrate to what lengths an unscrupulous undertaker will
go. No considerations give him pause; he leaves no
road untried that promises success. The trust threw its
goods away at ridiculous prices in order to conquer new
markets ; middlemen received enormous commissions ;
well-known brands were imitated and poor quality wares
were sold in wrappers that misled the public. If it became
involved in litigation, the trust by its superior financial
strength was able to draw out the cases until its opponents
were utterly exhausted. Even retail trading received careful
attention, for the trust opened shops at effective points,
and by underselling forced the old-established tobacconists
to close their doors. Finally, the trust monopolized the
raw material, and so came into conflict with the tobacco-
growers of Kentucky. In rgir the trust was proceeded
against under the Sherman Law, and the presiding judge
in delivering sentence characterized the activities of the
undertaking against their competitors as having been
carried on with extraordinary cunning, precaution, and
devilry. Every human creature that by energy or skill
threatened to stand in the way of the trust was mercilessly
crushed.

Perhaps the most perfect type of the unscrupulous,
smart business man was Edward H. Harriman, who died
a few years ago. An obituary notice 235 declared that the


186 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


secret of his victorious career was his utter lack of moral
scruples. Had he not cast these overboard he would have
stumbled almost at the very first step he took. He began by
breaking the man who had opened for him the gates of the
railway paradise; following this up by his brutal campaign
against Morgan, who, however, knew how to utilize for
his own ends the capacities of his opponent. Harriman’s
fight with Hill was as unscrupulous as the policy that
brought him into the Standard Oil Trust. But Harriman’s
delinquencies were not merely personal ; they form part
and parcel of American speculation.

Of the great victors on the racecourse of modern
capitalism it may be asserted, what was recently said of
Rockefeller, that they know how to glide over every moral
restraint with almost childlike disregard. The mirror of
this naive view of life will be found in the memoirs of
John Rockefeller, who once summed up the faith within
him by saying that he was willing to pay a substitute a
salary of a million dollars, if beside other positive qualities
he had no scruples whatsoever, and was ready to kill off
thousands of victims without a murmur.

Another undertaker, this time a German, who considered
himself rather backward in this respect because he was
‘too good-natured and considerate ’—I refer to Werner
Siemens—urged his brother Charles to become a smart
business man in these terms: ‘“‘ Always be determined and
unscrupulous. That in so large a concern is called for.
Once begin to be considerate of private interests and
you will fall into a morass of demands and intrigues”
(letter of March 31, 1856).

4. The middle-class virtues—industry, frugality, and
honesty—are they of any consequence for the modern
capitalist undertaker? It is as difficult to reply to the
question in the affirmative as in the negative. The place
of these virtues in modern economic life is so very


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 187


different from what they occupied in the early capitalist
system. As a matter of fact, they have ceased to be
necessary to the undertaker. Nevertheless, they still play
their part in undertaking. Before, these virtues were still
in the sphere wherein personal will-power was exercised ;
now they have become part of the mechanism of business.
Before, they were characteristic of living beings; now, they
have turned into objective principles of business methods.

This may sound difficult. I will explain my meaning
by considering each of the virtues in turn.

In the olden days when industry was preached as a
prime virtue in the tradesman, it was necessary to implant
a solid foundation of duties in the inner consciousness of
men. Everybody had to be urged to exercise his will-
power in a certain direction, and when the habit was once
formed the industrious tradesman went through his day’s
work in conscious self-mastery. To-day all this is changed.
The business man works at high pressure because the
stress of economic activities carries him along in spite of
himself. He is no longer exercising a virtue ; necessity
drives him to this particular course. The general business
pace determines what his own business pace shall be. He
can no more be idle than a man at a machine; whereas a
craftsman with his tools can be idle or industrious as he
chooses.

The objectiveness of frugality is even more marked, for
the private and the business “housekeeping” of the under-
taker are now separate. In the latter frugality is needful
more thanever. ‘“ Extravagance even in the smallest things
should be avoided. It is not petty to have a care of this,
for extravagance is a consuming disease difficult to localize.
There are great undertakings whose existence depends on
whether all the sand is removed from the carts or whether
one shovelfull is left behind.” 236 Recall the careful, almost
miserly, economy of Rockefeller in his management of the


188 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Standard Oil Company ; recall how not a drop of oil was
wasted ; the wooden boxes in which tin was brought from
Europe were sold to florists or were used as firewood.?37
But in the private housekeeping of the undertaker you
will find none of this fanatical thrift. Neither Rathenau’s
nor Rockefeller’s castle is a centre of that frugality so
much beloved of Benjamin Franklin; and the festive
boards of our rich undertakers know nothing of sufficiency
and moderation. And if the head of the family is content
to go on in the old-fashioned bourgeois style of his youth,
his wife, his sons, and his daughters will all see to it that
luxury and superfluity and pomp become part and parcel
of the new bourgeois spirit. Bourgeois the style of life
still is, even in the case of the wealthiest. The old
doctrines of Alberti still hold sway. Never let your
expenditure exceed your income, he urged his disciples.
And calculate. To-day this advice is faithfully obeyed by
the modern bourgeois. Herein his mode of living differs
from the seigniorial. The seignieur scorns money.
Commercial honesty comes last. Can any one doubt
that honesty is to-day—to-day perhaps more than ever—
a factor in business life? In business life only, however.
For the conduct of the undertaker as a man may differ
widely from his conduct as a tradesman. Commercial
honesty is a complexity of principles that are intended to
apply to business but not to the personal conduct of the
business subject. An honest tradesman to-day may
certainly be unmoral in his private life. When you say
he is “ good,” you mean that he is reliable in his busi-
ness ; that he will pay; that his firm has a good name.
You pass no judgment on his personal conduct, which is
governed by other principles. Indeed, the firm may not
have an individual head at all. It may be an impersonal
limited company, the directors of which change from time
totime. Their personal morality stands in no relationship


THE MODERN BUSINESS MAN 189


to the business. The “‘name”’ of the business is all that
matters. Thus, here, too, what before was a personal
quality has now become a matter of business routine.
You can see it best by considering modern credit. A
bank in olden days was relied upon because it could
point to an ancient and honoured name ; it was “ good ”
for personal reasons. To-day a bank inspires confidence
by the size of its invested capital and its reserves. To-
day you assume that business is carried on honestly—
anyhow until some swindle comes to light to prove the
contrary. In this virtue then, as in the others, what
before was organic has now become mechanical.

All this applies to the large undertakings. In the
small and middle-sized enterprises, however, you may still
find the principles prevalent in the early days of capitalism.
The middle-class virtues are still cultivated, and the
undertaker’s personal characteristics determine his
economic progress. It is in the large undertakings and
their directors and managers that we find the spirit of
capitalism fully developed in all its shining purity.

Now, why has the capitalist spirit developed in this
fashion? Why did it not take on another guise? What
forces moulded it? What nourished it during its
growth? ‘These are questions that require consideration
by themselves, and so the sources whence the capitalist


spirit sprang will be reviewed in the following section
of this book.


BOOK II


THE ORIGINS OF THE CAPITALIST
SPIRIT


INTRODUCTION


CHAPTER XII
THE PROBLEM


Wuart is the origin of the capitalist spirit? Whence did
it spring? Two ways of answering these questions are
possible. The first is by a reference to external facts.
You may point to the appearance of a capitalist under-
taker in a land in which he had come to trade or where
he had set up business. Thus you may say the capitalist
spirit in China owes its origin to the English; or, the
Jews introduced the capitalist spirit into Magdeburg. In
this sense the question is answered by the facts of the
history of migration. But we shall not deal with this
aspect of the question here. What we want to know in
this book is, How did a capitalist economic outlook grow
up in the minds of men? Why in any particular period
did the capitalist spirit dominate economic activities,
giving men a certain aim, calling forth in them certain
capacities, making them obey certain principles? And
what was responsible for the appearance from time to
time, now in one generation, now in another, of certain
people with strongly marked views and a particular out-
look, with a certain will-power and a certain skill?

I am bound to say that many people do not admit
that there is any problem at all to be solved. They


take it as self-evident that the capitalist spirit was
13 193


194 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


engendered by capitalism. They do not admit that the
capitalist spirit has an independent existence. But this
is by no means an axiom ; it certainly requires proof. It
is possible, of course, that an economic outlook may be
the result of economic conditions, but the exact relation-
ship between the two has to be most carefully taken
into account. We want to know how and why the one
springs from the other.

There are other people who admit the problem, but
deny that a scientific solution is possible. One of the
younger scholars of the day expressed himself on the
subject in some such terms as these. 238 The capitalist
spirit and all that it conveys are merely very useful descrip-
tive labels. We may talk of the development or the
history of morals, but we cannot lay bare the stages in its
growth by the aid of documentary evidence. So, in the
same way, thrift, self-interest, and all the other qualities
contained in the conception “capitalist spirit’ have un-
doubtedly developed, but we cannot trace that develop-
ment historically.

There is clearly a good deal of truth in this suggestion.
No one can definitely show when certain outlooks or
opinions first came into existence. It would obviously
be an impossibility to demonstrate by reference to sources
what the influence (say) of Puritanism was on the
capitalist spirit. 239 But what can be done is to differen-
tiate between natural capacities and tendencies and
the influence upon such of environment in general or
specific occurrences in particular. Wecan even lay down
one or two rules to guide us in considering this contrast.
These rules will exclude, for example, certain common
denominators found among all peoples as sources of a
given intellectual outlook ; they will make it impossible
to account for certain aspects of the capitalist spirit by
quoting authorities that come later in point of time


THE PROBLEM 195


For instance, views of life in the 15th century cannot
possibly be traced to religious doctrines which were
first enunciated in the 17th ; or, the capitalist spirit of
Germany in the 19th century cannot be regarded as the
fruit of Puritan or Quaker religious teaching.

In order to arrive at a right view of the cause and
effects, one or two facts must be borne in mind.

1. The component parts of the capitalist spirit vary so
much that their origins will vary also, Some of the
factors in that spirit may be what are termed “instinctive
passions ’’—acquisitiveness, activity, the desire to plunder
your neighbour. All successful undertakers have always
had a goodly dose of these instincts. This is common
knowledge, and there is ample proof in support of the
statement .74°

Take as an illustration what Gentz, in a letter to Adam
Muller, says of the Rothschilds : “They are just ordi-
nary, ignorant Jews with tolerably good manners, and
in their business unspoiled children of nature, under-
standing the larger aspect of things but little. But they
possess a marvellous instinct of always being able to
decide upon what is right, and, of two good courses, to
choose the better. Their enormous wealth is due entirely
to this instinct, which the populace calls luck.” Heine’s
description of James Rothschild is in almost identical
terms : “‘ He has the peculiar capacity of insight, or, if
you will, the natural instinct of being able to take the
measure of others in all spheres of action.”

Again, the capitalist spirit may express itself in cer-
tain personal characteristics to which particular business
principles or middle-class virtues may be sympathetic. Or
we may see acquired skill—say, in rapid calculation or the
arrangements of a business or something similar.

Accordingly, when we come to consider the variations
in the root elements of the capitalist spirit the question


196 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


as to the origins of that spirit assumes a twofold impor-
tance. In the first place, the manner in which the
individual characteristics manifest ‘themselves in one and
the same person is different according as the component
factors of the capitalist spirit are present in a larger or
lesser degree. Instinctive movement, instinctive capabi-
lities, are always to be found—they are bred in the bone ;
they may be either repressed, neglected, or not made
use of, or they may be quickened, strengthened, and
broadened.

The nature of the two other factors is such that the
possibility of their acquirement is patent, and is as a rule
the result of tuition. The first factor—moulding the
character—is due to educative influences; the second—
forming the mind—is due to instruction.

In the second place, the question of inheritance divides
the various factors into two sharply defined groups.
The first consists of those qualities which may be trans-
mitted from one person or from one age to another.
The second group is composed of all such characteristics
as are so intimately interwoven with the personality of the
individual that they can only affect others by the force of
example, and their existence ceases with that of their
possessor. Instincts and talents can never be accumulated
independently of the individual ; they are inherited, but
though they may have grown and developed, each human
has perforce to return to the old starting-point and to
pass through all transitory states. On the other hand,
virtues and capabilities, though the sum total of man’s
single and united efforts, are quite distinct from person-
ality, and the stages of their progress may be followed
and catalogued in codes and systems. Men die, but these
codes continue. In them later generations find the accu-
mulated experience of their ancestors, and profit thereby.
It matters not that for a long time any particular precept


THE PROBLEM 197


remains disregarded. So long as it is written down, some
one or other may one day be inspired by it. Wise rules
for conduct and for craftsmanship are transferable both as
to time and space. The latter differ from the former
only in that they are added to by each successive genera-
tion, seeing that experience is enlarged and technical
inventions increased. But rules of conduct can hardly be
said to gain by reason of any that were current before.

From all this it now becomes obvious that the process
of growth of each of the elements of the capitalist spirit
differed enormously among themselves.

2. Secondly, in tracing the origins of the capitalist
spirit we must always bear in mind that the conditions
vary fundamentally with each epoch of capitalist develop-
ment. Above all, the era of early capitalism must be
sharply distinguished from that of perfected capitalism.
If you are to sum up the economic activities of each in a
phrase, you might say that in the early capitalist age the
undertaker produced capitalism, in the perfected capitalist
age capitalism produces the undertaker. In the young
days of capitalism, capitalist organization was by no means
general ; it was mostly the creation of the non-capitalist
genius. Its stock of knowledge and experience was not
large ; both experience and knowledge had to be gained,
garnered, and tested. It had little in the way of capitalist
machinery, and that little had to be painfully acquired.
And as for the primary foundations of all contracts and
agreements, they had not yet been laid; long and
strenuous was the upward striving of credit and confidence
and trust. Does it not stand to sense that under such
circumstances the capitalist undertaker was bound to act
on his own initiative, and possibly with a good deal of
caprice? To-day all this has been altered. Modern
capitalist organization is, in the words of Max Weber, a
huge cosmos into which the human unit is born, and


198 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


which represents for him as such an eternally unmodifi-
able structure in which he is compelled to live. And
this cosmos imposes upon him, in so far as he comes into-
the market-place, economic laws of its own. The indi-
vidual to-day stands face to face with a mountain of
experience which threatens to crush him—book-keeping
methods, calculating systems, wages customs, organization
of management, business technics and what not. All
these are so specialized that their application becomes a
work of no small difficulty. So much so that specialists
have to be called in to carry them through for the
capitalist undertaker.

What conspicuous changes therefore in the ‘‘environ-
ment”? in which the capitalist spirit grew up then and
now! All these distinctions must naturally be taken into
account if we are to solve our problem with anything like
exactitude.

The material at our command is enormous in extent ;
it is indeed almost overwhelming. By two methods we
may obtain the mastery over it. We may take each element
of the capitalist spirit by itself, and try to discover the
reasons for its genesis. For instance, what produced the
greed of gold; what gave an impetus to the spirit of
undertaking ; why did the middle-class virtues arise >—and
so forth. Or we may trace back the manifold resultants
of the capitalist spirit, and thus arrive at the complexity
of causes that gave them birth. A good deal of repetition
is necessarily involved in the first method, and so I prefer
the second, which anyhow promises variety in outlook.

This is the course I propose to follow. One section
shall be devoted to the biological foundations on which
the history of the whole capitalist spirit is built up.
Another section will consider the moral forces which have ©
influenced mankind in determining how much, or how
little, of the capitalist spirit it should imbibe. And in the


THE PROBLEM 199


third section the social conditions that have been effective
find their place. In the last two sections our aim will
thus be to make plain how outward circumstances helped
to mould human beings with a capitalist turn of mind.
These circumstances will be reviewed in all their details,
from the earliest stages down to this very day ; and at
the end we shall realize how manifold have been the
influences at work on the capitalist spirit.


SECTION I


THE BIOLOGICAL FOUNDATIONS


CHARTER ALY


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT


Is one born a bourgeois? Are there people who are
naturally ‘“‘ middle class,” and thus different from others
who are not? If this is so, shall we not have to describe
the capitalist spirit as something temperamental? In any
event, what is the true relationship between natural gifts
and the capitalist spirit?

To answer these questions aright we must pay attention
to the following general observations.

There is no doubt that all expressions of the capitalist
spirit, as indeed soul expressions in general, may be traced
to particular inherent personal characteristics ; that is to
say, to original, inherited qualities of the organism, which
account for the ability and tendency to exercise certain
functions, or the inclination to acquire certain qualities.24!
We need not discuss for the moment whether the
biological tendencies to capitalism are of a general nature,
and so capable of development in various directions and
not necessarily only into the bourgeois ideal ; or whether
from the first they lead to this one goal, and to this only.

I repeat : there can be no doubt that all the expressions


200


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT 201


of the capitalist spirit, that is to say, the mental constitu-
tion of the bourgeois, are rooted in inherited tendencies.
This holds good equally of qualities that depend on the
will, as of those that are instinctive ; of middle-class
virtues therefore, as of inherent talents. All spring from
certain qualities in the soul. It matters not whether or
no these psychic qualities have physical parallels ; nor is it
of consequence to discover how the tendencies themselves
arose in any individual—whether he acquired them, and
if so, when and how. It is sufficient for us that they are
there at a time when we know capitalism to have been
born. That is really the important point—to be alive to
the fact that at that given moment man had already made
these qualities so much his own that transmission was
possible. In short, these qualities, the broader develop-
ments of primitive instincts, had become hereditary.

The question now faces us: are these tendencies
toward the expression of the capitalist spirit general ; are
they common in like degree to all mankind? Alike, of
course, they cannot be, since no two people possess the
same psychological outfit. Even as regards such aptitudes
as are almost universal—that of learning languages, for
instance—there are differences in degree. Some people
are able to acquire languages more easily and quickly
than others. You can see it in children learning to speak
their mother-tongue ; you can see it best of all in grown-
ups learning foreign languages.

But I go further and believe that the qualities referred
to are not common to humanity. They exist in this and
not in that individual. Or, at least, some people possess
them in such small doses that for all practical purposes
the quantity is negligible ; whereas others are so imbued
with them as to be at once distinguishable from their
neighbours. Is it not obvious that many men have no
great capacity or inclination to become freebooters, to


202 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


organize and supervise the work of a thousand hands, 'to
find a path through the mazes of stock-exchange business,
to calculate with lightning rapidity, even to lay by for a
rainy day, to economize their time or to lead a regular
life? And should we not be agreed that not many people
are gifted with a large number, less with all, of the quall-
ties of mind that go to make up the capitalist spirit ?

Nevertheless, there are beings who impress you as born
capitalist undertakers, who have the bourgeois tempera-
ment (even though they may never actually lead a middle-
class existence). We have in mind, of course, a more or
less perfect bourgeois nature, and we ask, What is its
specific mental constitution? How does the blood of
such natures vary from that of other folk? .

Two souls dwell in the breast of every complete
bourgeois: the soul of the undertaker and the soul of
the respectable middle-class man. The union of the two
produces the capitalist spirit. Hence in the bourgeois
temperament we may distinguish two contributory factors
—the undertaking nature and the nature of the respect-
able middle-class citizen. We will take each of these
in turn.


1. UNDERTAKING NaTuREs.


What mental or psychological qualities are essential to
the capitalist undertaker if he is to be successful? I
should say he must be intelligent, clever, and imaginative.

Intelligent means quick in comprehension, true in judg-
ment, clear in thought, with a sure eye for the needful,
enabling him to recognize the psychological moment (the
Greeks called it Kacpos). He must be endowed with quick-
wittedness in a large measure, with that nimbleness of spirit
which may be compared to the light cavalry of an army ;
the quality which the French ascribe to all great under-
takers—vzvacité d’esprit et de corps ; he must be able to


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT 203


find his way through the complicated conditions of the
market, much as the advance posts of an army are expected
to render intelligence service. Above all, he must have
a good memory—a gift all capitalist undertakers know
how to value. Carnegie was glad to possess it ; Werner
Siemens deplored the lack of it.242

Clever means the capacity for forming judgments about
the world and men ; it postulates shrewdness in weighing
up things, and instinctive tact in handling men aright ;
it denotes ability in arriving at a correct valuation of
situations of all kinds, and a knowledge of the weak-
nesses and disadvantages of one’s surroundings. The
last especially is a predominant feature which is continually
praised in great captains of industry. Pliancy on the one
hand and suggestive influence on the other are indispen-
sable to the negotiator.

Imaginative means fertile in ideas, resourceful, gifted
with what has been termed the “ faculty of combination,”
as opposed to the “intuitive faculty” of the artist.

All these great gifts of intellect must be accompanied
by an abundance of the will to live, by “life energy,” by
that something (call it what you will) requisite for all
undertaking, which produces satisfaction, nay, joy. This
joy of work gives the undertaker the necessary resolution
for the consummation of his enterprise. It makes him
want to achieve, so that enforced idleness worries him.
Then he must also be robust, with plenty of nerve, un-
shrinking. You know the type. He has determination,
he persists in pegging away, he can hold on indefinitely,
he is never at rest, he knows what he wants, he can risk
much, and his boldness makes your hair stand on end.
In a word, he lives greatly ; his vitality is above the
average.

It is rather disadvantageous to be blessed with a strong
sensitiveness. A capitalist undertaker should have no


204 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


feelings. His intellect alone should rule his conduct if he
is to scale great heights.

Contrast the undertaking nature with others, and you
will discern its outlines clearly enough. ‘Take the artistic
temperament. The undertaker, especially where he has
carried through some marvellous organizing work, has
been compared to the artist. The comparison, to my
mind, is a wrong one, The two are opposites, not
parallels. All they have in common is a vivid imagina-
tion which helps them to create. But the imagination in
each case is of a different quality. Apart from this
superficial likeness, the two types differ from each other.
Their respective souls draw their strength from very
different sources. The undertaker works towards a goal ;
to the artist an end in view is an abomination. The
former is dominated by his intellect, the latter by his
emotions. The former is hard where the latter is delicate
and tender. The undertaker is practical and businesslike,
the artist is the most unpractical and unbusinesslike fellow
in the world. The undertaker’s eyes look without to the
macrocosm beyond, the artist’s gaze is fixed on the micro-
cosm within. That is why the undertaker is acquainted
with men, while the artist knows only man.

Similarly, undertaking natures have little in common
with those of craftsmen, private gentlemen living on their
means, zesthetic folk, scholars, sybarites, strict moralists,
and others of that ilk. On the other hand, they have a
good many of the qualities of the general and the states-
man, both of whom (more particularly the latter) are in
the long run conquerors, organizers, and dealers. Single
traits of the capitalist undertaker may be found also in the
chess-player and the clever doctor. Skill in diagnosis
enables you not only to heal the sick but also to do well
on the stock exchange.


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT 205


?


2. “ Mippie-ciass”’ Natures.


Either you are born a bourgeois or you are not. It
must be in the blood ; it is a natural inclination. We all
feel that. Everybody knows the middle-class nature ; it
has a sort of aroma of its own. And yet it is difficult,
we may even say impossible, to analyse its psychological
qualities. We shall have to content ourselves with a
detailed sketch of the middle-class nature, and a com-
parison between that and other natures.

It would appear that the contrast between the natures
we have described as middle-class and those not so repre-
sents a fundamental deviation between the two human
types in modern society, anyhow so far as Europe is con-
cerned, People are either of the giving or of the taking
sort ; either extravagant or economical. Deep down in
our natures, as they recognized in classical antiquity and
as the medizval schoolmen philosophized, we are all of
us inclined either to /uxuria or to avaritia. Some are
naturally spendthrifts, careless alike of material and spiri-
tual riches ; others tend them carefully, store them, make
the most of them, watch closely over the acquisition and
expenditure of mental and bodily strength, of goods
and chattels and money. Bergson has also called atten-
tion to this contrast; he speaks of l’homme ouvert and
Phomme clos.

These two types—those who spend and those who
hoard, the aristocratic and the middle-class natures—
stand facing each other in all human life. They appraise
the world, they appraise even life itself, from opposite
vantage-grounds. The ideals of the one are subjective
and personal ; those of the other objective and material.
The former are born for pleasure, the latter for duty ;
the former are individualists, loving solitude ; the latter
are gregarious; for the one esthetics is the supreme


206 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


thing in life, for the other ethics. The former are
like beautiful flowers wasting their perfume on the
desert air; the latter are like healing herbs and edible
roots. It is only to be expected that they should hold
conflicting views as to any man’s occupation in particular,
and the sweat of the world in general. The first class
regard only those activities as worthy and noble which
permit a man to become noble and worthy, which culti-
vate his personality; the second values all activities
alike, provided they contribute to the general good,
provided, that is, they are useful. Is it not manifest
that it makes an exceeding great difference in the
prevailing outlook on life according as the one view
or the other is in the ascendant? ‘The ancients had
personal values; we middle-class folk have material
ones. Recall Cicero’s polished statement: ‘ Not what
one has achieved is of consequence, but what one is.”’ 243

The two types are in everlasting contrast throughout
life. In his threescore years and ten the one lives,
sees, thinks; the other organizes, trains, educates. The
one dreams dreams and sees visions; the other calcu-
lates. Even as a boy Rockefeller had a reputation for
calculations. He made regular bargains with his father,
a physician in Cleveland. “From my earliest child-
hood,” so he himself relates in his Memoirs, “I had a
little book in which I entered what I got and what I
spent. I called it my account-book, and have preserved
it to this day.” You notice it was in his blood. No
power on earth could have made Byron jot down his
income and expenditure in a book, and not only that,
but preserve the book !

The first type goes carolling through life; the
second is dumb. The first are many-coloured in all
they say and do, the second are drab. The first are
artists (not necessarily by profession); the second are


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT 207


officials. The first are silk, the second wool. Wilhelm
Meister and his friend Werner—there you have the
types. The one talks as though he had kingdoms to
dispose of, the other like a person who carefully picks
up a pin.

It is in the erotic life of each that you find the
greatest contrast. After all, the love passion is the
mightiest force in human affairs, and the erotic tempera-
ment is as far remote from the middle-class nature as
pole is from pole. But what is the erotic temperament ?
It cannot be defined; it can only be felt. Perhaps
Goethe pictured it in his “ Pater ecstaticus”’:


Endless ecstatic fire,

Glow of the pure desire,
Pain of the pining breast,
Rapture of God possessed !
Arrows, transpierce ye me ;
Lances, coerce ye me;
Bludgeons, so batter me,
Lightnings, so shatter me,
That all of mortality’s
Vain unrealities

Die, and the star above
Beam but Eternal Love.*


“JT suffered and loved; my heart knew nought else.”
Everything in the world is nothing worth, save only
love. There is only one abiding value: love. Is not
this the feeling of the erotic temperament? Sexual
love, all-comprehensive, all-embracing love—love of God
and love of man: anything beyond is vanity. Nor
should love ever be but means to an end. It should
not be for pleasure ; it should not be for the propagation


* [The passage will be found towards the end of the Second Part of
Faust. The version here given is by Bayard Taylor.]


208 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


’


of the species. ‘Be fruitful and multiply’ expresses
the most grievous sin against love.

Love is not lasciviousness. The lascivious and the
cold natures are both equally far removed from the
erotic temperament. On the other hand, they are
closely bound up with middle-class natures. Indeed, sen-
suality and love are mutually exclusive terms, whereas
cold and lascivious natures can easily accommodate them-
selves to the love of order inherent in the ‘ middle-
class temperament.” Strong sexual passion, if restrained
and controlled, may even be of great service to capitalism.

It need hardly be pointed out that erotic temperaments
vary in strength and intensity, ranging from St. Augustine
and St. Francis to the ordinary man of to-day, who spends
his life in amorous adventures. But no matter what
their degree, they have little in common with the middle-
class nature. For there is only one of two alternatives.
Either economic activities are the central interest in life
or love is. You live for love or for business. Economic
activity implies thrift ; while love is usually accompanied
by extravagance. It is an old contrast, and the ancient
economists did not overlook it. Listen to Kenophon.244
“‘T also notice that you seem to think you are rich, that
you care nothing for business, that your mind is full of
love. JI am sorry for you on that account. Iam afraid
that before long you will be in difficulties.” Or again :
“Who is the best housekeeper? She who is most
capable of exercising moderation in food, drink, sleep, and
love.” In another passage he says that “those who are
in love are useless in business.”’ You will find the same
opinion in Columella, the well-known Roman writer on
agriculture. ‘Keep far from amorous adventures,” he
advises, ‘‘ for whoso enters on them can think of nothing
else. Such a one values one prize only—the fulfilment of
his desire ; he fears only one punishment—to be crossed


THE BOURGEOIS TEMPERAMENT 209


in love.’ 245 A good housewife should give no single
thought to men; she must be @ viris remotissima.

These indications must suffice. A more thorough
investigation into the relationship between love and
capitalism would lead us too far afield. Enough that
we have realized that those mental gifts necessary for
capitalism lie rooted in the sexual constitution.

We have thus observed how the capitalist spirit thrives
in bourgeois natures (these being a hybrid between under-
taking and middle-class natures). In other words, we
have realized that there are people in the world who are
so constituted mentally that they are able to develop the
capitalist spirit more rapidly than others ; who incline in
a more marked degree than those others themselves to
become capitalist undertakers ; who cultivate the middle-
class virtues much more easily ; who possess the qualities
needful for success in economic life in a larger measure.

The consideration of the problem, however, is not thus
exhausted. When all is said, it is of small moment
whether one individual or another tends to capitalism.
Overshadowing this question is a second of far greater
magnitude. What is the aspect of these bourgeois
natures in the mass? To what extent are they repre-
sented among the different nations? Is one nation more
prone than another to develop such natures? And can
we say therefore that one nation is more gifted for
capitalism than another? Do racial or national charac-
teristics in this respect remain constant, or vary from age
to age? If so, why? The answer to these questions
will show definitely what the biological foundation of
capitalism is ; and the following chapter will be devoted
to their consideration.


14


CHAPTER XV
NATIONAL TRAITS


We saw in the last chapter that all expressions of the
capitalist spirit are due to personal qualities inherent in
the individual. And in our survey of the progress of
capitalism in Europe we noted that the capitalist spirit
manifested itself among all nations, though not in the
same degree. In some it was more intense than in
others ; or again its component parts were commingled
in varying proportions in different nations.

Two conclusions follow :—

(1) All European peoples have the qualities necessary
for capitalism ; and

(2) Each nation has these qualities in a varying degree.

When we speak of a nation having certain qualities,
the explanation is that the national group in question
possesses a large proportion of individuals with those
qualities. Hence the conclusions noted above may be
thus further amplified.

(1) All peoples have the qualities necessary for
capitalism. That is to say that in the course of the
history of the European nations there grew up in them
a large number of capitalist variants (by which we mean
variants specially gifted for the development of the
capitalist spirit), and these made it possible for capitalism
to thrive and extend.

(2) Each nation has the qualities in a varying degree,


210


NATIONAL TRAITS 211


That is to say, in the first place, the requisite gifts vary
quantitatively in the individuals in each national group ;
and in the second place, they vary qualitatively.

From a biological point of view, how do these varia-
tions spring up ? 246

In all probability the nations must from their earliest
origins have had a kind of germ-capacity for capitalism,
and either all had it in the same degree or the degree
varied in each nation. Suppose we take the first assump-
tion. Then the variations that appeared later will have
to be accounted for by saying that this germ-capacity
was exercised unevenly, and so some nations ended with
a strong tendency to capitalism, others with one less
strong. As for the second assumption, it suffices itself
as an explanation of variations. In theory both views
are possible. But history rather shows that the second
assumption was probably the correct one, at any rate
for all but the prehistoric ages. Certainly the second
assumption clears up many a difficulty, and as I see no
reason against its adoption, it is on that basis that I shall
proceed.

The tribes or races from which the modern European
nations have sprung were partly over-inclined to capitalism
and partly under-inclined. That the latter must have
possessed some individuals with capitalist possibilities goes
without saying ; it would be absurd to imagine that there
is any race wholly without capitalist tendencies of some
sort. But these individuals must have been so few in
number, and what capitalist tendencies they had so weak,
that the capitalist spirit among the under-inclined peoples
did not develop beyond its primary stage. The over-
inclined peoples on the other hand had many richly-gifted
individuals who were capitalistically inclined; in them,
therefore, the capitalist spirit developed more rapidly
and completely.


212. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALIS®


We see at once that the assumption of a varied degree
of germ-capitalism cannot well be avoided. How else
should we account for such differing results in the process
of development? After all, was there much variation in
the growth of Spain and Italy, of France and Germany,
of Scotland and Ireland? Yet capitalism, as we have seen,
fared differently in each. Varying original national
traits seem to be the only explanation for this, as for most
other phenomena in the life of a nation. Surely every
people has the political system, the religion, even the
wars which are in accord with its national qualities.

What peoples may be described as under-inclined to
capitalism? I should say the Celts and a few of the
Germanic tribes, the Goths in particular.* Wherever
the Celtic element predominated capitalism made little
headway. ‘The nobility continued to live seigniorially
with never a thought for thrift or the virtues of
middle-class respectability ; and the middle grades of
the community went on in the old ruts of tradition-
alism, preferring a safe billet rather than adventurous
careers in the field of commerce and industry. The
Highlanders in Scotland are Celts,247 more especially
the nobility—a knightly race, a little quixotic, a little
quarrelsome, holding fast to their ancient class traditions,
untouched by capitalism down to this very day. The
Scottish chieftain looks upon himself as an old feudal
lord, and when the money-lenders begin to remove
his possessions one by one, his family heirlooms he
guards most jealously.


* [There is no need to regard all the Germanic peoples as having
common traits. No doubt they had many qualities in common which
made them different from other races (say, from Jews). But so far as
their qualities that bear on economic life are concerned, they differed
radically among themselves. Compare in this respect the Goths, the
Lombards, and the Frisians. ]


NATIONAL TRAITS 213


The Irish are Celts too. Do we not all know the
plaint of the capitalist observers that the Irish are no
good for business? Even in America, where the eco-
nomic whirlwind storms, the Irish have managed to
maintain their peaceful attitude, preferring above all
else the secure harbour of an office in the service of
the State.

There is a goodly admixture of Celts among the
French. It is the Celtic blood that explains the
strongly marked tendency to live on investments and
the “plague of office-hunting”’ (a characteristic of the
French people we have already noted). It is the Celtic
blood also that probably accounts for that vivacity
found more among French undertakers than others.
John Law first met with a sympathetic understanding of
his ideas in France. Perhaps that was because of his
partially Celtic origin. On his father’s side Law traced
his descent from lLowlanders, on his mother’s his
family belonged to the Highland nobility.248

Lastly, the Spaniards are to some extent Celts.
When the Visigoths came to the Pyrenean Peninsula
the people there were a mongrel race of Celts, Iberians
(a most un-capitalistic folk, for whom gold, desired
of almost all peoples, had no attraction), and the
descendants of early Roman colonists.249 The Celts
and the Goths were responsible for the slow develop-
ment of capitalism in the Peninsula after its best
strength had been spent in heroic and adventurous
expeditions. What capitalism did thrive in Spain and
Portugal was due to Jewish and Moorish influences,

But it is the over-inclined peoples that interest us
most. Who were they?

Two groups meet our gaze. The one was more
talented for forcible, all-conquering undertakings on a
large scale, smacking somewhat of freebooting; the


214 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


other for successful peaceful trading, with a tendency
to middle-class respectability. The first we will call
Heroic peoples, the second, Trading peoples.

The first introduced a touch of the heroic even in
their economic activities. The warlike or semi-warlike
undertakers with whom we have already made ourselves
acquainted sprang from them. First in order we must
mention the Romans, who formed an ethnical element in
Italy, in parts of Spain, in Gaul, and in Western Germany.
Their method of trading rested on force, and was
governed by the idea that economic success can be won
by the aid of the sword.25° It was in accord with this
idea that the different sorts of undertakings were variously
appraised in classical antiquity. The attitude then was
the same as that in England and France at a later period.
There the shipping-merchant, with more in him of the
soldier than the trader, was socially superior to the mere
tradesman. Cicero’s excellent contrast between the two
is well known. ‘Oversea commerce to distant lands,
bringing commodities from all quarters, taking no mean
advantage over customers or talking their heads off, is by
no means to be despised.’ 25! Put this into the termino-
logy used in our pages, and what does it amount to? A
conqueror-undertaker—that is something, certainly; a
tradesman-undertaker—no one with any self-respect can
sink so low.

Side by side with the Romans must be placed several
of the Germanic races. The Normans, the Lombards,
the Saxons, and the Franks all appear to have had the
same all-conquering spirit within them, and their influence
will account, together with the Romans, for undertakings,
whether of the freebooting or the feudal sort, that were
found among the Venetians and the Genoese, the
English and the Germans,

You may see the true nature of these peoples by


NATIONAL TRAITS 215


comparing them with others equally gifted for the
development of capitalism, but in another way. I mean
the essentially trading peoples, who have the capacity
strongly marked of doing successful business by peaceful
contract-making, by diplomacy and by clever calculation.
We have already noted what peoples helped to develop
this aspect of the capitalist spirit in Europe: the
Florentines, the Scotch, and the Jews. It remains only to
adduce some testimony to prove that in all probability—
and the evidence at our disposal suffices for a probability
only—these peoples became what they were because of
certain primary qualities which were theirs from the
earliest times.

The Florentines became traders, became the foremost
and greatest trading community in the Middle Ages,
because of their Etruscan and Greek (i.e. Oriental) blood.

It is somewhat difficult to estimate exactly the influence
of the Etruscans on the inhabitants of Tuscany through-
out the ancient period of their history. But authorities
seem to agree that the city on the Arno was more
Etruscan in character than its neighbours.252 Certainly
Etruscan blood flowed in the veins of very many
Florentines. Now the Etruscans,253 possibly even more
than the Phoenicians and Carthaginians, were the trading
people of antiquity, and their commercial policy, so far as
can be judged, was much like that of the Florentines in
a later day. From the earliest times their trade was
mainly peaceful land-trade, particularly with their northern
neighbours, When Rome conquered their country, the
Etruscans continued to ply their trade, seeing that the
Romans scorned trafficking and allowed the inhabitants in
the conquered territories to live their life as heretofore.

What manner of ideal was the Etruscan’s? The
most trustworthy authorities describe it as rational and
practical.254 ‘They were also a religious folk with a


216 TH QUINTESSENCE (OF CAPITALISM


national church.255 Is it not curious that the same can
be said of the Florentines, no less than of the Jews and
the Scotch P

During the Roman sway the Etruscan ethnical layer
had superimposed upon it another of Asiatic origin,
which was probably of the same quality, seeing that the
newcomers wandered into Italy as traffickers. The
influence of the two elements continued right into the
Middle Ages. ‘*The number of Greeks or Hither-
Asiatics in Florence,” says one writer,25© ‘‘ was consider-
able. Of 115 tombstones of the pre-Christian period, the
inscriptions on 21 are in Greek, and of 48 epitaphs of
Christians 9 are in Greek. ... In one of these it is
recorded that the grave contains a man born in Asia
Minor.” The same authority holds that the Greek in-
scriptions would seem to point to the conclusion that
traders from Hither-Asia must have settled in Florence.
As late as the 11th century there is evidence pointing to
the same fact. At baptisms the priest asked whether the
formulas were to be pronounced in Latin or in Greek.

As for the Scotch, if there is any truth in the
hypothesis 257 that the Frisians settled on the eastern
shores of Scotland, are we not justified in asserting that
the Scotch too have possessed their peculiar national
traits from the very earliest period in their history ?
The Frisians, so much is certain, were a clever and
skilful race of traders.?58 On this basis it is perfectly
easy to trace the peculiar characteristics of the English
to the influence of the Romans, Saxons, and Normans ;
that of the Lowland Scotch to the Frisians. It is a racial
or blood difference.

One other nation is indebted to the Frisians for its
national bent—the Dutch. From their earliest history the
folk in the Low Countries were devoted to trade, traffic,
and calculations. The Frisians, indeed, may be regarded


NATIONAL TRAITS 217


as the paramount commercial race in the Germanic family,
by whose side later the Alemanni took up a similar
position. The Alemanni were the ancestors of the Swiss.

As for the Jews, I believe that in my treatise on The
Jews and Modern Capitalism 1 have established the fact
that the racial characteristics of this gifted people, as we
perceive them when they first began to exercise an
influence on capitalism (say about the 17th century),
were inherent in their blood from the earliest times. Jews
were traders from the first.

Summing up our considerations, we arrive at this
important conclusion : that the capitalist spirit in Europe
was cultivated by a number of races, each with different
characteristics of its own, and that of these races the
Trading peoples (Etruscans, Frisians, and Jews) may be
divided off from those we have termed Heroic.

Now, the original traits of a people are only a starting-
point in the consideration of its biological development.
In every generation the original traits are influenced
anew, and two processes are responsible for the change.
The one is selection, the other admixture with other
races.

So far as our knowledge goes, it would seem that among
the trading people the process of selection left the fittest
to survive ; that is to say, those who possessed the trading
characteristic in a high degree. Of the Jews it may even
be said that among them selection was hardly active at
all, for they were from the first a pure trading people.
The Florentines, on the other hand, had a trace of
Germanic blood, which flowed in the veins of the nobility.
So long as the influence of this social group predominated,
Florence had the appearance of a military town. But
slowly the foreign element was shed, nowhere so soon
and so thoroughly as in this city. A large part of the
nobility vanished. Did not Dante mourn the decline of


218 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


numerous noble families? What was left was removed
by force. As early as 1292 the people with the true
commercial spirit in them succeeded in establishing a law
that no grandee should be a member of the Senate.
What was the result? Those of the nobility that
possessed the quality of adaptation had themselves put
down among the commons ; the others, those in whom
we must suppose the seigniorial temperament to have been
strong, whose natures were averse to traffic, emigrated.
The later history of Florence showed that its public life
became more and more democratic, that from the 14th
century on its citizens were all bourgeois.

Some such similar process must have taken place in the
Scotch Lowlands, from which the Celtic nobility were
eliminated before long. Their decline commenced in the
1sth century; it was due to their “eternal want of
pence,” and their inability to dispense with them. “The
day had gone by when a following of rudely armed
retainers made a great man of Bell-the-Cat or Tiger Earl.
As things now went, what had been a source of strength
was fast becoming a source of weakness. Retainers had
to be maintained, and their maintenance was a drain on
the lord’s resources which his extended wants made ever
more undesirable. . . . A noble lord with broad domains
and a scanty purse was a stranded leviathan, impotent to
put forth his strength in the new conditions in which he
found himself.’ 259 Those of the nobility that could,
saved themselves by removing to the Highlands. The
result was that the Frisian trading element became pre-
dominant in the Lowlands.

The process of selection was the same, if slower, among
the other peoples. Probably there were two stages
among them. First the non-capitalist elements were |
eliminated, and then from the residue those that had a
strong tendency to trade. The process went on in so far


NATIONAL TRAITS 219


as the more gifted in the lowest social grades worked
their way up and became capitalist undertakers. They
could only do so by skill in negotiating, by economy, and
by careful calculation.

So much for selection. Blood-admixture had the same
results, and they may already be perceived in the Middle
Ages. From the 16th century onward the admixture of
blood in countries like France and England had important
consequences. To explain these it is necessary to assume
that as a general rule, when nobles and commoners inter-
married, the blood of the latter was the stronger and
prevailed. How else are we to account for a man like
Leon Battista Alberti? The Albertis were among the
highest and purest of the Germanic nobility in Tuscany,
spending their lives in martial undertakings. Many of
its branches we know something about ; 259* the Contal-
bertis may be mentioned as an instance. Leon Battista’s
own clan was proud and mighty. It sprang from
Castello di Catenaia in Val d’Arno; beside their own
family estate they were the lords of many others; and
they had intermarried with distinguished Germanic
noble families. Defeated in a local quarrel, they moved
into the town (in the 13th century), where the first of the
Albertis joined the Gild of the Giudici, and gradually
they became the most famous drapers in Florence. It
was the descendant of such a line that wrote a book
second to none in its bourgeois sentiments, a book which
already breathed the spirit of Benjamin Franklin. How
many shopkeeper families must have crossed the noble
breed to produce a result like this? In Leon Battista’s
own case the crossing was certain : he was an illegitimate
child and born in Venice. His mother must have been a
woman of the middle class sprung from a trading stock.

One other point before we conclude these considera-
tions. Every increase of capitalist variants denoted an


2200 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


extension of the capitalist spirit. But it also denoted
its greater intensity, for every additional variant in-
creasingly facilitated the expression of that spirit. Ina
word, the reaction on each other of the variants with
similar traits increased the possibilities of their expression.


It only remains for us now to consider the historical
aspect of our problem. We must discover what it was
that enabled the original inherent national tendencies to
capitalism to grow and expand. I see two groups of such
forces, internal and external, if you like to call them so—
though the terms are hardly exact, seeing that the internal
group is influenced from without and the external can
scarcely be conceived without internal, psychological
processes. Still, the moral forces press more from within
outwardly, and the social circumstances exercise their
influence more from without inwards.

The influence of nature I have not considered
separately. I refer to the influence of the land, climate,
geographical position, mineral wealth. In so far as
these must be noted, we shall take cognizance of them
under the group of forces we have termed “social
circumstances,” For example, the effect of particular
callings, the exploitation of mineral deposits, the develop-
ment of technical science, and so forth.

One word more before we leave the debatable problem
of biology—a word of comfort to the sceptical. The
historical considerations that we are about to enter upon
are of value even if the biological arguments have failed
to carry conviction. ‘The most devoted advocate of the
environment theory will find nothing to object to in
them. For those who, like us, believe in latent tendencies,
these historical investigations will demonstrate what forces |
developed them, and how unsuitable variants were shed ;
whereas for those who pin their faith to the environment


NATIONAL TRAITS 221


theory they will explain how capitalism came into being
(out of nothing apparently). But both sides will agree
that the trend of history has resulted in the develop-
ment of the capitalist spirit ; both, therefore, will attach


the utmost importance to the historical factors in the
problem.


SECTION II


MORAL FORCES


CHAPTER XVI
PHILOSOPHY


Ir the idea of the ethical outlook is so far extended as to
include the religious sanctions of morality, then it may
be said that the highest moral forces that shape our
conduct and our actions are to be found in philosophy
and religion. Hence both are not without influence on
the soul of man in so far as his economic activities are
concerned. Hence both must have counted for some-
thing in the growth and development of the capitalist
spirit.

To assert that philosophy is one of the fountains from
which the capitalist spirit drew inspiration may at first
sound like a bad joke. Yet such is the case. There can
be no doubt that philosophy has done its share to help
capitalism grow. But the minds of capitalist undertakers
were influenced by the degenerate children of a noble
mother. The philosophy of common sense, utilitarianism
in all its aspects—in reality nothing more than a systema-
tized middle-class outlook on life—is it not on this that
the many authorities with whose views we have become
acquainted rely ? And who more so than Alberti and


222


PHILOSOPHY 223


Franklin, the one at the beginning of the early capitalist
epoch, the other at the end? Both are thorough-going
Utilitarians. Be good and you will be prosperous—such
is the essence of their doctrines. By “good” they
meant economical. To be good, therefore, was to
economize in body and soul. Hence the supreme
importance of frugality in their philosophy. They said
in effect, Ask yourself what is most profitable for you,
and your life will be virtuous ; if it is virtuous, it will be
happy. But how discover what is profitable? Listen to
the voice of Reason. Reason is the great teacher in life.
Reason and self-contro! will enable us to achieve whatever
we resolve. Accordingly, to rationalize and economize
life is the first duty of a wise man.26° “ Vicious actions,”’
writes Benjamin Franklin, “are not hurtful because they
are forbidden, but forbidden because they are hurtful. . . .
It was therefore every one’s interest to be virtuous who
wished to be happy even in this world; and I should
from this circumstance . . . have endeavoured to
convince young persons that no qualities are so likely
to make a poor man’s fortune as those of probity and
integrity.”

What was the origin of these views? The men who
preached them, the one a draper and the other a printer,
could hardly have invented them. Possibly in the case of
Franklin we may associate them with the empirical
schools of philosophy, then coming to the fore in England,
in which the law of virtue was so important a factor. In
Alberti and others of his type the philosophy of the
ancients is manifest, more particularly of the later
classical period. There is little doubt that this philosophy
was one of the sources from which the capitalist spirit
received nurture. There is, indeed, evidence of a direct
connection between the economic conceptions current in
Italy in the early capitalist epoch and those of the


224 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


ancient world. ‘The doctrines of the medieval church
were a bond of this sort, but I am excluding that. There
is no need to refer to it, for did not every man of the
early Renaissance pride himself on his knowledge of
the classical authors and on his efforts to make their
opinions his own ?261 Take any of the Italian writers on
economic questions in those days, those who first worked
out capitalist ideas systematically, and you will find that
they were well versed in classical literature. In Albertt’s
Family Books there are frequent references to Homer,
Demosthenes, and Xenophon, to Virgil, Cicero, and Livy,
to Plutarch, Plato, and Aristotle, to Varro, Columella,
Cato, and Pliny. Another merchant of the period,
Giovanni Ruccellai, supports his rules for trade by quo-
tations from Seneca, Ovid, Aristotle, Cicero, Solomon,
Cato, and Plato.262 As for writers on agriculture, it goes
without saying that they all based their treatises on those
of the Roman scriptores rei rustice. Moreover, the
frequency of the references would go to show that the
views of the old writers and those of the Florentine
political economists coincided.

But the latter did not just take over the philosophical
systems of the former in their entirety, and develop their
own views logically from them. The Italian gentlemen
were no philosophers. They were practical men, men of
affairs, and having read widely they mingled their reading
with their experience, and so arrived at their conclusions
for the conduct of life.

Among the principal ideas of the later classical philo-
sophy none appealed to them as much as that of a
moral, natural law (a cardinal doctrine of the Stoics also),
according to which Reason governs appetites. The
thought is a noble one; it lay at the root of the exalted
view of life taught by the Stoics. But the Italian
economists, by giving it a utilitarian interpretation, turned


PHILOSOPHY 225


a noble ideal into a commonplace one. They urged that
the greatest happiness flowed from the rationalization of
life, from making life practical. Life should be disciplined
and methodical, so Alberti and his kind taught; and
there is no doubt that the doctrine was eminently helpful
to the growth of capitalism. In every case they backed
up their admonitions by appeals to the ancients. Alberti
never tired of preaching self-control, and is for ever
quoting the classical writers in support.263

The Stoic philosophy, moreover, is capable of being
turned into a commonplace, utilitarian, rationalistic
system, if its teachings are taken by themselves and out
of their context and applied to life. Our drapers were
acquainted with those teachings, and I can well imagine
how many wise saws they found among them which
coloured their outlook. I can well imagine Alberti or
Ruccellai turning to the marvellous Mediiations of
Marcus Aurelius, and specially noting many a passage
in them.* Many of the maxims of the Imperial philo-
sopher read as though they were translations of passages
from Alberti’s Family Book or Penn’s Fruits of
Solitude, or Franklin’s writings.

This philosophy of life must have been specially
popular with our Florentine friends for yet another
reason. They found in it excellent excuses for their
acquisitiveness. Thus, Seneca’s disquisition on the
meaning and use of wealth is copied almost word for
word by Alberti. A few of the passages will be
illuminating (De tranquillitate animi, 21-23) :—

The wise man does not hold himself unworthy of accepting the
gifts of Fortune. He does not love riches, but he is not averse to


them. He does not give them a place in his heart, but in his home.
And when he has them he does not despise them but holds them fast.


HV See, ¢2., 1, 33 i: 8; ih 165. iv. 135 Vv. 15 Vil, 74 5.1%. 73
fais ti. 20:]


15


226 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Of course, when a wise man has means he is able to cultivate his
mind to better effect than when he is poor. . . . Riches offer great
opportunities for moderation, generosity, care, pomp, and wise spending.
(Alberti, careful of the pennies, did not take quite so broad a view.
Generosity with him had a practical end, either to get a reputation for
open-handedness or to acquire new friends.) Riches bring joy, much
like a fair breeze on a voyage, or a fine day, or a ray of sunshine on a
wintry landscape. . . . Some things are valued but slightly ; others
much. Among the latter every one will vote riches . . . . Cease then
proscribing money to the philosopher. Has any one condemned
wisdom to poverty? A philosopher indeed may possess great riches.
They have made no man the poorer ; they are not blood-stained ;
they have been gotten without injustice and ignoble courses.


These ideas about wealth were common in the ancient
world. The reader will probably recall Cicero’s dictum
that “‘ Money is to be sought after, not for itself but for
the advantages it is able to bestow.” Was not this the
prevailing sentiment throughout the early capitalist age?
Acquire as much as you can, so it was said, but do so
honestly. And when you have wealth, do not make a
fetish of it. Remember, it is a means to an end, and not
the end itself.

Still more popular must those writings of the ancients
have been wherein practical rules for managing affairs
were ready at hand. ‘These could at once be adopted in
one’s own business, and though, strictly speaking, the
maxims in question hardly come under the heading of
philosophy, I should like to deal with them here. To
the best of my judgment Xenophon’s Cconomicus in
Greek, and the agricultural writers (Columella above the
rest) in Latin literature, must have exercised very great
influence on the development of capitalist thought.
Xenophon was more widely read and more highly
esteemed than Aristotle.

Let us glance at a passage or two from the Cco-
nomicus.


PHILOSOPAY 227


My conduct is always right and proper and my aim is to secure, by
fair means, strength, health, honourable citizenship, the good opinion
of my friends, success in war and riches. Riches enable you to honour
the Gods and your friends in due fashion, to be of assistance to the
latter in time of need, and to contribute something to the beauty and
splendour of your native city,


Alberti copied this almost word for word. So too the
following :—


If you spend money extravagantly, out of all proportion to your
income, it is not surprising to find want in place of superfluity.6s


No less attractive to Alberti was Xenophon’s advice to
the good housewife to see to it that orderliness is the first
rule in her domain. ‘Order is the most useful and
beautiful thing in life.” [t keeps women from frivolity,
flirtation, and vanity ; the careful housewife does not
paint her face; and more to the same effect.

The Roman writers on farm management were equally
popular. They, too, are full of wise saws to enable the
farmer to carry on his business profitably and success-
fully.26© Acquisitiveness and rational conduct are sur-
prisingly developed in these writings.267_ Above all else
they preach the value of time.268

Side by side with these formal treatises on domestic or
agricultural economy, our Italian drapers must have found
many a quotation from the poets and the historians in
praise of middle-class virtues, more especially industry
and frugality. Many such dicta were particularly
effective because of their crisp expression, making them
into popular proverbs. One of them Alberti actually
quotes. An old saw, he says, repeated in his own day, was
that ‘‘Idleness is the source of all evil.” There were
many others. Let us conclude with one from Lucretius,
who writes : ‘ The greatest riches come from saving.” 269


CHAPTER XVII


THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION ON THE AGE OF
EARLY CAPITALISM


1. THE CaTHOLICs.


We have observed that the economic outlook of the
Florentine drapers was influenced in many respects by
the more or less philosophical ideas of the ancient writers.
But let us be careful not to rate that influence too highly,
for it was overshadowed by that of religion, and at first
of Roman Catholicism. The origins of capitalism made
their appearance at a time when the Church held sway
over men’s minds in all their activities, and therefore
social and economic activities were subject to its regula-
tions. This extensive power of the Church continued
until the 15th century, and every man was subject to it,
even the advanced spirits who attempted to think for
themselves, who read the Greek and Latin classics, and
sought to fashion their life in accordance with ancient
ideals. For even these people with but few exceptions
wished to be orthodox, and took over from the heathen
world only so much as was compatible with the Catholic
faith within them. We see it in the case of Alberti, who
protests his orthodoxy again and again, and admonishes
his disciples above all else to serve God (as Mother
Church had taught him). ‘“ Whoso does not fear God,


whoso has driven religion from his heart, must be
228


THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION 229


accounted wicked in all things. Children should first
and foremost be filled with the greatest awe of God, for
the observance of His laws is a wonderful help against all
manner of evils.” 27° Accordingly, Alberti established
all his maxims on the basis of God’s commandments.
And even when he adopts a wise saw from the heathen
writers he at once connects it with God’s will. Thus in
preaching industry he clinches his argument by the
assertion that “It was not God’s purpose that any living
thing should be idle. Consequently man should be active
ever.”’ 271

If the advanced spirits were thus under the influence of
the Church, how much more the masses. It is now a
recognized fact that in the 14th century Italy was still
orthodox ; scepticism did not begin to be rampant until
the 15th.272

Now, it is of supreme interest to note that religious
zeal was nowhere so hot and strong as in Florence, the
Bethlehem of the capitalist spirit (of Christian origin).
Tuscany was the citadel of clericalism in the early Middle
Ages. The history of the individual churches in this
province was more closely intertwined with that of the
towns than anywhere else ; monasticism was exceedingly
active and widespread ; the orders that were established
in other parts took on a new lease of life when they came
to Tuscany, and the population prided itself on its
intolerance of schismatics and the purity of its faith.273
Pretty well all authorities on the history of Florence are
agreed that its democracy of craftsmen and_ traders
were faithful children of the Church.274

As for the later period, it is not a far-fetched assump-
tion that the living faith of the great mass of the Catholics
in all lands must have continued, especially after it had
been strengthened by the Reformation, until the end of
the period of early capitalism. The industrialists and


230 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


merchants of the 18th century were as pious as those of
the 14th, and lived in the fear of the Lord. Their reli-
gion impregnated their business. Many an expression of
opinion found in merchants’ memoirs must have sprung
from an honest religious conviction. ‘A merchant’s life
and conduct should be above suspicion,” so we read
in one such production. ‘Dishonesty never thrives,
whereas the possessions of a God-fearing and righteous
man take root and have the blessing of Heaven showered
upon them, even unto the third and fourth generation.”
Sentiments such as these were frequent. Profit is God’s
gift; so are children. ‘From God we obtain our all.
He it is who sends blessings on our enterprises and brings
them to fruition ””—so wrote a French woollen-draper of
the 18th century. The same man commenced his Livre
de Raison with the words: ‘‘In the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Blessed and exalted be the
Trinity in all Eternity.” 275 One cannot help feeling
that they came from his heart. It was no empty phrase
in those days when men looked to God to bless their
business. To-day it would be nothing short of blasphemy.

Finally, we must not forget how mighty a weapon
the Catholic Church possessed in the confessional. The
Lateran Council of 1215 had imposed it as a duty on
the faithful to go to confession at least once a year.
It is not difficult to perceive how the soul and the
will-power could be influenced, and consequently
the life of the individual. We must suppose that
the business man discussed with his father-confessor the
principles that governed his economic activities, Do we
not know that numerous treatises (known under the
name of Summa theologice) were written, advising the
clergy how to guide their flocks in all that affects life,
even to the minutest detail? Economic activities were
naturally also considered, and rules were laid down for


THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION 231


their regulation and direction. These books are one of
the most illuminating sources for a right understanding
of what the Church taught should exist, and at the
same time, reading between the lines, for what actually
did exist. We shall recur to these books later.


2. THe PRoreEstTAnts.


It is a matter of common knowledge that in all Pro-
testant countries there was an exceedingly strong religious
fervour during the two centuries that followed the
Reformation. There is therefore no need to enlarge
upon it. But one thing I should like to point out.
It was in Scotland that this religious feeling reached its
height, in the land where, as we have already seen, the
capitalist spirit took on enormous proportions towards
the end of the 17th century. It is difficult to
imagine the fervour, nay, the violence, of religious
sentiment in Scotland in the 17th century. Buckle
has painted it in its true colours in the fourth chapter
of the second volume of his standard work, The
History of Civilization in England. What does he
tell us? That in all activities of life religion was the
dominant force. The Scotch attended church most
zealously, and their subservience to their preachers was
almost servile. The clergy interfered in the most intimate
affairs and the elders almost dragooned the congregation
into orthodoxy. Whatever came from the pulpit was
regarded as a voice from God. A system such as this
was bound to breed superstition, and superstition there
was. Evil spirits, with Satan at their head, were believed
to swarm on the earth, attempting to terrorize man.
Indeed, the fear of the Evil One became an obsession,
and the preaching of the clergy, detailing the punishments
of hell, only fanned the flame into fiercer heat. God


232 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Almighty Himself, in the minds of the masses, became
Vengeance personified. But then the God of Calvin and
John Knox was a fearful Being, striking awe into the
heart of man. This conception of Him resulted in the
widespread desire so to order life as to bring it into com-
plete accord with the doctrines of the Church. That ts
the important thing for us to observe, considering as we
are the influence of religion on the soul of man, more
especially so far as his economic activities are called
into question. There can be little doubt that in the
17th century religious influences on life in Protestant, or
at least in Calvinist, countries were much deeper than
ever they had been before. Religion became a sort of
madness, depriving man of his common sense. Think of
the doctrine of predestination and how it made the Cal-
vinists into religious fanatics. Yet the simple logic of
common sense says that if my salvation and happiness
have nothing to do with my will and actions, why should
I not arrange my life as I wish, seeing that my fate is
already determined beforehand? But you could not
reason with men out of their minds.

The views of the clergy as to the good life were em-
bodied in stout tractates, called in England Directories,
which every Calvinist preacher of any significance thought
it necessary to publish. They may be looked upon as the
Protestant prototypes of the Summez theologice, and in
both economic ethics occupies no small space.


3. Tue Jews.


In considering the influence of religion on the develop-
ment of the capitalist spirit, it is self-evident that the
Jewish religion will have to receive special attention. To
begin with, let it be stated that in the age of early capi-
talism religion was an exceedingly powerful influence in


THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION 233


all walks of life among the Jews as well ; nay, more
among the Jews than among other peoples. So much
may be asserted without fear of contradiction. I have
attempted to demonstrate this fully in my book on The
Jews and Modern Capitalism, and J would refer the reader
to its pages for the details.276 Here I shall merely
summarize the more important and unquestioned con-
clusions arrived at therein.

Religion for the Jew was not an affair of Sabbaths and
holydays; it entered into his everyday life and regu-
lated the minutest action. The influence of his religion
on the Jew is therefore apparent. Indeed, all human
actions were sanctified by religion. In every course of
conduct the Jew asked himself whether it would tend to
the glory of God, or to the profanation of His name.
And Jewish law regulated not only the relationship
between God and man, but also every possible relationship
between man and the natural world. Jewish law, it
must be remembered, is as much a part of the Jewish
religious system as are Jewish ethics. For the law is
from God; it is morally right. Moral laws and Divine
ordinances are inseparable terms in the Jewish outlook.

No other people have taken so great a care that the
tenets of their faith shall be generally known among them.
Jewish education is proverbial for its excellence. Even
divine service is to a large extent instruction in religion.
Passages from Holy Writ are publicly read and explained,
in accordance with a cycle whereby the whole of the
Torah [Pentateuch] is gone through in the course of the
year. Moreover, the duty of Torah study is inculcated
in the Jew as a prime necessity.

Nor has any other people walked so steadfastly in the
ways of God, or so scrupulously observed the ordinances
of religion. The Jews have been called the most irre-
ligious of all peoples. I will not now consider whether


234 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


justly or not. But they are certainly the most God-
fearing people in all the earth. They always lived in
fear and trembling of the Divine wrath. And in the
course of history this fear of God was seconded by other
forces in making the Jews more scrupulous than ever in
the observation of their religious practices. First and
foremost must be placed the tragedy of their national
existence. The destruction of the Jewish state brought
with it as one result that the Scribes and Pharisees, the
men who kept alive the tradition of Ezra, who before
must have had some moral influence, now became the
chief authority of the people, and directed it into grooves
of their own choosing. When their national sanctuary
was razed to the ground, when their state came to an end,
the Jews flocked round the Pharisees and the Torah, “ the
portable fatherland,’ as Heine called it. The Rabbis
thus established their authority, and the fate of the Jews
in the Middle Ages only helped to strengthen it, so much
so that it became a yoke, of which, from time to time,
the Jews themselves complained. The more the Jews
were excluded (or excluded themselves) from the nations
among whom they dwelt, the greater became the influence
of the Rabbis. Which is only another way of saying
that the Jews were more and more submissive to the Law.
But the Law was observed for its own sake too. In the
midst of the cruel persecutions and humiliations that
were the lot of the Jews in every land, what could give
them hope, what help them to maintain their self-respect,
what make life worth living, so much as the loving obser-
vance of religious precepts? These were contained in
the Talmud, and in the Talmud and for the Talmud the
Jews throughout the centuries lived and had their being.

Internal and external causes thus combined to make the
Jews strictly religious. Nor must it be imagined that
this was true only of the masses. On the contrary,


THE INFLUENCE OF RELIGION 235


the wealthy and the intelligent were equally orthodox,
the very people among whom the capitalist spirit took
root and throve. The Rabbis, too, gave decisions and
advice on the conduct of life, perhaps more so than the
Catholic and Protestant clergy ; and, like these, they
collected their opinions in the large volumes of Responsa
literature, which in their turn became the sources on
which later decisions were based. And so, like the
Directories and the Summez theologice, these collections
contain a very large amount of advice on economic
affairs.


CHAPTER XVIII
CATHOLICISM


Reticious systems and churches are able to influence
economic life in different ways, particularly by their
’ power of directing the mind to this goal or that. Some-
times their influence may be direct, sometimes very round-
about. It may check certain tendencies or give them an
impetus. It is not surprising therefore that the history
of the capitalist spirit should be inextricably bound up
with the history of churches and religious systems.

In the following chapters I shall attempt to show how
the great religions helped capitalism forward, and only
incidentally touch upon the checks and stumbling-blocks
for which they were responsible.

The capitalist spirit received a set-back at the hands
of Catholicism in Spain. There religious interests
developed to the exclusion of all others. The reason
for this is plain, and historians have not overlooked it.
The history of the Iberian Peninsula for a thousand
years and more was the story of the struggle between
Christianity and Islam. The Mahometan domination
resulted in giving the Spanish Christians one great aim
in life—the expulsion of the Moors. ‘ While the other
peoples of Europe turned their gaze to the new intel-
lectual and economic problems of the day, the Spaniards,
so long as a single Moorish banner flapped in the breeze,


had no thought for aught else but its removal.” Lafuente
236


CATHOLICISM 237


speaks of ‘an everlasting and constant crusade against
the infidels.” It is said that no less than 3,700 battles
were waged against the Moors before they were finally
expelled. But even after that the ideal of Christian
chivalry predominated in Spain, so much so that it
characterized all the Spanish colonial enterprises and
coloured the home policy of the crown. Feudalism and
fanaticism intertwined to form a special outlook on life,
which maintained itself as long as it could, but was
wholly out of place in the modern period of history.
The national hero of Spain is probably the most un-
capitalist type in the annals of the world. Who does not
_ know him—the last knight-errant, the kindly and attrac-
tive Don Quixote?

Whether Catholicism stood in the way of the capitalist
spirit in Ireland it is not easy to say. But certain it is
that in all other countries its influence was most beneficial
to capitalist growth, which it assisted and accelerated.
Such was the case in an especial degree in Italy, which
played the first role in the history of early capitalism.
Let us see how Catholicism achieved this end.

There is no doubt that the popes and their financial
policies contributed much to the establishment of
capitalism, and thus to the expansion of the capitalist
spirit. But I do not intend considering that side of the
problem, which I have already dealt with in another
connection, and which other scholars have elaborated with
great skill.277 Moreover, the facts are generally well
known. ‘The system of papal taxation, which extended to
the whole of the then known world (especially from the
13th century on), called into existence an upper class of
powerful international bankers, who acted like yeast
on the capitalist dough.

What is of far greater significance, and what I pro-
pose to review, is the influence exercised by the


238 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Catholic Church on the capitalist spirit by reason of its
doctrines.

Of course, not all the doctrines of Catholicism will
come into our survey. To consider them all would be to
make our labour much more difficult than it need be.
It would also distract us from the root of the matter,
which is the influence of religion in any period on the
mind of man in his capacity of economic agent.
Religious and metaphysical hair-splitting are quite un-
necessary for the solution of the problem; all that is
needed is just to view the practical rules of everyday life
and common religious exercises. There is no need for our
purpose, so it seems to me, to go into the philosophical
and theological depths of the problem. Deep ploughing
is not always a necessity of successful tillage. If, therefore,
I remain on the surface of things, it is because I believe
that the causes and their effects will be best apparent
there.

The doctrines of the Catholic Church were embodied
in medieval scholasticism as formulated by Thomas
Aquinas. Ever since the 14th century this religious
system has been recognized as official by the Church
of Rome. Its main characteristic 278 is that it unites the
two currents of thought found in Christianity from its
very beginning—the Pauline and Augustinian doctrines
of love and the legalism of the Law. Thomas Aquinas
did away with the opposition between the Law and the
Gospels, and his theory of legal ethics is what we must
turn to.

The fundamental idea of the ethical system is the
rationalization of life. Reason, everlasting and divine,
that governs nature and the universe—Reason must
regulate the world by the senses and control the passions
and appetites. “Sin in human affairs is what is contrary
to the dictates of reason,” says Aquinas. Or again, “the


CATHOLICISM 239


more necessary a thing is, the more should reference be
had to the demands of Reason.” The sexual passion is
most necessary for the common good; consequently it
should most stringently be held in sway, in accordance
with the dictates of reason.279 Virtue is nought else but
the maintenance of the equilibrium in all things,28° as
reason demands; its essence consists in making the
desires of the senses subservient to reason, so that no
passions out of all accord with reason may spring up.28!

In the natural world with its appetites and desires a
moral, rational world is built up of the Biblical Laws.
This new world, born of freedom, Aquinas puts on an
equality with the decalogue,28? although elements of
Hellenistic philosophy formed part and parcel of it in
later times. The goal set by Aquinas for all men is to
live in accord with reason. What means to that end does
he suggest ? The fear of God. The fear of God sets a
man thinking ; it forces him to review his conduct ; it
makes a rational being of him.283

Now bear in mind that the very idea of rationalizing
life was in itself a great impetus to the growth of capi-
talism. Acquisitiveness and economic rationalism are in
reality the result of applying to economic life the rule of
religion. Before capitalism could develop it was needful
to root up natural man with all his passions, to replace
the primitive and original outlook by specifically ration-
alist habits of mind, to turn topsy-turvey all the values
of life. The homo capitalisticus, that artificial and artistic
creation, was the result. Whatever other forces may
have helped the growth of economic rationalism, there
can be no doubt that one of its mightiest supports came
from the fact that rationalism was inculcated by the
Church, which desired to influence the whole of life in
the same direction as the capitalist spirit influenced
economic activities. Kven were we to suppose that eco-


240 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


nomic interests were not without influence on ecclesias-
tical ethics (a problem we shall touch upon in due course),
the view would still hold good that economic rationalism
was bound to profit by forming part of such a thoroughly
rationalist body of rules, supported moreover by the all-
embracing power of the Church.

The influence of religious doctrines on the economic
outlook must have been immense, seeing that they affected
the mind in just such ways as were beneficial to capitalism.
Take the behest of Christian ethics that the erotic appetite
should be held in check.284 No one perceived more than
St. Thomas that middle-class virtues would thrive only
where the sexual life of man was controlled. He knew
only too well that extravagance, the deadly sin of the
bourgeois outlook, went as a rule hand in hand with an
advanced attitude towards love. Extravagance in other
things usually meant extravagance in voluptuousness.?85
He knew also that luxury and debauchery are twin sisters.
Accordingly, he taught that whoso lived in purity and
moderation was hardly likely to be subject to the sin of
prodigality, and besides would manage his affairs econo-
mically. What bearing had this on capitalism? The
abstemious liver was sure to make an energetic under-
taker.

Moderation of appetite was thus the foundation for a
larger structure. To begin with, if you ordered your
passions aright you would the more easily be able to order
aright the whole of life and be economical in material
things. Reason and order in worldly affairs was a
cardinal doctrine in Christian ethics.

But above all else the Schoolmen praised economy,
which they termed /zberalitas. Liberalitas represents the
right middle policy which avoids the two extremes of
avarice and prodigality ; it denotes a proper balancing of 3
income and expenditure ; 28° it teaches the art of using


CATHOLICISM 241


the goods of the world 288 aright ; 287 it inculcates the
true love of money and opulence.289 The prodigal loves
money too little, the miser too much.29° In Aquinas’s
condemnation of too great an expenditure,29! especially
when it tends to make you live beyond your means,292
there is implied the duty of saving ; and his dwelling
upon the evil consequences of extravagance 293 implies a
recommendation of the bourgeois economy based on
income, and a condemnation of the seigniorial economy
based on expenditure.

But extravagance is not the only enemy of middle-class
virtues condemned by Christian ethics and accounted
sinful. There are others, chief among them being idle-
ness, which is the beginning of all evil. The idler
commits a sin because he wastes time which is exceedingly
precious ; 294 he is lower than the beasts, for even brute
creation is industrious ; 1n nature nothing idles.295 Par-
ticularly eloquent in his plea for filling up every minute
is St. Antonine of Florence, who brushes aside the excuse
of idlers that they are intent on divine contemplation,
that they follow Mary rather than Martha. Narrow is
the gate of those who can see God, he says, and few be
they who enter in thereby. Consequently the great mass
of people must be active and busy.

Honesty no less than industry and frugality was also
taught by the Schoolmen, more especially commercial
honesty, which, as we have seen, forms a good part of the
capitalist spirit. Commercial honesty owes much to the
teaching of the Church. Within the bounds of the city,
where your neighbour’s eye might be looking, or the gild
brethren watching, you could not help being honest in
your business. But when markets extended beyond the
city, what but the conscience of the tradesman could keep
him straight ? That was where the Church came in, for
it was its business to stir up the individual conscience.

16


242 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


It did so by condemning all manner of cheating as one
of the mortal sins.29© How great the influence of the
Church was in this respect appears from a remark of
Alberti’s, who ascribes the success of his family not only
to business acumen but also to their commercial honesty,
for which God Almighty had rewarded them.?97

From a careful study of the writings of the Schoolmen,
and more especially of the wonderful works of Thomas
Aquinas, who for grandeur may be worthily compared
with Dante and Michael Angelo, the impression is borne
in upon the mind that their intention was not merely to
instruct their contemporaries in the ways of middle-class
respectability and honesty, but also to make them straight-
forward, courageous, wise, and energetic men. Else why
do they constantly attach so much importance to energy
and freshness? Nothing moves their ire more than in-
tellectual or moral laziness, that acidia which was con-
sidered good form in 13th-century Italy, and of which
Petrarch has so much to say. The Schoolmen condemned
it as a deadly sin. Indeed, much of their moral teach-
ing reads like a course of ‘“soul-training.” What are
the two cardinal virtues? Wisdom and strength, the
sources of intellectual and moral energy.

Wisdom is an intellectual virtue and includes many
others298 which are secondary to it— remembering,
understanding, insight, common-sense thought, willing-
ness to learn from others, foresight, circumspection,
and caution. And what are the opposites of wisdom,
that a man should avoid? Imprudence, rashness, in-
consideration, and negligence.

St. Antonine 299 of Florence was especially concerned
with the intellectual fault of acidia, which may be best
translated ‘moral laziness.” In his view moral laziness
leads to negligence, idleness, unreliability, stupidity,
time-wasting, and imprudence. And luxury is the


CATHOLICISM 243


mother of this brood—luxury with its pleasure-seeking
in general and its erotic licence in particular. Perfect
wisdom is only the controlling of sensual passion.3°°

Imagine how valuable this training was from the
point of view of capitalism. The Church fathers
certainly did not think of the capitalist undertaker,
but he more than any other profited much by the
practice of these virtues of intellectual energy. They
are the very qualities needed for success as an under-
taker, and here was the Church backing them up with
all its authority. If the subject of a prize-essay were,
“ Fiow would you make the lusty feudal lord and the
stupid, lazy craftsman respectively into a capitalist under-
taker ?”’ there could be no better way of answering the
question than by quoting the ethics of the Schoolmen.

I am aware that my view of the influence of the
Church’s teaching on capitalism is opposed to the pre-
vailing one. Not only has the latter not observed that
the ethics of Thomas Aquinas are very favourably
disposed to the capitalist spirit, but it has also been
suggested that numerous. maxims and prescriptions in
it show that scholasticism was actually opposed to the
new type of man who came into being in the
capitalist age. A renewed study of the sources has
convinced me that the accepted views are incorrect.
The opinions of the Schoolmen, especially of the later
ones, concerning wealth and its acquisition, and more
particularly their views on usury, far from being a
hindrance to the growth of the capitalist spirit, were in
reality an impetus of no small weight.

Nor is there anything remarkable about that. For
what manner of people were the Schoolmen? It is a
mistake to think of them as mild bookworms, unlearned
in the ways of the world, abstruse thinkers of the
cloisters and the study, engaged in hair-splitting and


244 THE QUINTESSENCE OF (‘CAPITALISM


endless repetitions concerning unrealities. Many of the
lesser lights do indeed fit into this picture. But the
great minds never. I have already indicated what I
think of the writings of Aquinas. I want to add in
this place that it is an error to regard St. Thomas as
a medieval writer. The century in which he lived and
wrote was for the country where he was active the
beginning of the modern era. But even if Thomas
Aquinas be placed in pre-capitalist times, the men who
wrote on Christian ethics after him were certainly
children of an age of capitalist development. Take
Antonine of Florence, who was born in 1389 and died
in 1459 ; take his contemporary, Bernard of Siena ; take
the commentator on Aquinas, Cardinal Cajetan, who
died in 1489; take Chrysostom Javellus and many
more besides. These men were neither without know-
ledge of the world nor were they unworldly. They
understood the inwardness of the economic revolution
that had been effected in their day, and had no
inclination to sacrifice themselves to the “ steam-roller.”’
As a matter of fact, these later Schoolmen had more
sympathy for and understanding of capitalism than the
17th-century zealot preachers of Puritanism. How
much practical knowledge is to be found in the Summa
of St. Antonine! It is the work of one of the most
wideawake men of his time, who walked through the
streets of Florence with his eyes open, who was
acquainted with the thousand and one business tricks
of his fellow-citizens, who was not unlearned in
transport insurance nor in the nature of bills of
exchange, who knew all about the silk industry and
wool-making.

What, then, was the attitude of these men to the
new economic order and its spirit ?

Let us first turn to the teachings of the Schoolmen


CATHOLICISM 245


in regard to poverty and wealth. The old Christian
ideal of poverty which the early Fathers valued so much,
and which the first sectaries not only preached but
practised, appears in the later Schoolmen to have vanished
altogether. It is of little moment whether the pious
Christian be poor or rich; what is of consequence is
what use he makes of his poverty or his riches. The
wise man does not flee from opulence or from poverty
as such; he discountenances and avoids the misuse of
either.30! And if you weigh up the advantages and
disadvantages of wealth with those of poverty, those of
the former overbalance those of the latter.302 In any
event, whether you are rich or poor it is God’s doing,33
and in either case He is fulfilling His beneficent purpose.
The poor is being taught contentment, the rich is given
a sign of grace or is provided with the means of nobly
applying his possessions.3°4 The noble use is what
matters, and the good Christian should not therefore
think too much of his riches or misuse them for a sinful
end. If he does not do this, if he utilizes his wealth in a
godly way, then the term “sinful”? which may sometimes
be applied to riches is not appropriate.3°5 The end of
riches is not, of course, more riches ; it has only one end,
and that is to minister to man’s wants and through man
to God. God is the ultimate, man the immediate goal.

To be wealthy was always looked upon by the
Schoolmen as an act of God. But what of becoming
wealthy, what of acquiring wealth? On this point the
views did not always accord. St. Thomas holds the
static conception of society, that which characterized
social conditions in the pre-capitalist era. Every man
had his niche wherein he stayed to the end of his
days. He had his calling and his status, and the income
in accord with that. All change, all development, all
progress were inward processes and were conceivable only


246 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


as regards man’s relation to the Deity. Consequently the
amount of wealth of every person was a fixed quantity.
He was as rich as his status required.

But such a view could not possibly be maintained in
the revolutionary 14th and 15th centuries. Indeed, it was
something of a problem for the father-confessors. For if
you followed it to its logical conclusion, it’‘meant that no
one should rise above his station, that no one should
obtain riches, and so be able to live the life of the social
grade above him. Accordingly, once a peasant always a
peasant, once a craftsman always a craftsman— which
is absurd,’ as Cardinal Cajetan concludes in his criticism
of Aquinas’s opinions. Clearly, he holds, every man
ought to have the possibility of working himself up and
becoming richer than he was. And these are his reasons.
If any one has special gifts which enable him to rise
beyond his station, he ought also to be allowed to acquire
the means appropriate for the higher status. This
version of the matter opened wide the doors for the
capitalist undertakers, the men who stood out from the
crowd by virtue of their greater capacities, ““ who could
justly claim to have dominion over the rest, although
they were not lords,” the men who had a keen eye for
business and other large enterprises. These could
acquire gain and accumulate capital as much as they
wanted with the full approval of Mother Church.3%

As much as they wanted? There were limitations, of
course. ‘Their acquisitions had to be made in accordance
with reason, and the means they adopted for reaching
their goal had to be such as were not in conflict with
morality. But what was not in accordance with reason ?
To get gain for its own sake, to heap up riches for the
riches themselves, to climb upward for the sake of the
climbing—all this was worthy of punishment. It was
also foolish, seeing that no limit was set to any of the


CATHOLICISM 247


three.307, Equally reprehensible was it to pay no heed to
morality in business, or to act in a way contrary to the
general good, or to stop your ears to the voice of
conscience. Whoso did such things as these was
endangering his soul’s welfare for the sake of filthy
lucre.3°8 ~=In a word, unscrupulous and unbounded
acquisitiveness has always been condemned by Catholic
teachers of morality down almost to this very day. By so
doing they lent their support to the conceptions of the
old-fashioned bourgeois, which prevailed to the end of
the period of early capitalism, but which, it must be
added, was not averse to profits honestly gotten. It was
not so much the quantity of profit that the Church
teachers were concerned with as the mental attitude of
the capitalist undertaker. What they wanted to prevent,
and no doubt succeeded in preventing, was the utter
transvaluation of all values, such as that which charac-
terizes our own age.

A warm sympathetic understanding of the expansion of
economic life in their age and country rings true in all
that the later Italian Schoolmen wrote touching economic
questions. In other words, capitalism appealed to them.
It was on that account that they clung to the teaching
of the canon law concerning usury. For what did the
prohibition of usury mean to the Catholic moralists of
the 15th and 16th centuries? Expressed in modern
terms it denoted: Don’t prevent money from becoming
capital.

At first sight this may seem paradoxical, Yet the
more carefully I study the sources the more convinced I
become that the prohibition of usury gave a mighty
impetus to the expansion of the capitalist spirit. I am
surprised that no one has noticed this before. Possibly
one reason is that the specialists who have hitherto devoted
themselves to scholastic philosophy were not economists


248 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


and lacked that knowledge of affairs which Bernard of
Siena and Antonine of Florence both possessed.

The conception of capital in St. Thomas’s writings is in
the germinating stage. But even he differentiates between
borrowing for unproductive purposes (the simple loan)
and borrowing for productive objects (capital), and goes
so far as to say that while to receive payment for the first
is wrong, to receive payment for the second is perfectly
legitimate.3°9 Antonine of Florence and Bernard of
Siena appear to understand the essence of capitalism in its
completeness. Indeed, they use the term “capital,” and
what they have to say about it political economy has
learned afresh from Karl Marx. Incidentally it may be
noted that Antonine, with a fullness of knowledge, indi-
cated the importance of a speedy turnover for increasing
profits.31° But we are more interested in his clear
demarcation between the investment of capital (ratio capi-
talis) and the simple loan of money (ratio mutuz).311 Inthe
second case money is barren, in the first it 1s productive,
“possessing in that capacity not merely the character of
money or of a commodity, but something more—the
power of creation, which we term ‘capital.’ ”’ 312

What is the attitude of the Church authorities to
interest and profit? Payment for simple lending they
forbade, but a share of the surplus which capital created
they allowed in all cases, whether it flowed from commerce
or from the work of a middleman 3!3 or from transport
insurance 3!4 or from a joint-stock,3!5 or in any other
way.3!© Only one condition is postulated : the capitalist
must himself participate in the undertaking. If he
remains in the background, if he will not adventure his
money, if he lacks the spirit of enterprise, let him have
no profit. It is clear from this that before a man
might receive interest he had to be prepared to bear the
losses as well as provide the initial capital. Hence a


CATHOLICISM 249


joint-stock company had to limit its liabilities ; bank
deposits could not yield interest ; 317 you were not allowed
to lend a craftsman a sum of money at a fixed rate (seeing
that you eliminated risk) ;3!8 a partnership might be
entered into only if all the partners agreed to share
the losses.3!9

It is clear that these pious men were anxious to spur
on enterprise. What they rewarded was industry, the
mother of all profit. Money in itself was just barren
dross. Only when industry—undertaking—is applied to
it does it become fruitful, and then only the surplus is
lawful.320 The Schoolmen hated nothing so much as
idleness, and their theory of interest bears witness to the
fact. For if a man lends out money at interest without
himself being an undertaker of some sort, he is an idler,
who may not therefore receive his reward in the form of
interest, even if the money borrowed is productive capital.
This holds good so long as others and not the lender
apply it productively. A passage in Antonine’s writings
is characteristic. It is there pointed out that the nodili
who will not work, but put their money in other people’s
businesses without also sharing their risks, are receiving
usury pure and simple.3?1

We can understand why the later Schoolmen hated
professional money-lending, which is one of the deadly
foes of capitalist undertaking. Avarice in their view
was one of the most heinous sins, and avarice, remember,
is not only not the same thing as the acquisition of profit
but its very opposite. The avaricious man is a usurer,
whom St. Antonine pictured in such bold outlines—how
he gleefully surveys his treasure, how he trembles in his
shoes at the thought of thieves and robbers, how he
counts and recounts the golden coin evening after evening,
how horrible visions make his flesh creep at night, and
how he is on the look-out by day for some one to draw


250 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


into his net. The significance of the last touch will
become apparent if we call to mind how much money-
lending there was in those days in the shape of consump-
tive credit, so necessary in a feudal society to make
ends meet.

Note further that avarice breeds idleness. ‘‘ The
avaricious soul of the usurer kills all energy within him,
so that he is unable to find profit in lawful and useful
callings. He becomes idle, slack, and slothful, and is
thus forced to have recourse to unlawful practices in order
to maintain himself.”’ 322

The doctrine of lawful profit and that of the intel-
lectual virtues thus coalesce. The burden of both is the
same: energetic undertaking is a delight unto the Lord,
but an extravagant nobility, stay-at-home slackers, and idle
usurers are an abomination unto His soul.


CHAPTER XIX
PROTESTANTISM


PRorTesTanTism has been all along the line a foe to capi-
talism, and more especially to the capitalist economic
outlook. How could it be otherwise? Capitalism is
something worldly, something for this life on earth, and
the more man’s gaze is directed to the joys of existence
here below, the more devotees will capitalism enrol.
But for that very reason it will be hated and condemned
of all who regard our life here as only a preparation for
life hereafter. The increasing intensity of religious feel-
ings necessarily results in an increasing indifference to
economic activities, and an increasing indifference to eco-
nomic activities means a weakening and dissolution of the
capitalist spirit. This actually happened at the Reforma-
tion. The reform movement gave a fillip to the inner
life, and intensified the craving for metaphysics in men.
Consequently capitalism was prejudiced in proportion as
the reform doctrines spread.

In Lutheranism this tendency was strengthened by
Luther’s own devotion to the economic conditions that
prevailed in the early Middle Ages with the self-support-
ing peasant and craftsman. That is why Luther’s
philosophy is far behind that of the Schoolmen. It may
be said with certainty that in those countries where
Lutheranism triumphed the influence of religion on
economic affairs, in so far as it was effective, made not
for the growth, but most decidedly for the retardation, of


251


252 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


capitalist tendencies. But other forms of Protestantism,
and Calvinism in particular, were no different in this
respect. In Calvinist lands the Church was distinctly
hostile to capitalism, and the assumption is not far-fetched
that the new faith was on the whole more harmful than
helpful to the growth of the capitalist spirit.

This view, I know, is contrary to that generally pre-
vailing, which holds that Calvinism, especially in its
Anglo-Scottish guise of Puritanism, aided capitalist
development, if, indeed, it did not give it birth. It
remains for me therefore to demonstrate the anti-capitalist
direction of Calvinist-Puritanical ethics. I shall limit
my consideration to English and Scotch sources, seeing
that it is commonly accepted that Puritanism helped
capitalism in Great Britain more than anywhere else.

At the outset let us note that the early Christian ideal
of poverty came to the fore once again in Puritan ethics.
Riches and their acquisition were regarded in much the
same fashion as the Gospels speak of them, and the aver-
sion to earthly goods was more marked than in scholasti-
cism. In principle, the Puritans and the Schoolmen were
agreed. For both, riches and poverty were of no conse-
quence whatever for the soul’s salvation. But whereas
we observed a certain inclination on the part of the
Schoolmen to riches, among the Puritans the consensus of
opinion is more sympathetic to poverty. In other words,
reason in both schools is indifferent to poverty and
wealth alike, but the feelings of the doctors sway them in
opposite directions. The Schoolmen were for wealth,
the Puritans for poverty. Hence it is that the condem-
nation of riches in Baxter’s Directory occupies ever so.
much more space than in the Summe theologice of the
Catholic writers. Let us hear Baxter on the subject.


How little do the wealth and honours of the world concern a
soul that is going into another world, and knows not but it


PROTESTANTISM 253


may be this night. Then keep the wealth, or take it with thee, if
thou canst.

Labour to feel thy greatest wants, which worldly wealth will not
supply.

Thou art dead in sin and polluted and captivated by the flesh, and
money will sooner increase thy bondage than deliver thee.

Will honest poverty or overloved wealth be sweeter at last ?

Remember that riches do make it much harder for a man to be
saved. Remember the apostle’s word (1 Tim. vi. 10): “The love
of money is the root of all evil.” Do you believe that here lieth the
danger of your souls? And yet can you so love and choose and
seek it?

Worldliness makes the Word unprofitable, and keepeth men from
believing and repenting and coming home to God and minding seriously
the everlasting world. What so much hindereth the conversion ot
sinners as the love and cares of earthly things? ‘They cannot serve
God and Mammon.

In a word, as ye have heard, “the love of money is the root of all
evil,’ and the love of the Father is not in the lovers of the world.

Remember that riches are no part of your felicity. Yea, remember
that riches are not the smallest temptation and danger to your souls.
. . . It is not for nothing that Christ giveth so many terrible warn-
ings about riches, and so describeth the folly, the danger, and the
misery of the worldly-rich . . . and telleth you how hardly the rich
are saved.3?3


Baxter summarizes the evil consequences of the love of
money under ten headings, viz. it draws the heart away
from God; it stops the ear to His word; it makes
impossible holy meditation and conference; it steals
the time needful for preparing for death ; it generates
spite between neighbours and wars between nations ; it
is the source of all unrighteousness and oppression ; it
destroys charity and good works ; it disordereth and
profaneth families; it is the very price that the devil
gives for souls; and it distracts from communion
with God.

If wealth is thus frowned upon, how much more its
acquisition, especially by means of capitalist undertaking.


234 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Here, too, the Gospel provides a watchword: ‘“ Take
no thought for the morrow.”


He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house, but he that hateth
gifts shall live. Do you not know that a godly man contented with
his daily bread hath a far sweeter and quieter life and death than a
self-troubling worldling?

If Christ did scrape and care for riches, then so do thou ; if He
thought it the happiest life, do you think so too. But if He contemned
it, do thou contemn it.

If you had believed that the gain of holy wisdom had been better
than the gaining of gold, as Solomon saith (Prov. iii. 14), you would
have laid out much of that time in labouring to understand the Scrip-
tures, and preparing for your endless life.

Piercing sorrows here and damnation hereafter are a very dear price
to give for money.

Take heed lest the success and prosperity of your affairs do too much
please you.3%4


I have hitherto quoted Baxter because he is the typical
representative of the Puritan moral teachers. All of
them, however, were inimical to acquisitiveness ; all of
them are everlastingly asking, Why care for earthly
goods? Why take thought for to-morrow? The
words are almost identical with those of Baxter.


When men are not content with food and raiment but would
still heap up more, it is just with God to leave them not so much as
bread ; and to suffer men to have an evil eye upon them, even so long
as they have meat.

Ye may: have things necessary here — food and raiment; and if
ye seek more, if ye will be rich, and will have superfluities, then ye
shall fall into many temptations, snares, and hurtful lusts which shall
drown you in perdition,

And certainly to crave and be desirous of more than what is
competent for the maintenance and support of our lives is both
inconsistent with that dependance and subjection we owe to God, and
doth also bespeak a great deal of vanity, folly, and inconsiderateness,

Why should men rack their heads with cares how to provide for
to-morrow, while they know not if they shall then need anything ? 325


PROTESTANTISM 255


Men are loth to lend their ears to the Word, when they
abound in prosperity.

Such is the weakness even of godly men that they can hardly live
in a prosperous condition and not be overtaken with some security,
carnal confidence, or other miscarriage.3?6


It was only to be expected that this condemnation of
all earthly goods was paralleled by a strong recommenda-
tion to turn the mind to God. Every moment spent not
in the service of God is lost. Every hour spent in
prayer, in attention to sermons, in holy ceremonies, is
fruitful of treasures that cannot be compared with money.
Time is only wasted with ‘excess of worldly cares and
business.” Men so occupied are full of mundane
thoughts from early morn till late at night. The world
leaves them no time for earnest communion, and robs
them of precious moments which belong to God and
their immortal souls—moments for prayer, reading, or
conference on holy matters.327

For many a year life was moulded in accordance with
views such as these, especially in Scotland, the stronghold |
of Puritanism. Which means that the greater part of
men’s waking hours were spent in church or in prepara-
tion for the Church services. Markets were forbidden
to be held, certainly in the 17th century, on Saturdays,
Sundays, and Mondays. There were week-day services,
morning and evening, in all the churches ; sermons were
delivered twice and even three times a week; in ‘the
year 1650 an address was given every afternoon. In
1653 a weekly programme was instituted for religious
exercises. For Wednesdays, fasting and eight hours’
prayer and preaching; for Saturdays, two or three
sermons ; for Sundays, twelve hours’ service in church ;
for Mondays, three or four sermons.3?8

To flee from the world—that was the ideal of every
word, of every action of the pious Puritan of those days.


286 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


There had been nothing like it since the early Christian
sects. Nevertheless, Puritanism did not altogether
suppress the capitalist spirit. Indeed, certain of its
aspects unconsciously facilitated its growth. Puritanism
served the interests of its arch-enemy, capitalism, in that
it took up and developed the ethical principles of
scholasticism passionately and with a singleness of
purpose. .

Puritanism re-echoed the old watchwords : Rationalize
life; keep the passions under control; let reason
dominate the natural inclinations. ‘ Take nothing and
do nothing merely because the sense or appetite would
have it, but because you have reason so to do,” 329
These words of Baxter appear again and again insistently.
Once more the master-sin is sensuality, flesh-pleasing or
voluptuousness. Isaac Barrow’s treatise Of Indusiry
sums up the fundamental teaching of Puritanism. ‘“ We
should govern and regulate according to very strict and
severe laws all the faculties of our soul, all the members
of our body, all internal motions and all external actions
proceeding from us; we should check our inclinations,
curb our appetites and compose our passions; we
should guard our hearts from vain thoughts and bad
desires; we should bridle our tongues from evil
and from idle discourses; we should order our
steps in the straight way of righteousness, not deflecting
to the right hand or to the left.” 33°

Conduct of this kind was held to lead to grace, and
every individual had to keep close watch on himself if he
would retain that grace. So the habit was formed of
tashioning the whole of life on the basis of reason, in
accordance with the will of God. Not that the average
man ever gave the theory of it a thought. Sufficient for |
him that the minister proclaimed God’s desire for a
particular conduct of life, which to the pious was just


PROTESTANTISM 257


the sum total of a number of behests. These he obeyed
according to the measure of the fear of God within him.
He was no different in this respect from the good
Catholic, who had likewise to plague himself with self-
control. If anything, the Puritan was stricter in his
observance. Now, as the doctrines of scholasticism and
Puritanism were identical in their terms, the sternness of
the Puritan can be accounted for only by the deeper
religious feelings of the 17th-century man.

It is curious how the single virtues are recommended
to the faithful by the Puritan preachers and the Catholic
doctors in exactly the same way, word for word. Life
was to be ordered aright, so both demanded; and the
middle-class virtues which each _ proclaimed were
identical.

First as to industry : ‘“ By industry we understand a
serious and steady application of mind, joined with a
rigorous exercise of our active faculties in prosecution of
any reasonable, honest, useful design in order to the
accomplishment or attainment of some considerable
good ; as, for instance, a merchant is industrious, who
continueth intent and active in driving on his trade for
acquiring wealth.” 33! Industry is desired of God. All
gifts, of course, come from Him, but His will is that
we should attain them by work. We are therefore to
be industrious. ‘That is the burden of Isaac Barrow’s
dissertation, which quotes the Old Testament freely.
“Shall we alone be idle, while all things are so busy?
We may easily observe every creature about us incessantly
working toward the end for which it was designed, inde-
fatigably exercising the powers with which it is endowed ;
diligently observing the law of its creation. . . .”’ 332
Is not this the repetition of what St. Antonine wrote ?
And this likewise? ‘Idleness is indeed the nursery of
sins, which as naturally grow up therein as weeds in a

17


288° THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM ©


neglected field or insects in a standing puddle: ‘ Idleness
teaches much evil’ (Eccles. xxxiii. 27).’’ 333

Next, employ your time usefully; games, gaming,
hunting, and masked balls are evil things and should
be avoided.334

Thirdly, in both codes sensuality and drunkenness are
of the Devil, and are deadly sins. Possibly there was
greater control of these things in the Puritan countries in
the 17th century than in the Italian cities in the 15th.
We are told, for example, of an elaborate and refined
spying system in Scotland.335 Perhaps, too, the demands
of religion were more insistent among the Puritans than
among the Schoolmen. In particular the sexual life of
individuals was more closely watched in Puritan than in
Catholic countries. Purity among the Anglo-Saxons
became prudery. It is not too much to say that
Puritanism is responsible for the humbug and hypocrisy
in sexual matters in old England no less than in New
England across the Atlantic. ‘We separate the sexes,”
boasts an American Quaker merchant of the 18th
century to a French colleague, “for when they are
together they melt away like snow in the sun.” 336

Fourth in order comes economy, a master virtue with
the Schoolmen and the Puritans alike. In 17th-century
Scotland the preachers reintroduced sumptuary laws,
insisting that there should be strict economy in clothing,
in house-room, and at celebrations of weddings and
the like.337 Is it not well-known that Quakers drove
economy to excess, applying it even to words, gestures,
and the names of the days of the week ? 338

But all Protestant sects took an extremist view of
economy, so much so that we are perhaps on the track
of one—the only one—point of divergence in the social
ethics of the Puritans and the Schoolmen. It can be best
expressed by saying that Puritanism utterly crushed the


PROTESTANTISM 259


least sign of any artistic longing for sensuous magnificence
and grandeur. Far otherwise was the outlook of
scholasticism. Its beauty was that it sprang from a
deeply artistic temperament. Even yet we may perceive
in it the heavenly spirit of the Augustinian outlook on
life. Recall St. Thomas’s words about the glorious
harmony of the world and of man, a harmony worthy of
beautiful expression, even as Dionysius pointed out, who
said : “‘God as the source of harmony in the universe is
robed in beauty.’’ So the body’s comeliness is in the
harmony of its members, and the harmony of conduct
worthy of reason is the beauty of the soul. St. Augustine,
indeed, calls honesty a “ spiritual beauty.”

All this sense of the artistic expresses itself in the
recognition as a virtue of high rank of something which
finds no place whatever in any of the systems of Protestant
ethics. I refer to what the Schoolmen called magnificentia,
which denoted the striving to accomplish what is great
and glorious. In the first place, you think of the Church
and public life. But you are by no means to exclude a
love of the ornate from your own life, whether it be for
special occasions, as, for example, a wedding-feast, or for
constant enjoyment, as, for example, your home. And
of course in works of art this love of beauty and magnifi-
cence must most certainly express itself.339


The Protestants had lost all sense of beauty ; magnifi- |


centia found no place in their ethical and religious system,
well-suited as it was to their cold, drab, whitewashed,
pictureless kirks,34° that took the place of the noble
Gothic piles with their ‘storied windows richly dight
casting a dim religious light.”” Indeed, in Puritan ethics
the very opposite of magnificentia, miserliness, became one
of the cardinal virtues. The Schoolmen, on the other
hand, had condemned it as a deadly sin. “A man is
termed a miser when he is small-minded in doing things.


260 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


. . . He who loves pomp and magnificence first thinks
out his plan and then considers the great expense, which
for the sake of the result he does not shrink from. The
miser, however, first reflects how much a thing will
cost before he decides upon it, his object all the time
being to spend as little as possible.” 341

Nevertheless, to change parsimony into miserliness was
one of the chief services rendered to capitalism by Puritan
and Quaker ethics, unless it be held that the removal of
the ban on interest was a greater service. This | myself
doubt. We have already observed that the medieval
prohibition of interest was really a blessing in disguise for
the capitalist spirit. Consequently the attitude of the
later moralists to interest and usury was of little
moment.

But there are a number of things for which Puritanism
was certainly not responsible. First and foremost, it had
nothing to do with middle-class virtues as such, seeing
that when Puritanism arose these had been in existence
for several centuries. Does not Alberti know them all
to perfection? If any religious system is to be made
responsible for them, it must be Catholicism. Protes-
tantism merely took over what the Schoolmen had
created.

Nor do I think Puritanism accountable for the
boundless development of acquisitiveness, and the
senseless desire to make money anyhow, which character-
izes the capitalist spirit at its zenith. Puritan preachers
were totally averse to all money-getting. Jn so far as
they did reckon with natural acquisitiveness and the desire
for riches, there was always the condition, implied or
expressed, that riches were not to be regarded as an end
in themselves. Wealth could be justified only when it
was spent in ways pleasing to God, and so long as it did
not endanger the salvation of the undertaker. Here


PROTESTANTISM 261


again we meet with the precisely similar language of the
Schoolmen. Baxter is not opposed to riches, but they
must only be used for doing good— in the service of
God, in beneficence to our neighbour, in advancing public
good.”’ Or again, “ Riches may enable us to relieve our
needy brethren and promote good works for Church and
state.” Once more, “That you make not riches your
chief end : riches for our fleshly ends must not ultimately
be intended or sought. But—in subordination to higher
things they may. Then your end must be, that you may
be better provided to do God service, and may do the
more good with what you have. You may labour to be
rich for God, though not for the flesh and sin.” 342
In the third place, unscrupulous money-getting cannot
be laid at the door of Puritanism. Like scholasticism
it preached the need for honourable ways in business.
‘“What a man compasseth by honest industry that he is
apt highly to prize.” 343 Moreover, Puritanism clung to
the doctrine of “‘ just price” current among the Schoolmen.
And what does “ just price”? mean but the subjection of
the market to the laws of righteousness and the cheapen-
ing of wares? Free competition Puritanism condemned
utterly. “It is a false rule of them that think their
commodity is worth as much as any one will give. But
it is taken for granted in the market that every man
will get as much as he can have and that ‘ Caveat emptor ’
is ‘the only security.’ It is not soamong Christians, nor
infidels who profess either truth or common honesty.” 344
Finally, I doubt very much whether Puritanism was
the cause of the great undertakings that appeared later in
Puritan countries. Puritanism hardly encouraged far-
sighted and adventurous enterprises ; shopkeeping was
the most it could achieve. Your Scotchman is a Puritan.
But to regard as Puritans men like Cecil Rhodes and the
really great undertakers who came to the fore in England


262 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


and America in the 19th century, that is hardly warranted
by the facts. It would be but a narrow conception of the
capitalist spirit thus to see its various manifestations
springing from Puritanism. The truth is that our latter-
day “merchant adventurers” are all made of very dif-
ferent stuff; their progenitors were the Raleighs, the
Cavendishes, the Drakes, the Fuggers, and the rest of
them, who, born before Puritanism became a force, were
immune from the abstruse stuff which a ghost like
Mr. Baxter crammed into the Christian Dictionary.

It cannot be denied, of course, that there were some
great capitalist undertakers among the Puritans. But
whether they owed their greatness to Puritan ethics is
doubtful. It was more probably much more due to their
racial qualities or to fortune’s guiding hand, as we shall
have occasion to consider in due course. One factor, and
only one, may have helped the capitalist spirit, and that
was the subjection of the undertaker to the laws of
Puritan ethics. But deep this influence could never
have been.


CHAPTER XX
JUDAISM


For a detailed consideration of the influences of Judaism
on economic life, especially on the development of the
capitalist spirit, 1 would refer the reader to my book, The
Jews and Modern Capitalism.

On the whole, my views on the subject have undergone
little change since I wrote that book, despite the criticism
levelled against it, particularly by learned Rabbis. There
is only one point to which I should like to reply. It has
been suggested that I have overlooked certain aspects of
Judaism ; for example, its mystical elements. Without
going into the merits of the question, I need only add
that my business was to lay bare the relationship of
Judaism and capitalism. To this end there was no
necessity for me to include in my survey of the problem
such elements of Judaism as had no influence whatever
on the capitalist spirit. Jewish mysticism was therefore
not mentioned, just as in my consideration of the scholastic
ethics I leave out of account its Pauline and Augustinian
doctrines of love, though these are part and parcel of
official Catholicism.

This particular criticism thus falls to the ground.
Nevertheless, there is one important point on which I must
revise my opinions.

When I wrote the book on the Jews and modern capi-


talism I had not made a study of the ethics of Aquinas.
263


264 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Accordingly, many doctrines of Judaism (for example,
the conditional recognition of wealth, or the behest to
rationalize the whole of life), seemed to me specifically
and uniquely Jewish, and I contrasted them with the
Christian views prevalent in the pre-Puritan age.
That was an error. Those portions of Judaism which
were of great significance for our problem were by no
means unique. ‘They certainly were not in their entirety
part of early Christianity, but as certainly they found a
place in scholastic morality. There is nothing surprising
in this, inasmuch as the Schoolmen looked upon Jewish
moral laws as the kernel of the divine law of nature.
Truth to tell, Judaism, Catholicism, and Puritanism all
expressed themselves alike on those points which are vital
for our problem.

Nevertheless, there are elements in Judaism that dif-
ferentiate it from the two other religious systems (always
bearing in mind that I am referring to those parts of it
only which had any bearing on capitalism). What is
especially peculiar to Judaism is that it perfected and
carried to their logical conclusions all those teachings that
were beneficial to the capitalist spirit.

Take its attitude to riches. It is a shade more favour-
able than even that of the Schoolmen. Nor is this sur-
prising. Judaism found support for its views in the Old
Testament, wherein riches and prosperity in ninety-nine
cases out of a hundred were not classed as an evil;
whereas Christian moralists had to get over the New
Testament ideal of poverty. Judaism never formulated
a poverty ideal.

As for the rationalization of life, it is preached much
more thoroughly, and was given a more comprehensive
connotation, in Judaism than in Catholicism. The Jewish
attitude was closely akin to the Puritan. More especially
was this the case in the subjugation of the sexual appetite.


JUDAISM 265


This assuredly occupied an important place in Scholasti-
cism too, but in Judaism and Puritanism it was a sterner
demand, turning self-control in both into a caricature
that made you shiver.

Similarly, Judaism and Puritanism have in common
their suppression of every artistic taste, which, as we have
seen, Aquinas allows and makes much of. In fact, the
second commandment seems to have been quite disregarded
by the Schoolmen ; in Judaism, on the other hand, its
influence was immense.

Jewish ethics require a place apart, so far as their
influence on the modern spirit goes, for yet another reason.
They received form and shape at a time when Christianity
moved in such different channels. While Christianity
was yet held in bond by the Essene ideal of poverty,
Judaism did not reject riches ; while the former was filled
with Pauline and Augustinian spirit of love, the latter
preached a rabid and extremist nationalism. Thus all
those ethical regulations that were favourable to the
development of the capitalist spirit were influential in
Judaism a thousand years longer than in Christianity.
Moreover, in the course of a long period of history the
process of selection was at work among the Jews,
eliminating the units too weak for capitalism and allowing
the strong capitalist types to survive. Accordingly,
when the capitalist epoch in modern history commenced,
the Jews, thanks to their religion, had undergone a more
thorough and longer training for it than any Christian
people. Had other things been equal the Jews would in
this way have had an enormous advantage over non-Jews.

In one respect, however, Judaism was able to exercise
an almost revolutionary influence: in its attitude to the
stranger. Jewish ethics, Janus-like, was given two
aspects. One was applicable for intercourse with Jews,
the other for intercourse with non-Jews. All early


266 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


peoples had this double-barrelled morality, with one code
of conduct towards the tribesmen and another towards the
stranger. But the fate of the Jews through long centuries
perpetuated this twofold code, and until quite recently
gave their commercial principles a peculiar tendency.

This special law for the stranger the reader will find
elaborated in my /ews and Modern Capitalism.* Here
we need only refer to its consequences. In the first place,
intercourse with strangers was bereft of all considerations,
and commercial morality (if I may put it so) became
elastic ; in the second, the differential treatment of non-
Jews in Jewish commercial law resulted in the complete
transformation of the idea of commerce and industry,
generally in the direction of more freedom. We have
called the Jews the Fathers of Free Trade and therefore
of capitalism. They were prepared for this réle by the
free-trading spirit of their commercial and industrial law.
This received an enormous impetus towards a policy of
laissez-faire by its attitude towards strangers. And if
free trade and industrial freedom were in accordance
with Jewish law, they were in accordance with the will
of God. Think what a mighty motive power this
was in economic life!


* [See especially pp. 242-48. |


CHAPTER XXI
MORAL INFLUENCES AND THE CAPITALIST SPIRIT


In the preceding chapter we have been occupied, without
prejudice, not to say naively, with the influence of moral
forces on the growth of the capitalist spirit. But with
what justice? For we have yet to satisfy ourselves, that
the influence was a real one. The preceding pages have
by no means proved this. What they did show was that
in numerous instances there is a parallelism between
certain aspects of the capitalist spirit and certain teachings
of philosophy and religion.

It may be objected that the parallelism is not necessarily
due to interaction between the two groups. It is quite
well possible to imagine that the capitalist spirit drew its
nurture from other sources which happened to give it the
same colouring as ethical teaching might have done. Or,
an even more damaging objection may be urged, one
that is to be expected considering the prevailing trend of
thought in some quarters. It is admitted that ethics and
the capitalist spirit have interacted, but the interaction
was the very opposite of that which we have assumed.
The capitalist spirit was not shaped by philosophy and
religion, but, on the contrary, these reflected the pre-
vailing economic conditions. A consideration of the
question is essential, but we shall be brief.

Think as you like of the genius of the founder of a


religion, this much is clear—that before any religion can
267


268 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


strike root certain conditions must exist. Economic
conditions are of the number, but they are not the only
ones. Biological and ethnological factors play a very
important part too. Ina word, the totality of a people’s
life—its blood and its social state—determines whether or
no any religion (or indeed any philosophical system, for
the same to a less degree holds good of that too) is
accepted, and the totality of its life likewise explains the
development of the adopted religion through the ages.
This is what is meant when we say that a people has a
certain disposition for some religion. ‘‘ As well expect
seed to bring forth fruit from a flinty rock as a philo-
sophical religion of love to be accepted by ignorant and
wild savages.”’

This disposition in a people will be influenced more
and more by economic conditions the nearer we approach
our own times, seeing that economic life, anyhow in the
modern history of Western Europe, has dominated man
to a greater and greater degree. Consequently, the
more recent a religion is, the more likely is economic
life to have a strong influence upon it.

This in my view is a fundamental dictum, and we
shall best see its truth by comparing the influence of
economic life on the different systems of Christianity in
their respective epochs.

To ascribe any influence whatever to economic condi-
tions on the Augustinian doctrines is clearly to subvert
facts. They had none. But when we come to scholas-
ticism, the influence of economic life is somewhat
marked. I am inclined to think that the development
of scholastic ethics in the 14th and 15th centuries was
very much affected by the economic development of the
period. On the whole, however, we may take it that
Catholicism, even in the later Middle Ages, continued to
draw on its earliest founts, and not on those of its own


MORAL INFLUENCES 269


time or place. As we have already seen, it was a com-
posite of religious experience, the wisdom of every-day
life, the maxims of later antiquity and the morality of
the Jews.

Still more marked is the influence of economic life on
Calvinism. The somewhat advanced capitalist system of
its age was not without results on this species of Pro-
testantism. Economic conditions forced from Puritanism
the admission that the bourgeois mode of life was not
opposed to the state of Grace. The true nature of
Puritanism was absolutely inimical to capitalism. The
Puritan preachers of the 16th and 17th centuries would
have been very much inclined to consign the whole
business of Mammon-service to the depths of the sea, and
to have replaced it by the subsistence economic order of
the early Middle Ages with its small peasants and crafts-
men. Such a social system was more in accord with
their other-worldly teaching. But it was too late. It
was impossible for them to do what Luther had
succeeded in doing in the economically backward
Germany of his day—ignore capitalism altogether.
With heavy hearts, no doubt, they had to reckon with
it, and they sought as best they could to bring it into
accord with their religious views. How much it
entered into these is manifest in their mode of present-
ing their doctrines. Many a time and oft they utilize
pictures and comparisons from economic activities.
Thus, one writer urges that when the “Saint” takes
stock of his sins, let him think of them as capital and
interest, so that ‘the sanctification of life may become as
it were a business.’’ Baxter himself, in explaining God’s
invisibility, remarks that just as by correspondence one
man may carry on profitable business with another whom
he has never seen, so too it is possible by means of
“holy intercourse” with the invisible Deity to obtain “a


270 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


precious pearl.”” Commercial similes such as these were
characteristic of Puritanism, which in effect suggested that
man should bargain for his salvation.345

But there was nothing new in this; these ideas were to
be found in Judaism in abundance, as I have shown in my
book on the Jews and capitalism. The probability is that
the Puritan preachers found the similes and metaphors
they used in the writings of their Jewish colleagues.
That they adopted them only shows that capitalism was
already firmly rooted in their day, seeing that Jewish
theological thought was most suited to capitalist condi-
tions. Had the Puritan preachers lived in the manorial
or gild stage of social development, it would have been
absurd if, in order to drive home this message, they had
referred by way of illustration to book-keeping, capital, or
interest.

However (and this is the important thing), once a
religion (or a philosophical system) has become accepted,
there can be no doubt that its teachings, surrounded with
a divine halo as they often are, cannot but influence the
whole of life, and therefore also of economic activities. It
would indeed be passing strange were not the mental and
moral outlook of the economic agent conditioned by
systematic and reiterated instruction in a special ethical
code.

But this influence depends for its effectiveness on two
considerations, one personal, the other external.

The personal consideration is simple enough. If
ethical dogmas are to have any practical influence on
economic conduct they must be real forces in the life
of men. The best ethical teaching in the world would
be useless if no one believed in it and carried it out.
This condition certainly held good in the age of early
capitalism. The real, living interest in philosophy during
the period of the Renaissance and the deep religiosity


MORAL INFLUENCES 271


prevalent in all lands until the 18th century are generally
admitted facts.

The other and external condition was likewise fulfilled
in the early capitalist age, in that capitalism was then but
slightly developed. For as long as any economic order is
in process of growth, as long as it depends on the untram-
melled decisions of individuals, the influence of ethical
teaching must necessarily be strongly marked upon it,
much more so than when every branch of economic
activity has become specialized, the processes almost auto-
matic, and the individual economic agent held in the
system as in a vice.

We are thus led to this conclusion. During the age of
early capitalism both considerations held, and therefore,
no matter what view we may entertain as to the origin of
religion and philosophy, there can be no doubt that both,
once they were established, contributed their quota to the
development of the capitalist spirit. In the parallelism
between the two, therefore, the moral forces were the
cause, the particular economic conduct the effect.

What precisely did the moral forces achieve for the
capitalist spirit? I fancy we might point to three
things.

1. They produced a frame of mind, as we may term it,
favourable to capitalism. They helped the evolution of a
conception of life that was in accordance with reason, and
demanded order and method for its realization. The
philosophy of the later ancient world and the three
prevailing religious systems all shared in that.

2. They contributed to the cultivation of middle-class
virtues, beloved and recommended alike by the sages of
philosophy and the saints of religion.

3. They put a brake on the acquisition of wealth and
hemmed in economic activities.

Briefly expressed, it may be said that capitalism, down


272 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


to the end of this period, was under the restraining influ-
ences of Christian ethics. If you do not see that, you
have not grasped the true nature of early capitalism.

But even during this period the old landmarks were
being removed. Jewish ethics, as we have seen in con-
sidering its attitude to strangers, knew nothing of the
ordinances that regulated and circumscribed the economic
activities of Christians. The Jews, then, could take the
open road in the direction of unrestricted and unscrupu-
lous competition, and they did so quite early. But it was
not until capitalism was full blown that unrestricted and
unscrupulous competition became bone of its bone and
flesh of its flesh. When this occurred religion, at any
rate in Protestant countries, had undoubtedly lost its
former domination, while equally undoubted was the
increasing influence of Judaism. So that we may say
that full-blown capitalism also owed something to moral
forces—to the Christian religions, that they were no longer
active ; to the Jewish, that it was.

But let us not overestimate the influence of moral
forces on the economic life of the era wherein capitalism
reached its most perfect form. Moral forces could not
possibly have been responsible for the whole of capi-
talist development. Some share in it they certainly
had, but we must be clear in our minds as to its
limitations.

1. Observe that as long as ethical values were
current, ie. as long as men were religious (in the
broadest connotation of the term), moral laws helped
to shape the capitalist spirit under certain conditions.

2. But even so long as men continued to be
religious, the capitalist spirit drew upon other sources
also for its nutrition. Were this not the case, similar
religious systems would have produced a capitalist
spirit of exactly the same tenor. But this never hap-


MORAL INFLUENCES 273


pened : compare Spain and Italy. Nor could the same
capitalist spirit have sprung from different religious
systems : compare Italy, Germany, and America.

A little thought will suffice to make it clear that
moral forces were not alone in shaping the capitalist
spirit. Are not some of its aspects, are not many of
the forms in which it expressed itself, quite beyond the
possibility of being shaped? Economic methods, for
instance, cannot spring from moral behests.346 And is
not the capitalist spirit a composite conception to
which numerous qualities of mind and heart have
contributed ? Only some of these are subject to moral
influences ; these alone, therefore, may be shaped or
trained or educated. We called them virtues—intel-
lectual and moral virtues—and both depend on the way
intellect and will have been trained. They may be
acquired by obedience to certain ethical teaching,
though it is as well to remember incidentally that
some natures acquire them more readily than others
because of their peculiar “disposition.” Anyhow, the
influence of moral forces is limited to these virtues
alone.

But there are other factors in the capitalist spirit of
which some cannot at all be acquired, because they are
natural gifts or talents, while others again depend on
technical skill.

You are either born with talents or you are not.
The makings of the daring capitalist undertaker, the
brilliant speculator, or the wonderful calculator are in
the blood. No moral force in the world can make a
genius out of a good-for-nothing fellow or a calculator
out of a dreamer. Of course, talents may be trained
and perfected; they may even be added to. But in
either case there is no question of the influence of
moral forces.

18


274. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


As for technical skill, I refer to such things as the
capacity of controlling a business, or organizing ability
in general. These may be learned, but moral forces
have nothing to do with them. After all, it is clear
enough that the most morally perfect man will be a
bad capitalist undertaker if his book-keeping is on
a wrong system or his calculations have grievous errors
in them.

The truth is that all the abilities of the capitalist
depend on three things—on the sum total of technical
skill in existence, on the personal capacity of each one to
learn them, and on the will-power in the learning process.
Only the last has a point of contact with moral forces ;
the other two are wholly independent of them. Technical
improvements depend on the inventing capacity, which
people either have or not; how quickly and perfectly
any one may learn to utilize them and work them
depends on his native ability, which, as we know, varies
in each individual. The average of this ability may be
raised in the course of generations by a process of
selection. But moral forces have nothing to do with that.

It is evident, then, that many elements of the capitalist
spirit are wholly independent of the influence of moral
forces, even though these may still hold sway over men’s
minds. But what if they have lost this power, as has
certainly been the case among Christians ever since the
period of early capitalism came to an end? What if in
the interval the capitalist spirit has evolved through
revolutionary changes; changes that were only possible
by rejecting the doctrines of Christian morality, Pro-
testant and Catholic alike ; changes that resulted from
breaking through the bounds which both Catholicism
and Protestantism set to economic activities; changes
that were in accord with only one ethical system—the
Jewish? It would really be too much to ascribe the


MORAL INFLUENCES 275


characteristics of modern man in his economic life to
the influence of Jewish ethics, though truth to tell that
influence was not by any means slight.

There is no alternative but to discover other forces
which contributed to the shaping of perfect capitalism.
Other forces must, as a matter of fact, always have existed.
In the early capitalist period they stood side by side
with the moral forces; in the period of perfected
capitalism they took their place. These other forces
resulted from the existing social conditions—the con-
sideration of which has been reserved for the next
section.


SECTION III


THE SOCIAL CONDITIONS


CHAPTER XXII
THE STATE


In the next chapters I propose to point to the external,
i.e. social, circumstances that have had a directing
influence on the psychological development of modern
man regarded as an “economic animal.” But obviously
I shall on the one hand have to limit myself to a fairly
comprehensive general survey of the mass of complex
causes, and, on the other, to bring into relief a few points
which appear to me to be of special importance. To do
more would mean writing the economic history of the last
five hundred years; it might even mean writing the
whole history of civilization during that period, seeing
that the problem in which we are specially interested has
a more or less close connection with almost every aspect
of that history.

The first in the mass of complex causes that I men-
tion is the state. And I do so not only because of the
tremendous influence exercised by the state on the de-
velopment of the spirit of capitalism (more especially in
its earliest stages), but also because the state, like a husk
which encloses the kernel, contains within itself a large


number of other complex causes.
270


THE STATE 277


To begin with, I want to indicate how the state helped
the capitalistic spirit to grow. But before doing this let
me mention in what way the state has also hindered
capitalism.

There can be no doubt that the theory of bullionism
driven to excess may be a stumbling-block to enterprise,
and may eventually even crush it altogether. If taxes are
very heavy, if they reduce profits either by being too
much of a burden to the employing class or by raising
wages make competition with foreign lands impossible,
it is obvious that the desire to invest capital will be
weakened. The economic decline of Spain since the 17th
century, and the speedy disappearance of Dutch industry
in the 18th century, have both been attributed to the
great pressure of taxation. Similarly (though to be sure
to a lesser extent) a wrong commercial or industrial policy
may set bounds to enterprise ; and an extremist social
programme in a state might have the same effect, though
there is no actual case on record up to the present.

But the capitalist spirit has been hemmed by the
growth of the modern state in another direction. I refer
to national debts, where the complaint about a wrong
policy was scarcely apposite. In another place 347 I have
adduced figures to show what enormous sums have flowed
into the coffers of states since the Middle Ages, more
especially for warlike undertakings. This loss of life-
blood deprived the body economic of a good deal of
its strength, despite the fact that the spending of the
sums collected increased production, For not only was
instrumental capital lessened, but enterprise received
little encouragement ; at any rate, when money could be
invested in profitable public loans its development was
not so fast as it might have been. Directly the moneyed
classes, instead of putting their money into capitalist
undertakings, begin to buy government securities,


278 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


they at once sink into what may be termed a state of
economic lethargy. This was a general complaint in the
17th and 18th centuries in England, France, and Holland
on the part of those who were well disposed to capitalism.
Money that might have been used to create thriving trade
and industry found its way, it was said, into the public
treasuries, which paid a high rate of interest for it.348

One of the most effective methods of killing the spirit
of enterprise manifested itself in France, where, as we have
already seen, the traffic in offices under the crown became
a marked characteristic of public life throughout many
centuries. The form this evil took was different from
that of the public debt ; but the effect was the same. The
rich became comfortable and interested themselves no
longer in capitalistic enterprise. We have here a speci-
ally good example of the interdependence of the different
forces which influenced the capitalist spirit. The French
national spirit, little gifted as it was for capitalism (pro-
bably, as we have seen, because of its Celtic origin), had
recourse to the selling of government posts as a method
of utilizing money best suited to its nature. This in its
turn had a clogging influence on enterprise, with the
result that any capitalist qualities that may have existed
in France were starved. And so on in an everlasting circle.

The same effects may ensue from the attitude of the
state to the different social groups within it. Suppose it
favours the nobility, which neither knows nor cares for
commerce ; suppose it raises to the highest social grade
the most successful elements of the middle class. Will it
be possible to say with certainty what is cause and what
effect; or whether the lack of interest in capitalist
affairs was due to the ennobling of simple burghers or the
ennobling merely the outward recognition of an internal
atrophy ?

But when all is said, the advantages that the capitalist


REESE T AE, 279


spirit enjoyed at the hands of the state in all manner
of ways more than compensated for these obstacles,

In the first place, the state wished to help capitalism
forward, and so adopted a number of regulations in its
favour. Indeed, as we already know, the state was itself
one of the earliest of capitalist undertakers and invariably
continued to be one of the largest. In this way it set
an example to private enterprise; it showed the way in
all matters of capitalist organization, and it was educative
in questions of commercial morality. But it also exerted
an influence in the transvaluation of social values. By
itself engaging in business the state removed the prejudice
against “low callings’? which prevailed in the pre-
capitalist era ; it raised the arées sordide to the position
of being activities fit for gentlemen.

But greater still was the indirect influence of the state,
chiefly because of its particular economic policy. Let it
not be forgotten that capitalist interests in the era of
early capitalism were favoured tremendously by the
mercantile system. In accordance with the doctrines of
mercantilism the state, as it were, almost led the private
citizen by the hand in order to direct his activities into
the channels of capitalist undertaking, It pushed him
into capitalism; it held out good reasons for his
remaining there. This picture of physical force is
actually to be found in a cameralist writer of the 18th
century, who holds ‘“‘that the lower orders will not give
up their old ways until they are dragged by the nose and
the arms to their new advantages.”349 In the same
way Colbert’s efforts to stir up his lazy countrymen are
positively touching.35° As for England, behind ever so
many undertakings in the 16th and 17th centuries we
see the monarch as the direct moving force, for he was
financially interested in them. The Drakes and the
Raleighs were urged, in long interviews, to set out on


280 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


new expeditions. The idea that Raleigh should sail to
Guiana emanated from the impecunious James I,35! and
in the reign of his successor we find the King’s agents up
and down the country making profitable contracts with
industrial undertakers. 352

Nor must we leave unmentioned the system of privi-
leges by which the mercantile state favoured such
capitalist interests as already existed, nursed those that
were about to take root, and, planted new ones. The
real meaning of these state privileges (using the word
in its widest connotation) is best brought out in a letter
of Henry II of France, dated June 13, 1558, in which
he expresses the hope that his privileges and benevolence
may act as a spur to honest and industrious handicrafts-
men to undertake profitable enterprises.353 In every
case the underlying idea was the same—to stir up the
spirit of enterprise by the inducement of material or
other advantages. The privileges took different forms.
Sometimes they were monopolies, negative privileges as
it were, in that a monopoly for producing a particular
article was granted, or a monopoly of trade, or again a
monopoly in the means of communication. Sometimes
they meted out special commercial advantages to their
holders ; sometimes, too, they were direct bounties. In
his Dictionnaire Savary gives a list of some of the
inducements held out to spur on new undertakings :
you were made a peer, or you were naturalized, or you
were excused custom dues, or had a loan made to you
without interest, or you received a pension or a grant
of land. ‘All manner of inventions were assisted by
privileges and protection; the King’s treasury was on
the look-out for all those who had made any invention
in order to give them a reward.” What is this but state
assistance and support for the “projects” of which we
have already discoursed


THE STATE 281


Similarly, by the break-up of the mercantile system
and the introduction of economic liberty in the rgth
century, the state also cultivated the spirit of enterprise
—to a limited extent, it is true, seeing that it already
flourished at the time. More effective in the impetus
it gave to the capitalist spirit was the stress laid on
education in all its branches. We have already observed
how the establishment of educational institutions was to
be regarded as a sign that the capitalist spirit in one form
or another was in existence ; here it is our business to lay
stress on their importance as a nursery of that spirit.
From the arithmetic schools, founded in Florence as early
as the 14th century, to the commercial colleges of our
own day, the institutions which were established by public
bodies to spread the sort of knowledge useful to the
trader have all become centres where the capitalist spirit
throve. Did they not all teach the art of calculating and
the rules for carrying on commerce?

I am of opinion, however, that some of the effects
of state action which were hardly contemplated were of
more significance for the growth of capitalism than
those which the state of set purpose tried to achieve.
The very non-existence of the state (if I may put it so)
was in many cases of tremendous advantage to capitalism.
What I mean is that the peculiar conditions in a state,
which for a time were unfavourable to the rise of a great
political entity, formed a splendid environment for the
speedy growth and development of the capitalist spirit.
Take Switzerland, or Germany before 1870. The Swiss
and the Germans had no mighty state to back them up
and win markets for them; consequently, in their economic
activities they had to rely on themselves to a great degree.
They had to accommodate themselves to the needs of
customers ; if they wanted to capture trade they were
forced to do so by their skill in selling and the excellence


282 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


of their commodities. Hence their wits were sharpened
and their backs adjusted to any burden. All this meant
the development of the capitalist spirit, more especially
of its commercial elements. We have already seen some
special characteristics of the German bourgeois spirit,
clearly distinguishing it from the English, and one
reason for the difference will be found in the lack of
German unity, which prevented it from obtaining assured
colonial markets, and forced its merchants and captains
of industry to win respect abroad, to carve out for them-
selves “‘a place in the sun” without the help of a
navy.354

But if the “ non-existence” of the state was effective
in forwarding the capitalist spirit, much more so was its
existence. The state may be regarded as one of the
basic forms of enterprise, showing the way to the other
great capitalist undertakings in the organization of its
officials, in the extensiveness of its aim, and in the per-
sistence of its efforts. Organizing ability was thus
encouraged and developed.

Some branches of state activity influenced the growth
of the capitalist spirit in a special degree. The first and
foremost of these was the army. It may be said that the
rise of the professional military class—in the Middle Ages
the feudal army, in modern times the paid army—was one
of those social phenomena which had far-reaching results.
For what was its significance? Specialization had set in,
and the demand was no longer for a complete man,
struggling for his existence, no longer for a man who
possessed both military and economic capacities, but only
for half a man—that is to say, for one who devoted him-
self to military or to economic affairs. The result of
such differentiation was obvious. Those virtues which
we have termed “ middle-class’? had a better chance of
growth, and the trading spirit, freed from any admixture


THE SS TATE 283


of military elements, was able to develop apace. For an
effective illustration look at the Florentines. The
burghers of the famous Italian Republic as early as
the 13th century engaged hired soldiers for their
defence. How different would the Florentine commer-
cial spirit have been if the good citizens had had, like
German peasants, to bear arms themselves in defence
of hearth and home. Indeed, so keen an observer as
Alberti traces the conspicuous trading ability of his fellow-
citizens to the very fact that in his native town there was
no occasion to exercise the soldier’s craft. This being
the case, he avers, men sought for themselves honoured
positions in the state by accumulating gold, and they got
gold by trading.355

If the Florentines furnish one illustration of the general
statement, the Jews supply another. The Jews may be
taken as the most perfect type of a trading people. But
how did they become such? Surely no small reason was
that Fate for 2,000 years deprived them of any need of
cultivating warlike activities. The warlike natures among
them thus gradually disappeared.

The growth of modern armies has brought two forces
to the fore—discipline on the one hand, and organizing
talent on the other. The influence of standing armies
on the capitalist spirit, so far as these two forces are
concerned, is plain enough.35®

Look at the military virtues as they have grown up
since the 17th century. Are they not all essentially
those of capitalism? Nor must we forget that before
ever organization began to play its very important rdle
in modern capitalist undertakings, it was already a mighty
force in the management of armies. It is no accident,
therefore, that in the countries with a perfected military
system we find a great development of those capitalist
qualities that owe their existence to efficient military drill.


284 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Take Germany. To-day, when capitalist enterprise is
more and more extended, when it takes on more and
more the appearance of a disposition of mighty armies in
the field, it is only natural that Germans should profit by
their military training. Unprejudiced foreigners admit
the superiority of German capitalist undertakers in this
respect. Here, for instance, is the view of an Englishman
whose capacity for observation no one will deny. It 1s
no exaggeration to say, he writes, that military service
has an influence greater than any other on German
industry. Employers and employed have both been
through the training, they have both learned in the same
school that order and discipline are needful for any
organized -powers, be they military or industrial.357

Finally, biological qualities and historic destiny both
had an influence on the problem before us. Little did
the guiding spirits of the time think, when modern
states first began to have strong standing armies, that
one element in the population would come to the fore
as a result. I refer to the Jews. In my book on the
relation between the Jews and capitalism I have shown
in detail how this people, from the 17th century
onward, furnished the ruling princes with the necessary
money for carrying on wars, either by personal loans
or by acting as agents on the stock exchanges (to the
growth of which they contributed so much). Besides
this, the Jews became army contractors, whereby not
only was their wealth increased, but their social position
also improved. It is not too much to say, therefore,
that the growth of modern armies was responsible in
no small measure for the emancipation of the Jews,
and as the Jews were mightily concerned in extending
the capitalist spirit, the latter may thus indirectly be
traced, in this connection also, to the growth of standing
armies.


THE STATE 285


Next in importance to the military factor we must
consider the finances of the state in their influence on
the growth of capitalism. Once more the Jews are
the pivot. The princes of modern times were wise
enough to utilize for their needs the services of Jewish
financiers. The special treatment accorded to these men
resulted in increasing Jewish influence. Now, whatever
increased Jewish influence—and be this noted once for
all—that also extended the spirit of capitalism in its
highest form; whether it was through the increase of
Jewish undertakers or the influence of Christian under-
takers by the Jewish spirit, or, again, by the impregnation
of this spirit through the whole of economic life, or,
finally, by the survival of those fittest for the new com-
mercial enterprises.

The financial system of states was not without effects
in other directions too. In its earlier stages its very
forms contributed something to the growth of capitalism.
We have it on record that the financial methods of the
Italian republics are, in many respects, quite modern.
There is little doubt now but that commercial book-
keeping first came to be used in connection with the
finances of Genoa; and we may assume that the need
for exact statistical information must have arisen among
those who were responsible for the finances of this
thriving community. ‘A power such as that of Venice,
resting as it did on so complicated a foundation, its
activities and interests extending in very many directions,
can scarcely be conceived without a thorough survey of
the whole, without constant calculations as to strength
and burdens, increases and declines. We may regard
Venice, and Florence with it, as the cradle of modern
statistics.” 358 What influence a summary of social life
in terms of figures may have had, we can well imagine.
Calculations and qualitative manipulations, both factors


286 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


of great significance in modern capitalism, must certainly
have been cultivated.

In short, public finance furnished the first instance
of “applied housekeeping” on a large scale, just as the
modern state was the first great “undertaking.” In
both, therefore, capitalist ideas must have found a model.

As for the public debts, we have in them the first
instance of contracts on a large scale which affected larger
groups than the clan or the social class, and which
therefore looked to other moral forces for their recog-
nition than were to be found in primitive communities.
“Social”? sanctions had to be created ; all those forces
on which capitalist intercourse rests—commercial morality,
confidence and credit, acceptances in advance over a long
period of time with the intention of honouring them.
Nowhere did these forces show themselves so early,
nowhere was there as much opportunity for their exercise,
as in the arrangements for the public debts of rising
states and cities.

But the public indebtedness had other influences also
on the capitalist spirit. Speculation was early associated
with it; we need only recall the South Sea Bubble in
England or the John Law fiasco in France. These may
have been swindles ; nevertheless, they were not without
lessons for joint-stock enterprise in later times ; and both
would have been inconceivable without the peculiar and
extensive growth of national debts.

Side by side with the army and the finances of the
state we must place as the third great factor the state’s
ecclesiastical policy. Here once more we meet the Jews.
For in a large point of view Jewish emancipation is part
of ecclesiastical policy, and the importance of the Jews in
the development of capitalism we have already seen. But
in speaking of the ecclesiastical policy of modern states as
an influence on the speedy growth of the capitalist spirit,


THE STATE 287


I have something very different in view. I refer to the
creation by the state, chiefly through the institution of a
national church, of the conception of the heretic or non-
conformist as a social or political category. Do we not
find two sorts of citizens in modern states—full citizens
and semi-citizens, according to the religion they profess ?
The former belong to the national church and enjoy
full privileges of citizenship; the latter subscribe to
the doctrines of other churches and are subject to civil
disabilities. The Jews were “‘semi-citizens ” in this sense
pretty well everywhere down to the 18th century, and
in some countries even beyond that date. In Catholic
countries the Protestants, in Protestant countries the
Catholics, were in the same class. In Great Britain the
Presbyterians, the Quakers, and the rest were the non-
conformists ; in the Presbyterian New England states
those who professed High Church doctrines.

This sort of heresy, quite apart from its particular
tenets, must be looked upon as an abundant well-spring of
capitalism. The reason is clear: it brought economic
interests to the fore and gave commercial ability a special
chance. Is it not obvious that the dissenters, excluded as
they were from public life, could not but throw all their
energies into economic activities? Only from this source
could they hope to derive the means for winning for
themselves respected positions in the body politic. What
wonder, then, that in this “ excluded”’ class money was
valued more highly, other things being equal, than among
the rest of the population? For these people money was
the sole means to power.

On the other hand, it followed from their peculiar
position as dissenters that their economic activities were
hampered by all manner of difficulties. Hence there was
a tendency for their economic capacities to be highly
developed. For they could hope for commercial success


288 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


only from the most scrupulous conscientiousness, the most
careful calculations, and the utmost endeavours to meet
the needs of their customers. What says Benoit of the
Huguenots? ‘Persecuted and suspected as they were,
they were able to maintain their position only by wise
conduct and honesty.”

Now, in the first stages of capitalism, capitalist enter-
prise offered the greatest profits ; it held out the pro-
mise of wealth, and therefore of distinction. Conse-
quently, it was only to be expected that the dissenters
should throw themselves heart and soul into capitalist
undertakings, and accordingly, in those critical times, say
from the 16th to the 18th centuries, they were the fore-
most bankers, merchants, and manufacturers. In a word,
they dominated trade. Contemporary observers were not
blind to this tendency. The Spaniards asserted that
heresy was good for trade. And in England, this is what
was written by a man so gifted with insight as William
Petty :—

Moreover, it is to be observed that trade doth not (as some think)
best flourish under popular governments, but rather that trade is most
vigorously carried on, in every state and government, by the Heterodox
part of the same, and such as profess opinions different from what are
publicly established : (that is to say) in India, where the Mahometan
religion is authorized, there the Banians are the most considerable
merchants. In the Turkish Empire the Jews and Christians. At
Venice, Naples, Leghorn, Genoa, and Lisbon, Jews and non-Papist
merchant-strangers ; but to be short, in that part of Europe where the
Roman Catholic religion now hath or lately hath had establishment, there
three-quarters of the whole Trade is in the hands of such as have
separated from the Church, (that is to say) the inhabitants of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, as also those of the United Provinces, with
Denmark, Sweden, and Norway . . . do at this present time possess
three-quarters of the trade of the world. And even in France itself
the Huguenots are proportionately far the greater traders, . . . From
whence it follows that trade is not fixed to any species of religion as
such, but rather, as before hath been said, to the Heterodox part of the
whole.359


ULE AS TALE 289


Petty’s opinion was by no means an isolated one; we
meet with very many similar views as to the great signifi-
cance of the nonconformists in the development of
English commerce and industry. ‘‘ They (the noncon-
formists) are not excluded from the nobility and among
the gentry they are not a few; but none are of more im-
portance than they in the trading part of the people and
those that live by industry, upon whose hands the
business of the nation lies much.” 360

The facts certainly go to support all these writers.
Consider, for example, the economic history of France,
about which we have a mass of information in the
reports which the Intendants sent to the King after the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes.36! It would appear
that the greatest part of the capitalist industries and over-
sea trade of France were in the hands of the Reformers.
They owned the ironworks of Sedan, the paper-mills of
Auvergne and elsewhere, and the tanning establishments
in Touraine, which competed so hotly with English
tanning. In Normandy, Maine, and Brittany they had
the controlling influence in the linen-weaving factories ;
the silk industry of Tours and Lyons was under their
control, so was the woollen trade of Provence and the
lace-making of Paris. The wine trade of Guienne was
wholly theirs; in two provinces, de Brouage and
d’Oléron, a dozen families held the salt monopoly ; and
in Sancerre the Intendant reports that “their numbers,
their wealth, and their prestige are far superior to those
of the Catholics.” In foreign trade, likewise, they were
superior. They traded mostly with MHhlland and
England, and the Dutch and the English preferred to
trade with them because-—such is the opinion of Benoit—
they had more confidence in them than in the Catholics.
It was not otherwise in finance. We come across many
Reformers in France who are bankers; and where they

19


2900 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


received the necessary permission they became farmers
of taxes. No wonder Colbert, as is generally known,
was much opposed to the edicts which excluded them
from the administration of the finances.36

The question now presents itself, Are we not in error
in deducing the capitalist spirit from nonconformity ?
Did the nonconformists incline to capitalism because of
their nonconformity, or was it not rather because they
were dominated by the capitalist spirit that they became
nonconformists? Or, indeed, may it not be said that
possibly they were nonconformists and capitalists at the
same time because their blood inclined them to both?
May it not be said that the French Huguenots are
descendants of Germanic tribes, and thus tended to
capitalism and to a more unfettered religious attitude ?
It may be so. Nay, I am even inclined to the view
that probably nonconformity and capitalism are both
the expression of certain biological characteristics, and
that nonconformity may be traced to economic causes,
To prove the statement is obviously impossible. But
suppose the assumption is true; can there be any doubt
but that the social condition produced by nonconformity
must have accentuated tendencies already in existence ?
If certain capitalist capacities are exercised in this way,
is there not a speedier and more determined survival
of the capitalistically fit? And if such be the case,
are we not justified in the view that in every case
nonconformity is no insignificant source of the capitalist
spirit ?

We now proceed a step further. Closely bound up
with religious, or, if you will, with political heresy is
another social phenomenon, which has exercised even
greater influence on the growth of the capitalist spirit
than heresy itself. I mean the migrations from one land


THE STATE 201


to another, which were due to religious or political
persecutions in the centuries of the early capitalist period.
The heretics became emigrants.

But migrations resulted from causes other than reli-
gious or political; and therefore the question becomes
a large one—so large that it requires a chapter to itself.


CHAPTER XXIII
MIGRATIONS


I can imagine it to be of exceeding great interest to write
the history of mankind from the point of view of the
stranger and his influence on the trend of events. From
the earliest dawn of history we may observe how commu-
nities developed in special directions, no less in important
than in insignificant things, because of influences from
without. Be it religion or technical inventions, good
form in conduct or fashions in dress, political revolutions
or stock-exchange machinery, the impetus always, or at
least in many cases, came from strangers, It is not
surprising, therefore, that in the history of the intellectual
and religious growth of the bourgeois the stranger should
play no small part. Throughout the whole of the Middle
Ages in Europe, and to a large extent in the centuries
that followed, families left their homes to set up their
hearth anew in other lands. The wanderers were, in the
majority of cases, economic agents with a strongly marked
tendency towards capitalism, and they originated capitalist
methods and cultivated them. Accordingly, it will be
helpful to trace the interaction of migrations and the
history of the capitalist spirit.

First, as to the facts themselves.3©3 Two sorts of migra-
tions may be distinguished, those of single individuals and
those of groups. In the first category must be placed the


292


MIGRATIONS 293


removal, of their own free will, of a family, or it may
even be of a few families, from one district or country to
another. Such cases were universal. But we are chiefly
concerned with those instances in which the capitalist
spirit manifested itself, as we must assume it did where
the immigrants were acquainted with a more complex
economic system or were the founders of new industries.
Take as an instance the Lombards and other Italian
merchants, who in the early Middle Ages carried on
business in England, France, and elsewhere. Or, recall
how in the Middle Ages many an industry, more especially
silk-weaving, that was established in any district was intro-
duced by foreigners, and very often on a capitalist basis.
‘** A new phase in the development of the Venetian silk
industry began with the arrival of traders and silk-workers
from Lucca, whereby the industry reached its zenith.
The commercial element came more and more to the
fore ; the merchants became the organizers of production,
providing the master craftsman with raw materials which
he worked up.” So we read in Broglio d’Ajano.364 We
are told a similar tale about the silk industry in Genoa,
which received an enormous impetus when the Perolerii
began to employ craftsmen from Lucca.365 In 1341
what was probably the first factory for silk manufacture
was erected by one Bolognino di Barghesano, of Lucca.366
Even in Lyons tradition asserts that Italians introduced
the making of silk, and when in the 16th century the
industry was placed on a capitalist basis, the initiative
thereto came once more from aliens.37 It was the same
in Switzerland, where the silk industry was introduced by
the Pelligari in 1685.36 In Austria likewise we hear
the same tale.369

Silk-making in these instances is but one example ;
there were very many others. Here one industry was
introduced, there another ; here it was by Frenchmen or


294 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Germans, there by Italians or Dutchmen. And always
the new establishments came at the moment when the
industries in question were about to become capitalistic in
their organization.37°

Individual migrations, then, were not without influence
on the economic development of society. But much
more powerful was the effect of the wanderings of large
groups from one land toanother. From the 16th century
onwards migrations of this sort may be distinguished
under three heads : (1) Jewish migrations, (2) the migra-
tion of persecuted Christians, more especially of Protes-
tants, and (3) the colonizing movement, particularly the
settlement in America.

Let us take a brief survey of the facts necessary for the
understanding of the importance of the trend of events.


1. Jewish Micrations.37!


The Jews have been a wandering race ever since the
Babylonian exile. But so far as our problem is concerned,
we need only recall their movements from about the end
of the 15th century, when some 300,000 Spanish Jews
migrated to Navarre, France, Portugal, and the Orient.
A goodly number, too, made for England, Holland, and
the German cities of Frankfort and Hamburg—and that
when Jews were being expelled from Italian towns and
those of Southern Germany. Again, from the time of the
Cossack massacres in the 17th century, the Jews began to
leave Poland, whither they had foregathered from all
parts throughout the Middle Ages. This dispersion of
Russo-Polish Jews continued, in an almost organized
fashion, until at the end of the 19th century the volcano
belched forth fresh masses, hundreds of thousands of
them, who sought a haven of refuge in the lands of the
New World, Possibly the last movement may have


MIGRATIONS 295


affected millions of Jews ; in East Prussia alone, between
1880 and 1905, more than 70,000 left their homes.

We have already had occasion to refer to the vast
importance of the Jews in the story of modern capitalism,
and to their enormous influence on the shaping of the
capitalist spirit. Those who desire further information
on the subject are recommended to turn to my book on
The Fews and Modern Capitalism.


2. THe Micration oF PersecuTED CHRISTIANS,
MORE ESPECIALLY PROTESTANTS.372


From the period of the Reformation these migrations
were generally concerned with large masses of people.
Pretty well all countries have given and received in the
process ; but it is generally agreed that France lost most,
and that other lands admitted more French immigrants
than the emigrants they lost. A statistical survey is im-
possible. Nevertheless, it may be asserted that hundreds
of thousands changed their place of abode in Europe because
they would not change their faith. One estimate 373
of the number of Protestants who left France after the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes (1685) is between
250,000 and 300,000 (the total French Protestants at the
time being about one million souls). Besides, it must be
remembered that the migrations had commenced as early
as the 16th century, and, furthermore, that France was
not the only country from which an exodus took place.
But, after all, whether a few hundred thousand people
more or less were concerned in the movement is of no
great consequence; our business is to see clearly the
significance of these migrations for economic life. This
is no difficult task if we direct our attention to the
activities of the newcomers in the lands where they
settled. What do we find? Everywhere the immigrants


f
206 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


were foremost in building up the capitalist fabric ; more
especially, the growth of banking and of industries in all
lands owes much to them. To demonstrate this in detail
would be to write the economic history of the three
centuries from the 16th to the 18th. But the salient
points may with advantage be referred to ; they will help
the reader to appreciate in some measure how much
modern capitalism owes to the refugees fleeing from
religious persecution.

Let us turn to Germany, where large numbers of
Austrians, Frenchmen, and Scotchmen found a new home.
Of these, the Scotch and the French are the important
factors in the growth of capitalism. The former came in
the 16th and 17th centuries to East Prussia and Posen,
where, by the way, among others, the forefathers of
Immanuel Kant (Cant) settled. Whether Catholics or
Protestants, they had left their native land for their faith’s
sake, and for the most part were wealthy and intelligent,
and rather looked upon as dangerous competitors.374 But
they pushed more inland too. Towards the end of the
16th century there were Scotch settlements in Cracow,
Bromberg, and Posen, and everywhere they were among
the most respected traders. When the 17th century set
in, more than half of the merchants in Posen were Scotch-
men ; in 1713, eight of them, out of a total of 36, were
members of the Merchant Gild there. What they were
thought of in Posen is evident from a petition, bearing
date 11 August, 1795, of the Posen merchants to the
Marquis of Hoym.375 ‘‘ The city of Posen,” they say,
‘is indebted for its ancient prestige and the magnitude of
its commerce to those of its inhabitants who had emigrated
from Scotland.”

Refugees from the Palatinate and Holland—they were
Reformers and Mennonites—established the silk industry
of Crefeld, which from its earliest beginnings was


MIGRATIONS 207


capitalistically organized. Members of the refugee family
of von der Leyen, who came to Germany in 1688, may
be regarded as its founders; in 1768 the Crefeld house
of von der Leyen Brothers employed 2,800  silk-
weavers.376 Dutchmen also—and Jews—were the fore-
most bankers in Frankfort on the Main.

As for the French immigrants, their influence on
German economic life in the 17th and 18th centuries is
well known. Many an industry and many a branch
of commerce owes its foundation to their activities.
What were their main settlements? 377 In the Duchy
of Saxony, Frankfort, Hamburg, Brunswick, Cassel, and,
most important of all, Brandenburg and Prussia generally.
It is estimated 378 that under Frederick William I and,
Frederick III no less than 25,000 Frenchmen were
received into Prussia, of whom 10,000 came to Berlin.
Everywhere they introduced the domestic system of
industry, more particularly in the silk and wool industries
of Halle, Berlin, and Magdeburg. In the last-named
cities in 1687 André Valentin, of Nimes, and Pierre
Claparéde, of Montpellier, employed 100 weavers and
400 female spinners. Nor were these capitalistically
organized industries the only ones which were introduced
by the French. The making of stockings and of hats
(in 1782 the first hat factory, with 37 employees, was
opened in Berlin by a Frenchman) ; 379 leather goods
and gloves; paper and playing cards; linoleum and
mirrors,38° are some other manufactures of French
origin.381 Indeed, in the year 1808, of the 386 members
of the Drapers and Mercers’ Gild in Berlin, no less than
81 had French names. 382

It is the same story in Holland. Ever since the revolt
of the seven provinces Holland became a haven of refuge
for all manner of folk. La Grande Arche des fugitifs
Bayle calls it,383 and the religious motive was by no


2098 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


means decisive. The Low Countries offered a welcome
to all who could be of commercial advantage to them ;
Heathens, Jews and Christians, Catholics and Protestants,
all were alike received.384 Thirty thousand Englishmen
migrated to Holland in the reign of Mary Tudor ;
numerous Germans arrived in the time of the Thirty
Years War; Walloons, Flemings and Brabanters fled
thither from the Spanish Netherlands in the 16th century ;
the Jews, as we have already seen, came even earlier still
—on their expulsion from Spain ; and lastly, in the 17th
century, large masses of French Protestants, to the
number probably of between 55,000 and 75,000. 385
The newcomers, here as elsewhere, contributed no
small part to the general economic revival which took
place; in other words, to the rise and growth of capitalism.
Jewish influence on the stock exchange and on speculation
receives detailed treatment in my book, The Fews and
Modern Capitalism; the Amsterdam Stock Exchange
was almost completely dominated by Jews in the 17th
and 18th centuries.386 But the other immigrants also
were very soon to the fore in trade and industry. The
French more especially ; among them may be mentioned
Balthazar de Moncheron, “genial and energetic,” who
founded trading companies, and his brother Melchior,
a merchant of great standing.387 It was as the fathers of
capitalist industries that the French was best known.
One 17th-century writer is of opinion that more than
twenty different branches of industry were introduced
into Holland by French refugees.388 And what of the
rise of Amsterdam? Another contemporary writer 389
ascribes it to the influence of the aliens. Leiden and
Haarlem likewise profited by their settlements. 39° The
principal new industries, here as elsewhere, were silk,
hat-making, the manufacture of paper, and printing,39!
That the tendency to capitalist organization was always


MIGRATIONS 299


due to the influence of foreigners is clear enough. Until
the 17th century the old medieval handicraft system
existed in full vigour. But in the second half of that
century the towns entered into contracts with foreigners
for the erection of factories. In 1666, for example, the
city fathers of Haarlem entered into agreement with an
Englishman that he should start a mirror factory there ;
and in 1678 they arranged with J. Becher for a silk-
weaving establishment.392

That alien immigration had much to do with the
growth of capitalism in England is less well known ; but
the fact is none the less true. Consider the influence
on English economic life of the Italians who swarmed
in this country in the 14th century. No less an authority
than Cunningham is of opinion that the earliest organiza-
tions of capitalists were modelled on Italian originals.393
Consider further the deep furrows marked on English
economic development by the Dutch and French im-
migrants in the 16th and 17th centuries. The new-
comers must have been pretty numerous. In 1560 the
Spanish ambassador reported that 10,000 Flemish
refugees had found shelter in England; for 1563 the
number he gives is 30,000. Possibly he was exaggerat-
ing; but that he was not very far from the actual state
of the case is proved by official statistics. In 1568 the
Lord Mayor of London’s census of aliens in the capital
showed a total of 6,704, of whom 5,225 were from the
Low Countries. In 1571 there were 32,925 Dutchmen
and Walloons in Norwich; in 1587 they formed the
larger part of the population there—4,679.394 Indeed,
some authorities declare that the history of English in-
dustry commences with these Dutchmen. But numerous
as these were, the total of the French settlers is said to
have been even greater. Eighty thousand is the estimate,
of whom about half, it is alleged, must have continued


300 THE QUINTESSENCE OF | CAPITALISM


their journey to America. But those who remained in
England were the wealthier sort, including the rich
Huguenots.395

The capacity of the new settlers for capitalist organiza-
tion began to be exercised in all directions in industry and
commerce, and much of their activity was excellent
pioneer work. What trades were affected? Again it
was silk, lace-making also; carpet-weaving and _ hat-
making. Before this hats were imported from Flanders ;
but already in 1552 immigrants established a factory for
felt and “thrummed” hats. A German, Spillmann by
name, introduced the making of paper in 1598; we learn
from one of Thomas Churchyard’s poems that he
employed 600 workpeople. Glass-making is another
instance. In 1566 a patent for twenty-one years was
granted to Anthony Been and John Care, both Dutchmen,
for the erecting of a glass-blowing factory “in order to
make glass of the French, Dutch, and Burgundian sort.”
In 1670 Venetians erected a large plate-glass factory.
Wire-drawing is said to have been introduced by Dutch-
men. In 1577 English dyers were taught the use of
indigo dyes by Pero Vaz Devora, a Portuguese; in the
17th century a Fleming, Kepler by name, introduced the
famous scarlet dye; Bauer, another Fleming, perfected
wool-dyeing in 1667. And so in numerous other instances.
Alien immigrants were responsible for calico-printing
(1690), the making of fine cambrics, the cotton industry,
clocks (Dutch clocks) ; the water supply of London was
planned by an Italian, Genelli ; a company of German
undertakers carried on copper-mining ; Sheffield cutlery
first became famous through Flemish craftsmen. The
list might be considerably lengthened ; but enough has
been mentioned.3%


MIGRATIONS 301


3. Cotonizinc MoveMENTS, PARTICULARLY THE
SETTLEMENTS IN AMERICA.


The stream of emigration from Europe to America
during the last two centuries far surpasses in magnitude
and extent the migrations we have just considered. With
the close of the 18th century some hundreds of thousands
at least must already have left Europe for ever to seek
their fortunes in the New World; of Germans alone
there were probably between 80,000 and 100,000. But
the stream reached its maximum volume from the ’thirties
of the last century onward. Thus, from 1820 to 1870
the statistics of American immigration show a total of
7,553,865 persons. Great Britain and Germany sent
some two-thirds of these (3,857,850 and 2,368,483
respectively) ; France comes next (with 245,812); then
Sweden and Norway (153,928), followed by China
(109,502), and other countries. But in the subsequent
decades the total was greater still; nearly 12 million
immigrants arrived in the United States between 1871
and 1900. We may say, therefore, that in the 1gth
century Europe sent America some 20 millions of
people.397_ The origin of the mass of the wanderers in
the last generation differed considerably from what it
was in the past. Britains and Germans are no longer the
mainstay of the arrivals, but Italians, Slavs, and Jews.
This latest migratory stream, however, does not affect
the problem we are considering.

It remains for us to prove that the “spirit” of the
inhabitants of the New World (and we may regard them
as typical of all colonial countries) is capitalist in its
essence. That the Americans are filled with the most
perfect expression of that spirit we already know. We
know, too, that in its present aspect this spirit dominated
the American in his economic activities at a time when


302 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Europe was acquainted with only its earlier forms. Read
the reports of competent observers of the third, fourth,
and fifth decades of the 19th century—their name is
legion 398—and you will find a picture of the typical
American of those days little different from that of his
descendants of to-day. Greed of gain, devotion to work
to a degree which might even be regarded as folly, the
chase of profit irrespective of all other considerations,
the highest degree of economic rationalism ; in short, the
characteristic features of a highly developed capitalist
system—you will find them all in the United States
before the Civil War.

We come, then, to the general question. Is it not a
fact that the “‘ stranger,” the immigrant, was possessed of
a specially developed capitalist spirit, and this quite apart
from his environment, and, to a lesser degree, his religion
or his nationality ? We see it in the old states of Europe
no less than in the new settlements beyond ; in Jews and
Gentiles alike ; in Protestants and Catholics (the French
in Louisiana were, by the middle of the 19th century, not
a whit behind the Anglo-Saxons of the New England
states in this respect).399 The assumption therefore
forces itself upon us that this particular social condition
—migration or change of habitat—was responsible for
the unfolding of the capitalist spirit. Let us attempt
to show how.

What is it that leads to emigration? It seems to me
that the answer to this question will throw much light on
the influence of migrations. In the first place, every one
of these movements of the population represents a process
of selection. The capitalist variants emigrate—that is to
say, those who are already fully developed, in the capitalist
sense, or those who possess the necessary qualities for
development. In other words, those who resolved to
leave home—particularly in early times, when to change


MIGRATIONS 303


your abode was no easy matter, to say nothing of
planting new colonies—those who resolved to leave
home must have been the most active, the strongest-
willed, the most enterprising, the coolest, the most
calculating, the least sentimental natures ; and this quite
apart from the particular consideration that forced
them to emigrate, whether religious, political, or
merely economic. Oppression at home, as we have
already seen, was the best school of capitalist training.
But even among those who were oppressed there was a
process of selection. Those migrated who would no
longer by adaptation and abject submission keep their
heads above water in their own country. The wanderers
therefore represented the strongest among the oppressed ;
for not all the oppressed would decide to leave home.
The great majority of the Huguenots—four-fifths of
them, it is said—remained in France ; and very many
Jews continued to live in Russian Poland for centuries
before beginning to move.

It may be, too, that, regarded as a complete whole,
those races that exhibited capitalist variants in a high
degree were essentially of a wandering disposition. Think
of the Etruscans (that is, the Lombards), the Jews, and
the Scotch, other Germanic races from whom the French
Huguenots were sprung, the Alemanni (that is, the Swiss),
and others. ‘The mere dispersion of these gifted popular
groups was a powerful influence for the extensive develop-
ment of the capitalist spirit, for each of them acted like
yeast in the dough. Obversely, when any country lost
these capitalistically gifted individuals it suffered of neces-
sity an economic decline. Think of Spain or France.

But what we want to discover most of all is the
particular reason why a sojourn in a new land should
tend to broaden and intensify the capitalist spirit.

If we are content to find it in a single cause it would


304 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


be the breach with all old ways of life and all old social
relationships. Indeed, the psychology of the stranger in
a new land may easily be explained by reference to this
one supreme fact. His clan, his country, his people, his
state, no matter how deeply he was rooted in them, have
now ceased to be realities for him. His first aim is to
make profit. How could it be otherwise? There is
nothing else open to him. In the old country he was
excluded from playing his part in public life; in the
colony of his choice there is no public life to speak of.
Neither can he devote himself to a life of comfortable,
slothful ease ; the new lands have little comfort. Nor is
the newcomer moved by sentiment. His environment
means nothing to him. At best he regards it as a means
to an end—to make a living. All this must surely be of
great consequence for the rise of a mental outlook that
cares only for gain; and who will deny that colonial
activity generates it? ‘Our rivulets and streams turn
mill wheels and bring rafts into the valleys, as they do in
Scotland. But not one ballad, not a single song reminds
us that on their banks men and women live who experi-
ence the happiness of love and the pangs of separation ;
that under each roof in the valleys life’s joys and sorrows
come and go.’ 49° This plaint of an American of the old
days expresses my meaning ; it has been noted again and
again, particularly by those who visited America at the
beginning of the 19th century. The only relationship
between the Yankee and his environment is one of
practical usefulness. The soil, as one of them says, is not
regarded as “the mother of men, the hearth of the Gods,
the abiding resting-place of the past generations, but only
as a means to get rich,” There is nothing of “ the poetry
of the place” anywhere to check commercial devastations.
The spire of his village is for the American like any
other spire; in his eyes the newest and most gaudily


MIGRATIONS 305


painted is the most beautiful. A waterfall for him
merely represents so much motive power. ‘“ What a
mighty volume of water!” is, as we are assured, the
usual cry of an American on seeing Niagara for the first
time, and his highest praise of it is that it surpasses all
other waterfalls in the world in its horse-power.

Nor has the immigrant or colonial settler a sense of
the present or the past. He has only a future. Before
long the possession of money becomes his one aim and
ambition, for it is clear to him that by its means alone
will he be able to shape that future. But how can he
amass money? Surely by enterprise. His being where
he is proves that he has capacities, that he can take risks ;
is it remarkable, then, that sooner or later his unbridled
acquisitiveness will turn him into a restless capitalist
undertaker ? Here again we have cause and effect. He
undervalues the present; he overvalues the future.
Hence his activities are such as they are. Is it too much
to say that even to-day American civilization has some-
thing of the unfinished about it, something that seems
as yet to be in the making, something that turns from
the present to the future?

Another characteristic of the newcomer everywhere
is that there are no bounds to his enterprise. He is
not held in check by personal considerations ; in all
his dealings he comes into contact only with strangers like
himself. As we have already had occasion to point out,
the first profitable trade was carried on with strangers ;
your own kith and kin received assistance from you.
You lent out money at interest only to the stranger, as
Antonio remarked to Shylock, for from the stranger you
could demand more than you lent.

Nor is the stranger held in check by considerations
other than personal ones. He has no traditions to respect ;
he is not bound by the policy of an old business. He

20


306 THE QUINTESSENCE’ OF CAFITALISK


begins with a clean slate; he has no local connections
that bind him to any one spot. Is not every locality
in a new country as good as every other? You therefore
decide upon the one that promises most profit. As
Roscher says, a man who has risked his all and left his
home to cross the ocean in search of his fortune will not
be likely to shrink from a small speculation if this means
a change of abode. A little travelling more or less can
make no difference.

So it comes about that the feverish searching after
novelties manifested itself in the American character
quite early. “If to live means constant movement and
the coming and going of thoughts and feelings in quick
succession, then the people here live a hundred lives.
All is circulation, movement, and vibrating life. If one
attempt fails another follows on its heels, and before
ever one undertaking has been completed the next has
already been entered upon” (Chevalier), The enter-
prising impulse leads to speculation ; and here again early
observers have noticed the national trait. ‘‘ Everybody
speculates and no commodity escapes from the speculating
rage. It is not tulip speculation this time, but speculations
in cottons, real estate, banks, and railways.”

One characteristic of the stranger’s activity, be he a
settler in a new or an old land, follows of necessity.
I refer to the determination to apply the utmost rational
effort in the field of economic and technical activity.
The stranger must carry through plans with success
because of necessity, or because he cannot withstand
the desire to secure his future. On the other hand,
he is able to do it more easily than other folk because
he is not hampered by tradition. This explains clearly
enough why alien immigrants, as we have seen, furthered
commercial and industrial progress wherever they came.
Similarly we may thus account for the well-known fact


MIGRATIONS 307


that nowhere are technical inventions so plentiful as in
America, that railway construction and the making of
machinery proceed much more rapidly there than any-
where else in the world. It all comes from the peculiar
conditions of the problem, conditions that have been
termed colonial—great distances, dear labour, and the
will to progress. The state of mind that will have, nay,
must have progress is that of the stranger, untrammelled
by the past and gazing towards the future.


Yet results such as these are not achieved by strangers
merely because they happen to be strangers. Place a
negro in a new environment ; will he build railways and
invent labour-saving machines? Hardly. There must
be a certain fitness; it must be in the blood. In short,
other forces beside that of being merely a stranger in a
strange land are bound to co-operate before the total
result can be fully accounted for. There must be a
process of selection, making the best types available, and
the ethical and moral factor, too, counts for much.
Nevertheless, the migrations themselves were a very
powerful element in the growth of capitalism. The
others we shall study in the next chapter.


CHAPTER XXIV
THE PRECIOUS METALS AND THEIR DISCOVERY


AN increase in the gold supply is a necessary condition
for the development of the capitalist spirit ; at the same
time it is also a direct agent in the process.

1. You must have a minimum of metallic currency
before the capitalist spirit can appear. In other words, a
money economy is the environment in which capitalism
first shows its head. When a money economy becomes
general, gold gradually obtains its all-embracing influence,
and when it reaches this stage, gold is highly valued.
Once this comes about, the result is, as we have already
seen, to turn greed of gold into desire for money, and to
place all economic activities on a new basis—that of gain.
In the history of Europe, anyhow in the history of cer-
tain countries (Italy, for instance), the absolute supremacy
of gold was undoubtedly established by about the middle
of the 14th century. We can thus understand why it was
that money-making became the passion we have shown it
to be (cf. p. 34).

A remarkable piece of evidence for those days is to be
found in a fine passage in one of Petrarch’s letters. I
shall quote a translation of it here as additional testimony
to what has already been said, first because it is probably
the best that has ever been written about the power of


gold, and secondly, because to my knowledge no economic
308


THE. PRECIOUS. METALS 309


historian appears to have observed the passage. Here
it is :—


We, dear friend, now have everything made of gold—lances and
shields, chains and coronets ; gold binds and holds us ; gold makes us
rich or poor, happy or miserable. Gold enslaves the free and frees the
slaves : it acquits evildoers and punishes the innocent ; it gives speech
to the dumb and makes the eloquent speechless. . . . It turns slaves
into princes, and princes into slaves; makes brave men cowards
and gives the coward self-reliance ; arms the defenceless and disarms
the warrior ; tames bold leaders and crushes whole peoples down;
creates strong armies and wages long wars in a few hours’ space ; dic-
tates and maintains peace ; dries up rivers and surveys countries ; con-
nects oceans and removes mountains; throws open the entrance to
cloisters ; attacks cities; captures fortresses and destroys stout
ramparts. As Cicero hath it, no place is so strong but that an ass laden
with gold will find a way in. Gold forges bonds of friendship; brings
partnerships about; even makes honourable marriages. You ask how?
By making the noble-hearted, the powerful, the learned, the hand-
some, and—it may surprise you to hear it—even the saintly its masters.
So it comes to pass that those who are rich are called good citizens and
their word is trusted. But there is little confidence in the poor, see-
ing that they have no money. There is much truth in the verses of
the satirist who said, “The good repute you may command is measured
by your cash in hand.” Finally—I say so unwillingly, but truth compels
me—gold is not merely powerful, it is almost all-powerful, and every-
thing under the heavens above is subject to its domination. Piety and
chastity and faith all serve gold ; in short, all virtue and all renown
recognize it as their overlord. Why, marry, even over our immortal
souls the glittering metal exercises sway. Gold holds Kings and
Popes in bond ; it appeases mortals, and, as some assert, the Gods also.
Nothing withstands its power ; nothing is beyond its reach.4


Now, a money economy accustoms people to look at
the world in a purely quantitative way. When the habit
of applying money as a canon or rule for all things has
grown for years and centuries, the natural attitude of
mind which regards the inherent and qualitative differ-
ences in things, dies out. Arithmetical valuations—
weight, mass, etc.—come to be taken as a matter of course


310 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


in everyday life. A money economy, therefore, is in
reality the preparatory school of the capitalist spirit ;
therein the minds of men were trained for a capitalist
view of the universe.

The universal adoption of money (in the form of
metals, and mostly of precious metals) gave an impetus
to that factor in the capitalist spirit which we have
termed calculation. In the independent family economy,
or even in the social system a stage more advanced,
to calculate was uncommonly difficult, if not altogether
impossible. Before you can reckon you must have
numbers, and you cannot have numbers before you have
some sort of size or quantity. It is only when you can
express values in terms of money that you may speak
of measurable quantities.

Furthermore, without a money economy the modern
state would have been inconceivable; and how the
modern state has advanced the capitalist spirit we have
already seen. Without a money economy there would
have been no St. Antonine of Florence. And so on,
ad infinitum. Without a money economy there would,
in a word, have been no capitalism, that is, no sphere of
influence for the capitalist spirit.

It must not be forgotten that a money economy was
conditioned by, and its extension dependent on, a
sufficient supply of the commodity from which money
is made being available. In practice this meant a
sufficient quantity of the precious metals.

2. An increase in the quantity of money in circulation
usually accompanies increased private possessions ; that is
to say, large amounts of money tend to accumulate in
certain spots. Asa result, the expansion of the capitalist
spirit receives an impetus. For increased private posses-
sions heighten the desire for money, and the desire for —
money is the mother of the capitalist spirit.


JHE PRECIOUS METALS 311


It would seem to be an innate characteristic of the
human soul that the more we possess the more we desire.
At all times and among all peoples has the tendency been
observed. Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit
[As money increases the love of money increases with it],
says Juvenal (Saures 14), and Crescentem sequitur cura
pecuniam matorumque fames {Increase of wealth increases
love of money and the desire for more] are the words
of Horace (Lib. 3, c. 16). Or, as Montaigne puts it,
Crest plutot Pabondance qui produit 1’ avarice [More often
than not superfluity brings forth greed]. But have we
not all seen the same thing in our everyday life? And
does not history bear witness to its truth? Where in the
Middle Ages do we first find greed of gold and the chase
of profits ? Among those who were the first to accumulate
large quantities of money—the clergy and the Jews.

This simple psychological phenomenon certainly lays
bare one of the roots of that endless profit-hunting which
characterizes modern economic activities. We will note
others in due course.

Now, observe that it is not merely our own possessions
that stir up in our hearts the desire for more. The sight
of other people’s money, the very thought of large
quantities of cash, may have exactly the same result.
When men brood on these things it makes them mad ;
they develop that mentally excited state which, as we
have already observed, is a striking feature of all great
speculative periods. We see the glitter of the yellow
metal, we hear its clink, and it whips up our blood to
madness, confuses our senses, fills us with a wild longing
to possess as much as possible of it ourselves. Read Zola’s
L’ Argent and you will see there the picture of it all, with
the “ music of money” that is heard through all business,
that music that is “like the voice of the elves in


fairyland.”


3r2 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


The influence on the soul of the conception of large
masses of gold is partially effected by pure sensual
impressions, We are bewitched through our eyes and
our ears. Sometimes, however, the same end is achieved
by such abstractions as huge figures; for example,
tremendous profits, enormous wealth, an extraordinarily
large turnover, and the like. In short, exhibit large sums
of money anywhere and our pulses beat more quickly.

3. Closely akin to this effect is another, which is like-
wise due to the large accumulation of gold in any land.
I refer to speculation—the offspring of the mad union
between the greed of gold and the spirit of enterprise.
An increase in the different kinds of money may facilitate
speculation in diverse ways. To begin with, we know
that the mere existence of large supplies of the precious
metals in any country intensifies the already existing
propensities of capitalist undertakers. Colbert must have
had some sort of vague idea of this when he wrote,
“* When money is in the land, there is a universal wish to
profit by it, whereby it is set in motion.” 4°2 Or it may
call forth the desire in capitalist undertakers themselves
to participate in gold production. That was certainly
the result in Spain and Portugal, the two nations con-
cerned when America was discovered. A _ reliable
authority on the subject tells us that “about that time
(1530) innumerable offers of colonial enterprises were
made to the India Council, for, once more rumours were
current of the discovery of another gold-bearing reef in
the heart of South America, and all the adventurous
spirits were wildly excited in consequence.” 4°3

These results were important enough, but I want to
lay stress on another. Increase the money in any country,
and indirectly you produce a period of expanding trade
and a general boom. Europe passed through such an
epoch of prosperity for the first time towards the end of


THE PRECIOUS METALS 313


the 17th and the beginning of the 18th centuries.
There have been others since.

The results of that first trade-boom—we may call it
the age of speculation or of company promotion—I have
already tried to describe in an earlier chapter. I
attempted more especially to demonstrate how at that
time a new aspect of the capitalist spirit manifested itself
in speculation, since then a necessarily component part
of capitalism. Here I am anxious to point out that the
mania for speculation and company promotion, which was
a direct result of the rapid and immense accumulation
of bullion, appeared in France and England, the two
countries most concerned.

France in the 17th century was filled with silver
and gold by reason of its foreign trade. We have
no reliable statistics for the extent of this trade, but
indications are available of its immensity. Between 1716
and 1720, the period be it noted of the greatest bubbles
and swindles, France exported 30 million francs’ worth
of goods more than it imported.4°4 The lion’s share of
available cash was due to Spanish-American trade, and the
surplus from this quarter was utilized in paying debts
to other countries. When the French East India Com-
pany was criticized for taking money out of the land,
Seignelay 4°5 defended its action by informing the King
that the Indian imports were paid for in Spanish silver.
Many ships there were that carried more than 300
million francs on board. ‘Tiepolo,4°° the Venetian
ambassador, bears testimony to the great profitableness
of the Spanish-American trade, and English writers
calculated that from this source alone France obtained
some hundreds of millions, and so would be enabled to
continue the war. Indeed, the weightiest criticism of the
Whigs by the Tories was that they had done nothing to


undermine that trade.4°7


314 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Another source whence money flowed into France
was Holland. In the 17th century Holland simply
abounded in ready cash. In 1684, for instance, money
was so plentiful that the city of Amsterdam reduced the
rate of interest on its loans from 34 to 3 per cent.4°
For the large supplies of cash Holland was indebted to
the French refugees,4°9 and, doubtless, also to the Jews.
But the trade with Spain, as all authorities agree, 41° must
have produced by far the largest portion.

From Holland France drew a good deal of money
all through the period in which Franco-Dutch trade
continued. In 1658 French exports to Holland were
valued at 72 million francs, of which 52 millions were
for manufactured articles.411 These goods were paid
for mostly in cash; indeed, it was calculated that in
those times France received from Holland more than
30 million gulden annually.412

But the sums of money that flowed into England
towards the end of the 17th and the beginning of
the 18th centuries must have been larger still. They
came from three sources. The French immigrants
brought their fortunes with them, and if those who
settled in Holland were rich, those who came here were
richer.4!13 Then there were the Jews, who were likewise
wealthy. Some had come from Portugal, in the suite
of Catherine of Braganza; others from Holland with
William of Orange.414_ Thirdly, English export trade was
so far above the import trade that in the first decades
of the 18th century it yielded an annual surplus of
between two and three millions.415 Four tributaries fed
this stream. The Dutch trade was one.4!6 The second
was the trade with Spain. In the 17th century
Englishmen had managed to obtain a number of com-
mercial privileges in Spain;4!7 and in the Assiento
Treaty of the Utrecht settlement England reserved the


THE PRECIOUS METALS 315


right of sending to Spanish America a ship of 500 tons
(later 650 tons) of English goods to compete freely at
the fairs of Porto Bello and Vera Cruz.418 The third
channel of commerce was with Portugal. By the middle
of the 17th century, when the wave of prosperity
commenced in Portugal, England entered into close
relations with that country. In 1642 a commercial
treaty was signed which gave the English a more favoured
position than the Dutch in trading with Portuguese
Colonies. Then came Charles II’s marriage with Catherine
of Braganza; and by the Methuen Treaty, concluded
in 1703, no less a sum than 50,000 pounds sterling was
said to flow every week from Portugal into England.419
The figure is probably not too high, for a Portuguese
authority is of opinion that in the first year of the
treaty England exported foods to Portugal to the value
of 13 million crusados (1 crusados equals about two shill-
ings).42° Finally there was the stream of commerce with
Brazil, whither a large part of the exports from England
to Portugal were re-exported. But there was a fair
amount of direct trade too, more especially in English
woollen goods, which were much favoured by the rich
Brazilians.421

These facts, it seems to me, showing as they do that
England and France, when the 17th century ended
and the 18th began, were simply flooded with cash,
are of very great significance, and should not be over-
looked in forming a proper estimate of economic activities
in those days. I have already pointed out that reliable
contemporary authorities described the period as “an age
of projecting ”’—quite generally, and apart from the South
Sea and the Law bubbles which burst towards the end
of it. The evidence we have adduced goes to prove that
the contemporary views were correct. Did we not see
how much money flowed into France and England ?


316 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


And is the conclusion not justifiable that these vast sums
both produced and nourished the speculating fever?
We have here standing out with perfect clearness a most
important fact ineconomic history. Increase the available
quantity of money in a country and you prepare the
ground for a development of the capitalist spirit.

Where did all the money come from? ‘The answer
to this question takes us a step further. But it has
already been given in the course of our considerations.
It was American silver and Brazilian gold that fructified
the economic life of England and France.

Holland gathered the bullion of the New World in its
markets. From there it was carried directly (by emigra-
tion) and indirectly (by trade) to England and France.
Commercial intercourse between these two countries and
the source of supply only added to the stores already
obtained.

This was the case in the 16th century ; in the’ course
of the 17th the system became perfected. Spain
and Portugal were merely canals through which the
precious metals of their colonies were distributed.422
To obtain some idea of the quantities produced, let me
give a few figures, generally accepted as reliable. Silver
came from Mexico, Peru, and Bolivia. The rich mines
of Guanaxuato and Potosi were first opened about the
middle of the 16th century, and the output increased
from an average of some 30,067,000 ounces, between
1521 and 1544, to 103,900,000 ounces, between 1545
and 1560. In the 17th century the supply varied
between 100,000,000 and 140,000,000 ounces. In that
century Brazilian gold was discovered, and the silver age
of capitalism ended, to give place to the age of gold.
Between 1701 and 1720 Brazil yielded gold to the value
of 74 millions sterling.

Here we have the key to the proper appreciation of


THE PRECIOUS METALS 317


the economic life of Europe from 1680 to 1720. We
may now realize the connection between the expansion
of the capitalist spirit and the supply of the precious
metals. In this particular instance, to be sure the most
important one, I have attempted to show the facts in
some detail, But the generalization holds good univer-
sally. German commercial enterprise in the 16th century
was not unconnected with silver-mining in Schwaz and
Joachimstal ; the feverish speculation of the ’fifties in the
last century may be similarly traced to the Californian
gold-mines. There is no need for figures in proof of
these facts; those already given are typical. Besides,
they are of further importance because they bring to
light the underlying causes for the first appearance of
speculation on a large scale.

Let it be noted that, despite the title of this chapter,
we treated of an increase in the supply of money first,
and then went on to discuss the increase in the supply
of the precious metals, The reason is obvious. Money
is the medium through which gold and silver can influ-
ence economic activities. We see this in the early
capitalist period, that is, in the 15th and 16th centuries,
to say nothing of the Italian city states before the 15th
century. About their supply of metallic currency we
know hardly anything; we can only assume that the
precious metals, which made the rise and progress of
capitalism possible, they must have obtained from
Germany (silver), and from the Byzantine Empire and
North Africa (gold).

But, when all is said, it is obvious that modern
economic activities and the people who participate in
them cannot be wholly explained by a reference to the
discoveries of gold and silver. These could have had
only a limited influence. Nay, more, in order to effect
even this influence many other conditions were necessary.


318. THE QUINTESSENCE Of CAPITALISM


And they were operative in Western Europe all through
the centuries with which we are concerned. Had they
not been in existence, the results of the opening of the
gold and silver mines in America might have been very
different. Spain and Portugal bear witness to that.423

On the other hand, even if all the other circumstances
necessary for the evolution of the capitalist spirit had
been present, without the American supplies of the
precious metals the capitalist spirit might have grown
into something very different from what it actually is.
Just think of it. If the miners on the Cordilleras and
in the Brazilian valleys had not chanced upon gold and
silver veins—quite by accident too—the modern business
man might never have come into existence.


But we must proceed with the unravelling of the
threads. Two other factors were potent in shaping
the capitalist spirit—technical inventions and economic
activities themselves. The two combined had mighty
consequences. We must, however, consider them singly,
and the next chapter proceeds to do so.


CHAPTER XXV
THE INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS


Is it possible to picture to one’s mind that peculiar
economic animal, the modern commercial man, without
reference to the technical inventions and improvements of
the last five centuries, particularly those that have facili-
tated production and transport? We think not. But
what is meant by technical improvements? In the widest
sense, any applied knowledge to achieve a given end ; in
the narrower sense, the utilization of instruments either
for manufacturing goods or for moving from place to
place commodities, persons, or news.

Such being the case, are we justified in placing tech-
nical inventions among the social factors that have helped
to mould the capitalist spirit? Surely technical inven-
tions are due to individual knowledge. That criticism is
just ; but it must be remembered that the first condition
for the growth of technical knowledge is an organized
social system. Another objection must also be met. We
talk of the effects of technical inventions on the capitalist
spirit. But may it not be asserted that technical inven-
tions are themselves the offspring of the capitalist spirit ?
How, then, can they be looked upon as its generator ?

In the first place, every technical invention is not
necessarily due to capitalist enterprise. Many advances in
technical science are due to pure accident, and even those


that are sought after often take on a shape least expected.
319


320 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


But suppose that indeed every mechanical invention be
due to the influence of the capitalist spirit, would not each
invention, in its turn, help to shape the capitalist spirit in
its further growth? We see this over and over again:
cause and effect combine as influences in its development.

The effects on the capitalist spirit exercised by tech-
nical improvements may be of two kinds, those that are
direct, which we shall call primary, and those that are
indirect or secondary.

The very existence of an invention is due to enter-
prise. Inherently, therefore, all inventions exercise a
primary influence on capitalism. Carry your mind back
to 1484, before the discovery of the nautical astrolabe.
No ship could venture on the ocean, for it had no means
of directing its course aright. Oversea voyages were
therefore impossible. But as soon as this difficulty was
overcome, think what opportunities were opened out to
enterprising spirits.

Take another instance. Before the water-pump was
invented in the 16th century, a limit was set to mining,
seeing that man could not control the water in mines.
But when it became possible to extend the working of old
mines and to open any number of new ones, what an
impetus must have been given to capitalists, who had
only been waiting for their opportunity. Indeed, we can
see how in the 16th century the gradual introduction of
the water-pump into mines was followed by the participa-
tion of moneyed men in mining ; in other words, how the
mining industry was placed on a capitalist basis,

The same process manifests itself from century to
century. Every invention that renders production on a
large scale possible and makes the process of manufacture
more roundabout, results in the stirring up of latent
powers of enterprise. Inventions give the conditions
necessary for capitalist undertakings, but they also force


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 321


their pace. The more complex and extended production
and transport become, the more capitalist spirits are
tempted to master the new conditions. ‘“ Undertakers to
the fore” is the cry whenever a new invention is patented.
Consequently technical advance acts as a selective force
among those who are engaged in economic activities ; it
trains the capitalist undertaker, from whom more and more
is expected, the more the latest inventions make it neces-
sary to have a complexer organization if the best results
of technical science are to be attained.

We may go so far as to regard it as a law, certainly
applicable to modern inventions, that the work of the
capitalist undertaker in modern times goes on increasing.
For every new mechanical appliance means the use of a
greater number of instruments of production ; means also,
in the great majority of cases, the lengthening of the
processes of production.

Look at our big industries of to-day—those which manu-
facture tools for production ; which make machinery and
the materials for machines. Undertaking on the largest
possible scale is called for in these branches of manu-
facture—machine-making, iron-founding, coal-mining.
It is obvious that those countries which, by reason of
their natural resources, are best fitted for the growth
of industries of this kind, are also splendid nurseries of
the capitalist spirit. Accordingly, the coal and iron fields
of Germany, England, and America have not been
without influence on the expansion of modern enter-
prise. The same holds good for those countries that
are blessed with an abundant water supply. Directly
the water can be utilized as a motive power, say to
generate electricity, an army of undertakers will rush
to the spot. Incidentally, it is apparent why the
capitalist spirit takes on different aspects in different
countries. But certain it is that if any land is rich in

21


322 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


coal and iron it will possess a more developed capitalism
than its less favoured neighbours.

One other fact must not be lost sight of. Technical
improvements in our day have developed beyond the
dreams of man. They have liberated applied science from
the organized, living forces of nature, so that it can now
utilize the energy which the sun has stored up deep down
in the earth. Applied science no longer looks to men
of flesh and blood or to the fields and woods for aid
in making progress; it relies on dead matter and
mechanical power for its achievement. What is the
result ? ‘Technical improvements know no bounds ; they
make possible what was inconceivable before ; they pile
up Pelion on Ossa and create the universe anew.

We cannot here enter into a consideration of the
reasons why technical improvements in modern times
have achieved these marvellous things. 424 It must
suffice merely to draw attention to the results, with
which, indeed, every man is more or less acquainted,
But the important fact is the bearing of these bound-
less possibilities on the growth of the capitalist spirit.
Obviously they must have been a most potent factor in
its development. The limitless expansion of capitalist
enterprise to-day can be explained only by reference to
the undreamed-of possibilities of technical science. You
would not have the hustle and the hurry and the scurry
of a modern capitalist undertaking if technical science
were not able to perform marvels. In order to master
this giant, man in his economic activities had to have
recourse to organization, and the desire to hold him in
compiete control kindled a fire in the breasts of our big
captains of industry which is consuming them, and with
them the rest of us.

Nor must we forget the many-sidedness of technical |
knowledge. Every day produces something new, and so


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 323


creates the need for a new form of organization. That
only expands the possibilities of the capitalist spirit.
Take a small illustration. In one industry technical
knowledge remains at a standstill for a decade or so,
and you go on employing the same methods in your
factory year after year. In another, technical science
revolutionizes the processes of manufacture every few
years, and if you are to keep pace with them you must
introduce more modern organization. Often enough the
new organization demands the foundation of an entirely
new enterprise, and so technical improvements may be
responsible for the setting up of a new factory or the
starting of a new business. In many cases the enterprise
owes its origin to the younger and more sanguine brother
of the capitalist spirit—speculation. Hence, we may say
that technical improvements are often responsible for
speculative activity. Look at the history of the last few
centuries and you will find that in the wake of epoch-
making inventions, or in a period when inventions were
particularly numerous, speculation became exceedingly
active. Take the case of that wonderful age towards the
end of the 17th century, to which I have already referred
more than once, when speculation was for the first time
at fever heat. But technical inventions were also very
numerous ; and indeed it was no less an age of projecting
than one of inventing. Inventions were just beginning
to appear, and therefore even those of minor importance
were able to produce speculation on a large scale. Later
on, and more particularly in our own time, technical
improvements became so commonplace that only the very
important ones had sufficient magnetic power to call forth
new enterprises. But their effects were all the more
powerful. I need only mention by way of illustration
two remarkable periods of speculation in the 19th
century, one about the middle, in connection with rail-


324 THE “QUINTESSENCE ‘Of ‘CAPITALISI


ways, and the other towards the end of it, when there
were numerous inventions for utilizing electricity.

All this goes to show that as technical knowledge
advances it influences the will-power of modern man in
his economic activities. But it does more. It also
influences, nay, often enough revolutionizes, his thoughts.

To begin with, it gives that thought a goal and a
purpose ; which is another way of saying that it stirs and
develops rationalism in him; and rational thinking, as we
know, is an element of the capitalist spirit. The influence
of technical improvements on the growth of economic
rationalism in every age has already been noticed by many
writers. Every new invention, as one authority puts
it,425 brings man into contact with reality, and by so
doing crushes the traditional habits in his character,
which, as we have noted above, are rooted deep in his
being. So long as the inventions appear at rare intervals,
their power to influence man’s natural conservatism will
not be great. It will be merely, as it were, a scratch on
the surface, and before long all trace of it will have
vanished. But as soon as inventions come thick and
fast, as has been the case since the opening of the modern
era, then their effect is more lasting. Constant changes
in technical processes cannot but influence the state of
mind of those concerned with them. But when the
changes are themselves due, as is the case with inventions
in our own day, to organized scientific thinking, their
influence on the psychology of men is even stronger
and more lasting.

All earlier technical advances, 426 remarkable though
they were, were empiric in character ; they sprang from
the personal experience of generations of masters, handed
down from one man to another. Those engaged in an
industry knew all the “tricks of the trade,” and con-
tented themselves with them. The experience which


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 325


had accumulated in the past was preserved for the
future.

But from the 17th century onward natural science
began to make its influence felt in supplanting the
gathered experience of ages as the soil from which inven-
tions sprang up. Henceforth new methods came to be
used, not because one man who had acquired them by
way of experience showed the way, but because any
one interested could learn the underlying technical laws
and be assured of success if he conformed to them.
Before, men worked according to rule of thumb; now
they looked to laws, the explanation and application of
which was the work of rational thinking.

The contrast between the old and new methods of
work is paralleled by that between domestic handicrafts
and industries on a capitalist basis; and the parallel is
by no means accidental. In either case it is a contrast
between empiricism and rationalism, or rule-of-thumb
and scientific knowledge. Now, when in two such closely
related spheres as technical knowledge and economic
activities there is so great a similarity in development as
that noted above, the inference is surely not far-fetched
that the one has had an influence on the other. We may
say, then, that economic rationalism owes much of its
growth and expansion to technical rationalism.

As a matter of fact, we are not altogether without
evidence on this point. Do we not all know that now-
adays every business is organized in accordance with the
demands of technical science? And does not every
director of a business constantly study the technical side
of the processes of production? The employment of
technical specialists in business, as we have already
noted (p. 143), is only in accordance with the demands
of economic rationalism. All in all, the needs of technical
science call for the very highest economic organization.


326 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Thought in economic activities, then, becomes more
definite and conscious, in other words, more rational ;
and modern technical science has tended to make it so.
But it has also helped to make it more exact and
punctual, by providing the necessary machinery for
measuring quantities, more especially for measuring
time.

Clocks have played a very important part in the
mental history of the business man. Pendulum clocks
are said to have been invented in the roth century ;
while the first clock worked by wheels was that made
by Heinrich von Wick, in Paris, in 1364, for King
Charles V. During the 14th century nearly all the
large towns in Italy had clocks that could strike
twenty-four hours.427 Watches were first invented by
Peter Hele in 1510. Writing about them in 15§11,
John Coclaus says, “He made small clocks of iron,
which contained many wheels; they indicated and
struck forty hours, and could be carried in the bosom
or the purse.” 428 In 1690, second hands were intro-
duced by John Floyer as a more exact means of
examining the pulse-beat—an instance, by the way,
of an invention not due to economic needs. Now, the
exact measurement of time became possible only when
the necessary instruments were available, just as exact
calculations in terms of money became possible only
when technical progress was able to provide a reliable
currency.

Punctual business likewise owes much to the gradual
perfection of technical processes. Exact calculations as
to the delivery of goods presuppose a reliable system of
production ; and it is not too much to say that modern
means of transport have made modern commerce into
a sort of huge automatic machine. Calculations of all
kinds, therefore, were to a large extent made possible by


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 327


technical progress. So was the hustle of the modern
business man. Would all this haste be conceivable
without railways, telegraphs, and telephones? There
are, of course, other reasons also for the breathlessness of
modern business, as we shall see; but ultimately it is due
to technical progress, which intensifies it and makes it
universal.

Technical progress can also be held accountable for the
particular way in which the modern business man looks
at the world. Everything for him is purely quantitative.
No doubt this is due largely to the habit of appraising
all things in terms of money. But it is not to be
forgotten that what specially characterizes modern science
is the same tendency of laying stress on quantity to the
neglect of quality. The words of Kant are significant.
Only when you can express any natural phenomenon by
a mathematical formula are you entitled to speak of a law
of nature.

Here, too, it would seem that we have alighted on
a parallel development, that between the capitalist spirit
of to-day and the scientific spirit as seen in technical
advancement. ‘The parallelism might be carried a good
deal further.429 But it would not be easy to show, in
a general way, the influence of scientific on economic
thought, and therefore I will not attempt it in this place.
I want rather to direct the reader’s observation to another
psychological phenomenon, wherein once more we may
see the interdependence of the capitalist spirit and the
progress of technology.

Is it not a fact that the centres of interest in life to-day
are very different from what they used to be? The
cause of the change may be traced to the mighty progress
in technical science, and its effect on the mental outlook
of modern man must be admitted to be stupendous.
That interest in problems of technical science is to-day


328 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


very much to the fore can be easily understood. The
remarkable achievements in the field of applied science
have appealed to people’s inquisitive faculty, have drawn
all eyes on to themselves, and have given our age its
cause for pride. And no wonder, when it is recalled that
technical progress is the one sphere where we may
fearlessly reckon up our gains and losses! The crowd,
which always worships success, is quite naturally enthu-
siastic about those spheres of thought where our greatest
achievements have been won, the more so as they are so
easy of appreciation. It cannot be gainsaid that most
people to-day (and this is specially true of our youth) are
more interested in the progress of wireless telegraphy
and aviation than in the problem of original sin or the
Sorrows of Werther.

Nor is this all. Technical progress must also be held
responsible for another characteristic of our age—that we
value material things far too highly. We have grown rich
quickly ; we have come to regard peace as a certainty ;
and technical progress has shielded us from dread plagues
and cholera. Is it surprising, then, that all idealistic ten-
dencies have been pushed into the background by man’s
lower instincts—undisturbed enjoyment of pleasures and
the craving for creature comforts? We are like a herd
of cattle peacefully grazing in the meadow.

The overestimation of material things has had this
result on the capitalist undertaker, that it has spurred him
on to obtain the means of becoming rich. In other words,
it has stirred up his acquisitiveness. The pursuit of the
dollars is not so imaginary as some millionaire philo-
sophers, writing from their high tower of princely wealth,
would have us believe. On the contrary, it is one of the
mightiest motive powers in our modern economy ; and
the intense greed of gain, generated as we have just
observed, in part at least, by the progress of technical


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 329


science, is one element in the composition of the soul
of the modern business man. That this profit-chasing
is now bereft of any shame that attached to it of old;
that we no longer think it dishonourable for any one to
engage in dollar-hunting ; that we mix freely with people
of whom we know that to make money is their sole aim
in life—all this has only tended to cultivate this aspect of
the capitalist spirit still more, and the impetus came from
the new trend of things produced by advances in technical
knowledge.

Another effect of our keen appreciation of technical
improvements and our overvaluation of their results has
been to intensify the love of profit in the capitalist under-
taker in yet another way. It has heightened his interest
in the technical side of business and manufacture. We
have already noted it as a characteristic of modern eco-
nomic activities that man is constantly making things,
almost senselessly increasing them; and that the only
explanation of the phenomenon (if, indeed, there is an
explanation at all) is to be found in a certain childish
pleasure in technical perfection. And can we conceive of
such delight except in a technical age? Can we conceive
it possible, except in such an age, that an undertaker
should think it of any consequence whether or no he
makes ever so many machines or electric lamps or adver-
tisement posters or aeroplanes? How can we explain his
satisfaction in the mere production of these things, except
that a sort of enthusiasm for producing is a driving power
within him ?

This enthusiasm for mere producing is akin to the zeal
for “progress”’ which fills the soul of many an under-
taker, and is responsible in America for the childish
smugness of the intellectual life of the country. Every
traveller cannot help noticing it. You associate it with
children, with colonials, with those devoted to technical


330 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


progress. For if the senseless idea of ‘‘ progress’’ means
anything, it means undreamed-of possibilities in the realm
of technical science. You cannot say that Kant stands
for progress as compared with Plato, or Bentham as
compared with Buddha. But you can most certainly
say so when you compare the steam-engine of to-day
with that of Watt’s !

The transvaluation of values in modern times is also
apparent in the habit of regarding the means to any
end as the end itselt. Here again, no doubt, money is to
blame. But not money alone, for the responsibility is
shared by technical science. Technical progress has
brought it about that we care far too much to note
how a thing is made and how it works, no matter whether
it serves a noble end or not. The means (machinery),
say, for controlling a whole transport system, or produc-
ing a newspaper, are now so wonderful that they take our
breath away, and engage our interest to such an extent
that we no longer think of the purpose they were in-
tended to serve. We are astounded at the sight of the
latest sample of a linotype machine, forgetting all the
while that it is printing some journalistic “rag ”’ or other.
We feel a shudder down our backs as we watch a flying-
machine ascend into the air, but never once do we realize
that its only purpose for the present is to add an exciting
item to a music-hall programme, or, at best, to enrich
a few mechanics. And soon in all things. Here, at any
rate, is one explanation of the meaningless transvaluation
of values in modern life. and the futility of capitalist
endeavour,

One other point. We have already seen that the
bourgeois spirit of our age is utterly careless of man’s
fate. We noted how man is no longer the central fact
of economic activities and economic thought. It is only
the procedure that matters—production, transport, price


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 331


formation. Ina word, Fiat productio et pereat homo. How
are we to account for this tendency, if not by tracing it to
the changes which technical progress has brought about ?
Technology has liberated the work of production from
the control of man. Before, we needed the living
organism to regulate production ; we now direct it by
mechanical means.

The natural world, with its fullness of life, has been
shattered to atoms; on its ruins an artificial world
of dead matter has been erected by human ingenuity.
And this is true for the economic sphere as for that
of technical science. Technical improvements have had
the effect of changing the face of the globe, and our
whole view of the universe has changed in consequence.
The more technical science tended to make man of less
and less importance in the process of production, the
more he was thrown into the background, not only so far
as economic activities were concerned, but also in the
whole sphere of human thought and action.

There are numerous indirect influences exercised by
technical progress on the growth of the capitalist spirit,
by the creation of circumstances favourable for its
development. I propose to deal with two such cases ;
the reader will easily think of others.

In the preceding chapter we saw how the abundance
of the gold and silver mines gave an impetus, in the
16th and 17th centuries, to the rise of feverish speculation.
But we must not forget that the extraction of the precious
metals was only made possible by advances in technical
knowledge. Indeed, we may go so far as to assert that
without technical science America might never have been
settled. But I am thinking rather of the epoch-making
improvements in mining, by the aid of which Europe
was able to enjoy an abundance of silver in the 16th
century. I recall such inventions as the pumping-engine,


332 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


or the still more important process of extracting the
silver from the ore by the aid of quicksilver—the
amalgam process—which dates from about 1557. Once
that was known, it was possible, at no great cost, to
extract the pure silver on the rugged slopes of the
Cordilleras, where it was found; and the new process
so cheapened the expenses of production that silver-
mining became exceedingly profitable.

This is one illustration of the indirect effects of
technical progress on the growth of capitalism. The
other that I have in mind made possible the rapid growth
of population in the 1gth century. This was due not
so much to an increase in the actual number of births
as rather to a decrease in the number of deaths. And
was not this decrease due to two causes, both the results
of advances in technical knowledge? The one was
improved hygienic methods, better precautions against
epidemics, and the progress of applied medicine; the
other was a more perfected manufacturing and transport
system, which enabled more people to be fed, and so to
be kept alive. Now, the increase in population had,
in its turn, consequences for the development of the
capitalist spirit. On the one hand, a growing population
necessarily leads to emigration; on the other hand, it
expands capitalist enterprise to its utmost capacity. With
the effects on capitalism of emigration we have already
dealt. As for the expansion of enterprise, is it not
obvious that the more people there are in a country the
greater must competition be? With a large population
there is an increasing necessity for individuals to be
economically active. With a large population it becomes
more and more difficult merely to live on your income,
merely to be a gentleman at large. The members of
a numerous family look very differently on the need of
earning their livings than do the members of a small one.


INFLUENCE OF TECHNICAL INVENTIONS 333


Where the children are many, the parents’ fortune is
necessarily divided into smaller shares than when the chil-
dren are few. In the first case, therefore, there is greater
call than in the second for the children to engage in some
occupation, if they are to remain on the social level of
their parents. An increasing population very soon creates
a definite attitude of parents towards the economic inde-
pendence of their children. Parents are more concerned
with putting their children to a profitable trade than
with leaving them sufficient to live upon without having
to work.

The increased growth of the population in the 1gth
century, due chiefly to biological or social causes, has
varied in different countries ; and the variations will not
be unconnected with the greater or smaller intensity of
the capitalist spirit in each.


CHAPTER XXVI
THE INFLUENCE OF PRE-CAPITALIST CALLINGS


Tue last set of influences on the capitalist spirit that I
shall deal with are the most obvious. A little reflection
will show that there were some callings in the pre-
capitalist period which were training grounds of capitalism.

First and foremost we must mention trade and com-
merce, where the seeds of capitalism took root quite early.
Trade necessarily taught men the habit of thinking in
quantities. The producer in the pre-capitalist age,
whether a peasant or craftsman, was dominated, as we
have seen, by the idea of quality; the trader, on the
other hand, cared less for the quality of his wares, prin-
cipally because he stood in no personal relation to them.
Peasant and craftsman alike had a keen personal interest
in the commodities they made; the articles were, in a
sense, a part of themselves, an expression of their indi-
viduality. The trader was differently situated; his
interest in his merchandise was purely objective. He
knew little of the travail and care expended on the making
of commodities; they reached him in their final form
ready for sale, and he was able to look at them from
one point of view only—that of their value in exchange.
Now, value is represented by a quantity ; accordingly, we
see a second reason for his quantitative interest. The
trader thinks in terms of money, and in the money value
all conceptions of quality melt away. In face of this,


may it not be said that the trader’s calling, like the
334


PRE-CAPITALIST CALLINGS 335


capitalist’s generally, is concerned with money only ; that
all his thought is influenced by questions of money ; and
that therefore he must of necessity be a calculator? Of
course, in the early stages of trade the calculations were
of a primitive kind. But primitive or not, it was cal-
culation, and the trader’s calling provided the necessary
opportunities for its development.

This holds good of commerce as a whole, and though
its various branches and kinds influenced the soul of
man in somewhat varying degrees, the direction in every
case was towards capitalism.

Look at foreign commerce, the traffic that extends
beyond the borders of the state. Its significance for
capitalism is much akin to that of the emigration of
peoples, for, like the latter, it tends to create a rational
outlook on life and rational action. Is not the mer-
chant forced to adapt himself to strange manners
and customs? Does he not strive to choose the right
place and to adopt the best methods for his activities?
One powerful aid to rationalist thinking is an acquain-
tance with foreign tongues; and the knowledge of lan-
guages comes easily from international trade. All these
results of foreign commerce may arise when a central
establishment appoints agents in foreign parts. The
agents soon take on a more rational life, and
before long infect their principals, to whom they send
reports, and with whom, often enough, they come into
personal contact. The disintegrating influence of com-
merce on a system of life dominated by tradition became
stronger still when branches of one family of traders
scattered themselves in all directions. The effect in such
cases was the same as that produced by emigration on a
large scale. The best instance of such a policy is furnished
by Jewish trading families with whom it was almost a
maxim to distribute themselves in different commercial


336 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


centres.43° But the Jews did not stand alone in this
policy ; many a Christian family did likewise. There
were Albertis, for example, at the dawn of the 15th
century, in Italy, England, Flanders, Spain, France,
Catalonia, Rhodes, and Barbary.43!

Nor was this all. Foreign commerce aided the growth
of the capitalist spirit by cultivating commercial morality,
a specifically capitalist virtue. No doubt religious teach-
ing gave a solid foundation to the confidence of traders in
one another. As in so many cases, therefore, we see once
more that an element of the capitalist spirit owes its
appearance to more than one contributory influence. In
this instance it is ethical teaching and business interest.
Gustav Freytag was perfectly right when he observed 432
“that the merchant cannot carry on his calling without a
tremendous amount of confidence in others ; both in those
he himself employs and knows and those who are strangers
tohim ; both in Christians and in heathens. Honesty is a
necessity of commercial intercourse, and even if too great
a confidence results in loss, nevertheless commercial credit
is one of the bases of human intercourse.” The more
frequent the intercourse the surer confidence becomes. In
the process of time the trader realizes that it is not to his
interest to be dishonest. He may lose his customers; he
may have to waste a good deal of his time; and the
ensuing loss would in all probability hardly compensate
him for his ill-gotten profits. It is only natural, there-
fore, to find a gradual development of commercial
morality ; and the go-ahead grocers of the 15th no less
than those of the 18th century knew from practical ex-
perience that honesty was the best policy. The realization
of the soundness of this maxim as making for self-interest
must have slowly gained ground with the expansion of
foreign trade; and when teachers of morality gave it
their support it only sank deeper into men’s consciousness.


PRE-CAPITALIST CALLINGS 337


One other difference is to be noted, that between inland
and oversea trade. The latter continues for a long time
to have a dash of adventurous freebooting about it. Over-
sea trade therefore produced the dare-devil merchant
who will take risks. Inland trade, on the other hand,
rather lays stress on bargaining and calculating, and pro-
duced the careful merchant who cautiously balances gains
and losses, and guards himself by amply-worded con-
tracts. Inland woollen trade made the Florentines into
the clever merchants they were. Indeed, inland trade (as
a rule) rather than bold, enterprising oversea trade, culti-
vated the bourgeois virtues. That is why I cannot con-
ceive of a book on holy economy appearing in the 15th
century anywhere else than in the centre of the woollen
trade. Consider further the classical types of successful
traders, the Florentines, the Scotch, and the Jews. None
of them adventured on the sea ; it was not in their blood
to doso. From the very first they were inland traders.

A very special role in the history of the capitalist
spirit was played by money-lending. We have already
brought to the notice of our readers that the worldly-wise
and energy-loving Schoolmen of the later Middle Ages
regarded money-lending as an activity hostile to capi-
talism—and rightly so; and that they condemned it as
sinful. Nevertheless, money-lending had a very whole-
some influence on certain tendencies in the capitalist
system. Because I look at the problem from another
point of view than did St. Antonine of Florence, I can
account for the fact that one reason why the Jews were so
eminently prepared for capitalism was that they had been
money-lenders from the days of Solomon, while in the
Middle Ages it was a calling which they practically
monopolized. I am convinced that my view on the sub-
ject is correct. Money-lending was one of the well-
springs of the capitalist spirit, much more so than trade,

22


338 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


especially in an age when production was on a natural
basis and quality a prime factor in it. And why?
Money-lending knows nothing of quality ; its all-embrac-
ing concern is with quantities only. In money-lending
everything depends on contract, the substance of which
relates to what service is to be rendered, and how much
payment for it to be made; to prospectiveness and
delivery. Money-lending as such has nothing to do
with producing for consumption ; it does not call for any
use of technical appliances ; it is an intellectual economic
procedure, no more and no less. Indeed, we can scarcely
talk of economic activity in reference to money-lending,
for there is no physical exertion entailed ; and as it is
only an intellectual process, its success alone has any
meaning. All in all, money-lending is a most fruitful
field for the development of the calculating spirit ; we
can conceive of the money-lender as sitting at his desk
with pencil and paper making calculations all day long.
Money-lending enables you to earn money without
having to work in the sweat of your brow; enables you
to make other people work for you, and that without
any recourse to force.

What the professional money-lender lacks is, as
Antonine saw long ago, the spirit of enterprise. He
won’t take risks. But should a money-lender, neverthe-
less, be able to adventure much, he may easily turn into
a capitalist undertaker on a large scale. Specific com-
mercial activities are closely intertwined with lending
and borrowing. It is easy to see, therefore, that money-
lending may develop into capitalist money-dealing—that
is to say, into banking ; or it may grow into capitalist
production—as in the case of the “ clothiers.” Florence
was the centre of the woollen trade no less than of
banking.

But Florence was more than that. To appreciate why


PRE-CAPITALIST: CALLINGS 339


the city on the Arno became the citadel of early capitalism
we must recall that it was par excellence the city of gilds
and of gild influence. An historic accident, the quarrel
of the imperialists with the anti-imperial party, brought
the gilds some share in the government of the town as
early as the 12th century. ‘ The craft gilds were paid
heavily for the support they lent the Emperor, and the
Podesta and the councillors were in reality dependent on
the new social class that had risen to power.”433 In 1193
the foundation was laid for the democratic development
of the city state.

My point, hinted at above, is that the gild influence
in the history of Florence was in part responsible for the
early rise and growth of capitalism there. It may seem
paradoxical to say so, seeing that the gild system is the
mortal enemy of capitalism. It is true, nevertheless.
A very powerful element in the capitalist spirit hails from
the gild-halls. Think of the bourgeois virtues, and
more especially of holy economy. Where was economy
more at home than in the gild-hall? The practice was
taught by the gilds because necessity forced it on them.
The gild members, if they were not to endanger their
existence, had to be careful of the pennies, had to live
soberly, work hard, be pure and what not. All these
were called Christian virtues, and Christian they certainly
were. Their cultivation, without any pressure from
without, was a good thing; it spoke well for the self-
discipline of those who practised them. But the grocer
or the weaver had them forced upon him by his society ;
willy-nilly he was brought to the point of view that to
get into debt and to waste time in pleasure-seeking or
love affairs would surely bring him to beggary. Conse-
quently, the gild members everywhere became “ respectable
citizens’ by force of habit. Long before the Reformation
in England, we are told by a writer whose judgment is


340 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


reliable,434 long before the Puritan spirit was abroad in the
land, “the gaiety of the towns was already sobered by
the pressure of business.”” It was the same in Scotland,435
where the gilds also narrowed the life of the countryside.
Your real yeoman was much like a squire who lives and
lets live. But the craftsman in the town declined, his
life-blood dried up, his outlook was drab; in a word,
he became the ancestor of the “ respectable citizen ’’—the
bourgeois.

This bourgeois spirit became part and parcel of the
capitalist spirit, and even people who could afford to
live in a free-and-easy fashion made industry and frugality
their ideals. Many reasons will explain this phenomenon.
The morality of the philosophers and the Church was one
force that made towards the end. Another was a kind
of self-righteousness born of jealousy.

It has been asserted 436 that the whole of modern civili-
zation is marked by this self-righteous jealousy, which,
as everybody knows, Nietzsche made responsible for
the substitution of aristocratic values by that of crowd
morality. I believe that something of the same spirit
played a part in the history of capitalism. Does it not
adequately explain the raising of lower middle-class
principles, born as they were of sheer necessity, into
general and highly valued ideals of life? What were
simply bourgeois virtues became great human virtues.
And who preached them? Middle-class men, generally
those who had sunk from the upper class, who looked
with jealous eyes at the conduct of their superiors,
damned this conduct as sinful, and taught the wickedness
of the seigniorial life, though deep down in their hearts
they admired and desired it. Study carefully the family
records of Alberti and say whether this self-righteous
jealousy is not their keynote. I have already quoted
passages in which the hatred of the “signori,” from


PRE-CAPITALIST CALLINGS 341


whose circles Alberti was excluded, is comic, not to say
childish. There are very many such. And in every
case the condemnation of the aristocratic way of life,
of its hunting, its immorality, its nepotism, ends with
pharisaical laudation of the writer’s own middle-class
ideals. There is no doubt that commercial interests, the
precepts of philosophy, and the advice of the confessional
all contributed to the establishment of a middle-class view
of life. But the burning words of scorn that Alberti has
for the “signori”’ whenever he begins to talk about them
show that his experience of them must have been pretty
unpleasant. But they also show that perhaps the strongest
force that made him cling to his middle-class outlook on
life was this spirit of self-righteous jealousy.

Throughout all ages this has been the stoutest prop of
bourgeois morality. Every respectable citizen, even in
our own day, proclaims that the grapes are sour. It
is his comfort.

But to return to the gilds.) Whenever and wherever
these organizations rose to power, so much so that even-
tually they “called the tune” of the policy of their
community, the result always was that their ideals became
dominant and universally prized, despite the fact that they
first arose merely from the pressure of necessity and that
the necessity was made into a virtue. In such cases the
gild spirit became the generally accepted one. In Florence
we have the best illustration of the tendency. As early
as the 15th century Florence was just soaked in the
bourgeois spirit, while other cities, say Venice, for example,
retained their seigniorial mode of life for a much longer
space of time.


CHAPTER XXVII
THE INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF


Years ago, when I made the first attempt to study the
problem of the capitalist system by going to the heart
of the matter and starting out with the capitalist spirit, I
was much misunderstood and blamed. I was accused of
putting the cart before the horse. How could capitalism
be the result of the capitalist spirit? it was asked ; surely
the spirit was the product of the system, M. Simian
took up the defence of my position with great skill in a
review which he concluded with these words : “ Was not
the capitalist spirit as much the offspring of capitalism as
capitalism was the offspring of the capitalist spirit?” 437

Stated in this way the problem is complex; it will
receive full and reasoned treatment in the new edition of
my Modern Capitalism. In this place we are concerned
with the first part of the question, Cannot the capitalist
spirit be traced to capitalism itself? And we are con-
cerned with it very much. For if the answer be in the
affirmative, then the whole of the preceding twenty-six
chapters have been superfluous. The book might in that
case be limited to the present chapter alone. It is needful,
then, to look all around the problem.

To begin with, the question as stated is not quite clear.
Capitalism and capitalist spirit are not necessarily exclusive
conceptions. As well inquire whether the soul is the


product of the human being or the human being of the
342


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 343


soul. Obviously the capitalist spirit is part and parcel
of capitalism, using the latter term as equivalent to the
capitalist economic organization of society. Without
the capitalist spirit you cannot have the capitalist
system.

To be clear, therefore, the question must be stated
differently. The capitalist spirit must be so conceived
that it may be regarded either as a cause or as an effect.
To that end it must be contrasted not with the capitalist
system as a whole, but with ‘the capitalist body,” if
I may use the term. But what is meant by “ capitalist
body’? All those component parts of the capitalist
economic system which are outside the soul of the
capitalist undertaker. I mean all organization—the
treatment of others, general business management, in-
ternal economies as exemplified by (say) the planning
of a factory, a particular method of book-keeping,
business relations with other firms, or a special wage
system.

Another contrast is also possible, this time between the
capitalist spirit and the capitalist order itself. It is pos-
sible if you speak historically. For instance, the capitalist
spirit of a former age and the capitalist economic order of
to-day are distinct entities.

Looked at in this way, the capitalist spirit may in
theory certainly be regarded either as a cause or an effect.
Hence we may ask, Does the capitalist spirit create the
capitalist social organization, or does it itself spring from
the latter? This particular wording of the question
already points to the answer. Since organization is the
work of man, man and his spirit must first exist before
organization can be carried out—that 1s to say, a capitalist
social order cannot produce the capitalist spirit. If it
could, we should want to know what produced the
capitalist order. We might indeed reply, A pre-capitalist


344 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


spirit. But then, if a pre-capitalist spirit created anything,
it would not and could not be a capitalist organization.
It might produce something like it, but never the thing
itself.

Very different is the aspect of the second alternative.
Capitalism may produce the capitalist spirit, and the
cause and effect need not be any great distance apart.
A manual labourer whose little shop is close to a capitalist
undertaking of some sort may be touched by a spark of
the capitalist spirit dominant in the latter, which may set
his soul afire. Nor need capitalism develop in such a
way as only to influence the next generation; in one
and the same undertaking the presence of capitalism may
bring changes into the mental outlook of those who are
carrying on the business.

If this is so, what will be our reasoned judgment on
capitalism, regarded as a well-spring of the capitalist
spirit ? What shall we say of its influences on the present
and on the past?

Before dealing with the answer it is imperative to
remember that capitalism is not the only source of the
capitalist spirit. It goes without saying that at some
time in the distant past the capitalist spirit must have
been in existence—in embryo, if you like—before any
capitalist undertaking could become a reality. Hence
that early embryonic capitalist spirit must have been due
to other causes. But more than this. Even when
capitalism was already in being, other forces were
co-operating with it to produce the capitalist spirit and
to make it thrive. The truth of this I believe I have
proved in the preceding pages. In this chapter I hope
to show that the more capitalism developed the more
its importance grew as a creator of the capitalist spirit,
until at last one day it will possibly be its one and only
creator.


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 345


Just think. As capitalism grows and develops, some-
thing is produced besides services and material goods
which, unlike these, does not pass away. I am referring
to experiences. Thanks to certain circumstances, some
of which we have already considered, ways and means
have been found of withdrawing the different experiences
from the individual undertakings where they have accu-
mulated and making them available generally, and even
handing them down from generation to generation. This
mass of experience, whenever it has been utilized, has
made possible the perfection of economic rationalism.
That it has been utilized at all, that the later capitalist
undertaker profited by the experiences of his prede-
cessors, is due to the stress of circumstances in which
the undertaker finds himself. On the one hand, his
business is to increase his profits; on the other hand,
competition forces the pace for him. He has to arrange
his undertaking on the most rational basis possible.

But the inherent energy of economic rationalism itself,
driving it to self-expression, is possibly a mightier force
still in the perfecting of business methods and enterprise.
It is curious to observe the phenomenon, which is in no
wise unique. Here we have a system fashioned by man
waking to life of its own accord, and influencing the
activities of its creator without any reference to his will.
How did the process come about ?

As the demand for economic rationalism arose it was
satisfied by specialist work. Thousands of people are
engaged to-day in thinking out and carrying through
the best methods of conducting business. There is a
whole hierarchy of them, from the professors of economics
to the army of accountants, makers of calculating machines,
card-index systems, typewriters, and what not. In many
cases, too, the employees of business houses are urged by
promises of bonuses to take part in this production of


346 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


economic rationalism. What is the result? A large
amount of interest is stirred up in the perfection of
business methods ; a large store of energy is directed
towards that end. And this production is indeed an
end in itself for all those who engage in it professionally.
Recall what we said about technical improvements. The
end no longer interests us ; we forget it in our admiration
of the means, and thus the means are more and more
perfected for their own sake. It is the same in this case.
Here, too, man and his living, palpitating interests are
neglected in order to perfect a system. Consequently
economic rationalism in our time grows apace by its
own momentum ; it thrives on itself, so to say, and
man does nothing to help its development.

This thing which has become alive the capitalist under-
taker takes into his service without any very great
consideration, much as he engages a manager or work-
man ; in fact, just as he introduces the latest, the most
perfect machinery, so also he utilizes, quite mechanically,
the most up-to-date system of carrying on business. As
the systems go on improving—improving means becoming
more economical—so he automatically goes on changing
them. The system pervades the capitalist undertaking
like some silent ghost; “it’’ calculates, “‘it’’ keeps the
ledgers, ‘‘it’’ works out prices, “it ”’ determines rates of
wages, ‘it’ saves wherever possible, and so on. “It”
dominates the undertaker himself; ‘it’? makes demands
on him, “it” forces him to do what it requires. “It”
never rests; “it” is always on the watch, “it” is con- »
stantly becoming more and more perfect. “It” lives
a life of its own.

This independence of economic rationalism—its be-
coming objective, mechanical, automatic—is not without
far-reaching consequences on undertaking, and therefore ©
also on the growth of the capitalist spirit. The under-


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 347
taker has a load taken off his shoulders. He buys


automatic rationalism ready made, as it were, and engages
salaried assistants to introduce it into his business and
see that it is carried through. But even if he attends to
this himself, his responsibilities are lessened neverthe-
less. For does he not achieve the greatest utilities
without any thinking on his part? And what follows?
While in olden times the intellectual energy of the
undertaker was directed to the discovery of the cheapest
and quickest means of production, it is now free to be
utilized for other purposes. (Notice, in passing, this
curious result : that with the last stage in the development
of rationalism there appears a sort of traditional method
which holds men in bond.) What these purposes are
may be described in a word: Acquisition. The capitalist
undertaker can now devote all his powers to this end.
But there are other forces at work, all of them the result
of the development of capitalism, which only heighten
this tendency to get gain. The total result is that
economic activities are expanded to the uttermost, a
characteristic of modern economic life (as we have
already noted), and therefore also a characteristic of the
soul of the modern business man.

Let us consider how this comes about. In the soul ot
the modern business man there is a desire to achieve
bigger and bigger things, and this forces him to be
constantly undertaking more and more. But why?
Principally because he wants more profit. Not that
profit-chasing is the chiefest motive in his soul. The
condition of things forces profit-chasing upon him.438
All successful capitalist enterprise must necessarily work
to provide a surplus. It matters not how the individual
capitalist regards the surplus—whether he contents himself
with the mere acquisition of gold, or whether he aims
at power, or is satisfied so long as he is occupied, or


348 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


even desires to utilize the surplus in schemes for social
reform. In any event he must make profit ; his enterprise
must be gainful.

So the undertaker must be on the move. Constant
activity is forced upon him, and we may thus see the
psychological explanation of the modern tendency to want
to attempt absolutely everything, recognizing no limits
whatever. Modern technical appliances only aid this
tendency, and when it becomes active it receives an
impetus from many quarters. Not the least, as we have
already noted, is the psychological law that increased
wealth produces an increasing desire for more. Another
psychological law in this connection is that the greater
the problem to be solved, the greater becomes the strength
of the capacities and the will-power. This must have
dawned on the earliest writers on capitalism, who praise
it for this characteristic. The more business the more
work, the more work the more profits—so we may
sum up a passage in Alberti.439

The psychological tendency, then, is powerful enough in
this direction. But the force of outward circumstances
co-operates with it; and from two sources, technical
science and business organization.

Technical science in these days passes beyond all natural
barriers, and its application, too, becomes an unnatural
one. ‘The undertaker must keep pace with all the latest
inventions of technical science ; competition and profit-
chasing force him to do so, But to keep pace with
invention means that he must be ever ready to enlarge
his business. Indeed, it has almost become a law of
modern technical progress that if inventions are to be
utilized the existing instruments of production must
be increased and enlarged, and you must work on a
grander scale all round. Perhaps the steel-works at
Pittsburg are the largest undertaking of their kind in the


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 349


world. How did their founder explain their expansion?
By reference to the demands of technical progress. ‘“ We
always hoped,” said Mr. Carnegie,44° “that there would
be no need to grow. But we always found that to delay
expansion would mean to be left behind. In fact, to this
very day so fast and thick do the successive inventions
come that we have as much to do as ever before.”
Any freedom that technical advance may yet leave
to the undertaker is certainly requisitioned by the
needs of business organization. Here, as in the pre-
vious instance, the stress of outward circumstances
forces the hands of the undertaker to attempt unlimited
possibilities. There is little need to dwell on this pheno-
menon in an age when all production (except in agricul-
ture) tends to be on a very large scale. But it is
interesting to observe the psychology of the individual
undertaker in this connection, and fortunately we have
ample material for so doing in the autobiography of a
capitalist undertaker on a large scale who was active in
the early days of modern German capitalistic growth, and
who speaks with a candour that throws a flood of light
on the soul of the business man of to-day.44" What does
Dr. Strousberg tell us? His earliest intention was to
derive so much profit from his various railway enterprises
as would enable him to buy a country seat and to retire
from business. If an opportunity offered itself, he in-
tended to stand for Parliament and devote the remainder
of his life to Parliamentary activity. But did he achieve
his heart’s desire? He explains why not. To build a
railway takes a few years. In any case, you cannot be
sure that your line will turn out a financial success. To
be on the safe side, therefore, it is as well to build more
than one line, so that the good enterprises may compensate
for the failures. Besides, the organization necessary for
one line may be used for many. The counting-house,


330 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


the drawing-office, the various other offices will serve, at
a small additional cost, for many railway lines. More-
over, even when the lines are ready, the offices must be
retained in order to make final settlements with the rail-
way company, the suppliers of raw material, the contrac-
tors, and the rest. You must also retain your engineers
long after the work is completed. There are bound to
be numerous queries to answer in the working of the
line, and many other little things to see to. So it came
about that Dr. Strousberg entered upon one engage-
ment after another. His railway building brought other
work with it, and little by little his original ideal slowly
vanished into the distance and he gave himself up com-
pletely to his business.

Yet another characteristic of the modern business man,
side by side with the impetus within him to undertake
immeasurably large things, is his devotion to small affairs.
This expresses itself in his intensive activities, forcing
him to squeeze as much as possible into every minute,
and so make economic life one long rush and _ bustle.
Technical science has facilitated the process, but technical
science cannot be held accountable for it. Telephones
are in use in the Vatican, railway trains run in Spain,
telegraphic messages are not unknown in Turkey. But
in all three cases there is little rush or hurry. You get
that only when the modern business man comes along, for
capitalism has sown the seed of haste in his soul. Every
schoolboy knows how capitalism must needs have a quick
turnover. This is the secret power that effects such
marvels. ‘The velocity of the turnover determines prices
and profits. For the more quickly any given amount of
capital revolves the more cheaply can commodities be pro-
duced and the more speedily does the total profit grow.

Note, however, that the speeding up in the turnover
is assisted by the speeding up in machinery, in transport


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 351


service, and in buying and selling. All three owe much
to modern technical progress, which finds out improved
methods every day in order to curtail the whole system of
economic activities, if need be, by but a few seconds. The
speed with which the modern business man does his work
is thus forced upon him by capitalism itself, aided by
technical science. He must be quick, whether he wants
to or not.

But as a matter of fact he does want to—just as much
as he wants to be constantly expanding his business. He
must needs be engaged in economic activities without
cease, he wants to be economically active every minute
of his life. This is our last point in the characterization
of the soul of the modern business man, and requires a
word or two of explanation.

What is to be said of the phenomenon that perfectly
healthy, good-natured people, often enough with mental
gifts above the average, should care for such a thing as
economic activity? Not, mind you, because they regard
it as a duty or asa necessary evil, but because they love
it, because they have devoted themselves to it with heart
and soul, with mind and body!

To solve this puzzle, let us recall what we saw in the
colonist’s mind. An utter loneliness filled its every niche,
and, as a psychological necessity, gave birth to a longing
for undertaking something or other, and to wild business
enterprise. Outward circumstances force this state of mind
on the colonial ; all-powerful influences which we have
just considered produce the same effect on the capitalist
undertaker by their insistent action. Business is his sole
preoccupation ; is it any wonder that all else within him
dries up? Everything about him becomes a wilderness,
all life dies, all values disappear ; in short, his environ-
ment is like that which Nature produces for the colonist.
The home of the capitalist undertaker becomes for him, to


382 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


all intents and purposes, something foreign. Nature, Art,
Literature, Politics, friends—all vanish into nothingness.
He has no time for them. The colonist at least finds
refreshment for his soul in the family circle, but the fire
of enterprise in the soul of the modern capitalist under-
taker scorches even this last green spot out of his sur-
roundings. He is thus left in the desert, and is in danger
of perishing, seeing that all the ordinary values of life have
ceased to exist for him. But life is strong within him ; he
has the will to live. Accordingly, he must obtain new
values, and he finds them in business. And if he is to re-
tain the ground beneath his feet, if he is to make life worth
living, he cannot possibly look upon the new values as use-
less and senseless. It isacuriousphenomenon. From the
dry sandy wastes of everyday life there ooze forth for the
parched soul new springs of comfort. Though his own
needs are few, he derives peculiar satisfaction in seeing his
profits grow ; and the constant extension and perfecting of
his business make his heart glow with pride. David Hume
drew attention to the fact long ago: “If the employment
you give him be lucrative, especially if the profit be
attached to every particular exertion of industry, he has
gain so often in his eye that he acquires by degrees a
passion for it, and knows no such pleasure as that of
seeing the daily increase of his fortune. And that is the
reason why trade increases frugality, and why among
merchants there is the same overplus of misers above
prodigals as among the possessors of land there is the
contrary.” 442

If, for all that, this satisfaction of the modern capitalist
undertaker should yet be incomplete, he will find pleasure
in the universal enthusiasm for the technical progress of
our age, more especially as he will be able to feel that he
himself, by utilizing the results of technical progress, is
helping to make history. It is true that economic activi-


INFLUENCE OF CAPITALISM ITSELF 353


ties are only the means by which technical ideas are made
useful, But in accordance with the great law of our age,
the means play the all-important part, and the end,
humanity, is completely lost sight of. _We have advanced
so far that by a wonderful psychological process we praise
economic activities for their own sake, and without a
murmur. All values in life seem to be topsy-turvey,
and yet the truncated system that ensues is able to offer
sufficient attraction to men and women of to-day to go on
putting forth effort without a word of complaint.

It was not Puritanism that forced the undertaker into
the bog of senseless busy-ness, but capitalism ; and he
was able to give himself completely up to it only when he
lost the last foothold that kept him from sinking in the
mire. I mean his religious feelings. For he requires
no sense of duty in the thoughtless busy-ness that fills his
life, and Time has taught him to create new life-values
even in the desert by adding peculiar delights to his par-
ticular form of activity.

One result of this is that the intensity of economic life
is stretched to its utmost limit. It is influenced not
mostly by will-power but by the joy of action. The
business of the capitalist undertaker becomes, as it were,
his mistress : he dotes upon her with all his heart. Who
shall wonder if this course tends to still greater intensity
in economic activities? Who shall wonder if the soul of
the modern business man surpasses itself ?

Our task now is done : the soul of the modern business
man is a sealed mystery no longer.


CONCLUSION


CHAPTER * XXVIII
RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT


I can well imagine that the effect of this book on many
readers will be to produce a troubled feeling within them.
There has been so much new material and so many new
points of view and questions that a certain restlessness
may well be expected. Indeed, we cannot be anything but
restless when in the consideration of scientific problems
we seem to feel the ground slipping from beneath our
feet; and we do so when we lose the comfortable
formulas that have hitherto been our guides amid the
complexities of existence. In such a case we feel like
drowning in the ocean of facts, until we find a new
foothold or learn to swim.

Certainly this book had made short work of the pre-
vailing formulas as to the nature and origin of the
capitalist spirit. But many readers may be inclined to
throw it aside as useless because I have provided no new
formula in place of the old.

Are we to say, therefore, that the book is of no value
at all? A wit once said that a good book is one the
contents of which may be summed up in a sentence. I
confess I cannot do that in this case, except it be to say,


The problem of the capitalist spirit—its true nature and
384


RETROSPECT AND PROSPECT 355


its growth—is exceedingly intricate, far more intricate
than most people imagined, more even than I myself
once thought.

Yet though I am unable to provide any new formula, I
shall attempt in these last pages to lessen the feeling of
unrest that may have crept into the mind of the reader.
I shall attempt to provide him with a sort of sketch-map
by the aid of which he may find his way about in the
mass of facts before him.

What was the picture we drew of the nature and
development of the bourgeois ?

All historic development is the result of the natural
capacities of the different national units that have
appeared in European history .since the break-up of
the Roman Empire, and of their peculiar combina~
tion. In each group from its earliest history we
find two mighty forces at work; the one is the greed
of gold, the other the spirit of enterprise. Very soon
the two united, and from the union there sprang up in
the home of each nation a number of strong organisms,
economic and other, including the modern state itself.
With the state the conception of religious dissent made
its appearance, and gave a powerful impetus to the growth
of the capitalist spirit. But this conception again arose
from one other characteristic of the national consciousness
among European peoples—their strong religiosity.

The same motive powers forced the different groups
to undertake conquests and enterprises abroad in new
lands. Here they discovered an undreamed-of abundance
of the precious metals, which in their turn spurred on
afresh the old greed of gold and the spirit of enterprise.
Colonies were planted which, like the home lands, breathed
the capitalist spirit.

The spirit of enterprise was first active in the upper
classes, and consequently force played a great part in it.


356 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


But gradually it also spread among the broad masses,
who strove to become rich not by force but by the
peaceful methods of trafficking; and it is clear that
economical habits and careful calculations must have
helped them in the process.

All peoples witnessed the gradual rise in their midst
of the peaceful middle-class traders, who in the course
of time became an influential body ; but in some the
commercial spirit seemed to be more intense from the
very first, and brought the mercantile interests to the fore
more speedily. Such folk were the Etruscans, the Frisians,
and the Jews; and their influence increased as the psy-
chology of the capitalist undertaker tended to become
more and more that of the middle-class trader.

At first there were parallel streams in the national life
of peoples ; gradually these merged into one, so that the
capitalist undertaker united within himself the hero, the
trader, and the middle-class respectable citizen. But as
the stream flowed down to the sea, it was dominated more
and more by the middle-class trader, while the heroic
element slowly disappeared. Many forces helped to bring
this result about ; in particular the rise of the military
calling, the influence of morality and religion, both of
which helped to maintain the position of the peaceful
citizen, and last but not least the intermarrying of the
nobility and gentry with “city” elements, which gave
the latter the predominance. The truth is that heroic
qualities are rare enough, and any institution that desires
to become popular and widely accepted must base
itself on those instincts and capacities possessed by the
masses.

So the capitalist spirit developed apace, and we may
distinguish two stages in its growth. The one reached
out to about the end of the 18th century; the other
continued from that point of time to our own day, In


KEDROSPECT: AND PROSPECT 357


the first, the early capitalist epoch, the spirit of capitalism
was somewhat restricted by custom and morals, particu-
larly as taught by the Christian sects; and in the second
it enjoyed much more liberty.

Now, capitalist enterprise, aiming as it does at profits,
contains within itself tendencies that favour the growth
of unlimited and unprincipled undertakings. Five factors
combined to help the development of these tendencies :
(1) Natural Science, born of the Germanic-Romance
spirit, which was the mother of modern inventions ; (2)
Speculation, born of the Jewish spirit. Modern technical
progress allied with modern speculation provided the
necessary forms for the limitless efforts of capitalist
enterprise. The process was still more accelerated by
(3) the general Jewish influence which since the 17th
century has made itself felt in the economic life of
Europe. From its very nature this influence could not
but strive to extend its economic activities without let
or hindrance, regardless of all considerations; and its
religion, far from restraining it, gave it free rein. The
Jews were the catalytic substance in the rise of modern
capitalism. (4) As religious feeling became weaker and
weaker among the Christian peoples, the old bonds of
morality and tradition that had held capitalism in check
in its earliest stages gave way, until (5) they were
completely removed when through emigration the most
capable business types settled in new lands.

And so capitalism grew and grew and grew. To-day
it is like a mighty giant striding through the land,
treading down all that stands in its path.

What will its future be?

Those who believe that the giant Capitalism is destroying
both nature and man cannot but hope that he will be
captured and put within the bounds that restrained him
of old. Some people, indeed, expected to overcome him


358 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISH


by appealing to ethical principles ; I, for my part, can see
that such attempts are doomed to utter failure. When
we remember that capitalism has snapped the iron chains
of the oldest religions, it seems to me hardly likely that
it will allow itself to be bound by the silken threads of
the wisdom that hails from Weimar and Kénigsberg.
So long as the giant continues to be all-powerful it is
imperative to adopt such measures as will safeguard life
and limb and goods and chattels. Place buckets of water
in the shape of social legislation to protect the worker,
appoint trusty men to carry them into practice, and you
may extinguish the fire which is kindled in the peaceful
abodes of our civilization.

But, then, it may be asked, will its raging last for ever ?
Will it never be played out? I believe it will. I believe
that in the very nature of the capitalist spirit there are
elements that are making for its break-up and decay.
Cases of such decay we have already observed—in
Germany and Italy in the 16th century, in Holland and
France in the 17th, in England at the present time.*
Doubtless special circumstances will partially account for
the collapse in each case, but for the most part the result
was brought about by the inherent tendencies in the
capitalist spirit. As these influences were operative in
the past, so they may be operative in the future. The
spirit of enterprise (and with it naturally the capitalist
spirit) dies when men sink into the comfortable ease of
a life dependent on dividends; or, on the other hand,
when they are allured by the will-o’-the-wisps of society
and fashion. The bourgeois waxes fat as his riches
increase and as he accustoms himself to live on the
interest of his capital, to be held in the vice of luxury,
and to lead the life of a country gentleman. These


* (Cf. Mr. Edmund Holmes’s In Defence of What might be (1914),
chapter vi, “‘ The Decadence of England.” ]


RETROSPECT AND: PROSPECT 359


forces have been operative before; why should they
cease to be active now?

Nor do these forces stand alone in our own day. In
our own day capitalism must suffer wreck because of the
increasingly bureaucratic character of all our undertakings.
For that which is left after the dividend-receiver has had
his share goes to the bureaucrat. It is clear enough that
in a huge business run on a bureaucratic basis, where
economic rationalism no less than the spirit of enterprise
is a mechanical process, there is no room for the capitalist
spirit.

But in ail probability that spirit will be attacked from
yet another quarter. As civilization increases the number
of births decline, and before long the surplus of births
over deaths vanishes away. Against such a tendency we
seem powerless. No /ex Papia Poppzea, no nationalist or
religious revival, no problem plays will be of the slightest
use in counteracting its results. As the population
decreases capitalism will begin to lose strength. Was
not its mighty progress in the 19th century due to the
remarkable growth of the population?

And when the capitalist spirit has lost its power of
expansion, what then? That does not concern us here.
Possibly the blind giant may be condemned to draw the
wagon of a democratic civilization ; possibly it may be
the Twilight of the Gods and the gold will have to be
restored to the caverns of the Rhine. Who shall say?


MEW YORK SOCIETY LIBRARY
53 EAST 79 STREET
NEW YORK. NEW YORK 10021


NOTES AND REFERENCES


NOTES AND REFERENCES
INTRODUCTORY


Lirrie has been written on the subject of this book. Apart
from the critical studies of the chapters of my Modern Capitalism
which bear on the topics we may mention Max Weber’s essays in
Archiv fiir Sozialwtssenschaft und Sozialpolittk (vol. 21) on “ Die
protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus.” For the
rest very miscellaneous sources have been drawn upon ; and their
name is legion. For direct information as to the capitalist spirit
we may find ample material in the personal utterances of men
engaged in economic activities. Of course, this evidence must be
carefully sifted ; and in many instances the direct opposite of
what is stated may be concluded. Such direct evidence may be
either occasional utterances, conversations, extracts from letters,
and so on; or autobiographies, wills, or reflections. But the
indirect evidence is much more numerous, It may be classed
under several heads :

(1) The actual achievements or modern business, which of
necessity exemplify the capitalist spirit. “Take such things as
townplanning, organization of factories, transport facilities, tech-
nical aids of all sorts (railways, canals, waterworks, harbours),
commercial organization (e.g. speed in calculations), insurance
schemes, etc.

(2) Legal enactments and decisions—concerning competition,
advertisements, price formation, interest.

(3) Moral maxims, whether of religious or secular origin.
Here, too, may be included such things as social satires, party
pamphlets, suggestions for reforms, and the like.


(4) Reflections of the age as seen in public opinion (say, the
363


364 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


attitude of people to certain callings ; the attitude of the nobility
to trade), in literature, art, and science.

(5) The relationship of the social classes to one another—
industrial peace or industrial war ; patriarchal interest of employer
in employees, etc.

(6) Economic policy of a state—whether it favours free trade
or protection, and so on.


The relative value of these sources must of course vary. The
direct evidence is not abundant and thus not very fruitful of
results. Nevertheless, there are cases where it is invaluable,
particularly if you read between the lines. Especially does this
hold good of memoirs and autobiographies of successful business
men, in which the authors as a rule portray themselves as
unselfish folk wholly occupied with the weal of the common-
wealth, to whom money-getting is of comparatively little im-
portance, (This last assertion may even hold good in some cases
where the men concerned are steeped in wealth—say, Rocke-
feller, Carnegie, and others.) Some of the writers, however, are
honest enough to lay bare their naked souls ; these obviously are
the most useful authorities for our purpose. ‘The autobiography
of Strousberg [cf. pp. 175, 349] is a case in point. Another
fact must not be overlooked. Most of the memoirs and auto-
biographies of this kind that we possess are of the men who stood
head and shoulders above the crowd. Care is needed, therefore,
in generalizing ftom them.

Of the remainder, the evidence numbered (1) above is most
trustworthy : it never lies. That under (2) and (3) is also
useful, but only when carefully sifted. Otherwise it is dangerous,
so much so that some writers avoid it altogether.


CHAPTER I


1, St. Thomas, Summa theolog. II" I1*, qu. 50, article 3.

2. St. Thomas, Summa theolog. II* Il**, qu. 118, article 1.

3. Cf. my description of the seigniorial way of life in my Luxus
und Kapitalismus, p. 102 ff.

4. Alberti, Della famiglia, p. 265.

5. Cf. Willy Boehm, Friedrich Reisers Reformation des Kaisers


NOTES AND REFERENCES 365


Sigismund (1876), p. 218. ‘Es sind hantwerck darumb erdacht,
das yederman sein taglich brot darmit gewin und soll niemant
dem andern greiffen in sein hantwerck, damit schickt die welt ir
notdurft und mag sich yederman erneren.”

6. Keutgen, Amter und Ziinfte (1903), p. 84.

7. See, for example, B, C. Sattler, Handelsrechnungen des
deutschen Ordens (1887), p. 83; or the Introduction to Kopp-
mann’s Télners Handlungsbuch (xviii ff.) in the Geschichtsquellen
der Stadt Rostock, 1 (1885) 5 or the list of taxpayers of the City of
Paris for 1292, published by Géraud (Coll. des doc. inéd. 8. I.,
vol. 8 (1837), where we read “La plupart des additions sont
inexactes”” (p. v).

8. This applies even to Pegolotti (14th century) and Uzzano
(15th century).

9. H. Peetz, Volkswissenschaftliche Studien (1885), p. 186 ff.

10. A. Vierkandt, Die Stetigkett im Kulturwandel (1908),
p. 103 ff, a brilliant review of “ Traditionalism.”

11. F, Tonnies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft (and ed., 1912),
Hh. 11 2-f.

12. A. Vierkandt [note 10], p. 105.


CHAPTER II


13. [For an English translation of the Edda, see Corpus poeticum
boreale, by Vigfusson and F. York Powell, vol. 1, pp. 192 ff.
Or, the translation by Miss Bray, issued by the Viking Club
(Viking Club Publications, vol. 2).]

14. Gustav Freytag, Bilder aus der deutschen Vergangenhezt, 1,

f504
; eee von Ebengreuth, 4/lgemeine Miinzkunde (1904),
p. 139. ; é

15a, Lamprecht, Deutsches Wirtschaftsleben, vol, 2, p. 377.

16. Levasseur, Histoire de l'industrie, etc., vol. 1, p. 200.

17. Davidsohn, Geschichte von Florenz, vol. 1 (1896), p. 762.

18, Davilliers, L’orfevrerie et les arts décoratifs en Espagne,
quoted in Baudrillart, Histoire du Luxe, vol. 4, p. 217. Cf. also
Soetbeer in the 57th Supplement of Petermanns Mitteilungen,

21.


366 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


19. Briickner, Finanzgeschichtliche Studien, p. 733 Schurtz,
Entstehungsgeschichte des Geldes (1898), p. 120.

20. Amiet, “Die franzésische und lombardische Geldwucherer
der Mittelalter” (Fahrbuch fiir schweizerische Geschichte, vol. 1,
p. 183).

21. Alberti, Libri della famigha, p. 263.

22. Evidence on the point has been accumulated by E.
Michael, Geschichte des deutschen Volkes, vol. 1 (1897), p. 139.

2a: “ Regnat avaritia

regnant et avari


multum habet oneris
do, das, dedi, dare :
verbum hoc pre ceteris
norunt ignorare

divites, quos poteris
mari comparare.”


Carmina Burana, No. Ixvii, quoted by Michael [note 22],
p. 142.

24. Michael [note 22], p. 142.

25. The text is quoted in C. Frey, Loggia dei Lanzi.

25A. Regulo del governo di cura familiare, p. 128, quoted in
C. Guasti, Ser Lapo Mazzei, vol. 1 (1880), p. cxv.

26. These are a few instances from Alberti’s pages. Some
others may be found in Della famigha, ed. G. Mancini (1908),
pp: 26,.1 31, 132,°150,. 208,250, ete.

27. “El oro es excellentissimo, con el se hace tesoro y con el
tesoro quien lo tiene, hace cuanto quiere en el mundo y llega que
echa las animas al paraiso.” Quoted in A. von Humboldt’s
Examen critique de [histoire de la Géographie du nouveau continent,
vol."2: (1837), p. 40.

28. Cf. introduction to Vincent Tanara, L’ economia del cittadino
in villa (1648).

29. See, for example, Ulrich Gebhardt, Von der Kunst reich
zu werden, Augsburg, 1656. The author despises gold, but his
whole attitude (the very title of the book is significant) makes it
appear that he was preaching to deaf ears, as he taught that
the greatest wealth in the world was a kind heart and a sound
mind.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 367
CHAPTER III


30. Alberti, Della famiglia, p. 137.

31. V. Tanara [see note 28], p. 1.

22, “ Wiltu dich erneren
du junger edelman,
folg du miner lere
sitz uff, drab zum ban !
halt dich zu dem griinen wald
wan der bur ins holz fert
so renn in freislich an !
derwiisch in bi dem kragen
erfreuw das herze din
nimm im was er habe
span uss die pferdlin sin.”


See W. Arnold, Bibl. des Literarischen Vereins xu Stuttgart, vol. 43
(1857), p. 101. For later periods (say 1400) see the Chronicle
of Johannes Rothe of Creutzburg, edited by Karl Bartsch in
Mittelenglische Gedichte (1860).
33. Uhland, Alte hoch- und niederdeutsche Volkslieder, vol. 1
(1844), Pp. 339
34. H. Kapp, Die Alchemie, vol. 1 (1886), p. 12. A valuable
supplement to this book will be found in Schmieder, Geschichte
der Alchymie (1832). The author of this work still believes in
alchemy, and thus gives us a glimpse into the soul of the adept.
35. “Es will fast jedermann ein Alchimiste heissen,
Ein grober Idiot, der Jiinger mit den Greisen,
Ein Scherer, altes Weib, ein kurtzweiliger Rat,
Der kah! geschorne Monch, der Priester und Soldat.”


See Kapp [note 34], vol. 1, p. 234, who quotes the Examen
alchemisticum of Pantaleon.
36. Cf. also Paracelsus, Caelum philosophicum seu liber vexationum,


quoted by Kapp [note 34], vol. 1, p. 39.
37. See Louis Figuier, L’alchimie et les alchimistes (1860),


p. 130.
38. Cf. H. von Sbrik, Exporthandel Oesterreichs (1907),


gtk 3:
39. In Archiv fiir Soxialwissenschaft und soxiale Politik, vol. 34.


\


Mog
PROPERTY


OF THE 1 2Y¥


368 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


40. Ranke, Fiirsten und Volker von Siideuropa, vol. 1 (1857),
p. 410.

41, See G, Fagniez, L’ économie sociale de la France sous Henri
IV (1897), p- 33:

42. Charles Normand, La bourgeoisie frangaise au xvii siecle
(1908), p. 185. Beside the instances recorded in this valuable
book, the following may be mentioned: In the 17th century
there was the famous Theophraste Renaudot, “le fondateur du
journalisme frangais, le cerveau le plus inventif peut-étre de
V’époque, dans lequel ont germé bon nombre d’idées utiles, a peine
mélées d’un grain @utopie.” Cf. G. d’Avenel, Histoire éono-
mique, vol. 1 (1894), p. 121. By his side may be placed Nicholas
Blegny, who died in 1722. He has been described as “ A pothe-
caire, écrivain, collectionneur et journaliste; fondateur d’une
société médicale, d’une maison de santé et d’un cours pour les
garcons perruquiers ; premier chirurgien de la Reine et ‘ chirur-
gien ordinaire du corps de Monsieur’ ; chevalier d’industrie a
Yoccasion et finalement jeté en prison... auteur du ‘Livre
commode contenant les adresses de la ville de Paris, etc., par
Abraham du Pradel, philosophe et mathematicien, Paris, 1692’ ”’
(new edition, 1878). Cf. E. Bonassé, Dictionnaire des amateurs
frangais au 17 siécle (1884). [For an account of an English
projector see Addison’s Spectator (April 5, 1711).]

43. Cf. Mercier, Tableau de Paris, vol. 1, p. 222 (ch. 73).

44. In Adolf Beer, Die Staatsschulden und die Ordnung des
Staatshaushaltes unter Maria Theresia, vol. 1 (1894), pp. 37-8.

45. The first lottery was instituted by the state in Florence
in 1530; later developments of lottery came into existence in
Holland in the 16th century, in Hamburg in 1610, in England
in 1694, in Nuremberg in 1699. Cf. the article “ Lotterie ” in
the Handworterbuch des Staatswissenschaften. The interest in
lotteries became intense towards the end of the 17th century.
Cf. Reflexions sur ce que l’on appelle bonheur et malheur en matiére
de Loteries, Amsterdam, 1696.

46. I follow Max Wirth, Geschichte der Handelskrisen (1883).

47. W. Sombart, The Fews and Modern Capitalism, p. 88
[cf. for an evaluation of this book, “The Jews as an Economic
Force,” by M. Epstein, in The Fortnightly Review, April,
1914].

48. Defoe, On Projects (1697) [pp. 29, 30].


NOTES AND REFERENCES 369


CHAPTER IV


48a. The problem treated in this chapter I first dealt with in
an article on the subject in the Archiv fir Sozialwissenschaft und
Sozialpolitik, vol. 29 (1909). Cf. also H. Kurella, Die Intellek-
tuellen und die Gesellschaft (1913).

49. The Greeks had a word to express the idea perfectly :
XpnuariGav. Cf. Plato, Republic, 434A.


CHAPTER V


49a. J. Burckhardt, Kultur der Renaissance, vol. 1 (3rd ed.),
p. 22%

50. Carl Clausewitz, Vom Kriege, Bk. I, ch. 3. [There is
now an English version of this book. ]

51. Cf. J. Burckhardt [cf. note 49a], pp. 15, 16.


CHAPTER VI


52. Cf. also Lastig, “ Beitrage zur Geschichte des Handels-

rechts” in the Zeitschrift fiir das gesammte Handelsrecht, vol. 23,
ps2.

; 53. Clemens Sander, quoted in Ehrenberg’s Zeitalter der

Fugger, vol. 1 (1896), pp. 212-13.

54. C. Neuburg, Goslars Bergbau (1892), p. 191.

55. F. Dobel, “ Der Fugger Bergbau und Handel in Ungarn”
in the Zeitschrift des historischen Vereins fiir Schwaben und Neu-
burg (1907), p. 368.

56. H. von Sbrik [see note 38], p. 368.

57. P. Hitzinger, Das Quecksilberbergewerk zu Idria (1860),
pp. 18, 24.

574. U. Krafft, Denkwiirdigkeiten, ed. Cohn (1862), p. 459.

58. K. Graf Sternberg, Geschichte d. béhmischen Bergwerke,
vol. 1 (1836), p. 308.

59. G. R. Lewis, The Stanneries (1908).

60. H. Peetz [see note g], p. 69.

24


370 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


61. H. Beck, Geschichte des Eisens, vol. 2, pp. 602 ff., 652.

62. Cf, Sternberg [see note 58], vol. 1, p. 389.

63. Allgemeine Schatzkammer der Kaufmannschaft, vol. 2 (1741),
p. 734 f.

64. Cf. Savary’s statement, “La plupart des personnes de
qualité, de robe et autres donnant leur argent au négociants
en gros pour le faire valoir ; ceux-ci vendent leur marchandise a
credit d’un an ou de quinze mois aux détaillants ; ils en tirent
par ce moyen Io % d’intérét et profitent ainsi de 3 ou 4%.”

65. P. Kaeppelin, La compagnie des Indes orientales (1908),

aes
: 66. P. Kaeppelin [see note 65], p. 8. Cf. also Sternberg [see
note 58], vol. 1, p. 2.

67. Cf. Sternberg [see note 58], vol. 1, p. 2.

68. Ed. Heyck, Genua und seine Morium (1886), p. 182.

69. W. Heyd, Geschichte des Levantehandels im Mittelalter,
vol. 1 (1879), p. 255. For cases of piracy, cf. vol. 1, pp. 258,
263, 487, 489; vol. 2, p. 16. See also Tafel and Thomas,
Quellen zur oesterreichische Geschichte, vol. 3, pp. 159-281.

6ga. H. Pigeonneau, Histoire du commerce de la France, vol. 2
(1889), p. 170.

70. Published in Eugene Sue, L’histoire de la marine frangaise,
vol. 4 (1836), Bk. VII, ch. 1 and 2.

71. See Histoire des Aventuriers, by A. O. Ocxmelin (J.
Esquemeling), 1678. Cf. also P. Pyle, The Buccaneers and
Marooners of America, 1891 ; Burney, History of the Buccaneers
of America, latest edition, 1902; H. Handelmann, Geschichte der
Insel Haiti (1856), p. 22. For a bibliography (not complete) of
sea-robbery and piracy in the 16th and 17th centuries, see
J. Pohler, Bibliographia historico-militaris, vol. 3 (1895), p. 737.

72. Froude, History of England, vol. 8 (1863), p. 451.

73. F. Hume Brown, Scotland in the Time of Queen Mary
(1904), p. 72.

74. Gardiner, Commonwealth, vol. 1, p. 330, quoted in Cun-
ningham’s Growth of English Industry and Commerce, vol. 2
(1903), p. 188.

75. 9.C. Hughson, The Carolina Pirates and Colonial Com-
merce, 1670-1740 (1894), one of the best books on the subject.

76. The most important documents illustrating the history of |
privateering in the North American colonies, including the very


NOTES AND REFERENCES 371


valuable reports of the Earl of Bellamont to the Lords Com-
missioners of Trade, may be found in Documents relating to the
Colonial History of the State of New York, vol. 4 (1854), pp. 306,
323, 447, 480, and 512. Cf, also Macaulay’s History of England,
vol. 10.

77. See, e.g. F. A. von Langegg, E/ Dorado, Geschichte der
Entdeckungenfahrten nach dem Goldlande El Dorado im xvi und
xvit Fahrhundert, 1888.

78. The philosopher’s stone slowly began to be the accom-
paniment of the wished-for El Dorado. . Cf., e.g., Laurentius
Ventura in his enigma della Pietra phisica (1571) :—


“Nell India (parte pi calda del mondo)
Nasce pietra talhar ch’en se rinchiude
Virtu infinite che vengon dal cielo.”


Cf. C. G. von Murr, Literarische Nachrichten zu der Geschichte
des sogenannten Goldmachens (1805), p. 40.

79. A good recent biography of Raleigh is that by Hugh de
Sélincourt, Great Raleigh (1908).

80, Captain Francis Allen to Anthony Bacon, August 17,
1589, quoted by Douglas Campbell, The Puritans in Holland,
England, and America, vol. 2 (1892), p. 120. [With regard to
Drake, for a somewhat new aspect of his career see New Light
on Drake: a collection of documents relating to his circumnavigation,
translated and edited by Zelia Nuttall (The Hakluyt Society,
I9I4).

81. Benjamin of Tudela’s travels. [There is an English
translation of this interesting work by A. Asher, London,
1840. ]

81a. Cf. G. Caro, Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte der “fuden,
vol. 1 (1908), p. 235.

82. See H. R. Fox Bourne, English Merchants (1886), for a
study of English merchants in the early capitalist epoch.

83. F. A. von Langegg [see note 77]. Also Konrad Habler,
Die iiberseeischen Unternehmungen der Welfer und threr Gesell-
schafter (1903), and F. Eulenburg in the Historische Zeitschrift


(1904), p. 104. ie
84. Ulrich Kraffts, Merkwiirdigkeiten, ed. Cohn, 1862.


372 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


84a. H. Pigeonneau [see note 69a], vol. 2 (1889), p. 170.

85. Cf. Sieveking, Genueser Finanzwesen, vol. 1, Pp. 1773
Four 2; peegd.

86. O. Burrish, Batavia illustrata, or, A View of the Policy and
Commerce of the United Provinces (1728), p. 333-

87. Prince Neuwied, Reise in Nordamerika, vol. 1, pp. 351,
427, 552, 610; vol. 2, p. 713 quoted by Roscher, Kolonien (3rd
ed., 1885), p. 267.

88. Heyd [note 69], vol. 2, p. 376.

89. Postlethwayt, Dictionary of Commerce, vol. 1, p. 241.

go. Report of the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plan-
tations, quoted by Anderson [note 132], vol. 3, p. 203. In Pos-
tlethwayt’s Dictionary, vol. 1, p. 728, there is an account of
the forts, munition, and men on the African coast.

g1. Cunningham [see note 74], vol. 2, p. 70.

92. As is done for example in J. P. J. Dubois, Vie des
gouverneurs généraux avec l’abrégé des établissements hollandais aux
Indes orientales (1763).

93. Cf. E. Laspeyres, Geschichte der volkswirtschaftlchen
Anschauungen der Niederlinder (1863), p. 60.

94. Peter Mischler, Das deutsche Eisenhiittengewerbe, vol. 1
(1852), p. 201.

gs. For instance see Dictionnaire du Commerce, under Société ;
the Introduction a la Correspondance administr. de Louis XIV,
vol 3, p. liv (by Depping) ; G. Martin, La grande industrie sous
Louis XV (1900), p. 109 ; Postlethwayt, Dictionary of Commerce,
vol. 2, p. 778; Anderson, Origin of Commerce [see note 132],
vol. 2, p. 5943 George Unwin, Industrial Organization in the
16th and 17th Centuries (1904), pp. 145, 165.

96. Cf. R. M. Garnier, History of the English Landed Interest,
2 vols, 1892, 2nd ed., 1908.

97. G. Knapp, Die Bauernbefreiung, 2 vols, 1887.

98. G. T. Lapsley in Englhsh Historical Review, vol. 14
(1899), p. 509.

99. Unwin [see note 95], p. 167.

100. Rymer, Federa, vol. 18, p. 870, quoted by Anderson
[see note 132], vol. 2, p. 234.

to1. Hugh de Sélincourt [see note 79], p. 89.

102. Anderson [see note 132], vol. 2, p. 594.

102A. Jars, Voyages métallurgiques, vol. 1 (1774), p. 190.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 373


103. Cf. Claude Corbier, “Les forges a Guerigny” in
Bulletin de la Société nivernaise, 1870.

104. G. Martin, Louis XV, p. 115,

105. Ibid. p. 110.

106, Ibid. p, 214.

107. Ibid. p. 115.

108. Cf. A. des Cilleuls, La grande industrie (1898), p. 59,
and notes, 210.

109. Depping [see note 95], vol. 3, p. Ix.

110. G. Martin, Louis XIV (1899), p. 318.

111. P. Hitzinger [see note 57], pp. 13, 14.

112. S. Worms, Schwazer Bergbau (1904), p. 37.

113. H. Beck, Geschichte des Eisens, vol. 2, p. 152.

114. Beck, vol. 2; p. 620,

115. Gustaf of Gejerstam, Arbetarnes stillning vid fyra svenska
grufoor.

116, W. J. Ashley, Woollen Industry, p. 80; cf. Gibbins,
Industry of England (1906 ed.), p. 147.

117. Rymer, Fadera, 19, 35, quoted by Anderson [note 132],
vol. 2, p; 335.

118. G. Martin, Louis XV (1900), p. 199.

119, A. de Calonne, La vie agricole sous l’ancien régime en
Picardie et en Artois (1883), p. III.

120. Cf. G. Martin, Louis XV, pp. 113, 214.

121. Cf. Karl Pribram, Geschichte der oesterreichischen Gewerbe-
politzk, vol. 1 (1907), p. 120.

122. T. Geering, “ Entwicklung des Zeugdrucks im Abend-
lande seit dem 17°" Jahrhundert” in the Viertelahrschrift fir
Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte, vol. 1, p. 409.

123. See the letters patent for 1577, 1603, 1615, 1655, 1727,
and 1734 in A. des Cilleuls [see note 95], notes 17, 18, and 19.

124. For France, see P. Boissonade, Organisation du Travail
en Poitou, vol. 1 (1900), p. 120, For Germany, Allgemeine
Schatzkammer der Kaufmannschaft, vol. 3 (1742), p. 677. For
England, Rymer, Federa, vol. 20, p. 1g1, quoted in Anderson
fsee note 197 f vol.2, p. 376.

125. The colonial systems in the Levant and in Central and
South America I have described at length in my Modern Capital
ism, Vol, I, p. 331.

126, J. C. Ballagh, White Servitude in Virginia (1895), p. 17 3


374. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


E. J. McCormac, White Servitude in Maryland (1904), p. 11 5
R. W. Jeffrey, The History of the Thirteen Colonies of North
America (1908).

126a, T. Vogelstein, Organisationsformen der Eisenindustrie und
Textilindustrie in England und Amerika (1910), p. 191.

127. Lettres, etc., de Colbert, par P. Clément, vol. 2, part 2,
ccvil,

128. F. von Bezold, Staat und Gesellschaft des Reformations-
zeitalters (1908), p. 64.

129. Leipziger Sammlungen (ed. Zinken, 1745), vol. 9, p- 973,
quoted by Schmoller in his ‘Fahrbuch, vol. 15, p. 8

130. Alfred Bosenik, Uber die Arbeitsleistung beim Steinkohlen-
bergbau in Preussen (1906), p. 103.

131. See Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 246, for Colbert’s work
in founding the “ Compagnie du Point de France.”

132. A. Anderson [4 Historical and Chronological Deduction
of the Origin of Commerce, from the Earliest Accounts, 4 vols., 1787],
vol, 3, p. 9I.

133. Think of the “spirit” of the great speculator, and the
mind immediately turns to the characterization of Saccard in
Zola’s L’ Argent.

134. From the Clothworkers’ Court Book, July 12, 34 Henry
VIII, quoted by Unwin [see note 95], p. 57.

135. 3 & 4 Edward VI, c. 6, quoted by Unwin, p. 56.

136, Cf. Levasseur [see note 16], vol. 2, p. 163.

137. For Frankfort on the Main, see F. Bothe, Beitrdge zur
Wirtschafts- und Soxialgeschichte der Reichstadt Frankfurt (1906),
p. 733 Kracauer, “ Beitrage zur Geschichte der Frankfurter
Juden im Dreisigjahrigen Kriege” in Zeitschrift fiir Geschichte
der ‘Fuden in Deutschland, vol. 3 (1889), p. 148. For London,
see History of the Trade in England (1702), pp. 134, 164; C.
Weiss, Histoire des réfugiés protestants, vol. 1 (1853), p. 337.
For aoe P. Malvezin, Les Fuifs a4 Bordeaux (1875),
p. 196.

137A, Cf. W. Heyd [see note 69], vol. 2, pp. 295, 336, 477,
486. Cf. also the same writer’s article, “Die italienischen
Handelskompagnien auf Cypern” in Zeitschrift fiir die gesammte
Staatswissenschaften (1865).

138, Cf. John Mackintosh, History of Civilization in Scotland,


vol, 3 (1895), p. 300.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 375


138a. Heinrich Heine in his English Fragments (1828), ch. iv.

139. “ Un entrepreneur de fabrique qu’il connaisse ou qu’il ne
connaisse pas le détail des opérations d’un grand objet, est celui
qui les embrasse toutes, ainsi que les spéculations qui y ont
rapport et qui a en sous ordre des contre-maitres et des commis
pour diriger les unes et les autres et les lui rapporter comme a un
centre qui leur est commun. Ainsi homme qui est a la téte
dun établissement en grand, ot l’on employe diverses sortes de
matiére ou d’un établissement ot l’on modifie trés diversement la
méme matiére—cet homme est un entrepreneur. Si, au lieu de
cela, il n’a, par exemple, a diriger qu’une manufacture de draps,
de toiles, d’étoffes quelconques, dont les détails plus rapprochés,
peuvent et doivent €étre sus et suivi imperturbablement par lui-
méme, cet homme est un fabricant: il a ou il n’a pas sous lui
des contre-maitres ; mais il est le premier contre-maitre de sa
fabrique.” See article “Attelier” in the Encyclop. méthodique
manufact., vol. 1 (1785), p. I.

139A. G. Schmoller, Geschichte der deutschen Kleingewerbe
(1870), p. 580.

140. For Berlin, cf. O. Wiedfeldt, Die Berliner Industrie


(1899), p- 79.
CHAPTER VII


141. See, for’ example, the so-called Zzba/doni, of which
numerous instances are extant, as, e.g., the Tesoro of Brunetti
Latini, the Dittamondo of Fazio degli Uberti, the Zzbaldone of
Giovanni Ruccellai. None of them has, to my knowledge, been
edited. Extracts from the last named may be found in G.
Marcotti’s Un mercante fiorentino e la sua famigha nel secolo xv
(Florence, 1881), For a notice of this book see D’Ancona in
the Nuova Antologia for July 15, 1881. “These Zibaldoni were a
sort of scrap book, in which their authors set down the
important events of their land and family, extracts from their
reading, their commercial experience and trade advice. The
family books of Alberti are one of the principal sources of this
kind; an excellent edition of these is now available: Leon
Battista Alberti, 1 Libri della Famigha, editi da Girolamo
Mancini, Florence, 1908. Agnolo Pandolfini’s De/ governo della
famigha (frequent editions since 1825), which was so highly


376 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


praised by Burckhardt [see note 49a], vol. 1, p. 164, is merely
an almost verbal reproduction of Alberti. Concerning the
Recordanze domestiche of Luca di Matteo da Panzano (1406-61)
there is some account (but not a good one) by Carlo Carnefechi,
“Un fiorentino del secolo xv,” in Archivo storio italiano, 5th
series, vol. 4, p. 145. Useful to a slight extent also is Lettere
di un notaro a un mercante del secolo xiv, published by Cesare
Guasti, under the title Ser Lapo Mazzei, 2 vols., Florence, 1880.

142. Alberti, Della famiglia, p. 142. Pandolfini has almost
the identical words.

143. Giovanni Ruccellai in his Zibaldone (1459), quoted in
Marcotti [note 141], p. 106.

144. Ruccellai once more, in Marcotti, p. 112.

145. Alberti [note 142], p. 135.

146. Ibid. pp. 150-4.

147. Ibid. p. 154.

148. Ibid.

149. Ibid. pp. 198-9.

149A. Ibid. p. 163.

150. Ibid. p. 166.

151. Ibid. p. 45.

152. Ibid. pp. 121, 200.

153. Ibid. p. 200.

154. Ibid. p. 165.

155. Ibid. p. 137.

156. Ina historical novel by Dimitry Sergew Mereschkowski,
Leonardo da Vinci. A German translation was published in 1912,

157. Cf. Agricoltura tratta da diversi antichi et moderni scrittori.
Da Sig. G. Alfonso d’Herrera .. . et tradotta di lingua spagnuola
in italiana da Mambrino Roseo da Fabriano, In Venetio, 1592.

158. See the Italian translation of Etienne (1581), pp. 7, 10,
Lgatd, 929, alg ch. *0;

159. V. Tanara [note 31], pp. 2, 119, 202, 269.

160, Le parfait négociant, by Jacques Savary, 4th ed., vol. 1
(1697), Pp. 31.

161. The Complete English Tradesman (sth ed., 1745).

162. Franklins Schatzkdstlein, ed. by von Bergk, vol. 1 (1839),
pi7k:

163. The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, by Albert Henry
Smyth, 1907, vol, 2, p. 370.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 37


164. [Smyth, vol. 3, p. 408, “ Preface to Poor Richard im-
proved, 1758.”]

165. “Poor Richard’s Almanac,” Smyth, vol. 3, pp. 413
and 417.

166. Smyth, vol. 2, p. 372.

167, Franklin’s Autobiography, Smyth, a Ty peng20.

168. Cf, Le négociant patriote (1779), p

169. Smyth, vol. 1, Introduction, p. ie

170. Alberti, Della famigha, pp. 133, 134.

171. Cf., e.g., Samuel Lamb in his memorandum against the
foundation of a Bank in London (1659), in Lord Somers’ Tracts.
Cf. also the view of Owen Felltham in his Observations (1652)
as to “the moderation and constancy ” of the Dutch, and the
greed of the English, who “ would cheat all if it were in their
power.” Quoted by Douglas Campbell in his Puritans, vol. 2,
p- 327. Compare furthermore Froude’s History of England,
vol. 12, p. 565, and F, A, Inderwick, The Interregnum, pp. 62,
79, 81.

172, Alberti [see note 170], pp. 139, 140.

173. Smyth, vol. 1, p. 307.


CHAPTER VIII


174. See, for example (Lucas de Burgo), Swmma de Arithmetica
(1494), ed. 1523, p. 198 [compare also Burke’s famous dictum,
in his Reflexions on the French Revolution, “ The age of chivalry is
gone, that of sophisters, economists, and calculators has suc-
ceeded ”’].

175. Some useful books of reference on the subject of the
whole of Chapter VIII may be added. The Liber Abacit was
published in 1857 by Buoncompagni. The system of double
entry of Fra Luca is treated of by E. L. Jager, Lucas Pacioh
und Simon Stevin (1876). For a history of calculation consult
any good history of mathematics. Furthermore, Hugo Grosse,
Historische Rechenbiicher des 16 und 17 ‘fahrhunderts (1901).

176. Alberti [note 170], pp. 191-2.


177. Smyth, vol. 1, p. 345.
178. Ludolf Schleicher, Das merkantilische Hamburg (1838),


Pp. 75:


378 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM
CHAPTER X


179. Burckhardt [note 49a], vol. 1, p. 78.

180. Ibid. vol. 2, pp. 107, 167.

181. For the sources see Burckhardt, vol. 2, p. 167.

182. Cf. also the “Proemio” in Crescenzi, De/l’ agricultura
(1605).

183. Cf. Buckle, History of Civilization, vol. 2, p. 67.

184. Sempere, AZonarchie Espagnole, vol. 2, p. 50.

185. von Bezold [note 128], p. 45.

186. Ranke [note 40], vol. 1 (1857), p. 446.

187. Travellers of the 17th century all bear witness to the
disappearance of the capitalist spirit from Spain in those days.
Says a writer in 1699: “Ils mésprisent tellement le travail, que
la plipart des artisans sont étrangers.” Voyages faits en divers
temps par M.M., Amsterdam, 1700, p. 80. An Englishman in
1693 reported: “They think it below the dignity of a Spaniard
to labour and provide for the future,” Travels by a Gentleman,
London, 1702, p. 35. See also D’Aulnoy, Relat. du Voyage
d@’ Espagne, Lyons (1693), vol. 2, pp. 369-70. All these authorities
are quoted by Buckle [note 183], vol. 2, p. 64.

188, For Mexico (Spaniards) see A. von Humboldt, Nouvelle
Espagne, vol, 4, p. 21. For Brazil (Portuguese), see von
Eschwege, Pluto brasiliensis (1833), p. 251.

189. Montaigne, Essays, livre 1, ch. 30.

190. See P. Kaeppelin [note 65], p. 4.

191. P. Kaeppelin, pp. 4, 11, 16, 130.

192. Le négociant patriote (1779), p. 13.

193. Ibid. pp. 27, 228.

194. Cf. Pigeonneau [note 69a], vol. 2, pp. 175-6.

195. C. Normand [note 42], pp. 11, 42. See also Levasseur
[note 16], vol. 2, p. 237, for the same point ; likewise Savary
[note 160], vol. 2, p. 183. [That this French characteristic has
in no wise disappeared in modern days is shown by Emile
Faguet’s book, The Decay of Responsibility (English version by
Mrs. Putnam). ]

196. Lassemas, Traité du commerce de la vie du royal marchand
(1601), quoted by G. Fagniez [note 41], p. 253.

197. “Tout est perdu lorsque la profession lucrative du traitant
parvient encore par ses richesses a étre une profession honorée.”


NOTES AND REFERENCES 379


198. “Est stultissimum ac sordidissimum negotiatorum
Sensi.

199. “Es ist vor allen ein iiberaus stinckende Sect der
Kauffeut.<.. .”

200. Otto Neurath, “Zur Anschauung der Antike iiber
Handel, etc.,” in Fahrbiicher fiir Nationalékonomie, Series 34,
Pp. 179:

201. Cf. my Deutsche Volkswirtschaft im 19°" Fahrhundert
(1913), pp. 100, 118.

202. All the oilawine quotations are from Buckle [note 183],
vol. 2, p. 160,

203. Such is the heading of a chapter in Schulze-Gaevernitz’s
valuable book, Britischer Imperialismus und englischer Freihandel
(1906).

204. Ibid. p. 362.

205. Some of it will be found in T. Vogelstein [126a],
p- 170.


CHAPTER XI


206. Alberti [note 170], p. 49.

207. Ibid. p. 139.

208. Ibid. p. 49.

209. The Economy of Human Life (1785), p. 338.

210. The Way to Wealth (edition by Dr. Bergk, 1838).

211. Ibid.

212. Alberti [note 170], p. 242.

213. The Economy of Human Life, p, 121.

[213a]. Smyth [note 163], vol. 1, p. 332.

[213B]. The Complete English Tradesman, part 2 (1727 ed.),
pp. 97, 161 and 213.

214. G. Smith, Diss. de privilegiis societatis Indie orientalis
(1786), quoted by Laspeyres [note 93], p. 91.

215. Laspeyres [note 93], p. 87.

216. Alberti [note 170], p. 165.

217. Cf. J. Godard, L’ouvrier en soie, vol. 1 (1899), pp. 38-9.

218. Cf. Fox Bourne [note 82], p. 394.

219. The fews and Modern Capitalism, p. 122.

220. See Allgemeine Schatzkammer der Kaufmannschaft (1741),
vol. 3, p. 148; vol. 4, p. 6773 vol. 3, p. 13253 vol. 1, p. 1392.


380 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


221. W. Barrett, The Old Merchants of New York City (1863),
pp. 22, 25.

222. The Complete English Tradesman (ed. 1727), part 2,
plist:

223. Josiah Child, 4 New Discourse of Trade (4th ed.), p. 159.

224. See Unwin [note 95], p. 117.

225. See Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 257.

226, J. J. Becher, Nérrische Weisheit (1686), p. 15.

226a. Cf. Carl Ergang, “ Untersuchungen zum Maschinen-
problem in der Volkswirtschaftlichen Lehre,” in Freiburger
Volkswirtschaftliche Abhandlungen, vol. 1, section 2 (1911), pp. 4
and 10.

227. Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, bk. 23, ch, 15.

228. Postlethwayt [note 89], vol. 2, p. 121.


CHAPTER XII


229. Walter Rathenau, Reflexionen (1908), p. 81.
230. Ibid. p. 82.
231. See my essay in Archiv fir Soziale Wissenschaft, vol. 29,
p. 700, where I have elaborated this subject.
232. Andrew Carnegie’s Autobiography.
233. Report of the Indiana Commission (1900), p. 795.
234. Dr. Strousberg und sein Wirken. By himself (1876),
p. ;
235. L. Jolles, “Eine wirtschaftliche Personlichkeit” in
Der Tag, No. 215 of 1909.
236. W. Rathenau [note 229], p. 99.
237. John R. Rockefeller’s Wemoirs.


CHAPTER XIII


238. Ludwig Feuchtwanger, “ Die ethischen Grundlagen der
Nationalokonomie,” in Schmoller’s Fahrbuch, vol. 37 (1913),
p. 961.

239. See F. Rochfahl, “ Kalvinismus und Kapitalismus” in
Internationales Wochenschrift (1909), p. 1293.

240. Cf. for instance Rathenau [note 229], p. 92.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 381


CHAPTER XIV


241, Consult the Handwirterbuch der Philosophie, by Dr.
Rudolf Eisler (1913), for “natural gifts.’ Also H. Kurella
[note 48a].

242. Werner Siemens, Lebenserinnerungen, p. 296.

243. Cicero, Brutus, p. 257.

244, Xenophon, CGiconomicus, chaps. 2, 9, and 12.

245. Columella, De re rustica, lib. xi. ch, 1.


CHAPTER XV


246. Cf. H. E. Ziegler, Die Naturwissenschaft und die sozial-
demokratische Theorie (1893), p. 251.

247. For the ethnography of Scotland, see W. F. Skene,
Celtic Scotland, 3 vols. (1876-80) ; John Mackintosh, History
of Civilization in Scotland, 4 vols. (1892).

248. A. W. Wiston-Glynn, Fohn Law of Lauriston (1907),
: ae For a good account of the ethnology of the Iberian
Peninsula see H. Schurtz, “ Die Pyrrhenaen-Halbinsel,” in
Helmholts’ Weltgeschichte, vol. 4.

250. Cf. J. Jung in Helmholts, vol. 4, p. 366.

251. Cicero, De offciis, I, c, 42. Cf. Otto Neurath
[note 200], p. 577.

252. G. Toniolo, Dei remoti fattori della potenza economica di
Firenze (1882), pp. 12, 46.

253. For the Etruscans, see Miiller-Deecke, Die Etrusker,
2 vols, (1877). Cf. also Pauli, “ Die Urvolker der Apenninhalb-
insel” in Helmholts [note 249], vol. 4; also H. Genthe, Uber
den etruskischen Tauschhandel nach den Norden (1874).

254. Miiller-Deecke, ibid. vol. 2, p. 325.

a5sr Livyyuvecl,

256. Davidsohn [note 17], vol. 1, p. 39.

257. Skene [note 247], vol. 1, pp. 145, 191, 231.

258. J. Klumker, Der friesische Tuchhandel xur Zeit Karls des
Grossen (Doctorate dissertation, University of Leipzig).


382 THE QUINTESSENCE, OF CAPITALISM


259. T. Hume Brown, Scotland in the Time of Queen Mary
(1904), p. 182. .
25ga. Cf. Luigi Passerini, Gi Alberti de Firenze. Genealogia,


storia e documenti, 2 vols., 1869.


CHAPTER XVI


260. Alberti, pp. 164, 198, 264 et passim.

261. Cf. N. Tamassia, La famiglia italiana net sc. xv e xvt
(1910), p. 40.

262. Marcotti [note 141], p. 106.

263. Ibid. p. 46.

264. Xenophon, Gconomicus, ch. 11.

265. Ibid.

266. Max Weber, Rémische Agrargeschichte (1891), p. 225.

267. Cf. Columella [note 245], lib. i. ch. 1.

268. Ibid. lib. xi. ch. 1.

269. “ Divitiz grandes homini sunt vivere parce.”


CHAPTER XVII


270. Alberti [note 141], p. 54.

291. Lid, pu i122.

272. Cf. Charles Dejob, La foi religieuse en Italie au xiv siécte
(1906).

273. Cf. G. Toniolo, Dei remoti fattori della potenza economica
di Firenze (1882).

274. Cf., for instance, O. Hartwig, Quellen und Forchungen zur
dlteren Geschichte von Florenz, vol. 1 (1875), p. 93.

275. Charles de Ribbe, Les familles et la société en France avant
la Révolution d’aprés des documents originaux, 2nd ed., 2 vols.,
Paris (1874). The book contains numerous extracts from the
Livres de raison of the 15th to the 18th centuries.

276, W. Sombart, The Fews and Modern Capitalism, p. 191 ft.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 383


CHAPTER XVIII


277. Cf. Jacob Strieder, “ Kirche, Staat und Friihkapitalismus”
in the Hertling Festschrift (1913). See also, for further references,
Sombart’s Der Moderne Kapitalismus, vol. 1 (1902).

278. Our principal source is to be found in the writings of St.
Thomas himself. ‘The citations in the following notes are from
the Jubilee edition of the work, S. Thome Aquinatis Summa
theologica, Rome (1886). Even more important are the writings
of the later Schoolmen, notably the Summa theologica of St.
Antonine of Florence, of which I have used the Florentine
edition of 1741, S. Antonini . . . summa moralis, cura Th. Marie
Mammachi et Dionysii Remedelli (the best edition is that of
Verona of 1741). Beside these two authorities the following
should likewise be consulted : Bernhardini Senensis Opera omnia,
5 vols., Paris (1636) ; Chrys. Favellus, Philosophia economica divina
atque christiana, Venice (1540). As for modern works, the
following may be mentioned: W. Endemann, Studien in der
romanisch-kanonischen Wirtschafts- und Rechtslehre, 2. vols. (1874—
83); Funk, “ Uber die dkonomischen Anschauungen der mittel-
alterlichen Theologen,” in the Zeitschrift fiir die gesammten
Staatswissenschaften, vol. 25 (1869). A good piece of work,
unfortunately left unfinished, is M. Maurenbrecher’s Leipzig
doctorate dissertation, Thomas von Aquinos Stellung zum Wirt-
schaftsleben seiner Zeit. Antonine of Florence has been carefully
studied by Carl Ilgner in his book, Die volkswirtschaftlichen
Anschauungen Antonins von Florenz (1904). Another piece of
work worth mentioning in this connection is Franz Keller’s
Unternehmung und Mehrwert. Eine sozial-ethische Studie xur
Geschaftsmoral (1912). (This forms the twelfth volume of the
Schriften der Gtrres-Gesellschaft, Sektion fiir Rechts- und Staats-
wissenschaften.) Finally, Ernst Troeltsch will be found sugges-
tive in his Die Soxiallehren der christlichen Kirchen und Gruppen
(1912).

[For a good account in English of the canonist doctrines, see
Professor Ashley’s Economic History, vol. 1, part 1, ch. 3, and
part 2, ch. 6.]

279. St. Thomas, Summa [note 278], Il* Il, qu. 153,
a. 2 and 3.


384. THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


280. “Virtus consistet in medio rei vel rationis.” Cf.
Antonine, Summa moralis [note 278], II, 9, cap. 3 and 4.

281. St. Thomas [note 278], II* Il*, qu. 155, a. 1.

282. Ibid. qu. 98, a. 5.

283. Antonine, Summa moralis [note 278], II, 9.

284. The Canonist doctrines stand most stringently for the
Jewish teaching that sexual intercourse should be only for the
purpose of propagation. Cf. St. Thomas [note 278], II* II*,
qu. 153, a. 2 and 3.

285. St. Antonine [note 278], II, 6, 8, § 1.

286. Ibid. IV, 5, 17, § 4.

287. St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 129, a. 4.

288. St. Antonine, IV, 5, 17, § 1.

28g. Ibid. II, 6, 8, § 1.

290. Cf. also St. Thomas, qu. 117, 118, and 119.

291. St. Antonine, II, 6, 8, § 1.

292. Ibid.

293. Ibid.

204 ADIL, 6525'S 23

295. Ibid.

296. Ibid. II, 1, 16, § 2. Cf. also the whole of chap. 17, the
superscription of which is “ De variis fraudibus, que commititur
in negotiando,”

297. Alberti [note 141], p. 134.

298. St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 49, 53, 123.

299. Cf. Part Il, 9 of Summa moralis [note 278].

300, St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 53, a. b.

s01,-Ch, Uoner [note 278 1,-p.ask,

302. St. Antonine [note 278], IV, 2, 3.

803 1bids IT a 15/8) 4,

moge TOIG 75-358. 2

Bos. bid. Eh i 5 GE

306. Cf. the commentary of Cardinal Cajetan to St. Thomas
[note 278], qu. 118, a. 1.

307. St. Antonine [note 278], II, 1, 16, § 2.

308. Bernhardini Senensis [note 278], 3, 311. Cf. F. Keller
[note 278], pp. 35, 78.

309. St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 78, a. 2.

310. St. Antonine [note 278], III, 8, 4, § 2.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 385


311. Ibid. II, 1, 6, § 16. Cf. Bernhardini Senensis, Sermo 42,
ch. 2 [note 278].

312. Bernhardini Senensis [note 278], 34, ch. 3.

313. “Dans pecuniam .. . artefici ad materias emendas et ea
eis artificiata faciendum.” St. Antonine [note 278], II, 1, 5, 37.

at4. Ebid: I): 13.5, 46. ;

315. “Modo societatis.” Ibid. II, 1, 5, 37.

316, Ibid, Il, 1, 6, § 15, § 29. Cf. Bernhardini Senensis,
Sermo 42, ch, 2.

317. St. Antonine, II, vol. 1, ch. 5, § 34.

318. Ibid. II, 1, 5, § 37.

319. Ibid.

320. Ibid. II, 1, 6, §§ 16 and 36; also II, 1, 16, § 2.

321. “Sunt nobiles qui nolunt laborare; et ne pecunia eis
deficiat paulatim consumendo, tradunt eam mercatori vel trapezi-
tae, intendentes principaliter aliquid annuatim recipere ad dis-
cretionem eorum salvo tamen capitali: tamen clare usura est.”

322. St. Antonine, II, 1, 2, § 6


CHAPTER XIX


323. Baxter, Christian Directory, vol. 1 (1678), pp. 218, 220,
part 2, ch. 28.

222. ibid, vol. 1, pp. 219, 229.

325. Hutcheson, Exposition of the Book of “Fob, p. 296;
Binning, Sermons, vol. 3, p. 359, quoted in Buckle [note 183],
vol, 2, p. 388; Cockburn, Facob’s Vow, or Man’s Felicity and
Duty ; Boston, Human Nature in its Fourfold State, p. 300.

326. Abernethy, Physick for the Soul, p. 488, quoted by Buckle
[note 183], p. 387 ; Hutcheson [note 325], p. 387.

327. Baxter [note 323], vol. 1, pp. 237, 245.

328. Burnet’s History of His Own Time, vol. 1, p. 108;
Mackintosh [note 138], vol. 3, p. 269.

329. Baxter [note 323], vol. 1, p. 229.

330. Isaac Borrow, Of Industry, p. 104.

Stp eo lbiG. pe 2.

332, Ibid. p. 78.

432. Ibid. p.-62.

334. Ibid. p. 94. Cf. A.C. Applegarth, Quakers in Pennsyl-
vania (1892), p. 10, and William Penn, Fruits of Solitude (1697).

25


386 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


335. Selections from the Records of the Kirk-Sessions of
Aberdeen, p. 32, quoted in Mackintosh [note 138], vol. 3, p. 265.

336. Le névociant patriote, p. 240.

337. See Buckle [note 183], vol. 2, p. 381.

338. Applegarth [note 334], pp. 10, 16, 26.

339. St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 134, a. I.

340. Cf, the destruction of images in the parish church of
Perth on May 11, 1559, after Knox had stirred up the multitude.
The First Book of Discipline, by the Scotch Reformer, condemns
all idolatry. See John Knox, Works, vol. 2, p. 183; vol. 1,
pp. 320, 361.

341. St. Thomas [note 278], qu. 135, I.

342. Isaac Borrow [note 330], p. 66. Cf. also Baxter’s
Directory, vol. 1, pp. 108, 214, 378.

343- Borrow [note 330], pp. 50, 51.

344. Baxter [note 323], vol. 4, p. 104.


CHAPTER XXI


345. Max Weber, “ Protestantische Ethik,” in the Archiv fiir
die gesammte Staatswissenschaften, vol. 25, p. 35+

346. Cf. his reply to H. Karl Fischer’s criticisms, in the same
journal, vol. 25, p. 246.


CHAPTER XXII


347. W. Sombart, Krieg und Kapitalismus (1913), Pp. 7.

348. For instances see note 347 in the last-named book.

349. Cf. Schmoller in his Fahrbuch, vol. 15, p. 8.

350. Cf. Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 256.

351. Cf. Sélincourt [note 79], p. 259.

352. Cf. Unwin [note 95], p. 168.

353. Cf. Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 37.

354. Cf. W. Sombart, Die deutsche Volkswirtschaft im 19" Fahr-
hundert (3rd ed., 1913), p. 118.

355- Alberti [note 141], pp. 36, 37.

356. Cf. Sombart [note 354], p. 110 and [note 347], p. 28.

357. Dr. Shadwell in The Times, quoted by Schulze-Gaevernitz
[note 203], p. 121.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 387


358. J. Burckhardt [note 49a], vol. 1, p. 69.

359. W. Petty, Several Essays in Political Arithmetic (1699),
p. 185.

360. Discourse of the Religion of England, 1667, quoted by
H. Hallam, Constitutional History, vol. 3 (1827), p. 451.

361. Etat de la France . . . Par le Comte de Boulainvilliers,
6 vols., 1737. Cf. also Ch. Bénoit, Histoire de P’édit de Nantes,
5 vols., 1693.

362. Cf. Ranke, Franzisische Geschichte, vol. 3, p. 456.


CHAPTER XXIII


363. For the influence of aliens in England see W. Cunning-
ham, Alien Immigrants to England (1897). For Russia, see
Ernst Freiherr von d. Briiggen, Wie Russland europdisch wurde.
Studien zur Kulturgeschichte (1885).

364. Broglio d’Ajano, Die Venetianer Seidenindustrie (1895),
p. 24.

365. Sieveking, ‘‘ Genueser Seidenindustrie’
Fahrbuch, vol. 21, p, 102.

366, A. Alidolfi, Instruttione delle cose notabil di Bologna (1621),
p. 37. Cf. also, W. Sombart, Luxus und Kapitalismus, p. 180.

367. E. Parifet, Histoire de la Fabrique lyonnaise (1901),
pp. 29, 30. Cf. Sombart [note 366], p. 179.

368. T. Geering, Basels Industrie, p. 471.

369. Bujatti, Geschichte der Seidenindustrie Osterreiches (1893),
p.22G.

370. For further details see, for England, Cunningham [note
363], Price, The English Patents of Monopoly (1906), pp. 55, 82.
For Holland, O. Pringsheim, Bettrdége, p. 31. For France,
Levasseur [note 16] contains a mass of material. See, too, B. P.
Boissonade, “ L’industrie du Papier en Charente” in the Bzblio-
théque du Pays Poitevin, No. 9 (1899), p. 8. For Germany,
G. Schanz, Zur Geschichte der Kolonisation und Industrie in
Franken (1884); E. Gothein, Wirtschaftsgeschichte des Schwarz-
walds, vol. 1 (1896); C. Frahne, Textilindustrie im Wirtschaftsleben
Schlesien’s (1905), p. 90. For Austria, Sbrik [note 56], p. 3.
For Sweden, L. Beck, Geschichte des Eisens, vol. 2, pp. 900,
1290. For Russia, A. Briickner, Peter der Grosse (1879) ; F.


> in Schmoller’s


388 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


Matthzi, Die Industrie Russlands in ihrer bisherigen Entwicklung,
vol, 1 (1871).

371. For further details see W. Sombart, The Fews and Modern
Capitalism. Cf. also W. W. Kaplun-Kogan, Die Wander-
bewegungen der “fuden (1912). [See also, Fewish Immigration to
the United States, by Samuel Joseph (Columbia University Studies
in Political Science), 1913, and Fewish Life in Modern Times, by
Israel Cohen (1914), Book I, ch. 1.]

372. Books about Protestant emigrants and immigrants are
very numerous, I may mention the following as being among
the best: C. Weiss, Histoire des réfugiés protestants de France
depuis la révocation de Pédit de Nantes jusqu’a nos jours, 2 vols.
(1853), which is the classical book on the subject; W. E, I.
Berg, De Réfugiés in de Nederlanden na de herroeping ven het edict
van Nantes, 2 vols, 18453; J. S. Burn, History of the French,
Walloon, Dutch, and other Foreign Protestant Refugees settled in
England, from Henry VIII to the Revocation of the Edict of
Nantes, with notices of their trade and commerce, copious extracts
from the registers, lists of the early settlers, etc. (1846) ; Cunningham
[note 363]; Erman and Reclam, AZémoires pour servir a [histoire
de réfugiés, 9 vols. (1782-99); Charles Baird, History of the
Huguenot Emigration to America, 2 vols. (1885).

373. Weiss [note 372], vol. 1, p. 104.

374. J. Sembrzycki, “ Die Schotten und Englander in Ost-
preussen,” in Altpreussische Monatschrift, vol. 29 (1892), p. 228.

375. See Moritz Jaffe, Die Stadt Posen unter preuss. Herrschaft,
p. 14. Also T. A. Fisher, The Scots in Germany, and the same
writer’s Scots in Eastern and Western Prussia. See also E. Siegel,
Geschichte des Posamentiergewerbes (1892), p. 42.

376. Paul Schulze, “ Die Seidenindustrie,” in Handbuch der
Wirtschaftskunde Deutschlands, vol. 3 (1904), p. 658. Cf. Berg
[note 372], vol. 1, p. 285.

377. Weiss [note 372], vol. 1, p. 225.

270.01 bid. VGl. 2, p. 230.

379. O. Wiedfeldt, Statistische Studien zur Entwicklungsgeschichte
der Berliner Industrie (1898), p. 209.

380. Ibid. p. 386.

381. In Erman and Reclam [note 372], vols. 5 and 6, there is
a complete list of the industries established by Frenchmen

382. Verzeichnis der Vorsteher und sdémtlicher Mitgheder der


NOTES AND REFERENCES 389


teutsch und franzosisch vereinigten Kaufmannschaft der Tuch- und
Seidenhandlung hiesiger Residenzien nach alphabetischer Ordnung
zum Anfang des Fahres 1808 von den Altesten aus den Gildebiichern
angefertigt und zu haben bei der Witwe Arendt im Borsenhause.

383. Bayle, Dict. hist. et crit., in article “ Kuchlin.”

384. Berg [note 372], vol. 1, p. 167.

385. Ibid. vol. 1, p. 218 ; Weiss [note 372], vol. 2, p. 18.

386. See also Ricard, Le négoce d’ Amsterdam (1723), p. 6.
This book came under my notice after the publication of my
book on the Jews and modern capitalism. Ricard relates that
the Stock Exchange, although it had 4,500 members, was
generally full, save only on Saturdays, “‘ when the Jews were not
present.”

387. J. N. de Stoppelaar, Balthasar de Moucheron (1901),
quoted by S. van Brakel, De hollandsche Handelscompagnie én der
zevenentiende eeuv (1908), p. 4.

388. Leti, Teatro belgico, 2, p. 148, quoted by Berg [note 372],
¥O).or. pr 202.

389. See Weiss [note 372], vol. 2, pp. 135-6.

390. Ibid. vol. 2, p. 135.

391. Berg [note 372], vol. 1, p. 169.

392. O. Pringsheim, Beitrdge, p. 32.

393. W. Cunningham, Aken Immigrants to England, p. 69.

394. See Douglas Campbell, The Puritans, vol. 1, p. 269.

395. Cf. Weiss [note 372], vol. 1, p. 132. /

396. For fuller details see J. S. Burn [note 372], p. 2543
Cunningham [note 393], pp. 178, 212, 235, 263; Campbell
[note 394], vol. 1, p. 489, and Lecky, History of the Exghteenth
Century, vol. 1, p. 205.

397. The figures are taken from the article “ Auswanderung ”
(by E. von Philippovich) in the Handwirterbuch der Staatswissen-
schaften, vol. 1, p. 283.

398. E.g. Tocqueville, Chevalier, F. Loher, to name but
three. Roscher utilized these reports in his splendid chapter on
the “ Geistigen Character des Koloniallebens” in his book on
Colonies (1st ed., 1848 ; 3rd ed., 1885).

399. Th. Vogelstein [note 126], p. 177.

400. F. Ratzel, Vereinigte Staaten, vol. 2, p. 579-


3900 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


CHAPTER XXIV


401. Petrarca, Epist. de reb. famil., lib. xx, letter 1. [The
original Latin is a beautiful piece of writing, well worthy, as
Sombart says, of being read more than once. |

402. Mémoires de Colbert au roi, 1670. Lettres, ed. Clement,
VOU..7, pr gas

403. K. Habler, Die Fuggersche Handlung, p. 56.

404. Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 546.

405. Cf. P. Kaeppelin [note 65], p. 201.

406. Quoted by Ranke [note 362], vol. 4, p. 322.

407. Ibid.

408. Berg [note 372], vol. 1, p. 218; Le Moine de I’Espine,
Le négoce a’ Amsterdam (1710), p. 39.

409. Mariet, a wine merchant of Paris, got away with
600,000 florins ; Gaylen, a bookseller of Lyons, with a million,
and his brother with 100,000. The majority of the rich
merchants came to Holland from Normandy, Brittany, Poitou,
and Guienne, often enough in their own ships. See Berg [note
372], vol. 1, p. 218; Weiss [note 372], vol. 2, p. 18.

410. Cf.S. van Brakel, Die Hollandsche Handelscompagnie, p. xiv.

411. Levasseur [note 16], vol. 2, p. 293.

412. Onslow Burrish [note 86], p. 353.

413. See Weiss [note 372], vol. 1, p. 132, and Berg [note
372], vol, t,-p. 219.

414. W. Sombart, The Fews and Modern Capitalism, pp. 55,
87.
415. According to Erasmus Philips, State of the Nation (quoted
by James, Worsted Manufacture, 1857, p. 207), English exports
between 1702 and 1712 were of the average annual value of
£,2,881,357 ; according to Woods, Survey of Trade, it was
£2,389,872 in the years 1707-10, and £ 2,103,148 in the years
1713 and 1714. See Anderson [note 132], vol. 3, pp. 41, 63.

416. O. Burrish [note 86], part 2, section g.

417. Hayne’s Great Britain’s Glory (1715), p. 15, quoted by
James [note 415]. Cf. also Cunningham [note 74], vol. 2,
p. 196.

418. Postlethwayt, Dictionary of Commerce, article “ Assiento.”’ —

419. See Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, book iv, ch. 6.


NOTES AND REFERENCES 391


420, Cf. Bento Carqueja, O capitalismo moderno e as suas origens
em Portugal (1908), p. 132.

421, Cf. James [note 415], p. 184. See also Postlethwayt
[note 418], article “ Brazil.”

422. Bento Carqueja [note 420], p. 125,

423. v. Eschwege [note 188], p. 284.


CHAPTER XXKV


424. Cf. W. Sombart [note 354], ch. 8.

425. Vierkandt [note 10], p. 109.

426. For a detailed study of the point see W. Sombart
[note 354], p. 136.

427, L. Muratori, SS. rer. ita/., vol. 12, p. 1011 (for Milan) ;
vol. 18, p. 172 (for Bologna, 1356).

428. L. Darmstaedter and RK. du Bois-Reymond, Vier tausend
Fahre Pionierarbeit in den exacten Wissenschaften (1904), p. 24.

429. W. Sombart [note 354], p. 139.


CHAPTER XXVI


430. W. Sombart, The “fews and Modern Capitalism, p. 170.

431. Alberti [note 141], p. 250.

432. G, Freytag [note 14], vol. 2, p. 228.

433. Davidsohn [note 17], vol. 1, p. 6or.

434. Mrs. Richard Green, Town Life in the Fifteenth Century
(1894), vol. 1, p. 1525 vol. 2, p. 156.

435. P. Hume Brown [note 73], p. 163.

430. Max Scheler, Uber Ressentiment und moralisches Werturteil
(1912), a brilliant essay.


CHAPTER XXVII


437. Année sociologique, vol. 6, p. 483.
438. See Sombart’s Essay, “ Der kapitalistische Unternehmer,”


392 THE QUINTESSENCE OF CAPITALISM


in Archiv fiir Sozialwissenschaft und soziale Politik, vol. 29,
p. 698.

439. Alberti [note 141], p. 137.

440. A. Carnegie in his Autobiography.


441. Dr. Strousberg [note 234], p. 396.
442. Hume’s Essays, vol. 2, p. 57.


INDEX


Acidia, Antonine on, 242-3

Acquisitiveness, condemned by
Church, 247; by Puritans,
260-1 ; modern, 328-9; the
purpose of business, 347

Activity, senseless, 353

Advertisement, old
against, 162

Alberti, on the clergy of Florence,
15, 29, 30; his Four Ways of
money-getting, 34 ; the typical
bourgeois, 104-5; on Holy
Economy, 105-9 ; on honesty,
122—3,5 128, 155, 160, ~219,
222-3; quotes classical authors,
224 ; his rationalism, 225 ; in-
fluenced by the Stoics, 225-8 ;
283, 336

Alchemy, 39

Alien, ability of the, 302 ; psycho-
logy of the, 304; see Migra-
tion

America, migrations to, 301

American spirit, the, purely capi-
talistic, 301-2

American Tobacco Co., The, 185

American Union, States of the,
83 ; English nobles in, 83

Amieri, failure of the, 64

Amsterdam, rise of, 298

Anderson, on the Bubble Com-
panies, 89

Antonine of Florence, 242, 244 ;
on Avarice, 249; on Idleness,


257


Appointments, purchase of, ini-


prejudice


393


mical to capitalist development,


Aquinas, Thomas, 14 ; formulates
mediaeval Scholasticism, 238-46

Aristocrats, as capitalists, 64—s,
77-9, 81 ; compared with bour-
geols, 205-6

Arithmetic, mediaeval, usually
incorrect, 18 ; commercial, 125;
schools of,” 127; ‘spread of,
127-9 ; 281

Armateur, the, 72

Armies, modern, influence of, 283

Arte della Lana di Pisa, 94

Artist versus Undertaker, 204

Astrolabe, value of, 320

Augustinian doctrines, 265, 268

Austria, “projecting” in, 43

Avarice, 249


Banks, early, 63

Bardi, failure of, 64

Barrow, Of Industry, 256-7

Bart, Jean, 68

Baxter, on riches, 252-3, 261, 269

Beauty, Puritan attitude towards,
259 a

Becher, his list of alchemists, 39

Bembo, on Venetian factories in
Tana, 74

Benjamin of Tudela, on Genose
corsairs, 71

Beowulf, as Undertaker, 58

Bergson, on the bourgeois, 205

Bernard of Siena, 244

Bigness, worship of, 176-7


* 394


Bohemia, development of industry
in, 81
Bohemia, King of, as mining
magnate, 65
Book-keeping of the Middle Ages,
Lois D215
‘Booms, cause of, 312
Bourgeois, genesis of the, 130 5 in
Florence, 132 ; the old style of,
(153-67); definition of the,
198 ; temperament, the, (z00-
9); born, not made, 205; a
hybrid, 209 ; the bourgeois life
not opposed to a state of grace,
269; thinks only of pro-
cedure, 330; jealousy of, 340-1;
development of the, 3553; see
Citizen, Middle Class
Bourgeois spirit, the, in Florence,
341
Brasseurs @affaires, 42
Brazil, early trade with, 315 ; gold
discovered in, 316
Bubble Companies, the, 32, go
Buccaneers, 68
Buckle, on religious violence in
Scotland, 231
Bullion, gathered by Holland, 316
Bullionism, 277
Bureaucracy, French worship of
the, 139; inimical to capitalist
spirit, 359
Busbeck, introduces the tulip to
Holland, 45
Business man, the, in literature, 9 ;
the modern, (168-89) ; types of
the, 168; psychology of, 176-
80; activities of, 181 ; evolution
of the, 276; the modern, 350
Business Morality, 121-4
Business principles, 182-4


Cagliostro, 43-4

Cajetan, Cardinal, 244, 246

Calculation, Art of, 125-9

Calvin, 232

Calvinism, opposed to Capitalism,
252; affected by economic con-
ditions, 269


INDEX


Capital, how obtained, 63


Capitalism, the, Church’s view of,
246-7 ; influence of, 342-53 5
overgrowth of, 357-8 ; probable
decline of, 358-9

Capitalist Body, the, 343

Capitalist Spirit, the, in Middle
Ages, 11 ; origin and growth of,
223 genesis of gradual, 34;
national expression of, (130-52);
analysis of, 131; in Italy,
132-4 ; in the Peninsula, 134-
6; in France, 136-40; in
Germany, 141-3; in Holland,
144-7 ; in Great Britain, 147—
51; in U.S.A., 151-2 ; due to
migration, 193 ; components of,
195-6; early and late, 196;
union of spirit of undertaking
with the bourgeois qualities,
202 ; according to nationality,
210-21 ; affected by technical
inventions, 320

Capitalist Undertaking, 51-62 ;
fundamental types of, 63-102

Capitalists, great, non-moral, 186 ;
abilities of, 274

Carnegie, Andrew, 174, 349

Catholicism, influence of, 228-31;
236-50

Cavendish, successful freebooter,
71

Celts, not capitalistic, 212-3;
decline of in Scottish Lowlands,
218

Chaloner, Sir Thos., 68

Child, Sir Josiah, 165

Chios, owned by a Maona, 73

Church, the, an Undertaking, 57,
62 ; fosters spirit of capitalism,
243 ; on wealth, 246; on capi-
talism, 247

Citizen, the respectable, appear-
ance of, 103

Civil servant, the, 66, 83-7

Civil War, American, puts an end
to feudalism, 83

Clerics, greed of, 29

Cleverness, 203


INDEX


Clocks, influence of, 326

Coeur, Jacques, a great French
trader, 137

Colbert, on Mercantilism, 84, 87 ;
on French trading incapacity,
135 ; 166, 279, 290, 312

Colonist, psychology of the, 351

Colonizing movement, the, 301-7;
Eiect ob, 355

Columbus, 31

Columella, on love, 208, 226

Community, the village, 16

Competition, unrestricted, 185

Complete English — Tradesman,
Defoe’s, 162-3

Conqueror, the, 52

Cornelius Agrippa, 39

Cornwall, tin in, 65

Corsairs, Italian, 67 ; French, 68 ;
English, 69-71

Craft ideal, made for good work, 19

Craftsman, the, 101-z

Custom-hunting, 161, 183-4

Cyprus, Florentines in, 97


Dacre, Lord, early steel magnate, 78

Dante, on greed, 30; 217

Dealer, the, 54

Decker, van, Das Lob der Geld-
sucht, 31-2

Defoe, on “projecting,” 41; 49-503
on speculation, 87-8; 120; 159 ;
on poaching custom, 163-4

Dernburg, type of organiser, 169

Directories, 232

Discovery, voyages of, 69-71

Dominici, Beato, on the curse of
money, 30

Donneurs davis, 42

Don Quixote, type of non-capitalist,
237

Double entry, 127-8

Drake, 71

Durham, Bishop of, his forge, 78

Dutch East India Co., 75, 159-60

Dutch, money madness of, 32 ;
Frisian blood in, 217 ; as emi-
grants, 2g6—7, to England, 299

Dutch West India Co., 73


395
East India Co., The, 75


Economic activities, change of
during ages, 9-11 ; love of, for
their own sake, 351

Economic progress, 175

Economy, Alberti on, 105; the
Schoolmen on, 240; the Puri-
tans on, 258

Edict of Nantes, repeal of the, 289

Elbow-room, 184

Energy, importance of emphasized
by Schoolmen, 242

England, speculation fever in,
32; capitalist decline of, 150;
Italians in, 299; other aliens,
299; abundance of cash in the
17th century, 315

Enterprise, killed by bureaucracy,
278

Erasmus, on greed, 30; translated
by Franck, 141

Erotics, Christian view of, 208—9,
240

Etruscans, influence of on Flo-
rentines, 215 ; a trading people,
215-6

European peoples and capitalism,
210

Exactitude, a modern virtue, 18

“Expenditure system,” the, 13

Extravagance, Aquinas on, 241


Facheux of Moliére, the, 43

Farming, capitalist, 77

Fathers, see Schoolmen

Faustus, as Undertaker, 56

Fletcher of Saltoun, on Scots in
trade, 149

Florence, love of money in, 30 ;
arithmetic and book-keeping in,
127 ; development of the bour-
geois spirit in, 1323; develop-
ment of opposing feudal spirit,
134; Greek and Etruscan blood
in, 215-7; Germanic, 217 ;
religious zeal in, 229; the city
of gilds, 339

Florentine trader, the, 96-8 ;
organises cloth-making, 98 ; the


396


first “compleat citizen,” 103 ;
compared with the Venetian,
133

Force, acquisition of money by, 36

Fouquet, 137

France, the Law swindles in, 32 ;
“ projecting” in, 42 ; privateers
of, 68; mining industry in, 78-9;
spirit of capitalism in, 136-40 ;
worship of officialism in, 139 ;
trade despised in, 139-40 ; sale
of Crown offices in, 278;
national spirit of, 278 ; trade of
in Protestant hands, 289

Franklin, Benjamin, the perfect
bourgeois, 104, 116-73 his
Virtues, 118; Poor Richard’s
Almanac, 1213 1243 128-9; on
the value of money, 156; on
economy of time, 157-8; 223 ;
compared with Marcus Aurelius,
22%

Frederick the Great on the coup
@a@il, 56; on the spinning
machine, 166

Freebooter, the, 66-76 ; see Pirate,
Corsair

French East India Co., the, 65

French emigrants in England,
cook a LS)

Freytag, Gustav, 26, 336

Frisians, a trading people, influence
Holland and Scotland, 216-7

Frobisher, 7

Frugality, 187-8

‘“‘ Fuggering,” Luther on, 141

Fuggers, the, 14, 158


Genoa, corsairs of, 67 ; arithmetic
and bookkeeping in, 127-8

German undertakers, 143

Germanic tribe and community,
the, 16

Germany, development of capital-
ist spirit in, 140-3; the
feudalizing spirit checks it, 142 ;
revival and vast development of,
142-3 ; initiative before 1870,
281-2 ; effect of military train-


INDEX


ingon, 284; French immigrants
in, 297

Gild, the village community idea
applied to trade and industry,
16; gildin Florence, 339

Glasgow, old-fashioned traders of,
160

Glass-making, favoured by gentry,
81-2

Gold, early desire for, 25-6; as
ornament, 26-7; necessary to
capitalism, 308; Petrarch on,
309; love of, 311; found in
Brazil, 316; see Precious Metals

Grammaticus, arithmetician, 127

Great Britain, development of
capitalist industry in, 14.7; heroic
age of, 147; affected by Act of
Union, 148

Greeks, in Florence, 216

Grenville, 71

Gucciardini, on Spaniards, 136

Gustavus Vasa, as capitalist under-
taker, 84


Habit, 20

Harriman, E. H., 185-6

Hawkins, the, 72

Henry II, of France, fosters in-
dustry, 280

Heroic peoples, 214

Heterodoxy, a _ well-spring of
capitalism, 287-8

“‘ Hidalgos,” the, 136

Highlanders, not capitalistic, 213

Highway robbery, 36-7

Hochstetter, Ambrosius, medizval
capitalist, 64

Holidays, frequency of, in Middle
Ages, 19

Holland, development of capitalist
spirit in, 144-7 ; accumulation
of wares in, 145 ; achievements
in the East, 145; maritime
greatness of, 146; middle-class
virtues of, 166 ; money-lending
in, 147 ; Jews in, 298

“ Holy Economy,” 105


INDEX


Honesty, 188 ; Aquinas on, 241;
336

Housewife, the perfect, 208, 227

Hudson Bay Co., the, 74

Huguenots, the, 288, 290 ; wealth
and industrial power of, 289 ;
selective emigration of, 295-300

Hume, on trade and avarice, 352


Idria, quicksilver mines of, 65-80

Imagination, 203

Industry, virtue of, 257; English,
due to aliens, 299-300

Interest, centre of, shifted, 327-8

Invention, technical, influence of,
319-37

Irish, the, not capitalistic, 213

Iron, in Germany, 80

Italy, tyrannies, of, 61 ; piracy in
sea-ports of, 673 capitalist
spirit in, 132-43 ancestry of
inhabitants, 214-6;  utilitari-
anism in, 2245 rationalism in,
225


James J, as capitalist, 280

Jews, the, 1oo-1, 217, 232-5 ;
selection among the, 265 ; non-
military, 283; rapid rise to
power due to standing armies,
284; as State financiers, 285 ;
semi-citizens, 2873; migration
of, 294-5; as money-lenders,
337-8

Judaism, 263-6; peculiar ele-
ments of, 264; favourable to
capitalist spirit, 264 ; preaches
rationalism, 265; ethics of,


265 ; double morality of, 265-6


Knitting-frame, forbidden in 1684,
166

Knox, John, 232

Krafft, Ubrich, 72


Landlord, the, as undertaker, 66,
76-83

Landlordism, semi-feudal, 76-7

Law’s Bank and Swindles, 47, 88,
213, 286


397


Levant Trade, the, 71-2

Liber Abbaci, 126

Liberalitas, 240

Loans, to States, 35

Logan, James, on piracy in New
York, 69

Lotteries, 45

Love, 207-8 ; Aquinas on, 239-
40

Low prices, old hatred of, 184 ;
a modern ideal, 184

Luther, his economy retrograde,


251, 269


Machine-making, 321

Magic, as a means of money-
getting, 37-8

Mahometan law in Spain, 236-7

Manorial system, an undertaking,
57, 59-60; necessitating
forced labour, 60

Manufacturer, the, 101

Maone, of Genoa, the, 73

Marcus Aurelius, 225

Martial undertakings, 57

Material, over-valuation of the,
328

Medizval ideal of life, 14

Medici, the, 98, 134

Mercantilism, 84, 279, 281

Methuen Treaty, the, 315

Middle-Class Outlook, the, 103-
2

Middle-Class Virtues, the, 103-
24, 186-7, 257, 260

Migrations, 290-1, (292-307);
two sorts of, 292; Jewish,
294-5 ; Christian, 295-300 ;
Huguenot, 295 ; of Jews, 295 ;
of Scots, 296; of French,
297; of Dutch, 297-8; of
Italians, 299 ; to England, 299-
300 ; to America, 301 ; causes
and selective action of, 302-3

Migratory races, 303

Military class, professional, in-
fluence of a, 282

Military virtues, 283

Mine Adventurers’ Co., 78


398


Mining industry, medieval, 64-5 ;
feudal nature of, 78 ; in France,
78-9 ; in the Ruhr district, 85 ;
improvements in, 331-2

Modern world, artificial, 331

Moliére, 43

Moluccas, the, 74

Momentum of business, the, 174

Monarchs as promoters of industry,
65, 84, 87, 280

Monasticism in Tuscany, 229

Money, love of, 29-31 ; money
economy, effect of, 309-10;
effect of plentiful, 312

Money-getting, ways and means
of, 34-50

Money-lending, 44, 337-8

Montaigne, on the French char-
acter, 137

Moral influences and the Capitalist
Spirit, 267-75


National Debt, taken over by the
South Sea Co., 90 ; 286

National traits, 210-21

Natural wants, criterion of pre-
capitalist activities, 13

New England, piracy of, 68-9

New York State, pirates of, 69

Nobles, engage in trade and in-
dustry, 77-8, 81

Nonconformists, develop trade and
industry, 289

Nonconformity, due to economic
causes, 290

Novelty, attraction of, 178


Official careers, 35
Organiser, the, 53


Pagnini, on the Florentines, 97

Papal taxation, evokes a system of
banking, 237

Patriotic Merchant, The, 138-9

Peasant, economic ideal of, 16-7

Peninsula, capitalist spirit in the,
134-6 ; voyages of discovery
from, 135; industries of, 135 ;
paralysis of, 135-6; Catholic
influence in, 236-7


INDEX


Peoples, over and under inclined
to capitalism, 212

Petty, Wm., Sir, on heterodoxy,
288-9

Philip III, orders minting of gold
and silver treasure, 28

Philosophy, influence of, 222-3

Pisa, corsairs of, 67

Pisano’s Liber Abbaci, 126

Pope Nicholas III, account-books
of, 12

Population, effect of growth and
decrease, 332-3, 359

Portugal, English trade with, 315

Posen, great number of Scots in,
296

Power, sense of, 179

Practice, effect of, 20

Pre-capitalist man, 13, 334-41

Precious metals, discovery of, etc.,
(308-18); effect of, upon
Europe, 317, 331, 355

Privateers, 68 ; sce Corsairs, Pirates,

Producing, mania for, 329

Production in the Middle Ages,
why slow, 19 ; for exchange, 182

Profit-making, chief end of busi-
ness, 10

Protestantism, effect of, 231-5 ; a
foe to capitalism, 251-62

Protestants, migration of, 295-300

Pump, the, makes extensive
mining possible, 220

Puritanism, a foe to capitalism,
251-8; ethics of, 256-61; a
foe to art and beauty, 259;
bargaining spirit of, 2703; see
Knox, Calvin.


Quality, ethics of, 183
Quantitative and
interests of


vendor, 334-5


qualitative
producer and


Raleigh, 71, 280

Ranke, on “ Hidalgos,” 136; on
prosperity of Holland, 144-5

Rathenau, on the business man’s
aim, 173


INDEX


Rationalism, in business, 182 ; in
Scholasticism, 238; an ele-
ment of the capitalist spirit,
324; stimulated by foreign
trade, 335

Reason in Scholasticism, 238

Record-breaking, mania for, 178

Reformation, a foe to capitalism,
251

Religion, influence of, 228-66

Responsa literature of the Jews,
235

Restfulness of pre-capitalist life,
21

Retainer, profession of, 35

Retirement, an ideal of the trades-
man, 158-9

Rhodes, Cecil, 168-9

Riotous living, in old families,
15

Rochette, fraudulent speculator,
169-70

Rockefeller, 174, 186, 206

Rothschilds, Gentz and Heine
on, 195


Ruccellai, quotes classics, 224


Sachs, Hans, on greed, 30

Sali, bankruptcy of, 64

Savary, 280

Scepticism, in Italy, 229

Scheming, means of money-gett-
ing, 40

Scholasticism, medizvai(z38—50) ;
fosters capitalist spirit, 243 ;
does not preach poverty, 245 ;


Schoolmen, the, see Scholasticism.
Science, supplants experience, 325
Scotland, birth of capitalist spirit

in, 148~g; violence of religious


zeal in, 231; Puritanism in,
255 ;
Scots, the Florentines of the


North, 98-100 ; not a maritime
people, 99; contrasted with
Trish, 100; Frisian blood in,
216; migrations of, 296; in
Posen, 296


399


Sea-robbery, see Corsairs, Pirates,
Freebooters, Privateers.

Seneca, 9; quoted by Alberti,
225-6

Sherman law, the, 185

Siemens, Werner, 186

Silesia, mines of, 77; still in
the hands of landowners, 80

Silk industry, migrations of, 293

Silver, South American, 316

Soranzo Brothers, books of, 128

South America, feudalism in, 82

South Sea Bubble, theyi47; 88-91,
286

Spain, decline
Peninsula

Spaniards, their conception of
gold, 28-9; not capitalistic,
213

Specialists, modern need of, 198

Specialization, growth of,
Middle Ages, 282

Speculator, as capitalist and under-
taker, 87-93, 180

Speed, mania for, 178, 181

Standard Oil Co., 174, 186

State, the, an undertaking, 57 ;
60-1, 83 ; undertakings of the,
86-7

Stock-exchange gambling, 45, 48

Stock-holders, in 18th-century
England, 36 ; 139, 150

Stoics, 224—5

Strousberg, on extension
business, 175, 349-50

Subsistence economic. order, the,
269

Success, in business, 173

Sufficiency, ideal of, 15-17

Suggestion in trading, 55

Summe theologice, 230

Sweden, the iron industry in, 80

Switzerland, initiation in, 281-2

System, in business, 346-7


of, See


277 3


in


of


Tailors, Jew, 96

Talents, 273

Tallies supplanted, 126
Tartaglia, arithmetician, 126


400


Taxation, effects of excess in, 277

Tax-farmers, 36

Technical inventions, the old
idea of, 165; opposition to,
166-7 ; influence of, 319-33 ;
instances of, 3203 incalculable
advance of, 322, 348-9

Technical knowledge, effect of,


323

Technical skill, 274

Technical specialist, the 325-6

Textile industries, 65 ; nobles in,
81-2

Thurzo, mining capitalist, 64

‘Tournaments in Florence, 134

Toutine, invention of the, 42

Trade, inland and oversea, 337

Trader, the, 54, (93-101); be-
comes manufacturer, 943 as
middleman, 95; the old style
of, 160-2 ; ancient and modern,
534

Trading function, the, 180

Trading peoples, 214, 283, 336

Traditionalism, 20

Treasure, hoarding, 27-8

Trusts, 180, 185

Tulip mania, the, 32, 45-7

Turcarets, 36

‘Tuscan cities, 132

Tyrannies of Italy, 61


Underselling, old scorn of, 162-3

Undertaker, the collective, 171;
the modern capitalist, 172-3 ;
his psychology compared to a
child’s, 176; 201-2 ; contrasted
with artist, 204

Undertaking, the spirit of, (51-56);
what is an undertaking? 51;


INDEX


four types of, 57 ; in Germany,
143; qualities demanded by, 525.
beginnings of, 56-62 ; modern,
171-2 ; dependent on coal and
iron, 321

United States, development of the
capitalist spirit in, 151-2

Usury, Catholic views of, 246-8;
distinguished from investment,
248-9

Utilitarianism, 223


Venice, cradle of modern statistics,
285

Village community, the, 16

Vinci, Lorenzo da, 109-10; his
Tavola, 110

Vinci, Ser Guidodi Ser Michele
da, 111-3

Vitry, Jacques de, 37

Vogelweide, Walter von der, on
love of money, 29


Voluspa Saga, the, 25


Water, results of plentiful supply
Of, 32

Way to Wealth, 121

Welser Expedition to Venezuela,
72

West Indies, fortified factories in,


74
Will to live, the, 203


Women, and the modern business
man, 181-2


Xenophon, on love, 208, 226; on
the housewife, 227


Zorn, on freebooters, 37


OF 7 HE
rei?


he a


NEW


eae og
¥ | BRARY


SEyCie. i BF


UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED, THE GRESHAM PRESS, WOKING AND LONDON


a,


=,
? oP ee RAR ee ae OT
Cr SF
7 Moody Ny vr er ~
She Dg: aeRO
" ee ey ee ie ee
a "wn Lee SNA
~~ @ are. FF hay ti
a a 4c Net id Av?
A.
em 7 er a re &
i, ose one 4c
iy > a) féye- hoe @
i
: ye ‘ Ph) COR Ea oe : oe ; ain
ty cana (Bins eee i. yy Seni
1 ; MULE a al, ae .
— ay, es ide ee OI Ya AD sane d te ae ;
7 >" V5 ae PA ge oe ae
pare < le ¢ a at © : : eee r
t, ¥ Sern 4s a¢ . oy Pe one ee 1
ie 7 ~~ deere” GWG x Ny
_ ay » ar pe ‘ sain 5 " ——
WA co ae Phot wie on. ay
- - a 5 : yh 7 . at
Ff SPN Ceara | rien! WA) “eae
: 5 is A Sales Se aa a ae ae
, ee oll te ’ eee ¢ Pee, pth tN a Gog. “id. i
Pes a CUR Ia cus [ape ee eee :
“ My ary an —_ arti a
eal 7 eos a at
~~. ed So eT secs 4 ere rere ey
: ; < ie bas a oY
_ > am = : Tou * a ely,
H ie Aa ae a el ened .
Se y 2 4 diy oe NO eee
ae a
pownestedh' bev ints i
7 }
i's ’ on e: dapive | ye nm: Das, +
tg 9 wit na) Lee lhe
- - =
1 pation Pile ee Ra ah
"
— A ny
;
a


