Personal Recollections, from Early Life to Old Age (Mary Somerville, 1873)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1873 John Murray edition (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.86476). Somerville's recollections — the 'queen of science' on a life among Herschel, Laplace, and the Victorian scientific world.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

nN 


0002315 


NOT TO BE ISSUE 
OUT OF: THE LIBRARY. 


ORLA wwy a" REAR 9 ; JAREEEREE RRS 


ae Ara Aer save G2 

2 BOMBAY BRANCH 4 
OF THE 

Q ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY. 9 

a Tows Hatt. Bowsay. 

RES VSES VES BUSES ESES E40 


Digitized with financial assistance from the 
Government of Maharashtra 
on 18 July, 2018 


MARY SOMERVILLE 


PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS, 


FROM EARLY LIFE TO OLD AGE, 


OF 


MARY SOMERVILLE. 


WITH 


Selections from Her Correspondence. 


BY HER DAUGHTER, MARTHA SOMERVILLE. 


LONDON : 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 
1873, 


23159 


WORKS BY MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


—_—>— 


THE Oe ee OF THE HEAVENS. Svo. 1831. 
@ 


THE CUNNECTIUN OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES. 
9A Elition, Post 8vo, 9s. 1858. 


PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY. 


6th Edition. Post 8vo. 9s. 
1870. 


MOLECULAR AND MICROSCOPIC SCIENCE. 
Post Svo, 21s, 1869. 


UUUOUO 


00023159 


2 vols. 


CONTENTS. 


—— 


SHAPTER I. 
TNTRODUCTION—PARENTAGE—LIFE IN SCOTLAND IN THE LAST 


CENTURY—EARLY EDUCATION—SCHOOL « 2 . . . 


CHAPTER IL 


FREEDOM—RELIGIOUS EDUCATION—JEDBURGH ° ry oe 


CHAPTER III. 


EDINBURGH— YOUTHFUL STUDIES AND AMUSEMENTS—POLITICS— 
THE THEATRES OF THE TIME. . . 2. ° . . 


CHAPTER IV. 
EDINBURGH SUPPER PARTIES—TOUR IN THE HIGHLANDS—MUTINY 
_ JN THE FLEET—BATTLE OF CAMPERDOWN. 6 ww 
CHAPTER VY. 


FIRST MARRIAGE (1804)—wIDOWHOOD—STUDIES—-SECOND MAR- 
RIAGE . ° . sos . ° . 


CUAPTER VI. 


SOMERVILLE FAMILY—DR. SOMERVILLE’S CHARACTER —LETTERS— 
JOURNEY TO THE LAKES—DEATH OF SIR WILLIAM FAIRFAX— 
REMINISCENCES OF SIR WALTER SCOTT . . . 8 


PAGE 


41 


61 


83 


PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS 


OF 


MARY SOMERVILLE. 


SHAPTER I. 


INTRODUCTION—PARENTAGE—LIFE IN SCOTLAND IN THE LAST CENTURY 
—EARLY EDUCATION—SCHOOL, 


Tue life of a woman entirely devoted to her family 
duties and to scientific pursuits affords little scope for a_ 
biography. There are in it neither stirring events nor 
brilliant deeds to record; and as my Mother was strongly 
averse to gossip, and to revelations of private life or of 
intimate correspondence, nothing of the kind will be found 
in the following pages. It has been only after very great 
hesitation, and on the recommendation of valued friends, 
who think that some account of so remarkable and 
beautiful a character cannot fail to interest the public, 
that I have resolved to publish some detached Recollec- 
tions of past times, noted down by my mother during the 
last years of her life, together with a few letters from 
eminent men and women, referring almost exclusively to 
her scientific works. A still smaller number of her own 


letters have been added, either as illustrating her 
B 


2 Mary Somerville. 


opinions on events she witnessed, or else as affording 
some slight idea of her simple and loving disposition. 

Few thoughtful minds will read without emotion my 
mother’s own account of the wonderful energy and in- 
domitable perseverance by which, in her ardent thirst for 
knowledge, she overcame obstacles apparently insur- 
mountable, at a time when women were well-nigh totally 
debarred from education ; and the almost intuitive way in 
which she entered upon studies of which she had scarcely 
heard the names, living, as she did, among persons to 
whom they were utterly unknown, and who disapproved 
of her devotion to pursuits so different from those of 
ordinary young girls at the end of the last century, 
especially in Scotland, which was far more old-fashioned 
and primitive than England. 

Nor is her simple account of her early days without 
interest, when, as a lonely child, she wandered by the 
seashore, and on the links of Burntisland, collecting 
shells and flowers ; or spent the clear, cold nights at her 
window, watching the starlit heavens, whose mysteries 
she was destined one day to penetrate in all their pro- 
found and sublime laws, making clear to others that 
knowledge which she herself had acquired, at the cost of 
so hard a struggle. 

It was not only in her childhood and youth that my 
mother’s studies encountered disapproval. Not till she 
became a widow, had she perfect freedom to pursue them. 
The first person—indeed the only one in her early days— 
who encouraged her passion for Jearning was her uncle 
by marriage, afterwards her father-in-law, the Rev. Dr. 
Somerville, minister of Jedburgh, a man very much in 
advance of his century in liberality of thought on all 
subjects. He was one of the first to discern her rare 


Introduction. 3 


qualities, and-valued her as she deserved; while through 
life she retained the most grateful affection for him, and 
confided to him many doubts and difficulties on subjects 
of the highest importance. Nothing can be more 
erroneous than the statement, repeated in several 
obituary notices of my mother, that Mr. Greig (her first 
husband) aided her in her mathematical and other pur- 
suits. Nearly the contrary was the case. Mr. Greig 
took no interest in science or literature, and possessed 
in full the prejudice against learned women which was 
common at that time. Only on her marriage with 
my father, my mother at last met with one who 
entirely sympathised with her, and warmly entered into 
all her ideas, encouraging her zeal for study to the 
utmost, and affording her every facility for it in his 
power. His love and admiration for her were unbounded; 
he frankly and willingly acknowledged her superiority to 
himself, and many of our friends can bear witness to the 
honest pride and gratification which he always testified 
in the fame and honours she attained. 

No one can escape sorrow, and my mother, in the 
course of her long life, had her full share, but she bore 
it with that deep feeling of trust in the great goodness 
of God which formed so marked a feature in her cha- 
racter. She had a buoyant and hopeful spirit, and though 
her affections were very strong, and she felt keenly, 
it was ever her nature to turn from the shadows to ail 
that is bright and beautiful in mortal life. She had much 
to make life pleasant in the great honours universally 
bestowed upon her; but she found far more in the de- 
voted affection of friends, to say,nothing of those whose 
happy lot it has been to live in close and loving inter- 


course with so noble and gentle a spirit. . 
. B2 


4 Mary Somerville. 


She met with unbounded kindness from men of science 
of all countries, and most profound was her gratitude to 
them. Modest and unpretending ta excess, nothing 
could be more generous than the unfeigned delight sho 
shewed in recognising the genius and discoveries of others; 
ever jealous of their fame, and never of her own. 

It is not uncommon to see persons who hold in youth 
opinions in advance of the age in which they live, but who 
at a certain period seem to crystallise, and lose the faculty 
of comprehending and accepting new ideas and theories ; 
thus remaining at last as far behind, as they were once 
in advance of public opinion. Not so my mother, who 
was ever ready to hail joyfully any new idea or theory, 
and to give it honest attention, even if it were at variance 
with her former convictions. This quality she never lost, 
and it enabled her to sympathise with the younger gene- 
ration of philosophers, as she had done with their pre- 
decessors, her own contemporaries. 

Although her favourite pursuit;nd the one for which 
she had decidedly most aptitude, was mathematics ; yet 
there were few subjects in which she did not take in- 
terest, whether in science or literature, philosophy or 
politics. She was passionately fond of poetry, her es- 
pecial favourites being Shakespeare and Dante, and 
also the great Greek dramatists, whose tragedies she 
read fluently ir the original, being a gvod classical 
scholar. She was very fond of music, and devoted much 
time to it in her youth, and she painted from nature with 
considerable taste. The latter was, perhaps, the recrea- 
tion in which she most delighted, from the opportunity 
it afforded her of sontemplating the wonderful beauty 
-of the world, which was a never-failing source of in- 
tense enjoyment to her, whether she watched the 


Introduction. ~ 5 


changing effects of light and shade on her favourite. 
Roman Campagna, or gazed, enchanted, on the gorgeous 
sunsets on the bay of Naples, as she witnessed them from 
her much-loved Sorrento, where she passed the last 
summers of her life. All things fair were a joy to her— 
the flowers we brought her from our rambles, the sea- 
weeds, the wild birds she saw, all interested and pleased 
her. Everything in nature. spoke to her of that great 
God who created all things, the grand and sublimely 
beautiful as well as the exquisite loveliness of minute 
Objects. Above all, in the laws which science unveils 
step by step, she found ever renewed motives for the love 
and adoration of their Author and Sustainer. This fer- 
vour of religious feeling accompanied her through life, 
and very early she shook off all that was dark and narrow 
in the creed of her first instructors for a purer and 
a happier faith. 

It would be almost incredible were I to describe how 
much my mother contrived to do in the course of the day. 
When my sister and I were small children, although 
busily engaged in writing for the press, she used to teach 
us for three hours every morning, besides managing 
her house carefully, reading the newspapers (for she 
always was a keen, and, I must add, a liberal politician), 
and the most important new books on all subjects, grave 
and gay. In addition to all this, she freely visited and re- 
ceived her friends. She was, indeed, very fond of society, 
and did not look for transcendent talent in those with whom 
she associated, although no one appreciated it more when 
she found it. Gay and cheerful company was a pleasant 
relaxation after a hard day’s work My mother never 
introduced scientific or learned subjects into general 
conversation. When they were brought forward by 


6 Mary Somerville. 


e 
others, she talked simply and naturally about them, 
without the slightest pretension to superior knowledge. 
Finally, tu complete the list of her accomplishments, 
I must add that she was a remarkably neat and skilful 
needlewoman. We still possess some elaborate specimens 
of her embroidery and lace-work. 

Devoted and loving in all the relations of life, my 
mother was ever forgetful of self. Indulgent and sym- 
pathising, she never judged others with harshness or 
severity; yet she could be very angry when her in- 
dignation was aroused by hearing of injustice or oppres- 
sion, of cruelty to man or beast, or of any attack on 
those she loved. Rather timid and retiring in general 
society, she was otherwise fearless in her quiet way. I 
well remember her cool composure on some occasions 
when we were in great danger. This she inherited from 
her father, Admiral Sir William Fairfax, a gallant gentle- 
man who distinguished himself greatly at the battle of 
Camperdown.* 

My mother speaks of him as follows among her 

“‘ Recollections,” of which I now proceed to place some 
portions before the reader. 


* Sir William Fairfax was the son of Joseph Fairfax, Esq., of Bag- 
shot, in the county of Surrey, who died in 1783, aged 77, having served 
in the army previous to 1745. It is understood that his family was de- 
seended from the Fairfaxes of Walton, in Yorkshire, the main branch 
of which were created Viscounts Fairfax of Emly, in the peerage of 
Ireland (now extinct), and a younger branch Barons Fairfax of 
Cameron, in the peerage of Scotland. Of the last-named was the great 
Lord Fairfax, Commander-in-Chief of the armies of the Parliament, 
1645—50, whose title is now held by the eleventh Lord Fairfax, a resi- 
dent in the United States of America. 


Admiral Fairfax, 7 


My father was very good looking, of a brave and 
noble nature, and a perfect gentleman both in ap- 
pearance and character. He was sent to sea as 
midshipman at ten years of age, so he had very 
little education; but he read a great deal, chiefly 
history and voyages, He was very cool, and of 
instant resource in moments of danger. 

One night, when his little vessel had taken 
refuge with many others from an intenscly violent 
gale and drifting snow in Yarmouth Roads, they 
saw lights disappear, as vessel after vessel foundered. 
My father, after having done all that was possible 
for the safety of the ship, went to bed. His cabin 
door did not shut closely, from the rolling of the 
ship, and the man who was sentry that night told 
my mother years afterwards, that when he saw 
my father on his knees praying, he thought it 
would soon be all over with them; then seeing 
him go to bed and fall asleep, he felt no more 
fear. In the morning the coast was strewed with 
wrecks. There were no life-boats in those days ; 
now the lives of hundreds are annually saved by 
the noble self-devotion of British sailors. 

My mother was the daughter of Samuel Charters, 
Solicitor of the Customs for Scotland, and his wife 


8 Mary Somerville. 


Christian Murray, of Kynynmont, whose eldest sister 
married the great grandfather of the present Earl 
of Minto. My grandmother was exceedingly proud 
and stately. She made her children stand in her pre- 
sence. My mother, on the contrary, was indulgent 
and kind, eo that her children were perfectly at 
ease with her. She seldom read anything but the 
Bible, sermons, and the newspaper. She was very 
sincere and devout in her religion, and was re- 
markable for good sense and great strength. of ex- 
pression in writing and conversation. Though by 
no means pretty, she was exceedingly distinguished 
and ladylike both in appearance and manners, 

My father was constantly employed, and twice 
distinguished himself by attacking vessels of superior 
force. He captured the first, but was overpowered 
by tha second, and being taken to France, re- 
mained two years a prisoner on parole, when he 
met with much kindness from the Choiseul family. 
At last lhe was “exchanged, and afterwards was 
appointed lieutenant on hoard a frigate destined 
for foreign service. ,1 think it was the North 
American station, for the war of Independence was 
not over till the beginning of 1783. As my mother 
knew that my father would be absent for some years, . 
she accompanied him to London, though so near her 
confinement that in returning bome she had just 


Birth, 9 


time. to.arrive at- the manse of Jedburgh, her sister 
Martha Somerville’s*- house, when I was born, on the 
26th December, 1780. - My: mother was dangerously 


ill, and my aunt, who was about to wean her second 


daughter Janet,-who married General Henry Elliot, 
nursed me til] .a wetnurse'eould be found. So I 
was, born in the, house of my future husband, and 
nursed by his’ mothgy-—a’ rather oe coinci- 
flence. pial 

During. my father’s absence; my mother lived 
with’ great’.economy in a house not. far from 
Burntisland which belonged to my grandfather, 
solely occupied with the care of her family, which 
consisted of her eldest son Samuel, four or five years 
old, and myself. One evéning while my brother was 


ying at play on the floor, he called ont, “O, mam-- 


ma,. there’s ‘the moon rinnin’ awa.” It wag the 
lcelebrated meteor of 1783. . 
‘Some time afterwards, for what reason I do not 
ow, my father and mother went to live for a 
short time at Inveresk, and thence returned to 


'Burntisland, our permanent home. 

i *. ad : * * * 

| [This place, in which my mother’s early life was, spent, 

exercised so’ much influence on her life and, pursuits, 
* Wife of the Rev. Dr. Thomas Somerville, minister of Jedburgh, 


already mentioned (p. 2). Dr. Somerville was author of Histories of 
Queen Anne and of William and Mary, and also of an autobiography. 


10 Mary Somerville. 


that I am happy to be able to give the description of it 
in her own words, 


Burntisland was then a small quiet seaport town 
with little or no commerce, situated on the coast of 
Fife, immediately opposite to Edinburgh. It is 
sheltered at some distance on the north by a high 
and steep hill called the Bix The harbour lies on 
the west, and the town ended on the east in a plain’ 
of short grass called the Links, on which the towns- 
people had the right of pasturing their cows and 
geese. The Links were bounded on each side by 
low hills covered with gorse and heather, and on 
the east by a beautiful bay with a sandy beach, 
which, beginning at a low rocky point, formed a 
bow and then stretched for several miles to the town 
of Kinghorn, the distant part skirting a range of high 
precipitous crags. 

Our house, which lay to the south of the town, 
was very long, with a southern exposure, and its 
length was increased by a wall covered with fruit- 
trees, which eoncealed a courtyard, cow-house, and 
other offices. From this the garden extended south- 
wards, and ended in a plot of short grass covering a 
ledge of low black rocks washed by the sea. It was 
divided into three parts by narrow, almost unfre- 
quented, lanes. These gardens yielded abundance 


Burntisland. 1 


of common fruit and vegetables, but the warmest 
and best exposures were always devoted to flowers. 
The garden next to the house was bounded on the 
south by an ivy-covered wall hid by a row of old 
elm trees, from whence a steep mossy bank descended ° 
to a flat plot of grass with a gravel walk and flower 
borders on each side, and a broad gravel walk ran 
along the front of the house. My mother was fond 
of flowers, and prided herself on her moss-roses, 
which flourished luxuriantly on the front of the 
house ; but my father, though a sailor, was an excel- 
lent florist. He procured the finest bulbs and flower 
seeds from Holland, and kept each kind in a 
separate bed. 

The manners and customs of the people who 
inhabited this pretty spot at that time were ex- 
ceedingly primitive. 

Upon the death of any of the townspeople, a 
man went about ringing a bell at the doors of the 
friends and acquaintances of the person just dead, and, 
after calling out “Oyez!” three times, he announced 
the death which had occurred. This was still called 
by the name of the Passing-bell, which in Catholic 
times invited the prayers of the living for the 
spirit just passed away. 

There was much sympathy and kindness shown 
on these occasions ; friends always paid- a visit of | 


13 Mary Somerville. 


condolence to the afflicted, dressed in black. The 
gude wives in Burutisland thought it respectable to 
provide dead-clothes for themselves and the “ gude 
map,” that they might have a decent funeral. I once 
saw a set of grave-clothes nicely folded up, which 
consisted of a long shirt and cap of white flannel, 
and a shroud of fine linen mace of yarn, spun by 
the gude wife herself. I did not like that gude wife ; 
she was purse-proud, and took every opportunity of 
treating with scorn a poor neighbour who had had a 
nusfurtune, that is,a child by her husband before 
marriage, but who made a very good wife. Her 
husband worked in our garden, and took our cow to 
the Links to graze. The wife kept a little shop, 
where we bought things, and she told us her neigh- 
bour had given her “ mony a sair greet ”—that is, a 
bitter fit of weeping. 

The howdie, or midwife, was a person of much 
consequence. She had often to go far into the 
country, by day and by night, riding a cart-horse. 
The neighbours used to go and congratulate the 
mother, and, of course, to admire the baby. Cake 
and caudle were handed round, caudle being oat- 
meal gruel, with sugar, nutmeg, and white wine. In 
the poorest class, hot ale and “scons” were offered. 

Penny-weddings were by no means uncommon in 
my young days. When a very poor couple were 


Burntisland. 13 


‘going to be married, the best man, and even the 
bridegroom himself, went from house to house, 
asking for small sums to enable’them to have a 
wedding supper, and pay the town fiddler for a 
dance ; any one was admitted who paid a penny. 
I recollect the prisoners in the Tolbooth letting 
down bags from the prison windows, begging for 
charity. Ido not remember any execution taking 
place. 

Men and old women of the lower classes smoked 
tobacco in short pipes, and many took snuff—even 
young ladies must have done so ; for I have a very 
pretty and quaint gold snuff-box which was given to 
my grandmother as a marriage present. Licensed beg- 
gars, called “ gaberlunzie men,” were still common. 
They wore a blue coat, with a tin badge, and wan- 
dered about the country, knew all that was going 
on, and were always welcome at the farm-houses, 
where the gude wife liked to have a crack (gossip) 
with the blue coat, and, in return for his news, gave 
him dinner or supper, as might be. Edie Ochiltrec 
is a perfect specimen of this extinct race. There 
was another species of beggar, of ‘yet higher an- 
tiquity. If a man were a cripple, and poor, his 
relations put him in a hand-barrow, and wheeled 
him to their next neighbour's door, and left him 
there. Some one came out, gave him oat-cake 


14 Mary Somerville. 


or peasemeal bannock, and then wheeled him to the 
next door; and in this way, going from house to 
house, he obtained a fair livelihood. 

My brother Sam lived with our grandfather in 
Edinburgh, and attended the High School, which 
was in the old town, and, like other boys, he was 
given pennies to buy bread ; but the boys preferred 
oysters, which they bought from the fishwives, the 
bargain being, a dozen oysters for a halfpenny, and 
a kiss for the thirteenth. These fishwives and their 
husbands were industrious, hard-working people, 
forming a community of their own in the village of 
Newhaven, close to the sea, and about two miles 
from Edinburgh. The men were exposed to cold, 
and often to danger, in their small boats, not always 
well-built nor fitted for our stormy Firth. The 
women helped to land and prepare the fish when 
the boats came in, carried it to town for sale in the 
early morning, kept the purse, managed the house, 
brought up the children, and provided food and 
clothing for all fany were rich, lived well, and 
sometimes had dances. Many of the young women 
were pretty, and all wore—and, I am told, still wear 
—a bright-coloured, picturesque costume. Svome 
young men, amongst others a cousin of my own, 
who attempted to intrude into one of these balls, 
got pelted with fish offal by the women. The village 


Burntistland. 15 


smelt styonply of fish, certainly ; yet the people 
were very clean personally. I recollect their 
keeping tame gulls, which they fed with fish offal. 

Although there was no individual enmity between 
the boys of the old and of the new or aristocratic 
part of Edinburgh, there were frequent battles, called 
“‘ bickers,” between them, in which they pelted each 
other with stones. Sometimes they were joined by 
bigger lads, and then the fight became so serious 
that the magistrates sent the city guard—a set of 
old men with halberds and a quaint uniform—to 
separate them ; but no sooner did the guard appear, 
than both parties joined against them. 

Strings of wild geese were common in autumn, 
and I was amused on one occasion to see the clumsy 
tame fat geese which were feeding on the Links rise - 
in a body and try to follow the wild ones. 

As the grass on the plot before our.house did not 
form a fine even turf, the ground was trenched and 
sown with good seed, but along with the grass a vast 
crop of thistles and groundsel appeared, which at- 
tracted quantities of goldfinches, and in the early 
mornings I have seen as many as sixty to eighty of 
these beautiful birds feeding on it. 

My love of birds has continued through life, for 
only two years ago, in my extreme old age, I lost a 
pet mountain sparrow, which for eight years was my 


16 Mary Somerville. 


constant companion; sitting on my shoulder, peck- 
ing at my papers, and eating out of my mouth ; and 
I am not ashamed to say I felt its accidental 
death very much. 

Before the grass came up on this plot of ground, 
its surface in the evening swarmed with earthworms, 
which instantly shrank into their holes on the ap- 
proach of a foot. My aunt Janet, who was then 
with us, and afraid even to speak of death, was 
horrified on seeing them, firmly believing that she 
would one day be eaten by them—a very general 
opinion at that time ; few people being then aware 
that the finest mould in our gardens and fields 
has passed through the entrails of the earthworm, 
the vegetable juices it contains being sufficient to 
maintain these harmless creatures. 

My mother was very much afraid of thunder and 
lightning. She knew when a storm was near from 
the appearance of the clouds, and prepared for it by 
taking out the steel pins which fastened her cap on. 
She then sat on a sofa at a distance from the fire- 
place, which had a very high chimney, and read 
different parts of the Bible, especially the sublime 
descriptions of storms in the Psalms, which made 
me, who sat close by her, still more afraid. We had 
an excellent and beautiful pointer, called Hero, a 
great favourite, who generally lived in the garden, but 


Childhood, 17 


at the first clap of thunder he used to rush howling 
in-doors, and place his face on my knee. Then my 
father, who laughed not a little at our fear, would 
bring a glass of wine to my mother, and say, “ Drink 
that, Peg ; it will give you courage, for we are going 
to have a rat-tat-too.” My mother would beg him 
to shut the window-shutters, and though she could 
no longer see to read, she kept the Bible on her knee 
for protection, ; 

My mother taught me to read the Bible, and 
to say my prayers morning and evening; other- 
wise she allowed .me to grow up a wild creature. 
When J was seven or eight years old I began to 
be useful, for I pulled the fruit for preserving ; 
shelled the peas and beans, fed the poultry, and 
looked after the dairy, for we kept a cow. 

On one occasion I had put green gooseberries into 
bottles and sent them to the kitchen with orders to 
the cook to boil the bottles uncorked, and, when the 
fruit was sufficiently cooked, to cork and tie up the 
bottles. After a time all the house was alarmed by 
loud explosions and violent screaming in the kitchen ; 
the cook had corked the bottles before she boiled 
them, and of course they exploded. For greater 
preservation, the bottles were always buried in the 
ground ; a number were once found in our garden 
with the fruit in high preservation which had been 


18 Mary Somerville. 


buried no one knew when. Thus experience is 
sometimes the antecedent of science, for it was little 
suspected at that time that by shutting out thie air 
the invisible organic world was excluded—the cause 
of all fermentation and decay. 

I never cared for, dolls, and had’ no one to play 
with me. F amused myself in the garden, which 
was much frequented by birds.. I knew most of 
them, their flight and their habits. The swallows - 
wete never prevented from building above’ our 

’ windows, and, when about to migrate, they used to 
assemble in hundreds on the roof of our house, and 
prepared for their j journey by short flights. "We fed 

: the birds when-the ground was Siceted with snow, 

and opened our windows at breakfast-time to let in 
the robins, who would hop on the table'to pick up 
crumbs. The quantity of singing birds. was very 
great, for the farmers and gardeners were less cruel 
and avaricious than they are now+—though poorer. 

They allowed our pretty songsters ta share in the 

bounties of providence. The shortsighted cruelty, 
which is too prevalent now, brings its own punish- 
ment, for, owing to the reckfess deatichion of birds, 

the equilibauin’ of nature is disturbed, insects~in- 

“erease to such an extent as materially to affect every 
description of crop. This summer (1872), when I 
was at Sorrento; even the olives, grapes, and oranges 


The Catechism. ‘19 


were seriously injured by the caterpillars—a dis- 
- aster which I entirely attribute to the ruthless. 
havoe'made among every kind of bird. 

* *-: * ‘ #* * x 

My mother set me in due time to learn the 
catechism of the Kirk of Scotland, and to attend 
the public examinations in the kirk, This was a 
. severe trial for me; for, besides being timid and 
shy, I hada bad memory, and did. not understand 
one word of the catechism. ‘These’ meetings, which- 
began ‘with prayet, were attended Dy-all “the: chil’ 
dren of the town and neighbourhood, with thei 
mothers, and a great many old women, who < came | 
to be edified. ‘They were an acute race, and could 
éqnote chapter aud verse*of Scripture as aecprately 
as the minister himself. I remember he said ‘to one 
of then—* Peggie, what lightened the*world before’ 
the sun was madé?”- After thinking for a minute, 
she said—‘*’Deed, sir; the question is mair curious 
than edifying.” 

Besides these public examinations, ‘the minister , 
‘made an annual visit to each household {n’ his 
parish. When he came to. us, the servants were 
called in, and we all knelt" while he said a ‘prayer ; 
and then’ he pxamined each individual as to the 
‘state of his soul and conduct. + He asked me ‘if I 


could say my “Questions” '—that is, the catechism of 
E cz 


20 Mary Somerville. 


the Kirk of Scotland—and asked a question at 
random to ascertain the fact. He did the same to 
the servants. 
When I was between eight and nine years old, my 
father came home from sea, and was shocked to find 
me such a savage. [had not yet been taught to 
write, and although I amused myself reading the 
“Arabian Nights,” “Robinson Crusoe,” and the 
“Pilerim’s Progress,” I read very badly, and with a 
strong Scotch accent ; so, besides a chapter of the 
Bible, he made me read a paper of the “ Spectator ” 
aloud every morning, after breakfast; the conse- 
quence of which discipline is that I have never since 
opened that book. Hume’s “ History of England” 
was also a real penance to me. I gladly accompanied 
my father when he cultivated his flowers, which even 
now I can say were of the best quality. The tulips 
and other bulbous plants, ranunculi, anemones, car- 
nations, as well as the annuals then known, were all 
beautiful. He used to root up and throw away 
mapy plants I thought very beautiful; he said he 
did so because the colours of their petals were not 
sharply defined, and that they would spoil the 
seed of the others. Thus I learnt to know the 
good and the bad—how to lay carnations, and 
how to distinguish between the leaf and fruit buds 
4D, prunjag fruit trees; this kind of knowledge 


School, gt 


was of no practical use, for, as my after-life was 
spent in towns, I never had a garden, to my great 
regret. 

George the Third was so popular, that even in 
Burntisland nosegays were placed in every window 
on the 4th of June, his birthday ; and it occasionally 
happened that our garden was robbed the preceding 
night of its gayest flowers. 

My father at last said to my mother,—* This kind 
of life will never do, Mary must at least know 
how to write and keep accounts.” So at ten years 
old I was sent to a boarding-school, kept by a 
Miss Primrose, at Musselburgh, where I was utterly 
wretched. The change from perfect liberty to per- 
petual restraint was in itself a great trial ; besides, 
being naturally shy and timid, I was afraid of 
strangers, and although Miss Primrose was not 
unkind she had an habitual frown, which even the 
elder girls dreaded. My future companions, who 
were all older than I, came round me like a 
swarm of bees, and asked if my father had a title, 
what was the name of our estate, if we kept 
@ carriage, and other such questions, which made 
me first feel the difference of station. However, 
the girls were very kind, and often bathed my 
eyes to prevent our stern mistress from seeing 
that I was perpetually in tears. A few days after 


23 Mary Somerville. 


my arrival, although perfectly straight and well- 
made, I was enclosed in stiff stays with a steel 
busk in front, while, above my frock, bands drew’ 
my shoulders back till the shoulder-blades met. 
Then a steel rod,, with a semi-circle which went 
under the chin, was clasped to the steel busk in 
my stays) In this constrained state I, and most 
of the younger girls, had to prepare our lessons. 
Fhe chief thing I had to do was to learn. by heart 
» page of Johnson’s dictionary, not only to spell 
che words, give their parts of speech and meaning, 
but as an exercise of memory to remember their 
order of succession, Besides I had to learn the 
first principles of writing, and the rudiments of 
French and English grammar. The method of 
teaching was extremely tedious and inefficient. 
Jur religious duties were attended to in a remark- 
ible way. Some of the girls were Presbyterians, 
others belonged to the Church of England, so Miss 
Primrose cut the matter short by taking us all to 
the kirk in the morning and to church in the 
ifternoon. 

In our play-hours we amused ourselves with 
playing at ball, marbles, and especially at “Scotch 
and English,” a game which represented a raid on 
the debatable land, or Border between Scotland and 
England, in which each party tried to rob the 


Holidays. 43 


other of. their playthings. The little ones were 
always compelled to be English, for the bigger girls 
thought it too degrading. 

Lady Hope, a relative of my mother, frequently 
invited me to spend Saturday at, Pinkie, She was 
a very ladylike person, in delicate health, and with 
cold manners. Sir Archihald was stout, loud, pas: 
sionate, and devoted to hunting. I amused myseli 
in the grounds, a good deal afraid of a turkey. 
cock, who was pugnacious and defiant. 


CHAPTER II. 


FREEDOM—RELIGIOUS EDUCATION—JEDBURGEH. 


{My mother remained at school at Musselburgh for a 
twelvemonth, till she was eleven years old. After this 
prolonged and elaborate education, she was recalled to 
Burntisland, and the results of the process she had 
undergone are detailed in her “ Recollections” with 
much drollery. 


Soon after my return home I received a note 
from a lady in the neighbourhood, inquiring for my 
mother, who had been ill. This note greatly dis- 
tressed me, for my half-text writing was as bad as 
possible, and I could neither compose an answer nor 
spell the words. My eldest cousin, Miss Somerville, 
- a grown-up young lady, then with us, got me out of 
this scrape, but I soon got myself into another, by 
writing to my brother in Edinburgh that I had 
sent him a bank-knot (note) to buy something for 
me. The school at Musselburgh was expensive, 
and I was reproached with having cost so much 
money in vain. My mother said she would have 


Freedom. 25 


been contented if I had only learnt to write well, 
and keep accounts, which was all that a woman was 
expected to know. 

This passed over, and I was like a wild animal 
escaped out of a cage. I was no longer amused 
in the gardens, but wandered about the country. 
When the tide was out I spent hours on the sands, 
looking at the star-fish and sea-yrchins, or watch- 
ing the children digging for sand-eels, cockles, and 
the spouting razor-fish. I made a collection of 
shells, such 9s were cast ashore, some so small that 
they appeared like white specks in patches of black 
sand. There was a small pier on the sands for 
shipping limestone brought from the coal mines 
inland. I was astonished to see the surface of 
these blocks of stone covered with beautiful im- 
pressions of what seemed to be leaves; how they 
got there I could not imagine, but I picked up 
the broken bits, and even large pieces, and brought 
them to my repository. I knew the eggs of many 
birds, and made a collection of them. I never 
robbed a nest, but bought strings of eggs, which 
were sold by boys, besides getting sea-fowl eggs 
from sailors who had been in whalers or on other 
northern voyages. It was believed by these sailors 
that there was a gigantic flat fish in the North Sea, 
called a kraken. It was so enormous that when 


26 Mary Somerville. 


it came to the surface, covered with tangles and 
sand, it was supposed to be an island, till, on one 
occasion, part of a ship’s crew landed on it and 
found out their mistake. However, much as they 
believed in it, none of the sailors at Burntisland 
had ever seen it. The sea serpent was also an 
article of our faith. 

In the rocks af the end. of our garden there 
was a shingly openings4} . which we used to 
bathe, and where at low tide I frequently waded 
among masses of rock covered with. sea-weeds. 
With the exception of dulse and tangle I knew 
‘the names of none, though I was well acquainted 
with and admired many of these beautiful plants. 
I also watched the crabs, live shells, jelly-fish, and 
various marine animals, all of which were objects 
of curiosity and amusement to me in my lonely life. 

The flora on the links and hills around was very 
beautiful, and I soon learnt the trivial names of all 
the plants. There was not a tree nor bush higher 
than furze in this part of the country, but the coast 
to the north-west of Burntisland was bordered by a 
tree and brushwood-covered bank belonging to the 
Earl of Morton, which extended to Aberdour. I 
could not go so far alone, but had frequent oppor- 
tunities of walking there and gathering ferns, fox- 
gloves, and primroses, which grew on the mossy 


Shakespeare. ary, 


banks of a little stream that ran into the sea. The 
bed of this stream or burn was thickly covered 
with the freshwater mussel, which I knew often 
contained pearls, but I did not like to kill the 
creatures to get the pearls. 

One day my father, who was a keen sportsman, 
having gone to fish for red trout at the mouth of this 
stream, found a young -whéle, or grampus, stranded 
in the shallow water. 4 fe immediately ran back 
to the town, got boats, captured the whale, and 
landed it in the harbour, where I went with the 
rest of the crowd to see the muckle fish. 

There was always a good deal of shipbuilding 
carried on in the harbour, generally coasting vessels 
or colliers. We, of course, went to see them launched, 
which was a pretty sight. 

* * * * * 

When the bad weather began I did not know 
what to do with myself. Fortunately we had a 
small collection of books, among which I found 
Shakespeare, and read it at every moment I could 
spare from my domestic duties. These occupied a 
great part of my time; besides, I had to shew 
(sew) my sampler, working the alphabet from A 
to Z, as well as the ten numbers, on canvas. 

My mother did not prevent me from reading, but 
my aunt Janet, who came to live in Burntisland 


28 Mary Somerville. 


after her father’s death, greatly disapproved of my 
conduct. She was an old maid who could be very 
agreeable and witty, but she had all the prejudices 
of the time with regard to women’s duties, and said 
to my mother, “I wonder you let. Mary waste her 
time in reading, she never shews (sews) more than if 
she were a man.” Whereupon I was sent to the 
village school to learn plain needlework. I do not 
remember how long it was after this that an old 
lady sent some very fine linen to be made into 
shirts for her brother, and desired that one should 
be made entirely by me. This shirt was so well 
worked that I was relieved from attending the 
school, but the house lincn was given into my 
charge to make and to mend. We had a large 
stock, much of it very beautiful, for the Scotch 
ladies at that time were very proud of their napery, 
but they no longer sent it to Holland to be bleached, . 
as had once been the custom. We grew flax, and 
our maids spun it. The coarser yarn was woven in 
Burntisland, and bleached upon the links ; the finer 
was sent to Dunfermline, where there was a manu- 
factory of table-linen. 

I was annoyed that my turn for reading was so 
much disapproved of, and thought it unjust that 
women should have been given a desire for know- 
ledge if it were wrong to acquire it. Among our 


Alemory. 29 


books I found Chapone’s “ Letters to Young Women,” 
and resolved to follow the course of history there 
recommended, the more so as we had most of the 
works she mentions. One, however, which my 
cousin lent me was in French, and here the little [had 
learnt at school was useful, for with the help of a 
dictionary I made out the sense. What annoyed 
me was my memory not being good—I could re~ 
member neither names nor dates. Years afterwards 
I studied a “Memoria Technica,” then in fashion, 
without success ; yet in my youth I could play long 
pieces of music on the piano without the book, and 
I never forget mathematical formule. In looking 
over one of my MSS., which I had not seen for forty 
years, I at once recognised the formule for com- 
puting the secular inequalities of the moon. 

We had two small globes, and my mother allowed 
me to learn the use of them from Mr. Reed, the 
village schoolmaster, who came to teach me for a 
few weeks in the winter evenings. Besides the 
ordinary branches, Mr. Reed taught Latin and navi- 
gation, but these wére out of the question for me. 
At the village school the boys often learnt Latin, 
but it was thought sufficient for the girls to be able 
to read the Bible; very few even learnt writing. I 
recollect, however, that some men were ignorant of 
book-keeping ; our baker, for instance, had a wooden 


30 Mary Somervilie. 


tally, in which he made a notch for every loaf of 
bread, and of course we had the corresponding tally. 
They were called nick-sticks. 

My bedroom had a window to the south, and a 
small closet near had one to the north. At these I 
spent many hours, studying the stars by the aid of 
the celestial globe. Although I watched and ad- 
mired the magnificent displays of the Aurora, which 
frequently occurred, they seemed to be so nearly 
allied to lightning that I was somewhat afraid of 
them. At an earlier period of my life there was a 
comet, which I dreaded exceedingly. 

= * * * * 

My father was Captain of the “Repulse,” a fifty- 
gun ship, attached to the Northern fleet commanded 
by the Earl of Northesk. The winter was extremely 
stormy, the fleet was driven far north, and kept 
there by adverse gales, till both officers and crew 
were on short rations. They ran out of candles, 
and had to tear up their stockings for wicks, and 
dip them into the fat of the salt meat which was 
left. We were in great anxiety, for it was reported 
that some of the ships had foundered; we were, 
however, relieved by the arrival of the “ Repulse” 
in Leith roads for repair. 

Our house on one occasion being full, I was 
sent to sleep in a room quite detached from the 


Nocturnal Terrors. 31 


rest and with a different staircase. There was 
a closet in this room in which my father kept 
his fowling pieces, fishing tackle, and golf clubs, 
and a long garret overhead was filled with 
presses and stores of all kinds, among other things 
a number of large cheeses were on a board slung 
by ropes to the rafters. One night I had put 
out my candle and was fast asleep, when I was 
awakened by a violent crash, and then a rolling noise 
‘over my head. Now the room was said to be 
haunted, so that the servants would not sleep in it. 
I was desperate, for there was no bell. I groped 
my way to the closet—lucifer matches were un- 
known in those days—I seized one of the golf clubs, 
which are shod with iron, and thundered on the bed- 
room door till I brought my father, followed by 
the whole household, to my aid. It was found 
that the rats had gnawed through the ropes by 
which the cheeses were suspended, so that the crash 
and rolling were accounted for, and I was scolded 
for making such an uproar. 

Children suffer much misery by being left alone in- 
the dark, When I was very young I was sent to bed at 
eight or nine o'clock, and the maid who slept in the 
room went away as soon as I was in bed, leaving 
me alone in the dark till she came to bed herself. 
All that time I was in an agony of fear of something 


$2 Mary Somerville. 


indefinite, I could not tell what. The joy, the relief, 
when the maid came back, were such that I instantly 
fell asleep. Now that I am a widow and old, 
although I always have a night-lamp, such is the 
power of early impressions that I rejoice when 
daylight comes. 

s » * ‘ * * 

At Burntisland the sacrament was administered in 
summer because people came in crowds from the 
neighbouring parishes to attend the preachings. 
The service was long and fatiguing. A number 
of clergymen came to assist, and as the minister's 
Manse could not accommodate them all, we enter- 
tained three of them, one of whom was always the 
Rev. Dr. Campbell, father of Lord Campbell. 

Thursday was a day of preparation. The morning 
service began by a psalm sung by the congregation, 
then a prayer was said by the minister, followed by 
a lecture on some chapter of the Bible, generally 
lasting an hour, after that another psalm was sung, 
followed by a prayer, a sermon which lasted seldom 
less than an hour, and the whole ended with a 
psalm, a short prayer and a benediction. Every one 
then went home to dinner and returned afterwards 
for afternoon service, which lasted more than an 
hour and a half. Friday was a day of rest, but I 
together with many young people went at this time 


The Sacrament. 83 


to the minister to receive a stamped piece of lead as 
a token that we were sufficiently instructed to be 
dmitted to Christ’s table. This ticket was given 
to the Elder on the following Sunday. On Saturday 
there was a morning service, and on Sunday such 
multitudes came to receive the sacrament that the 
devotions continued till late in the evening. The 
‘ ceremony was very strikingly and solemnly con- 
ducted. The communicants sat on each side of long 
narrow tables covered with white linen, in imitation 
of the last supper of Christ, and the Elders handed 
the bread and wine. Aftera short exhortation from 
one of the ministers the first set retired, and were 
succeeded by others. When the weather was fine a 
sermon, prayers, and psalm-singing took place either 
in the churchyard or on a grassy’ bank at the Links 
for such as were waiting to communicate. On the 
Monday morning there was the same long service as 
on the Thursday. It was too much for me; I always 
came home with a headache, and took a dislike to 
sermons. . é 

Our minister was a rigid Calvinist. His sermons 
were gloomy, and so long that he occasionally would 
startle the congregation by calling out to some cul- 
prit, “Sit up there, how daur ye sleep i’ the kirk.” 
Some saw-mills in the neighbourhood were burnt 
down, so the following Sunday we had a sermon on 


St Mary Somerville. 


hell-fire. The kirk was very large and quaint; a 
stair led to a gallery on each side of the pulpit, which 
was intended for the tradespeople, and each division 
was marked with a suitable device, and text from 
Scripture. On the bakers’ portion a sheaf of wheat 
was painted ; a balance and weights on the grocers’, 
and on the weavers’, which was opposite to our pew, 
there was a shuttle, and below it the motto, “My 
days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, and are 
spent without hop job.” The artist was evidently 
no clerk. 

My brother Sam, while attending the university 
in Edinburgh, came to us on the Saturdays and 
returned to town on Monday. He of course 
went with us to the kirk on Sunday morning, 
but we let our mother attend afternoon service 
alone, as he and I were happy to be together, 
and we spent the time sitting on the grassy rocks 
at the foot of our garden, from whence we could 
see a vast extent of the Firth of Forth with Edin- 
burgh and its picturesque hills. It was very 
amusing, for we occasionally saw three or four 
whales spouting, and shoals of porpoises at play. 
However, we did not escape reproof, for I recollect 
the servant coming to tell us that the minister 
had sent to inquire whether Mr. and Miss Fairfax 
had been taken ill, as he had not seen them at 


Edinburgh. 33 


the kirk in the afternoon. The minister in ques- 
tion was Mr. Wemyss, who had married a younger 
sister of my mother’s. 
* * * * * 

When I was about thirteen my mother took a 
small apartment in Edinburgh for the winter, and I 
was sent to a writing school, where I soon learnt 
to write a good hand, and studied the common 
rules of arithmetic. My uncle William Henry 
Charters, lately retuned from India, gave me a 
pianoforte, and I had music lessons from an old lady 
who lived in the top story of one of the highest houses 
in'the old town. I slept in the same room with 
my mother. ‘One morning I called out, much 
alarmed, “‘ There is lightning !” but my mother said, 
after a moment, “ No; it is fire!” and on opening 
the window shutters I found that the flakes of fire 
flying past had made the glass quite hot. The next 
house but one was on fire and burning fiercely, 
and the people next door were throwing everything 
theY possessed, even china and glass, out of the - 
windows into the street. We dressed quickly, and 
my mother sent immediately to Trotter the up- 
holsterer for four men. We then put our family 
papers, our silver, &c., &c., into trunks; then my 
mother said, “‘ Now let us breakfast, it is time enough 


for us to move our things when the next house takes 
D2 


36 Mary Somerville. 


fire.” Of its doing so there was every probability 
because casks of turpentine and oil were exploding 
from time to time in a carriage manufactory at the 
back of it. Several gentlemen of our acquaintance 
who came to assist us were surprised to find us 
breakfasting quietly as if there were nothing unusual 
going on. In fact my mother, though a coward in 
many things, had, like most women, the presence of 
mind and the courage of necessity. The fire was 
extinguished, and we had only the four men to pay 
for doing nothing, nor did we sacrifice any of our 
property like our neighbours who had completely 
lost their heads from terror. I may mention 
here that on one occasion when my father, was at 
home he had been ill with a severe cold, and wore 
his nightcap. While reading in the drawing-room 
one evening he called out, “I smell fire, there, is no 
time to be lost,” so, snatching up a candle, he 
wandered from room to room followed by us all still 
smelling fire, when one of the servants said, “0, sir, 
it is the tassel of your nightcap that is on fire.” ° 


s * Ld * * 


On returning to Burntisland, I spent four or five 
hours daily at the piano ; and for the sake of having 
something to do, I taught myself Latin enongh, 
from such books as we had, to read Czesar’s * Com- 


 Fedburgh.-: 87 


mentaries.” I went’ that’ simmer on’ a visit to my 
aunt at Jedburgh, and, for the first time’ in my life, 
I'met in my unele, Dr. Somerville, with a friend 
who approved of my thirst for knowledge. During 
long walks with him in the early mornings, he was 
so iad: that IF had the courage to tell him that I 
had been trying to’ learn Latin, but I feared it was 
in vain ; for my brother ‘and other: boys, superior to 
me in talent, and with every assistance, spent years 
in learning it. He assured me, on the contrary, 
that in ancient times many women—some of them 
of the highest rank in England—had been very 
elegant' scholars, and that he would ‘read Virgil 
with me if I would come to his study for an 
hour or two every morning before breakfast, which 
I gladly did. 

I never was happier in my life than during the 
months I spent at Jedburgh. My aunt was a 
charming companion—witty, full of anecdote, and 
had read more than most women of her day, es- 
pecially Shakespeare, who was her favourite author. 
My cousins had little turn for reading, but they 
were better educated than most girls. They were 
, taught to write by David Brewster, son of the 
village schoolmaster, afterwards Sir David, who 
became one of the most distinguished philosophers 
and discoverers of the age,.member of all the 


38 + Mary Somerville. 


scientific societies at home and abroad, and at last 
President of the University of Edinburgh. He was 
studying in Edinburgh when I was at Jedburgh; 
so I did not make his acquaintance then ; but later 
in life he became my valued friend. I did not 
know till after his death, that, while teaching my 
eousins, he fell in love with my cousin Margaret. 
I do not believe she was aware of it. She was 
afterwards attached to an officer in the army; but 
my aunt would not allow her to go to that out- 
landish place, Malta, where he was quartered ; so 
she lived and died unmarried. Steam has changed 
our ideas of distance since that time. 

My uncle’s house—the manse—in which I was 
born, stands in a pretty garden, bounded by the 
fine ancient abbey, which, though partially ruined, 
atill serves as the parish kirk. The garden produced 
abundance of common flowers, vegetables, and fruit. 
Some of the plum and pear trees were very old, and 
were said to have been planted by the monks. 
Both were excellent in quality, and very productive. 
The view from both garden and manse was over the 
beautiful narrow valley through which the Jed 
flows. The precipitous banks of red sandstone 
are richly clothed with vegetation, some of the trees 
ancient and very fine, especially the magnificent one 
called the capon tree, and the lofty king of ‘the 


Fedburgh. 89 


wood, remnants of the fine forests which ‘at one 
time had covered the country. An inland scene 
was new to me, and I was never tired of admiring 
the tree-crowned scaurs or precipices, where the tich 
glow of the red sandstone harmonized so well with 
the autumnal tints of the foliage. 

We often bathed in the pure stream of the Jed. 
My aunt always went with us, and was the merriest 
of the ‘party; we bathed in a pool which was 
deep under the high scaur, but sloped gradually: 
from the grassy bank on the other side. Quiet and 
transparent as the Jed was, it one day came down 
with irresistible fury, red with the débris of the 
sandstone scaurs. There had been a thunderstorm , 
in the hills up-stream, and as soon as the river 
began to rise, the people came out with pitchforks 
and hooks to catch the hayricks, sheaves of corn, 
drowned pigs, and other animals that came sweeping 
past. My cousins and I were standing on the 
bridge, but my aunt: called us off when the water 
rose above the arches, for fear of the bridge giving 
way. We made expeditions every day ; sometimes 
‘we went nutting in the forest; at other times we 
gathered mushrooms on the grass parks of Stewart- 
field, where there was a wood of picturesque old 
Scotch firs, inhabited by a colony of rooks. I still 
kept the habit of looking out for birds, and had the 


40 Mary Somerville. 


good fortune to see a heron, now a rare bird in the 
valley of the Jed. Some of us went every day to 
a spring called the Allerly well, about a quarter of 
a mile from the manse, and brought a large jug of 
its sparkling -water for dinner. The evenings were 
cheerful ; my aunt sang Scotch songs prettily, and 
told us stories and legends about Jedburgh, which 
had been a royal residence in the olden time. She 
had a tame white and tawny-coloured ow, which 
we fed every night, and sometimes brought into the 
drawing-room. The Sunday evening never was 
gloomy, though properly observed. We occasionally 
drank tea with acquaintances, and made visits of a 
few days to the Rutherfurds of Edgerton and others ; 
but I was always glad to return to the manse. 

My uncle, like other ministers of the Scottish 
Kirk, was allowed a glebe, which he farmed him- 
self. Besides horses, a cow was kept, which sup- 
plied the family with cream and butter, and the 
skimmed milk was given to the poor; but as the 
milk became scaree, one woman was deprived, for the 
time, of her share. Soon after, the cow was taken 
ill, and my uncle’s ploughman, Will, came to him 
and said, “Sir, gin you would give that carline 
Tibby Jones her soup o’ milk again, the coo would 
soon be weel eneugh.” Will was by no means the 
only believer in witchcraft at that time. 


CHAPTER III. 


EDINBURGH— YOUTHFUL STUDIES AND AMUSEMENTS— POLITICS—THE 
THEATRES OF THE TIME, 


[My mother’s next visit was to the house of her uncle, 
William Charters, in Edinburgh. From thence she was 
enabled to partake of the advantages of a dancing-school 
of the period. 


Tuey sent me to Strange’s dancing school. Strange 
himself was exactly like a figure on the stage ; tall 
and thin, he wore a powdered wig, with cannons at 
the ears, and.a pigtail. Ruffles at the breast and 
wrists, white waistcoat, black silk or velvet shorts, | 
white silk stockings, large silver buckles, and a pale 
blue coat completed his costume. He had a little 
fiddle on which he played, called a kit. My first 
lesson was how to walk and make a curtsey. “Young 
lady, if you visit the queen you must make three 
curtsies, lower and lower and lower as you approach 
her. So-o—o,”. leading me on and making me 
curtsey. “ Now, if the queen were to ask you to 
eat a bit of mutton with her, what would you say ?” 

= 


a2 Mary Somerviile. 


Every Saturday afternoon all the scholars, both boys 
and girls, met to practise in the public assembly 
rooms in George’s Street. It was a handsome large 
hall with benches rising like an amphitheatre. 
Some of the elder girls were very pretty, and 
danced well, so these practisings became a lounge for 
officers from the Castle, and other young men. We 
used always to go in full evening dress. We learnt 
the mtuct de la cour, reels and country dances. 
Our partners used to give us gingerbread and 
oranges. Dancing before so many people was quite 
an exhibition, and I was greatly mortified one day 
when ready to begin a minuet, by the dancing- 
master shaking me roughly and making me hold 
out my frock properly. 

Though kind in the main, my uncle and his wife 
were rather sarcastic and severe, and kept me down 
a good deal, which I felt keenly, but said nothing. I 
was not a favourite with my family at that period 
of my life, because I was reserved and unexpansive, 
in consequence of the silence [ was obliged to observe 
on the subjects which interested me. Three Miss 
Melvilles, friends, or perhaps relatives, of Mrs. 
Charters, were always held up to me as models of 
perfection, to be imitated in everything, and I 
wearied of hearing them constantly praised at my 
expense. 


Edinburgh Gossip.’ 48 


In a small society like that of Edinburgh there 
was a good deal of scandal and gossip ;' every one’s 
character and conduet were freely criticised; and by 
none more than by my aunt and her friends. She 
used to sit at a window embroidering, where she not 
only could see every one that passed, but with a- 
small telescope could look into the dressing-room of 
a lady of her acquaintance, and watch all she did. 
A spinster lady of good family, a cousin of ours, 

- carried her gossip so far, that she was tried for de- 
famation, and condemned to a month’s imprisonment, 
which she actually underwent in the Tolbooth. She 
«was let out just before the king's birthday, to cele- 
brate which, besides the guns fired at the Castle, the 
boys let off squibs and crackers in all the streets, 
As the lady in question was walking up the High 
Street, some lads in a wynd, or narrow street, fired a 
small cannon, anc one of the slugs with which it 
was loaded hit her mouth and wounded her tongue. 
This raised universal laugh ; and no one enjoyed 
it more than my uncle William, who disliked this 
somewhat masculine woman. 

Whilst at my uncle’s house, I attended a school 
for writing and arithmetic, and made considerable 
progress in the latter, for I liked it, but I soon ee 
it from want of practice. 

My uncle and aunt generally paid a visit to ‘the 


44 Mary Somerville. 


Lyells of Kinnordy, the father and mother of my 
friend Sir Charles Lyell, the celebrated ‘geologist ; 
bat this time they accepted an invitation from Cap- 
tain Wedderburn, and took me with them. Captain 
Wedderburn was an old bachelor, who had left the 
army and devoted himself to agriculture. Mounted 
on a very tall but quiet horse, I accompanied my 
host every morning when he went over his farm, 
which was chiefly a grass farm. The house was 
infested with rats, and a masculine old maid, who 
was of the party, lived in such terror of them, that 
she had a light in her bedroom, and after she 
was in bed, made her maid tuck in the white 
dimity curtains all round. One ‘night we were 
awakened by violent screams, and on going to see 
what was the matter, we found Miss Cowe in the 
middle of the room, bare-footed, in her night-dress, 
screaming at the top of her voice. Instead of tucking 
the rats out of the bed, the maid had tucked one 
in, and Miss Cowe on waking beheld it sitting on 
her pillow. 
= 2 = = = 

There was great political agitation at this time. 
The corruption and tyranny of the court, nobility, 
and clergy in France were so great, that when the 
revolution broke out, a large portion of our popula- 
tion thought the French people were perfectly justi- 


Polittcs, 45 


fied in revolting, and warmly espoused their cause. 
Later,;many changed their opinions, shocked, as 
every ong ,was, at the death of the king and 
queen, and the atrocious massacres which took placq 
in France. Yet some not only approved of the 
revolution abroad, but were so disgusted with our, 
mal-administration at home, to which they. attributed, 
our failure, in the war in Holland and elsewhere, 
that great dissatisfaction and alarm prevailed 
throughout ,the country. The violence, pn,.the 
other hand,, of the opposite party was not to be 
described,—-the very name of Liberal was detested., 

Great dissensions were caused by difference of 
opinion in families; and I heard people pre 
viously much esteemed accused from this, cause 
of all. that was-evil. My uncle William and my 
father_ were as violent Tories as any.. 

The Liberals were distinguished by wearing their 
hair short, and when one day I happened to say 
how becoming a crop was, and that I wished the 
men would cut off those ugly pigtails, my father 
exclaimed, “By G—, when a man cuts off his 
queue, the head should go with it.” 

, The unjust and exaggerated abuse of the. Liberal 
party made me a Liberal. From my earliest 
years my mind revolted against oppression and 
tyranny, and I resented the injustice of the world - 


46 Mary Somerville. 


in denying all those privileges of education 
to my sex which were so lavishly bestowed on 
men. My liberal opinions, both in religion and 
politics, have remained unchanged (or, rather, have 
advanced) throughout my life, but I have never been 
a republican. I have always considered a highly- 
educated aristocracy essential, not only for govern- 
ment, but for the refinement of a people. 


[After her winter in Edinburgh, my mother returned 
to Burntisland. Strange to sey, she found there, in an 
illustrated Magazine of Fashions, the introduction to the 
great study of her life. 


I was often invited with my mother to the tea- 
parties given either by widows or maiden ladies who 
resided at Burntisland. A pool of commerce used 
to be keenly contested till a late hour at these 
parties, which bored me exceedingly, but I there be- 
came acquainted with a Miss Ogilvie, much younger 
than the rest, who asked me to go and see fancy 
works she was doing, and at which she was very 
clever. I went next day, and after admiring her 
work, and being told how it was done, she showed 
me a monthly magazine with coloured plates of 
ladies’ dresses, charades, and puzzles. At the end 
of a page I read what appeared to me to be simply 
. an arithmetical question ; but on turning the page I 


Algebra: 47 


was surprised to sce strange looking lines mixed 
with letters, chiefly X’es and Y’s, and asked; ‘“ What 
is that?” “Oh,” said Miss Ogilvie, “it is a kind 
of arithmetic: they call it Algebra; but I can tell 
you nothing about it.” And we talked about 
other things; but on going home I thought I 
would lookif any of our books could tell me what 
was meant by Algebra. 

In Robertson’s “ Navigation” I flattered myself 
that I had got precisely what I wanted ; but I soon 
found that I was mistaken. I perceived, however, 
that astronomy did not consist in star-gazing,* and 
as I persevered in studying the book for a time, I 
certainly got a dim view of several subjects which 
were useful to me afterwards. Unfortunately not one 
of our acquaintances or relations knew anything of 
science or natural history ; nor, had they done so, 
should I have had courage to ask any of them a 
question, for I should have been laughed at. I 
was often very sad and forlorn; not a hand held 
out to help me. 

My uncle and aunt Charters bok a house at Burnt- 
island for the summer, and the Miss Melville I have 
already mentioned came to pay them a visit. She 


* Many people evidently think the science of astronomy consists 
entirely in observing the stars, for I have been frequently asked if I 
passed my nights looking through a telescope, and I have astonished 
the enquirers by eaying I did not even possess one. 


48 Mary Somerville. 


painted miniatures, and from seeing her at work, I 
took a fancy to learn to draw, and actually wasted 
time in copying prints ; but this circumstance en- 
abled me to get elementary books on Algebra and 
Geometry without asking questions of any one, as+ 
will be explained afterwards. The rest of the sum- 
mer I spent in playing on the piano and learning 
Greek enough to read Xenophon and part of Hero- 
dotus ; then we prepared to go to Edinburgh. 

My mother was so much afraid of the sea that she 
never would cross the Firth except in a boat belonging 
to a certain skipper who had served in the Navy and 
lost a hand; he had a hook fastened on the stump 
to enable him to haul ropes. My brother and I were 
tired of the country, and one sunny day we per- 
suaded my mother to embark. When we came to 
the shore, the skipper said, “I wonder that the 
leddy boats to-day, for though it is calm here under 
the lee of the land, there is a stiff breeze outside.” 
We ‘made him a sign to hold his tongue, for we 
knew this as well as he did. Our mother went 
down to the cabin and remained silent and quiet for 
a time; but when we began to roll and be tossed 
about, she called out to the skipper, “George! this 
iz an awful storm, I am sure we are in great danger. 
Mind how you steer; remember, I trust in you!” 
He laughed, and said, “ Dinna trust in me, leddy ; 


Painting Lessons. 49 


trust in God Almighty.” Our mother, in perfect 
terror, called out, “Dear me! is it come to that?” 
We burst out laughing, skipper and all. 

Nasmyth, an exceedingly good landscape painter 
had opened an academy for ladies in Edinburgh, a 
proof of the gradual improvement which was taking 
place in ‘the: education of the higher classes ; my 
mother, very willingly allowed me to attend it. The 
class was very full. I was not taught to draw, but 
looked on while Nasmyth painted ; then a picture 
was given me to copy, the master correcting the 
faults. Though I spoilt canvas, I had made some 
progress by the end of the season.* Mr. Nasmyth, 
besides being a good artist, was clever, well- 
informed, and had a great deal of conversation. One 
day I happened to be near him while he was talking 
to the Ladies Douglas about perspective. He said, 
“You should study Euclid’s Elements of Geometry , 
the foundation not only of Depecaye, but of astro-- 
nomy and all mechanical science.’ ” Here, in the most 
unexpected manner, I got the information I wanted, 
for I at once saw that it would help me to under- 
stand some parts of Robertson’s “ Navigation ;” but 
as to going to a bookseller and asking for Euclid the 


* Nasmyth told a lady still alive who took lessons from him in her 
youth, that the cleverest young lady he ever taught was Miss Mary 
Fairfax. 

E 


50 Mary Somerville. 


thing was impossible! Besides I did not yet know 
anything definite about Algebra, so no more could 
be done at that time ; but I nover lost sight of an 
object which had interested me from the first. 

I rose early, and played four or five hours, as 
usual, on the piano, and had lessons from Corri, an 
Italian, who taught carelessly, and did not correct a 
habit I had of thumping so as to break the 
strings; but I learned to tune a piano and mend the 
strings, as there was no tuner at Burntisland. After- 
wards I got over my bad habit and played the music 
then in vogue : pieces by Pleyel, Clementi, Steibelt, 
Mozart, and Beethoven, the last being my favourite 
to this day. I was sometimes accompanied on 
the violin by Mr. Thomson, the friend of Burns ; 
more frequently by Stabilini ; but I was always too 
shy to play before people, and invariably played 
badly when obliged to do so, which vexed me. 

= * = * * 

The prejudice against the theatre had been very 
great in Scotland, and still existed among the rigid 
Calvinists. One day, when I was fourteen or fifteen, 
on going into the drawing-room, an old man sitting 
beside my mother rose and kissed me, saying, “I 
am one of your mother’s oldest friends.” It was 
Home, the author of the tragedy of “ Douglas.” 
He was obliged to resign his living in the kirk for 


Theatres. 5E 


the scandal of having had his play acted in the 
theatre in Edinburgh, and some of his clerical friends 
were publicly rebuked for gaing to see it. Our family 
was perfectly liberal in all these matters. The first 
time I had ever been in a theatre I went with my 
father to sce ‘‘Cymbeline.” I had never neglected 
Shakespeare, and when: our great tragedians, Mrs. 
Siddons and her brother, John Kemble, came for a 
short time to act in Edinburgh, I could think of 
nothing els. They were both remarkably hand- 
some, and, notwithstanding the Scotch prejudice, 
the theatre was crowded every night. It was.a 
misfortune to me that my mother never would .go 
into society during the absence of my father, nor, 
indeed, at any time, except, perhaps, to a dinnér 
party; but I had no difficulty in finding a chaperone, 
as we knew many people. I used to go to the 
theatre in the morning, afid ask to see the plan of 
the house for the evening, that I might know which 
ladies I could accompany to their boxes. Of 
course I paid for my place. Our friends were so 
- kind that I saw these great artists, as well as 
Charles Kemble, Young, and Bannister, in “ Ham- 
let,” “ Macbeth,” “Othello,” “Coriolanus,” “ The 
Gamester,” &c. 1 

It was greatly to the honour of the British stage 
that all the principal actors, men and women, were 

E2 


52 Mary Somervilic. 


of excellent moral character, and much esteemed. 
Many years afterwards, when Mrs. Siddons was an 
old woman, I drank tea with her, and heard her 
Tread Milton and Shakespeare. Her daughter told us 
to applaud, for she had been so much accustomed to 
it in the theatre that she could not read with spirit 
without this expression of approbation. 

My mother was pleased with my musie and 
painting, and, although she did not go to the 
theatre herself, she encouraged me to go. She was 
quite of the old school with regard to the duties of 
women, and very particular about her table; and, 
although we were obliged to live with rigid economy, 
our food was of the best quality, well dressed, and 
aeatly served, for she could tell the cook exactly 
what was amiss when anything was badly cooked. 
She thought besides that some of the comfort of 
married life depended upon the table, so I was sent 
to a pastrycook fora short time every day, to learn 
the art of cookery. I had for companions Miss Mon- 
creiff, daughter of Sir Henry Moncreiff Wellwood, 
a Scotch baronet of old family. She was older than 
I, pretty, pleasing, and one of the belles of the 
day. We were amused at the time, and afterwards 
made jellies and creams for little supper parties, 
then in fashion, though, as far as economy went, we 
might as well have bought them. 


Euclid at last. 58 


On veturning to Burntisland, I played on the 
piano as diligently as ever, and painted several 
hours every day. At this time, however, a Mr. 
Craw came to live with us as tutor to my youngest 
brother, Henry. He had been educated. for the 
kirk, was a fair Greek and Latin scholar, but, 
unfortunately for me, was no mathematician. He 
was a simple, good-natured kind of man, and I 
ventured to ask him about algebra and geometry, 
and begged him, the first time he went to Edin- 
burgh, to buy me something elementary on these 
subjects, so he soon brought me “Euclid” and Bonny- 
castle’s “Algebra,” which were the books used in the 
schools at that time. Now I had got what I so 
long and earnestly desired. I asked Mr. Craw to 
hear, me demonstrate a few problems in the first 
book of “ Euclid,” and then I continued the study 
alone with courage and assiduity, knowing I was on 
the right road. Before I began to read algebra I 
found it necessary to study arithmetic again, having 
forgotten much of it. I never was expert at 
addition, for, in summing up a long column of 
pounds, shillings, and pence, in the family account 
book, it seldom came out twice the same way. In 
after life I, of course, used logarithms for the higher 
branches of science. 

T had to take parg in the household affairs, and to 


54 Mary Somervitte. 


make and mend my own clothes. ‘1 rose early, 
played on the piano, and painted during the time 
I could spare in the daylight hours, but I sat up 
very late reading Euclid. The servants, however, 
told my mother “It was no wonder the stock of 
candles was soon exhausted, for Miss Maty sat up 
reading till a very late hour;” whereupon an order 
was given to take away my candle as soon as I was 
in bed. I had, however, already gone through the 
first six books of Euclid, and now I was thrown 
on my memory, which I exercised by begiming at 
the first book, and demonstrating in my mind a 
certain number of problems every night, till I could 
nearly go through the whole. My father came home 
for a short time, and, somehow or other, finding out 
what I was about, said to my mother, “Peg, we 
must put a stop to this, or we shall have Mary in 
a strait jacket one of these days, There was X., 
who went raving mad about the longitude !” 
= * = * *= 

In our younger days my brother Sam and I kept 
various festivals: we burnt nuts, ducked for apples, 
and observed many other of the ceremonies of 
Halloween, so well described by Burns, and we 
always sat up to hail the new year on New Year's 
Eve. When in Edinburgh we sometimes disguised 
ourselves as “ guisarts,” and went about with a basket 


Christmas Doings. 55 


f 


Tal of Christmas cakes called buns and shortbread, 
and 3 flagon of “het-pint” or posset, to wish our 
friends a “ Happy New Year.” At Christrhas time a, 
set of men, called the Christmas Wakes, walked 
slowly through the streets during the midnight 
hours, playing our sweet Scotch airs on flageolets, 
I remember the sound from a distance fell gently 
on my sleeping ear, swelled softly, and died away 
in ‘distance again, a passing breeze of sweet sound, 
It was very pleasing ; some thought it too sad... 
My grandfather was intimate with the Boswells 
of Balmuto, a bleak plice a few miles to the north 
ef Burntisland. Lord Balmuto, a Scotch judge, 
who was then proprietor, had been a dancing com: 
panion of my mother’s, and had a son and two 
daughters, the eldest a nice girl of my age, with whom 
I was intimate, so I gladly accepted an invitation to 
visit them at Balmuto. Lord Balmuto was a large 
coarse-looking man, with black hair and beetling 
eyebrows. Though not vulgar, he was passionate, 
and had a boisterous manner. My mother and her 
sisters gave him the nickname of the “black bull of 
Norr’away,” in allusion to the northern position of 
Balmuto. Mrs. Boswell was gentle and lady-like. 
The son had a turn for chemistry, and his father took 
me to see what they called the Laboratory. What 
a laboratory. might be I knew not, as I had never 


56 Mary Somerville. 


heard the word before, but somehow I did not like the: 
look of the curiously-shaped glass things and other 
apparatus; so when the son put a substance on the 
table, and took a hammer, his father saying, “ Now 
you will hear a fine report,” I ran out of the room, 
saying, “I don’t like reports.” Sure enough there was 
a very loud report, followed by a violent crash, and 
on going into the room again, we found that the son 
had been knocked down, the father was trembling 
from head to foot, and the apparatus had been 
smashed to pieces. They had had a narrow escape. 
Miss Boswell led a dull life, often passing the 
winter with her mother in that solitary place, 
Balmuto; and when in Edinburgh, she was much 
kept down by her father, and associated little with 
people of her own age and station. The conse~ 
quence was that she eloped with her drawing- 
master, to the inexpressible rage and mortification 
of her father, who had all the Scotch pride of family 
and pure blood. 

This year we remamed longer in the country 
than usual, and I went to spend Christmas, with, 
the Oswalds of Dunnikeir. The family consisted 
of a son, a colonel in the army, and three 
daughters, the youngest about my age, a bold 
horsewoman. She had talent, became a good 
Greek and Latin scholar, and was afterwards 


The Oswald Famity. 57. 


married to the Earl of Elgin. More than seventy 
years after this I had a visit from the Dean of 
Westminster and Lady Augusta Stanley, her. 
daughter; a very charming person, who told me 
about her family, of which I had heard nothing 
for years. I was very happy to see the Dean, one 
of the most liberal and distinguished members of 
the Church of England, and son of my old friend 
“the late Bishop of Norwich. 
oe: * , * * * 
‘S* When I returned to Edinburgh Mr. Nasmyth 
. was niuch pleased with the progress I had made in 
painting, for, besides having copied several land- 
scapes he had lent me, [ had taken -the outline 
of & print and coloured it from a storm I saw at 
the end of our garden. ‘This picture I still possess. 
Dr. Blair, minister of the High Kirk of Edin- 
burgh, the well-known author and professor of 
Rhetoric and Belles Lettres in the University, an 
amtimate friend of my grandfather's, had heard ‘of 
my-turn for painting, and asked my mother to let 
him ‘see some of my pictures. A few of the best 
Were: sent to him, and were returned after a few 
days accompanied by a long letter from the old 
gentleman, pointing out what he admired most in 
each picture. I was delighted with tle letter, and 
not-a little vain of the praise. 


53 Marv Sonrerville. 


LETTER FROM DR, BLAIR TO MARY FAIRFAX. 


My pear Miss Famrax, ss 

This comes to return you a ‘thousand thanks , 
for the pleasure and entertainment J have had from your 
landscape paintings. , I had them placed in the best 
light I could contrive in’ my drawing-room, and eriter- 
tained myself a gogd while every day looking at them 
and admiring their beauties, which always grew upon me. 
I intend to return them to you to-morrow, or rather on 
the beginning of next week; and as they were taken 
particulary care of, I hope they shall not appear to have 
suffered any ihjury. 

I have exhibited them to several people, some of 
whom were excellent judges, whom I brought on purpose 
to view them—Lady Miller, the Solicitor and Mrs. Blair, 
his lady, Dr. Hill, Miss Anne Ker of Nisbet, and a 
variety of Indies. All joined in praising them highly. 
The penserosa figure caught the highest admiration of 
any, from the gracefulness of the figure and attitude, and 

“the boldness and propriety of the scenery. The two 
morning and evening views—one of Lochnesy and the 
other of Eleho Castle—which make fine companions, and 
which I always placed together, were also highly admired. 
Each of them had their different partizans, and I myself 
wase for a good while undetermined which of them to 
prefer. At last, I found the placidity of the scene in 
Elcho Castle, with the cottages among the trees, dwelt 
most dn my imagination, though the gaiety and brightness 
of the morning sky in the other has also exquisite beauty. 

_ On the whole, Iam persuaded that your taste and powers 

of execution in that art are uncommonly great, and that 


_ Letter frou Dr. Blair. 59 


if you go on you must excel highly, and may go what 

length you please. ° ‘Landseapé painting has been always 

a great favourite with me; and you have really con- 

tributed inuch to my entertainment. As I thought you 
’ might wish to know my sentiments, after your paintings 

had been a little consider éd, I was led to write you these 
lines: (in which I assure you there is nothing flattering),’ 

before sending back your piecés to you. With best 
: compliments to Lady Fairfax, ‘believe me, 

3 Your obliged and most obedient Servant, 

~s . Hvuen Briar. 


ArcyLn Square, 11h April (probably) 1797" 


A ig or fwo after this a Mrs, Ramsay a rich 

oud widow; a relation of my mother’s, came with 
her daughter, who was an heiress, to pay us a 
morning visit. Looking round the room she asked 
who had painted the pictures hung up on the 
walls. My mother, who was rather proud of them, 
said they were painted by*me. “I am glad,” said. 
Mrs. Rafnsay, “that Miss Fairfax has any kind of 
talent that may enable her to win her bread, for 
everyone knows she will not have a sixperice.” 
It was a very severe hit, because it was true. Had 
it been my lot to win my bread by painting, I fear 
I should have fared badly, but I never should have 
been ashamed of it; on the contrary, I should have 
been very proud had I been successful. I must 
say the idea of making money had never entered ° 


60 Mary Somerville. 


my head in any of my pursuits, but I was in- 
tensely ambitious to excel in something, for I felt 
in my own breast that women were capable of 
taking a higher place in creation than that as- 
signed to them in my early days, which was 
very low. 

Not long after Mrs. Ramsay’s visit to my mother, 
Miss Ramsay went to visit the Dons, at Newton 
Don, a pretty place near Kelso. Miss Ramsay and 
the three Miss Dons were returning from a long 
walk ; they had reached the park of Newton Don, 
when they Jeard the dinner bell ring, and fearing to 
be too late for dinner, instead of going round, they 
attempted to cross a brook which runs through the 
park. One of the Miss Dons stumbled on the 
stepping-stones and fell into the water. Her two 
sisters and Miss Ramsay, trying to save her, fell 
in one after another. The three Miss Dons were 
drowned, but Miss Ramsay, who wore a stiff worsted 
petticoat, was buoyed up by it and carried down 
stream, where she caught by the branch of a tree 
and was saved. She never recovered the shock of 


the dreadful scene. 


CHAPTER IV 


EDINBURGH SUPPER PARTIES—TOUR IN THE HIGHLANDS—MUTINY in 
THE FLEET—BATTLE OF CAMPERDOWN. 
4 


[By this time my mother was grown up, and extremely 
pretty. All those who knew her speak of her rare and 
delicate’ beauty, both of face and figure. They called 
her the “Rose of Jedwood.” She kept her beauty to 
the last day of her life, and was a beautiful old woman, 
as she had been a lovely young one. She used to 
say, laughing, that “it was very hard no one ever thought 
of painting her portrait so long as she was young and 
pretty.” After she became celebrated, various like- 
nesses were taken of her, by far the best of which 
are a beautiful bust, modelled at Rome in 1844 by Mr. 
Lawrence Macdonald, and a crayon drawing by Mr. 
James Swinton, done in London in 1848. My mother 
always looked considerably younger than her age ; even 
at ninety, she looked younger than some who were 
her juniors by several years. This was owing, no doubt, 
principally to her being small and delicate in face and 
figure, but also, I think, to the extreme youthfulness 
and freshness of both her heart and mind, neither of 
which ever grew old. It certainly was not due to a 
youthful style of dress, for she had perfect taste in such 
matters, as well as in other things; and although no 


62 Mary Somerville. 


one spent less thought or money on it than she, my 
mother was at all times both neatly and becomingly 
dressed. She never was careless; and her room, her 
papers, and all that belonged to her were invariably in 
the most beautiful trder. My mother’s recollections of 
this period of her life are as follows :— 


1 Ar that time Edinburgh was really the capital of 
Scotlaad ; most of the Scotch families of distinetion 
spent the winter there, and we had numerous 
acquajntandes who invited me to whatever gaiety 
whs going on. As my mother refused to go int 
society when my*father‘was at sea, I had to find a 
chaperon ; but I never was at a loss, for we were 
‘somehow related to the Erskine family, and . the 
Countess of Buchan, an amiable old lady, was always 
ready to take charge of me. 

It was under Lady Buchan’s care that I made 
my first appearance at a ball, and my first dancing 
partner was the late Earl of Minto, then Mr. Gilbert 
Eliot, with whom I was always on very friendly 
terms, as well as with his family. Many other 
ladies were willing to take charge of me, but a 
chaperon was only required for the theatre, and con- 
certa, and for balls in the public assembly rooms ; at 
private balls the lady of the house was thought suffi- 
cient. Still, although I -was sure to know everybody 
in the room, or nearly so, I liked to have some one 


_ First Ball, - 63 


with whom to enter and to. sit beside. Few ladies 

kept carriages, but went in sedan. -chaits, of -which’ 
there were stands in the’ principal streets. ° ‘Ladies 
were generally attended by a man-ervant, but ‘TF. 
went alone, as our household consisted of twa maid- 
servants only. My mother knew, however," that 
the Highlanders who carried: me “could: be trusted. 

I was fond of dancing, and never without _pertners, 

and often came home in bright daylight. The 
dances were reels; country dances, and sometimes 
Sir Roger de Coverley. 


[At this period, although busily engaged ‘in studying 
‘painting at Nasmyth’s academy, practising the piano five 
hours a day, and pursuing her more’ serious' studies: 
zealously, my mother went a good deal into society, for 
Edinburgh was a gay, sociable: place, and. many ‘people 
who recollect her at that time, and some who were her 
dancing partners, have told me she was much admired, 
and a great favourite. They said she had’ a “graceful 
figure, below the middle size, a small head; well sét. on 
her shoulders, a beautiful complexion, bright, intelligent ' 
yes, and q profusion of soft brown hair, Besides the 
various occupations I have mentioned, she made all her 
own dresses, even for balls. These, however, unlike the 
elaborate productions of our day, were simply of fine 
India muslin, with ® little Flanders lace. ‘She says of 
her life in Edinburgh ;-~ 


64 Mary Somerville, 


Girls had perfect liberty at that time in Edin- 
burgh ; we walked together in Princes Street, the 
fashionable promenade, and were joined by our 
dancing partners. We occasionally gave little 
supper parties, and presented these young men to 
our parents as they came in. At these meetings 
we played at games, danced reels, or had a little 
music—never cards. After supper there were toasts, 
sentiments, and songs. There were always one or 
two hot dishes, and a variety of sweet things and 
fruit. Though I was much more at ease in society 
now, I was always terribly put out when asked for 
a toast ora sentiment. Like other girls, I did not dis- 
like a little quiet flirtation ; but I never could speak 
across a table, or take a leading part in conversation. 
This diffidence was probably owing to the secluded 
life I led in my early youth. At this time I gladly 
took part in any gaiety that was going on, and spent 
the day after a ball in idleness and gossiping with my 
friends ; but these were rare occasious, for the balls 
were not numerous, and F never lost sight of the 
main object of my life, which was to prosecute my 
studies. So -I painted at Nasmyth’s, played the 
usual number of hours on the piano, worked and“ 
conversed with my mother in the evening; and as 
we kept early hours, I rose at day-break, and after 
dressing, } wrapped myself in a blanket from my 


Relief from Study. 65 


bed on account of the excessive cold—having no 
fire at that hour—and read algebra or the classics. 
till breakfast time. I had, and still have, deter- 
mined perseverance, but I soon found that it was 
in vain to occupy my mind beyond a certain time. 
T grew tired and did more harm thai good ; so, if I 
net with a difficult point, for example, in algebra, 
instead of poring over it till I was bewildered, I left 
it, took my work or some amusing book, and resumed 
_it when my mind was fresh. Poetry was my great 
resource on these occasions, but at a later period 
I read novels, the “Old English Baron,” the 
“ Mysteries of Udolpho,” the ‘Romance of the 
Forest,” &c. I was very fond of ghost and wite) 
' stories, both*of which were believed in by most of 
the common people and many of the better educated. 
I heard an old naval officer say that he never opened 
his eyes after he was.in bed. I asked him why ? 
and he replied, “ For fear I should see something !” 
Now I did ‘not actually believe in either ghosts or 
witches, but yet, when alone in the dead of the 
night, I have beer seized with “a dread of, I know 
not what. Few people will now understand me if I 
say I was eerie, a Scotch expression for supersti-. 
tious awe. I have been struck, on reading the life 
of the late Sir David Brewster, with the jnfluence 
the superstitions of the age and country. had: on 


66 Mary Somervrlle. 


both Jearned ail unleained. Sir David. was one of 
the greatest philosophers of the day. He was only a’ 
ear younger than I;'we were both born in Jed. 
burgh, and . botlr ‘yore, ‘iufluénced. hy the supersti- 
tions ef our age and eountry in a. similar manner, 
“for he.confestéd shat, although ke,lid not believe 
in- ghosts, hé was eérte when ‘sitting up to’a laie 
hour in &,Jone hpuse that was haunted. This is a 
totally. different thing from believing in spirit- 
rapping, -which I scorn.’ : 

We returned as usual to Burntisland, in spring, 
und my father, who was at home, took my mother 
aud me a tour in the Highlands. I° was a great 
admirer of Ossian’s poems, and viewed the grand and 
beautiful scenery with awe; and my’ father, who 
was of a romaific disposition,’smiled at my en- 
thusiastic ata Mon of the eagles as they soared 
above the mountains. These noble birds are nearly 
extirpated ; and, indeed, the feathered tribes, which 
were more varied and numerous in Britain than in 
any part of Europe, wilk soon disappear. They 
will certainly be avenged. & the insects. 

On coming home from the journey I was quite 
lroken-hearted to find my beautiful goldfinch, which 
used to draw its water so prettily with an ivory cup 
iid little chain, dead in its cage. The odious 
wretches of servants, to whose care I trusted it, let 


Mutiny ‘in the Fleet. : 67 


“Ht die of “hinge My ‘heart is. deeply pained.23 
I write this, seventy years afterwatds.: 


In Fifeshire, as -elsewheye, gpolitical ‘opinions 
-separated friends » ind disturbed « the, -peace. “of 
families,; digseygsipnis “one "political questions were 
violent and - daxigeroug. on’ actount, of ’ “the” hard- 
drinking then sa prevalent, - “Abs this’. time ‘the 
oppression and cruelty committed in Great Britain 
were almost beyond endurance. “Men and women 
were executed for what at the present day would 
only have been held to deserve a few weeks’ 
or mouths’ Imprisonment.* Every liberal opinion 
was crushed, men were entrapped into the army 
by promises which were never, kept, and press- 
gangs tore merchant seamen fro i: families, 
and forced them to serve in“th8, avy, where 
they were miserably previded for. The severity 
of discipline in both services amounted to tor- 
ture. Such was the treatment-of the brave men 
on whom the safety of tif nation depended! They 
could bear it no longer@e mutiny broke out in the 
fleet which had been crufsing off the Texel to watch 
the movements of a powerful Dutch squadron. The 


* The late Justice Coltman told us, when he and Lady Coltman 
came to see my father and mother at Siena, that he recollected when he 
first went the circuit"seeing more than twenty people hanged at once at 
York, chiefly for horse-stealing and such offences..—EDIToR. 


F2 


638 Mary Somerville. 


men rose against their officers, took the command, 
and ship after ship returned to England, leaving 
only a frigate and the “ Venerable,” commanded by 
Admiral Duncan, gith my father as his flag-captain. 
To deceive the Dutch, they continued to make 
signals, as if the rest of the fleet were in the offing, till 
they could return to England ; when, without delay, 
Admiral Duncan and my father went, alone on board 
each ship, ordered the men to arrest the ringleaders, 
which was done, and the fleet immediately returned 
to its station off the Texel. At last, on the morning 
of the 11th October, 1797, the Dutch fleet came out 
in great force, and formed in line of battle ; that is, 
with their broadsides towards our ships. Then 
Admiral Duncan said to my father, “ Fairfax, what 
shall we do ?”—* Break their line, sir, and draw up 
on the other sidé where they will not be so well 
prepared.” —“ Do it, then, Fairfax.” So my father 
signalled accordingly. The circumstances of the 
\attle, which was nobly fought on both sides, are 
historical. Nine ships of the line and two frigates 
were taken, and my father was sent home to an- 
nounce the victory to the Admiralty. The rejoicing 
was excessive ; every town and village was illumi- 
nated ; and the Administration, relieved from the 
fear of a revolution, continued more confidently its 
opptessive Measures, 


Camperdown. 69 


When Admiral Duncan came to London, he was 
made a Baron, and afterwards Earl of Camperdown ; 
and, by an unanimous vote of the House of Com- 
mons, he received a pension-or€ sum of money, I 
forget which ; my father was knighted, and mdde 
Colonel of Marines. Earl Spencer was First Lord 
of the Admiralty at the time, and Lady Spencer 
said to my father, “You ask for the promotion of 
your officers, but you never have asked a reward 
for yourself.” He replied, “I leave¥ that to my 
eountry.” But his country did nothing for him ; 
and at his death my mother had nothing to live 
upon but the usual pension of an Admiral’s *vidow, 
of seventy-five pounds a-year. Our friends, espe- 
cially Robert Ferguson, junior, of Raith, made 
various attempts to obtain an addition to it; but 
it was too late: Camperdown was forgotten. 

I remember one morning going to Lord Camper- 
down’s house in ‘Edinburgh with my mother, to see 
a very large painting, representing the quarter-deck 
of the “ Venerable,” Admiral Duncan, as large as 
life, standing upright, and the Dutch Admiral, De 
Winter, presenting his sword to my father. Another 
representation of the same scene may be secn 
among the numerous pictures of naval battles which 
decorate the walls of the great hall at Greenwich 
Hospital Many years afterwards I was surprised to 


70 Mary Somerville. 


see an engraving of this very picture in the public 
library at Milan. I did not know that one existed. 

At a great entertainment given to Lord Duncan 
by the East IndiaCompany, then in great power, 
the President asked my father, who sat at his left 
hand, if he had any relation in India? He replied, 
“ My eldest son is in the Company’s military service.” 
“Then,” said the President, “he shall be a Writer, 
the highest appointment in my power to bestow.” 
T cannot tell how thankful we were ; for, instead of 
a separation of almost a lifetime, it gave hopes that 
my brother might make a sufficient fortune in a 
few years to enable him to come home. There was 
a great review of the troups at Calcutta, under a 
burning sun; my brother returned to the barracks, 
sun-struck, where he found his appointment, and 
died that evening, at the age of twenty-one. 

* * * * * 


[My mother has often told us of her heart-broken 
parting with this brother on his going to India. It was 
then almost for a lifetime, and he was her favourite 
brother, and the companion of her childhood. He must 
have been wonderfully handsome, judging from a beauti- 
fully-painted miniature which we have of him. 


Public events became more and more exciting 
every day, and difficultics occurred at home. There 
had been bad harvests, and there was a great 


At Fedburgh, val 


searcity of bread ; the people were much distressed, 
and the manufacturing towns in England were 
almost in a state of revolution ; but the fear of 
invasion kept them quiet. I gloyied in the brilliant 
success of our arms by land and by sea; and 
although I shoyld have been glad if the people 
had resisted oppression at home, when we were 
threatened with invasion, I would have died to. 
prevent a Frenchman from landing on oir coast. 
No one can imagine the intense excitement. which 
pervaded all-ranks at that time. Every one was 
armed, and, notwithstanding the alarm, we could 
not but laugh at the awkward, and often ridiculous, 
figures of our old acquaintances, when at drill iu 
uniform. At that time I went to visit my relations 
at Jedburgh. Soon after my arrival, we were 
awakened in the middle of the night by the 
Yeomanry entering the town at full gallop. 
The beacons were burning on the top of the 
Cheviots and other hills, as a signal that the French 
had landed. When day came, every preparation 
was made; but it was a false alarm. 

The rapid succession of victories by sea and land 
was intensely exciting. We always illuminated our 
house, and went to the rocky bank in our southern 
garden to see the illumination of Edinburgh, Leith, 
and the shipping in the Roads, which was inex- 


72 Mary Somerville. 


pressibly beautiful, though there was no gas in 
those times. It often’ happened that balls were 
given by the officers of the ships of war that came 
occasionally to Leith Roads, and I was always 
invited, but never allowed to go; for my mother 
thought it foolish to run the risk of crossing the 
Firth, a distance of seven miles, at a late hour, in 
a small open boat and returning in the morning, as 
the weather was always uncertain, and the sea often 
rouzh from tide and wind. On one occasion, my 
father was at home, and, though it’ was blowing 
hard, I thought he would not object to accepting 
the invitation; but he said, “ Were it a matter of 
duty, you should go, even at the risk of your life, 
Lut for a ball, certainjy not.” 

We were as poor as ever, even more so; for my 
father was led into unavoidable expenses in Lundon; 
so, after all the excitement, we returned to our 
more than usually economical life. No events worth 
mentioning happened for a long time. I continued 
my diversified pursuits as usual; had they been 
more concentrated, it would have been better; but 
there was no choice ; fur I had not the means of 
pursuing any: one as far as I could wish, nor had I - 
any friend to whum I could apply for direction or 
infurmation. I was often deeply depressed at 
spending so much time to so little purpose. 


CHAPTER V. 


FIRST MARRLAGE (1804)—wipDowHOOD—STUDIES— SECOND MARRIAGE. 


(Mr. Samuel Greig was a distant relation of the 
Charters family. His father, an officer in the British 
navy, had been sent by our government, at the request 
of the Empress Catharine, to organize the Russian navy. 
Mr. Greig came to the Firth of Forth on board a Russian 
frigate, and was received by the Fairfaxes at Burntisland 
with Scotch hospitality, as a cousin. He eventually mar- 
ried my mother; not, however, until he had obtained the 
Tussian consulship, and settled permanently in London, 
for Russia was then governed in the most arbitrary and 
tyrannical manner, and was neither a safe nor a desirable 
residence, and my grandfather only gave his consent to 
the marriage on this condition. My mother says :— 


My cousin, Samuel Greig, commissioner of the 
Russian navy, and Russian consul for Britain, came 
to pay us a visit, and ultimately became my hus- 
band. Fortune I had none, and my mother could 
ouly afford to give me a very moderate trousseau, 
consisting chiefly of fine personal and household 


7 Mary Somerville. 


linen. When I was going away she gave me 
twenty pounds to buy a shawl or something warm 
for the following winter. I knew that the Presi- 
dent of the Academy of Painting, Sir Arthur Shee, 
had painted a portrait of my father immediately 
after the battle of Camperdown, and I went to see 
it. The likeness pleased me,—the price was twenty 
pounds ; so instead of a warm shawl I bought my ° 
father’s picture, which I have since given to my 
nephew, Sir William George Fairfax. My husband’s 
brother, Sir Alexis Greig, who commanded the 
Russian naval force in the Black Sea for more than 
twenty years, came to London about this time, and 
gave me some furs, which were very welcome. Long 
after this, I applied to Sir Alexis, at the request 
of Dr. Whewell, Master of Trinity College, Cam- 
bridge, and through his interest an order was 
issued by the Russian Government for simultaneous 
observations to be made of the tides on every 
sea-coast of the empire. 


LETTER FROM DR. WHEWELL TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
Unrversiry Crus, Jan. 5, 1838. 


My pear Mas. SoMERVILLE, * 

I enclose a memorandum respecting tide 
observations, to which subject I am desirous of drawing 
the attention of the Russian Government. Nobody 
knows better than you do how much remains to be done 


First Marriage. 75 


respecting the tides, and what important results any 
advance in that subject would have. I hope, through 
your Russian friends, you may have the means of 
bringing this memorandum to the notice of the adminis- 
tration of their navy, so as to lead to some steps being 
taken, in the. way of directing observations to be 
made. The Russian Government has shown so much 
zeal in promoting science, that I hope it will not be 
difficult to engage them in a kind of research so easy, 
so useful practically, and so interesting in its theoretical 
bearing. 
Believe me, dear Mrs. Somerville, 
Very faithfully yours, 
W. Waewe.u. 


* * - * * * 


My husband had taken me to his bachelor’s house 
in, London, which was exceedingly small and ill 
ventilated. I had a key of the neighbouring square, 
where I used to walk. I was alone the whole of the 
day, so I continued my mathematical and other 
pursuits, but under great disadvantages; for although 
my husband did not prevent me from studying, I 
met with no sympathy whatever from him, as he 
had a very low opinion of the capacity of my sex, 
and had neither knowledge of nor interest in science 
of any kind. [ took becouse i in French, and learnt 
to speak it so as to be understood. I had no car- 
riage, 80 went to the nearest church; but, accus- 


76 Mary Somerville. 


tomed to our Scotch Kirk, I never could sympathise 
with thecoldness and formality of the service of the 
Church of England. However, I thought it my 
duty to go to church and join where I could in 
prayer with the congregation. 

There was no Italian Opera in Edinburgh ; the 
first time I went to one was in London as chaperone 
to Countess Catharine Woronzow, afterwards Coun- 
tess of Pembroke, who was godmother to my eldest 
son. I sometimes spent the evening with her, and 
occasionally dined at the embassy ; but went nowhere 
else till we became acquainted with the family of 
Mr. Thomson Bonar, a rich Russian merchant, who 
lived in great luxury at a beautiful villa at Chisel- 
hurst, in the neighbourhvod of London, which has 
since become the refuge of the ex-Emperor Napoleon 
the Third and the Empress Eugénie. The family 
consisted of Mr. and Mrs, Buvar,—kind, excellent 
people,—with two sons and a daughter, all grown 
up. We were invited from time to time to spend 
ten days or a furtuight with them, which I enjoyed 
exceedingly. I had been at a riding school in 
Edinburgh, and rode tolerably, but had little prac- 
tice, as we could not afford to keep horses. Onour 
first visit, Mrs. Bonar asked me if I would ride with 
Ler, as there was 4 good ludy’s horse to spare, but I 

declined. Next day I said, “I should like to ride 


fhe Bonars. 7 


with you.” “Why did you not go out with me 
yesterday ?” she asked. “Because I had heard so 
much of English ladies’ riding, that I thought you 
would clear all the hedges and ditches, and that I 
should be left behind lying on the ground.” I spent 
many pleasant days’ with these dear good people ; 
and no words can express the horror I felt when we 
heard that they had been barbarously murdered in 
their bedroom. The eldest son and daughter had 
been at a ball somewhere near, and on coming home 
they found that one of the men-servants had dashed. 
out the brains of both their parents with a poker. 
The motive remains a mystery to this day, for it was 
not robbery. 


* * * * * 


{After three years of married life, my mother returned 
to her father’s house in Burntisland, a widow, wifh two 
little boys. The youngest died in childhood. The eldest 
was Woronzow Greig, barrister-at-law, late Clerk of 
the Peace for Surrey. He died suddenly in 1865, to 
the unspeakable sorrow of his family, and the regret of 
all who knew him. 


a wes much out of health after my husband's 
death, and chiefly otcupied with my children, 
especially with the one I was nursing; but as 


13 Mary Somerville. 


I did not. go into society, I rose early, and, 
having plenty ef time; I resumed my mathe- 
matical studies. By this time I° had studied 
plane and spherical trigonometry, conic sections, and 
-Fergussen’s “Astronomy.” I think it was imme- 
diately after my return to Scotland that I attempted 
to read Newton's “ Principia.” I found it extremely 
difficult, and certainly did not understand it till 
I returned to it some time after, when I studied 
that wonderful work with great assiduity, and wrote 
numerous notes and observations on it. I obtained 
a loan of what I believe was called the Jesuit’s 
edition, which helped me. At this period mathe- 
matical science was at a low ebb in Britain; reverence 
for Newton had prevented men from adopting the 
“Calculus,” which had enabled foreign mathema- 
ticians to carry astronomical and mechanical science 
to the highest perfection. Professors Ivory and 
de Murgan had adopted the “Calculus”; but several 
yeurs elapsed before Mr. Herschel and Mr. Babbage 
were joint-editors with Professor Peacock in pub- 
lishing an abridged translation of La Croix’s 
“Treatise on the Differential and Integral Cal- 
culus.” I became- acquainted with Mr. Wallace, 
who was, if I am not mistaken, mathematieal 
teacher of the Military CBllege at Marlow, and 
editur of a mathematical journal published there. 


Mathematics 79° 
I had solved some of the problems, contained in’ 
it and sent them to him, which led to a corres- 
pondence, as Mr. Wallace sent me his own solutions 
in retwn. Mine were sometimes right and -some- : 
times wrong, and it occasionally happened.that we; 
solved the same problem by different methods. At: 
last I succeeded in solving a prize problem! It was 
a diophantine problem, and I was awarded a silver 
medal cast on purpose with my name, which pleased 
me exéeedingly. 

Mr. Wallace was elected Professor of Mathematics 
in the University of Edinburgh, and was very kind 
to me. When I told him that I earnestly desired 
to go through a regular cpurse of mathematical and 
astronomical science, even including the highest 
branches, he gave me a list of the requisite books, 
which were in French, and consisted of Francceur’s 
pure “Mathematics,” and his “ Elements of Me- 
chanics,” La Croix’s “ Algebra,” and his large work 
on the “ Differential and Integral Calculus,” together . 
with his work on “Finite Differences and Series,’ 
. Biot’s “Analytical Geometry and Astronomy,” 
Poisson’s “Treatise on Mechanics,’ La Grange’s 
“Theory of Analytical Functions,” Euler's “Algebra,” 
Euler's “Isoperimetrical Problems” (in Latin), Clair- 
ault’s “ Figure of the Earth,” Monge’s “ Application 
of Analysis to Geometry,” Callet’s “ Logarithms,” 


80 Mary Somerville. 


La Place’s “ Mécanique Céleste,” and his “ Ana- 
lytical Theory of Probabilities,” &¢., &e., &c.* 

I was thirty-three years of age when I bought this 
excellent little library. 1 could hardly believe that I 
possessed such a treasure when I looked back on the 
day that I first saw the mysterious word ‘ Algebra,” 
and the long course of years in which I had perse- 
vered almost without hope. It taught me never to 
despair. I had now the means, and pursucd my 
studies with increased assiduity ; concealmént was 
no longer possible, nor was it attempted. I was 
considered eccentric and foolish, and my conduct 
was highly disapproved of by many, especially by 
some members of my owg family, as will be seen 
hereafter. They expected me to entertain and keep 
a gay house for them, and in that they were disap- 
pointed. As I was quite independent, I did not 
care for their criticism. A great part of the day I 
was occupied with my children ; im the evening I 
worked, played piquet with my father, or played on 
the piano, sometimes with violin accompaniment. 

* * * * 

This was the most brilliant period of the Edén- 

burgh Review ; it was planned and conducted with 


* These books and all the other mathematical works helonging to my 
mother at the time of her death have been presented to the College for 
Waumen, st Girton, Cambridze. 


The Edinburgh Review, 81 


consummate talent by a small society of men of the 
most liberal principles. Their powerful articles gave 
a severe and lasting blow to the oppressive and 
illiberal spirit which had hitherto prevailed. I be- 
came acquainted with some of these illustrious men, 
and with many of their immediate successors. I 
then met Henry Brougham, who had so remarkable 
an influence on my future life. His sister had been 
my early companion, and while visiting her I saw 
her mother—a fine, intelligent old lady, a niece of 
Robertson the historian. I had seen the Rev. Sydney 
Smith, that celebrated wit and able contributor to 
the Review, at Burntisland, where he and his wife 
came for sea-bathing. Jeong afterwards we lived 
‘on the most friendly terms till their deaths. Of 
that older group no one was more celebrated than 
Professor Playfair. He knew that I was reading the 
“Mécanique Céleste,” and asked me how I got on?, 
I told him that I was stopped short by a difficulty 
now and. then, but I persevered till I got over it. 
He said, “ You would do better to read on for a few 
pages and return to it again, it will then no longer 
seem so difficult.” I invariably followed his advice 
and with much success. 3 
Professor Playfair was a man of the most varied 
accomplishments and of the highest scientific dis- 
tinction. He was an elderly man when-I first 


82 Mary Somerville. 


became acquainted with him, by no means good- 
looking, but with a benevolent expression, somewhat 
concealed by the large spectacles he always wore. 
His manner was gravely cheerful ; he was perfectly 
amiable, and was both respected and loved, but he 
could be a severe though just, critic. He liked 
female society, and, philosopher as he was, marked 
attention from the sex obviously flattered him. 

I had now read a good deal on the higher branches 
of mathematics and physical astronomy, but as I 
never had been taught, I was afraid that I might 
imagine that I understood the subjects when, I really 
did not ; so by Professor Wallace’s advice I engaged 
his brother to read wjth, me, and the book I chose 
to study with him was the “Mécanique Céleste.” Mr. . 
John Wallace was a good mathematician, but I soon 
found that I understood the subject as well as he 
did. I was glad, however, to have taken this resolu- 
tion, as it gave me confidence in myself and conse- 
quently courage to persevere. We had advanced 
but little in this work when my marriage with my 
cousin, William. Somerville (1812), put an end to 
scientific pursuits for a time. 


CHAPTER ‘VI. 


SOMERVILLE FAMILY — DR. SOMERVILLE’S CHARACTER —: LETTERS — 
JOURNEY TO THE LAKES—DEATH OF SIR WILLIAM FAIRFAX— 
REMINISCENCES OF SIR WALTER SOOTT. : 


[With regard to my father’s family, I cannot do better 
than quote what my grandfather, the Rev. Thomas 
Somerville, says in his ‘‘ Life and Times” :—“I am a 
descendant of the ancient family of Somerville of Cam- 
busnethan, which was a branch of the Somervilles of 
Drum, ennobled in the. yefr 1424. Upon the death of 
George Somerville, of Corhouse, fifty years ago, I became 
the only male representative of the family.” There isa 
quaint old chronicle, entitled ‘“‘Memorie of the Somer- 
willes,” written by James, eleventh Lord Somerville, who 
died in 1690, which was printed for private distribution, 
and edited by Sir Walter Scott, and gives ample details 
of all the branches of our family. Although infinitely 
too prolix for our nineteenth century ideas, it contains 
many curious anecdotes and pictures.of Scottish life. 

My father was the eldest son of the minister of Jed- 
burgh, and until his marriage with my mother, had lived 
almost entirely abroad and in our colonies. It was 
always a subject of regret to my mother that my father 
never could be induced to publish an account of his im- 


portant travels in South Africa, for which he had ample 
02 


St Mary Somerville, 


materials in the notes he brought home, many of which 
we still possess. Without being very deeply learned 
on any one special subject, he was generally well- 
informed, and very intelligent. He was an excellent 
classical scholar, and could repeat long passages from 
Horace and other authors. He had a lively interest in 
all branches of natural history, was a good botanist and 
mineralogist, and could take note of all the strange 
animals, plants, or minerals he saw in his adventurous 
jourmnies in the countries, now colonized, but then the 
bunting-grounds of Caffres and other uncivilized tribes. 
He was the first white man who penetrated so far into 
the country, and it was not without great risk. Indeed, 
on one occasion he was sentenced to death by a Caffre 
chief, and only saved by the interposition of the chief’s 
mother. 

My father’s style in writing English was singularly 
pure and correct, and he was very fastidious on this 
topic—a severe critic, whether in correcting the chil- 
dren’s lessons or in reading over the last proof sheets of 
my mother’s works previous to their publication. These 
qualities would have fitted him very well to write the 
history of his travels, but he disliked the trouble of it, 
and, never having the slightest ambition on his own 
account, he let the time for publication slip by. Others 
travelled over’ the country he first explored, and the 
novelty was at an end. He was far happier in helping 
my mother in various ways, searching the libraries for 
the books she required, indefatigably copying and re- 
copying her manuscripts, to save her time. No trouble 
seemed too great which he bestowed upon her; it was a 
labour of love. My father was most kindhearted, and 
I have often heard my mother say how many persons he 


Dr. Somerville’s Character. 85 


had assisted in life, and what generous actions he had 
done, many of them requited with ingratitude, and with 
betrayal of confidence. From the way my mother speaks 
of their life, it can be seen how happy was their marriage — 
and how much sympathy there was between them. 
Speaking of his son’s marriage with my mother, the Rev. 
Dr. Somerville says, in his “‘ Life and Times,” page $90: 
**To myself this connection was on every account pecu- 
liarly gratifying. Miss Fairfax had been born and nursed 
in my house; her father being at that time abroad on 
public service. She afterwards often resided in my 
family, was occasionally my scholar, and was looked 
upon by me and my wife as if she had been one of our 
own children. I can truly say, that next to them ske 
was the object of our most tender regard. Her ardent 
thirst for knowledge, her assiduous application to stady, ' 
and her eminent proficiency in :science and the fine 
arts, have procured her a. celebrity rarely obtained 
by any of hey sex. But she never displays any pre- 
tensions to superiority, while the affability of her 
temper, and the gentleness of her manners afford eon- 
stant sources of gratification to her friends. | But what, 
above all other circumstances, rendered my son’s ehoice 
acceptable to me, was that it had been the anxious, 
though secret, desire of my dear wife.” I have ‘already 
said that this. esteem and affection of her father-in-law 
was warmly responded to by my mother. The followin 


t 


letter from her to him shows it vividly :-— it 


86 Mary Someritle. 


LETTER FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO THE 
REY. DR. SOMERVILLE. 
' EprvsurecH, 1st June, 1812, 
My pear Sr, 

I have this moment been gratified and de- 
lighted with your excellent and affectionate letter; the 
intercourse we have so long enjoyed has always been a 
source of the purest pleasure to me, and the kind interest 
you have taken from my infancy in my welfare was at all 
times highly flattering, and much valued ; but now that 
the sacred name of Father is added, nothing is wanting 
to complete my happiness; and you may rest assured 
that William is not more anxious to hasten our visit to 
Jedburgh thanITam. . . . . With the affectionate 
Jove of all here, 

I remain youg ever most affectionate daughter, 

Mary SoMERVILLE. 


P.S.—I am much flattered by the Latin quotation, 
and feel happy that your instructions have enabled me to 
read it. 


s * * * * 


[I will now proceed with the extracts from my mother’s 
Recollections :— 


My husband had been present at the taking of the 
Cape of Good Hope, and was sent by the authorities 
to make a treaty with the savage tribes on the 
borders of the colony, who had ‘attacked the boors, 
or Dutch farmers, and carried off their cattle. In 


A frappy Daughter-in-Law. 87 


this journey he was furnished with a waggon and 
accompanied by Mr. Daniel, a good artist, who made 
drawings of the scenery, as well as of the animals 
and people. The savage tribes again became 
troublesome, and in a second expedition my cousin 
was only accompanied by 'a faithful Hottentot as 
interpreter. They were both mounted, and each led 
a, spare horse with such things as were absolutely 
necessary, and when they. bivouacked where, for fear 
of the natives, they did not dare light a fire.to keep 
off the wild beasts, one kept’ watch while the other 
slept. After many adventures ‘and dangers, my 
husband reached the Orange River, and was the first 
white man who had ever been 3 in that part of Africa. 
He afterwards served: in'Canada and in Sicily! at the 
» head of thé medical staff, under his friend General 
Sir ‘James' Craig. ‘On returning to England ‘he 
generally lived in London, so that he was seldom 
with his family, with whom he was not a favourite 
on account of his liberal principles, the very circum- © 
stance that was an attraction to me.’ ‘He had lived 
in the world, was extremely handsome, had gentle- 
manly manners, spoke good English, and was emanci- 
_ pated, from Scotch prejudices. 
-I had been livin very quietly with my parents 
and children, go until I was engaged to my cousin 
J was not aware of the extreme severity with which 


88 Mary Somerville, 


my conduct was criticised by his family, and I have 
no doubt by many others ; for as soon as our en- 
gagement was known I received a most impertinent 
letter from one of his sisters, who was unmarried, 
and younger than I, saying, she “hoped I would 
give up my foolish manner of life and studies, and 
make a respectable and useful wife to her brother.” 
I was extremely indignant. My husband was still 
more so, and wrote a severe and angry letter to 
her; none of the family dared to interfere again. 
I lived in peace with her, but there was a coldness 
and reserve between us ever after. I forgot to 
mention that during my widowhood I had several 
offers of marriage. One of the persons whilst he 
was paying court to me, sent me a volume of ser- 
mons with the page ostentatiously turned down at a 
sermon on the Duties of a Wife, which were expa- 
tiated upon in the most illiberal and narrow-minded 
language. I thought this as impertinent as it was 
premature ; sent back the book and refused the 
proposal. 

My uncle, ‘the Rev. Dr. Somerville, was delighted 
with my marriage with his son, for he was liberal, and 
sincerely attached to me. We were married by his 
intimate friend, Sir Henry Moncyiff Wellwood, and 
eet off for the lakes in Cumberfi , Ay husband’s 
second sister. Janet. resolvad to us. and. she 


Fourney to the Lakes. 89 


succeeded through the influerice of my aunt, now 
my mother-in-law—a very agreeable, but bold,-de- 
termined person, who was always very kind and 
sincerely attached to me. We were soon followed 
by my cousin, Samuel Somerville and his wife. We 
had only been a day or two in the little inn at 
Lowood when he was taken ill of a fever, which de- 
tained us there for more than a month. During his 
illness he took a longing for currant jelly, and here 
my cookery was needed ; I made*some that was ex- 
cellent, and I never can forget the astonishment ex- 
pressed at my being able to be so-useful. 

Somerville and I proceeded to London; and 
we managed to obtain,a good position near Tem- 
ple Bar to see the Emperor of Russia, the King 
of Prussia and his sons, Blucher, Platoff, the Het- 
man of the Cossacks, &c., &c., enter the City. There 
was a brilliant illumination in the evening, and 
great excitement. We often saw these,noted persons 
afterwards, but we did not stay long in London, as 
my husband was appointed head of the Army Medi- 
cal Department in Scotland, so we settled in Edin- 
burgh. As he was allowed to have a secretary, he 
made choice of Donald Finlayson, a young man of 
great learning and merit, who was to act as tutor 
to my son, WérpAth Greig, then attending the 
High School, of’ wie Ma Pillans was master. Mr. 


20 Mary Somerville. 


Finlayson was a remarkably good Greek scholar, and 
my husband said, “ Why not take advantage of such 
an opportunity of improvement ?” Sa I read Homer 
for an hour every morning. before breakfast. Mr. 
Finlayson joined the army as surgeon, and distin~ 
guished himself by his courage and humanity during 
the battle of Waterloo ; but he was lost in the march 
of the army to Paris, and his brother George, after 
having sought for him in vain, came to live with 
us in his stead. He excelled in botany, and here 
again, by my husband’s advice, I devoted a morning 
hour to that science, though I was nursing a baby at 
the time. I knew the vulgar name of most of the 
plants that Mr. Finlayson had gathered, but now J 
was taught systematically, and afterwards made a 
herbarium, both of land plants and fuci. This 
young man’s hopeful career was early arrested by 
his love of science, for he died of jungle fever in 
Bengal, caught while in search of plants. 

Professor Playfair was now old, and resigned his 
chair, which Mr, Leslie was perfectly competent to 
fill on account of his acknowledged scientific acquire- 
ments; but, being suspected of heretica] opinions, his 
appointment was keenly opposed, especially on the 
part of the clergy, and a violent contest arose, which 
ended in his favour. We beeame acquainted with 
him and liked him. He was a man df original genius, 


Professor Leslie. 91 


full of information on a variety of subjects, agreé- 
able in conversation and good natured, but with a 
singular vanity as to personal appearance. Though 
one of the coarsest looking men I ever knew, he 
talked so much of polish and refinement that it 
tempted Mr. William Clerk, of Eldin, to make a 
very clever clay model of his ungainly figure. The 
professor's hair was grey, and he dyed it with some- 
thing that made it purple; and, as at that time the 
art was not brought to its present perfection, the 
operation was tedious and only employed at inter- 
‘vals, so that the professor’s hair was often white at 
‘the roots and dark purple at the extremities. He 
was always falling in love, and, to Somerville’s inex- 
pressible amusement, he made me his decoy duck, 
inviting me to see some experiments, which he per- 
formed dexterously ; at the same time telling me to 
bring as many young ladies as I: chose, especially 
Miss , for he was sure’ she had a turn for 
science. He was unfortunate in his aspirations; and 
remained a bachelor to the end of his life.:! 


It was the custom in Edinburgh, especially among 
the clergy, to dine between the morning and even- 
ing service on Sundays, and to sup at’ nine ‘or' ten 
o'clock. In no fathily were ‘these suppers more agree- 
able or cheerful than in that of Sir Henry Moncreiff 


92 Mary Somerville. 


Wellwood, minister of the West Kirk. There were 
always a few of the friends of Sir Henry and Lady 
Moncreiff present, and we were invited occasionally. 
There was a substantial hot supper of roasted fowls, 
game, or lamb, and afterwards a lively, animated 
conversation on a variety of subjects, without a shade 
of austerity, though Sir Henry was esteemed an 
orthodox preacher. 

There was an idiot in Edinburgh, the son of a 
respectable family, who had a remarkable memory. 
He never failed to go to the Kirk on Sunday, and 
on returning home could repeat the sermon word 
for word, saying, Here the minister coughed, Here 
he stopped to blow his nose. During the tour 
we made in the Highlands we met with another 
idiot who knew the Bible so perfectly that if you 
asked him where such a verse was to be found, 
he could tell without hesitation, and repeat the 
chapter. The common people in Scotland at that 
time had a kind of serious compassion for these 
harmless idiots, because “the hand of God was 
upon them.” 

The wise as well as the foolish are sometimes 
endowed with a powerful memory. Dr. Gregory, 
an eminent Edinburgh physician, one of the cleverest 
and most agreeable men I ever met with, was a 
remarkable instance of this. He wrote and spoke 


Death of Sir William Fairfax. 93 


Latin fluently, and Somerville, who was a good 
Latinist, met with a Latin quotation in some book he 
was reading, but not knowing from whence it was 
taken, asked his friend Dr. Gregory. “It is forty 
years since I read that author,” said Dn Gregory, 
“but I think you will find the passage in the 
middle of such a page.” Somerville went for the 
book, and at the place mentioned there it was. 

* * * * * 

I had the grief to Jose my dear father, at this 
time. He had served sixty-seven years in the 
British Navy, and must have been twice on the 
North American station, for he was present at: 
the taking of Quebec by General Wolfe, in 1759, 
and afterwards during the War of Independence. 
After the battle of Camperdown he was made a 
Colonel of Marines, and died, in 1813; Vice-Admiral 
of the Red. 

* * * * * 

Geology, which has now been so far advanced 
as a science, was still in its infancy. Professor Play- 
fair and Mr. Hugh Miller had written on the sub- 
ject; and in my gay young days, when Lady Helen 
Hall was occasionally my chaperone, I had heard 
that Sir James Hall had taken up the subject, but 
I did not care about it; I am certain that at that 
time I had never heard the word Geology. I think 


Ot Mary Somerville. 


it was now, on going with Somerville to see the 
Edinburgh Museum, that I recognised the fossil 
plants I had seen in the coal limestone on the 
sands at the Links of Burntisland. Ultimately 
Geology became a favourite pursuit of ours, but 
then minerals were the objects of our joint study. 
Mineralogy had been much cultivated on the Con- 
tinent by this time, especially in Germany. It had 
been established as a science by Werther, who was 
educated at an institution near the silver mines of 
Friburg, where he afterwards lectured on the pro- 
perties of crystals, and had many pupils. In one 
of our tours on the Continent, Somerville and I 
went to see these silver mines and bought some 
specimens for our cabinet. The French took up 
the subject with great zeal, and the Abbé Haiiy’s 
work became a standard book on the science. 
Cabinets of minerals had heen established in the 
principal cities of Great Britain, professors were 
appointed in the Universities, and collections of 
minerals were not uncommon in private houses. 
While quite a girl, I went with my parents to visit 
the Fergusons of Raith, near Kirkcaldy, and there I 
saw a magnificent collection of minerals, made by 
their son while abroad. It contained gems of great 
value and crystallized specimens of precious and 
other metals, which surprised and interested me» 


Reminiscences of Sir Walter Scott. 9% 


but seeing that such valuable things could never be 
‘obtained by me, I thought no more about them. 
In those early days I had every difficulty to con- 
tend with ; now, through the kindmess and liberal 
opinions of my husband, I had every encourage- 
ment. He took up the'study of mineralogy with 
zeal, and I heartily joined: with: him. We made 
the acquaintance of Professor Jameson, a pupil of 
Werner’s, whose work on mineralogy was of great 
use to us. We began to form a cabinet of minerals, 
which, although small, were good of their kind. We 
were ‘criticized for extravagance, and, no doubt I | 
‘had the lion’s share of blame ; but more of minerals 
hereafter. 
1% ® * * * 

Abbotsford is only twelve miles distant from Jed- 
burgh, and my father-in-law, Dr. Somervill, and Sir 
Walter Scott had been intimate friendsformany years, 
indeed through life. The house at Abbotsford was 
at first a mere cottage, on the banks of the Tweed ; 
‘my brother-in-law, Samuel, had a villa adjacent to 
it, and John, Lord Somerville, had a house and 
property on the opposite bank of the river, to which 
he came every spring for salmon fishing. He was 
a handsome, agreeable man, had' been educated in 
England, and as he thought he should’ never live 
in Scotland, he sold the family estate of Drum, 


96 Mary Somerville. 


within five miles of Edinburgh, which he after- 
wards regretted, and bought the property on the 
Tweed he then inhabited. ; 

There was great intimacy between the three 
families, and the society was often enlivencd by 
Adam Ferguson and Willie Clerk; whom we had 
met with at Raith. I shall never forget the charm 
of this little society, especially the sipper-parties at 
Abbotsford, when Scott was in the highest glee, 
telling amusing tales, ancient legends, ghost and 
witch stories. Then Adam Ferguson would sing 
the “Laird of Cockpen,” and other comic songs, 
and Willie Clerk amused us with his dry wit. 
When it was time to go away all rose, and, stand- 
ing hand-in-hand round the table, Scott taking the 
lead, we sang in full chorus, 


Weel may we a’ be, 

Til may we never see ; 
Health to the king 
And the gude companie. 


At that time no one knew who was the author 
of the Waverley Novels. There was much specu- 
lation and curiosity on the subject. While talking 
about one which had just been published, my son 
Woronzow said, “ I knew all these stories long ago, 
for Mr. Scott writes on the dinner-table. When he 
has finished, he puts the green-cloth with the papers 


Walter Scott. 97 


in a corner ‘of the dining-room ; and when he goes 
out, Charlie Scott and I read the stories.” My 
son’s tutor was the original of Dominie Sampson 
in“ Guy Mabnering.” The “ Memorie of the Somer- 
villes” was edited’ by Walter Scott, from an ancient 
and very quaiht manuscript found in the archives 
of the family, ‘and from this he takes passages 
which he could-hot have found elsewhere. Although 
the work was printed it was never published, but 
copies were distributed to the different members of 
the family. Oné was of course given to my hus- 
band. : 

The Burning of the Water, so well described by 
Walter Scott in “ Redgauntlet,” we often witnessed. 
The illumination of the banks of the river, the 
activity of the men striking the salmon with the 
“Jeisters,” and the shouting of the people when a 
fish was struck, was an animated, and picturesque, 
but cruel scene. . 

Sophia Scott, afterwards married to Mr. Lockhart, 
editor of the “Quarterly Review,” was the only one of 
Sir Walter’s family who had talent. She was not 
pretty, but remarkably engaging and agreeable, and 
possessed her father’s joyous disposition as well as 
his memory and fondness for ancient Border legends 
and poetry. Like him, she was thoroughly alive to 
peculiarities of character, and laughed at them 


98 Mary Somerwlle. 


good-naturedly. She was not a musician, had little 
voice, but she sang Scotch songs and translations 
from the Gaelic with, or without, harp accompani- 
ment; the serious songs With'so much expression, 
and the merry ones with so mpch spirit; that she 
charmed everybody.’ The death of her brothers and 
of her father, to whom she was devotedly. ettached, 
cast a shade over the latter partsof her life. , Mr. 
Lockhart was clever and an able'writer, bug ha was 
too sarcastic to be quite agreeable ; héwever, we 
were always on, | the most friendly terms, , He was 
of a Lanarkshire family and distantly related to 
Somerville. After the death of his wife and sons, 
‘Lockhart fell into bad health and lost much of his 
asperity. 

Scott was ordered to go abroad for relaxa- 
tion. Somerville and I happened to be at the sea- 
port where he embarked, and we went to take leave 
of him. He kissed me, and said, “Farewell, my 
dear ; I am going to die abroad like other British 
novelists.” Happy would it have been if God 
had so willed it, for he returned completely broken 
down ; his hopes were blighted, his sons dead, and 
his only remaining descendant was a grand-daughter, 
daughter of Mrs. Lockhart. She married Mr. James 
Hope, and soon died, leaving an only daughter, the 
last descendant of Sir Walter Scott. Thus the 


Fames Veitch; : 99 


~* Merry, nierry days that.] have seen,” ended very 
‘sadly, 


When at Jedburgh, I never failed to visit James 
Veitch, wha: was Laird of Inchbonhy, a small pro- 
perty beautifplly.gituated ‘in the valley of the Jed, 
at, & short’ distayie* ‘from the fmanse. He was a 
playgh-wright, a ‘hard-working man, but of rare 
genius, “who’taught himself mathematics and 
astronomy in the evgnings with wonderful success, 
for’ he knew the motions of ‘the, planejs, calculated 
eclipses. ‘and occultations, was vérsed ‘in various 
scientific subjects, and made excellent telescopes, of 
which I bought a very small one ; it was ‘the only 
one I ever possessed. Veitch was handsome, with 
a singularly fine bald forehead aiid piercing eyes, that 
quite looked through one. He was perfectly aware 
of his talents, shrewd, and sarcastic. His fame had 
spread, and he had many visits, of which he was 
impatient, as it wasted his time. He complained 
especially of those from fadies not much skilled-in - 
science, saying, “What should they do but ask 
silly questions, when they spend their lives in 
doing naething but spatting muslin?” Veitch 
was strictly religious and conscientious, observing 
the Sabbath day with great solemnity ; and I 
had the impression that he was stern to his wife, 


100 Mary Somerville 


who seemed to be a person of intelligence, for 
I remember. seeing her come fromthe washing- 
tub to point out the planet Venns while it was 
still daylight. 

The return of Halley’s comet, in 1835, exactly 
at the computed time, was a great astronomical] 
event, as it -was the first comet of long period 
clearly proved to belong to our system. I was 
asked by Mr. John Murray to write an article on 

efthe subject for the * Quarterly Review.” After it 
was published, I received a letter from James Veitch, 
reproaching me for having mentioned that a peasant 
in Hungary was the first to see Halley’s comet, and 
for having omitted to say that, “a peasant at Inch- 
bonny was the first to see the comet of 1811, the 
greatest that had ‘appeared for a century.” I re- 
gretted, on receiving this letter, that I either had not 
known, or had forgotten the circumstance. Veitch 
has been long dead, but I avail myself of this oppor- 
tunity of waking the amende honorable to a may 
of great mental power and acquirements who had 
struggled through difficulties, unaided, as I have 
done’myself. 


Letter from Fames Veitch. 10% 


LETTER FROM JAMES VEITCH TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 

“ EcHBONKY, 12th October, 1886, 

Dear Mapam, ‘ 

I saw in the Quarterly review for December 

1885 page 216 that the comet 1682 was discovered by a 
Peasent, George Palitzch residing in the neighbourhood 
of Dresden on the 25th of December 1758 with a amall 
Telescope. But no mention is made of the Peasent at 
Inchbonny who first discovered the beautiful comet 1811. 
You will remember when Dr. Wollaston was ‘at Inch- | 
bonny I put a difficult question to him that I could not 
solve about the focal distance of optic glasses when the 
Dr. got into a passion and said: Had he problems in his 
pocket ready to pull out in every occasion ? and with an 
angry look at me said, You pretend to be the first that 
discovered the comet altho’ it has been looked for by 
men of science for some time back. Now I never heard 
of such a thing and you will perhaps know something 
about it as the Dr. would not be mistaken. After we 
got acquainted, the Dr. was a warm friend of mine and 
I have often regretted that I had not improved the 
opportunity I had when he was here on many things 
he was master off. What ever others had known or 
expected‘I knew nothing about, But I know this, that on 
the 27th of August 1811 I first saw it in the NNW. 
part of the Heavens nigh the star marked 26 on the 
shoulder of the little Lion and continued treacing its 
path among the fixed stars untill it dissapeared and it 
was generally admitted that I had discovered it four 
days before any other person in Britain. However 
Mr. Thomas Dick on the Diffusion of Knowledge page 


23139 


108 Mary Sonterville 


102 and 102 has made the following observation ‘ The 
Splendid comet which appeared, in: opr hemisphere in, 
’ 1811 was first discovered in this country by a sawer. 
The name of this Gentleman is Mr. Veitch and [ 
believe he resides in the heighbourhood of Kelso who 
with a Reflecting telescope of bis own constraction and 
from his sawpit'as an observatory, descried that celestial 
visitant before it had heen noticed by any other 
astronomer in North Britain.’ A etmange story—a 
sawer and a gentleman; and what is stranger still 
Mr. Baily would not have any place but the sawpit 
for his observatory on the 15th May last. I am sorry 
to say with all the improvement and learning that we 
can bost of in the present day Halley’s comet the 
predictions have not been fulfilled, either with respect 
to time or place. Thus on the 10 October, at 50 
minutes past 5 in the evening the Right ascension of 
the comet was 168° $7’, with 68° 38’ of north declina- 
tion but by the nautical almanac for the 10 October 
its right ascension ought to have been 225° 2’ 6, and 
its declination 29° 33’. -Hence the difference is no less 
than 61° in Right Ae es and 84° in declination. 
When you have time, write me. 
: Dear Madam, I remain, 
Yours sincerely, 
JAMES Veqrcn. 


Sir David Brewster wag many years younger than 
James Veitch; in his early years he assisted his 
father in teaching the parish-school at Jedburgh, 
and in the evenings he went to Inchbonny to study 


Brewster. 108 , 


® 
astronomy with’James Veitch, whoalways called him; 
Davie. They-wore as nineh puzzled about the: mean- 
ip of the word parallax as hed ‘been with regard to 
the word algebra, and only‘learnt v what it meant when! 
Brewster went.to study for, the . kirk in Edinburgh. 
They were both very devout ; Yevertheless; Brewater: 
soon gave up the ‘kirk for science, ‘and he ' devoted 
anes especially to optics,’ in which he made, so 
y discoveries. Sir ‘David was of ‘ordinary, 
a with fair or sandy-coloured hair and blue 
eyes. “He was by no means good-looking, yet with 
a very pleasant, amiable expression ; in conversae 
tion he was cheerful and ‘agreeable when quite at 
ease, but of a timid, nervous, and irritable tempera- 
ment, often at war with his felbow-philosophers 
upen disputed subjects, and extremely jealous 
upon priority of discovery. I was much indebted 
to Sir David, for he revived my book on‘ the 
“Connexion of the Physical Sciences,” in the April 
number of the “ Edinburgh Review ” for 1834, and 
e “Physical Geography” in the April number 
of the’ North British Review,” both favourably. 


106 ‘Mary Somerville. 


never seen any that were good, I was not aware of 
their beauty. 

I also took lessons in mineralogy from Mrs. 
Lowry, a Jewess, the wife of an eminent line 
engraver, who had a large collection of minerals, 
and in the evening Somerville and I amused our- 
selves with our own, which were not numerous. 

Our house in Hanover Square was within a walk- 
ing distance of many of our friends,. and of the 
Royal Institution in Albemarle Street, where I 
attended the lectures, and Somerville frequently 
awent with me. The discoveries of Sir Humphry 
Davy made this a memorable epoch in the annals of 
chemical science. At this time there was much talk 
about the celebrated Count Rumford’s steam kitchen, 
by which food was to be cooked at a very small 

nse of fuel. It was adopted by several people, 
and among others by Naldi, the opera singer, who 
invited some friends ta dine the first. day it was to 
be used. Before dinner they all went to see the 
new invention, but while Naldi was explaining its 
stsucture, it exploded and killed him on the spot. 
By this sad accident his daughter, a pretty girl and 
a good singer, was left destitute. A numerously- 
attended eoncert was given for her benefit, at which 
Somerville and I were present. She was soon after 
engaged to sing in Paris, but ultimately married the 


The Prince de Condf. 107 
Comte de Sparre, a French —— and left the 


stage. 

When MM. Arago and Biot came to England to 
continue the French are of the meridian through 
Great Britain, they were warmly received by the 
scientific men in London, and we were always in- 
vited to meet them by those whom we knew. They 
had been told of my turn for science, and that I had 
read the works of La Place. Biot expressed his 
apne at my year 

* * * 

One summer Somerville proposed to make a tour 
in Switzerland, so we set off, and on arriving 
at Chantilly we were told that we might see the 
chateau upon giving our cards to the doorkeeper. 
On reading our name, Mademoiselle de Rohan came 
to meet us, saying that she had been at school in 
England with a sister of Lord Somerville’s, and was 
glad to see any of the family. She presented us to 
the Prince de Condé, a fine-looking old man, who 
received us very courteously, and sent the lord-in- 
waiting to show us the grounds, and especially the 
stables, the only part of the castle left in its regal 
magnificence after the Revolution. The Prince and 
‘the gentleman who accompanied us wore a gaudy 
uniform like a livery, which we were told was the 
Chantilly uniform, and that at each palace belonging 


108 Mary Somerville, 


to the Prince there was a different uniform worn by 
him and his court. 

At Paris we were received with the kindest hos- 
pitality by M. and Mme. Arago. I liked her 
much, she was so gentle and ladylike; he was tall 
and good-looking, with an animated countenance 
and black eyes. His character was noble, generous, 
and singularly energetic ; his manners lively and even 
gay. He was a man of very general information, 
and, from his excitable temperament, he entered as 
ardently into the politics and passing events of the 
time as into science, in which few had more exten- 
sive knowledge. On this account I thought his 
conversation more brilliant than that of any of the 
French savans with whom I was acquainted. They 
were living at the Observatory, and M. Arago 
showed me all the instruments of that magnificent 
establishment in the minutest detail, which was 
highly interésting at the time, and proved more 
useful to me than I was aware of. M. Arago made 
us acquainted with the Marquis de la Place, and the 
Marquise, who was quite an élégante. The Marquis 
fas not tall, but thin, upright, and rather formal. 
He was distinguished in his manners, and I thought 
there was a little of the courtier in them, perhaps from 
having been so much at the court of the Emperor 
Napoleon, who had the highest regard for him. 


A rage anit’La Pluce. 109 


Thovgh: intoniparably ‘hipetior “to"Aidgo iit ‘masthé? 
maties and astronomical seience, hé‘was inferior td 
hin! in’ general ‘acquirements;”' 'so that ‘his ' ‘bouveksa- 
tion was less varied ' dnd ‘pophlat: “WY were invited 
to go’ tarly'and'spend a daywith theni at ‘Arete suil, 
wheré: they had“ ‘country ‘houses Mi ‘Ara ‘Arago had 
told’ M. de. la’ Place ‘that’ I had ‘read’ the “ Méca- 
nique Céleste;”'so'wé had 2 great deal of. conveiation 
about ustronomy And the calctilus, and lie gave me 
a copy ‘of his “ Systattie ‘du Mondé,” with his ‘in: 
seription, ‘which ‘pleased’ me: exceedingly." I spoke 
French very badly, but’ I was' less at loss’ on scien- 
tific subjects, because’ almost all my books on science 
were in’ French. Thé party at dinner ‘consisted of 
MM! Biot, 'Atago, ‘Bouvard, ‘and Poisson. 'T sat 
next M.'de'ls Place,’ who’ was “exceedingly kind 
and attentive!’ In‘ such an assemblagé of' philoso- 
phers I expeeted a very gtave and learned conversa-’ 
tion. But not'at all! Everyone talked in a gay, 
animated, and loud key, especially M. Poisson, who 
had all the‘ vivacity ‘of a'Frenchman. Madame 
Biot, from: whom we received the greatest attention, 
made a party on purpose, as she said, to 'show us, 
“les personnes distinguées.” Madame Biot was a 
well-educated woman, and had made a translation 
from’ the German: of. a work, which was published 
under ‘the name of her husband. The dinner was 


110 Mary Somerville. 


very good, and Madame Biot was at great pains in 
placing every one. Those present were Monsieur 
and Madame Arago, Monsieur and Madame Poisson, 
who had only been married the day before, and 
Baron Humboldt. The conversation was lively and 
entertaining, ‘ 

The consulate and empire of the fiyst Napoleon 
was the most brilliant period of physical astronomy 
in France. La Grange, who proved the stability of 
the solar system, La Place, Biot, Arago, Bouvard, 
and afterwards Poinsot, formed a perfect constella- 
tion of undying names ; yet the French had been 
for many years inferior to the English in practical 
astronomy. The observations made at Greenwich 
by Bradley, Maskelyn, and Pond, have been so ad- 
mirably continued under the direction of the present 
astronomer-royal, Mr. Airy, the first practical astro- 
nomer in Europe, that they have furnished data for 
calculating the astronomical tables both in France 
and England. 

The theatre was at this time very brilliant in 
Paris. We saw Talma, who was considered to be 
the first tragedian of the age in the character of Tan- 
eréde. J admired the skill with which he overcame 
the disagreeable effect which the rhyme of the French 
tragedies has always had on me. Notwithstand- 
ing his personal advantages, I thought him a great 


Cuuier. ll 


artist, though inferior to John Kemble. J] am afraid 
my admiration of Shakespeare, my want of sym- 
pathy with the artificial style of French tragedy, 
and perhaps my youthful remembrance of our great 
tragedian Mrs. Siddons, made me unjust to Made- 
moiselle Duchénois, who, although ugly, was cer- 
tainly an excellent actress and a favourite of the 
public. I was so fond of the theatre that I enjoyed 
comedy quite as much as tragedy, and was delighted 
with Mademoiselle Mars, whom we saw in Tartuffe. 
Some years later I saw her again, when, although 
an old woman, she still appeared handsome and 
young upon the stage, and was as ae and 
lively as ever. 

Soon after our dinner party at ‘Arceeuil, we went 
to pay a morning visit to Madame de la Place. It 
was late in the day; but she received us in bed 
elegantly dressed. I think the curtains were of 
muslin with some gold ornaments, and the coverlet 
was of rich silk and gold. It was the first time that 
I had ever seen a lady receive in that manner. 
Madame de La Place was lively and agreeable ; I 
liked her very much, 

We spent a most entertaining day with M. and 
Madame Cuvier at the Jardin des Plantes, and saw 
the Museum, and everything in that celebrated 
establishment. .On returning to the house, we 


112 Mary Somerville. 


found several people had come to spend the 
evening, and the conversation was carried on with 
a good deal of spirit; the Countess Albrizzi, 
a Venetian lady, of high acquirements, joined in 
it with considerable talent and animation. Cuvier 
had a very remarkable countenance,‘not hand- 
some, but agreeable, and his manner was pleasing 
and modest, and his conversation very interest- 
ing. Madame de Staél having died lately, was 
much discussed. She was much praised for her 
good-nature, and for the brilliancy of her conversa- 
tion, They agreed, that the energy of her character, 
not old age, had worn ber out. Cuvier said, the 
force of her imagination misled her judgment, and 
made her see things in a light different from all 
the world. As a proof of this, he mentioned 
that she makes Corinne lean on a marble lion 
which is on a tomb in St. Peter's, at Rome, 
more than twenty feet high. Education was 
very much discussed. Cuvier said, that when he 
was sent to inspect the schools at Bordeaux and 
Marseilles, he found very few of the scholars who 
could perform a simple calculation in arithmetic ; 
as to science, history, or literature, they were un- 
known, and the names of the most celebrated 
French philosophers, famed in other countries, were 
“utterly unknown to those who lived in the pro- 


Ar. Pentland, 118 


vinces. JM. Biot. had written home, that he had 
‘found in Aberdeen not one alone, but many, who 
‘perfectly understood the object of his journey, and 
were competent to converse with him on the sub- 
ject. Cuvier said such a circumstance constituted 
one of the striking differences between France and 
England ; for in France science was highly cultivated, 
but confined to the capital. It was at M. Cuvier’s 
that I first met Mr. Pentland, who made a series of 
physical and geological observations on the Andts 
of Peru, I was residing in Italy when I published 
‘my “Physical Geography,” and Mr. Pentland* kindly 
undertook to carry the book through the préss for 
me. From that time he has been a steady friend, 
ever ready to get me information, books, or any- 
thing I wanted. We became acquainted also with 
M. Gay-Lussac, who lived in the Jardin des Plantes, 
and with Baron Larrey, who had been at the head 
of the medical department of the army in Egypt 
under the first Napoleon. 


* * * * * 

At Paris 1 equipped myself in proper dresses, and 
we proceeded by Fontainebleau to Geneva, where 
we found Dr. Marcet, with whom my husband had 

* Joseph Barclay Pentland, Consul-General in Bolivia (1836-39), died 
in London, July, 1873. He first discovered that Ilimani and Sorata 


(not Chimborazo) were the highest mountains in America. (Seo 
Humboldt’s “ Kosmos.”) 


114 Mary Somerville. 


already been acquainted in London. I, for the 
first time, met Mrs. Marcet, with whom I have ever 
lived on terms of affectionate friendship. So many 
books have now been published for young people, 
that no one at this time can duly estimate the im- 
portance of Mrs. Marcet’s scientific works. To them 
is partly owing that higher intellectual education 
now beginning to prevail among the better classes 
in Britain. They produced a great sensation, and 
went through many editions. Her “Conversations 
on Chemistry,” first opened out to Faraday’s mind 
that field of science in which he became so illus- 
trious, and at the height of his fame he always men- 
tioned Mrs. Marcet with deep reverence. 

Through these kind friends we became acquainted 
with Professors De Candolle, Prevost, and De la Rive. 
Other distinguished men were also presented to us ; 
among these was Mr. Sismondi, author of the “ His- 
tory of the Italian Republics.” Madame Sismondi 
was a Afiss Allen, of a family with whom we were 
very intimate. 

{Some time after her return to England, my mother, 
desirous of continuing the study of botany, in which she 
had already attained considerable proficiency, wrote to 


M. De Candolle, asking his advice, and he sent her the 
fullowing reply :— 


De Candolle. 151 


LETTER FRUM M. DE CANDOLLE TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


Lonpnes, 5 Juin, 1819. 

Mapamr, 

Vous avez passé les premiéres difficultés de 
l'étude des plantes et vous me faites honneur de me 
consulter sur les moyens d’aller en avant; connaissant 
votre gotit et votre talent pour les sciences les plus 
relevées je ne craindrai point de vous engager 4 sortir 
de la Botanique élémentaire et & vous Glever aux con- 
sidérations et aux études qui en font une science sus- 
ceptible Widées générales,’ d’applications aux choses 
utiles et de liaison avec les autres branches des con- 
naissances humaines. Pour cela il faut étudier non plus 
seulement la nomenclature et l’échafaudage artificiel 
qui la soutient, mais les rapports des plantes entre elles 
et avec les élémens extérieurs, ou en d'autres termes, la 
classification naturelle et la Physiologie. 

Pour l'un et l’autre de ces branches de la science il est 
nécessaire en premier lien de se familiariser avec la 
structure des plantes considérée dans leur caractére 
exacte. Vous trouverez un précis abrégé de ces carac- 
téres dans le 1¢ vol. de la Flore francaise; vous la 
trouverez plus développé et accompagné de planches dans 
les Elémens de Botanique de Michel. Quant & la struc- 
ture du fruit qui est un des points les plus difficiles et 
les plus importans, vous allez avoir un bon ouvrage 
traduit et augmenté par un de vos jeunes et habiles com- 
patriotes, Mr. Lindley—c’est V’analyse du fruit de M. 
Richard. La traduction vaudra mieux que original. 
Outre ces lectures, ce qui vous apprendra surtout la 


structure des plantes, c’est de les analyser et de les 
r2 


116 Mary Somerville. 


décrire vous-méme d’aprés Jes termes techniques; ce 
travail deviendrait pénible et inutile 4 faire sur un grand 
nombre de plantes, et il vaut mieux ne le faire que sur 
un trés petit nombre d’espéces choisies dans des classes 
trés distinctes. Quelques descriptions faites aussi com- 
plétes qu’il vous sera possible vous apprendra plus que 
tous les livres. 

Dés que vous connaitrez bien les organes et concur- 
remment avec cette étude vous devrez chercher 4 prendre 
une idée de la classification naturelle. Je crains de vous 
paraitre présomptueux en vous engageant & lire-d’abord 
sous ce point de vue ma Théorie élémentaire. Aprés 
ces études ou 4 peu prés en méme temps pour profiter 
de la saison, vous ferez bien de rapporter aux ordres 
naturels toutes les plantes que vous aurez recueillies. 
La lecture des caractéres des familles faites la plante & 
la main et l’acte de ranger vos plantes en familles vous 
feront connaitre par théorie -et par pratique ces groupes 
naturels. Je vous engage dans cette étude, surtout en le 
commencement, 4 ne donner que peu d’attention au 
systeme général qui lie les familles, mgis beaucoup 4 la 
connaissance de la physionomie qui est propre & chacune 
delles. Sous ce point de vue vous pourrez trouver 
quelque intérét & lire—1° les Tableaux de la Nature de 
M. de Humboldt; 2° mon essai sur les proprietés des 
plantes comparées avec leurs formes extérieures; 8° les 
remarques sur la géographie botanique de la Nouvelle 
Hollande et de l'Afrique, ins¢rés par M. Robt. Brown 
& la fin dw voyage de Finders et de Vexpedition au 
Congo. 

Quant a l'étude de la Physiologie ou de la connais- 
sance des végétaux considérés comme étres vivans, je 
yous engage 4 lire les ouvrages dans lordre suivant: 


De Candolle. 117 


Philibert, Elémens de Bot. et de Phys., 3 vols.; Ia 20e 
partie des principes démentaires de la Bot. de la Flore 
frangaise. Vous trouverez la partie anatomique dans 
Youvrage de Mirbel; la partie chimique dans les 
recherches chimiques sur la Veget. de T. de Saussure ; 
la partie statique dans la statique des végétaux de 
Hales, &c. ke. Mais je vous engage surtout & voir par 
vous-méme les plantes 4 tous leurs ages, 4 suivre leur 
végétation, & les décrire en détail, en un mot a vivre avec 
elles plus qu’avec les livres. 

Je désire, madame, que ces conseils puissent vous 
engager & suivre l'étude des plantes sous cette direction 
qui je crois en reléve beaucoup importance et Vintérét. 
Je m’estimerai heureux si en vous l’indiquant je puis 
concourir & vos succés futures et & vous initier dans une 
étude que j’si toujours regardé comme une de celles 
qui peut le plus contribuer au bonheur journalier. 

Je vous prie d’agréer mes hommages empressés. 

De CanDo.ie. 


We had made the ordinary short tour through 
Switzerland, and had arrived at Lausanne on our 
way home, when I was taken ill with a severe fever 
which detained us there for many weeks. I shall 
never forget the kindness I received from two Miss 
Barclays, Quaker ladies, and a Miss Fotheringham, 
who, on hearing of my illness, came and sat up 
alternate nights with me, as if I had been their 
sister. 

The winter was now fast approaching, and Somer- 


118 Mary Somerville. 


ville thought that in my weak state a warm climate 
was necessary ; 80 we arranged with our friends, the 
Miss Barclays, to pass the Simplon together. We 
parted company at Milan, but we renewed our 
friendship in London. 

We went to Monza, and saw the iron crown ; and 
there I found the Magnolia grandiflora, which 
hitherto I had only known as a greenhouse plant, 
rising almost into a forest tree. 

At Venice we renewed our acquaintance with’ the 
Countess Albrizzi, who received every evening. It 
was at these receptions that we saw Lord Byron, but 
he would not make the acquaintance of any English 
people at that time. When he came into the room I 
did not perceive his tameness, and thought him 
strikingly like my brother Henry, who was remark- 
ably handsome. I said to Somerville, “Is Lord 
Byron like anyone you know?” “Your brother 
Henry, decidedly.” Lord Broughton, then Sir John 
Cam Hobhouse, was also present. 

At Florence, I was presented to the Countess of 
Albany, widow of Prince Charles Edward Stuart 
the Pretender. She was then supposed to be married 
to Alfieri the poet, and had a kind of state reception 
every evening. I did not like her, and never went 
again. Her manner was proud and insolent. “So 
you don’t speak Italian ; you must have had a very 


Countess of Albary. 119 


bad education, for Miss Clephane Maclane there 
{who was close by] speaks both French and Italian 
perfectly.” So saying, she turned away, and never 
addressed another word to me. That evening I 
recognised in Countess Moretti my old friend 
Agnes Bonar. Moretti was of good family; but, 
having been banished from home for political 
opinions, he taught the guitar in London for bread, 
and an attachment was formed between him and 
his pupil. After the murder of her parents, they 
were both persecuted with the most unrelenting 
cruelty by her brother. They :z:aped to Milan 
where they were married. 

I was still ayoung woman; but I thought myself 
too old to learn to speak a foreign language, conse- 
quently I did not try. I spoke French badly ; and 
now, after several years’ residence in Italy, although 
I can carry oft a conversation fluently in Italian, I 
do not speak it well. 


{When my mother first went abroad, she had no 
fivency in talking French, although she was well ac- 
quainted with the literature. To show how, at every 
period of her life, she missed no opportunity of acquiring 
information or improvement, I may mention thet many 
years after, when we were spending a summer in 
Siena, where the language is spoken with great purity 
and elegance, she engaged a lady to converse in Italian 
with her for a couple of hours daily. By this means 


120 Mary Sonterville. 


she very soon became perfecfly familiar with the Innguage, 
ard could keep up conversation in Italian without diffi- 
culty. She never cared to write in any language but 
English. Her style has been reckoned particularly clear 
and good, and she was complimented on it by various 
competent judges, although she herself was always diffi- 
dent abouf her writings, saying she was only a self- 
taught, uneducated Scotchwoman, and feared to use 
Seotch idioms inadvertently. In speaking she had a 
very decided but pleasant Scotch accent, and when 
aroused and excited, would often unconsciously use not 
only native idioms, but quaint old Scotch words. Her 
voice was soft and low, and her manner earnest. 


On our way to Rome, where we spent the winter of 
1817, it was startling to see the fine church of Santa 
Maria degli Angeli, below Assisi, cut in two; half 
of the church and half of the dome above it were 
still entire; the rest had been thrown down by the 
earthquake which had destroyed the neighbouring 
town of Foligno, and comnfitted such ravages in 
this part of Umbria. 

At that time I might have been pardoned if I had 
described St. Peter’s, the Vatican, and the innume- 
rable treasures of art and antiquity at Rome; but 
now that they are so well known it would be 
ridiculous and superfluous. Here I gained a little 
more knowledge about pictures; but I preferred 
sculpture, partly from the noble specimens of Greek. 


Thorwaldsen and Canova. 121 


art I saw in Paris and Rome, and partly because I 
was such an enthusiast about the language and 
everything belonging to ancient Greece. During 
this journey I was highly gratified, for we made the 
acquaintance of Thorwaldsen and Canova. Canova 
was gentle and amiable, with a beautiful counte-' 
nance, and was an artist of great reputation. Thor- 
waldsen had a noble and striking appearance, and 
had more power and originality than Canova. His 
bas-reliefs were greatly admired. I saw the one he 
made of Night in the house of an English lady, who 
had a talent for modelling,‘and was said to be 
attached to him. We were presented to Pope Pius 
the Seventh ; a handsome, gentlemanly, and amiable 
old man. He received us in a summer-house in the 
garden of the Vatican. He was sitting on a sofa, 
and made me sit beside him. His manners were 
simple and very gracious; he spoke freely of what 
he had suffered in Fr&nce. He said, “God forbid 
that he should bear ill-will to any one; but the 
journey and the cold were trying to an old man, and 
he was glad to return to a warm climate and to his 
own country.” When we took leave, he said to me, 
“Though a Protestant, you will be none the worse 
for an old man’s blessing.” Pius the Seventh was 
loved and respected ; the people knelt to him as he 
passed. Many years afterwards we were pre- 


122 Mary Somerville. 


sented to Gregory the Sixteenth, a very common- 
looking man, forming a great contrast to Pius the 
Seventh. 

I heard more good music during this first visit to 
Rome than I ever did after; for besides that usual 
in St. Peter’s, there was an Academia every -week, 
where Marcello’s Psalms were sung in concert by a 
number of male voices, besides other concerts, private 
and public. We did not make the acquaintance of 
any of the Roman families at this time ; but we saw 
Pauline Borghese, sister of the Emperor Napoleon, 
so celebrated for her beauty, walking on the Pincio 
every afternoon. Our great geologist, Sir Roderick 
Murchison, with his wife, were among the English 
residents at Rome. At that time he hardly knew 
one stone from another. He had been an officer in 
the Dragoons, an excellent horseman, and a keen 
fox-hunter. Lady Murchison,—an amiable and ac- 
complished woman, with solid acquirements which 
few ladies at that time possessed—had taken to 
the study of geology; and soon after her husband 
began that career which has rendered him the first 
geologist of our country. It was then that a 
friendship began between them and us, which will 
only end with life. Mrs. Fairfax, of Gilling Castle, 
and her two handsome daughters were also, at 
Rome. She was my namesake—Mary Fairfax—and 


Brigands, 123 


my valued friend till her death. Now, alas! many 
of these friends are gone. 

There were such troops of brigands in the Papal 
States, that it was considered unsafe to go outside 
the gates of Rome. They carried off people to the 
mountains, and kept them till ransomed ; sometimes 
even mutilated them, as they do at the present day 
in the kingdom of Naples. Lucien Bonaparte made 
a narrow escape from being carried off from his villa, 
Villa Ruffinella, near Frascati. When it could be 
proved that brigands had committed murder, th. y 
were confined in prisons in the Maremma, at Can:»0 
Morto, where fever prevails, and where they wure 
supposed to die of malaria. I saw Gasperone, rhe 
chief of a famous band, in a prison at Civita Vecchia; 
he was said to be a relative of Cardinal Antonelli, 
both coming from the brigand village of Sonnino, in 
the Volscian mountains. In going to Naples our 
friends advised us to take a guard of soldiers; but 
these were suspected of being as bad, and in league 
with the brigands, So we travelled post without 
them ; and though I foolishly insisted on going round 
by the ruins of ancient Capua, which was considered 
very unsafe, we arrived at Naples without any 
encounter. Here we met with the son and daughter 
of Mr. Smith, of Norwich, a celebrated leader in the 
anti-slavery question. This was a bond of interest 


ret Mary. Somerville. 


between his family and me ; for when I was a girl I 
took the anti-slavery cause so warmly to heart that 
I would not take sugar in my tea, or indeed taste 
anything with sugar in it. I was not singular in 
this, for my cousins and many of my acquaintances 
came to the same resolution. How long we kept it 
I do not remember. Patty Smith and I became 
great friends, and I knew her sisters; but only 
remember her niece Florence Nightingale as a very 
little child. My friend Patty was liberal in her 
opinions, witty, original, an excellent horsewoman, 
and drew cleverly; but from bad health she was 
peculiar in all her habits. She was a good judge 
of art. Her father had a valuable collection of 
pictures of the ancient masters; and I learnt much 
from her with regard to paintings and style in 
drawing. We went to see everything in Naples and 
its environs together, and she accompanied Somer- 
ville and me in an expedition to Pestum, where we 
made sketches of the temples. At Naples we bought 
a beautiful cork model of the Temple of Neptune, 
which was placed on our mineral cabinet on our 
return to London. A Jady who came to pay me a 
morning visit asked Somerville what it was; and 
when he told her, she said, “ How dreadful it is to 
think that all the people who worshipped in that 
temple are in eternal misery, because they did not 


Minerals. 128 


believe in our Saviour.” Somerville asked, “ How 
could they believe in Christ when He was not 
born till many centuries after?” I am sure she 
thought it was all the same. 


There had been an eruption of Vesuvius just 
before our arrival at Naples, and it was still 
smoking very much ; however, we ascended it, 
and walked round the crater, running and holding 
a handkerchief to our nose as we passed through the 
smoke, when the wind blew it to our side. The 
crater was just like an empty funnel, wide at the 
mouth, and narrowing to a throat. The lava was 
hard enough to bear us; but there were numerous. 
Sumeroles, or red-hot chasms, in it, which we could 
look into. Somerville bought a number of crystals 
from the guides, and went repeatedly to Portici 
afterwards. to complete our collection of volcanic 
minerals. 

They were excavating busily at Pompeii ; at that 
time, and in one of our mafiy excursions there 
Somerville bought from one of the workmen a 
bronze statuette of Minerva, and a very fine rosso 
anticod Terminus, which we contrived to smuggle 
into Naples; and it now forms part of a small 
but excellent collection of antiques which I stil] 
possess. The excavations at that period were con- 


126 Mary Somerville. 


ducted with little regularity or direction, and the 
guides were able to carry on a contraband trade 
as mentioned. Since the annexation of the Nea- 
politan provinces to the kingdom of Italy, the 
Cavaliere Fiorelli has organized the system of ex- 
cavations in the most masterly manner, and has 
made many interesting discoveries. About one- 
third of the town has been excavated since it was 
discovered till the present day. 

In passing through Bologna, we became ac- 
quainted with the celebrated Mezzofanti, after- 
wards Cardinal. He was a quiet-looking priest ; 
we could not see anything in his countenance that 
indicated talent, nor was his conversation remark~ 
able ; yet he told us that he understood fifty-two 
languages. He left no memoir at his death; nor 
did he ever trace any connection between these 
languages; it was merely an astonishing power, 
which led two nothing, like that of a young American 
I lately heard of, who could play eleven games 
at chess at the sanfe time, without looking at any 


chess-board. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


EDUCATION OF DAUGHTERS—DR. WOLLASTON—DR. YOUNG— 
THE HERSCHEES, 


WHEN we returned to Hanover Square, I devoted 
my morning hours, as usual, to domestic affairs ; 
but now my children occupied a good deal of my 
time. Although still very young, I thought it ad- 
visable. for them to acquire foreign languages ; so I 
engaged aFrench nursery-maid, that they might never 
suffer what I had done from ignorance of modern 
languages. I besides gave them instruction in such 
things as I was capable of teaching, and which were 
suited to their age. 

It was a great amusement to Somerville and 
myself to arrange the minerals.we had collected 
during our journey. Our cabinet was now very rich. 
Some of our specimens we had bought ; our friends 
had given us duplicates of those they possessed ; 
and George Finlayson, who was with our troops in 
Ceylon, and who had devoted all his spare time to 
the study of the natural productions of the country, 


128 Mary Someraille. 


sent us a valuable collection of crystals of sapphire, 
ruby, oriental topaz, amethyst, &c., &c. Somerville 
used to analyze minerals with the blowpipe, which 
I never did. One evening, when he was so occu- 
pied, I was playing the piano, when suddenly I 
fainted ; he was very much startled, as neither I 
nor any of our family had ever done such a thing. 
When I recovered, I said it was the smell of 
garlic that had made me ill. The truth was, the 
mineral contained arsenic, and I was poisoned for 
the time by the fumes. 

At this time we formed an acquaintance with Dr.” 
Wollaston, Which soon became a lasting friendship. 
He was gentlemanly, a cheerful companion, and a 
philosopher ; he was also of agreeable appearance, 
having a remarkably fine, intellectual head. He 
was essentially a chemist, and discovered palladium ; 
but there were few branches of science with which 
he was not more or less acquainted. He made ex- 
periments to discover imponderable matter; I believe, 
with regard to the ethereal medium. Mr. Brand, of 
the Royal Institution, enraged lim by sending so 
strong a current of electricity through a machine he 
had made to prove electro-magnetic rotation, as to 
destroy it. His characteristic was extremre accuracy, 
which particularly fitted him for giving that pre- 
cision to the science of erystallography' which it had 


Dr. Wollaston. 129 


not hitherto attained. By the “invention of the 
goniometer which bears his name, he was enabled to 
measure the angle formed by the faces of a crystal 
by means of the reflected images of bright objects 
seen in them. We bought a goniometer, and Dr. 
Wollaston, who often dined with us, taught Somer- 
ville and me how to use it, by measuring the angles 
of many of our crystals during: the evening. IJ 
‘Jearnt a great deal on a variety es subjects besides 
crystallography from Dr. Wollaston, who, at his 
death, left me a collection of models of the forms of 
all the natural crystals then known. 

Though still oceasionally pccupiel with the 
mineral productions of the earth, I became far 
more interested in the formation of the earth itself. 
Geologists had excited public attention, and had 
shocked the clergy and the more scrupulous of the 
laity by proving beyond a doubt that the forma- 
tion of the globe extended through enormous 
periods of 4ime. The contest was even more keen 
then than it is at the present time about the various 
races of pre-historic men. It lasted very long, too ; 
for after .[ had published my work on Physical 
Geography, I was preached against by name in York’ 
Cathedral’ Our friend, Dr. Buckland, committed 
himself by taking the clerical view in his “ Bridge- 
water Treatise - but facts are such stubborn things 


180 Mary Somervtlle, 


that he was obliged to join the geologists at last. 
He and Mrs. Buckland invited Somerville and me 
to spend a week with them in Christchurch College, 
Oxford. Mr. and Mrs. Murchison were their guests 
at the same time. Mr. Murghison (now QggRoderick) 
was then rising rapidly to the pre-eminence he now 
holds as a geologist. We spent every day in seeing 
some of the numerous objects of interest in that 
celebrated university, venerable for its antiquity, 
historical records, and noble architecture. 

Somerville and I used frequently to spend the 
evening with Captain and Mrs. Kater. Dr. Wol- 
laston, Dr. Young, and others were generally of the 
party ; sometimes we had music, for Captain and 
Mrs. Kater sang very prettily. All kinds of scientific 
subjects were discussed, experiments tried and astro- 
nomical observations made in a little garden in front 
of the house. One evening we had been trying the 
power of a telescope in separating double stars till 
about two in the morning ; on our way home we 
saw a light in Dr. Young’s window, and when 
Somerville rang the bell, down came the doctor him- 
self in his dressing-gown, and said, “Come in; I 
have something curious to show you.” Astronomi- 
cal signs are frequently found on ancient Egyptian 
monuments, and were supposed to have been em- 
ployed by the priests to record dates. Now Dr. 


Dr. Young. 181 


Young had received a papyrus from Egypt, sent to 
him by Mr. Salt, who had found it in at mummy- 
ease; and that very evening he had proved it to 
be a horoscope of the age of the Ptolemies, and 
had detersgmed the date from the configuration 
of the heavens at the time of its construction 
Dr. Young had already made himself famous by 
the interpretation of hieroglyphic characters on : 
stone which had been brought to the British Museun 
from Rosetta in Egypt. On that stone there is ai 
inscription ‘in Hieroglyphics, the sacred symboli: 
language of the early Egyptians; another in th 
Enchorial or spoken language of that most ancien 
. people, and a mutilated insctiption in Greek. Bi 
the aid of some fragments of papyri Dr. Young dis 
covered that the Enchorial language is alphabetical 
and that nine of its letters correspond with ours 
moreover, he discovered such a relation between th: 
Enchorial and the hieroglyphic inscription that hi 
interpreted the latter and published his discoveries ix 
the years 1815 and 1816. 

M. Champollion, who had been on the same pur 
suit, examined the fine collection of papyri in th 
museum at Turin, and afterwards went to Egypt t 
pursue his studies on hieroglyphics, to our know 
ledge of which he contributed greatly. It is t 


be regretted that one who had brought that brane] 
kK? 


182 ‘Mary Somerville, ' 


of science to such perfection should have been so 
ungenerous as to ignore the-assistance he had re- 
ceived from the researches of Dr. Young. When the 
Royal Institution was first established, Dr. Young 
lectured on natural philosophy. He proved the un- 
dulatory theory of light by direct experiment, but as 
it depended upon the hypothesis of an ethereal 
medium, it was not received in England, the more 
go as it was contrary to Newton’s theory. The 
French sevens afterwards did Young ample justice. 
The existence of the ethereal medium is now all but 
“proved, since part of the eorona surrounding the 
moon during a total solar eclipse is polarized—a phe- 
nomenon depending on ‘matter. Young’s Lectures, 
which had been published, were a mine of riches to 
me. He was of a Quaker family ; but although he 
left the Society of Friends at an early age, he retained 
their formal precision of manner to the last. He 
was of a kindly disposition, and his wife and 
her sisters, with whom I was intimate, were much 
attached to him. Dr. Young was an elegant and 
critical scholar at a very early age; he was an 
astronomer, a mathematician, and there were few 
branches of science in which he was not versed. 
When young, his Quaker habits did not prevent him 
from taking lessons in musie and dancing. I have 
heard him accompany his sister-in-law with the flute, 


The First Spectvum, Analysis, 138 


while she played the piano. When not more than 
sixteen years of age he was se remarkable for steadi- 
ness and acquirements that he was engaged more as 
a companion than tuter to,young Hudson Gurney; 
who was nearly of his own age, One spring morn- 
ing Young came to breakfast in a bright green coat, 
and said in explanation of his somewhat eccentri¢ 
costume for one who had been a Quaker, that it was 
suitable to the season. One day, on returning from 
their ride Gurney, leaped his horse over the stable- 
yardgate. Young, trying to-do the same, was thrown; 
he got up, mounted, and made a second attempt with 
no better success ; the third time he-kept his seat, 
then quietly dismounting, he said, ‘“ What one man 
can do, another may.” : 
* * * * * 

One bright morning Dr. Wollaston came to pay 
us a visit in Hanover Square, saying, “I have dis- 
covered seven dark lines crossing the solar spectrum, 
which I wish to show you ;” then, closing the window- 
shutters so as to leave only a narrow line of light, 
he put a small glass prism into my hand, telling me 
how to hold it. I saw them distinctly. I was 
among the first, if not the very first, to whom he 
showed these lines, which were the origin of the most 
wonderful series of cosmical discoveries, and have 
proved that many of the substances of our globe are 


134 Mary Somerville. 


also constituents of the sun, the stars, and even of 
the nebule. Dr. Wollaston gave me the little prism, 
which is doubly valuable, being of glass manufac- 
tured at Munich by Fraunhofer, whose table of dark 
lines has now become the standard of comparison in 
that marvellous science, the work of many illustrious 
men, brought to perfection by Bunsen and Kirchhoff, 
€ * 2 * * 

Sir William Herschel had discovered that what 
appeared to be single stars were frequently two stars 
in such close approximation that it required a very 
hich telescopic power to see them separately, and 
that in many of these one star was revolving in an 
orbit round the other. Sir James South estab- 
lished an observatory at Camden Hill, near Kensing- 
ton, where he and Sir John Herschel united in 
observing the double stars and binary systems with 
the view of affording further data for improving our 
knowledge of their movements. In each two observa- 
tions are requisite, namely, the distance between the 
two stars, and the angle of position, that is, the angle 
which the meridian or a parallel to the equator 
makes with the lines joining the two stars. These 
observations were made by adjusting a micrometer 
toa very powerful teleseope, and were data sufli- 
cient for the’ determination of the orbit of the 
revolving star, should it be a binary system. I have 


Binary Stars. 1185 


given an account of this in the “ Connexion of the 
Physical Sciences,” so I shall only mention here that - 
im one or two of the binary systems the revolying 
star has been seen to make more than one revolution, 
and that the periodical times and the elliptical ele- 
ments of a, great many other orbits have been caleu- 
lated, though they’ are more than 200,000 times 
farther from the sun than we are. 

After Sir John Herschel was married, we paid 
him a visit at Slough; fortunately, the sky was 
clear, and Sir John had the kindness to show me 
many nebule and clusters of stars which I had 
never seen to such advantage as in his 20 ft. tele- 
scope. I shall never forget the glorious appearance 
of Jupiter as he entered the field of that instru- 
ment. : : 

For years the British nation was kept in a state of 
excitement by the Arctic voyages of our undaunted 
seamen in quest of a north-west passage from the 
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean. The idea was not 
new, for a direct way to our Eastern possessions had 
been long desired. On this occasion thé impulse 
was given by William Scoresby, captain of a whaler, 
who had sailed on the east coast of Greenland as 
high as the 80th parallel of latitude, and for two suc- - 
cessive seasons had found that the sea between 

: Greenland and Spitzbergen was free of ice for 18,000 


156 Mary Somerville. 


square miles—a circumstance which had not 'oc- 
curred before in the memory of man. Scoresby was 
of rare genius, well versed in science, and of 
strict probity. When he published. this discovery, 
the Admiralty, in the year 1818, sent off two expedi- 
tions, one under the command of Captains Franklin 
and Buchan to the east of Greenland, and another 
under Captains Ross and Parry to Baffin’s Bay. 
Such was the beginning of a series of noble adven- 
tures, now the province of history. 

I had an early passion for everything relating to 
the sea, and when my father was at home I never 
tired asking him questions about his voyages and the 
dangers to which he had been exposed. Now, when 
I knew something of nautical science, I entered with 
enthusiasm into the spirit of these Arctic voyages ; 
nor was my husband less interested. We read 
Scoresby’s whaling voyages with great delight, and 
we made the acquaintance of all the officers who 
had been on these northern expeditions. 

Sir Edward Parry, who had brought us minerals 
and seeds of plants from Melville Island, invited us 
to see the ships prepared for his third voyage, and 
three years’ residence in the Arctic seas. It is im- 
possible to describe how perfectly everything was 
arranged : experience had taught them what was 
necessary for such an expedition. On this occasion 


Somerville Island, 187 


I put in practice my lessons in cookery-bymaking a 
large quantity of orange marmalad¢ for the voyage. 
When, after three .;yeais, -the 'ships-returned, we 
were infoxmed that the hame of Somerville liad been 
given to-an island se far-to the north - tliat it, was 
all but perpetually coveted with ice and snow. Not- 
withstanding the sameness: which naturally prevails 
in the narratives of these voyages, they are investec 
with a roniantic interest by the daring’ bravery dis: 

played, and by the appalling difficulties’ overcome 

The noble‘ endeavour of Lady Franklin to save hei 

gallant husband, and the solitary. voyage of Sir 
Leopold. McClintock in a small -yacht:in- search of 
his lost friend, form the touching and sad termina- 
tien to avery glorious period of maritiine adventure. 
More than fifty years after these events I renewed my 
acquaintance with Lady Franklin. She and her niece 
came to see me at Spezia on their way'to Dalmatia. 
She had circumnavigated the globe with her husband 
when he was governor in Australia. - After his loss 
she and her niece had gone round the world a second 
time, and she assured me that although they went to 
Japan and China (less known at that time than they 
are now), they never experienced any difficulty. 
Seeing ladies travelling alone, people were always 
willing to help them. The French sent a Polar expe- 
dition under Captain Gaimard in the years 1838 and 


138 Mary . Somerville. 


1839 ; and the United States of North America took 
an active part in Arctic exploration. Whether Dr. 
Kane’s discovery of an open polar ocean will ever be 
verified is problematical ; at all events, the deplorable 
fate of Sir John Franklin has put a stop to the 
chance of it for the present ; yet it is a great geogra+ 
phical question which we should all like to sce 
decided. 

Captain Sabine, of the Artillery (now General Sir 
Edward Sabine, President of the Royal Society), 
was appointed to accompany the first expedition 
under Captains Ross and Parry on account of his 
high scientific acquirements. The observations made 
during the series of Arctic voyages on the magnetism 
of the earth, combined with an enormous mass of 
observations made by numerous observers in all 
parts of the globe by sea and by land, have enabled 
Sir Edward Sabine, after a labour of nearly fifty 
years, to complete his maryellous system of terrestrial 
magnetism in both hemispheres. During that long 
period a friendship has lasted between Sir Edward 
and me. He has uniformly sent me copies of all 
his works; to them I chiefly owe what I know on 
the subject, and quite recently I have received his 
latest and most important publication. Sir Edward 
marnied a lady of talent and scientific acquirements. 
She translated “Cosmos” from the German, and 


Lefeboats. ‘139 


assisted and calculated for her husband in his labo- 
rious work. 

I do not remember the exact period, but I think 
it was subsequent to'the Arctic voyages, that the 
theory was discovered of those tropical hurricanes 
which cause such’ devastation by sea and land. 
Observations are now made on barometric ‘pres- 
sure, and warnings are sent to our principal sea- 
ports by telegraph, as well as along both sides 
of the Channel; bit notwithstanding numerous 
disastrous shipwrecks occur every winter on our 
dangerous coasts. They were far more’ numerous 
in my younger days. Life-boats were not then 
invented ; now they are stationed on almost 
‘every coast of Great Britain, and on many conti- 
nental shores. The readiness with which they are 
manned, and the formidable dangers encountered to 
save life, show the gallant, noble character of the 
' sailor. 


CHAPTER IX. 


SOCIETY IN LONDON—CORONATION OF GEORGE IV.—LETTER 
TO DR. SOMERVILLE, 


WE went frequently to see Mr. Babbage while he 
was making his Calculating-machines. He had a 
transcendant intellect, unconquerable perseverance, 
and extensive knowledge on many subjects, besides 
being a first-rate mathematician. I always found 
him most amiable and patient in explaining the 
structure and use of the engines. The first he made 
could only perform arithmetical operations Not . 
satisfied with that, Mr. Babbage constructed an 
analytical engine, which could be so arranged as to 
perform all kinds of mathematical calculations, and . 
print each result. 

Nothing has afforded me so convincing a proof of 
the unity of the Deity as these purely mental con- 
ceptions of numerical and mathematical science 
which have been by slow degrees vouchsafed to 
man, and are still granted in these latter times by 
the Differential Calculus, now superseded by the 


Religious Opinions. 141 


Higher Algebra, all of which must have existed in 
that sublimely omniscienb’Mind: from eternity. 

Many of our friends had very decided and various 
religious opinions; but my husband and I never 
entered into controversy ; we had too high a regard 
for liberty of conscience to interfere with any one’s 
opinions, so we have lived’ on terms of sincere 
friendship and love with people who differed essen- 
tially from us in religious views, and in all-the books 
which I have written I have confined rayself strictly 
and entirely to scientific subjects;- although my 
religious opinions are very decided. — - 

Timidity of character, probably owing to early 
education, had a great influence on my daily life ; 
for I did not assume my place in society in my 
younger days; and in argument I was in- 
stantly silenced, although I often knew, and could 
have proved, that I was in the right. The only 
thing in which I was determined and inflexible 
was in the prosecution of my studies. They were 
perpetually interrupted, but always resumed at the 
first opportunity. No analysis is so difficult as that 
of one’s own mind, but I do not think I érr mueh in 
saying that perseverance is a characteristic of mine. 

oe e * % _* 

Somerville and I were very happy when we 
lived in Hanover Square. We were always cn- 


143 Mary Somerville. 


gaged in some pursuit, and had good saciety. 
General society was at that time brilliant for 
wit and talent. The Rev. Sidney Smith, Rogers, 
Thomas Moore, Campbell, the Hon. Williani Spencer, 
Macaulay, Sir James Mackintosh, Lord: Melbourne, 
&c., &c., all made the dinner-parties very agreeable. 
The men sat longer at table than they do now, and, 
except in the families where I was intimate, the con- 
versation of the ladies in the drawing-room, when we 
came up from dinner, often bored me. I disliked routs 
exceedingly, and should often have sent an excuse if 
Thad known what to say. After my marriage I did 
not dance, for in Scotland it was thought highly in- 
decorous for a married woman to dance. Waltzing, 
when first introduced, was looked upon with horror, 
and even in England it was then thought very im- 
proper. 

One season [ subscribed to the Concerts of Ancient 
Music, established by George the Third. They 
seemed to be the resort of the aged; a young face 
was scarcely to be seen. The music was perfect 
of its kind, but the whole affair was very dull. 
The Philharmonic Concerts were excellent for scien- 
tific musicians, and I sometimes went to them; 
but for my part I infinitely preferred hearing 
Pasta, Malibran, and Grisi, who have left the 
most .vivid impression on my mind, although so 

. e 


Theatres. 143 


uluerend Tom each other. Somerville enjoyed. a 
comic opera exceedingly, and so did I; and at that 
time Tablache was in the height of his fame. 
‘Whe Somerville ‘and I made the tour in Italy al- 
ready mentioned, we visited Catalani (then Madame 
Valabréque) in a villa near Florence, to which she 
‘etiréed in her old age. She, however, died in Paris, 
of cholera, some years later. 

Somerville liked the theatre as much.as I did; so 
we saw all the greatest actors of the day, both in 
tragedy and comedy, and the English theatre was 
then excellent. Young, who was scarcely inferior 
to John Kemble, Macready, Kean, Liston, &c., and 
Miss O’Neill, who after a short brilliant career 
entered into domestic life on her marriage with Sir 
William Beecher, were all at the height of their 
fame. It was then I became acquainted with Lady 
Beecher, who was so simple and natural that no one 
could have discovered she had ever been on the 
stage. A very clever company of French comedians 
acted in a temporary theatre in Tottenham Court 
Road, where we frequently went with a party of 
friends, and enjoyed very pleasant evenings. I 
think my fondness for the theatre depended to a 
‘certain degree on my silent disposition ; for unless 
among intimate friends, or when much excited, | 
was startled at the sound of my own veiee ‘iu 


144 Mary Somerville. 


general conversation, from the shyness which has 
haunted me through life, and starts up occasionally 
like a ghost in my old age. At a play I was not 
called upon to make any exertion, but could enjoy 
at my ease an intellectual pleasure for the most part 
far superior to the general run of conversation. 


Among many others, we were intimate with 
Dr. and Mrs. Baillie and his sisters. Joanna was 
my dear and valued friend to the end of her life. 
When her tragedy of “Montfort” was to be brought 
on the stage, Somerville and I, with a large party of 
her relations and friends, went with her to the theatre. 
The play was admirably acted, for Mrs. Siddons and 
her brother John Kemble performed the principal 
parts. It was warmly applauded by a full house, 
but it was never acted again. Some time afterwards 
“The Family Legend,” founded on a Highland 
story, had better success in Edinburgh ; but Miss 
Baillie’s plays, though highly poetical, are not suited 
to the stage. Miss Mitford was more successful, 
for some of her plays were repeatedly acted. She 
excelled also asa writer. “Our Village ” is perfect of 
its kind ; nothing can be more animated than her 
description of a game of cricket. I met with Miss 
Austin’s novels at this time, and thought them ex- 
cellent, especially “Pride and Prejudice.” It cer- 


Mrs: Opie and Mrs. Fry. 145 


tainly formed a curious contrast to my old favourites, 
the Radcliffe novels and the ghost stories; but I 
had now come to years of discretion. , 

Among my Quaker friends I met with that amiable 
but eccentric person Mrs. Opie. Though a “wet” 
Quakeress, she continued to wear the peculiar dress. 
1 was told that she was presented in it at the Tuileries, 
and astonished the French ladies. We were also ac- 
quainted with Mrs, Fry, a very different person, and 
heard her preach. Her voice was fine, her delivery 
admirable, and her prayer sublime. We were inti- 
mate with Mr. (now Sir Charles) Lyell, who, if I mis- 
take not, first met with his wife at our house, where 
she was extremely admired as the beautiful Miss 
Horner. Until we lost all our fortune, and went 
to live at Chelsea, I used to have little evening 
parties in Hanover Square. 

* * * * * 

1 was not present at the coronation of George the 
Fourth ; but I had a ticket for the gallery in West- 
minster Hall, to see the banquet. Though I went 
very early in the morning, I found a wonderful 
confusion. I showed my ticket of admission to one 
official person after another ; the answer always was 
“TI know nothing about it.” At last I got a good 
place near some ladies I knew ; even at that early' 
hour the gallery was full. Some time after the 


146 Afary Someervitle, 


ceremony in the Abbey was over, the doot of the 
magnificent hall was thrown open; and. the king 
entered i in the flowing curls and. costume ‘of Henry 
the Eighth, and, imitating the jaunty manner of that 
monarch, walked up the hall and sat ‘down on the 
throne at its extremity. The-peeresses had already 
taken their seats under the gallery, and the king 
was followed by the peers, and the knights of the 
Garter, Bath, Thistle, and St. Patrick, all in their 
robes. After every one had taken his seat, the 
Champion, on his horse, both in fall armour, fode 
up the hall, and threw down a gauntlet before the 
king, while the heralds proclaimed that “he was 
ready to do battle with any one who denied, that 
George the Fourth was the liege lord. of these 
realms. Then various persons presented offerings to 
the king in right of which they held their estates. 
Une gentleman presented a beautiful pair of falcons 
in their hoods. While this pageantry and noise was 
at its height, Queen Caroline demanded to be ad- 
mitted. There was a sudden silence and consterna- 
tion,—it was like the “handwriting on the wall!” 
The sensation was intense. At last the order was piven 
to refuse her admittance; the pageantry was re- 
newed, and the banquet followed. The noise, 
heat, and vivid light of the illumination of the hall 
gave me a racking headache ; at last I went out o/ 


Two Coronations. 147 


the gallery and Sat- on, a stair, where there was a 
little fresh ‘air, and was very glad when all was over. 
Years: afterwards I was present in Westminster 
Abbey. at the ceronation of our Queen, then a pretty 
poung girl of eighteen; “Placed in the most trying 
positién at that early age, by her virtues, both 
public and -private,she has endeared herself to the 
nation beyond’ what any sovereign ever did before. 


~ L.who had so many. occupations and duties at- 
houte, soon’ tired of the idleness and formality of 
visiting in the cquntry. . I made an exception, how- 
sver, in favour of an occasional visit ta Mr. Sotheby, 
he poet, and his family in Epping Forest, of which, 
f I mistake not, he was deputy-ranger ; at. all 
2wents, he had a pretty cottage there where he 
mq his family received their friends with kind 
aospitality. He spent part of the day in his study, 
und afterwards I have seen him playing ericket 
with his son and grandson, with as much vivacity 
1s any of them. The freshness of the air was quite 
ceviving to Somerville and me; and our two little 
zirls played in the forest all the day. 

We also gladly went for several successive years 
0 visit Sir John Saunders Sebright at Beech- 
wood Park, Hertfordshire. Dr. Wollaston gene- 


rally travelled with us on these oceasions, when 
S L2 


148 Mary Somerville. 


we had much conversation on a varicty of sub- 
jects, scientific or general. He was remarkably 
acute in his observations on objects as we passed 
them. “Look at that ash tree; did you ever 
notice that the branches of the ash tree are 
curves of double curvature?” There was a comet 
visible at the time of one of these little journeys. 
Dr. Wollaston had made a drawing of the orbit and 
its elements ; but, having left it in town, he de- 
scribed the hnes so accurately without naming 
them, that I remarked at once, ‘That is the curtate 
or perihelion distance,” which pleased him greatly, 
as it showed how accurate his description was. He 
was a chess-player, and, when travelling alone, he 
used to carry a book with diagrams of partially- 
played games, in which it is required to give check- 
mate in a fixed number of moves. He would 
study one of them, and then, shutting the book, 
play out the game mentally. 

Although Sir Jokn was a keen sportsman and 
fox-hunter in his youth, he was remarkable for his 
kindness to animals and for the facility with which 
he tamed them. He kept terriérs, and his pointers 
were first rate, yet he never allowed his keepers to 
beat a dog, nor did he ever do it himself; he said a 
deg once cowed was good for nothing ever after. 
He trained them by tying a string to the collar and 


Training Dogs. 149 


giving it a sharp pull when the dog did wrong, 
and patting him kindly when he did right. In this 
manner he taught some of his non-sporting dogs 
to play all sorts of tricks, such as picking out the 
card chosen by any spectator from a number placed 
in a circle on the floor, the signal being one 
momentary glance at the card, &. &e. Sir John 
published a pamphlet on the subject, and sent 
copies of it to the sporting gentlemen and keepers 
in the county, I fear with little effect; men are 
so apt to vent their own bad temper on their dogs 
and horses. : 

At one of the battues at Beechwood, Chantrey killed 
two woodcocks at one shot. Mr. Hudson Gurn-y 
some time after saw a brace of woodcocks carved in 
marble in Chantrey’s studio; Chantrey told him of 
his shot and the difficulty of finding a suitable 
inscription, and that it had been tried in Latin 
and even Greek without success. Mr. Gurney said it 
should be very simple, such as :— 


« Driven from the north, where winter starved them, 
Chantrey first shot, and then he carved them. 


Beechwood was one of the few places in Great 
Britain in which hawking was kept up. The falcons 
were brought from Flanders, for, except in the Isle 
of Skye, they have been extirpated in Great Britain 
like many other of our fine indigenous birds. Sir 


aap Mary Somerville, 


John kept faney pigeons of all breeds. He told 
me he could alter the colour of their plumage in 
three years by cross-breeding, but that it required 
fully six to alter the shape of the bird. 
* 


a es * * 


At some house where we were dining in London, 
I forget with whom, Ugo Foscolo, the poet, was 
one of the party. He was extremely excitable and 
irritable, and when some one spoke of a translation 
of Dante as being perfect, “ Impossible,” shouted 
Foscolo, starting up in great excitement, at the 
same time tossing his cup full of coffee into the 
air, cup and all, regardless of the china and the 
ladies’ dresses. He died in England, I fear in great 
poverty. He was a most distinguished classical 
scholar as well as poet. His remains have been 
brought to Italy within these few years, and in- 
terred in Sante Croce, in Florence. 

2 * * -®# * 

I had a severe attack of what appeared to be 
cholera, and during my recovery Mrs. Hankey very 
kindly lent us her villa at Hampstead for a few 
weeks, There I went with my children, Somerville 
with some friends always coming to dinner on the 
Sundays. On one of these occasions there was a 
violent thunderstorm, and a large tree was struck 
not far from the house. We all went to look at the 


Practical Astronomy. 1hl 


® 


tree as soon as the storm ceased, and found that, a 
i large mass of ,wood was scooped out of the trunk 
from top to bottom. I had occasion in two other 
instances to notice the same effect. Dr. Wollaston 
lent me a sextant and artificial horizon ; sol amused 
myself taking the. altitude of the sun, the conse- 
quence of which was that I became as brown as a 
raulatto, but I-was too anxious to learn something of 
practical astronomy to care about the matter. 


CHAPTER X. 


DEATH OF MARGARET SOMERVILLE—LETTER FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE 
To THE REV. DR. SOMERVILLE—LIFE AT CHELSEA—THE NAPIRRS— 
MARIA EPGEWORTH—TOUR IN GERMANY. 


Ovr happy and cheerful life in Hanover Square 
came toa sad end. The illness and death of our 
eldest girl threw Somerville and me into the deepest 
affiction. She was a child of intelligence and 
acquirements far beyond her tender age. 


[The long illness and death of this young girl fell very 
heavily on my mother, who by this time had lost several 
children. The following letter was written by her to 
my grandfather on this occasion. It shows her steadfast 
faith in the mercy and goodness of God, even when 
crushed by almost the severest affliction which can wring 
a mother's heart :— . 


MBS. SOMERVILLE TO THE REY. DR. SOMERVILLE. 
Lonpon, October, 1823. 
My pear FaTuer, 
I never was so long of writing to you, but when 
the heart is breaking it is impossible to find words ade- . 
quate to its relief. We are in deep affliction, for though 
the first violence of grief has subsided, there has suc- 


Appointment to Chelsea. 153 


ceeded a calm sorrow not less painful, a feeling of hope- 
lessness in this world which only finds comfort in the 
prospect of another, which longs for the consummation 
of all things that we may join those who have gone 
before. To return to the duties of life is irksome, even 
to those duties which were a delight when the candle of 
the Lord shone upon us. I do not arraign the decrees 
of Providence, but even in the bitterness of my soul I 
acknowledge the wisdom and goodness of God, and 
endeavour to be resigned to His will. It is ungrateful 
not to remember the many happy years we have enjoyed, 
but thag very remembrance renders our present state 
more desolate and dreary—presenting a sad contrast. 
The great source of consolation is in the mercy of God 
and the virtues of those we lament; the full assurance 
that no good disposition can be lost but must be brought 
to perfection in a better world. Our business is to 
render ourselves fit fpr that blessed inheritance that we 
may again be united to those we mourn. 
Your affectionate daughter, 
Mary Somervinie. 


’ Somerville still held his place at the army medical 
board, and was now appointed physician to Chelsea 
ospital ; so we left our cheerful, comfortable house 
and went to reside in a government house in a very 
dreary and: unhealthy situation, far from all our 
friends, which was a serious loss to me, as I was not 
a good walker, and during the whole time I lived 
at Chelsea I suffered from sick headaches. Still we 


lit Mary Somerville. 


were very glad of the appointment, for at this time 
we lost almost the whole of our fortune, through the 
dishonesty of a person in whom we had the ereatest 
confidence. 

All the time we lived at Chelsea we had constant 
intercourse with Lady Noel Byron and Ada, who 
lived at Esher, and when I came abroad I kept up a 
correspondence with both as long as they lived. Ada 
was much attached to me, and often came to stay 
with me. It was by my advice that she studied 
mathematics. She always wrote to me for an ex- 
planation when she met with any difficulty. Among 
my papers I lately found many of her notes, asking 
mathematical questions. Ada Byron married Lord 
King, afterwards created Earl of. Lovelace, a college 
companion and friend of my son. 

Somerville had formed a friendship with. Sir 
Henry Bunbury when he had a command in Sicily, 
and we went occasionally to visit him at Barton in 
Suffolk. I liked Lady Bunbury very much; she 
was a niece of the celebrated Charles Fox, and had 
a turn for natural history. I had made a collec- 
tion of native shells at Burntisland, but I only 
knew their vulgar names; now [ learnt their scien- 
tific arrangement from Lady Bunbury. Her son, 
Sir Charles Bunbury, is an authority for fossil 
botany. The first Pinetum I ever saw was at Barton, 


The Napiers. 15 


and in 1837 I planted a cedar in remembrance of 
one of our visits, ; 

Through Lady Bunbury we became intimate with 
all the members of the illustrious family of the 
Napiers, as she was sister of Colonel, afterwards 
General Sir William Napier, author of the “ His- 
‘tory of the Peninsular War.” One day Colonel 
Napier, who was then living in Sloane Street, intro- 
duced Somerville and me to his mother, Lady Sarah 
Napier. Her manners were distinguished, and 
though totally blind, she still had the remains of 
great beauty ; her hand and arm, which were ex- 
posed by the ancient costume she wore, were most 
beautiful still. The most sincere friendship existed 
between Richard Napier and his wife and me through 
life ; I shall never forget their kindness to me at a 
time when I was in great sorrow. All the brothers 
are now gone. Richard and his wife were long in 
bad health, and he was nearly blind; but his wife- 
never kuew it, through the devoted attachment of 
Emily Shirriff, daughter of Admiral Shirriff, who 
was the comfort and consolation of both to their 
dying day. 

Maria Edgeworth came frequently to see us when 
she was in England. She was one of my most 
intimate friends, warm-hearted and kind, a charming 
companion, with all the liveliness and-originality of 


156 Mary Somerville. 


an Irishwoman. For seventeen years I was in con- 
stant correspondence with her. The cleverness and 
animation as well as affection of her letters I cannot 
express ; certainly women are superior to men in 
letter-writing. 


(The following is an extract from a letter from Maria 
Edgeworth to a friend concerning my mother :— 


MARIA EDGEWORTH TO MISS ..... 
Brgecuwoop Park, January 17th, 1822. 

We have spent two days pleasantly here with Dr. 
Wollaston, our own dear friend Mrs. Marcet, and the 
Somervilles. Mrs. Somerville is the lady who, Laplace 
says, is the only woman who understands bis works. 
She draws beautifully, and while her head is among the 
stars her feet are firm upon the earth. 

Mrs. Somerville is little, slightly made, fairish hair, 
pink colour, small, grey, round, intelligent, smiling eyes, 
very pleasing countenance, remarkably soft voice, strong, 
but well-bred Scotch accent; timid, not disqualifying 
timid, but naturally modest, yet with a degree of self- 
possession through it which prevents her being in the 
least awkward, and gives her all the advantage of her 
understanding, at the same time that it adds a pre- 
possessing charm to her manner and takes off all dread 
of her superior scientific learning. 


While in London I had a French maid for my 
daughters, and on coming to Chelsea I taught them 


Education of Daughters. 157 


a little geometry and algebra, as well as Latin and 
Greck, and, later, got a master for them, that they 
might have a more perfect knowledge of these lan- 
guages than I possessed. -Keenly alive to my own 
defects, I was anxious that my children should never 
undergo the embarrassment and mortification I had 
suffered from ignorance of the common European 
languages. I engaged a young German lady, 
daughter of Professor Becker, of Offenbach, near 
Frankfort, as governess, and was most happy in my 
choice ; but after being with us for a couple of 
years, she had a very bad attack of fever, and was 
obliged to return home. She was replaced by a 
younger sister, who afterwards married Professor 
Trendelenburg, Professor of Philosophy at the Uni- 
versity of Berlin. Though both these sisters were 
quite young, I had the most perfect confidence 
in* them, from their strict conscientiousness and 
morality. They were well educated, ladylike, and 
so amiable, that they gained the friendship of my 
children and the affection of us all. 

As we could with perfect confidence leave the 
children to Miss Becker’s care, Sir James Mackintosh, 
Somerville and I made an excursiou to the Continent. 
We went to Brussels, and what lady can go there 
without seeing the lace manufactory? I saw, 
admired,—and bought tone! We were kindly re- 


158 Mary Somerville. 


ceived by Professor Quetelet, whom we had pre- 
viously known, and who never failed to send me 4 
copy of his valuable memoirs as soon as they were 
published. I have uniformly met with the greatest 
kindness from scientific men at home and abroad. If 
any of them are alive when this record is published, 
I beg they will accept of my gratitude. Of those 
that are no more | bear a grateful remembrance. 

The weather was beautiful when we were at 
Brussels, and in the evening we went to the public 
garden. It was crowded with people, and very gay. - 
We sat down, and amused ourselves by looking at 
them as they passed. Sir James was a most agree- 
able companion, intimate with all the political 
characters of the day, full of aneedote and historical 
knowledge. That evening his conversation was so 
brilliant that we forgot the time, and looking 
around found that everybody had left the gardtn, 
so we thought we might as well return to the hotel ; 
but on coming to the iron-barred gate we found it 
locked. Sir James and Somerville begged some of 
those that were passing to call the keeper of the 
park to let us out; but they said it was impossible, 
that we must wait till morning. A crowd as- 
sembled laughing and mocking, till at last we got 
out through the house of one of the keepers of the 
park. 7 


Tour in Holland, 159 


At Bonn we met with Baron Humboldt, and M. 
Schlegel, celebrated for his translation of Shake- 
speare. On going up the Rhine, Sir James knew the 
history of every place and of every battle that, had 
been fought, A professor of his acquaintance in one 
of the towns invited us to dinner, and I was as- 
tonished to see the lady of the house going about 
with a great bunch of keys dangling at her side, 
assigting in serving up the dinner, and doing all the 
duty of carving, her husband taking no. part what. 
ever init. I was annoyed that we had given so 
much trouble by accepting the invitation. In my 
younger days in Scotland, a lady might make the 
pastry and jelly, or direct in the kitchen; but she. 
took no part in cooking or serving up the dinner, 
and never rose from the table till the ladies went to 
the drawing-room. However, ,as we could not afford 
to keep a regular cook, an ill-dressed dish would 
occasionally appear, and then my father would say, 
“ God sends food, but the devil sends cooks.” 

In our tour through Holland, Somerville was 
quite at home, and amused himself talking to the 
people, for he had learnt the Dutch language at the 
Cape of Good Hope. We admired the pretty quaint 
costumes of the women ; but I was the only one who 
took interest in the galleries. Many of the pictures 
of the Dutch school are very fine; but I never - 


160 ‘Mary Somervill 


should have made a collection exclusively of them as 
was often done at one timein England. Lord Gran- 
ville was British Minister at the Hague, and dining 
at the Embassy one day we met with a Mrs. ; 
who, on hearing one of the attachés addressed as Mr. 
Abercromby,* said, “Pray, Lord Granville, is that a 
son of the great captain whom the Lord slew in the 
land of Egypt ?” 

I never met with Madame de Staél, but heard a 
great deal about her during this journey from Sir 
James Mackintosh, who was very intimate with her. 
At that time the men sat longer at table after 
dinner than they do now; and on one occasion, 
at a dinner party at Sir James’s house, when Lady 
Mackintosh and the ladies returned to the drawing- 
room, Madame de Staél, who was exceedingly im- 
patient of women’s society, would not deign . to 
enter into conversation with any of the ladies, but 
walked about the room; then suddenly ringing 
the bell, she said, “Ceci est insupportable!” and 
when the servant appeared, she said: “Tell your 
master to come upstairs directly; they have sat 
long enough at their wine.” 


© Afterwards Sir Ralph Abercromby, later Lord Dunfermline, minister 
first at Florence, then at Turin, 


CHAPTER XI. 


LETTER FROM LORD BROUGHAM — WRITES ‘MECHANISM OF TRE 
WEAVENS”—ANECDOTE OF THE ROMAN IMPROVISATRICE—LETTERS 
FROM SIR JOHN HERSCHEL AND PROFESSOR WHEWELL—ELECTED 
HON, MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ASTRONOMICAL SUCTETY—NOTICE IN 
THE ACADEMIE DES £CIENCES, AND LETTER FROM M. BIOT— 
PENSION—-LETTER SROM SIR ROBERT PEEL—BEGINS TO WRITE ON 
THE CONNECTION OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES—VISIT TO CAM- 
BRIDGE—LETTERS FROM PROFESSOR SEDGWIUK AND LAPLACB. 


{After my mother’s return home my father received 
the following letter from Lord Brougham, which very 
importantly influenced the further course of my mother’s 
life. It is dated March 27th, 1827 :— 


LETTER FROM LORD BROUGHAM TO DR. SOMERVILLE. 


My pear Sm, 

I fear you will think me very daring for the 
design I have formed against Mrs. Somerville, and still 
more for making you my advocate with her; through 
whom I have every hope of prevailing. There will be 
sent to you a prospectus, rules, and a preliminary treatise 
of our Society for Diffusing Useful Knowledge, and I 
assure you I speak without any flattery when I say that 
of the two subjects which I find it most difficult to see 


PS 


162 Mary Somerville. 


the chance of executing, there is one, which—unless Mrs. 
Somerville will undertake—none else can, and it must be 
left undone, though about the most interesting of the 
whole, I mean an account of the Mécanique Céleste ; the 
other is an account of the Principia, which I have some 
hopes of at Cambridge. The kind of thing wanted is 
such a description of that divine work as will both explain 
to the unleamed the sort of thing it is—the plan, the 
vast merit, the wonderful truths unfolded or methodized 
—and the calculus by which all this is accomplished, and 
will also give a somewhat deeper insight to the un- 
initiated. Two treatises would do this. No one without 
trying it can conceive how far we may carry ignorant 
readers into an understanding of the depths of science, 
and our treatises have about 100 to 800 pages of space 
each, so that one might give the more popular view, and 
another the analytical abstracts and illustrations. In’ 
England there are now not twenty people who know this 
great work, except by name; and not a hundred who 
know it eyen by name. My firm belief is that Mrs. 
Somerville could add two cyphers to each of those 
figures. Will you be my counsel in this suit? Of 
course our names are concealed, and no one of our 
council but myself needs to know it. 
Yours ever most truly, 
H. BrovcHam. 


My mother in alluding to the above says :— 


Tuas letter surprised me beyond expression. I 
thought Lord Brougham must have been mistaken 
with regard to my acquirements, and naturally con- 


Diffidence. 163 


cluded that my self-acquired knowledge was so far 
inferior to that of the men who had been educated 
in our universities that it would be the height of 
presumption to attempt to write on such a subject, 
or indeed on any other. A few days after this Lord 
Brougham came to Chelsea himself, and Somerville 
joined with him in urging me at least to make the 
attempt. I said, “Lord Brougham, you must, be 
aware that the work in question never can be popu- 
larized, since the student must at least know some- 
thing of the differential and integral calculi, and as 
*a preliminary step I should have to prove various 
problems in physical mechanics and astronomy. 
Besides, La Place never gives diagrams or figures, 
because they are not necessary to persons versed in 
the calculus, but they would be indispensable in a 
work such as you wish me to write. I am afraid I 
am incapable of such a task: but as you both wish 
itso much, I shall do my very best upon condition of 
secrecy, gnd that if I fail the manuscript shall be 
put into the fire.” Thus suddenly and unexpectedly 
the whole character and course of my future life was 
changed. 
I rose early and made such arrangements with re- 
gard to my children and family affairs that I had time 
to write afterwards ; not, however, without many in- 


terruptions. A man can always command his time 
u2 


164 Mary Somerville. 


under the plea of business, a woman is not allowed 
any such excuse. At Chelsea I was always supposed 
to be at home, and as my friends and acquaintances 
came so far out of their way on purpose to see me, 
it would have been unkind and ungenerous not to 
receive them. Nevertheless, I was sometimes an- 
noyed when in the midst of a difficult problem some 
one would enter and say, “I have come to spend a 
few hours with you.” However, I learnt by habit 
to leave a subject and resume it again at once, like 
putting a mark into a book I might be reading ; this 
was the more necessary as there was no fire-placé 
in my little room, and I had to,write in the 
drawing-room in winter. Frequently I hid my 
papers as soon as the bell announced a visitor, lest 
anyone should discover my secret 


(My mother had a singular power of abstraction. When 
occupied with some difficult problem, or even a train 
of thought which deeply interested her, she lost all con- 
sciousness of what went on around her, and became s0 
entirely absorbed that any amount of talking, or even 
practising scales and solfeggi, went on without in the 
least disturbing her. Sometimes a song or a strain of 
melody would recall her to a sense of the present, for 
she was passionately fond of music. A curivud’ instance 
of this peculiarity of hers occurred at Rome, when a 
large party were assembled to listen to a celebrated 
improvisatrice. My mother was placed in the front row, 


The Improvisatrice. 165 
close to the poetess, who, for: several stanzas, adhered 
strictly to the subject which had been given to her. What 
it was I do not recollect, except that it had no connec- 
tion with what followed. All at once, as if by a sudden 
inspiration, the Jady turned her eyes full upon my mother, 
and with true Italian vehemence and in the full musical 
accents of Rome, poured forth stanza after stanza of the 
most eloquent paneg gyric upon her talents and virtues, 
extolling them and her to the. skies. Throughout the 
whole of this scene, Which lasted a, considerable time, 
my mother remained calm and unmoved, never changing 
countenance, which surprised not only the persons 
present but ourselves, as we well knew how much she 
disliked any display or being brought forward in public. 
The truth was, that after listening for a while to the, 
improvising) a thought struck her connected with some 

. subject she was engaged in writing upon at the time and 
so entirely absorbed her that she heard not.a word of all 
that had been declaimed in her praise, and was not a 
little surprised and confused when she was complimented 
on it. I call this, advisedly, 4 power of hers, for although 
it occasionally led her into strange positions, such as the, 
one above mentioned, it rendered her entirely indepen- 
dent of outward circumstanced, ‘nor did she require to 
isolate herself from the family circle in order to pursue 
her studies. I have already mentioned that when we 
were very young she taught us herself for a few hours 
daily ; when our lessons were over we always remained 
in the room with her, learning grammar, arithmetic, or 
some such plague of childhood. Any one who has 
plunged into the mazes of the higher branches of 
mathematics or other abstruse science, would probably 
feel no slight degree of irritation on being inter- 


166 Mary Somerville. 


rupted at a critical moment when the solution was 
almost within his grasp, by some childish question 
about tense or gender, or how much seven times 
seven made. My mother was never impatient, but 
explained our little difficulties quickly and kindly, 
and returned calmly to her own profound thought» 
Yet on occasion she could show both irritation and 
impatience—when we were stupid or inattentive, neither 
of which she could stand. With her clear mind she 
darted at the solution, sometimes forgetting that we had 
to toil after her laboriously step by step. I well remem- 
ber her slender white hand pointing impatiently to the 
book or slate—‘t Don’t you see it? there is no difficulty 
in it, it is quite clear.” Things were so clear to her! I 
must here add some other recollections by my mother of 
this very interesting portion of her life. 


I was a considerable time employed in writing this 
book, but I by no means gave up society, which 
would neither have suited Somerville nor me. We 
dined out, went to evening parties, and occasionally 
to the theatre. As socn as my work was finished I 
sent the manuscript to Lord Brougham, requesting 
that it might'be thoroughly examined, criticised and 
destroyed according to promise if a failure. I was 
very nervous while it was under examination, and 
was equally surprised and gratified that Sir John 
Herschel, our greatest astronomer, and perfectly 
versed in the calculus, should have found so few 


Herschel’s A, [pproval. 167 


errors. The letter he wrote on this occasion made 
me so happy and proud that I have preserved i it. 


LETTER FROM SIR JOHN HERSCHEL TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
| l, 


a Dear Mrs. Somervitte, : 

I have read your , manuscript, with tne greatest 
pleasure, and will not hesitate to add, (because I am sure 
you will believe it sincere,) with the highest admiration. 
Go on thus, and you will leave a memorial of no common 
kind to posterity; and, what you will value far more 
than fame, you will have accomplished 8 most useful 
work. What a pity that La Place, has not lived to see 
this illustration of his great work! You will only, I fear, 
give too strong a stimulus to the study of abstract science 
by this performance. 

I have marked as somewhat obscure a part of the 
illustration of the principle of virtual velocities. .. .. : 
Will you look at this point again? I have made a 
trifling remark in page 6, but it is a mere matter of 
metaphysical’ nicety, and perhaps hardly worth pencilling 
your beantiful manuscript for. 

Ever yours most traly, 
_ 9. HERSCHEL. 

[In publishing the following letter, I do not ¢onsider 
that I am infringing on the rule I have followed in obedi- 
ence to my  miother’s wishes, that, is, to abstain from 
giving publicity to all letters which are of a private and 
confidential character. This one entirely concerns her 
scientific writings, and is interesting as showing'the con- 
fidence which existed between Sir John Herschel and . 


168 Mary Somerville. 


herself. This great philosopher was my mother’s truest. 
and best friend, one whose opinion she valued above all 
others, whose genius and consummate talents she ad- 
mired, and whose beautiful character she loved with an 
intensity which is better shown by some extracts from 
her letters to be given presently than by anything I can 
say. This deep regard on her part he returned with the 
most chivalrous respect and admiration. In any doubt 
or difficulty it was his advice she sought, his criticism 
she submitted to; both were always frankly given with- 
out the slightest fear of giving offence, for Sir John 
Herschel well knew the spirit with which any remarks of 
his would be received. 


FROM SIR JOHN HERSCHES TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


SLouGH, Feb, 23rd, 1330. 
My pear Mrs. Somervie, 

- - . . As you contemplate separate 
pabliestion, and as the attention of many will be turned 
to a work from your pen who will just possess quantum 
enough of mathematical knowledge to be able to read the 
first chapter without being able to follow you into its 
application, and as these, moreover, are the very people 
who will think themselves privileged to criticise and use 
their privilege with the least discretion, I cannot recom- 
mend too much clearness, fulness, and order in the 
expose of the principles. Were I you, I would devote to 
this first part at least donble the space you have done, 
Your familiarity with the results and formule has led you 
into what is extremely natural in such a case—a somewhat 
hasty passing over what, to a beginner, would prove 


Herschels Advice. 169 


insuperable difficulties; and if I may so express it, a 
sketchiness of outline (as a painter you wii] understand 
my meaning, and what is of more consequence, see how 
it is to be remedied). 

You have adopted, I see, the principle of virtual velocity, 
and the principle of d’Alembert, rather as separate and 
independent principles to be used as instruments of 
investigation than as convenient theories, flowing them- 
selves from the general law of force and equilibrium, 
to be first proved and then remembered as :compact 
statements in a form fit for use. The demonstration of 
the principle of virtual velocities is so easy and direct 
in Laplace that I cannot imagine anything capable of 
rendering it plainer than he has done. But a good deal 
more explanation of what is virtual velocity, &c., would be 
advantageous—and virtual velocities should be kept quite 
distinct from the arbitrary variations represented by the 
sign 3. 

With regard to the principle of d’Alembert—take my 
advice and explode it altogether. It is the most awkward 
and involve statement of a plain dynamical equation 
that ever puzzled student. I speak feelingly and with a 
sense of irritation at the whirls and vortices it used to 
cause in my poor head when first I entered on this 
subject in my days of studentship. I know not a single 
case where its application does not create obscurity—nay 
doubt. Nor can a case ever occur where any such 

‘ principle is called for. The general law that the change 
of motion is proportional to the moving force and takes 
place in its direction, provided: we take care always to 
regard the reaction of curves, surfaces, obstacles, ke., as 
so many real moving forces of (for a time) unknown 
magnitude, will always help us out of any dynamical 


170 Mary Somerville. 


scrape we may get into. Laplace, page 20, Méc. Cél. art 
7, is a little obscure here, and in deriving his equation 
(/) a page of explanation would be well bestowed. 

One thing let me recommend, if you use as principles 
either this, or that of virtual velocities, or any other, state 
them broadly and in general terms. 

You will think me, I fear, a rough critic, but I think of 
Horace’s good critic, 
Fiet Aristarchus : nec dices, onr ego amicum 
Offendam in nugis? He nuge seria ducent 
Tn mala, 


and what we can both now laugh at, and you may, if you 
like, burn as nonsense (I mean these remarks), would come 
with a very different kind of force from some sneering 
reviewer in the plenitude of his triumph at the detection 
of a slip of the pen or one of those little inaccuracies 
which humana parum cavit natura... 
Very faithfully 3 roar 
J. Herscen. 


[About the same time my father received a letter from 
Dr. Whewell, afterwards Master of Trinity College, 
Cambridge, dated 2nd November, 1831, in which he 
Says :— 


“*T beg you to offer my best thanks to Mrs. Sumerville 
for her kind present. I shall have peculiar satisfaction 
in possessing it as a gift of the author, a book which I 
look upon as one of the most remarkable which our age 
has produced, which ‘would be highly valuable from any- 
one, and which derives a peculiar interest from its writer. 


Dr. Whewells Sonnet. 171 


Iam charged also to return the thanks of the Philosophi- 
eal Society here for the copy presented to them. 4 have 
not thought it necessary to send the official letter con- 
taining the acknowledgment, as Mrs. Somerville will 
probably have a sufficient collection of specimens of such _ 
character. I have also to thank her on the part of our 
College for the copy sent to the library. Iam glad that 
our young mathematicians in Trinity will have easy access 
to the book, which will be very good for them as soon as 
they can read it. When Mrs. Somerville shows herself 
in the field which we mathematicians have been labouring 
in all our lives, and puts us to shame, she ought not to 
be surprised if we move off to other ground, and betake 
ourselves to poetry. If the fashion of ‘ commendatory 
verses’ were not gone by, I have no doubt her work 
might have appeared with a very pretty collection of 
well-deserved poetical praises in its introductory pages, 
As old customs linger longest in places like this, I hope 
she and you will not think it quite extravagant to send a 
single sonnet on the occasion. 
“ Believe me, 
“Faithfully yours, 
““W. WHEWELL.” 


TO MRS, SOMERVILEE, 
ON HER “MECHANISM OF THE HEAVENS.” 


Lapy, it was the wont in earlier days 

‘When some fair volume from a valued pen, 

Long looked for, came at last, that grateful men 
Hailed its forthcoming in complacent lays : 

As if the Muse would gladly haste to praise 

That which her mother, Memory, long should keep 
Among her treasures. Shall such usage sleep 
With us, who feel too slight the common phrase 


173 Mary Samerville. 


For our pleased thoughts of you, when thus we find 
«That dark to you seems bright, perplexed seems plain, 
Seen in the depths of a pellucid mind, 
Fall of clear thought, pure from the ill and vain 
That cloud the inward light? An honoured name 
Be yours ; and peace of heart grow with your growing fame. 


{Professor Peacock, afterwards Dean of Ely, in a letter, 
dated February 14th, 1832, thanked my mother for a 
copy of the ‘‘ Mechanism of the Heavens.” 


LETTER FROM PROFESSOR PEACOCK TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


“T consider it to be a work which will contribute 
greatly to the extension of the knowledge of physical 
astronomy, in this country, and of the great analytical 
processes which have been employed in such investiga- 
tions. It is with this view that I consider it to be a 
work of the greatest value and importance. Dr Whewell 
and myself have already taken steps to introduce it into 
the course of our studies at Cambridge, and I have little 
doubt that it will immediately become an essential work 
to those of our students who aspire to the highest places 
in our examinations.” 


(On this my mother remarks :— 


I consider this as the highest honour [ ever 
received, at the time I was no less sensible of 
it, and was most grateful. I was surprised and 
pleased beyond measure to find that my book 
should be so much approved of by Dr. Whewell, 


one of the most eminent men of the age for 


Professor Peacock. 178 


science and literature; and by Professor Peacock, a 
profound mathematician, who with Herschel and 
Babbage had, a few years before, first introduced the 
calculus as an essential branch of science into the 
University of Cambridge. 

In consequence of this decision the whole editich 
of the “ Mechanism of the Heavens,” amounting to 
750 copies, was sold chiefly at Cambridge, with the 
exception of a very few which I gave to friends ; 
but as the preface was the only part of the work 
that was intelligible to the general reader, 1 had 
some copies of it printed separately to give away. 

I was astonished at the success of my book ; all 
the reviews of it were highly favourable ; I received 
letters of congratulation from many men of science. 
I was elected an honorary member of the Royal 
Astronomical Society at the same time as Miss 
Caroline Herschel. To be associated with so distin- 
guished an astronomer was in itself an honour. 
Mr. De Morgan, to whom I am indebted for many 
excellent mathematical works, was then secretary of 
the society, and announced to us the distinction 
conferred. The council of the Society ordered that 
a copy of the “Greenwich Observations” should be 
regularly sent to me, 


{T he Acaglémie des Sciences elected my mother’s old 
friend M. Biot to draw up a report upon her “Mechanism 


174 Mary Somerville. 


of the Heavens,” which he did in the most flattering 
terms, and upon my mother writing to thank him, replied 
as follows :-— 


FROM M. BIOT TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


q Mapaue, 

Revenu de Lyon depuis quelques jours, j'ai trouvé 
& Paris les deux lettres dont vous avez daigné m’honorer, 
et j’ai recu également Pexemplaire de votre ouvrage que 
vous avez bien voulu joindre 4 la derniére. C’est étre 
mille fois trop bonne, Madame, que de me remercier en- 
core de ce qui m’a fait tant de plaisir. En rendant 
compte de cet étonnant Traité, je remplissais d’abord un 
devoir, puisque Académie m’avait chargé de le lire pour 
elle; mais ce devoir m’offrait un attrait que vous con- 
cevriez facilement, s'il vous était possible de vous rappeler 
Yadmiration vive et profonde que m’inspira il y a long- 
tems l'union si extraordinaire de tous les talens et de 
toutes les graces, avec Jes connaissances sevéres que 
nous autres hommes avions la folie de croire notre 
partage exclusif. Ce qui me charma alors, Madame, je 
n'ai pas cessé depuis de m’en souvenir; et des rapports 
d'amitié qui me sont bien chers, ont encore, a votre inscu, 
furtifié ces sentimens. Jugez done, Madame, combien 
jétais heureux d’avoir 4 peindre ce que je comprenais si 
bien, et ce que j’avais vu avec un si vif intérét. Le plus 
amusant pour moi de cette rencontre, c’était de voir 
nos plus graves confréres, par exemple, Lacroix et 
Legendre, qui certes ne sont pas des esprits légers, ni 
galans d*habitude, ni faciles & émouvoir, me gourmander, 
comme ils le faisaient 4 chaque séance, de ce que je tar- 
dais tant a faire mon rapport, de ce que j’y mettais tant 


Dr. Biot, 175 


Winsouciance et si peu de grace; enfin, Madame, c’était 
une conquéte intellectuelle compléte. Je n’ai pas manqué 
de racenter cette circonstance comme un des fleurons de 
votre couronne. Je me suis ainsi acquitté envers eux; 
et Guant & vous, Madame, d’aprés la maniére dont vous 
-parlez vous-méme de votre ouvrage, j’ai quelque espérance 
+de l'avoir présenté sous le -point de vue ob vous sembléz 
-Penvisager. Mais, en vous rendant ce juste et sincére 
hommage et en Vinsérant au Journal des Savans, j je n’ai 
pas eu i précaution de demander qu’ on m’en mit & part; 
aujourd'hui que la collection egt’ tirée je suis aux regrets 
d'avoir été si peu prévoyant.. Au reste, Madame, il n’y a 
rien dans cet extrait que ce que pensent tous ceux qui 
vous connaissent, ou méme qui ont eu une seule fois le 
bonhetr de vous approcher. Vos amis trouveront que 
j'ai exprimé bien faiblement les charmes de votre esprit et 
de votre caractére; charmes qu’ils doivent apprécier 
dVautant mieux qu’ils en jouissent plus souvent; mais 
vous, Madame, qui étes, indulgente, vous pardonnerez la 
faiblesse d'un portrait qui n’a pu étre fait que de sou- 
venir. : 
J’ai Yhonneur Wétre, avec le plus profond respect, _ 
Madame, 
Votre trés humble et trés obéissant serviteur, 
Brot. 


It was unanimously voted by the Royal Society 
of London, that my bust should be placed in their 
great Hall, and Chantrey was chosen as the sculptor. 
Soon after it was finished, Mr. Potter, a great ship- 


176 Mary Somerville. 


builder at Liverpool, who had just completed a fine 
vessel intended for the China and India trade, wrote 
to my friend, Sir Francis Beaufort, hydrographer of 
the Royal Navy, asking him if I would give him 
permission to call her the “ Mary Somerville,” and 
‘to have a copy of my bust for her figure-head. I 
was much gratified with this, as might be expected. 
The “Mary Somerville” sailed, but was never heard 
of again ; it was supposed she had foundered during 
a typhoon in the China sea. 

I was clected an honorary member of the Royal 
Academy at Dublin, of the Bristol Philosophical 
Institution, and of the Société de Physique et 
d'Histoire Naturelle of Geneva, which was an- 
nounced to me by a very gratifying letter from 
Professor Prevost. 

Our relations and others who had so severely 
criticized and ridiculed me, astonished at my suc- 
cess, were now loud in my praise. The warmth 
with which Somerville entered into my success 
deeply affected me; for not one in ten thousand 
would have rejoiced at it as he did; but he was of 
a generous nature, far above jealousy, and he con- 
tinued through life to take the kindest interest iz 
all I did. 

I now received the following letter from Sir 
Robert Peel, infurming me in the handsomest 


Str Robert Peel. ‘177 


manner that he had advised the King to grant 
me a pension of 2001. a year :— 


LETTER FROM SIR ROBERT PEEL TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


WBSITEHALL GARDENS, 
March, 1835, 
Mapan, 

In advising the Crown in respect to the grant 
of civil pensions, I have acted equally with a sense of 
public duty and on the impulse of my own private 
feelings in recognising among the first claims on the 
Royal favour those which are derived from eminence in 
science and literature. 

In reviewing such claims, it is impossible that I can 
overlook those which you have established by the 
successful prosecution of studies of the highest order, 
both from the importance of the objects to which they 
relate, and from the faculties and acquirements which 
they demand. os . 

As my object is a public one, to encourage others to 
. follow the bright example which you have set, and ti» 
prove that great scientific attainments are recognised. 
among public claims, I prefer making a direct communi- 
cation to you, to any private inquiries into your pecuniary 
circumstanees, or to any proposal through a third party. 
Iam enabled to advise His Majesty to grant to you » 
pension on the civil list of two hundred pounds per 
annum; and if that provision will enable you to pursue 
your lnbours with less of anxiety, either as to the present 
or the future, I shall only be fulfilling a public duty, and 
not imposing upon you the slightest obligation, by 

N 


180 Mary Somerville 
[Professor Sedgwick wrote as follows to my father :— 


FROM PROFESSOR SEDGWICK TO DR. SOMERVILLE. 
Truovrry CoLusGE, April, 1834. 
My pear SomMERvVILLE, 

Your letter delighted us. I have ordered dinner 
on Thursday at 6} and shall have a small party to 
welcome you and Mrs. Somerville. In order that we 
may not have to fight for you, we have been entering om 
the best arrangements we can think of. On Tuesday you 
will, I hope, dine with Peacock; on Wednesday with 
Whewell ; on Thursday at the Observatory. For Friday, 
Dr. Clarke, our Professor of Anatomy, puts in a claim. 
For the other days of your visit we shall, D.V., find ample 
employment. A four-poster bed now (a thing utterly out 
of our regular monastic system) will rear its head for you 
and Madame in the chambers immediately below my 
own; and your handmaid may safely rest her bones in a 
small inner chamber. Should Sheepshanks return, we 
ean stuff him into a lumber room of the observatory ; but 
of this there is no fear as I have written to him on the 
subject, and he has no immediate intention of returning. 
You will of course drive to the great gate of Trinity 
College, and my servant will be in waiting at the Porter's 
lodge to show you the way’to your academic residence. 
We have no cannons at Trinity College, otherwise we 
would fire a salute on your entry; we will however give 
you the warmest grecting we can. Meanwhile give my 
best regards to Mrs. S. 

And believe me most truly yours, 
A. Sepewtick. 


* e . € s 


La Place. ¥81. 


La Place had a profound veneration for Newton ; 
he sent me a copy of his “ Systéme du Monde,” and 
a letter, dated 15th August, 1824, in which he says: 
“ Je publie successivement les divers livres du cin- 
quiéme livre qui doit terminer mon traité' de 
« Mécanique Celeste,’ et dans cela je donne l’analyse 
historique des recherches des géométres sur cette 
matiére, cela m’a fait relire avec une attention parm 
ticuligre louvrage si incomparable des principes 
mathématiques de la philosophie naturelle de Newton, 
qui contient le germe de toutes ses recherches. Plug . 
jai étudié cet ouvrage plus il m’a paru admirable, 
en me transportant surtout 4 l’époque ot il a été 
publié. Mais en méme tems que je sens lélégance 
de la méthode synthétique suivant laquelle Newton 
2 presenté ses découvertes, j’ai reconnu Vindispen- 
sable nécessité de analyse pour approfondir les 
questions tres difficiles que Newton n’a pu qu’effleurer 
par la synthése. Je vois avec un grand plaisir vos 
mathématiciens se livrer maintenant 4 Vanalyse et 
je ne doute point qu’en suivant cette méthode avec 
la sagacité propre 4 votre nation ils ne seront con- 
duits 4 d’importantes découvertes.” 

Newton himself was aware that by the law of 
gravitation the stability of. the solar system was 
endangered. The power of analysis alone enabled 
La Grange to prove that all the disturbances arising 


182 Mary Somerville. 


_ from the reciprocal attraction of the planets and 
satellites are periodical, whatever the length of the 
periods may be, so that the stability of the solar 
system is insured for unlimited ages. The pertur- 
bations are only the oscillations of that immense 
pendulum of Eternity which beats centuries as ours 
beats seconds. 

La Place, and all the great mathematicians of that 
period, had scarcely passed away when the more 
powerful Quaternion system began to dawn. 


CHAPTER XII. 


PARIS~ARAGO, LAFAYETTE, ‘MM, BOUVARD, 'POIS8ON, LACROIX, , &C., 
MARQUISE DE LA PLACE, DUPIN, F. COOPER—LEGITIMISTE SOCIETY 
—MAJENDIE—VISIT BARON LOUIS—LETTER FROM LAFAYETTE. 

' 


My health was never good at Chelsea, and as I had 
been working too hard, I became so ill, that change 
of air and scene were thought absolutely necessary 
forme. We went accordingly to Paris; partly, because 
it was near home, as Somerville could not remain 
long with us at a time, and, partly, because we 
thought it a good opportunity to give masters to 
the girls, which we could not afford todo in London. 
When we arrived, I was so weak, that I always 
remained in bed writing till one o’clock, and then, 
either went to sit in the Tuileries gardens, or else 
received visits. All my old friends came to see me, 
Arago, the first. He was more engaged in politics 
than science, and as party spirit ran very high at 
that time, he said he would send tickets of admission , 
to the Chambers every time there was likely to be 
an “orage.” When I told him what I was writing, 


Ist. Mary Somerville. 


he gave me some interesting memoirs, and lent me 
a mass of manuscripts, with leave to make extracts, 
which were very useful to me. General de La 
Fayette came to town on purpose to invite 
Somerville and me to visit him at La Grange, 
where we found him living like a patriarch, sur- 
rounded by his family to the fourth generation. 
He was mild, highly distinguished, and noble in his 
manners; his conversation was exceedingly in- 
teresting, as he readily spoke of the Revolution in 
which he had taken so active a part. Among other 
anecdotes, he mentioned, that he had sent the prin- 
cipal key of the Bastile to General Washington, 
who kept it under a glass case. He was much in- 
terested to hear that I could, in some degree, claim 
a kind of relationship with Washington, whose 
mother was a Fairfax. Baron Fairfax, the head of 
the family, being settled in America, had joined 
the independent party at the Revolution. 

The two daughters of La Fayette, who had, been 
in prison with him at Olmiitz, were keen politicians, 
and discussed points with a warmth of gesticulation 
which amused Somerville and me, accustomed to 
our cold still manners) The grand-daughters, 
Meslames de Rémusat and de Corcelles, were 
kind friends to me all the time I was in Paris. 

M. Bouvard, whom we had known in London, 


French Savanis. 183 


was now Astronomer-Royal of France, and he invited 
us to dine with him at the Observatory. The table 
was surrounded by savants, whe complimented me 
on the “Mechanism of the Heavens.” I-sat next’ 
M. Poisson, who advised me in the strongest manner 
to write 4 second volume, so as‘to complete the 
account of La Place’s works; and he afterwards 
told Somerville, that there were net twenty men in! 
France who could read my book. M. Arago, who 
was of the party, said, he had not written to thank 
me for my book, because he had been reading it, and 
was busy preparing an account of it for the Journal 
of the Institute. At this party, I made the acquaint- 
ance of the celebrated astronomer, M. ‘Pontécoulant, 
and soon after, of M. La Croix, to whose works I was 
indebted for my knowledge of the highest branches 
of mathematics. M. ‘Prony, and M. Poinsot, came 
to visit me, the latter, an amiable and gentlemanly 
person ; both gave me a copy of their works, 

We had a long visit: from M. Biot, who.seemed 
really glad to renew our old friendship. He was 
making experiments on light, though much out of 
health ; but when we dined with him and Madame 
Biot, he forgot for the time his bad health, and re- 
sumed his former gaiety. They made us promise 
to visit them at their country-house when we re- 
turned to England, as it lay on our road. 


186 Mary Somerville. 


To my infinite regret, La Place had been dead 
some time ; the Marquise was still at Arcoouil, and 
we went to see her. She received us with the 
greatest warmth, and devoted herself to us the 
whole time we were in Paris. As soon as she came 
to town, we went to make a morning visit ; it was 
past five o’clock ; we were shown into a beautiful 
drawing-room, and the man-servant, without knock- 
ing at the door, went into the room which was 
adjacent, and we heard her call out, “J’irai la voir! 
jirai la voir!” and when the man-servant came 
out, he said, “ Madame est désolée, mais elle est en 
chemise.” Madame de La Place was exceedingly 
agreeable, the life of every party, with her cheerful 
gay manner. She was in great favour with the 
Royal Family, and was always welcome when she 
went to visit them in an evening. She received 
once a week, and her grand-daughter, only nineteen, 
lovely and graceful, was an ornament to her parties. 
She was already married to M. de Colbert, whose 
father fell at Corunna. 

No one was more attentive to me than Dr. 
Milne-Edwards, the® celebrated natural historian. 
He was the first Englishman who was elected 
a member of the Institute. I was indebted 
to him for the acquaintance of MM. Ampére and - 
Becquerel. I believe Dr. Edwards was at that time 


Female Society. 187 


writing on Physiology, and, in couversucion, I hap- 
pened to mention that the wild ducks in the fens, at 
Lincolnshire, always build their nests on high tufts 
of grass, or reeds, to save them from sudden floods ; 
and that Sir John Sebright had raised wild ducks 
under a hen, which built their nests on tufts of 
grass as if they had been in the fens. Dr. Edwards 
begged of me to inquire for how many — 
that instinct lasted. 

Monsieur and Madame Gay Lussac lived in. the 
Jardin des Plantes. Madame was only twenty-one, 
exceedingly pretty, and well-educated; she’ read 
English and German, painted prettily, and -was' 
musician. She told me it had been computed, 
that if all the property in France were equally 
divided among the population, each person would 
have 150 francs a-year, or four sous per day ; so 
that if anyone should spend eight sous a-day, some 
other person would starve. 

The Duchesse de Broglie, Madame de Staél’s 
daughter, called, and invited us to her receptions, 
which were the most brilliant in Paris. Tvery 
person of distinction was there, French or foreign, 
generally four or five men to one woman. The 
Duchess was a charming woman, both handsome 
and amiable, and received with much grace. ' The 
Duke was, then, Minister for Foreign Affairs. They 


188 Mary Somerville. 


were remarkable for their domestic virtues, as well 
as for high intellectual cultivation. The part the 
Duke took in politics is so well known, that I need 
not allude to it here. 

At some of these parties [ met with Madame 
Charles Dupin, whom I liked much. When I went 
to return her visit, she received us in her bed-room. 
She was a fashionable and rather elegant woman, 
with perfect manners. She invited us to dinner 
to mect her brother-in-law, the President of the 
Chamber of Deputies. He was animated and 
witty, very fat, and more ugly than his brother, 
but both were clever and agreeable. The President 
invited me to a very brilliant ball he gave, but as it 
was on a Sunday I could not accept the invitation. 
We went one evening with Madame Charles Dupin 
to be introduced to Madame de Rumford. Her first 
husband, Lavoisier, the chemist, had been guillotined 
at the Revolution, and she was now a widow, but 
had lived long separated from her second husband. 
She was enormously rich, and had a magnificent 
palace, garden, and conservatory, in which she gave’ 
balls and concerts. At all the evening parties in 

‘ Paris the best bed-room was lighted up for reception 
like the other rooms. Madame de Rumford was 
capricious and ill-tempered ; however, she received 
me very well, and invited me to meet a very large 


french, Socvety. 189 


party at dinner. Mr, Fenimore Cooper, the Ameri- 
can novelist, with his wife and daughter, were 
among the guests. J found him extremely amiable 
and agreeable, which surprised me, for when I knew 
him, in; England he, was. so touchy that it was 
difficult to converse with him without giving him 
offence. He was introduced to Sir Walter Scott by 
Sir James Mackintosh, who said, in presenting him, 
“Mr. Cooper, allow me to introduce you to your 
great forefather in the art of fiction”; “Sir,” said 
Cooper, with great asperity, “I have.no forefather.” 
Now, though his manners were rough, they were 
quite changed. We saw a great deal of him, and 
I was frequently in his house, and found him per- 
fectly liberal; so much so, that he told us the 
faults of his country, with the greatest frankness, 
yet he -was the champion of America, and hated 
England. 

None were kinder to us than Lord and Lady 
Granville. Lady Granville invited us to all her 
parties ; and when Somerville was obliged to return 
to England, she assured him that in case of any dis- 
turbance, we should find a refuge in the Embassy. 
I went to some balls at the Tuileries with Madame 
de Lafayette Lasteyrie and her sister. The Queen 
Amélie was tall, thin, and very fair, not pretty, 
but infinitely more regal than Adelaide, Queen of 


190 Mary Somerville. 


England, at that time. The Royal Family used to 
walk about in the streets of Paris without any 
attendants. 

Sir Sydney Smith was still in Paris trying to 
renew the order of the Knights Templars. Somer- 
ville and I went with him one evening to a recep- 
tion at the Duchesse d’Abrantés, widow of Junot. 
She was short, thick, and not in the least dis- 
tinguished-looking, nor in any way remarkable. I 
had met her at the Duchesse de Broglie’s, where she 
talked of Junot as if he had been in the next room. 
Sir Sydney was quite covered with stars and crosses, 
and I was amused with the way he threw his 
cloak back to display them as he handed me to the 
carriage. 

I met with Prince Koslofisky everywhere ; he 
was the fattest man I ever saw, a perfect Fal- 
staff. However, his intellect was not smothered, 
for he would sit an hour with me talking 
about mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, and 
what not. He was banished from Russia, and as 
he had been speaking imprudently about politics in 
Paris, he was ordered to go elsewhere; still, he 
lingered on, and was with me one morning when 
Pozzo di Borgo, the Russian Ambassador called. 
Pozzo di Borgo said to me, “Are you aware that 
Prince Kosloffsky has left Paris?” “Oh yes,” I 


_ Legetimasts, 191 


said, “I regret it much.” He took the hint, and 
went away directly. : 

I had hitherto been entirely among the Liberal 
set. How it came tliat I was invited to dine with 
M. Héricourt de Thury, I do not remember. M. de 
Thury was simple in his manners, and full of in- 
formation ; he had been Director of the Mines under 
Napoleon, and had charge of the Public Buildings 
under Louis XVIII. and Charles X., but resigned 
his charges at the Revolution of July. At this time 
the Duchesse de Berry was confined in the citadel of 
Blaye. She had a strong party in Paris, who 
furiously resented the treatment she met with. 
M. de Thury was a moderate Legitimiste, but 
Madame was ultra. When I happened to mention 
that we had been staying with Lafayette, at La 
Grange, she was horrified, and begged of me not to 
talk politics, or mention where we had been or 
else some of her guests would leave the room. The 
ladies of that party would not dance or go to any 
gay party ; they had a part of the theatre reserved 
for themselves ; they wore high dark dresses with 
long sleeves, called “Robes de Résistance,” and 
even the Legitimiste newspapers appeared with 
black edges. They criticised those who gave balls, 
and Lady Granville herself did not escape their 
censure. The marriage of the Duchesse de Berry to 


192 Mary Somerville. 


the Marchese Lucchesi Paili made an immense sen- 
sation ; it was discussed in the salons in a truly 
French manner; it was talked of in the strects ; 
the Robes de Résistance were no longer worn, and 
the Legitimiste newspapers went out of mourning. 

All parties criticised the British Administration 
in Ireland. A lady sitting by me at a party said, 
“No wonder so many English prefer France to so 
odious a country as England, where the people are 
oppressed, and even cabhanes are raised in hot- 
Neds.” I laughed,-and said, “I like England very 
well, for all that.” An old gentleman, who was 
standing near us, said, ‘“ Whatever terms two 
countries may be on, it behoves us individuals to 
observe good manners ;” and when I went away, this 
gentleman handed me to the carriage, though I hed 
never seen him before. 

The Marquise de La Place was commissioned by 
Dr. Majendie to invite me to meet her and Madame 
Gay Lussac at dinner. I was very unwilling to go ; 
for I detested the man for his wanton cruelties, but 
I found I could not refuse on account of these 
ladies. There was a large party of savants, agreeable 
and gentlemanly; but Majendie himself had the 
coarsest manners; his conversation was horridly 
professional ; many things were said and subjects 
discussed not fit for women to hear. What a con- 


a Majendie and Bell. 193. 


trast the refined and amiable Sir Charles Bell formed 
with Majendie! Majendie and the French school of 
anatomy made themselves odious by their cruelty, 

and failed to prove the true anatomy of the brain 
and nerves, while Sir Charles Bell did succeed, and 

thus made one of the greatest physiological dis- 

coveries of the age without torturing animals, which 

his gentle and kindly nature abhorred. To Lady 

Bell I am indebted for a copy of her husband’s Life. 

She is one of my few dear and valued friends who 

are still alive. 

* * ‘* * * 

While ‘in Paris, I lost my dear mother. ° She died 
at the age of ninety, attended by my brother 
Henry. She was still a fine old lady, with few 
grey hairs. The fear of death was almost hereditary 
in the Clarters family, and my mother possessed it 
in no ‘small degree; yet when it came, she was 
perfectly composed and prepared for it. I have 
never had that fear ; may God grant that I may be 
as calm and prepared as she was. 

_ * * _ * 

I was in better health, but still so delicate that I 
wrote in bed till one o’clock. The “Connexion. of 
the Physical Sciences” was a tedious work, and 
the proof sheets had to be sent through the Embassy. 

M. Arago told me that David, the sculptor, 


+ ° 


194 Mary Someryille, 


wished to make a medallion of me ; so he came ani. 
sat an hour with me, and pleased me by his in- 
telligent conversation and his enthusiasm for art. 
A day was fixed, and he took my profile on slate 
with pink wax, in a wonderfully short time. He 
made me a present of a medallion in bronze, nicely 
framed, and two plaster casts for my daughters. 
* * * _* * , 

I frequently went to hear the debates in the 
Chambers, and occasionally took my girls, as I 
thought it was an excellent lesson in French.’ As 
patty spirit ran very high, the scenes that occurred 
Were very amusing. A member, m the course of 
his speech, happening to mention the word “ liberté,” 
the President Dupin rang the bell, called out “Stop, 
& propos de liberté,” . . . jumped down from his 
seat, sprung into the tribune, pushed out the deputy, 
and made a long speech himself. 

The weather being fine, we made excursions 
in the neighbourhood. At Savres I saw two 
pieces of china; on one of them was a gnu, on 
the other a zebra. Somerville had told me that 
soon after his return from his African expedition, he 
had given the original drawings to M. Brongniart 
then director of the manufactory. 

Baron Louis invited me to spend a day with him 
and his niece, Mademoiselle de Rigny, at his country 


Baron Louis. 395 


chouse, not far from Paris. I went with Madame 
dle la Place, and we set, out early, to be in time for 
hreakfast. The -road lay through the Forest of 
Vincennes, The Baron’s park, which was close’ to 
the village of Petit-Brie, was very large, and richly 
wooded ; there were gardens, “hot-houses, and all 
the luxuries of an English nobleman’s residence. 
The house was handsome, with a magnificent library ; 
I remarked on the table the last numbers of the 
* Edinburgh” and “Quarterly” Reviews. Both 
the Baron and his niece were simple and kind. 
I was greatly taken with both; the Baron had all 
the quiet elegance of the old school, and his niecé 
had great learning and the mannegs of a woman of 
fashion. She lived in perfect retirement, having 
suffered much in ,the time of the Revolution. 
They had both eventful lives; for Baron Louis, who 
had been in orders, and Talleyrand officiated at the 
Champs de Mars when Louis the Sixteenth took 
the oath to maintain the constitution. Field- 
Marshal Macdonald, Duc de Tarante, and his son- 
in-law, the Duc de Massa ; Admiral de Rigny, 
Minister of Marine ; M. Barthe, Garde des Sceaux ; 
and the Bouvards, father and son, formed the party. 
After spending a most delightful and interesting 
day, we drove to Paris in bright moonlight. 

Our friends in Paris and at La Grange had been- 


196 Mary Somerville. 


so kind to us that we were very sad when we went 
to express our gratitude and take leave of them. 
We only stayed two days at La Grange, and when 
we returned to Paris, Somerville went home and 
my son joined us, when we made a rapid tour in 
Switzerland, the orily remarkable eveat of which 
was a singular atmospheric phenomenon we saw 
on the top of the Grimsel. On the clouds -of 
xapour below us we saw our shadows projected, of 
giant proportions, and each person saw his own 
shadow surrounded by a bright circle of prismatic 
colours. It is not uncommon in mountain regions. 
* 2 * * * 


[General Lafaygtte and all his family were extremely 
kind to my mother. He was her constant visitor, and 
we twice visited him at his country house, La Grange. 
He wished to persuade my mother to go there for some 
days, after our return from Switzerland, which we did not 
accomplish. The General wrote the following letter to 
my father :— 


FROM LAFAYETTE TO DR. SOMERVILLE. 


La GRANGE, 31st October, 1833. 
[y pEaR Sir, 

I waited to answer your kind letter, for the 
arrival of Mr. Coke’s* precious gift, which nobody could 
higher value, on every account, than the grateful farmer 
on whom it has been bestowed. The heifers and bull 


* 
* Mr. Coke, of Holkham, afterwards Ear! of Leicester. 


Lafayette. 197 


* 3 

are beautiful ; they have reached La Grange in the best 
order, and shall be tenderly attended to. . . . It has been 
a great disappointment not te see Mrs. Somerville and 
the young ladies before their departure. Had we not de- 
pended on their kind visit, we should have gone to take 
leave ofthem. They have had the goodness to regret the 
impossibility gp come before their departure. Beso kind 
as to receive the affectionate friendship and good wishes 
of a family who are happy in the ties of mutual attachment 
that bind us to you and them. . . . Public interest is now 
fixed upon the Peninsula, and while dynasties are at civil 
war, and despotic or juste milieu cabinets seem to agree 
in the fear of a genuine development of popular institu- 
tions, the matter for the friends of freedom is to know 
how far the great cause of Europe shall be forwarded by 
these royal squabbles. ; 

We shall remain at La Grange untijgthe opening of the 
session, hoping that, notwithstanding your and the ladies’ 
absence, your attention will not be quite withdrawn from 
our interior affairs—the sympathy shall be reciprocal. 

With all my heart, I am " 
Your affectionate friend, 
LaFayETtTe. 


és 
CHAPTER XIII. 


RElyos my saunas —enssen FROM HALLAM—TREATISE ON THE FORM 
. AND QOTAMIOM BF THE EARTH AND PLANETS—SECOND EDITION OF 
id \ ““CONNEXION OF PHYSICAL SCIENCES” — LETTERS PROM MARIA 
EL. EWORTH, MISS BERRY, LORD BROUGHAM, MRS. MARCET, ADMIRAL 
»SMYTH—DOUBLE STARS—ECLIPSE OF DOUBLE STARS—LETTER FROM 
ADMIRAL @MYTH—SIR WILLIAM HEESCHEL—NEBULZ—LETTER FROM 
Lv1.D ROSSE— LETTER FROM SIR JOWN HERSCHEL— SIR JAMES 
« @UTH’S OBSERVATORY—MR. JOHN MURRAY—MISS BERRY—LORD 
‘@ BEDLEY—MR, BOWDITCH AND OTHER DISTINGUISHED AMERICANS— 
MRS. BKOWNING WASHINGTON —- LETTER FROM THE REV. Dk. 
TUCKEEMAN —SIR WILLIAM FAIRFAX ATTACKED BY HIGHWAYMEN, 


As soon as we returned to Chelsea, the “Con- 
nexion of the Physical Sciences” was published. It 
was Aedicated to Queen Adelaide, who thanked me 
fur it ata drawing-room. Some time after Somerville 
and I went to Scotland ; we had travelled all night 
in the mail coach, and when it became light, a 
*entleman who was in the carriage said to Somer- 
ville, “Is not the lady opposite to me Mrs. Somer- 
ville, whose bust I saw at Chantrey’s?” The 
gentleman was Mr, Sopwith, of Newcastle-on-Tyne, 
a civil and mining engineer. He was distinguished 
for scientific knowledge, and had been in London 


The Egyptian Year. 199 


to give information to a ‘parliamentary eotnmittee, 
He travelled faster ‘than* we, “did; and when ’ WE 
arrived at Newcastle he was waiting to‘take us to: 
his house, where we were hospitably reaeived ty 
Mrs. Sopwith. His ‘conyersation. was | highly in-, 
teresting, and to him I was: andéhted* for much 
information on mining generally; ang on the’ qineral 
wealth of Great Britain, while wiiting ‘offPhiysical’ 
Geography. Many years after he ané Mas. Sopwith, 
came and saw me at Naples which gave me ‘much 
pleasure. He was unlike any other traveller I 
ever met with, so profound and original were his- 
observations on all he saw. s 

* * * * 

On coming home I found that I had made an 
error in the first edition of the “Physical Sciences,” in 
giving 365 days 6 hours as the length of the civil 
year of the ancient Egyptians. My friend Mr. 
Hallam, the historian, wrote to me, proving from 
history and epochs of the chronology of the ancient 
Egyptians, that their civil year was only 365 days. 
I was grateful to that great and amiable man for 
copies of all his works while he was alive, and I am 
obliged to his daughter for an excellent likeness of 
him, now that he is no more. 


200 Mary Somerville., 


FROM HENRY HALLAM, ESQ, TOMBS. SOMERVELLE, - 
Wrirove'Stieer. arch 1h 1835. 

My pear Manan, 

As you will probably .sdon .be called upon for 
another edition of your excellent work on the “ Connexion 
of the Physical Sciences,” I thik you will excuse the 
liberty I take in mentioning to you one passage which 
seems to have escaped your attention in so arduous a 
labour. It is in page 104, where you have this sen- 
tence -— 

“The Egvptians estimated the year at 365d. 6h., 
by which they lost one year in every 14,601, their Sothiac 
period. They determined the length of their year by 
the heliacal rising of Sirius, 2782 years before the Chris- 
tian era, which is the earliest epoch of Egyptian chron- 
ology.” ; 

The Egyptian civil year was of 365 days only, as we 
find in Herodotus, and I apprehend there is no dispute 
about it. The Sothiac period, or that cycle in which the 
heliacal rising of Sirius passed the whole civil year, and 
took place again on the same day, was of 1461 years, not 
14,601. If they had adopted a year of 365d. 6h., 
this period would have been more than three times 
14,601; the excess of the sidereal year above that being 
only 9' 9% which will not amount to a day in Jess than 
about 125 years. 

I do not see how the heliacal rising of Sirius in any one 
year could help them to determine its length. By com- 
paring two successive years they could of course have got 
at a sidereal year; but this is what they did not do; 
hence the irregularity which produced the canicular cycle. . 


Unpublished Writing. 201 


- The commencement: of, hat cycle is placed by ancient 
chionologers i in’ 1322 A. ‘8 “It seems not correct to call 
2782 a.c. ‘the: ‘dailjest, “epoch of Egyptian chronology,” 

‘fo? weshavg none of their’ chronology nearly so old, and 
in fact -tto- chronology, propérly so called, has yet been 
made-out by our Egyptian‘researches. It is indeed cer- 
tain that, if the reckoning by heliacal risings of Sirius did 
not begin ir 1822, we must go nearly 1460 years back for 
its origin; since it must Htave been adopted when that 
event preceded only for a short time the annual inunda- 
tion of the Nile. . But, according to some, the year 1822 
a.c. fell during the reign of Sésostris, to whom Herodotus 
ascribes several regulations connected with the rising of 
the Nile. Certainly, 2782 a.c. is a more remote era than 
we are hitherto warranted to assume for any astronomical 
observation. 

Believe me, dear Mrs. Someryjlle, 
Very truly yours, 
Henry /Hauiam. 


I refer you to Montucla, if you have any doubt about 
the Egyptian year being of 865 days without bissextile of 
any kind. 


I had sent a copy of the “ Mechanism of the 
Heavens” to M. Poisson soon after it was published, 
and I had reeeived a letter from him dated 30th 
May, 1832, advising me to complete the work by 
writing a volume on the form and rotation of the 
earth and planets. Being again strongly advised to 


22 Mary Somerville, 


do so while in Paris, E now began the work, and, in 
consequence, I.was led into a correspondence with 
Mr. Ivory, who.had written on the subject, and also 
with Mr. Francis -Baily, on the density and com- 
pression of the earth. My work was extensive, for 
it comprised the analytical attraction of spheroids, 
the form and rotation of the earth, the tides of the 
ocean and atmosphere, and small undulations. 

When this was finished, I had nothing to do, 
and as I preferred analysis to all other subjects, 
I wrote a work of 246 pages on curves and sur- 
faces of the second and higher orders. While 
writing this, con amore, ® new edition of the 
: Physical Sciences ” was much needed, so I put 
on high pressure and worked at both. Had these 
two manuscripts been published at that time, they 
might have been of use; I do not remember why 
they were laid aside, and furgotten-till I found 
them years afterwards among my papers. Long 
after the time I am writing about, while at Naples, 
I amused myself by repairing the time-worn parts 
of these manuscripts, and was surprised to find that 
in my eighty-ninth year I still retained facility in 
the “Calculus.” 

The second edition of the “ ‘ Physical Sciences’ 
was dedicated to my dear friend, Sir John Herschel. 
It went through nine editions, and has been trans- 


The Duchess of Kent. 2038 


lated into German and Italian: “The book: went 
through‘ various .editions in -the United .States, to 
the honours but not to the profit, of the author. 
However, the publisher wbligingly-sent me a copy. 
I must say that profit was never an object with 
me: I wrote because it was impossible for me to 
be idle. ; 

I had the honour of presenting a copy of my 
hook to the Duchess of Kent at a private audience. 
The Duchess and Princess Victoria were alone, and 
received me very graciously, and conversed for half 
an hour with.me. As I mentioned before, I saw 
the young Princess crowned: youthful, almost child- 
like as she was, she went through the imposing 
ceremony with all the dignity of a Queen. 


- [A few letters from some of my mother’s friends, 
written at this period, may prove of interest. They 
are chiefly written to thank her for copies of the Pre- 
liminary Dissertation or of the ‘‘ Physical Sciences.” 
One from Lord Brougham concerns my mother’s esti- 
mate of the scientific merit of Dr. Young, for whom she 
had the sincerest admiration, and considered him one 
of the first philosophers and discoursers of the age. 


FROM MISS EDGEWORTH TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
Epewonratown, May 31st, 1882. 
My pear Mrs. Somwervite, 
There is one satisfaction at least in giving 
knowledge to the ignorant, to those who know their 


204 Mary Somerville. 


ignorance at least, that they are grateful and humble. 
You should have my grateful and humble thanks long 
ago for the favour—the honour—you did me by sending 
me that Preliminary Dissertation, in which there is so 
much knowledge, but that I really wished to read it over 
and over again at some intervals of time, and to have 
the pleasure of seeing my sister Harriet read it, before 
I should write to you. She has come to us, and has 
just been enjoying it, as I knew she would. For* my 
part, I was long in the state of the boa constrictor after 
a full meal—and I am but just recovering the powers of 
motion. My mind was so distended by the magnitude, 
the immensity, of what you put into it! I am afraid 
that if you had been aware how ignorant I was you would 
not have sent me this dissertation, because you would 
have felt that you were throwing away much that I 
could not understand, and that could be better bestowed 
on scientific friends capable of judging of what they 
admire. I can only assure you that you have given me 
a great deal of pleasure ; that you have enlarged my con- 
ception of the sublimity of the universe, beyond any ideas 
I had ever before been enabled to form. * 

The great simplicity of your manner of writing, I may 
say of your mind, which appears in your writing, parti- 
cularly suits the scientific sublume—which would be 
destroyed by what is commonly called fine writing. You 
trust sufficiently to the natural interest of your subject, 
to the importance of the facts, the beauty of the whole, 
and the adaptation of,the means to the ends, in every 
part of the immense whole. This reliance upon your 
reader's feeling along with you, was to me very gratifying. 
The ornaments of eloquence dressing out a sublime 
subject are just so many proofs either of bad taste in the 


Miss Edgeworth. 205 


orator, or of distrust and contempt of the taste of those 
whom he is trying thus to captivate. 

I suppose nobody yet has completely mastered the 
tides, therefore I may well content myself with my in- 
ability to comprehend what relates to them. But instead 
o plaguing you with an endless enumeration of my difli- 
culties, I had better tell you some of the passages which 
gave me, ignoramus as I am, peculiar pleasure... . . . 
I am afraid I shall transcribe your whole book if I go 
on to tell you all that has struck me, and you would not 
thank me for that—you, who have so little vanity, and 
so much to do better with your time than to read my 
ignorant admiration. But pray let me mention to you 
a few of the passages that amused my imagination 
particularly, viz., Ist, the inhabitant of Pallas going 
round his world—or who might go—in five or six 
hours in one of our steam carriages ; 2nd, the moderate- 
sized man who would weigh two. tons at the surface 
of the sun—and who would weigh only a few pounds 
at the surface of the four new planets, and would be 
so ight as to find it impossible to stand from the 
excess of muscular force! I think a very entertaining 
dream might be made of a man’s visit to the sun and 
planets—these ideas are all like dreamy feelings when one 
is a little feverish. I forgot to mention (page 58) a passage 
on the propagation of sound. It is a beautiful sentence, 
as well as a sublime idea, “‘so that at a very small height 
above the surface of the earth, the noise of the tempest 
ceases and the thunder is heard no more in those bound- 
less regions, where the heavenly bodies accomplish their 
periods in eternal and sublime silence.” : 

Excuse me in my trade of sentence-monge~ *~7 cite 


206 Mary Somerville. 


me, dear Mrs. Somerville, truly your obliged and truly 


your affectionate friend, 
Maria Epceworts. 


I have persuaded your dear curly-headed friend, 
Harriet, to add her own observations; she sends her 
love to. you; and I know you love her, otherwise I would 
not press her to write her own say. 


FROM MISS JOANNA BAILLIE TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
HAMPSTEAD, February lst, 1832. 


aly DEAR Mrs. SomsRVILLE, 


I am now, thank God! recovered from a very 
heavy disease, but still very weak. I will not, however, 
delay any longer my grateful acknowledgments for your 
very flattering gift of your Preliminary Dissertation. 
Indeed, I feel myself greatly honoured by receiving such 
a mark of regard from one who has done more to remove 
the light estimation in which the capacity of women is 
too often held, than all that has been accomplished by 
the whole sisterhood of poetical damsels and novel- 
writing authors. I could say much more on this subject 
were I to follow my own feelings; but I am still so 
weak that writing is a trouble to me, and I have nearly 
done all that I am able. 

God bless and prosper you! 


Miss Berry. 207 


FROM MISS BERRY TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
BELLEVUE, 18th September, 1884. 
| My pean Mrs. Somervitye, \ , 

I haye just finished reading your book, which has 
entertained me extremely, and at the same time, I hope, 
improved my moral character in the Christian virtue of 
humility. These must appear to you such odd results— 
so little“like those -produced on the great majority of 
your readers, that you must allow me to explain them to 
you. Humbled, I must: be, by finding my own intellect 
unequal to following, beyond a, first step, the explanations 
by which you seek to make easy to comprehension the 
marvellous phenomena of the ‘universe—humbled,! by 
feeling the intellectual diiference between,, you and me, 
placing you as much above me in the scale of reasoning 
beings, as J am above my dog. Still I rejoice with 
humility at feeling myself, in that order of underxstand- 
ings which, although utterly incapable of, following the 
chain of your reasonings, calculations, and inductions-— 
utterly deprived of the powers necessary sic ,ituy-ad 
astra—am yet informed, enlightened, and entertained with 
the series of sublime truths to which you conduct me. 

In some foggy morning of November, I shall dyive out 
to you at Chelsea and surprise you with my ignorance 
of science, by asking you to explain to me some things 
which you will wonder any one can have so long existed 
without knowing. In the mean time, I wish you could 
read in any combination of the stars the probability of 
our often having such a season as this, of uninterrupted 
summer since April last, and when last weelf it was 
sobering into autumn, has now returned Wo enter 


+208 Mary Somervelle. 


‘summer again. The thermometer was at 83° in the 
shade yesterday, and to-day promises to be as much. 
We are delighted with our two months’ residence at this 
place, which we shall see with regret draw towards a 


close the end of this month. October we mean to spend - 


at Paris, before we return to the nebulositics of London.. 


During my residence in Paris, before we came here, I 
never had the good luck to meet with your friend M. 
Arago; had I not been reading your book, I should 
have begged you to give me a letter for him, But as it 
is, and as my stay at Paris will now be so short, I shall 
content myself with looking up ata respectful distance to 
all your great fixed stars of science, excepting always 
yourself, dear Mrs. Somerville.. No “disturbing influ- 
ence” will, I hope, ever throw me out of the orbit of 
your intimacy and friendship, whose value, believe me, is 
most duly and accurately calculated by your ignorant 
but very affectionate friend, 
M. Berry. 


FROM LORD BROUGHAM TO MRS. SOMERVILLF, 
1834, 


My pear Mrs. Somerviire, 


Many thanks for the sheets, which I have read 
witlf equal pleasure and instruction as those I formerly 
had from you. One or two things I could have troubled 
vou with, but they are of little moment. I shall note them. 
The only one that is at all material relates to the way you 
mention Dr. Young—not that I object to the word “ illus- 
trious,” or as applied to him. But as you don’t give it 
to one considerably more so, it looks either as if you over- 
rated Lim, or underrated Davy, or (which I suppose to be 


Mrs. Marcet. 209+ 


the truth) as if you felt Young had not had his due slfhre of 
lionour, and desired to make it up to his memory. Observe 
I give him a very high place—but Davy’s discoveries are 
both of more unquestioned originality and more un- 
doubtedly true—perhaps I should say, more brought to 
a close. The alkalis and the principle of the safety 
lamp are concluded and fixed, the undulation is in pro- 
gress, and somewhat uncertain as to how and where it 
mayend. You.will please to observe that I reckon both 
those .capital discoveries of Davy the fruit of inquiry, 
and not at all of chance—for,-as to the lamp, it is plain ; 
and as to the metals, if you look at the inquiries that 
immediately preceded, you will see he was thereby led 
to the alkalis. Igdeed, I well remember saying, when 
I read them, “‘ He will analyse lime and barytes.” Iam 
quite ready to admit his extreme folly in some things, 
but that is nothing to the present purpose. 
; Yours, 
H. B. 
(Henry Brougham.) 


FROM MRS. MARCET TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
.  GEnRva, 6th April, 1834, 
Dear Mrs. SomMERvILLE, ; \d 


I am desired by Professor Prevost to inform 
you that you were elected an honorary member of the 
Société de Physique et d'Histoire Naturelle de Genéve 
on the 3rd April, and that a diploma will be forwarded 
to you by the earliest opportunity. After all the honours 
you have received, this little feather is hardly worthy of 
waving in your plume, but I am glad that Geneva should 


, P 
~ ke 


210 Mary Somervitie. 


know how to appreciate your merit. You receive great 
honours, my dear friend, but that which you confer on our 
sex is stil] greater, for with talents and acquirements of 
masculine magnitude you unite the most sensitive and 
retiring modesty of the female sex; indeed, I know not 
any woman, perhaps I might say, any human being, who 
would support so much applause without feeling the 
weakness of vanity. Forgive me for allowing my pen 
to run away with this undisgujsed praise, it looks so 
much like compliment, but I assure you it comes 
straight from the heart, and you must know that it is 
fully deserved. .... I know not whether you have 
heard of the death of Professor de la Rive (the father) ; 
it was an unexpected blow, which has fallen heavily on 
all his family. It is indeed a great loss to Geneva, 
both as a man of science and a most excellent ¢jtizen. 

M. Rossi* has left us to occupy the chair of political 
economy of the late M. Say, at Paris; his absence is 
sadly felt, and it is in vain to look around for any one 
eapable of replacing him. .. . .. 

Yours affectionately, 
J. Mancer. 


FROM ADMIRAL W. H. SMYTH TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
‘ Crescent, BeprorD, October 3rd, 1835, 
My pear Mapa, 

As an oppoyfinity offers of sending a note to 
town, I beg to meffgon that I have somewhat impatiently 
waited for some appearance of settled weather, in order 

* M. Pellegrino Bost dierwards Minister of France at Rome, then 
Prime i to Pig the Ninth; murdered in 1848 on the steps 
W the Cancelleria, at Rome. 


Admiral Smyth. 211 


to press your coming here to inspect Halley’s comet, 
before it should have become visible to the unassisted 
eye. That unerring monitor, however, the barometer, 
held forth no hope, and the ceaseless traveller is already 
an object of conspicuous distinction without artificial 
aid, except, perhaps, to most eyes an opera-glass, mag- 
nifying three-or four times, will be found a pleasant 
addition. It is now gliding along with wonderful celerity, 
and the nucleus is very bright. It is accompanied with 
a great luminosity, and the nucleus. has changed its 
position therein ; that is, on the 29th August, the nucleus 
was like a minute star near the centre of the nebulous 
envelope; on the 2nd September it appeared in the n. f. 
quarter, and latterly it has been in the s. f. 

| How remarkable that the month of August this year 
should rattle Halley’s name throughout the globe, in 
identity with an astonishing scientific triumph, and that 
in the selfsame month the letters of Flamsteed should 
have appeared! How I wish some one would give us a 
life of Newton, with all the interesting documents that 
exist of his labours! Till such appears, Flamsteed’s 
statements, thougky bearing strong internal evidence of 
truth, are ex-parte, and it is evident his anxiety made 
* him prone to impute motives which he could not prove. 
The book is painfully interesting, but except in all that 
relates to the personal’ character of Flamsteed, I could 
almost have wished the documents had been destroyed. 
People of judgment well know thatymen without faults 
are monsters, but vulgar minds de¥Zht in seeing the 
standard of human excellence lowered. 

Dear Madim, 
Yourg faithfully; Yr 
W. H. Suyrra. 


_a 


212 Mary Somerville, 


We were deprived of the society of Sir John and 
Lady Herschel for four years, because Sir John took 
his telescope and other instruments to the Cape of 
Good Hope, where he went, accompanied by his 
family, for the purpose of observing the celestial 
phenomena of the southern hemisphere. . There are 
more than 6,000 double stars in the northern hemis- 
phere, in a large proportion of which the angle of 
position and distance between the two stars have 
been measured, and Sir John determined, in the 
same manner, 1081 in the southern hemisphere, and 
I believe many additions have been made to them 
since that time. In many of these one star revolves 
rapidly round the other. The elliptical orbits and 
periodical times of sixteen or seventeen of these 
stellar systems have been determined. In Gamma 
Virginis the two stars are nearly of the same magni- 
tude, and were so far apart in the middle of the 
last century that they were considered to be quite 
independent of each other. Since tHen they have 
been gradually approaching one another, till, in 
March, 1836, I had a letter from Admiral Smyth, 
informing me that he had seen one of the stars 
eclipse the other, from his observatory at Bedford. 


Occultation of a Star. 2.18 


FROM ADMIRAL SMYTH TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
Crescent, Beprorp, March 26th, 1836. 


My pear Manan, 


. Knowing the great interest you take in sidereal 
astronomy, of which so little is yet known, I trust it will 
not be an intrusion to tell you of. a new, extraordinary, 
and very unexpected fact, in the complete occultation of 
one “‘ fixed’ star by another, under circumstances which 
admit of no possible doubt or equivocation. 

You are aware that I have been measuring the position 
and distance of the two stars y' and 7 Virginis, which 
are both nearly of similar magnitudes, and also, that they 
have approximated to each other very rapidly. They were 
very close last year, and I expected to find they had 
crossed each other at this apparition, but to my surprise 
I find they have become a fair round disc, which my 
highest powers will not elongate~in fact, a single star! 
I shall watch with no litile interest for the reappearance 
of the second y. 

My dear madam, 
Your truly obliged servant, 
W. H. Suyru. 


This eclipse was also seen by Sir John Herschel at 
the Cape of Good Hope, as well as by many astrono- 
mers in Europe provided with instruments of great 


214 Mary Somerville. 


optical power. In 1782 Sir William Herschel saw 
one of the stars of Zeta Herculis eclipse the 
other. 

-In the “Connexion of the Physical Sciences” I 
have given an abridged account of St John 
Herschel’s most remarkable discoveries in the 
southern hemisphere ; but I may mention here thats 
he determined the position and made accurate draw- 
ings of all the nebule that were distinctly visible in 
his 20 ft. telescope. The work he published will be 
a standard for ascertaining the changes that may 
take place in these mysterious abjects for ages to 
come. Sir William Herschel had determined the 
places of 2,500 nebulz in the northern hemisphere ; 
they were examined by his son, and drawings made 
of some of the most remarkable, but when these 
nebulz were viewed through Lord Rosse’s telescope, 
they presented a very different appearance, showing 
that the apparent form of the nebule depends upon 
the space-penetrating power of the telescope, a cir- 
eumstance of vital importance in observing the 
changes which time may produce on these wonder- 
ful objects. 


[Long afterwards Lord Rosse wrote in reply to some 
questions which my mother had addressed to him on 
this subject :— 


The Earl of Rosse. 215 


FROM THE EARL OF ROSSE Td MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
CASTLE, PARSONSTOWN, June 12th, 1844. 


Dear Mrs. SomeRvILLE, 


I have very reluctantly postponed so long reply- 
ing to your inquiries respecting the telescope, but there 
were some points upon which I was anxious td ‘be 
enabled to’ speak more precisely. The instrument we 
are now using is 3 feet aperture, and 27 feet focus, 
and in the greater proportion of the nebule which have 
been observed with it some, new details have been 
brought out. Perhaps the most interesting general 
result is that, as far as we have gone, increasing optical 
power has enlarged the lst of clusters, by diminishing 
that of the nebule properly so-called. Such has always 
been the case since the nebulg have been observed with 
telescopes, and although it would be unsafe to draw the 
inference, it is impossible not to feel some expectation 
that with sufficient optical power the nebule would all 
be reduced into clusters. _Perhaps the two of thé most 
remarkable of the resolved, nebule are Fig., 26 and 
Fig. 55. In several of the planetary nebule we have 
discovered a star or bright point in the centre, and a 
filamentous edge, which is just the appearance which & 
cluster with a highly condensed centre would: present in 
4 small instrument. For instance,, Figs. 47 and, $2. 
We have also found that many of the nebulez haye not 
a symmetrical form, as they appear to have in inferior 
instruments; for instance, Fig. 81 is a cluster with long 
resolvable filaments from its southern extremity, and 
Fig. 85 is an oblong cluster ‘with a' bright centre. 
Fig. 45 is an annular nebula, like Herschel’s: drawing 


216 Mary Somerville. 


of the annular nebula in Lyra. I have sent drawings 
of a few of these objects to the Royal Society, they 
were forwarded a few days ago. We have upon the 
whole as yet observed but little with the telescope of 
8 feet aperture. You recollect Herschel said that it 
was a good observing year, in which there were 100 
hours fit for observing, and of the average of our hours 
I have not employed above 80. We have been for the 
last two years engaged in constructing a telescope of 
6 feet aperture and 52 feet fucus, and it would have 
been impossible to have bestowed the necessary atten- 
tion upon it had we made a business of observing. 
That instrument is nearly finished, and I hope it will 
effect something for astronomy. The unequal refrac- 
tion of the atmosphere will limit its powers, but how 
far remains to be ascertained. . . . . Lady Rosse joins 
me in very kind remembrances and believe me to be, 
Dear Mrs. Somerville, 
Yours very truly and ever, 
Rosse. 


‘Sir John Herschel wrote to my father from the 
Cape :— . 


FROM SIR JOHN HERSCHEL TO MR. SOMERVILLE. 
PELDRAUSEN, NEAR WYNBERG, C.G.H., July 17th, 1830. 
My pear Sowervine, 


Since our arrival here, I have,-I know in many 
instances, maintained or established the character of a 
bad correspondent ; and really it is not an inconvenient 
character to have established. Ouly, in your case, I 


flerschel at the Cape. 217 


‘should be very sorry to appear in that, or any other 
negligent or naughty light; but you, I know, will allow 
for the circumstances which have occasioned my silence. 
Meanwhile, I am not sorry that the execution of an 
intention I had more than once formed should have been 
deferred, till we read in the papers of the well-judged and 
highly creditable notice (creditable I mean to the govern- 
ment pro tempore) which His Majesty has been pleased to 
take of Mrs. Somerville’s elaborate works. Although 
the Royal notice is not quite so swift as the lightning in 
the selection of its objects, it agrees with it in this, that 
it is-nttracted by the loftiest ; and though what she hag 
performed may seem so natural and easy to herself, that 
she may blush to find it fame ; all the rest of the world 
will agree with me in rejoicing that merit of that kind is 
felt and recognised at length in the high places of the 
earth. This, and the honourable mention ‘of Airy by 
men of both parties in the House of Commons about the 
same time, are things that seem to mark the progress of 
the age we live'in; and I give Peel credit for his tact in 
pereeiving this mode of making a favourable impression 
on the public mind. 

We are all going on very comfortably, and continue to 
like the Cape as a place of (temporary) residence as much 
or more than at first. The climate is so very delicious. 
ae tealfiee The stars are most propitious, and, astronomi- 
cally speaking, I can now declare the climate to be most 
excellent. Night after night, for weeks and months, 
with hardly an interruption, of perfect astronomical 
weather, dists of stars reduced almost to points, and 
tranquilly gliding across the field of your telescope. It 
is really a treat, such as occurs once or perhaps twice a- 
year in England—hardly more. I had almost forgotten 


218 Mary Somerville. 


that by a recent vote of the Astronomical Society I can 
now claim Mrs. Somerville as a colleague. Pray make 
my compliments to her in that capacity, and tell her 
that I hope to meet her there at some future session. . ... 
Yours very faithfully, ‘ 
H. W. Herscuen. 
To WILLtaM SomMERYILLE, Esq. 


Spectrum analysis has shown that there is 
a vast quantity of self-luminous gaseous matter 
in space, incapable of being reduced into stars, 
however powerful the telescope through which 
it is observed. Hence the old opinion once more 
prevails, that this is the matter of which the sun 
and stellar systems have been formed, and that 
other stellar systems are being formed by slow, con- 
tinuous condensation. The principal constituents 
of this matter are, the terrestrial gases, hydrogen, 
and nitrogen. The yellow stars, like the sun, con- 
tain terrestrial matter. The nebulous and stellar 
eonstituents were chiefly discovered by Dr. Huggins. 

Somerville and I were always made welcome by Sir 
James South, and at Camden Hill I learnt the method 
of observing, and sometimes made observations my- 
self on the double stars and binary systems, which,. 
worthless as they were, enabled me to describe better 
what others haddone. One forenoon Somerville and 
I went to pay a visit to Lady South. Sir James, who 


Sceentifie Soctety. 219 - 


was present, said, “Come to the observatory, and 
measure the distance of Mercury from the’ sun ; for 
they are in close approximation, and I wish to see 
what kind of observation you will make.” ' It was 
erroneous, as might have been expected ;‘but when I 
took the mean of several observations, it differed but 
little from that which Sir James South had made ; 3 
and here I learnt practically the importance of taking 
the mean of approximate quantities. , 
” » * * * 

Dr. Wollaston, Dr. Young, and the Katers died 
before I became an author; Lord Brougham was 
one of the last of my scientific contemporaries, all 
the rest were younger than myself, and with this 
younger’ set, as with their’ predecessors, we' had 
most agreeable and constant intercourse. Although 
we lived so much in scientific society we had all 
along been on the most friendly and intimate terms 
with the literary society of the day, such as Hallam, 
Milman, Moore, Malthus, &c., &c. ' The highly in- 
tellectual conversation of these was enlivened by the 
brilliant wit of my early friend, Sydney Smith, who 
was loved and admired by every one. His daughter 
‘married our friend Sir Henry Holland, the distin- 
guished physician, well known for his eminent 
literary and scientific acquirements as well as for his 
refined taste. © 


229 Mary Somerville. 


No house in London was more uvopuauie aud 
agreeable than that of the late Mr. John Murray, in 
Albemarle Street. His dinner parties were brilliant, 
with all the poets and literary characters of the day, 
and Mr. Murray himself was gentlemanly, full of 
information, and kept up the conversation with 
spirit. He generously published the “ Mechanism 
of the Heavens” at his own risk, which, from its 
analytical character, could only be read by mathe- 
maticians. 

Besides those I have mentioned we had a numer- 
ous acquaintance who were neither learned nor 
scientific ; and at concerts at some of their houses I 
enjoyed much hearing the great artists of the day, 
such as Pasta, Malibran, Grisi, Rubini, &e., &e. 
We knew Lucien Buonaparte, who gave me a copy 
of his poems, which were a failure. 

I had beeome acquainted with Madame de 
Montalembert, who was an Englishwoman, and 
was mother of the celebrated Comte; she was 
very eccentric, and at that time was an Ultra- 
Protestant. One day she came to ask me to go 
and drive in the Park with her, and afterwards 
dine at her house, saying, “We shall all be ine 
high dresses” So I accepted, and on entering the 
drawing-room, found a bishop and several clergy- 
men, Lady Olivia Sparrow, and some other ladies, 


Exeter Halls 221 


all in high black satin dresses and white lace caps, 
precisely the dress I wore, and I thought it ‘a 
curious coincidence. The party was lively enough, 
and agreeable, but the conversation was in a style I 
had never heard before—in fact, it affected the 
phraseology of the Bible. We all went after dinner 
to a sort of meeting at Exeter Hall, I quite forget 
for what purpose, but our party was on a kind of 
raised platform. I mentioned this to a friend after- 
wards, and the curious circumstance of our all being 
dressed alike. ‘Do you not know,” she said, “that 
dress is assumed as a distinctive mark of the Evan- 
gelical party! So you were a wolf in sheep's 
clothing !” 

I had been acquainted with the Miss Berrys at 
Raith, when visiting their cousins, Mr. and Mrs. 
Ferguson. Mary, the eldest, was a handsome, 
accomplished woman, who from her youth had 
lived in the most distinguished society, both at 
horhe and abroad. She published a ‘“ Comparative 
View of Social Life in France and England,” which 
was well received by the public. She was a Latin 
scholar, spoke and wrote French fluently, ‘yet with 
all these advantages, the consciousness that she 
might have done something better, had female 
education been less frivolous, gave her a character- 
istic melancholy which lasted through life. She did 


222 Mary Somerville. 


not talk much herself, but she had the tact to lead 
conversation. She and her sister received every 
evening a select society in their small house in 
Curzon Street. Besides any distinguished foreigners 
who happened to be in London, among their 
habitual guests were my friend, Lady Charlotte 
Lindsay, always witty and agreeable, the brilliant. 
and beautiful Sheridans, Lady Theresa Lister, after- 
wards Lady Theresa Lewis, who edited Miss Berry's 
“Memoirs,” Lord Lansdowne, and many others. Lady 
Davy came occasionally, and the Miss Fanshaws, 
who were highly accomplished, and good artists, 
besides Miss Catherine Fanshaw wrote clever vers 
de société, such as a charade on the letter H, and, if 
Tam not mistaken, “The Butterfly’s Ball,” &c. I 
visited these ladies, but their manners were so col@ 
and. formal that, though I admired their talents, I 
never became intimate with them. On the con- 
trary, like everyone else, I loved Mary Berry, sii 
was so warm-hearted and kind. When London 
began to fill, and the season was at its height, the 
Miss Berrys used to retire to a pretty villa at 
Twickenham, where they received their friends to 
luncheon, and strawberries and cream, and ve 

delightful these visits were in fine spring weather. 
I recollect once, after dining there, to have been 
foruntate enough to give a place in my carriage to 


Rogers’ Epigram. 223 


Lord Macaulay, and those who remember his charm- 
ing and brilliant conversation will understand how 
short the drive to London appeared. 

We sometimes went to see Miss Lydia White, 
who received every evening ; she was clever, witty, 
and very free in her conversation. On one oceasion 
the party consisted, besides ourselves, of the Misses 
Berry, Lady Davy ; the three poets, Rogers, William 
Spencer, and ,Campbell; Sir James Macintosh, and 
Lord! Dudley. Rogers, who was ‘a bitter satirist 
and hated Lord Dudley, had. written the following 
epigram :— 

Ward has no heat, tis said ; but I deny it. 

He has a heart, and gets his speeches by it. 
I had never heard of this epigram, and on coming 
away Lord Dudley said, “You are going home 
to sleep and I to work.” I answered, “Oh! you 
are going to prepare your speech for to-morrow.” 
Ng appropriate remark raised an universal laugh. 

: * * * * * 

Mr. Bowditch, of Boston, U.S8., who died in 1838, 
left among other works a “‘ Commentary on La Place’s 
Mécanique Céleste” in four volumes. While busily 
_occupied in bringing out an edition of the “ Physical 
‘ g@ences,” I received a letter from his son, Mr. H. 
Bowditch, requesting me to write an elaborate review 
of that work, which would be published in Boston. 


224 Mary Somerville. 


along with the biography of his father, written by 
Mr. Young, who sent me a copy of it. Though 
highly sensible of the honour, I declined to under 
take so formidable a work, fearing that I should not 
do justice to the memory of'so great a man.. 

I have always been in communication with some 
of the most distinguished men of the United States. 
Washington Irving frequently came to see me when 
he was in London ; he was as agreeable in conversa- 
tion as he was distinguished as an author. No one 
could be more amiable than Admiral Wilkes, of the 
U.S. navy: he had all the frankness of a sailor. 
We saw a good deal of him when he was in London, 
and I had a long letter from him, giving me an ac- 
count of his fleet, his plan for cireumnavigation, &c. &c. 
I never had the good fortune to become personally 
acquainted with Captain Maury, of the U. S. navy, 
author of that fascinating book, the “ Physical 
Geography of the Sea,” but I am indebted to him 
for a copy of that work, and of his valuable charts. 
Mr. Dana, who is an honour to his country, sent me 
copies of his works, to which I have had occasiori 
frequently to refer as acknowledged authority on 
many branches of natural history. I should be un- 
grateful if I did not acknowledge the kindness 
I received from the Silliman family, who informed 
me of any scientific discovery in the United States, 


American Friends. 295 


and sent me a copy of their Journal when it con- 
tained. anything which might interest me. I was 
elected an honorary. member of the Geographical 
aud Statistical Society of New York, U.S. on the 
15th May, 1857, and on the 15th October, - 1869, 
I was elected a member of the American Philo- 
sophical Society at Philadelphia, for Promoting 
Useful Knowledge. I shall ever be most grateful 
for these honours. 

_ While living in Florence, many years after, an 
American friend invited me to an evening party to 
meet an American authoress who wished particu- 
larly to make my acquaintance. I accordingly 
went there on the evening in question, and my 
friends, after receiving me with their accustomed 
cordiality, presented me to the lady, and placed 
me beside her to give me an opportunity of con- 
versing with her. J addressed her several times, 
and made various attempts to enter into con- 
versation, but only received very dry answers in 
reply. At last she fairly turned her back upon 
me, and became engrossed with a lady who gat 
on her other side, upon which I got up and left 
her and never saw her again. A very different 
person in every respect was present that even- 
ing, as much distinguished by her high mental 
qualities and poetical genius as by her modesty and 

@ 


226 Mary Somerville. 


simplicity. I allude to our greatest British poetess, 
Mrs. Browning, who at that time resided in Florence, 
except when the delicacy of her health obliged her 
to go to Rome. I think there is no other instance 
of husband and wife both poets, and both distin- 
guished in their different lines. J can.imagine no 
happier or more fascinating life than theirs; two 
kindred spirits united in the highest and noblest 
aspirations. Unfortunately her life was a short 
one; in the full bloom of her intellect her frail 
health gave way, and she died leaving a noble 
record of genius to future ages, and a sweet memory 
to those who were_her contemporaries. The Flo 
rentines, who, like all Italians, greatly appreciate 
-genius, whether native or foreign, have placed a 
commemorative tablet on Casa Guidi, ‘the house 
Mrs. Browning inhabited. 
I was extremely delighted last spring in being 
‘honoured by a visit from Longfellow, that most 
genial poet. It is not always the case that the 
general appearance of a distinguished person answers 
to one’s ideal of what he ought to be—in this respeet 
Longfellow far surpasses expectation. I ‘was as 
much charmed with his winning manner and con- 
versation as by his calm, grand features and the ex- 
ssion of his intellectual countenance. 
_ The Barons Fairfax, as I mentioned already, had 


Tuckervwnan. 997, 


long -been members ‘of the Kepublic of the United 
States, and Washington’s rhother belonged to this 
“family. “During the war of Independence, while my 
father, then Lieutenant Fairfax, was on board a 
man-of-war on-the American station, he received a 
letter fromm General Washington claiming him as a 
relation, and inviting him to pay him a visit, saying, 
he did not think that war should interfere with the 
courtesies of private life. ‘Party spirit ran so high 
at that time that my father was reprimanded for 
being in cortespondence withthe enemy. I men- 
tioned to my friend, the Rev. Dr. Tuckerman, of the 
United States, how much I regretted that so pre- 
cious @ letter had beén lost, and he most kindly 
on going home sent me an autograph letter. of . 
General Washington. 


FROM THE REY. JOSEPH TUCKERMAN TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


Boston, August 28th, 1834, 
: My DEAR ee 

Ihave very great pleasure in sending to you an 
autograph letter of your and our glorious Washington. 
'I obtained it from Mr. Sparks, who had the gratification 
of seeing you when he was in England, and who told me 
when I applied to him for it, that there is no one in the 
world to whom he would ‘be so glad to give it. It is | 
beyond ‘comparison the best and almost thé only ie- * 
maining one at his disposal among’ the-“ Washington?’ , 
papers. 


28 Mary Somerville. 


*20 


T am again in my family and in the field of my 

But very dear to me are my associations with scenes 
and friends in England ; and most glad should 1 be if. I 
could renew that intercourse with yourself, and with the 
intellect and virtue around you, to which I have been 
indebted for great happiness, and which, I hope, has 
done something to qualify me for a more efficient service. 
Will you please to present my very sincere ‘respects to 
your husband, and to recall me to the kind remembrance 
of your children. With the highest respect and regard, 
allow me to call myself, 

Your friend, 
JosePH TUCKERMAN, 


I think it must have been on returning from the 
American station, or may be later in the career of 
my father’s life, that a circumstance occurred which 
distressed him exceedingly. Highway robberies were 
common on all the roads in the vicinity of London, 
but no violence was offered. My father was travel- 
ling alone over Blackheath when the postilion was 
ordered to stop, a pistol presented at my father, and 
his purse demanded. My father at once recognised 
the voice as that of a shipmate, and exclaimed, 
“Good God! I know that voice! can it be 
young ———? I am dreadfully shocked; I have 
a hundred pounds which shall be yours—come into 


Robbers on ‘Blackheath. 929 


the carriage, and let me take you to ‘London, where 
you will be safe.” ., “No, no,” the young man 
said, (‘I have associates whom I cannot leave-—it 
is too late.” .!. . It was too late; he was arrested 
eventually! and suffered. Years afterwards when 
by some accident my father mentioned this event, 
he was deeply affected, and never would tell the 
name of the young man who had been his mess- 
mate. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


ROME, NAPLES, AND ©OMO—BADEN—WINTER' AT FLORENCE—8IRNA— 
LETTER FROM LORD BROUGHAM—MR. MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE 
—LIFE AT EOME—CAMPAGNA CATTLE. 


[My mother was already meditating writing a book upon 
Physical Geography, and had begun to collect materials 
for it, when my father’s long and dangerous illness 
obliged her to* lay it aside for a time. My father was 
ordered to a warmer climate for the winter, and as soon 
as he was able to travel we proceeded to Rome, We 
were hardly settled when my mother, with her usual 
energy, set to work diligently, and began this book, which 
was not published for some time later, as it required much 
thought and research. She never allowed anything to 
interfere with ber morning’s work ; after that was over 
she was delighted to join m any plan which had been 
formed for the afternoon’s amusement, and enjoyed her- 
self thoroughly, whether in visiting antiquities and 
galleries, excursions in the neighbourhood, or else going 
with a friend to paint on théCampagna. My mother was 
extremely fond of Rome, and often said no place had 
ever suited her so well. Independently of the picturesque 
beauty of the place, which, to such a lover of nature, 
was sufficient in itself, there was a very pleasant society 


Fohkn Gibson at Rome. 231 


during many seasons we spent there. The visitors were 
far less numerous than they are now, but on that very 
account there was more sociability and intimacy, and 
scarcely an evening passed without our meeting. The 
artists residing at Rome, too, were a most delightful 
addition to society. Some of them became our very dear 
friends. My mother remarks :-— 


WE took lodgings at Bome, and as soon as we 
were settled I resumed my work and wrote every 
morning till two o’clock, then went to some gallery, 
walked on the Pincio, dined at six, and in the 
evening either went out or received visits at home— 
the pleastntest way of seeing friends, as ‘it does 
not interfere with one’s occupations. , 

We once joined a party that was arranged to see 
the statues in the Vatican by torchlight, at which 
Lord Macaulay astonished us by his correct know- 
ledge and learning as we passed through the gallery 
of inscriptions. To me this evening was memorable ; 3: 
on this occasion I first met with: Soun Gibson, the 
sculptor, who afterwards became a dear and valued 
friend. He must have been a pupil of Canova’s 
or Thorwaldsen’s when Somerville and I Were first 
at .Rome. Now his fame was as creat ag that, of 


232 Mary Somerville. 


{In spring we went to Naples for a few weeks, and 
returned to Rome by the San Germano road, now so 
familiar to travellers, but then hardly ever frequented, ag 
it was extremely unsafe on account of the brigands. We 
met with no adventures, although we often reached our 
night quarters long after sunset, for my mother sketched 
a great deal on the road. We travelled by vetturino and | 
continued this delightful journey to Como. My mother 
was a perfect travelling companion, always cheerful and 
contented and interested in all she saw. I leave her to 
tell of our pleasant residetice at Bellaggio in her own! 
words >— ; 


We remained only a short time at Florence, and 
then went for a month to Bellaggio, on the Lake of 
Como, at that time the most lonely village imaginable. 
We had neither letters, newspapers, nor any books, 
except the Bible, yet we liked it exceedingly. I 
did nothing but paint in the mornings, and Somer- 
ville sat by me. My daughters wandered about, 
and in the evening we went in a boat on the lake, 
Sometimes we made longer excursions. Qne day we 
went early to Menaggio, at the upper end of the 
lake. The day had been beautiful, but while at 
dinner we were startled by a loud peal of thunder. 
Tha boatmen desired us to embark without delay, 
as a storm was rising behind the mountains; 
it soon blew a gale, and the lake was a sheet 


‘Storm. 233 


of foam; we took’ shelter for while ‘aé some 
' place on' the coast ‘and set. out again, thinking 
the storm had blown cover, but, it was soon worse, 
than ever. We were. in. no small danger for two, 
hours. -Thée hoatmen, terrified, threw themselves 
on their knees i in' prayer to the.Madonna!' 'Somer- 
ville. ‘seized ‘the, helm’ ‘and! loweréd thé sail and 
ordered them to rise, saying, ‘the Madonna would 
help them if they jhelped themselves, and at last 
they returned to their duty. For a long time we 
Yemained perfectly silent,when-one of our daugh- 
ters said, “I have been’ thinking what a paragraph 
it will be in the newspapers, ‘ Drownéd, daring a 
sudden squall on the lake of Como, an’ English 
family named Somerville; father, mother ‘and ‘two 
daughters.’” The silence ‘thus broken made us 
laugh, though: our situation was serious enough, for 
when We landed the shore was crowded with people 
who had fully expected to see the boat go down. 
Twice after this we.were overtaken by these squalls, - 
which are very dangerous.: I shall never forget the 
magnificerice of the lightning and the grandeur of 
the thunder, which was echoed by the mountains 
during the storms on the Lake of Como. : 
We saw the fishermen spear the fish by torch- 
light, as they did on the Tweed. The fish were 
plenty and the water'so clear that they were seen 


234 Mary Somervilte. 


at a great depth. There are very large red-fleshed 
trout in the lake, and a small very delicious fish 
called agoni, caught in multitudes by fine silk 
nets, to which bells are attached on floats, that 
keep up a constant tinkling to let the fishermen 
know where to find their nets when floated away 
by the wind. 


e 

[We now crossed the Alps, by the St. Gothard, to Basle 
and Baden Baden, where we passed the summer, intend- 
ing to return to England in autumn, but as soon as the , 
rains began my father had so serious a return of his ill- 
ness that my mother was much alarmed. When he was 
well enough to travel, we once more crossed the Alps, 
and reached Florence, where we remained for the winter. 
My mother resumed her work there. 


Through the kindness of the Grand Duke, I was 
allowed to have books at home from his private 
library in the Pitti Palace, a favour only granted 
to the four Directors. This gave me courage to col- 
lect materials for my long neglected Physical Geo- 
graphy, still in embryo. As I took an interest in 
every branch of science I became acquainted with 
Professor Amici, whose microscopes were unrivalled 
at that time, and as he had made many remarkable 
microscopic discoveries in natural history, he took 
us to the Museum to see them magnified and 


The Pitte Palace. 235 


modelled in wax. J had the honour of being elected 
a member of the Academy of Natural Science at 
Florence. : 
‘There were many agreeable people at Florence 
that winter and a good deal of gaiety. The Mar- 
chese Antinori presented Somerville and me to 
the Grand Duke, who had expressed a wish to 
know me. He received us very graciously, and 
conversed with us for more than an hour on 
general subjects, He afterwards wrote me a polite 
letter, accompanied by a work on the -drainage 
of the Maremma, and gave directions about our 
being invited to a scientific meeting which was 
to be held at Pisa. We were presented to the 
Grand Duchess, who was very civil. We spent 
the summer at Siena, and had a cheerful airy 
apartment with a fine view of the hills of Santa 
Fiora, and with very pretty arabesques in fresco on 
the walls of all the rooms, some so very artistic 
that I made sketches of them. In these old cities 
many of the palaces and houses are decorated with 
that artistic taste which formerly prevailed to such 
an extent in Italy, and which has now yielded, 
here as elsewhere, to common-place modern furniture. 
* * * * * 


[While we were at Siena, my mother received the fol- 
lowing letfer from Lord Brougham, who was a frequent 


236 ary Somes ville. 


correspondent of herg, but whose letters are generally too 
exclusively mathematical for the general reader. My 
mother had described the curious horse-races which are 
held at Siena every three years, and other medieval cus- 
toms still prevalent. 


FROM LORD BROUGHAM TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
CoLE Hint, Ker, Sept. 28th, 1810. 


My pear Mrs. Somerviite, 

I am much obliged to you for your kind letter 
which let me know of your movements. I had not heard 
of them since I saw the Fergusons. ..... We have 
been here since parliament rose, ss I am not yet at’ alt 
equal to going to Brougham. My health is now quite 
restored ; but I shall not soon—nor in all probability 
ever—recover the losses I have been afilicted with. I 
passed the greater part of last winter in Provence, 
expecting some relief from change of scene and from 
the fine climate ; but I came back fully worse than when 
Iwent. In fact, I did wrong in struggling at first, which 
I did to be able tu meet parliament in January last. If 
T had yielded at once, I would have been better. I hope 
and trust they sent you a book I published two years 
ago ; I menn the “ Dissertations,” of which one is on the 
“ Principia,” and designed to try how far it may be 
taught to persons having but a very moderate stock of 
mathematics; also, if possible, to keep alive the trie 
taste (as I reckon it) in mathematics, which modern 
analysis has a little broken in upon. Assuming you to 
have got the book, I must mention that there are some 
intolerable errors of the press left, such as...... 
Excuse my troubling you with these errata, and impute. it 


Brougham:s. Dissertations. 287 


tg ,my wish that. you. should not suppose. me: to have 
yritten, the nonsense whieh. these pages' seem ‘to prove. 

By the. way, it is g.curious proof of nniversityi prejudice, 
_that though the Cambridge men admit my analysis of the 
“Principia” to be unexceptionable; and to.be well 
calculated for teaching the work, yet, not being by a 
Cambridge man, it cannot be used! They are far more 

liberal at Paris, where they only are waiting for my 

antlysis of the second book; but I put off finishing it, 

as I do still more my account of the'' “ Mécanique 

Cdeste.” The latter I have almost abandoned in 

despair after nearly: finishing it; I find-so much that 

cannot, be explained elementarily, or ailything near‘ ‘it. 

Sq that. my account to be complete.would be nearly: as! 
hard. reading as yours, and not 1000th part as. goqd'/ |. . 

L greatly envy you Siena ;: I never was there above a day, 

and always desired to stay longer. The language is,' as 

you say, a real charm; but I was not aware of the’ 
preservation in which you describe the! older’ manners’ to 

be.,; I.fear I shall not be able to!visit Provenee,: as I 

should have wished this winter . .. | | .' but ny plans! 
ae not quite fixed. ., The judicial business in Parliament- 
and the Privy Council will also make my: going abroad! 
after January difficult. | I: don’t write you any! news, ‘tor’ 
is there any but what you see in the papers: The !Tory 

restoration approaches: very: steadily, tho’ not -very 

rapidly; and I only hope that the Whigs; having: ¢on-* 
trived to destroy the Liberal party in the eountry—lI fear 
past all hope of recovery—-may not have:a war -abroad 

algo to mourn for... 

Believe me, 
Yours ever, 
' H. Brovenam. 


238 Mary Someruille. .. 


On going to Rome I required a good many books 
for continuing my work on “ Physical, Geography,” 
and had got “Transactions of the Geographical: 
Society” and other works sent from London. 
The Hon. Mountstuart Elphinstone who was then at 

-Rome, was an old acquaintance of ours. He was 
one of the most amiable men I ever met with, 
and quite won my heart one day at table when 
they were talking of the number of singing- 
birds that were eaten in Italy—nightingales, gold- 
finches, and robins—he called out, “ What! robins! 
our household birds! I would as soon eat a 
child!” He was so kind as to write to the Direc- 
tors of the East India Company requesting that I 
" might have the use of the library and papers that 
were in the India House. This was readily granted 
me; and I had a letter in consequence from Mr. 
Wilson, the Orientalist, giving me a list of the works 
they had on the geography of Eastern Asia and the 
most recent travels in the Himalaya, Thibet, and 
China, with much useful information from himself. I 
was indebted to Sir Henry Pottinger, then at Rome, 
for information relating to Scinde, for he had been 
for some years British Envoy at Beloochistan. 
Thus provided, I went on with my work. We lived 
several winters in an apartment on the second floor 
of Palazzo Lepni, Via dei Condotti, where we passed. 


A Flood in Ronte, 239 


many ‘happy’ days,, waen we nrst lived in Via 
Condetti, the yaste-pipes to carry off the rain-water 
from the roofs projected far into the street, and when 
there was a violent thunderstorm, one might: have 
thought a waterspout had broken over Rome, the 
water poured in such cascades from the houses on. 
each side of the street. On one occasion the rain 
continued in torrents for thirty-six hours, and the 
Tiber came down in heavy flood, inundating the 
Ghetto and all the low parts of the city ; the water 
was six feet ‘deep in the Pantheon.. The people 
were driven out of their houses in the middle of 
the night and took refuge in the churches, and 
boats plied in the streets supplying thé inhabitants 
with food, which they hauled up in baskets let down 
from the windows. The Campagna for miles. yag 
under water; it covered the Ponte Molle so that 
the courier could not pass; and seen, from the 
Pincio it looked like an extensive lake. Much 
anxiety was felt. for the people. who lived in the 
farm houses now surrounded with water. Boats 
were'sent to rescue them, and few lives were lost ; 
but many animals perished.- The flood did not 
subside till after three days, when it left every- 
thing covered with yellow mud; ithe loss of pro- 
petty was very great, and there was much misery 
for a long time. 


210 Mary Somerville. 


Our house was in a very central position, and when 
not engaged | gladly received anyone who liked to 
come to us in the evening, and we had a most agree- 
able society, foreign and English, for we were not 
looked upon as strangers, and the English society 
was much better during the years we spent in Rome 
than it was afterwards. 

T had an annual visit of an hour from the astro- 
nomer Padre Vico, and Padre Pianciani, Professor of 
Chemistry in the Collegio Romano. I was invited 
to see the Observatory ; but as I had seen those of 
Greenwich and Paris, I did not think it worth 
while accepting the invitation, especially as it re- 
quired an order from the Pope. I could easily 
have obtained leave, for we were presented to 
Gregory XVI. by the President of the Scotch 
Catholic College. The Pope received me with 
marked distinction ; notwithstanding I was dis- 
gusted to see the President prostrate on the 
Hoor, kissing the Pope’s foot as if he had been 
divine. I think it was about this time that I 
was elected an honorary associate of the Accademia’ 
Tiberiana. 

I had very great delight in the Campagna of 
Rome; the fine range of Apennines bounding the 
plain, over which the fleeting shadows of the passing 
clouds fell, ever changing and always beautiful, 


Drove of Composna ‘Cattle. 241 


whether vevel in ‘the early’ morning, or in the 
glory of the getting sun, I was never tired of ad- 
miring ; and whenever I drove out, preferred a 
country drive | to the more fashionable Villa Bor- 
ghese. One day Somerville and I and oar daughters 
went to drive towards the Tavolata, on thé road toe 
Albano. We got out of the carriage, and went into 
a field, tempted by the wild flowers. On one side of 
this field’ ran the aqueduct, on the other a deep and 
wide ditch full of water. I had gone towards the 
aqueduct, leaving the others in the field. Al at 
once we heard a Asal shouting, when an enormous 
drove of the beautiful Campagna grey cattle with 
their wide-spreading horns came rushing wildly 
between us with their heads down and their tails, 
erect, driven by men with long spears mounted on 
little spirited horses at full gallop. It was so sudden 
and so rapid, that only after it was over_did we per- 
ceive the danger we had run. As there was no 
possible escape, there was nothing for it but standing 
still, which Somerville and my girls had presenee of 
mind to do, and the drove dividing, rushed like a_ 
whirlwind to the right and left of them. The 
danger was not so much of being gored as ‘of 
being run over by the excited and terrified animals, 
and round the walls of Rome places of refuge are 
provided for those who may be passing when the. 


242 Mary Somerville. 


cattle gre driven. svear where tnis occurred there is 
a house with the inscription “Csa Dei Spiriti” ; but 
t do not think the Italians believe in either ghosts 
“Gr witehoS ¢ their chief superstition seems to be the 
 Jettatura,” or evil eye, hich they have inherited 
from the early Romans, and, I-believe, Etruscans. 
They donSider it’s ‘bad omen to meet a monk or 
priest on first going out in the morning.» My 
daughters were engaged to ride with a large party, 
and the meet was at our house. A Roman, who 
happened to go out first, saw a friar, and rushed in 
again laughing, and waited till he was out of sight. 
Soon after they set off, this gentleman was thrown 
from his horse and ducked in a pool; so the 
\“‘ Jettaturd-” was fulfilled. But my daughters 
thought his bad seat on horseback enough to 
account for his fall without the Evil Eye. 


CHAPTER XV. 


ALBANO—POPULAR SINGING—LETTERS FROM MBs. somakvittk—/areson’ 
—PERUGIA-—COMET OF 1843—SUMMER gf VENIOE—LETBERS JROM. 
MRS, SOMERVILLE AND MISS JOANNA BAILLIE—ELECTED ASSOCIATE 
O® THE COLLEGE OF RESURGENTI AND Rk, 1 ACADEMY oF borecE 
AP AREZZ0. 

In spring we went to Albano, and lived ina “ils 
high up on the hill in a beautiful situation not 
far from the lake. The view was most extensive, 
commanding the whole of the Campagna as far as 
Terracina, &c. In this wide expanse we gould see the 
thunderclouds forming and rising gradhiclly over th® 
sky before. the storm, and I used to watch the 
vapour condensing into a cloud as ‘it rose into the 
cool air. I never r witnessed anything so violent as 
the storms we had about the equinox, when the 
weather broke up. Our house being high above the 
plain became enveloped in vapour till, at 3 p.m, 
we could scarcely see the olives which grew below 
our windows, and crash followed crash with no 
interval between the lightning and the thunder, so 
that we felt sure many places must have been struck ; 


and we were not mistaken—trees, houses, and even 
; R2 


244 Mary Somerville. 


cattle had been struck close tg us.. Somerville went 
to Florence to attend a scientific meeting, and wrote, 
to us that the lightning there had stripped the gold, 
leaf off the conductors on the powder magazine ;. 4 
proof of their utility. 

The sunsets were glorious, and I,. fascinated . by, 
the gorgeous colouring, attempted; to paint what, 
Turner alone could have done justice to., I made, 
studies, too, which were signal failures, of the noble 
ilex trees bordering the lake of Albano. Thus 
I wasted a great deal of time, J, can hardly say 
in vain, from the pleasure J, had in,, the lovely 
scenery, Somerville sat often by.me with his book, 
while I painted from nature, or amused, himself 
examining the geological structure of the country; 
Our life was a solitary one, except for the occasional, 
visit from some friends who were at, Frascati; but, 
we never found it dull; besides, -we made many 
expeditions on mules or donkeys to places in the 
neighbourhood. I was very much delighted with 
the flora on the Campagna and the Alban hills, 
which in spring and early summer are a, perfect 
garden of flowers. Many plants we cultivate in 
England here grow wild, in profusion, such as, 
cyclamens, gum-cistus, both white and purple, many 
rare and beautiful orchidew, the large flowering 
Spanish broom, perfuming the air all around, the 


“Albano! 245 


tall, white-blossomed Mediterranean heath, and ‘the 
‘myrtle!’ These and ‘tiany' others my girls used’ to! 
bring in from 'theit'! early: morning walks. ' The 
flowers only lasted ‘till “the ‘end of June, when’ the 
heat began, and the whole country became brown and 
patched } but scarcely had the autumnal rains com- 
menced, when, like ‘magic; the whole country’ broke 
out onde mote ‘intd verdure} and myriads ’‘of cyela! 
miens covered the ground: Nightingales aboutided 
in the woods, singing both ‘by -Hight and by day+ 
and one ‘bright mootilight'night my daughters, whd 
dept ‘with their 'window ‘open| were ‘startled from 
tlicir ‘sleep bythe hooting of ' one of ' those beautiful 
birds: the “grvst-eared"! owl-Ule grand !dac”™ of 
Buffon—which' had séttled'on the railing of ‘their 
baleony: We tonstaritly cdme ‘across snakes, geité- 
rally harmiles$ Ones';' ‘but! theré: were ‘a good'many 
vipets, and ‘éncé, wher Sémerville and my daughters, 
with ‘Mr, Cromick, thé'‘artist} had gone from’ Gen- 
zand to’Nettulio for 'a bbuple of Bays, » small asp 
which was ! crawling ‘among’ ithe bent-grass’ on! the 
sea-shore, darted’ at! Une’ bf: the’ girls}'who had irri- 
tated 'it' by touching ‘it with"her parasol.’ By the 
natives théy re‘ wuch dredded, "both on''this coast 
anid in the’ piné'forest‘of ‘Ravenna, where the '¢attle 
ard’'said to be becasionally ‘poisoned by their bite. '' 


246 Mary Somerville. 


We had been acquainted with the Rev."Dr., after-* 
wards Cardinal Wiseman at Rome. He was head of 
a college of young men educating for the Catholic 
Church, who had their “villegciatura” at Monte 
Porzio. Wespenta day with him there, and visited 
Tusculum ; another day we went to Lariccia, where 
there is a palace and park belonging to the Chigi 
family in a most picturesque but dilapidated state. 
We went also to Genzano, Rocca “del Papa, and 
occasionally to visit friends at Frascati. There was 
a stone threshing-floor behind our house. During the 
vintage we had it nicely swept and lighted with 
storches, and the grape gatherers came and danced 
till long after midnight: to the great amusement of 
my daughters, who joined in the dance, which was 
the Saltarello, a variety of the Tarantella. They 
danced to the beating of tambourines. Italy is the 
country of music, especially of melody, and the 
popular airs, especially the Neapolitan, are ex- 
tremely beautiful and melodious ; yet it is a fact, 
that the singing of the peasantry, particularly in 
the Roman and Neapolitan provinces, is most dis- 
‘agreeable and discordant. It is notemelody at all, 
but a kind of wild chant, meandering through 
minor tones, without rhythm of any sort or apparent 
rule, and my daughters say it is very difficult to 
note down ; yet there is some kind of method and 


Neapolitan Music. 247 


similarity im -it as one hears it shouted out at the 
loudest pitch of.the voice, the last note dwelt upon 
and drawn out to an immeasurable length. The 
words are frequently improvised by the singers, who 
answer one another from a distance, as they work 
in the fields. I have been told this style of chant- 
ing—singing it can hardly be called—has been 
handed down from the most ancient times, and it is- 
said, in the southern provinces, to have descended 
from the early Greek colonists. The ancient Greeks 
‘ are supposed to have chanted their poetry to music, 
as do the Italian improvisatori at the present day. 
In Tuscany, the words of the songs are often ex- 
tremely poetical and graceful. Frequently, these 
verses, called “stornelli” and “rispetti,” are com- 
posed by the peasants themselves, women as well as 
men ; the language is the purest and most classical 
Italian,.such as is spoken at the present day in the 
provinces of Siena, Pistoja, &c., very much less 
corrupted by foreign idioms or adaptations than 
what is spoken, even by cultivated persons, m 
Florence itself. The picturesque costumes so ung 
versal when I, first came to Italy, in 1817, had 
fallen very much into disuse when, at a much later 
period, we resided in Rome, and now they are rarely 
seen, 
We hired a handsome peasant girl from Al- 


250 Mary Somerville. 


when we go out and take a long walk ; come home to tea 
at nine, and go to bed at eleven: the same thing day 
after day, so you cannot expect a very amusing letter. 
Ses eue I have another commission J wish you would 
do for me; it is to inquire what discoveries Captain 
Ross has made at the South Pole. I sawa very interest- 
ing account in “ Galignani ” of what they have done, but 
cannot trust to a newspaper account so as to quote it. 


A new edition of my “Physical Sciences” was 
required, so the “Physical Geography” was laid 
aside for the present. On returning to Rome, we 
resumed our usual life, and continued to receive our 
friends in the evening without ceremony. There 
was generally a merry party round the tea table in 
a corner of the room. I cannot omit mentioning 
one of the most charming and intellectual of our 
friends, Don Michelangelo Gaetani, Duke of Ser- 
moneta, whose brilliant and witty conversation is 
unrivalled, and for whom I have had a very sin-» 
cere friendship for many years. I found him lately 
as charming as ever, notwithstanding the cruel loss 
of his sight. The last time I ever dined out was at 
his house at Rome, when I was on my way to Naples 
in 1867. 

* s = * * 

John Gibson, the sculptor, the most guileless and 

amiable of men, was now a dear friend. His style 


Fokn Gibson, the Sculptor. 251 


was the purest Grecian, and had some of his works 
been found among the ruins, multitudes would have 
come to Rome to admire them. He was now in 
the height of his fame; yet he was so kind and 
encouraging to young people that he allowed my 
girls to go and draw in his studio, and one 
of my daughters, with a friend, modelled there 
for some time. His drawings for bas-reliefs were 
most beautiful. He drew very slowly, but a line 
once drawn was never changed. * He ignored 
India-rubber or bread-crumbs, so perfect was his 
knowledge of anatomy, and so decided the character 
and expressiofi he meant to give. 

We had charades one evening in a small theatre 
in our house, which went off very well. ‘There was 
much beauty at Rome at that time ; no one who was 
there can have forgotten the beautiful and brilliant 
Sheridans. I recolleet Lady Dufferin at the Easter 
ceremonies at St. Peter’s, in her widow’s cap, with a 
large black crape veil thrown over it, creating quite 
asensation, With her exquisite features, oval face, 
and somewhat fantastical head-dress, anything more 
lovely could not be conceived; and the Roman 
people crowded round her in undisguised admiration 
of “la bella monaca Inglese.” Her charm of manner 
and her brilliant conversation will never be forgotten 
by those who knew her. To my mind, Mrs. Norton 


R52 Mary Somerville. 


was the most beautiful of the three sisters. Hers is 

a grand countenance, such as artists love to study. 

Gibson, whom J asked, after his return from England! 

which he had revisited .after twenty-seven years” 

absence, what he thought of Englishwomon, replied, . 
he had seen many handsome women, but no such . 
sculptural beauty as Mrs. Norton’s. I might add 

the Marchioness of Waterford, whose bust at Mac- 

donald’s I took at first for an ideal head, till I 

recognised the likeness. 

Lady Davy used to live a great deal at Rome, and 
togk an active part in society. She talked a great 
deal, and talked well when she spoke® English, but’ 
like many of us had more pretension with regard to 
the things she could not do well than to those shd 
really could. She was a Latin scholar, and as far as 
reading and knowing the literature of modern 
languages went she was very accomplished, but un~- 
fortunately, she fancied she spoke them perfectly, 
and was never happier than when she had people of 
different nations dining with her, each of whom she’ 
addressed in hisown language. Many amusing mis- 
takes of hers in speaking Italian were current in 
both Roman and English circles. 

* * = *- * 

A few months were very pleasantly spent one: 

summer at Perugia, where there is so much that is 


Perugia’... 256 


interesting -to ‘be seen! Thé neighbouring’ country’ is 
very ‘beautiful; and: the city being’ ‘on ‘the’ ‘top"'of & 
hill i is. véry,.cool during: the! hot: weather. | We had 
‘an. apartment in the \Casa ‘Oddi-Baglioni— hand 
well known in Italian history4—and'I yecolleet spend* 
ing some wery pleasant days''with the! Conte’ Oddi- 
Bagliqni, at 4 villa: called Célle- del: Cardinale, some 
ten or twelve miles from theitown: The house! was’ 
large and. handsomely décorated)' with ‘a ' profusion’ 
of the finest Chinese vases. -On ‘our’ toilet’ tables! 
were . pladed.- | perfumes,': scented! sdap,’ ahd! very 
elaborately embroidered, nightdresses, were’ laid out 
fox, use| I refnember especiatly admiting thé basins, 
jugs, &c.,, which wore all of the'finest japan ¢namel:' 
There,. was: a subterranean: apartment- where we’ 
dined, which was delightfully cool and pléasant, and 
ata large and profusely served: dinnér-table, - while’ 
we andthe. guests with the owner'of the-house! 
dined at.the upper end, at the lower end and below 
the salt there were the superintendent of the Count’s: 
farms, a house decorator and others of that rank. ‘Tt 
is not the only instance we met: with of ‘this very: 
ancient custom. The first..time Somerville ‘and I 
came to Italy, years before: this, while dining at a 
very noble house, the wet-nurse took her place, as a 
matter of course, at the foot of the dinner-table. 

On the morning after our arrival and'at 2 very 


254 Mary Somerville. 


early hour there was a very fine eclipse of the sun, 
though not total at Perugia or the neighbourhood ; 
the chill and unnatural gloom were very striking. 

Perugia is one of the places in which the ancient 
athletic game of pallone is played with spirit. It is 
so graceful when well- played that I wonder our 
active young men have not adopted it. A large 
leather ball filled with condensed air is struck and 
returned again by the opponent with the whole 
force of their right arms, covered to the elbow with 
a spiked wooden case. The promptness and activity 
required to keep up the ball is very great, and the 
impetus with which it strikes is such, that the boxes 
for spectators in the amphitheatres dedicated to this 
game are protected by strong netting. It is a very 
complicated game, and, I am told, somewhat re- 
sembles tennis. 

* * * * * 

On leaying Perugia we went for a few days to 
Asissi, spent a day at Chiusi, and then returned to 
Rome, which we found ina great state of excitement 
on account of three steamers which had just ar- 
rived from England to ply onthe Tiber. The Pope 
and Cardinals made a solemn procession to bless 
them. No doubt they would have thought our 
method of dashing a bottle of wine on a vessel on 
naming her highly profane. ; 


Tivok, Veit, &e. 265 


We constantly made expeditions to the country, to 
Tivoli, Veii, Ostia, &c., and my daughters rode on the 
Campagna. One day they rode to Albano, and on 
returning after dark they told me they had seen a 
most curious cloud which never altered its position ; 
it was a very long narrow atripe reaching from the 
horizon till nearly over head—it was the tail of the 
magnificent comet of 1843. 

We met with a great temptation in an invitation 
from Lady Stratford Canning, to go and visit them 
at Buyukdéré, near Constantinople, but res arcta 
prevented us from accepting what would have been 
so desirable ih every respect. At this time I sat to 
our good friend Mr. Macdonald for my bust, which 
was much liked.* 

* * * * * 

One early summer we went to Loreto and Ancona, 
where we embarked for Trieste ; the weather seemed 
fine when we set off, but.a storm came on, with 
thunder and lightning, very high sea and several 
waterspouts. The vessel rolled and pitched, and we 
were carried far out of our course to the Dalmatian 
coast. I was obliged to remain a couple of days at 
Trieste to rest, and was very glad when we arrived 


* The vessel on board which this bust was shipped for England ran 
on a ehoal and sank, but as the accident happened in shallow water, the 
bust was recovered, none the worse for its immersion in salt water. 


256 Mary Somerville. 


at Venice. The summer passed most delichtfully 
at Venice, and we had ample time to see everything 
without hurry. I wrote very little this summer, 
for the scenery was so beautiful that I painted all 
day; my daughters drew in the Belle Arti, and 
Somerville had plenty of books to amuse him, 
besides sight-seeing, which occupied much of our 
time. In the Armenian convent we met with 
Joseph Warten, an excellent mathematician and 
astronomer ; he was pastor at Neusatz, near Peter- 
wardein in Hungary, and he was making a tour 
through Europe. He asked me to give him a 
copy of the “Mechanism of the Heavens,” and 
afterwards wrote in Latin to Somerville and sent 
me some crrors of the press he had met with in my 
book, but they were of no use, as I never published 
asecond edition. We returned to Rome by Ravenna, 
where we stayed a couple of days, then travelled 
slowly along the Adriatic Coast. From thence 
we went by Gubbio and Perugia to Orvieto, one 
of the most interesting towns in Italy, and one 
seldom visited at that time; now the railway will 
bring it into the regular track of travellers. 


* 2 * * * 
{A few extracts from letters, written and received 
during this summer by my mother, may not be without 
interest. Also parts of two from my mother’s old and 


Venice. 257 


valued friend Miss Joanna Baillie. .The second letter 
was written several years later, and is nearly the last she . 
ever wrote to my mother. 


FROM MRS. SQMERVILLE TO WORONZOW, GREIG, ESQ 
« VENICE, 21st July, 1843 


I most sincerely rejoice. to hear that Agnes and 
you have gone to the Rhine, as I am confident a little . 
change of air and scene will be of the greatest service to 
you both..... We are ‘quite enchanted with Venice ; 
no one can form an idea of its infinite loveliness who has 
not seen it in summer and in moonlight. I often doubt 
my senses, and almost fear it may be a dream. We are 
lodged to perfection, the weather has been charming, no 
oppressive heat, though the thermometer ranges from 75° 
to 80°, accompanied bya good deal of scirocco ;" there are’ 
neither flies nor fleas, and as yet the ‘mosquitoeahave not 
molested us. We. owe much ef our comfort to the honse, 
we are in, for there are scarcely any furnished lodgings, 
and the hotels are bad, and dear, besides situation ig 
everything at this seasor, when the smaller canals’ ‘be- 
come offensive 'at low water, for, though there is little’ 
tide in the Mediterranean, there are four feet at new and 
full moon here, which is g great blessing, We have now 
seen everything, and have become acquainted with every- _ 
body, and met with ‘Kindness and attention beyond all 
description. ‘Many' of thé ‘gréat ducal families still’ 
exist, and live handsomely in their splendid palaces ; 
indeed, the decay of Venice, 80 much talked of, » iB 
quite a mistake ; certainly it is very different, ‘from 
what ‘it was in its palmy days, but there is a good 


deal of activity and trade. The abolition of the law 
8 


258 Mary Somerville. 


‘of primogeniture has injured the noble families more 
than anything else.~ We rise early, and are busy indoors 
all morning, except the girls, who go to the Academy of 
the Belle Arti, and paint from ten till three. We dine at 
fowx, and embark in our gondola at six or seven, and row 
about on the glassy sea till nine, when we go to the 
Piazza of San Marco, listen to a very fine military baud,. 
and sit gossiping till eleven or twelve, and then row home . 
by the Grand Canal, or make a visit in one of the various 
houses that are open to us. One of the most remarkable 
of these is that of the Countess Mocenigo’s, who has in 
one of her drawing-rooms the portraits of six doges of the 
Mocenigo name. I was presented by her to the Duc de 
Bordeaux, the other evening, a fat good-natured looking ° 
person. I was presented also to the Archduke—I forget 
what—son of the Archduke Charles, and admiral of the 
fleet here; a nice youth, but not clever. We meet him 
everywhere, and Somerville dined with him a few days 
ago. The only strangers of note are the Prince of Tour 
and Taxis, and Marshal Marmont. The Venetian ladies 
are very ladylike and agreeable, aud speak beautifully. 
We have received uncommon kindness from Mr. Rawdon 
Brown; he has made us acquainted with everybody, as 
he is quite at home here, having been settled in Venice 
for several years, and has got a most beautiful house 
fitted up, in rococo style, with great taste; he is an adept 
at Venetian history. He supplies us with books, which 
are a great comfort. .... The other evening we were 
surprised by a perfect fleet of gondolas stopping under 
our windows, from one of which we had the most beau- 
tiful serenade ; the moonlight was like day, and the etiect 
was admirable. There was a festa the other night in a 
church on the water’s edge; the shore was illuminated 


Letters. 259" 


and hundreds of gondolas were darting along like swale” 
lows, the gondoliers rowing as if they had bean “mast,” 
till the water was as much agitated as if there had deen’ 

a gale of wind: nothing could be more animated. You! 

will perceive from what I-have said that the evening, ti 

a late hour, is the time for amusement, in consequence of 

which I follow the Italian custom of sleeping after dinner, 

and am much the: better for it. This place agrees par- 

ticularly well with all of us, and is well suited for old 

people, who require air without fatigue. .... 

Most affectionately, 
Mary SomERvILLE. 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO WORONZOW GREIG, ESQ. 


Venice, 27th August, 1813. 
My pear Woronzow, 

Your excellent letter, giving an account of your 
agreeable expedition up the Rhine, did not arrive till 
nearly a month after it was written. . . . . I regret ex- 
ceedingly you could not stay longer, and still more that 
you could not come on and pay us a visit, and enjoy the 
charm of summer in Venice, so totally unlike every other 
place in every respect. I wished for you last night par- 
ticularly. As we were leaving the Piazza San Marco, 
about eleven, a boat came up, burning blue lights, with a 
piano, violins, flutes, and about twenty men on board, 
who sang choruses in the most delightful manner, and 
sometimes solos. They were followed by an immense 
number of gondolas, and we joined the cortége, and all 
went under the Bridge of Sighs, where the effect’ was 
beautiful beyond description. We then all turned and 


entered the Grand Canal, which was entirely filled with 
82 : 


260 Mary Somerville. 


gondolas from one side to the other, jammed together, so 
that we moved en masse, and stopped every now and then 
to burn blue or red Bengal lights before the principal 
palaces, singing going on all the while. We saw nom- 
bers of our Venetian friends in their gondolas, enjoying 
the scene as much as we did, to whom it was almost new. 
I never saw people who enjoyed life more, and they 
have much the advantage of us in their delicious climate 
and aquatic amusements, so much more picturesque than 
what can be done on land. However, we have had no 
less than three dances lately. The Grand Duke of Mo- 
dena, with his son and daughter-in-law, were here, and to 
them a féie was given by the Countess de Thurn. The 
palace was brilliant with lights; it is on the grand canal, 
and immediately under the balcony was a boat from 
which fireworks were let off, and then a couple of boats 
succeeded them, in which choruses were sung. The view 
from the balcony is one of the finest in Venice, and the 
night was charming, and there I was while the dancing 
went on. . , .- I never saw Somerville so well; this 
place suits us to the life, constant air and no fatigue; I 
never once have had a headache ... . Now, my déar 
W., tell me your tale; my tale is done. 
Yours affectionately, 
Mary SomMERVILLE. 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO WORONZOW GREIG, ESQ. 
Romer, Parazzo Lepai, Via Dei Conportri, 27th October, 1843. 
My pearest Woroxzow, 
~.... We had a beautiful journey to Rome, 
with fine weather and no annoyance, notwithstanding the 
disturbed state of the country. At Padua we only re- 


Ferrara. 261 


mained long enough to see the churches, and it was 
impossible to pass within a few miles of Arqua without 
paying q visit to the house of Petrarch. At Ferrara we 
had a letter to the Cardinal Legate, who was' very civil, 
His palace is the ancient abode of the ‘house of Este. 
~ . «+ We had a long visit from him in the evening, and 
found him most agreeable; he regretted that there was 
no opera, as he would have been happy to offer us his 
box. Fourteen of those unfortunate men who have been 
making an attempt to raise an insurrection were arrested 
the day before; and the night before we slept at Lugo, 
the Carabineers had searched the inn during the night, 
entering the rooms where the people were sleeping. We 
should have been more than surprised to have been 
wakened by armed men at midnight. In travelling 
through Italy the reliques and history of the early Chris 

tians and of the Middle Ages have a greater attraction for 
me than those of either the Romans or Etruscans, interest- 
ing though these latter be, and in this journey my taste was 
amply gratified, especially at Ravenna, where the church 
of San Vitale and the Bastlica of St. Apollinare in Classis, 
both built early in the 6th century, are the most magnifi- 
cent specimens imaginable. Here also is the tomb of 
Theodore, a most wonderful building ; the remains of his 
palace and numberless other objects of interest, too 
tedious to mention. Every church is full of them, and 
most valuable MSS. abound in the libraries. I like the 
history of the Middle Ages, because one feels that there is 
something in common between them and us; their names 
still exist in their descendants, who often inhabit the 
very palaces they dwelt in, and their very portraits, by 
the great masters, still hang in their halls; whereas we 
know nothing about the Greeks and Romans except their 


262 Mary Somerville. 


public deeds—their private life is a blank to us. Our. 
journey through the Apennines was most beautiful, pass- 
ing for days under the shade of magnificent oak forests 
or valleys rich in wine, oil, grain, and silk. We deviated 
from the main road for a short distance to Gubbio, to see 
the celebrated Eugubian tables, which are as sharp as if 
they had been engraved yesterday, but in a lost language. 
We stopped to rest at Perngia, but all our friends were at 
their country seats, which we regretted. The country 
round Perugia is unrivalled for richness and beauty, but 
it rained the morning we resumed our journey. It signi- 
fied the less as we had been previously at Citta della 
Pieve and Chiusi; so we proceeded to Orvieto in fine 
weather, still through onk forests. Orvieto is situated on 
the top of an escarped hill, very like the hill forts of 
India, and apparently as inaccessible; yet, by dint of 
numberless turns and windings, we did get up, but only 
in time fur bed. Next morning we saw the sun‘rise on 
the most glorious cathedral. After all we had seen we 
were completely taken by surprise, and were filled with 
the highest admiration at the extreme beauty and fine 
taste of this remarkable building... . . 
Your affectionate mother, 
Mary SomeErvILLe. 


FROM MISS JOANNA BAILLIE TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


HaMPstrEaD, December 27th, 1843. 
My pear Mrs. SomerviIL1e, 
Besides being proud of receiving a letter from you, 
I was much pleased to know that I am, though at such 
a distance, sometimes in your thoughts. I was much 


Joanna Baillie, 263 


pleased, too, with what you have said of the health and 
other gratifications you enjoy in Italy. I should gladly 
have thanked you at the time, had I known how to 
address my letter; and after receiving your proper 
direction from our friend Miss Montgomery, I have 
been prevented from using it by various things... . 
But though so long silent I have not been ungrateful, 
and thank you with all my -heart. The account you 
give of Venice is very interesting. There is something 
affecting.in still seeing the descendants of the former 
Doges holding a diminished state in their remaining 
palaces with so much courtesy. I am sure you have found 
yourself a guest in their saloons, hung with paintings 
of their ancestors, with very mixed feelings. However, 
Venice to the eye, as you describe it, is Venice still; 
and with its lights at night gleaming upon the waters 
makes a very vivid picture to my fancy. You no doubt 
have fixed it on canvas, and can carry it about with you 
tor the delight of your friends who may never see the 
original, 

In return to your kind inquiries after us, I have, all 
things considered, a very good account to give. Ladies 
of four score and upwards cannot expect to be robust, 
and need not be gay. We sit by the fire-side with 
our books (except when those plaguy notes are to be 
written) and receive the visits of our friendly neighbours 
very contentedly, and, I ought to say, and trust I 
may say, very thankfully... .. This morning brought 
one in whom I feel sure that you and your daughters 
take some interest, Maria Edgeworth. She has been 
dangerously ill, but is now nearly recovered, and is 
come from Ireland to pass the winter months with 
her sisters in London: weak in body, but the mind 


264 Mary Somerville, 


as clear and the spirits as buoyant as ever, You will, 
be glad to hear that she even has it in her thoughts 
to write a new work, and has the plan of it nemly 
arranged. There will be nothing new in the story 
itself, but the purpose and treating of it will be new 
which is, perhaps, a better thing. In our retired way of 
living, we know little of what goes on in the literary 
werld. . . . . I was, however, in town for a few houry 
the other day, and called upon a lady of rank who hag 
fashionable learned folks eoming about her, and she in- 
formed me that there are new ideas regarding philosophy 
entertained in the world, and that Sir John Herschel 
was now considered as a slight, second-rate man, or 
person. Who are the first-rate she did not say, aitd, I 
suppose, you will not be much mortified to hear that your 
name was not mentioned at all. So much for our learning. 
My sister was much disappointed the other day when, in 
expectation of a ghost story from Mr. Dickens, she only 
got a grotesque moral allegory ; now, as she delights in 
a ghost and hates an allegory, this was very provoking. 
Believe me, 
My dear Mrs. Somerville, 
Yours with admiration and esteem, 
J. BaLLre. 


FROM MISS JOANNA BAILLIE TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
HamPsTEAD, January 9th, 1851. 
My pear Friesp, 


My dear Mary Somerville, whom J am proud tu 
call my friend, and that she so calls me, I could say 
much on this point, but I dare not. I received your. 


Str Sohn Herschel. 265 


letter from Mr. Greig last night, and thank yor’ very 
gratefully. If my‘head were less confused I should do it 
better, but the pride I have in thinking of you as philoso- 
pher and a woman cannot be exceeded. Ishall read your 
letter many times over. My sister and myself at so great 
an age are waiting 'to be called away in ‘mercy’ by an 
Almighty Father, and we part with ‘our earthly friends as 
those whom we shalt meet again. ~ My great monster 
book is now published, and your copy I shall send to your 
son who will peep into’ it, and then forward ‘it’ to your- 
self. I beg tobe kindly and respectfully remembered to 
your husband’; I offer my best wishes to your daugh- 
ters. .... F 
, _ Yours, my pen Friend, 
Very faithfully, 
Joanna Baur. 


My sister begs of you and all’ your family to ‘accept her 
dest wishes. 


FROM SIR JOHN HERSCHEL TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


; | 18th March, 1844. 
My pear Mrs. SoMERVILLE, 

To have received a letter from you so long ago, anc 
not yet to’ have thanked you for it, is what I could hardly 
have believed myself—if the rapid lapse of time in thi 
uniform retirement in which we live were not pressed upor 
me in a variety of ways which convince me that as a mat 
grows older, his sand, as the grains get low in the glass 
slips through more glibly, and steals away with accele 
rated speed! Ywish I could either send you a copy o 
my Cape observations, or tell you they are ,publishe: 


264. Mary Somerville. 


er evén inthe press. Far from it—I do not expect to 
“ve fo press" before another year has elapsed, for 
-though I have got my catalogues of Southern nebule 
and Double stars reduced and arrangeg, yet there is a 
great deal of other matter still to be worked through, and 
I have every description of reduction entirely to execute 
myself. These are very tedious, and I am a very slow 
computer, and have been continually taken off the sub- 
ject by other matter, forced upon me by “ pressure from 
without.” What I am now engaged on is the monograph 
of the principal Southern Nebule, the object of which is 
to put on record every ascertainable particular of their 
actual appearance and the stars visible in them, so as to 
satisfy future observers whether new stars have appeared, 
or changes taken place in the nebulosity. To what an 
extent this work may go you may judge from the fact 
that the catalogue of visible stars actually mapped down 
in their places within the space of less than a square 
degree in the nebula about 4 Argus which I have just 
completed comprises between 1300 and 1400 stars. 
This is indeed a stupendous object. It is a vastly ex- 
tensive branching and looped nebula, in the centre of the 
densest part of which is 9 Argus, itself a most remark- 
able star, seeing that from the fourth magnitude which it 
‘had in Ptvulemy’s time, it has risen (by sudden starts, and 
not gradually) to such a degree of brilliancy as now 
actually to surpass Canopus, and to be second only to 
Sirius. One of these leaps I myself witnessed when in 
the interval of ceasing to observe it in one year, and re+ 
suming its observation in two or three months after in 
the next, it had sprung over the heads of all the stars of 
the jirst magnitude, from Fomalhaut and Regulus (the 
two least = them) to a Centauri, which it then jnst 


Planetary Nebule. ‘267 


equalled, and which is the brightest of all but Canopus: 
and Sirius! It has since made a fresh jump—and who: 
can say it will be the last ? roa 

One of the most beautiful objects in the southern’ 
hemisphere is a pretty large, perfectly round, and very 
well-defined planetary nebula, of a fine, full independent: 
blue colour—the only object I have ever seen in the 
heavens fairly entitled to be called independently blue, 
i.e., not by contrast. Another superk and most striking 
object is Lacaille’s 80 Doradus, a nebula of great size in 
the larger nubicula, of which it is impossible to give a 
better idea than to compare it to a “true lover’s knot,” 
or assemblage of nearly circular nebulous loops uniting 
in a centre, in or near which is an exactly circular round 
dark hole. Neither this nor the nebula about » Argus 
have any, the slightest, resemblance to the representations 
given of them by Dunlop. . . . . As you are so kind as to 
offer to obtain information on any points intevesting to 
me at Rome, here is one on which I earnestly desire to 
obtain the means of forming a correct opinion, i.e., the 
real powers and merits of De Vico’s great refractor at the 
Collegio Romano. De Vico’s accounts of it appear to 
me to have not a little of the extra-marvellous in them. 
Saturn’s two close satellites regularly observed—eight 
stars in the. trapezium of Orion! @ Aquile (as Schuma-" 
cher inquiringly writes to me) divided into three! the 
supernumerary divisions of Saturn’s ring well seen, &c., 
&e. And all by a Cauchoix refractor of eight inches? I 
fear me that these wonders are not for female eyes, the 
good monks are too well aware of the penetrating quali- 
ties of such optfes to allow them entry within the seven- 
fold walls of their Collegio, Has Somerville ever looked 
through it? On his report I know I could quiterely. As 


268 Mary Somerville. 


for Lord Rosse’s great reflector, I can only tell you what I 
hear, haying never seen it, or even his three feet onc. 
The great, ene is not yet completed. Of the other, 
those who have luoked through it speak in raptures. I 
met not long since an officer who, at Halifax in Nova 
Scotia, saw the comet at noon close -to the sun, and very 
conspicuous the day after the perihelion passage. 

Your account of the pictures and other delicie of 
Venice makes our mouths water; but it is of no use, so 
we can only congratulate those who are in the full enjoy- 
ment of such things. 

Ever yours most truly, 
J. HERSCHEL. 


On returning to Rome I was elected Associate of 
the College of Risurgenti, and in the following April 
I became an honorary member of the Imperial and 
Royal Academy of Science, Literature and Art at 
Arezzo. I finished an edition of the Physical 
Sciences, at which I had been working, and in 
spring Somerville hired a small hquse belonging 
to the Duca Sforza Cesarini, at Genzano, close to 
and with a beautiful view of the Lake of Nemi; 
but as I had not seen my son for some time, I 
now availed myself of the oppurtunity of travelling 
with our friend Sir Frederick Adam to England. 
We crossed the Channel at Osteng, and at the 
mouth of the Thames lay the old “ Venerable,” 
in which my father was flag-captain at the 


Visits in Englana. 269 


battle of Camperdown. I had a joyful meeting 
with ,my son and his wife, and we went to see 
many things that were new to me. One of our 
first expeditions was to the British Museum. I had 
already seen the Elgin marbles, and the antiquities 
collected at Babylon by Mr, Rich, when he was 
Consul at Bagdad, but now the Museum had been 
enriched by the marbles from Halicarnassus, and 
by the marvellous remains excavated by Mr. Layard 
from the ruins of Nineveh, the very site of which 
had been for ages unknown. 

I frequently went to Turner's studio, and was 
always welcomed. No one could imagine that. so 
much poetical feeling existed in so rough an exterior. 
The water-colour exhibitions were very good ; my 
countrymen still maintained their superiority in that 
style of art, and the drawings of some English ladies 
were scarcely inferior to those of first-rate artists, 
especially those of my friend, Miss Blake, of 
Danesbury. 

While in England I made several visits ; the first 
was to my dear friends Sir John and Lady Herschel, 
at Collingwood, who received me with the warmest 
affection. I cannot express the pleasure it gave me 
to feel myself at home in a family where not only 
the highest branches of science were freely discussed, 
but where the accomplishments and graces of life 


270 Mary Somerville, 


were cultivated. I was highly gratified and proud 
of being godmother to Rosa, tla daughter of Sir 
John and Lady Herschel. Among other places near 
Collingwood I was taken to see an excellent observa- 
tory formed by Mr. Dawes, a gentleman of inde- 
pendent fortune ; and here I must remark, to the 
honour of my countrymen, that at the time I am 
writing, there are twenty-six private observatories in 
Great Britain and Ireland, furnished with first-rate 
instruments, with which some of the most important 
astronomical discoveries have been made. 


[I received the following letter from my mother while 
we were at Genzano. It is one of several which record 
in her natural and unaffected words my mother’s profound 
admiration for Sir John Herschel. 


MRS. SOMERVILLE TO MISS SOMERVILLE. 
SYDENHAM, lst September, 1844. 
Sunday Night. 
My pear Muartaa, 

. We go to the Herschels’ to-morrow, and there I 
shall fnich this letter, as it is impossible to get it in 
time for Tuesday’s post, but I have so much to do now 
that you must not expect a letter every, post, and I had 
no time to begin this before, and I am too tired to sit up 
later towight..... 


CoLLaIGWooD, Monday. 


This appears to be a remarkably beautiful place, with 
abundance of fine timber. . . . W. brought your dear nice 


A Godchild. 271 


letter; it makes me long to be with you, and, please God, 
I shall be so before fong, as I set off this day fortnight. . 


Wednesday. 


Yesterday I had a great deal of scientific talk with 
Sir John, and.a long walk in the grounds which are 
extensive, and very pretty. Then the Airys arrived, and 
we had a large party at dinner... ... I think, now, 
as I always have done, that Sir John is by much the 
highest and finest character I have ever met with; the 
most gentlemanly and polished mind, combined with the 
most exalted morality, and the utmost of human attain- 
ment. His view of everything is philosophic, and at the 
same time highly poetical, in short, he combines every 
quality that is admirable and excellent with the most 
charming modesty, and Lady Herschel is quite worthy of 
such a husband, which is the greatest praise I can give 
her. Their kindness and affection for me has been un- 
bounded. Lady H. told me she heard such praises of you 

* two that she is anxious to know you, and she hopes you 
will always look upon her and her family as friends. The 
christening went off as well as possible. Mr. Airy was 
godfather, and Mrs. Airy and I godmothers, but I had 
the naming of the child—Matilda Rose, after Lady 
Herschel’s sister. I assure you I was quite adroit in 
taking the baby from the nurse and giving her to the 
clergyman. Sir John took Mrs. Airy and me a qrive to see 
a very fine picturesque castle a few miles off. . . . Ihave 
got loads of things for experiments on light from Sir John 
with a variety of papers, and you may believe that J have 
profited not a little by his conversation, and have a thou- 
sand projects for study and writing, so I think painting 
will be at a standstill, only that I have promised to paint 


272 Mary Somerville. 


something for Lady Herschel. Sir John computes four 
or five hours every day, and yet his Cape observations 
will not be finished for two years. I have seen every- 
thing he is or has been doing. 
Your affectionate mother, 
Mary SomMERvVIELE. 


(My mother continues her recollections of this journey! 


My next visit was to Lord and Lady Charles Percy, 
at Guy’s Cliff, in Warwickshire, a pretty picturesque 
place of historical and romantic memory. The 
society was pleasant, and I was taken to Kenilworth 
and Warwick Castle, on the banks of the Avon, a 
noble place, still bearing marks of the Wars of the 
Roses. I never saw such magnificent oak-trees as 
those on the Leigh estate, near Guy’s Cliff. 

I then visited my maiden namesake, Mrs. 
Fairfax, of Gilling Castle, Yorkshire. She was a 
highly cultivated person, had been much abroad, 
and was a warm-hearted friend. I was mueh inte- 
rested in the principal room, for a deep frieze sur- 
rounds the wall, on which are painted the coats of 
arms of all the families with whom the Fairfaxes 
have intermarried, ascending to very great antiquity ; 
besides, every pane of glass in a very large bay 
window in the same room is stained with one of 
these coats of arms, Every morning after breakfast 


Fedburgh Abbeys 278 


a prodigious flock of pea-fowl came from the woods 
around to be fed. 

I now went to the vicinity of Kelso to visit my 
brother and sister-in-law, General and Mrs. Elliot, 
who lived on the banks of the Tweed. We went to 
Jedburgh, the place of my birth. After many years 
T still thought the valley of the Jed very beautiful ; 
I fear the pretty stream has been invaded by manu- 
factories: there is a perpetual war between civiliza- 
tion and the beauty of nature. I went to see the spot 
from whence I once took a sketch of Jedburgh Abbey 
and the manse in which I was born, which does not 
exist, I believe, now. When I was a very young girl 
I made a painting from this sketch. Our next 
excursion was to a lonely village called Yetholm, in 
the hills, some miles from Kelso, belonging to the 
gipsies. The “king ” and the other men were absent, 
but the women were civil, and some of them very 
pretty. Our principal object in going there was to 
see a stone in the wall of a small and very ancient 
church at Linton, nearly in ruins, on which is carved 
in relief the wyvern and wheel, the crest of the 
Somervilles. 

From Kelso I went to Edinburgh to spend a few 
days with Lord Jeffrey and his family. No one who 
had seen his gentle kindness in domestic life, and 


the warmth of his attachment to his friends, could 
Tt 


274 Mary Somerville. 


have supposed. he possessed that power of ridicule 
and severity which made him the terror of authors. 
His total ignorance of science may perhaps excuse 
him for having admitted into the “ Review” 
Brougham’s intemperate article on the undulatory 
theory of light, a discovery which has immortalized 
the name of Dr. Young. I found Edinburgh, the 
city of my early recollections, picturesque and 
beautiful as ever, but enormously increased both to 
the north and to the south, Queen Street, which in 
my youth was open to the north and commanded a 
view of the Forth and the mountains beyond, was 
now in- the middle of the new town. All those I 
had formerly known were gone—a new generation 
had sprung up, living in all the luxury of modern 
times. On returning to London I spent a pleasant 
time with my son and his wife, who invited all those 
to meet me whom they thought I should like to see. 


[My mother returned to Rome in autumn in com- 
pany with an old friend and her daughter. 


The winter passed without any marked event, but 
always agreeably ; new people came, making a plea- 
sant variety in the society, which, though still 
refined, was beginning to be very mixed, as was 
amusingly seen at Torlonia’s balls and tableaux: 


Pushing People 275 


where many of the guests formed a singular contrast 
with the beautiful Princess, who was of the historical 
family of the Colonnas. I was often ashamed of 
my countrymen, who, all the while speaking of 
the Italians with contempt, tried to force themselves 
into their houses. Prince Borghese refused the 
same person an invitation te a ball five times. I 
was particularly scrupulous about invitations, and 
never asked for one in my life; nor did I ever seek 
to make acquaintances with the view of being in- 
vited to their houses. 
* * * * *- 


[The following letters give a aketch of life during the 
summer months at Rome :-— 


MRS. SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 


Rome, 3rd August, 1845, 
My pear Woronzow, 

- . Tamglad you are so much pleased 
with ag ust, and that it is so little injured after having 
been at the bottom of the sea. You will find Macdonald 
a very agreeable and original person. As to spending the 
summer in Rome, you may make yourself quite easy, for 
the heat is very bearable, the thermometer varying 
between 75° and 80° in our rooms during the day, which 
are kept in darkness, and at night it always becomes 
cooler. Thank God, we are all quite well, and Somerville 
Bereculaniy:® s0; he goes out during the day to amuse 

T2 


276 Mary Sanervlle. 


himself, and the girls paint in the Borghese gallery.., As, 
for myself I have always plenty to do till half past three, , 
when we dine, and after dinner I sleep for an hour or 
more, and when the sun is set we go out to wander a little, 
for a long walk is tuo fatiguing at this season. We have 
very little society, the only variety we have had was a 
very pretty supper party given by Signore Rossi, the 
French minister to the Prince and Princess de Broglie, 
son and daughter-in-law of the duke. The young lady 
is extremely beautiful, and as I knew the late Duchesse 
de Broglie (Madame de Staél’s daughter) we soon got 
acquainted. They are newly married, and have come to 
spend part of the summer in Rome, so you see people: 
are not so much alarmed asthe English. . . We went 
yesterday evening to see the Piazza Navona full of water ; 
it is flooded every Saturday and Sunday at this season ; 
there is music, and the whole population of Rome is 
collected round it, carts and carriages splashing through 
it in all directions. [think it must be about three feet deep. 
It was there the ancient Romans had their naval games ; 
and the custom of filling it with water in summer has 
lasted ever since. The fountain is one of the most 
beautiful in Reme, which is saying a great deal; indeed 
the immense gush of the purest water from innumerable 
fountains in every street and every villa is one of the 
peculiarities of Rome. I fear from what I have heard of 
those in Trafalgar Square that the quantity of water will 
be very miserable. 

The papers (I mean the Times), are full of abuse of 
Mr. Sedgwick and Dr. Buckland, but their adversaries 
write such nonsense that it matters little. I do not 
think I have anything to add to my new edition. If 
you hear of anything of moment let me know. Perhaps ; 


Life af Rome. 277 


something may have transpired at the British Asso- 
ciation. . 


Your affectionate mother,” 
Mary SoMERVILEE. 


MRS, SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 


Rome, May 28th, 1845, 
My prar Woroyzow, 

. I don’t know why I have so long delayed writing 
to you. I rather think it is because we have been living 
so quiet a lite, one day so precisely similar to the pre- 
ceding, that there has been nothing worth writing about. 
This is our first really summer-like day, and splendid it is ; 
but we are sitting in a kind of twilight. The only means 
of keeping the rooms cool is by keeping the house dark 
and shutting out the external air, and then in the evening 
we have a delightful walk; the country is splendid, the 
Campagna one sheet of deep verdure and flowers of every 
kind in abundance. We generally have six or seven large 
nosegays in the room; we have only to go to some of the 
neighbouring villas and gather them. Most of the 
English are gone; people make a great mistake in not 
remaining during the hot weather, this is the time for en- 
joyment. We are busy all the morning, and in the after- 
noon we take our book or drawing materials and sit on 
the grass in some of the lovely villas for hours ; then we 
come home to tea, and are glad to see anyone who will 
come in for an hour or two. We have had a son of 
Mr. Babbage here. He is employed in making * the 
railway that is to go from Genoa to Milan, and he was- 
travelling with eight other Englishmen who came to wake 


278 Mary Somerville. 


arrangements for covering Italy with a network of these 
iron roads, connecting all the great cities ‘and also the 
two seas from Venice to Milan and Genoa and from 
Ancona by Rome to Civita Vecchia. However the Pope is 
opposed to the latter part, but they say the cardinals and 
people wish it so much that he will at last consent... . 
Many thanks for the Vestiges, ke. I think it a powerful 
production, and was highly pleased with it, but I can easily 
see that it will offend in some quarters; however it 
shoald be remembered that there has been as much 
opposition to the trne system of astronomy and to geo- 
logical facts as there can be to this. At all events free 
and open discussion of all natural and moral phenomena 
must lead to truth at last. Is Babbage the author? I 
rather think he would not be so careful in concealing his 
name... .. 


[My mother made some curious experiments upon the 
effect of the solar spectrum on juices of plants and other 
substances, of which she sent an account to Sir John 
Herschel, who answered telling her that he had conp 
municated her account of her experiments to the Royal 
Society] 


SIR JOHN HERSCHEL TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 


CoLLINGWooD, November 21st, 1845. 
My pear Mrs. Somervinte, 


IT cannot express to you the pleasure I experi- 
enced from the receipt of your letter and the perusal of 
the elegant experiments it relates, which appear to me of 
the highest interest and show (what I always suspected), 
that there is a world of wonders awaiting disclosure in 


Mrs. Samerville's Expériments. 279 


the solar spectrum, and that influences widely differing 
from either light, heat or dolour are transmitted to us 
from our central luminary, which are mainly instrumental 
in evolving and maturing the splendid hues of the 
vegetable creation and elaborating the juices to which 
they owe their beauty and their vitality. I think it 
certain that heat goes for something in evaporating your 
liquids and thereby causing some of your phenomena; 
but there is a difference of quality as well as of quantity 
of heat brought into view which renders it susceptible of 
analysis by the coloured juices so that in certain parts 
of the spectrum it is retained and fixed, in others reflected - 
according as the nature of the tint favours the one or the 
other. Pray go on with these delightful experiments. I 
wish you could save yourself the fatigue of watching and 
directing your sunbeam by a clock work. If I were at 
your elbow I could rig you out a heliotrope quite 
sufficient with the aid of any common wooden clock. 
...... NowI am going to take a liberty (but not till 
after duly consulting Mr. Greig with whose approbation 
I act, and you are not to gainsay our proceedings) and 
that is to communicate your results in the form of 
“an extract of a letter” to myself—to the Royal Society. 
You may be very sure that I would not do this if I 
thought that the experiments were not intrinsiénlly quite 
deserving to be recorded in the pages of the Phil. Trans. 
and if I were not sure that they will lead to a vast field 
of curious and beautiful research; and as you have 
already once contributed to the Society, (on a subject 
connected with the spectrum and the sunbeam) this will, 
I trust, not appear in your eyes in a formidable or a 
repulsive light, and it will be a great matter of congratu- 
‘lation to us all to know that'these subjects: continue to 


850 Mary Somerville. 


engage your attention, and that you can turn your 
residence in that sunny clime to such admirable account. 
So do not eall upon me to retract (for before you get this 
the papers will be in the secretary’s hands). 

Iam here nearly as much out of the full stream of 
scientific matters as you at Rome. We had a full and 
very satisfactory meeting at Cambridge of the British 
Association, with a full attendance of continental magne- 
tists and meteorologists, and within these few days; I 
have learned that our Government meant to grant all our 
requests and continue the magnetic and meteorological 
observations. Humboldt has sent me his Cosmos (Vol. L.), 
which is good, all but the first 60 pages, which are 
oecupied in telling his readers what his book is not to be. 
Dr. Whewell has just published another book on the 
Principles of Morals, and also another on education, in 
which he cries up the geometrical processes in preference 
to analysis. .... a 

Yours very faithfully, 
J. HERSCHEL. 


The Prmce and Princesse de Broglié came to 
Rome in 1845, and Signore Pellegrino Rossi, at this 
time French Minister at the Vatican, gave them a 
supper party, to which we were invited. We had 
met with him long before at Geneva, where he had 
taken refuge after the insurrection of 1821. He was 
greatly esteemed there and admired for his eloquence 

"in the lectures he gave in the University. It was 


, Rossi, 28} 


@ curious circumstance, that he, wha,was,a Roman 
subject,‘ and was exiled; and, if I am not. mis- 
taken; condemned ‘to death, ‘should return to Ronie 
as French Minister. He had a remarkably fine 
countenance, resembling some ancient. Roman bust. 
M. Thiers had brought in a law in the French 
Chambers to check the audacity of the Jesuits, and 
Rossi was sent to negotiate with the Pope. We had 
seen much of him at, Rome, and were horrified, in 
1848, to hear that. he had been assassinated. on the 
steps of the Cancelleria, at Rome, where the Legisla- 
tive Assembly met, and whither he was proceeding 
‘to aftend its first meeting.’ No one offered to assist 
him, nor to arrest. the murderers, except Dr, Panta- 
leone, a much esteemed Roman physician, and mem- 
ber of the Chamber, who did what he could to save 
him, but in vain ; he was a great loss to the Liberal 
cause. . 

Towards the end of summer we spent a month 
most agreeably at Subiaco, receiving much civility 
from the Benedictine monks of the Sacro Speco, and 
visiting all the neighbouring towns, each one perched 
on some hill-top, and one more romantically pictur- 
esque than the other. It was in this part of the 
country that Claude Lorraine and, Poussin studied 
and painted. I never saw more beautiful country, 
or one which afforded so many exquisite subjects for 


282 Mary Somerville. 


a landscape painter. We went all over the country 
on mules—to some of the towns, such as Cervara, up 
steep flights of steps cut in“the rock. The people, 
tov, were extremely picturesque, and the women 
still wore their costumes, which probably now they 
have laid aside for tweeds and Manchester cottons, 
I often during my winters in Rome went to paint 

from nature in the Campagna, either with Somer- 
ville or with Lady Susan Percy, who drew very 
prettily. Once we set out a little later than usual, 
when, driving through the Piazza of the Bocca della 
Verita, we both called out, “Did you see that? 
How horrible!" It was the guillotine ; an execution 
had just taken place, and had we been a quarter of an 
hour earlier we should have passed at the fatal 
moment. Under Gregory XVI. everything was 
conducted in the most profound secrecy; arrests 
were made almost at our very door, of which we 
knew nothing ; Mazzini was busily at work on one 
side, the Jesuitical party actively intriguing, accord- 
ing to their wont, on the other; and in the mean 
time society went on gaily at the surface, ignorant 
of and indifferent to the course of events. We 
were preparing to leave Rome when Gregory died. 
We put off our journey to see his funeral, and 
the Conclave, which terminated, in the course 
of scarcely two daya, in the election of Pius IX. 


Pwo IX. 288 


We also saw the new Pope’s coronation, -and 
witnessed the beginning of that popularity which 
lasted, so short a titre. Much was expected 
from him, and in the beginning of his reign 
the, moderate liberals fondly hoped that Italy 
would unite in one great federation, with Pins IX. 
at’ the head of it; entirely forgetting how incom- 
patible a theocracy or government by priests ever 
must be with all progress and with ‘liberal institu- 
tions, Their hopes were soon blighted, and after al] 
the well-known events of 1848 and 1849, a reaction 
set in all over Italy, except in gallant little Pied- 
mont, .where the constitution was maintained, 
thanks to: Victor Emmanuel, and especially to that 
great genius, Camillo Cavour, and in spite of the 
disastrous reverses at Novara. Once more in 1859 
Piedmont went to war with Austria, this time with 
success,! and with the not disinterested help: of 
France. One province after another joined hey; 
and. Italy; freed from all the little petty princes, 
and last, not least, from the Bourbons, has become 
that one great. kingdom which was the dream'of 
some of her greatest men in times of old. 

1 We went to Bologna for a short time, and: there 
the enthusiasm for the new Pope was absolutely 
intolerable. “‘ Viva Pio Nono!” was shouted night 
atid day. There was no repose; bands of. music 


284 alary Somerville. - 


went about the streets, playing airs composed for 
the occasion, and in the theatres it was even worse, 
for the acting was interrupted, and the orchestra 
called upon to play the national tunes in vogue, 
and repeat them again and again, amid the deafen- 
ing shouts and applause of the excited audience. 
We found the Bolognese very sociable, and it was 
by far the most musical society I ever was in. 
Rossini was living in Bologna, and received in the 
evening, and there was always music, amateur and 
professional, at his house. Frequently there was 
part-singing or choruses, and after the music was 
over the evening ended with a dance. We fre- 
quently saw Rossini some years later, when we 
resided at Florence. He was clever and amusing in 
conversation, but satirical He was very bitter 
against the modern style of opera-singing, and con- 
sidered the singers. of the present day, with some 
exceptions, as wanting in study and finish. He 
objected to much of the modern music, as dwelling 
ton constantly on the highest notes of the voice, 
whereby it is very soon deteriorated, and the singer 
forced to scream ; besides which, he considered the 
orchestral accompaniments too loud. I, who recol- 
lected Pasta, Malibran, Grisi, Rubini, and others of 
that epoch, could not help agreeing with him when 
I compared them to the singers I heard at the 


‘Assassination 285° 


Pergola and elsewhere, -The theatre, téo, was’ good’ 
at. Bologna, and we frequently went to it. 

One, evening we were sitting on the balcony of 
the hotel, when we saw a man stab: another'in the 
back of the neck,.and' then run away. The victim 
staggered along for a minute, and then fell down in 
a pool of blood. He had been a spy of the police 
under Gregory XVI, and one. of the principal 
agents of his cruel government. He was’ so. ob- 
noxious to the people that his assassin-has never 
been discovered. oe 

From Bologna we went for'a few weeks to 
Recoaro, where I drank the waters, after, which we 
travelled to England by the St. Gothard pass. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


PUBLISHES ‘PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY ”’—LETTER FROM HUMBOLDT—CHRIST- 
MAS AT COLLINGWOOD—LETTEER FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE—BARADAY 
— LETTER FROM FARADAY—EEITH JOHNSTONE’S MAPS—WINTER AT 
MUNICH —SALZBURG—LAKE OF GARBA— MINISCALCHI—POEM BY 
CAYERINA BRENZONI—LETTER FROM BRENZONI—LETTER FROM MRS. 
SOMERVILLE—ELOGE BY MINISCALCHI—WINTER AT TURIN—BARON 
PLANA—CAMILLO CAVOUR—COLLINE NEAR TURIN—GENOA—TEBRESA 
DOVIA—FLORENCE—MISS F, P. COBBE—VIVISECTION —£XCUBSIONS IN 
THE NEIGHBOURHOOD—CHOLERA—MISERICORDIA—PIO NONO IN 
‘TUSCANY — COMET— TUSCAN REVOLUTION — WAR IN LOMBARDY— 
ENTRY OF VICTOR EMMANUEL INTO FLORENCE—LETTERS FROM MRS. 
SOMERVILLE—MY FATHER’S DEATH—LETTER FROM MISS COBBE. 


WE spent the autumn in visiting my relations on 
the banks of the Tweed. I was much out of health 
at the time. As winter came on I got better, and 
was preparing to print my “Physical Geography ” 
when “Cosmos” appeared. I at once determined to 
put my manuscript in the fire when Somerville said, 
“Do not be rash—consult some of our friends— 
Herschel for instance.” SoI sent the MS. to Sir 
John Herschel, who advised me by all means to 
publish it. It was very favourably reviewed by Sir 
Henry Holland in the “ Quarterly,” which tended 


Humboldt’s Letter. 287 


much to its success. I afterwards sent a copy of a 
later edition to Baron Humboldt, who wrote me a 
very kjnd letter in return. 


BARON HUMBOLDT TO MRS. SOMERVILLE 
. ( 


A Sans Souct, ce 12 Juillet, 1849. 
MapamE, 

C’est un devoir bien doux & remplir, Madame, 
que de vous offrir Phommage renouvellé de mon dévoue- 
ment et de ma respectueuse admiration. Ces sentimens 
datent de bien loin chez Yhomme antidiluvien auquel 
vous avez daigné adresser des lignes si aimables et la 
nouvelle édition de ce bel ouvrage qui m’a charmé et 
instruit dés qu'il avait paru pour la premiére fois. A cette 
grande supériorité que vous possedez et qui a si noble- 
ment illustré votre nom, dans les hautes régions de 
Yanalyse mathématique, vous joignez, Madame, une 
variété de connaissances dans toutes les parties de la 
physique et de Vhistoire naturelle descriptive. Aprés 
votre “Mechanism of the Heavens,” le philosophique 
ouvrage ‘“‘Connexion of the Physical Sciences” avait 
été objet de ma constante admiration. Je ]’ai lu en entier 
et puis relu dans la septiéme édition qui a paru en 1846 
dans les tems o& nous étions plus calme, od lorage 
politique ne grondait que de loin. L’auteur de Tim- 
prudent ‘‘ Cosmos” devoit saluer plus que tout autre la 
“‘ Géographie Physique’? de Mary Somerville. J’ai su 
me la procurer dés les premiéres semaines par les soins 
de notre ami commun le Chev. Bunsen. Je ne connais 
dans aucune langue un ouvrage de Géographie physique 


288 Mary Somerville. 


que Pon pourrait comparer au yotre. Je l’ai de nouvear 
étudié‘ dans la derniére édition que "je dois a votre 
gracieuse bienveillance. Le sentiment de précision que 
vos habitudes de ** Géométre ” vous ont si prefonfement 
imprimé, pénétt# tous vos travaux, Madame. <Aucun 
fait, aucune des grandes vues de la nature vous échap- 
pent. Vous avez profité et des livres et des conversa- 
tions des voyageurs dans cette malheureuse Itali¢ oy 
passe la grande route de Orient et de Inde. J'ai été 
surpris de la justice de vos apercus sur la Géographie 
des plantes et des animaux. Vous domisez dans ces 
regions comme en astronomie, en météorologie, en ma- 
gnetisme. Que n’ajoutez-vous pas la sphére céleste, 
Yuranologie, votre patrimoine, & la sphere terrestre ? 
C’est vous seule qui pourriez donner & votre belle litéra- 
ture un ouvrage cosmologique original, un ouvrage écrit 
avec cette lucidité et ce gout que distingue tout ce qui 
est emané de votre plume. On a, je le sais, beaucoup de 
bienveillance pour mon Cosmos dans votre patrie; mais il 
en est des formes de composition littéraires, comme de la 
varieté des races et de la difference primitive des langues: 
Un ouvrage traduit manque devie; ce que plait surles bords 
du Rhin doit paraitre bizarre sur les bords de la Tamise 
et de la Seine. Mon ouvrage est une production essen- 
tiellement allemande, et ce caractére méme, j’en suis sir, 
loin de m’en plaindre lui donne le goiit du terroir. Je 
jouis d’une bonne fortune & laquelle (4 cause de mon 
long séjour en France, de mes prédilections personnelles, 
de mes hérésies politiques) le Léopard ne m’avait pas 
trop accoutumé. Je demande 4 Villustre auteur du 
volume sur la Mécanique Céleste d’avoir le courage 
@agerandir sa Géographie Physique. Je suis stir que le 
grand homme que nous aimons le plus, vous et moi, Sir 


Discovery of Neptune. 289. 


John Herschel, serait de, mon opinion. Le Moxpe, j 44, 
me sers du titre que Descartes voulait donner a yn livre, 
dont nous n’avons que de pauyres fragmens ; le Monde, 
doit étre éerit pour les Anglais par un auteur de race pure, 
Tes a pas de séve, pas de vitalité diag les traductions 
les mieux faites... Ma santé s'est conservé, miraculeuse- 
“ment & Page de quatre-vingts ans, de mon ardeur pour, 
le travail noctume au milieu des agitations d’une position 
que je:n’ai pas besoin de vous depeindre puisque l’excel- 
lente: Mademoiselle de vous la fait connaitre. J’ ai 
bouleversé, dhangé mes deux volumes des “ Ansichten.” 
Tl n’en est resté que #. C’est comme un nouvel ouvrage 
que j’aurai bientét le bonheur de vous adresser si 
M. Cotta pense pouvoir hasarder une publication dans 
ces tems ow la force physique croit guérir un mal moral 
et vacciner le contentement 4 l’Allemagne unitaire!! Le 
troisigme volume de mon Cosmos avance, mais la sérénité 
Manque aux dimes moins crédules. 

Agréez, je vous supplie, Phommage de mon affectueuse 
et ie Soa reconnaissance, 

ALEXANDRE DE Homnoupt. 


Somerville and I spent the Christmas at Colling- | 
wood with our friends the Herschels. The party 
consisted of Mr. Airy, Astronomer-Royal, and Mr. 
Adams, who had taken high honours at Cambridge. 
This young man and M. Leverrier, the celebrated 
French astronomer, had separately caleulated the 
orbit'of Neptune and announced it so nearly at the 


290 mary Somerville. 


same time, that gach country claims the honour of 
the discovery. Mr. Adams told Somerville: that the 
following sentence in the sixth edition of the “ Con- 
nexion of the Physical Sciences, 3 published i in the year 
1842, put it into his head to calculate ‘the. orbit of 
Neptune. “If after the lapse of years the tables 
formed from a combination of numercus' observa- 
tions should be still inadequate to represent the 
motions of Uranus, the diserepancies ;may reveal 
the existence, nay, even the mass and orbit of a 
body placed for ever beyond the sphere of vision.” 
That prediction was fulfilled in 1846, by the dis- 
covery of Neptune revolving at the distance of 
3,000,000,000 of miles from the sun. The mass of 
Neptune, the size and position of his orbit in space, 
and his periodic time, were determined from his dis- 
turbing action on Uranus before the planet itself had 
been seen. 
We left Collingwood as ever with regret. 


[The following is an extract from a letter written by my 
mother during this visit :— 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
COLLINGWOOD, 1st January, 1848. 


- »- » You can more easily conceive than I edu 
fescribe the great kindness and affection which we have 
received from both Sir Joha and Lady Herschel ; I feel 


Faraday. 291 


"a pride ‘and pleasure beyond what le can: express in having 
‘sweh friends. Collingwood is a house by, itself in the 
world, there certainly is. nothing like it for all that is 
great and good. | The tharm of the conversation is only 
equalled by its variety'—every subject ‘Sir John touches 
turns to doubly refined gold ; profound, brilliant, amiable, 
and highly poetical,’ I could never end admiring and 
praising him,. The the children are so nice and he so 
kind and amusing to them, making them quite his friends 
and companions. 
Yours, my dearest Woronzow! 
Most affectionately, 
M,.Sowervinie, ;, 


We had formed such a friendship with Mr. Fara- 
day that while we lived abroad he sent me a copy _ 
of everything he published, and on returning ‘to 
England we.renewed our friendship with that illus- 
trious philosopher, and attended his lectures at the 
Royal Institution. He had already'!magnetized a 
ray of polarised light, but was still lecturing on the 
magnetic and diamagnetic propertics of matter. At 
the last lecture we attended he showed the diamag- 
netism of flame, which had been proved by a foreign 
philosopher. Mr. Faraday never would accept of 
any honour ; he lived in a circle of friends to whom 
he was deeply attached. A ‘touching and beautiful 
memoir was published of him by his friend and 


v2 


292 Mary Somerville. 


successor, Professor Tyndall, an experimental phi- 
losopher of the very highest genius. 


[The following letter was the last my mother received 
from Faraday :-— 


FROM PROFESSOR FARADAY.TO MRS. SOMERVILLE. 
Rovax Institution, 17th January, 1359, 
My pear Mrs. Somervite, 


So you have remembered me. again, and T 
have the delight of receiving from you a new copy of 
that work which has so often instructed me; and, 
I may well sav, cheered me in my simple homely course 
through life in this house. It was most kind to think 
of me; but ah! how sweet it is to believe that I have 
your approral in matters where kindness would be 
nothing, where judgment alone must rule. I almost 
deubt myself when J think I have your approbation, 
to some degree at least, in what I may have thought 
or said about gravitation, the forces of nature, their 
conservation, &c. As it is, I cannot go back from thése 
thoughts; on the contrary, I feel encouraged to go on 
by way of experiment, but am not so able as I was 
formerly; for when I try to hold the necessary group 
of thoughts in mind at one time, with the judgment 
suspended on almost all of them, then my head becomes 
giddy, and I am obliged to lay all aside for « while. 
1 am trying for time in magnetic action, and do not 
despair of reaching it, even though it may be only that 
of light. Nous rerrons. 

I have been putting into ong volume various papers 


faraday'’s Letter. 293 


of mine on experimental’ branches in chemistry and 
physics. The index and title-page has gone to the 
printer, and I expect soon to receive copies from him. 
T shall ask Mr. Murray to help me in sending one to 
you which I hope you will honour by acceptance. ‘There 
is nothing new in it, except a few additional pages ‘about 
*‘yegelation,” and also “ gravity.” It is useful to get 
one’s scattered papers together with an’ index, and 
society seems to like- the colleetion sufficiently to pay 
the expenses. .... Pray remember me most kindly 
to all with whom I may take that privilege, and ‘believe 
me to be most truly, 
Your admirer and 
faithful servant, 
M. Farapay, 


[My mother wrote of this letter :-— 


FLORENCE, Sth February, 1859, 

. . « . I have had the most charming and 
gratifying letter from Faraday; I cannot tell you 
how I value such a mark of approbation and friend- 
ship from the greatest experimental philosopher and 
discSverer next to Newton. 


We returned to the continent in autumn; so I 
eould not superintend the publication of my “Phy- 
sical Geography,” but Mr. Pentland kindly undertook 
to carry it through the press. Though I never was 
personally acquainted with Mr, Keith Johnston, of 


294 Mary Somerville. 


Edinburgh, that eminent geographer gave me copies 
of both the first and second editions of his splendid 
“ Atlas of Physical Geography,” which were of the 
greatest use tome. Besides, he published some time 
afterwards a small “ School Atlas of Ancient, Modern, 
and Physical Geography,” intended to accompany my 
work ; obligations which I gratefully acknowledge. 
No one has attempted to copy my “Connexion of 
the Physical Sciences,” the subjects are too diffeult ; 
but soon after the publication of the “Physical 
Geography ” a number of cheap books appeared, just 
keeping within the letter of the law, on which ac. 
count it has only gone through five editions. How. 
ever a sixth is now required. 
* + * 2 * 

The moment was unfavourable for going inte 
Italy, as war was raging between Charles Albert and 
the Austrians, so we resolved to remain at Munich 
and wait the course of events. We got a very pretty 
little apartment, well furnished with stoves, and ope 
posite the house of the Marchese Fabio Pallavicing 
formerly Sardinian minister at Munich. We spent 
most’of our evenings very pleasantly at their house. 
We attended the concerts at the Odeon of classical 
music : the execution was perfect, but the music 
‘was so refined and profound that it pa&sed my com- 
prehension, and I thought it tedious. The hours at 


Salzburg. 295 


Munich were so early that the opera cnded almost. at 
the time it. began in London. Gad 
In the: spring we went to Salzburg, where we re- 
mained all summer. We had an apartment in a 
dilapidated. old chateau, about an hour’s walk from 
the tqwn, called Leopold’s Krone. The picturesque 
situation of the town reminded me of the Castle and 
Old Town of Edinburgh. The view from our windows 
.was-elpine, and the trees bordering the roads were 
such as I have rarely seen out of England. We made 
many excursions to. Berchtesgaden, where King 
Louis and his court were then living, and went to 
_ the upper end of the Kénigsee. I have repeatedly 
_been at sea in very stormy weather without the 
smallest idea of fear; but the black, deep water of 
this lake, under the shadow of the , precipitous 
mountains, made a disagreeable impression on me. 
I thought if I were to be drowned I should prefer 
the blue sea to that cold, black pool. The. flora 
yas lovely, and on returning from our expeditions 
_j the evening, the damp, mossy ,banks were 
juminous with glowworms: I never saw so many, 
either before or since. We never fail to.make ac- 
quaintances wherever we go, and, our friends at 
Munich had given us letters to yarious.people who 
were passing the summer there, many of , whom 
had evening receptions nce a weck.,, At the 


296 Mary Somerville. 


Countess Irene Arco’s beautiful Gothic chateau of 
Anif, which rises out of a small pellucid lake, and’ 
is reached by a bridge, we spent many pleasant 
evenings, as well as at Countess Bellegarde’s, and at 
Aigen, which belonged to the Cardinal Schwartzen- 
berg. We never saw him, but went to visit his 
niece, with whom we were intimate. 

The war being over, we went by Innsbruck 
and the Brenner to Coli, on the Lago di Garda, 
within five miles of-Peschiera, where we spent a 
month with Count and Countess Erizzo Minis- 
ealcht, who had been our intimate friends for 
many years. The devastation of the country 
was frightful. Peschiera and its fortifications 
were in ruins; the villages around had been 
burnt down, and the wretched inhabitants were 
beginning to repair their roofless houses. Our 
friends themselves had but recently returned to 
Coli, which, from its commanding situation, was 
always the head-quarters of whatever army was 
in possession of the country around. On this 
account, the family had to fly more than once at 
the approach of the enemy. In 1848 the Countess 
had fled to Milan, and was confined at the very 
time the Austrians under Radetsky were besieging 
the town, which was defended by Charles Albert. 
Fearing what might occur when the city was sur- 


Countess. Bon-Brensont. 297 


rendered, the lady, together with her new-born 

*infant and the rest of her family, escaped the next 
day with considerable difficulty, and. travelled to 
Genoa. 

Although not acquainted with quite so many lan- 
guages as Mezzofanti, Count Miniscalchi is a remark- 
able linguist, especially with regard to Arabic and 
other oriental tongues. He has availed himself of his 

_ talent, and published several works, the most interest- 
ing of which is a translation of the Gospel of St 
John from Syro-Chaldaic-(the language probably 
spoken by our Saviour) into Latin. The manuscript, 
from which this translation is made, is preserved in 
the Vatican. 


[While we were at Cold my mother received a visit 
from a very distinguished and gifted. lady, the Countess 
Bon-Brenzoni. As an instance of the feelings enter- 
tained by an Italian woman towards my mother, I insert 
a letter written by the Countess some time afterwards, 
and also an extract from her poems:— —, 


FROM THE COUNTESS 'BON-BRENZONI TO MRS. ' 
SOMERVILLE. ied 


: VERONA, 28 Maggio, 1853., 
_ ILLustre Sienora, 
Fui molto contenta udendo che finalmente le sia, 
giunto I involto contenente le’ copie stampate del Carme, 


298 Mary Somerville. 


ch’ ebbi I onore di poterle offerire, mentre io era in gran 
pensiero non forse fossero insorte difficolté, o ritardi, 
in causa della posta. Ma, ben pit che per questo la 
sua graziosissima lettera mi fi di vera consolazione, per 
Y accoglienza tutta benevola e generosa ch’ Ella fece 
a’ miei versi. La ringrazio delle parole piene di bonta 
ch’ Ella mi scrive, e di aversi preso la gentil cura di 
farlo in italiano; cosi potess io ricambiarla scrivendo a 
Lei in inglese! Pur mi conforta In certezza che il 
linguaggio delle anime sia uno solo; mentre io non so 
s’ io debba chiamar presunzione, 0 ispirazione questa, che 
mi fa credere, che esista fra la sua e Ja mia una 
qualche intelligenza, e quantunque i suoi meriti e la 
sua bontad me ne spieghino in gran parte il mistero, 
pure trovo essere cosa non comune questo pensiero, 
che al mio cuore parla di Lei incessantemente, da 
quel giorno ch’ io I’ ho veduta per la prima e I’ unica 
volta ! y 

Ah se é vero che fra i sentimenti di compiacenza 
ch’ Ella prové per gli elogi ottenuti de’ suai lavori, abbia 
saputo trovar luogo fra i pitt cari quello che le desté 
nell’ animo I’ espressione viva e sincera della mia ammi- 
razione e del mio umile affetto, io raggiunsi un punto 
a cui certo non avea osato aspirare! 

Il trovarmi con Lei a Cola, od altrove che fosse, 
é uno de’ miei pid cari desideri, e-son lieta delle sue 
parole che me ne danno qualche speranza. 

Voglia presentare i miei distinti doveri all’ eccelente 
suo Sig™ marita ed alle. amabili figlie; e mentre 
io le prego da Dio le piu desiderabili benedizioni, 
Ella si ricordi di me siccome di una _ persona, 
che sebbene lontana fisicamente, le @ sempre vicina 


“I Ciel.” + 299- 


coll’ animo, nei sentimenti della piw affetuosa venerd- 
zione. 
Incoraggiata daila.sua bonta, mi onoro segnarmi:: 
' amica affezionatissima ' 
Carertna Bon-Brenxzont. 


The ‘ Carme” spoken of in the above letter form a 
long poem on modern astronomy, entitled. “I Cieli,” 
(published by Vallardi. Milan: 1853). The opening 
lines contnin the following address to Mrs. Somerville,— 
doubtless a genuine description of the author's feelings 
on first meeting the simple-mannered lady whose intel- 
lectual greatness she had long learned to appreciate :— 


Donna, quel giorno ch’ io ti vidi in prima, 
Dimmi, hai Tu scérto sul mio volto i segni 
Dell' anima commossa ?—Hai Tu veduto 
Come trepida innanzi io ti venia, 

E come reverenzae maraviglia | 

Tenean sospesa sull’ indocil labbro 

La parola mal certa ?—Ah! dimmi, hai scérto 
Come fur vinte dall’ affetto allora, 

Che ¢’udii favellar soave e piana, 

Coll’ angelica voce e I’ umiltade, 

Che a’ suoi pid cari sapienza insegna ? 
Questa, io dicea tra me, questa & Colei. 

Di che le mille volte udito ho il nome 
Venerato auonar tra i pid famosi ? , 

Questa 8 Colei che negli eterei spazj 

Segue il cammin degli astri, e negnisu 
Peso, moto, distanza, orbita e luce 7 


Another record of our visit to Cola is in a letter of my 
mother to my brother. 


300 Mary Somerville. 


4 
MRES. SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
Tuan, 4th Dec. 1849, 


My pearEst Woronzow, 


We arrived here all well the day before yester- 
day, after a fair but bitterly cold jowney, bright sun- 
shine and keen frost, and to-day we have a fall of snow. 
«e+e. It was a great disappointment not finding letters 
here, and I fear many have been lost on both sides, 
though we took care not to touch on political events, as 
all letters are opened by the Austrian police in Lom- 
bardy. We spent five wéeks with our friends the Minis- 
ealchis very agreeably, and received every mark of 
kindness and hospitality. They only live at Verona 
during the winter, and we found them in their country 
house at Cola situated on a height overlooking the 
Lago di Garda, with the snowy Alps on the opposite 
side of the lake. The view from their grounds is so fine 
that I was tempted to paint once more. They took us 
to see all the places in the neighbourhood; often a sad 
sight, from having been the seat of war and siege. The 
villages are burnt and the churches in ruin. But the 
people are repairing the mischief as fast as possible, and 
the fields are already well cultivated. The Count is a man 
of great learning and is occupied in the comparison of 
languages, especially the Eastern; he knows twenty-four 
and speaks Arabicas fluently as Italian. He is in the 
habit of speaking both Arabic and Chaldee every day, 
as there is a most learned Chaldean priest living with 
them, whose conversation gave me great pleasure and 
mach information. The Count has moreover a black 
servant who speaks these languages, having been -bought 


Baron Plana: 301: 


by the Count during his long residence in the East, and 
is now treated like one of the family. 't obtained much 
information which will be useful in my next edition of 
the Physical Geography . 
Your affectionate mother , 
Mary SomeRvinie. 


[After my mother’s death, our old friend Count Minis- 
calchi made a beautiful and touching “éloge’? on her 
at a meeting of the Royal Ttalian’ Geographical Society, 
to a numerous audience, assembled in the great hall of 
the Collegio Romano at Rome. | 
_ My mother was an honorary member of this Society, 
besides which the first gold medal granted ‘by them was 
yoted by acclamation to her. Her Recollections con- 
tinue_as follows :— 


From Cold we went to Turin, where I. became 
personally acquainted with Baron. Plana, Director 
ofthe Observatory. ' He had married a niece of the 
illustrious mathematician La Grange, who proved 
the stability of the solar system, Plana, himself, 
was a very great analyst,; his volume on. the Lunar 
Porturhations is a work of enormous: labour. He 
gave me a copy of it and of aif his works; for I 
continued to havd friendly ‘interéourse with him as 
long as he lived. As soon as he eard of our arrival, 
he came to take us out to.driva, I never.shall 
forget the beauty.of the Alps, and the broad valley 


802 Mary Somerville. 


of the Po and Dora, deeply covered with snow, and 
sparkling in bright sunshine. Another day the 
Baron took us to a church, from the cupola of which 
a very long pendulum was swinging, that we might 
see the rotation of the earth visibly proved by its 
action on the pendulum, according to M. Foucault's 
experiment. He devoted his time to get us estar 
blished, and we found a handsome apartment in 
Casa Cavour, and became acquainted with both 
the brothers to whom it belonged. Count Camillo 
Cavour, then Minister of the Interior, was the 
only great statesman Italy ever produced in modern 
times. His premature death ts deplorably felt 
at the preseut day. He was a real genius, and 
the most masterly act of his administration wos 
that of sending an army to act in concert with the 
French and English in the Crimean war. By at 
he at once gave Italy the rank of an independent 
European power, which was the first step towards 
Italian unity. He was delightful and cheerful ‘in 
society, and extremely beloved by his family. and 
friends, 
2 * * * * 

Ie spring we hired a villa on the. Colline’ 
above Turin. The house was in a garden, with 
@ terrace, whence the ground sank rapidly to 
the plain; low hills, clothed with chestnut: 


An Atmospheria Phenomenon. 303 


forests, ‘abounding in. ‘lilies of the valley, sur- 
rounded us behind. The summer had been stormy, 
and one evening we walked on the terrace to look 
at the lightning, which was: very fine, illuminating 
the chain of Alps. By-and-by it ceased, and the 
darkness was intense; but.we continued to walk, 
when, to our surprise, a pale bluish light rose in the 
Val di Susa, which gradually spread along .the 
summit of the Alps, and -the tops of the hills behind 
our houses then a column: ofthe same pale: blue 
light, actually within. our reach, came curling up 
from the slope close, to:the terrace, exactly as if wet 
weeds had been burning.!, In about ten minutes the 
whole vanished ; but-in less than a quarter of an 
hour the phenomena were repeated exactly as de- 
scribed, and were followed. by a dark night and 
torrents of rain. It was.a very unusual instance of 
what is known as electric glow; that is, electricity 
without tension. 

On our road to Genoa, we went to see some kind 
Piedmontese friends, who have.a chateau in the 
Monferrat, not many miles from Asti, where we left 
the railroad. We had not gone many miles when 
the carriage we had hired was upset, and, although 
nobody had broken bones, I got so severe a blow on 
my forehead that I was confined to bed for nearly a 

_month, and my face was black and blue for a much 


304 Mary Somerville. 


longer time. Nothing could equal the unwearied 
kindness of our friends during my illness, 

When I was able to travel, we went to Genoa for 
the winter, and lived on the second floor of a large 
house on the Acqua Sola, and overlooking the sea. 
Here first began our friendship with the Marchesa 
Teresa Doria, whose maiden name was Durazzo; in 
her youth one of the handsomest women in Genoa, 
a lady distinguished for her generous character and 
cultivated mind, and who fearlessly avowed her 
opinions at a time when it was a kind of disgrace to 
be called a Liberal. Her youngest son, Giacomo, 
has devoted his life to the study of natural history, 
and his mother used all her influenee to efigourage 
and help him in a pursuit so Thusual amongst 
people of rank in this country. Later, he travelled 
in Persia for two years, to make collections, and 
since then resided for a long time in Borneo, and is 
now arranging a museum in his native city. The 
Marchesa has always been a warm and devoted 
friend to me and mine. 

It was here that we got our dear old parrot Lory, 
who is still alive and merry. 

* s + * 

Our next move was to Florence, where we already 
knew many people. We had a lease of a house in’ 
Via del Mandorlo, which had a small garden and a 


Gibson. 305 


baleony, where we often sat and received in the 
warm summer evenings. My daughters had adorned 
it and the garden with rare creepers, shrubs, and 
flowers. 

We had a visit from our friend Gibson, as he 
passed through Florence on his way to Switzerland. 
He told us the history of his early life, as given in 
his biography, and much that is not mentioned there. 
He was devotedly attached to the Queen, and spoke 
of her in his simple manner as a charming lady. 

Miss Hosmer was travelling with Gibson, an 
American young lady, who was his pupil, and 
of whose works he was very proud. He looked 
upon her as ifgghe had been his daughter, and 
she took care of him; for he was careless and 
forgetful when travelling. I have the sincerest 
pleasure in expressing my admiration for Miss 
Hosmer, who has proved by her works that our 
sex possesses both genius and originality in the 
highest branches of art. * 

‘Tt was at Florence that I first met my dear friend 

.and constant correspondent, Frances Power Cobbe. 
She ia the cleverest and most agreeable woman I 
ever met swith, and one of the best. There is a dis- 
tant connection between us, as one of her ancestors 
married a niece of Lord Fairfax, the Parliamentary 
general, many of whose letters are in the posses- 


306 Mary Somerville. 


sion of her family. A German professor of physio- 
logy at Florence roused public indignation by his 
barbarous vivisections, and there was a canvass 
for a Memorial against this cruel practice. Miss 
Cobbe took a leading part in this movement, and I 
heartily joined, and wrote to all my acquaintances, 
requesting their votes ; among others, to a certain 
Marchese, who had published something on agricul- 
ture. He refused his vote, saying, “ Perhaps I was 
not aware that the present state of science was one 
of induction.” Then he went on explaining to me what 
“induction” meant, &c., &c., which amused me not a 
little. It made my family very indignant, as they 
thought it eminently presumptuous, addressed to me 
by a man who, though a good patriot and agricul- 
turist, knew nothing whatever about science, past or 
present. A good deal of political party spirit was 
brought into play in this instance, as is too often the 
case here. It is not complimentary to the state of 
civilisation in Italy, that in Russia and Poland, both 
of them very far behind her in many respects, there 
should exist societies for the prevention of cruelty to 
animals, to which all the most distinguished people 
have given their names. 

[I rejoice to say that this stain on Italian civilisation 
is now wiped away. My mother just lived to hail the 
formation of the Societa Protettrice degli Animali.—Ep. 


La Vernzea. 807 


In summer we sometimes made excursions to avoid 
the heat of Florence. One year we went to Valom- 
brosa and the convents of La Vernia, and Camaldoli, 
which are now suppressed. We travelled on mules 
or ponies, as the mountain paths are impracticable 
to carriages. I was disappointed in Valombrosa itself, 
but the road to it is beautiful. La Vernia is highly 
picturesque, there we remained twodays, which I spent 
in drawing. The trees round the convent formed a 
striking contrast to the arid cliffs we had passed on 
the road. The monks were naturally delighted to 
see strangers. They belonged to the order of St. 
Francis, and each in his turn wandered over the 
country’ begging and: living on the industry of others. 
We did not pay for our food and lodging, but left 
much more than an equivalent in the poor-box. 
Somerville slept in the convent, and we ladies were 
lodged in the so-called Foresteria outside ; but even 
Somerville was not admitted into the clausura at 
Camaldoli, for the monks make a vow of perpetual 
silence and solitude. Each had his little separate 
hut and garden, and some distance above the con- 
vent, on the slopes of the Apennines, they had an 
establishment called the Eremo, for those who sought 
for even greater solitude. The people told us that 
in winter, when deep snow covers the whole place, 
wolves are often seen prowling about. Not far from 


308 Mary Somerville, 


the Eremo there is a plaee from whence both the 
Mediterranean and the Adriatic can be seen. ' 

We occasionally went for sea-bathing to Viareggio, 
which is built on a flat sandy beach. The loose 
sand is drifted by the wind intg low hillocks, and 
bound together by coarse grass thickly coatéd with 
silex. Among this and other plants a lovely white 
amary llis, the Pancratium Maratimum, with a sweet 
and powerful perfume, springs’ up. We often tried 
to get the bulb, but it lay too deep under the sand. 
One evening we had gone a long way in search of 
these flowers, and sat down to rest, though it was 
beginning to be dark We had not sat many 
minutes when we were surrounded by a number of 
what we supposed to be bats trying to get at the 
flowers we had gathered, but at length we discovered 
that they were enormous moths, which followed us 
home, and actually flew into the room to soar over 
the flowers and suck the honey with their long 
probosces. They were beautiful creatures with large 
red eyes on their wings. 

# s * * # 

Our life at Florence went on pretty much as usual 
when all at once cholera broke out of the most viru- 
lent kind. Multitudes fled from Florence; often in 
vain, for it prevailed all through Tuscany to a great 
extent. The terrified people were kneeling to the 


The Cholera. 309 


-Madonna and makng processions, after which it 
was remarked that the number - of cases was in- 
yariably increased. The, Misericordia went about 
in their fearful costume, “indefatigable, in carrying 
the sick to the hospitals, The devotion of that 
society was beyond all praise; the young and the 
old, the agtisan and the nobleman, went night and 
day in detachments carrying aid to the sufferers, not 
in Florence only, but to Fiesole and the villages 
round. We never were afraid, but we consulted 
Professor Zanetti, our medical adviser, whether we 
should leave the town, which we were unwilling to 
do, as we thought we should be far, from medical 
assistance, and he said, “ By no means ; live as 
usual, drive out as you have always done, ‘and make 
not the smallest change.” We followed’ his advice, 
and drove out every afternoon till near dark, and 
then passed the rest of the evening with those friends 
who, like ourselves, had remained i in town. None of 
us took the disease except one of, our servants, who 
recovered from instant help being given. 

The Marquis of Normanby was British minister 
at that time, and Lady Normanby, and he were 
always kind and hospitable to us. At her house we 
became acquainted with Signora Barbieri-Nini, the 
celebrated opera-singer, who had retired from the 
stage, and lived with her husband, a Sienese gentle- 


$10 Jary Somerville. 


man, in a villa not far from Villa Normanby. She 
gave a musical party, to which she invited us. The 
music, which was entirely artistic, was excellent, 
the entertainment very handsome, and it was altd- 
gether very enjoyable. As we were driving home 
afterwards, late at night, going’ down the hill, our 
carriage ran against one of the dead carts which was 
carrying those who had died that day to the burying- 
ground at Trespiano. It was horribly ghastly—one 
could distinguish the forms of the limbs under the 
canvas thrown over the heap of dead. The burial 
of the poor and rich in Italy is in singular contrast ; 
the poor are thrown into the grave without a coffin, 
the rich are placed in coffins, and in full dress, 
which, especially in the case of youth and infancy, 
leaves a pleasant impression. An intimate friend of 
ours lost an infant, and asked me to go and see it 
laid out. The coffin, lined with white silk, was on 
a table, covered with a white cloth, strewed with 
flowers, and with a row of wax lights on either side. 
The baby was clothed in a white satin frock, leaving 
the neck and arms bare; a rose-bud was in each 
hand, and a wreath of rose-buds surrounded the 
head, which rested on a pillow. Nothing could be 
prettier; it was like a sleeping angel. 
2 * * * * 


Pio Nono had lost his popularity before he came 


Donate. 811 


to visit the Grand Duke of Tuscany. The people re- 
ceived him respectfully, but without enthusiasm ; 
nevertheless, Florence was illuminated in his honour. 
The Duomo, Campanile, and the old tower in the 
Piazza dei Signori were very fine, but the Lung’ 
Arno was beautiful beyond description; the river was 
full, and reflected the whole with dazzling splendour. 

I made the acquaintance of Signore Donati, after- 
wards celebrated for the discovery of one of the 
most brilliant comets of this century, whose course 
‘and changes I watched with the greatest interest. 
On one occasion I was accompanied by my valued 
friend Sir Henry Holland, who had come to Florence 
during'one of his annual journeys. I had much 
pleasure in seeing him again. 

Political parties ran very high in Florence ;, we 
sympathised with the Liberals, living on intimate 
terms with the chief of them.. As soon as the proba- 
bility of war between Piedmont and Austria became 
known, many young men of every rank, some even 
of the highest families, hastened to join as volun- 
teers. The most sanguine long hoped that the Grand 
Duke might remember that he was an Italian prince 
rather than an Austrian archduke, and, would send 
his troops to join the Italian cause; but his dynasty 
wa? doomed, and he blindly chose the losing side. 
At last the Austrians crossed the Mincio, and the 


212 Mary Somerville. 


war fairly broke out, France coming to the assistance 
of Piedmont. The enthusiasm of the Tuscans could 
then no longer be restrained, and on the 27th April 
1859, crowds of people assemlled on the Piazza 
dell’ Indipendenza, and raised the tri-coloured flag. 
The government, who, the day before, had warning of 
what was impending, had sent sealed orders to the 
forts of Belvedere and del Basso, which, when 
opened on the eventful morning, were found to con- 
tain orders for the bombardment of the town. This 
the officers refused to do, after which the troops 
joined the popular cause. When this ‘order became 
generally known, as it soon did, it proved the last 
blow to the dynasty, although the most eminent and 
respected Liberals used their best efforts during the 
whole of the 27th to restore harmony between the 
Grand Duke and the people. They advised his im- 
mediate abdication in favour of his son, the Archduke 
Ferdinand, the proclamation of the Constitution, and 
of course insisted on the immediate alliance with 
Piedmont as their principal condition. It was already 
.too late! All was of no avail, and in the evening, 
whilst we were as usual at the Cascine, the whole 
Imperial family, accompanied by the Austrian 
minister, and escorted by several of the Corps Diplo- 
matique, drove round the walls from Palazzo Pitti to 
Porta San Gallo unmolested amid a silent crowd, and 


Revolution. 813 


crossing the frontier onthe Bologna road, bade fare- 
well for evet to Tuscany. The obnoxious ministers 
were also permitted to retire unnoticed to their 
country houses. 

Thus ended this fieanead revolution ; . there 
was no disorder of any kind, which was due to the 
young men belonging to the principal families of 
Florence, such as Corsini, Incontri, Farinola, and 
others, using their influence with the people to calm 
and direct them. Indeed, so quiet was everything 
that my daughters walked about the streets, as did 
most ladies, to see what was going on; the only 
visible signs of the revolution throughout the whole 
day were bands of young men with tri-coloured 
flags and cockades shouting national songs at the top 
of their voices. As I have said already, we took 
our usual drive to the Cascine after dinner, and went 
to the theatre in the evening ; the streets were per- 
fectly quiet, and next morning the people were at 
work as usual. Sir James Searlett was our minister, 
and had a reception the evening after these events, 
where we heard many predictions of evil which 
never were fulfilled. The least of these was the 
occupation of Florence by a victorious Austrian army. 
The Tuscan archdukes precluded all chance of a 
restoration by joining the Austrian army, and being 
present at the battle of Solferino. At Florenee a 


314 Mary Somerville. 


provisional government was formed with Bettino 
Ricasoli at its head; a parliament assembled three 
times in the Sala dei Cinquecento, in the Palazzo 
Veechio, and voted with unanimity the expulsion of 
the House of Lorraine, and the annexation of 
Tuscany to the kingdom of Italy. In the meantime 
the French and Italian arms were victorious in 
Lombardy. As, however, it is not my intention to 
give an historical account of the revolution of 1859, 
but merely to jot down such circumstances as came 
under my own immediate notice, I shall not enter 
into any particulars regarding the well-known 
campaign which ended in the cession of Milan and 
Lombardy to Italy. 

We were keenly interested in the alliances between 
the Emperor Napoleon and the King of Italy, in 
hopes the Quadrilateral would be taken, and Venice 
added to the Italian States We had a map of 
Northern Italy spread on a table, and from day to 
day we marked the positions of the different head- 
quarters with coloured-headed pins. J can hardly 
describe our indignation when all at once peace was 
signed at Villafranca, and Napoleon received Nice 
and Savoy in recompense for his aid, which were 
given up to him without regard to the will of the 
people. When the peace was announced in Tuscany 
it caused great consternation and disgust ; the people 


Ricasoli, 315 


were in the greatest excitement, fearing that those 
rulers so obnoxious to them might by this treaty be 
again forced upon them; and it required the firm 
hand of Ricasoli to calm the people, and induce the 
King to accept the annexation which had been voted 
without one dissentient voice. 

Baron Ricasoli had naturally many enemies 
amongst the Codini, or retrograde party. Hand- 
grenades were thrown against the door of his house, 
as also at those of other ministers, but without doing 
harm. One evening my daughters were dressing to 
goto a ball that was to take place at the Palazzo 
delle Crocelle, ‘close to us, in a street parallel to 
ours, when we were startled by a loud explosion. 
An attempt had been made to throw a shell into the 
ball-room, which had happily failed. The streets 
were immediately lined with soldiers, and the ball, 
which was given by the Ministers, as far as I recol- 
lect, took place. 

When the war broke out, a large body of French 
troops, commanded by Prince Jeréme Napoleon, 
came to. Florence, and were bivouacked in the 
Cascine. The people in the streets welcomed them 
as deliverers from the Austrians, whose occupation 
of Tuscany, when first we came to reside in Florence, 
was such a bitter mortification to them, and one of 
the causes of the unpopularity of the Grand Duke, 


316 Mary Somerville, 


whom they never forgave for calling in the Austrian 
troops after 1848. The French.camp was a very 
pretty sight ; some of the soldiers playing at games, 
some mending their clothes, or else céoking. They 
were not very particular as to what they ate, for one 
of my daughters saw a sqldier skin a rat and put it 
into his soup-kettle. 

We were invited by the Marchesa Lajatico, with 
whom we were very intimate, to go and see the 
entry of Victor Emmanucl into Florence from the 
balcony of the Casa Corsini in the Piazza del Prato, 
where she resides. The King was received with 
acclamation : never was anything ‘like the enthu- 
siasm. Flowers were showered down from every 
window, and the streets were decorated with a taste 
peculiar to the Italians. 


[i think the following extracts from letters written by 
my mother during the year 1859 and the following, ever 
memorable in Italian history, may not be unwelcome to 
the reader. My mother took the keenést interest in all 
that occurred. Owing to the liberal opinions she had 
held from her youth, and to which she was ever constant, 
all her sympathies were with the Italian cause, and she 
rejoiced at every step which tended to unite all Italy in 
one kingdom. She lived to see this great revolution 
accomplished by the entry of Victor Emmanuel into 
Rome as King of Italy; a consummation believed by 

, most politicians to be a wild dream of poeta and hot- 
headed patriots, but now realised and accepted as a 


Letter fo Mr. Greg. 317 


matter of course. My mother had always firm faith 
in this result, and -it was' with inexpressible pleasure 
she watched its completion. Our intimacy with the lead- 
Ang politicians“both in Tuscany and Piedmont naturally 
added to onr interest. Ricasoli, Menabrea, Peruzzi, 
Minghetti, &e., we knew intimately, as well as Camillo 
Cavour, the greatest statesman Italy ever produced. No 
one who did not witness it can imagine the grief and con- 
sternation his death occasioned, and of which my mother 
writes in a letter dated June 19th, 1861. 


FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
1 1 


FLORENCE, Alay bth, 1859, 
My vearest W., 

Your letter of the 28th would hhave made me 
laugh heartily were we not annoyed that ‘you should 
have suffered’ such uneasiness on our account; the panic 
in England is ridiculous and most unfounded. The 
whole affair has been conducted with perfect unanimity 
and tranquillity, so that there has been no one to fight 
with. The Austrians are concentrated in Lombardy, 
and not in Tuscany, nor is there any one thing to 
disturb the perféct peace and quietness which prevail 
ever the whole country; not a soul thinks of leavm? 
Florence. You do the greatest injustice to the Tuscans. 
From first to last not a person has been insulted, not a 
ery raised against anyone; even the obnoxious ministers 
were allowed to go to their country houses without a 
word of insult, and troops were sent with the Grand 
Duke to escort him and his family to the frontier. 
Martha and Mary went all through the town the morning 
of the revolution, which was exactly like a common festa, 


318 Mary Somerville. 


and we found the tranquillity as great when we drove 
through the streets in the afternoon. The same quiet still 
prevails, the people are at their usual employments, the 
theatres and private receptions go on as usual, and the 
provisional government is excellent. Everyone knew of 
the revolution long before it took place and the quiet- 
ness with which it was to be conducted. I am grieved 
at the tone of English politics, and trust, for the honour 
of the country and humanity, that we do not intend to 
make war upon France and Sardinia. It would be a 
disgrace and everlasting stigma to make a crusade 
against the oppressed, being ourselves free. The people 
here have behaved splendidly, and we ‘rejoice that we 
have been here to witness such noble conduct. No 
nation ever made such progress as the Tuscans have 
done since the year "48. Not a word of republicanism, it 
has never been named. All they want is a constitutional 
government, and this they are quietly settling ..... 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
FLORENCE, 29th May, 1859. 


-. +. Everything is perfectly quiet here; 
the Tuscans are giving money liberally for carrying on 
the war. We have bought quantities of old linen, and 
your sisters and I spend the day in making lint and 
bandages for the wounded soldiers ; great quantities have 
already been sent to Piedmont. Hitherto the war has 
been favourable to the allied army. God grant that 
England may not enter into the contest till the Austrians 
are driven out of Italy! After that point has been gained, 


Pre-historic Races. 319 


our honour would be safe. To take part with the 
oppressors and maintain despotism in Italy would be in- 
famous. Tuscany isto be occupied by a Jarge body of 
troops under the command of Prince Napoleon. A great 
many are already encamped on the meadows at the 
Cascine—fine, spirited, merry young men; many of 
them have the Victoria medal. They are'a thorough 
protection against any attack by the Austrians, of which, 
however, there is little chance, as they have enough to 
do in Lombardy, There is to be a great affair this 
morning at nine o’clock ; an altar is raised in the middle 
of the camp, and the tricolour (Italian) flag is to be 
blessed amidst salvoes of cannon. Your friend, Bettino _ 
Ricasoli, is thought by far the most able and states- 
manlike person in Tuscany; he is highly respected. 
Martha and I dined with Mr. Scarlett, and met... 
who said if the Grand Duke had not been the most , 
foolish and obstinately weak man in the world, he might 
still have been on the throne of Tuscany; but that 
now he has made that impossible by going to Vienna and 
allowing his two sons to enter the Austrian army... .. 
We have had a visit from Dr. Falkner, his two nieces 
and brother. They had been spending the winter in 
Sicily, where he discovered rude implements formed 
by man mixed with the bones of prehistoric animals in a 
cave, so hermetically shut up that not a doubt is left of 
a race of men having lived at a period far anterior to that 
assigned as the origin of mankind. Similar discoveries 
have recently been made elsewhere.. Dr. Falkner had 
travelled much in the Himalayas, and lived two years on 
the great plain of Tibet; the account he*gave me of it 
was most interesting. His brother had spent fifteen 
years in Australia, so the conversation delighted me; I 


320 Mary Somerville. 


learnt so much that was new. I am glad to hear that 
the Queen has been so kind to my friend Faraday; it 
seems she has given him an apartment at Hampton 
Court nicely fitted up. She went to see it herself, and 
having consulted scientific men as to the instruments, 
that were necessary for his pursuits, she had a laboratory 
fitted up with them, and made him a present of the whole. 
That is doing things handsomely, and no once since 
Newton has deserved it so much. 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
FLORENCE, 5th June, 1809. 


e 

-..... Allis perfectly quiet; a large body of 
French troops are now in Tuscany, and many more aré 
expected probably to make a diversion on this side of thé 
Austrian army through Modena ; but nothing is known; i 
the most profound secrecy is iisintained as to all military 
movements. Success has hitherto attended the allied 
army, and the greatest bravery has been shown. The 
enthusiasm, among the men engaged is excessive, thé 
King of Sardinia himself the bravest of the brave, but 
exposes himself so much that the people are making 
petitions to him to be more careful. The Zouaves called 
out in the midst of the battle, * Le roi est un Zouave! ” 
Prince Napoleon keeps very quiet, and avoids shewing 
himself as much as possible. The French troops are 
very fine indeed—young, gay, extremely civil and well 
bred. The secrecy is quite curious; even the colonels 
of the regiments do not know where they may’ be snet 
till the order comes: so all is conjecture....... The 


Public Affairs. 321 


young King of Naples seems to follow the footsteps of 
his father ; I hope im God that we may not protect and 
defend him. How anxious we are to know what the 
House of Commons will do! Let us hope they will take 
the liberal side ; but the conservative party seems to be 
‘Increasing. 


_ FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ, 


FLORENCE, 22nd August, 1859. 

Eads Meuse Public affairs go on admirably. <A 
few weeks ago the elections took place of the members 
of the Tuscan parliament with a calm and tranquillity of 
.which you have no idea. Every proprietor who pays 
15 pauls of taxes (75 pence) has a vote. There are 180 
members, consisting of the most ancient nobility, the 
richest proprietors, the most distinguished physicians’ 
and lawyers, and the most respectable merchants. They 
hold their meetings in the magnificent hall of the 
Palazzo Vecchio—the Sala Dei Cinquecento. The first 
two or three days were employed in choosing a president 
&c., &e.; then a day was named to determine the fate of ° 
the house of Lorraine. I could net go, but Martha went 
with a Tuscan friend. There wasno speaking; the vote 
was by ballot, and each member separately went up to a 
. table before the president, and silently put his ball into 
a large vase. Two members poured the balls into a tray, 
and on examination, said, “No division is necessary ;. 
they are all black,”’—which was followed by long and 
loud cheering. They have been equally unanimous in the 
Legations in Parma and Modena; and the wish of the 


people is to form one kingdom of these four states under 
Y 


$22 Mary Somerville. 


an Italian prince, excluding all Austrians for ever. The 
union is perfect, and the determination quiet but deep 
and unalterable. If the Archduke is forced upon them, 
it must be by armed force, which the French emperor 
will not likely permit, after the Archduke was fool 
enough to fight against him at Solferino. All the four 
states have unanimously voted union with Piedmont; 
but they do not expect it to be granted. The destinies of 
Europe are now dependent on the two emperors. ... 


FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 


FLORENCE, 23rd April, 1860. 


You would have had this letter sooner, my dearest 
Woronzow, if I had not been prevented from writing to 
you yesterday evening....... The weather has been 
atrocious ; deluges of rain night and day, and so cold 
that I have been obliged te lay in a second supply of 
wood. The only good day, and the only one I have been 
out, was that on which the king arrived. It fortunately 
was fine, and the sight was magnificent ; quite worthy of 
60 great an historical event. No carriages were allowed 
after the guns fired announcing that the king had left 
Leghorn ; so we should have been ill off, had it not been 
for the kindness of our friend the Marchesa Lajatico, 
who invited us to her balcony, which is now very large, 
as they have built an addition to their house for the 
eldest son and his pretty wife. We were there some 
hours before the king arrived; but as all the Florentine 
society was there, and many of our friends from Turin 
and Genoa, we found it very agreeable. The house is in 


Entry of Victor Emmanuel. 828 


the Prato, very near the gate the king was to enter. On- 
each side of it stages were raised like steps in an amphi- 
theatre, which were densely crowded, every window 
decorated with gaily-coloured hangings and the Italian 
flag; the streets were lined with ‘‘ guardie civiche,” and 
bands of music played from time to time. The people 
shouted “ Evviva!” every time a gun was fired. In the 
midst of this joy, there appeared what resembled a. 
funeral procession—about a hundred emigrants following 
the Venetian, Roman, and Neapolitan colours, all hung 
with black crape; they were warmly applauded, and 
many people shed tears. They went to the railway 
station just without the gate to meet the King, and when 
they hailed him as “‘ Ré d'Italia !” he was much affected. 
At last he appeared riding a fine English horse, Prince 
Carignan on one hand and Baron Ricasoli on his left, 
followed by a numerous “troupe dorée” of generals and . 
of his suite in‘ gay uniforms and well mounted. The 
King rides well; so the effect was extremely brilliant. 
Then followed’ several carriages ; in the first were Count 
Cavour, Buoncompagni, and the Marchese Bartolommei. 
You cannot form the slightest idea of the exeitement ; it 
was & burst of enthusiasm, and the reception of Cavour 
was as warm. We threw a perfect shower of flowers 
over him, which the Marchesa had provided for the 
occasion; and her youngest son Cino, a nice lad, went 
himself to present his bouquet to the King, who seemed 
quite pleased with the boy. I felt so much for Madame 
de Lajatico herself. ..... . I said to her how kind I 
thought it in her to open ker house ; she burst into tears, 
and said, though she was in deep affliction, she could not 
be so selfish as not offer her friends the best position 


in Florence for seeing what to many of them was the 
_¥2 


$24 Mary Someruille, 


most important event in their lives, as it was to her even 
in her grief. The true Italian taste appeared to per- 
fection in every street through which the procession 
passed to the Duomo, and thence to the Palazzo Pitti. 
Those who saw it declare nothing could surpass the 
splendour of the cathedral when illuminated; but that 
we could not see, nor did we see the procession again; it 
was impossible to penetrate the crowd. They say there 
are 40,000 strangers in Florence? ...... I was much 
too tired to go out again to see the illuminations and the 
fireworks on “the Ponte Cairaja; your sisters saw it all, 
so I leave them to tell you all about it. The King and 
Prince are terribly early ; they and Ricasoli are on horse- 
back by five in the morniug; the King dines at twelve, 
and never touches food afterwards, though he has a 
dinner party of 60 or 80 every day at six.....,. 
Now, my dearest Woronzow, I must end, for I do not 
wish to miss another post. I am really wonderfully well 
for my age. 
Your devoted. mother, 
Mary SoMERVILLE- 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE _TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 
bs 
Frorence, 19th June, 1861. 


- « + « Italy has been wn into the deepest 
affiction by the death of Cavour. my long life I never 
knew any event whatever which caused so universal and 
deep sorrow. There is not a village or town throughout 
the whole peninsula which has not bad a funeral service, 
and the very poorest people, who had hardly clothes on 
their backs, had black crape tied round their arm or neck. 


Death of Cavour. 325 


Tt: was a state of consternation, and no wonder} Every one 
felt that the greatest and best, man of this ‘eentary has 
been. taken away before he had completely emancipated 
his country. , All the progress is due to him, and to him’ 
alone; the revolution has called forth men of much 
talent, yet the whole are. immeasurably his inferior i in 
every respect—even your "friend, Ricasoli, who is, most 
able, and the best succegsor ‘that can ‘be found, i is,, com- 
pare i with Cayour, ag Tuscany to, Europe. Happily thes 
lays did not occur sooner. Now things a are so far. advanced. 
that they cannot go back, and I trust that Ricasoli, who i is 
not wanting in firmness and moral pourage, will complete, 
what has been’ so happily , begun.’ Jam sorry to say he 
is not in very good health, but 11 trust he will not fall 
into the hands of the physician who attended Cavour, 
and who, mistook his _ disease, ‘reduced him by loss of, 
blood, aud then finding out his ‘real illness, tried to, 
strengthen him when too late. There was a most, ex: 
cellent article in the ¢ Times” on the two statesmen. 


(My mother's ee continue thus :— 


One night the moon ‘shone so bright that we 
sent the carriage ' away, and walked Aoi from 
a reception at ,the "Marchesa Giriori’s In crossing 
the, Piazza San Marco, an: ‘acquaintance, who accom: 
panied us, took us to ‘the Maglio,, which, is. elose,, 
by; to hear an echd..I like. an echo; . yet. there!’ 
is ' Something’ sO ‘unearthly’'“ini7 the’ aérial voice, 
that it never fails’ to ‘raise a ’ superstitious chill 


26 Mary Somerville 


in me, such as I have felt more than once 
as I read “Ossian” while travelling among our 
Highland hills in my early youth. In one of the 
grand passes of the Oberland, when we were in 
Switzerland, we were enveloped in a mist, through 
which peaks were dimly seen. We stopped to hear 
an echo; the response came clear and distinct from 
a great distance, and I felt as if the Spirit of the 
Mountain had spoken. The impression depends on 
accessory circumstances; for the roar of a railway 
train peeaing oer a wadacs has no auch sete 


I isa my husband i in Movsiies on abe 26th June, 
1860. . . . . From the preceding narrative may be 
seen the ‘ayapay, affection, and confidence, which 
always existed between us... . 


[After what has already been said of the happiness my 
mother enjoyed during the long years of their married 
life, it may be imagined what grief was her’s at my 
father’s death after only three days’ illness. My mother's 
dear friend and correspondent, Miss F. P. Cobbe, wrote 
to her as follows on this occasion :— 


“* Thave just learned from a letter from Captain Fairfax 
to my brother the great affliction which has befallen you. 
I cannot express to you how it has grieved me to think 
that such a sorrow should have fallen on you, and that 
the dear, kind old man, whose welcome so often touched 
and gratified me, should have passed away so soon after 


Second Widowhood.. 327 


T had seen you both, as I often thought, the most beauti- 
ful instance of united old age. His love and pride in you, 
breaking out as it did at every instant when you happened 
to be absent, gives me the measure of what his loss must 
be to your warm heart.” 


The following letter from my mother, dated April, 
1861, addressed to her sister-in-law, was written after 
reading my grandfather's “‘ Life and Times,” the publi- 
cation of which my father did not live to see. 


FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE TO MBS. ELLIOT, OF ROSEBANK, 
ROXBURGHSHIRE. 


FLorence, 28th April, 1861. 
‘ My pear JaNET,— - 


I received the precious volume * you have so 
kindly sent to me some days ago, but I have delayed 
thanking you ‘for it till now because we all wished to 
read it first. «We are highly pleased, and have been 
deeply interested in it. The whole tone of the book 
is characteristic of your dear father; the benevolence, 
warm-heartedness, and Christian charity which appeared 
in the whole course of his life and ministry." That 
which has struck us all most forcibly is the liberality of 
his sentiments, both religious and political, at a time 
when narrow views and bigotry made it even dangerous 
to avow them, and it required no small courage to do so. 
He was far in advance of the age in which he lived; 


* The Rev. P. Somerville’s “‘ Life and Times.” 


328 Mary Somerville. 


his political opinions are those of the present day,. his 
religious opinions still before it. There are many parts 
of the book which will please the general reader from 
the graphic description of the manners and customs 
of the time, as well as the narrative of his inter- 
course with many of the eminent men of his day. 
Your most dear father’s affectionate remembrance of me 
touches me deeply. TI have but one regret, dear Jenny, 
and that is that our dear William did not live to see 
the accomplishment of what was his dying wish; but 
God's will be done. . . .. We are all much as usual: Iam 
wonderfully well, and able to write, which I do for a time 
every day. Ido not think I feel any difference in capacity, 
but I become soon tired, and then I read the news- 
papers, some amusing book, or work. . . . Everything is 
flourishing in Italy, and the people happy and contented, 
except those who were emplored and dependent on the 
former sovereigns, but they are few in comparison; and 
now there is a fine army of 200,000 men to defend the 
country, even if Austria should make an attack, but 
that is not likely at present. Rome is still the difficulty, 
but the Pope must and soon will lose, his temporal 
power, for the people are determined it shall be so. . . - 
I am, dear sister, 3 
Most affectionately yours, 
Mary SomMeERvILLe. 


To Mus. Exior, of Rosebank, Roxburghshire. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


' 
SPEZIA—GENOA—BEGINS MOLECULAR AND MICROSCOPIC SCIENCE—TURIN 
—-SPEZIA—-BBITISH FLEET—LETTERS FROM — MRS. SOMERVILLE— 
GARIBALDI—SEVERE ILLNESS—FLORENCE—MY ‘BROTHER'S DEATH-~ 
! WNAPLES—ERUPTION OF VESUVIUS—J, 3, MILL—CHANGE IN PUBLIC 
‘\ OPINION ON WOMEN'S BDUTATION-r EIGHTY-NINTH :YEAR—DESCRIBES 
+ HER OWN CHARAGTER——THOUGHTS OX A FUTURE LIFE-—PROGRESS 
iN KNOWLEDGE OF GESOGRAPHY—VICTORIA MEDAL-~-MEDAL FROM 
” ROYAL ITALIAN GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY—LETTER FHOM MENABREA 

' —ROME, CAPITAL OF {TALY—AURORA BOREALIS, 


! 

Soon after my dear husband’s death, we went 
to Spezia, as my health required ‘change, and 
for some time we made it ‘our headquarters, 
spending one winter ate Florence, another at Genoa, 
where my son and his wife, came - to meet 
us, and where I had very great.delight in the 
beautiful singing of our.old friend Clara Novello, 
now Countess Gigliucci, who used to come to my 
house, and sing Handel to me. -It.was a real 
pleasure, and her voice was as pure and silvery 
as when I first heard her, years before. Another 
winter we spent at Turin. On returning to Spezia 
in the summer of 1861, the beautiful comet visible 


330 Mary Somerville. 


that year appeared for the first time the very 

evening we arrived. On the following; and during 
many evenings while it was visible, we used to row 

in a small boat a little way from shore, in order to 

see it to greater advantage. Nothing could be more 

poetical than the clear starlit heavens with this 

beautiful comet reflected, nay, almost repeated, in 

the calm glassy water of the gulf. The perfect 

silence and stillness of the scene was wery impres- 

sive. 

I was now unoccupied, and delt the necessity of 
having something to do, desultory reading being in- 
sufficient to interest me ; and as I had always con- 
sidered the section on chemistry the weakest part of 
the connection of the “Physical Sciences,” I resolved 
to write it anew. My daughters strongly opposed this, 
saying, “ Why not write a new book?” They were 
night; it would have been lust time: so I followed 
their advice, though it was a formidable undertaking 
at my age, considering that the general character of 
science had greatly changed. By the improved 
state of the microscope, an invisible creation in the 
air, the earth, and the water, had been brought 
within the limits of human vision ; the microscopic 
structure of plants and animals had been minutely 
studied, and by synthesis many substances had been 
formed of the elementary atoms similar to those 


Microscopic Science. 83t 


produced by nature, ' Dr. Tyndall’s experiments had 
proved the inconceivable minuteness of the atoms 
of matter; M. Gassiot and Professor Pliicher had- 
published their experiments on the stratification of 
the electric light; and that series of discoveries by 
scientific men abroad, but chiefly by our own 
philosophers at home, which had been in progress 
for a course of years, prepared the way for Bunsen 
and Kirchhéf’s marvellous consummation.’ _ 

Such was the field opened to me ; but instead of 
being discouraged by its magnitude, I seemed to 
have resumed the perseverance and energy of my 
youth, and began to write with courage, though I 
did not think ql should live to finish even the sketch 
I had made, and which I intended to publish under 
the name of “Molecular and Microscopic Science,” 
and assumed as my motto, “ Deus magnus in mag- 
nis, maximus in minimis,” from Saint Augustin. 

_ My manuscript notes on Science were now of the 
greatest use ; and we went for the winter to Turin 
(1861—1862), where I could get books from the 
public libraries, and much information on subjects of 
natural history from Professor De Filippi, who has 
recently died, much regretted, while on a scientific 
mission to Japan and China, as well as from other 
sources. I subscribed to various periodicals on 
chemical and other branches ‘of science; the transac- 


$32 Mary Somerville. 


tions of several of our Ssodicties were sent to me, and 
I began to write. I was now an old woman, very 
deaf and with shaking hands; but I could still see 
to thread the finest needle,.and read the finest print, 
‘but I got sooner tired when writing than I used to 
“do. I wrote regularly every morning from eight till 
twelve or one o'clock before rising. I was not 
alone, for I had a mountain sparrow, a great pet, 
which sat, and indeed is sitting on my arm as I write 
these lines. 
The Marchese Doria hasa large property at. Spezia, 
and my dear friend Teresa Doria gencrally spent the 
evening with us, when she and I chatted and played 
Bézique togethcr. Her sons also came frequently, 
and some of the officers of the Italian navy. One 
who became our very good friend is Captain William 
Acton, now Admiral, and for two years Minister of 
Marine ; he is very handsome, and, what js better, a 
most agreeable, aceomplished gentleman, -who has 
interested himself in many branches of natural his- 
tory, besides being a good linguist. In summer the 
British squadron, commanded by Admiral Smart, 
came for five waks to Spezia. My nephew, Henry 
Fairfax, was commander..on board the ironclad 
“ Remstanee.” Notwithstanding my age, I was so 
curious to see an ironclad that I went all over the 
“ Resistance,” even to the engine-room and screw- 


On Board 4: Flag-Ship. ; 333° 


alley. I also went to luncheon on ,board the flag- 
ship “ Victoria,” a three-decker, which put me-in 
mind of olden times. 


{The following extracts are froini letters of my mother’s 
written in 1863 and 1865 :—~ : 


FROM MRS. SOMERVILLE 'T6 'W, GREIG, ESQ. 
oa Spezza, 12th May, 1863. 

How happy fycur last ‘letter has made me, my 
dearest. Woronzow, to hear that you aré making real pro- 
gress, and that you begin to feel better from the Batlt 
waters «.... Of your general, health Ihad the very 
best account this morning from: your friend Colonel 
Gordon. I was most agreeably surprised and gratified 
by a very kind and interesting letter from him, enclosing 
his photograph, and giving me an account of his great 
works at Portsmouth with reference to the defence by 
iron as well ag stone 1... rye. 

I wish I could show you the baskets full of flowers: 
which ‘Martha and Mary bring to me from the mountains, , 
They are wonderfully beautiful’; ‘it 'is one of my greatest 
amusements ‘putting them! ini'Water. I quite regret 
when they cannot go for them. (‘The orchises and the 
gladioles are the chief flowerg now, but, such, a variety 
and such colours! You see we have our, quiet plea-' 
sures. I often think of more than * 60 years ago,” when 
I used to scramble over the' Bik at Burntisland after 
our tods-tails and leddies-finger's,'. but..I fear there is 
hardly a wild spot existing, now,.in. the lowlands of 
Scotland 2.66) gh. pele n 

God bless you, my dearest Woronzow. 


ra 


334 Mary Somerville. 


FROM MRS, SOMERVILLE TO W. GREIG, ESQ. 


SPEZIA, 27th Sept., 1865. 
My pearest Woroxzow, 


I fear Agnes and you must have thought your 
old mother had gone mad when you read M.’s letter. 
In my sober senses, however, though sufficiently excited 
to give me strength for the time, I went over every part 
of the Resistance,* and examined everything in detail 
except the stokehole! I was not even hoisted on board, 
but mounted the companion-ladder bravely. It was a 
glorious sight, the perfection of structure in every part 
astoni-hed me. A ship like thatis the triumph of human 
talent and of British talent, for all confess our supe- 
rioty in this respect to” every other nation, and I am 
happy to see that no jealousy has arisen from the meet- 
ing of the French and English fleets. I was proud that 
our “ young admiral” + had the command of so fine a 
vessel . . . . I also spent a most agreeable day on board 
the Victoria, three-decker, and saw every part of the three 
decks, which are very different from what they were in 
my father's time ; everything on a much larger scale, more 
elegant and convenient. But the greatest change is in the 
men; I never saw a finer set, so gentlemanly-looking 
and well-behaved; almost all can read and write, and 
they have an excellent library and reading-room in all 
the ships. No sooner was the fleet gone than the 
Italian Society of Natural History held their annual 


* The Resistance, ironclad, commanded A Captein Chamberlayne, 
then akeent on sick leave. 

+ Captain Henry Fairfax, my mother’s ane then Commander on 
board the Heristance, senior officer in the absence of the captain. 


Garibaldt. 335 


meeting here, Capellini* being president in the absence (in 
Borneo) of Giacomo Doria. There were altogether seventy 
members, Italian, French, and German. I was chosen an 
Assgciate by acclamation, and had to write a few lines of 
thanks. The weather was beautiful and the whole party 
dined every day on the terrace below our windows, which 
was very amusing to Miss Campbell and your sisters, 
who distinctly heard the speeches. I was invited to dinner 
and the wife of the celebrated Professor Vogt was asked 
to meet me; I declined dining, as it lasted so long that 
I should have been too tired, but I went down to the 
dessert. Capellini came for me, and all rose as I came 
in, and every attention was shown me, my health was 
drank, &e, &e. It lasted four days, and we had many 
evening visits, and I received 4 quantity of papers on all 
subjects. I am working very hard (for me at least), but 
I cannot hurry, nor do I see the need for it. I write 
so slowly on account of the shaking of my hand that 
although my head is clear I make little but steady 
progress ...... 
Your affectionate mother, 
; Mary SoMERvILLE. 


After the battle of Aspromonte, Garibaldi arrived 
a prisoner on board a man-of-war, and was placed at 
Varignano under surveillance. His wound had not 
been properly dressed, and he was in a state of great 
suffering. Manysurgeons came from all parts of Italy, 
and one even from England, to attend him, but the 


* Professor of Geology at Bologna. 


336 Mary Somerville. 


eminent Professor Neélaton saved him from amputa- 
tion, with which he was threatened, by extracting 
the bullet from his ankle. I never saw Garibaldi 
during his three months’ residence at Varignano aut 
Spezia ; I had no previous acquaintance with him ; 
consequently, as I could be of no use to him, I did 
not consider myself entitled to intrude.upon him 
mercly to gratify my own curiosity, although ‘no 
one admired his noble and disinterested character 
more than I did. Not so, many of my country- 
men, and countrywomen too, as well as ladies of 
other nations, who worried the poor man out of 
his life, and made themselves eminently ridicut 
lous. One Jady went so far as to collect the hairs 
from his comb,—others showered tracts upon him. 

IT had hitherto been very healthy ; but in the 
beginning of winter I was seized with a severe 
illness which, though not immediatély dangerous, 
lasted so long, that it was doubtful whether I 
should have stamina to recover. It was a painful 
and fatiguing time to my daughters. They were 
quite worn out with nursing me ; our maid was ill, 
and our man-servant, Luigi Lucchesi, watched me 
with such devotion that he sat up twenty-four nights 
with me. He has been with us eighteen years, and 
now that I am old and feeble, he attends me with 
unceasing kindness, It is but justice to say that 


Ltalian Servants. . 887 


‘we ‘never were so faithfully: or well served as by 
Italians; and none are more ingenious in tuming 
théir hands to anything, and in never objecting’ to 
6 this: or that, as not what they were hired for—a 
great quality for people who, like ourselves, keep 
few servants. After atime they identify them- 
éelves with the family they serve, as my faithful 
Luigi has done with all his heart. I am sincerely | 
attached to him. 


' In the spring, when I had recovered, my soh and 
his wife came to Spezia,and we all went to Fl- 
tence, where we had the pleasure. of seeing many old 
friends. We returned to Spezia, and my son and 
his wife left us to go back to England, intending to 
meet us again somewhere the following spring. I 
little thought we never should meet again. ... . . 
My son sent his sisters a beautiful little cutter, built 
by Mr. Forrest in London, which has been a great 
tesource to them. I always insist on their taking a 
good sailor with them, although I.am not in the 
least nervous for their. safety. Indeed, small as the 
“Frolic” is—and she is only about twenty-eight 
feet. from stem to stern—she has weathered some 
stiff gales gallantly, as, for instance, when our friend, 
Mr. Montague Brown, British consul at, Genoa, 
sailed her from Genoa .to Spezia in very bad 


% 


$35 Bary Somerville, 


weather ; aridin a very dangerous squall my daugh- 
ters were caught in, coming froin Amalfite Sorrénto. 
The “ Frolic” had enly just arrived at Spezia, when 
we heard of the sudden deatli of my dear’ son, Oct., 
1865. 


‘This event, which took from my mother’s last years 
one of her chief delights, she bore with her usual 
cabn courage, looking forward confidently to a reunion 
at no distant date with one who had been the most 
dutiful of sons and beloved of friends. She never per- 
mitte® herself, in writing her Recollections, to refer to 
her feelings under these great sorrows. 


Some time after this, my widowed daughter-in-law 
spent a few months with us. On her return to London, 
I sent the manuscript of the “ Molecular and Micro- 
scopic Science” with her for publication. In writing 
this book I made a great mistake, and repent it. 
Mathematics are the natural bent of my mind. + If 
I had devoted myself exclusively to that study, I 
might probably have written something useful, as a 
new era had begun in that science.- Although f got 
“‘Chales on the Higher Geometry,” it could be: but 
a secondary object while I was engaged, jn writing 
a popular book. Subsequently, it became a‘source 
of deep interest and oceupation to me. 


Spetia, 389 

Spezia’ is, very muehi: spoilt by ‘the works in 
progress fop.the arsenal; though aothing can change 
the, heauty.of- the gulf as geen from our windows, 
especially the: group of: the, Carrara mountains, with 
fine peaks;and ranges ‘of » becoming more and 
more verdant. down 6 the water's edge.. The effect 
of the setting-sun- on this group’ is varied ‘and 
brilliant beyond belief. Even I, in spite of my 
shaking hand, resumed the- brush, and painted a 
view of the ruined’ Castle of Ostia, at the mouth of 
the Tiber, from a sketch- of my own, for my dear 
friend Teresa Doria. 

We now came to live at Naples; and on leaving 
Spezia, I spent a fortnight with Count and Countess 
Usedom at the Villa Capponi, near Florence, where, 
though unable to visit, I had the pleasure of seeing 
my Florentine friends again. 

We spent two days in Rome, and dined‘ with our 
friends the Duca and Duchesa‘di Sermoneta. We 
were grieved at his blindness, but found him as 
agreeable as ever. 

Through our friend, Admiral Acton, I became 
acquainted with Professor Panceri, Professor 
of Comparative Anatomy; Signore de Gasparis, 
who hassdiscovered nine of the minor ' planets, 
and is an excellent mathematician; and some 


others. To these gentlemen I am indebted for being 
z2 


340 Mary Somerville. 


elected an honorary member of the Accademia 
Pontoniana. 

We were much interested in Vesuvius, which, for 
several months, was in a state of great activity. 
At first, there were only volumes of smoke ‘and 
some small streams of lava, but these were followed 
by the most magnificent projections of red hot 
stones and rocks rising 2,000 feet above the top of 
the mountain. Many fell back again into the crater, 
but a large portion were thrown in fiery showers 
down the sides of the cone. At length, these 
beautiful eruptions of lapilli ceased, and the lava 
flowed more abundantly, though, being intermittent 
and always issuing from the summit, it was quite 
harmless ; volumes of smoke and vapour rose from 
the crater, and were carried by the wind to a great 
distance. In sunshine the contrast was beautiful, 
between the jet-black smoke and the silvery-white 
clouds of vapour. At length, the’ mountain re- 
turned to apparent tranquillity, though the violent 
detonations occasionally heard gave warning that 
the calm might not last long. At last, one evening, 
in November, 1868, when one of my daughters | and 
I were observing the mountain through a very 
good telescope, lent us by a friend, we distinctly saw 
a new crater burst out at the foot of the cone in the 
Atrio del Cavallo, and bursts of red-hot lapilli and 


Eruption of Vesuvius. 841 


red smoke pouring forth in volumes. Early next 
morning we saw a great stream of lava pouring 
down to the north of the Observatory, and a column 
of black smoke issuing from the new craters, be- 
cause there were two, and assuming the well-known 
appearance of a pine-tree. The trees on the northern 
edge of the lava were already on fire. The stream 
of lava very soon reached the plain, where it 
overwhelmed fields, vineyards, and ‘houses. It was 
more than a mile in width and thirty feet deep. 
My daughters went up the mountain the evening 
after the new craters were formed; as for me, I 
could not risk the fatigue of such an excursion, but 
I saw it admirably from our own windows. During 
this year the volcanic forces in the interior of the 
earth were in unusual activity, for a serics of earth- 
quakes shook the west codst of South America for 
more than 2,500 miles, by which many thousands of 
the inhabitants perished, and many more were 
rendered homeless. Slight shocks were felt in many 
parts of Europe, and even in England. Vesuvius 
was our safety-valve. The pressure must have been 
very great which opened two new craters in the Atrio 
del Cavallo and forced out such a mass of matter. 
There is no evidence that water had been concerned 
in the late eruption of Vesuvius; but during the 
whole of the preceding autumn, the fall of rain had 


342 Mary Somerville. 


been unusually great and continuous. There wero 
frequent thunder-storms ; and, on one oceasion, th 

quantity of rain that fell was so great, as to causd 
a land-slip in Pizzifaleone, by which several houses 
were overwhelmed ; and, on another occasion, the 
torrent of rain was so violent, that the Riviera di 
Chiaja was covered, to the depth of half a metre, 
with mud, and stones brought down by the water 
from the heights above. This enormous quantity of 
water pouring on the slopes of Vesuvius, and per- 
colating through the crust of ‘the earth into the 
fiery caverns, where volcanic forces are gencrated, 
Leing resolved into steam, and possibly aided by the 
expansion of volcanic gases, may have been a partial 
agent in propelling the formidable stream of lava 
which has caused such destruction. We observed, 
that when lava abounded, the projection of rocks 
and lapilli cither ceased altogether, or became of 
small amount. The whole eruption ended in a 
shower of impalpable ashes, which hid the moun- 
tain for many days, and which were carried to a 
great distance by the wind. Sometimes the aghes 
were pure white, giving the mountain the appew- 
ance of being covered with snow, Vapour con- 
tinued to rise from Vesuvius in beautiful silver} 
clouds, which ceased and left the edge of the crater 
white with sublimations. I owe to Vesuvius the 


fligh Temperature. 343 


great pleasure of making the acquaintance of Mr, 
Phillips, Professor of Geology in the University of 
Oxford ; and, afterwards, that of Sir John Lubbock, 
and Professor Tyndall, who had come to Naples on 
purpose to see the eruption. Unfortunately, Sir 
John Lubbock, and Professor Tyndall were so 
limited for time, that they could only spend one 
evening with us ; but I enjoyed a delightful evening, 
and had much scientific conversation. , 
Notwithstanding the progress meteorology has 
made since it became a subject of exact observation, 
yet no explanation has been given of the almost un- 
precedented high summer temperature of 1868 in 
Great Britain, and_even in the Aretic regions. In 
England, the grass’ and heather were dried up, and 
extensive areas were set on fire by sparks from rail- 
way locomotives, the conflagrations .spreading so 
rapidly, that they could only be arrested by cutting 
trenches to intercept their course. The whalers 
found open water to a higher latitude than usual ; 
but, although the Br itish Government did not avail 
themselves of this opportunity for further Arctic dis- 
covery, Sweden, Germany, France, and especially 
the United States, have taken up the subject with 
great energy. Eight expeditions sailed for the North 
Polar region between the years 1868 and 1870; 
séveral for the express purpose of reaching the 


344 Mary Somerville. 


Polar Sea, which, I have no doubt, will be attained, 
now that steam has given such power to penetrate . 
the fields of floating ice. It would be more than a 
dashing exploit to make. a cruise on that unknown 
sea; it would be a discovery of vast scientific im- 
portance with regard to geography, magnetism, tem- 
perature, the general circulation of the atmosphere 
and oceans, as well as to natural history. I cannot 
but regret that I shall not live to hear the result of 
these voyages. 


# * = * * 


The British laws are adverse to women; and we 
are deeply indebted to Mr. Stuart Mill for daring 
to show their iniquity and injustice. The law in the 
United States is in some respects even worse, in- 
sulting the sex, by granting suffrage to the newly- 
emancipated slaves, and refusing it to the most 
highly-educated women of the Republic. 


{For the noble character and transcendent intellect of 
Mr. J. 8. Mill my mother had the greatest admiration. 
She had some correspondence with him on the subject of 
the petition to Parliament for the extension of the suf- 
frage to women, which she signed; and she also wrote to 
thank him warmly for his book on the “‘ Subjection of 
Women.” In Mr. Mill’s reply to the latter he says :— 


Letter from Mill. 345 


FROM JOHN STUART MILL, ESQ, TO MRS. SOMERVILLE, 


$ BLACKHEATH Park, July 12th, 1869. 
Dear Mapan, 


Such a ietter .as yours is a sufficient reward 
for the trouble of writing the little book. I could have 
desired no better proof that it was adapted to its purpose 
than such an encouraging opinion from you. I thank 
you heartily for taking the trouble to express, in such 
kind terms, your approbation of the book,—the approba- 
tion of one who has rendered such inestimable service to 
the cause of women by affording in her own. person so 
high an example of their intellectual capabilities, and, 
finally, by giving to the protest in the great Petition of 
last year the weight and importance derived from the 

‘signature which headed it. 
Iam, . 
Dear Madam, 
Most sincerely and respectfully yours, 
J. 8. Mu. 


Age has not abated my zeal for the emancipation 
of my sex from the unreasonable prejudice too 
prevalent in Great Britain against a literary and 
scientific education for women. The French are 
more civilized in this respect, for they have taken 
the lead, and have given the first example in modern 
times of encouragement to the high intellectual 
culture of the sex,, Madame Emma Chenu, who 
had received the degree of Master of Arts from 


346 Mary Somerville, 


the Academy of Sciences in Paris, has more. wen 
cently received the diploma of Licentiate in Mathe- 
matical Sciences from the same illustrious Society, 
after a successful examination in algebra, trigo- 
nometry, analytical geometry, the differential and 
integral calculi, and astronomy. A. Russian lady 
has also taken a degree; and a lady of my aee 
quaintance has received a gold medal from the samd 
Institution. 

[ joined in a petition to the Senate of London 
University, praying that degrees might be granted 
to women ; but, it was rejected. I have also fre- 
quently signed petitions to Parliament for ‘the 
Female Sutirage, and have the honour now to ‘be a 
member of the General Committee for Woman 
Suffrage in London. 


* * * * * 
t 


[My mother, in alluding to the great changes in publig 
opinion which she had lived to see, used to remark ‘that 
a conummonly well-informed woman of the present day 
would have been looked upon as a prodigy of learning in 
her youth, and that even till quite lately many considered 
tliat if women were to receive the solid education mtn 
enjoy, they would forfeit much of their feminine grace 
and become unfit to perform their domestic duties. My 
mother herself was one of the brightest examples of the 
fallacy of this old-world theory, for no one was more 
thoroughly and gracefully feminine than she was, both in 


Claims of Wonién. 847 


manner and appearatice ; and, as “I have: already men: 
tioned, no amount of scientifie labour ever induced her-ta 
neglect her home duties, She took the liveliest interest in 
all that has been done of late years to extend high clays 
education to women, both classical and scientific, and 
hailed the establishment of the Ladies’.College at Girton 
as a great step in’ the true direction, and dne which could 
not fail to obtain most {important results, Her scientifia 
library, as already stated, has been presented to this 
College as the best fulfilment of her wishes. 


; * * d . * ; ~ 
T have lately entered my goth year, grateful, to 
God for the innumerable blessings He has bestowed 
on me and my childrens at peace with all on. earth, 
and I trust that I may be at peace witli my Maker 
when my last hour comes, which cannot now be fur 
distant. 
Although I have been tried by many _ severe 
afflictions, my life upon the whole has becn 
happy. In my youth IF had ‘to contend with 
prejudice and illiberality ; ‘yet I was of a quiet 
temper, and ‘easy to live with, and I never 
interfered with or pryed. into., other people’s 
affairs. However, if invitated by what I considered 
unjust criticism or interference with myself, or any 
one I loved, I could resent it fiercely. I was not 
good at argument ; I was apt to lose my temper ; but 
I never bore ill will to any one, or forgot the manners 


348 Mary Somerville. 


of a gentlewoman, however angry I may have been 
at the time. But I must say that no one ever met 
with such kindness as I have done. I never had an 
encmy. I have never been of a melancholy dis- 
position ; though depressed sometimes by circum- 
stances, I always rallied again; and although I 
seldom laugh, I can laugh heartily at wit or on fit 
oceasion. The short time I have to live naturally 
occupies my thoughts. In the blessed hope of meet~ 
ing again with my beloved children, and those who 
were and are dear to me on earth, I think of death 
with composure,and perfect confidence in the mercy 
of God. Yet to me, who am afraid to sleep alone 
on a stormy night, or even to sleep comfortably any 
night unless some one is near, it is a fearful thought, 
that my spirit must enter that new state of exist- 
ence quite alone. We are told of the infinite 
glories of that state, and I believe in them, though 
it is incomprehensible to us; but as I do compre- 
hend, in some degree at least, the exquisite loveli- 
ness of the visible world, I confess I shall be sorry 
to leave it. I shall regret the sky, the sea, with all 
the changes of their beautiful colouring ; the earfh, 
with its verdure and flowers: but far more shall I 
grieve to leave animalg who have followed our steps 
affectionately for years, without knowing for cer- 
tainty their ultimate fate, though I firmly believe 


Geography. 349 


that the living principle 1s never extinguished,’ ‘pince 
the utoms of matter are indestructible, as far a8’ we 
know, it is difficult to believe that the spark which 
gives to their union life, memory, affection, intelli- 
genco, and fidelity, is- evanescent. Every atom in 
the human frame, as well as in that of’ animals, 
undergoes # periodical change by continual waste 
and renovation ; the abode is changed, not its in: 
habitant. If animals have' no future, the existence 
of many is most wretched ; multitudes are starved, 
qiuelly! beaten, ‘and loaded during life; many dié 
under a barbarous vivisection. 'I cannot believe that 
any creature was created for uncompensated misery} 
it would ‘be ‘eontrary to the’ attributes of God’s 
mercy and justice. I am sincerely ‘happy to find 
that Iam not the only believer in'the immortality 
of the lower animals, 


When I was taught geography. by’. the willage 
schoolmaster at Burntisland, it seemed to me that 
half the world was terra incognita, and now that'a 
new edition of my “Physical Geography ” is re- 
quired, it will be a work of great labour to bring it 
up'to the present time. The discoveries in South 
Africa alone would fill a volume. Japan and China 
have been opened to Europeans since my last 
edition. The great continent of Australia was ‘an 


3850 ; Mary Somerville, 


entirely unknown country, except part of the coast. 
Now telegrams havo been sent and answers received 
in the course of g few hours, from our eountrymen 

. througheut that mighty empire, and even from 
‘New Zealand, round half the globe. The inhabitants 
of the United States are our ofboria:: se-whatever 
,may heppen to Great Britain in the course’of events, 
it stil} will thave.the honour of colonizing, and con- 
sequently civilizing, half the world, 

In all recent geographical aiscovbaies our Royal 
Geographical Society has ‘borne the most important 
part, and none of ite members have done more than 
my highly-gifted friend’ the President, Sir Roderick 
Murchison, geologist of Russia, and founder and 
author of the colossal “Silurian System.” To the 
affection of this friend, sanctioned by the unanimous 
approval of the council of that illustrious Society, I 
owe the honour of being awarded the Victoria Medal 
fur my “Physical Geography.” An honour so un- 
expested, and so far beyond my merit, surprised and 
affected me more deeply than I can find words to 
express. 

In the events of my life it may be seen how 
much I have been honoured by the , scientific 
societies and universities of Italy, many of whom 
have elected me an honorary member or associate ; 
but the greatest honour I have received in Italy has 


Letter from Menabxea. 351 


been the gift of the first gold: medal, hitherto 
awarded by the. Geographical Society at Florence, 
and. avhich was. comed on .purpésq with my name 

on.the reverse. I received it the othei day, accom- 
panied by the following etter from. General Mona 
‘hrea, President of the Council, himsélf % distin. 
guished: mathematician and philosopher 

FROM GENERAL MENABREA ‘TO'MRS. 'SOMERYILIM,’ 

-Ftongxar, 30 Juin, 1869. 
MApann, 

Wai pris ‘connaissance ayec le plits grand intérét de 
la belle édition de votre’ dernier ouvrggesur la Géographie 
Physique, et je désire vous donner un témoignage d’haute 
estime pow vos travaux. Je vous prie donc, Madame, 
Waccepter une médaille d’or a Veffigie du Roi Victor 
Emmanuel, mon auguste souverain. C’est un souvenir 
de mon pays dans lequel vous comptez, comme chez 
toutes les nations ot la science est honoré, de nombreux 
amis et admirateurs. Veuillez croire, Madame, que je 
ne cesserai d’étre l'un et Yautre en méme temps que je 
suis, 

Votre trés dévoué Serviteur, 
“Menapnea. 


“At 4 general assembly of the Italian Geographical 
Society, at Florence, on the 14th March, 1870; I 
was elected by acclamation an Honorary Associate of 
thate distinguished society. I am indebted to the 
President, the Commendatore Negri, for having pro- 


352 Mary Somerville. 


posed my name, and for a very kind letter, in- 
forming me of the honour conferred upon me. 
* * e * 

I have still (in 1869) the habit of studying in 
bed from eight in the morning till twelve or one 
o'clock ; but, I am left solitary ; for I have lost my 
little bird who was my constant companion for eight 
years. It had both memory and intelligence, and 
such confidence in me as to sleep upon my arm 
while [ was writing. My daughter, to whom it 
was much attached, coming into my room early, 
was alarmed at its not flying to meet her, as it 
generally did, and at last, after a long search, the 
poor little creature was found drowned in the jug. 

On the 4th October, while at dinner, we had a 
shock of earthquake. The vibrations were nearly 
north and south; it lasted but a few seconds, and 
was very slight ; but in Calabria, &c., many villages 
and towns were overthrown, and very many people 
perished. The shocks were repeated again and 
again; only one was felt at Naples; but as it 
occurred in the night, we were unconscious of it. 
At Naples, it was believed there would be ‘an 
eruption of Vesuvius; for the smoke was particu- 
larly dense and black, and some of the wells were 
dried up. 


¢ s * * * 


Aurore. 853 


I can scarcely believe that Rome, where I have. 
spent so many happy years, is now the capital of 
united Italy. I heartily rejoice in that glorious ter- 
mination to the vicissitudes the country has under- 
gone, and only regret that age and infirmity prevent 
me from going to see Victor Emmanuel triumphantly 
enter the capital of his kingdom. The Pope’s reliance 
on foreign troops for his safety was an unpardon- 
able insult to his countrymen. 

* * * * * 

The month of October this year (1870), seems to 
have been remarkable for displays of the Aurora 
Borealis.’ It seriously interfered with the working 
of the telegraphs, particularly in the north of Eng-— 
land and Ireland. On the night of the 24th Oc- 
tober, it was seen over the greater part of Europe. 
At Florence, the common people were greatly 
alarmed, and at Naples, the peasantry were on their 
knees to the Madonna to avert the evil. Unfortu- 
nately, neither I nor any of my family saw the 
Aurora ; for most of our windows have a southern 
aspect. The frequent occurrence of the Aurora in 
1870 confirms the already known period of maxi- 
mum intensity and frequency, every ten or twelve 
years, since the last maximum occurred in 1859. 


CHAPTER XVIIL 


RCLIPSE—VISTTS OF SCIENTIFIC MEN—LIFE AT NAPLES—DARWIN’S BOOKS 
=-REMAEKS ON CIVILIZATION—FINE AURORA BOREALIS—DEATH OF 
HERSCHEL—SUMMER AT SORRENTO— BILL FOR PROTECTION OF 
ANIMALS—NINETY-SECOND YEAR—LETTER FROM PROFESSOR SEDG- 
WICK—GRAND ERUPTION .OF VESUVIUS—LAST SUMNER AT 
SORRENTO, PLANTS FOUND THERE—-CONCLUSION. 


THE summer of 1870 was unusually cool; but 
the winter has been extremely gloomy, with torrents 
of rain, and occasionally such thick fogs, that I 
could see neither to read nor to write. We had no 
storms during the hot weather ; but on the after- 
noon of the 21st December, there was one of the 
finest thunderstorms I ever saw ; the lightning was 
intensely vivid, and took the strangest forms, dart- 
ing in all directions through the air before it struck, 
and sometimes darting from the ground or the sea 
to the clouds. It ended in a deluge of rain, which 
lasted all night, and made us augur ill for the solar 
eclipse next day; and, sure enough, when I awoke 
next morning, the sky was darkened by clouds and 
rain. Fortunately, it cleared up just as the eclipse 


The Eclipse of 1870. 335 


began ; wé Were all prepared for observing it, and we 
followed its progress through the opening in the clouds 
till at last there was only a very slender crescént of 
the sun’s disc left ; its convexity was turned upwards, 
and its horns were nearly horizontal. It was then 
hidden by a dense mass of clouds ; but after a time 
they opened, and I saw the edge of the moon leave 
the limb of the sun. The appearance of the land- 
scape was very lurid, but by no means very dark. 
The common people and children had a very good 
view of the eclipse, reflected by the pools of water 
in the streets. es : 
Many of the astronomers who had been in Sicily 
observing the eclipse came to see me as they passed 
through Naples. One of their principal objects was 
to ascertain the nature of the corona, or bright white _ 
rays which surround the dark lunar disc at the 
time of the greatest obscurity. The spectroscope 
showed that it was: decidedly auroral, but as the 
aurora was seen on the dark disc of the moon it 
must have been due to the earth’s atmosphere. Part 
of the corona was polarized, and consequently must 
havé been material ; the question is, Can it be the 
etherial medium? A question of immense impor- 
tance, since the whole theory of light and coluurs 
and the resistance of Encke’s comet depends upon 
that hypothesis. The question is still in abeyance, 


AA2 


336 Mary Somerzille. 


but I have no doubt that it.will be decidéd in, the 
affirmative, and that even the cause of gravitation 
will,be known eventually. 
At this time I had the pleasure of a visit from 
’ Mr. Peirce, Professor of Mathematics and Astronomy, 
in the Harvard University, U.S., and Superintendent 
of the U.S. Coast Survey, who had come to Europe 
to observe the eclipse. On returning to America 
he kindly sent me a beautiful lithographed copy of 
avery profound memoir in linear and associative 
algebra. Although in writing my popular books I 
had somewhat neglected the higher algebra, I have 
read a great part of the work; but as I met with 
some difficulties [ wrote to Mr. Spottiswoode, asking 
his advice as, to the books that would be of pse, and 
he sent me Serret’s “Cours d’Algébre Supérieure,” 
Salmon’s “ Higher Algebra,” and Tait on “Quater- 
nions ;” so now I got exactly what I wanted, and I 
am very busy for a.few hours every morning; de- 
lighted to have an occupation so entirely to my 
mind: J thank God that my intellect is still 
unimpaired. I am grateful to Professor Peirce 
for giving me an opportunity of exercising if so 
agreeably. During the rest of the day, I have 
recourse to Shakespeare, Dante, and more modern 
light reading, besides the newspapers, which always 
interested me much. I have resumed my habit 


Darwinism 837 


of working, and can count. the threads of. a fine 
danvis' without spectacles,’ ‘I receive every one who 
comes to see me, and often have the pleasure -of a— 
Visit from old friends very unexpectedly. In the’ 
evening I read a novel, but my ‘tragie days: are 
‘Over; T prefer a cheerful conversational novel to - 
the sentimental ones. I have ‘recently been 
Yeading Walter Scott’s novels again, and enjoyed 
the broad Scotch in them. I play a few games 
‘at Bézique with one of my daughters, for honour 
‘and glory, and -so our evenings pass pleasantly 
énough. 
'' Tt is our habit to be separately occupicd during 
‘the morning, and spend the rest of the day together. 
“We are fond of birds and have several, all very 
tame. Our tame nightingales sing very beautifully, 
but, strange to say, not at night. We have also 
‘some solitary sparrows, which are, in fact, a variety 
of the thrush (Turdus cyaneus), and some birds 
which we rescued from destruction in spring, when 
‘caught and ill-used by the boys in ‘the streets ; 
egides, we have our dogs ; all of which afford me 
amusement and interest. 
* * * . * 

Mr. Murray has kindly sent me a copy of Darwin’s 
recent work on the “ Descent of Man.” Mr. Darwin 
‘maintains his theory with great talent and with: 


338 Mary Somerville. 


profound research. His knowledge of the characters 
and habits of animals of all kinds is very great, and 
his kindly feelings charming. It is chiefly by the 
feathered race that he has established his law of 
selection relative to sex. . The males of many birds 
are among the most beautiful objects in nature ; 
but that the beauty of nature is altogether irrelative 
to man’s admiration or appreciation, is strikingly 
proved by the admirable ‘sculpture on Diatoms and 
Foraminifera ; beings whose very existence was un- 
known prior to the invention of the microscope. 
The Duke of Argyll has illustrated this in the 
“Reign of Law,” by the variety, graceful forms and 
beautiful colouring of the humming birds in forests 
which man has never entered. 

In Mr. Darwin’s book it is amusing to see how 
conscious the male birds are of their beauty; they have 
reason to be so, but we scorn the vanity of the savage 
who decks himself in their spoils. Many women 
without remorse allow the life of a pretty bird to be’ 
extinguished in order that they may deck themselves 
with its corpse. In fact, hummfhg birds and other 
foreign birds have become an article of commerce. 
Our kingfishers and many of our other birds are 
on the eve of extinction on account of a cruel 
fashion. _ 

I have just received from Frances .Power Cobbe 


Tylor’s Researches. 359 


an essay, in which she controverts Darwin’s theory,” 
\80 far as the origin of the moral sense is concerned. 
Jt is written with, all the energy of her vigorous 
intellect as a moral philosopher, yet with a kindly 
tribute: to Mr. Darwin’s genius. I repeat no one 
admires Frances Cobbe more than I do. I have 
eyer found her a brilliant, charming companion, 
and a. warm, affectionate friend. She is one of 
the few with whom I keep up a correspondence, 

To Mr. Murray I am indebted for a copy of 
Tylor's “ Researches on the Early History of Man- 
kind, and the Development of Civilization” —a very 

, yemarkable work for extent of research, original 
wiews, and happy illustrations. The gradual pro- 
gress of the pre-historic races of mankind has laid 
foundation from, which Mr. Tylor proves that after 
the lapse of ages the barbarous races now existing 
are decidedly in a state of progress towards civiliza- 
tion. Yet one cannot conceive human beings in a 
more degraded state than some of them are still; their 
women are treated worse than their dogs. Sad to say, 
‘MO savages are. more gross than the lowest ranks in 
England, or treat, their wives with more cruelty. 


In the course of my, life Paris has been twice 
occupied by foreign troops, and‘ still oftener has 
‘ “Darwinism in Morals,” ko, 


360 Mary Somerville, 


it been in a state of anarchy. I regret to 
see that La Place’s house at Arcceuil has been 
broken inta, and his manuscripts thrown into the. 
river, from which some one has fortunately rescued 
that of the “Mécanique Céleste,” which is in his 
own handwriting. It is greatly to the honour of 
French men of science that during the siege they 
met as usual in the hall of the Institute, and read 
their papers as in the time of peace. The celebrated 
astronomer Janssen even escaped in a balloon, that 
he might :urive in time to observe the eclipse of the 
22nd November, 1870. 
e ® e * «# 

We had a most brilliant display of the Aurora on! 
the evening of Sunday, the 4th February, 1871, 
which lasted several hours. The whole sky from 
east to west was of the most brilliant flickering 
white light, from which streamers of red darted up to 
the zenith. There was also a lunar minbow. The 
common people were greatly alarmed, for there had» 
been 2 prediction that the world was coming to an 
end, and they thought the bright part of the Aurors 
was a piece of the moon that had already tumbled 
down! This Aurora was seen in Turkey and im. 
Egypt. 

* s. * Cd * 


lam deeply grieved and shaken by the death of 


Herschel’s Death. 30) 


Sir John Herschel, who, though ten. years younger 
than I am, has gone before me. In him I have lost - 
a dear and affectionate friend, whose advice was in- 
valuable, and his society a charm: None but those 
who have lived in his heme can imagine the bright- 
ness and happiness of his domestic life. He never 
presumed upon that superiority of intellect or the 
great discoveries which made him one of the most 
illustrious men of the age ; but conversed cheerfully 
and even playfully on any subject, though ever 
ready to give information on any of the various 
branches of stience to which he so largely contri- 
buted, and which to him were a source of constant 
happiness. Few of my early friends now remain—I 
am nearly left alone. ° 
«! . * * + 

We went to pass the summer and autumn 
at Sorrento, where we led a very quiet but 
happy life. The villa we lived in was at a short 
distance from and above the town, quite buried in 
groves of oranges and lemons, beyond which lay the 
sea, generally calny and blue, sometimes stormy ; to 
our left the islands of Ischia and Procida, the: Capo 
Miseno, with Baia, Pozzuoli, and Posilipo ; exactly 
opposite to us, Naples, then Vesuvius, and all the’ 
little towns on thgt coast,and lastly, to our -right, 
this wonderful panorama was bounded by ‘the fine 


362 Mary Somerville. 


cliffs of the Monte Santangelo. It was beautiful 
always, but most beautiful when the sun, setting be- 
hind Ischia, sent a perfect’ glory over the rippling 
sea, and tinged the Monte Santangelo and the cliffs 
which bound the Piano di Sorrento literally with 
purple and gold. I spent the whole day on a 
charming terrace sheltered from the sun, and there 
we dined and passed the evening watching the lights 
of Naples reflected in the water and the revolving 
lights of the different lighthouses. I often drove to 
Massa till after sunset, for from that road I could see 
the island of Capri, and I scarcely know a more 
lovely drive. Besides the books we took with us we 
had newspapers, reviews, and other periodicals, so 
that we were never dull. On one éccasion my 
daughters and I made an expedition up the hills to 
the Deserto, from whence one can see the Gulf of 
Salerno and the fine mountains of Calabria. My 
daughters rode and I was carried in a portantina. 
Tt was fine, clear, autumnal weather, and I enjoyed 
my expedition immensely, nor was I fatigued. ; 
* * + * * j 

In November we returned to Naples, where I 

resumed my usual life. I had received a copy of 


Hamilton’s Lectures on Quaternions from the: Rev. 
Whitewell Elwin. 1 am not acquainted with ‘that 


Law to Protect Animals. 363 


gentleman, and am the more grateful to him. Ihave 
now a valuable library of scientific books and trans- 
actions of scientific societies, the greater part gifts 
from the authors. 

Foreigners were so much shocked at the atrocious 
cruelty to animals in Italy, that an attempt was 
made about eight years ago to induce the Italian 
Parliament to pass a law for their protection, but it 
faileds As Italy is the only ‘civilized country in 
Europe in which animals are not protected by law, 
another attempt is now being made ; I have willingly 
given my name, and I received a kind letter from 
the Marchioness of Ely, from. Rome, to whom I 
had spoken upon the subject at Naples, telling 
me that the Princess Margaret, Crown Princess 

.of Italy, had been induced to head the petition. 
‘Unless the educated classes take up the cause one 
.cannot hope for much change for a long time. Our 
friend, Mr. Robert Hay, who resided at Rome for 
‘many years, had an old horse of which he was very 
fond, and on leaving Rome asked a Roman prince, 
who had very large possessions in the Campagna, if 
he would allow his old horse to end his days on his 
grassy meadows. “ Certainly,” replied the prince, 
“but how ean you care what becomes of an animal 
when he is no longer of use?” We English cannot 
boast of humanity, however, as long as our sportsmen 


364 Mary. Somerville. 


find pleasure in shooting down tame pigeons as they 
fly terrified out of a cage. 


+ 2 * * * 


Iam now in my 92nd year (1872), still able to 
drive out for several hours; I am extremely deaf, 
and my memory of ordinary events, and especially 
of the names of people, is failing, but not for mathe- 
matical and scientific subjects. I am still able to 
read books on the higher algebra for four or five 
hours in the morning, and even to solve the pro- 
Llems, Sometimes I find them difficult, but my old 
obstinacy remains, for if I do not succeed to-day, I 
attack them again on the morrow. I also enjoy 
reading about all the new discoveries and theories in 
the scientific world, and on all branches of science. , 

Sir Roderick Murchison has passed away, honoured 
by all, and of undying fame ; and my amiable friend, 
almost my contemporary, Professor Sedgwick, has 
Leen obliged to resign his chair of geology at Cam- 
bridge, from age, which he had filled with honour 
during a long life. 


[The following letter from her valued friend Professor 
Sedgwick, in 1869, is the last my mother received from 


— 
. 


Professor Sedgwish, | 365 


d- veel 
FROM PROFESSOR SEDGWICK | TO _MRS., SOMERVILLE. 


CAMBRIDGE, April 21st, 1869. 
My pear Mrs: Somervin.e, - : 


beni ;1 heard, when I was,jn.London, that, you ‘were 
still. good bodily health, and in full fruition of your, 
gveat intellectual strength, while breathing the sweet air 
of! Naples. I'had been a close’ prisoner to my college 
rodms through the past winter and ‘spring ; but-I broke’ 
fyom my prison-house at the :beginning of this month, 
that I might consult my oculist, gnd meet my niege on 
her way to Italy aaNet te . My. niece has for many 
yéas (ever since’ 1840) Den my “loving companion, 
during my annual‘ turn of residence ‘as' ‘canon of Nor- 
jvich }, and she is, and from ‘her childhood: has, been to’ 
me 9g a dear daughter. , I know,you, will forgive me for. 
my anxiety to hear from a, living witness ,that you are 
well and happy in the closing days of your honoured life; 
and for my longing desire that’ ihy beloved daughter (for 
kuch I ever regard her):should speak to you face to face, 
and see (for however short an. interview) the' Mrs. Somer: 
ville, of whom J have go, often. talked, with, her, in terms, 
of honest admiration and deep regard. The time, for 
the Italian tour is, alas! far too Y hort. But it will be a 
gveat pain to eacli bf thie'parth to'be alldwed)"éven ‘for ‘a 
short time, to gaze upon the earthly! paradise: that ‘is 
r8und about you, and to cast one look over its natural 
wonders and historic monuments. . . . . Since you 
were here, my ‘dea?‘and ‘horioured guest, ‘Cambridge is, 
gréatly changed." I am left here like a ‘vessel on its’ beam, 
ends, to mark the distance to which the current has. 
been drifting during a good many bygone years. I have- 


$66 Mary Souersville. 


outlived nearly all my early friends. Whewell, Master of 
Trinity, was the last of the old stock who was living here. 
Herschel has not been here for several years. Babbage 
was here for a day or two during the year before last. 
The <Astronomer-Royal belongs to a more recent 
generation. For many years long attacks of suppressed 
gout have made my life very unproductive. I yesterday 
dined in Hall. It was the first time I was able to meet 
my brother Fellows since last Christmas day. A long 
attack of bronchitis, followed by a distressing inflamma- 
tion of my eyes, had made me a close prisoner for nearly 
four months. But, thank God, I am again beginning to be 
cheery, and with many infirmities (the inevitable results 
of old age, for I have entered on my 85th year) I am still 
strong in general health, and capable of enjoying, I think 
as much as ever, the society of those whom I love, be 
they young or old. May God preserve and bless you ; 
and whensoever it may be His will to call you away to 
Himself, may your mind be without a cloud and your 
heart full of joyful Christian hope ! 
I remain, 
My dear Friend, 
Faithfully and gratefully yours, 
Apa. SEDGwWIck. 


After all the .violence and bloudshed of tlt. 

. preceding year, the Thanksgiving of Queen Victoria 
and the British nation for the recovery of the Prince 
of Wales will form a striking event in European 
history. For it was not the congregation in St. 


Vesuvius. 867 


Paul’s alone, it was the spontaneous gratitude of all 
ranks and all faiths throughout the three kingdoms 
that' were offered up to God that morning ; the 
people sympathized with their Queen, and no 
sovereign more deserves sympathy. 
* * * * * 
‘Vesuvius has exhibited a considerable activity 

during the winter and early spring, and frequent 
streams of lava flowed from the crater, and especially 
from the small cone to the north, a little way below 
the principal crater. But these streams were small. 
atid intermittent; and no greaf outbreak was ex- 
pected...” On the 24th April a stream of Java induced 
ug to ‘drive in -the evening. to Santa Lucia. ‘The 
next night, Thuraday, 25th April, my’ daughter 
Martha, wha had been ‘to the theatre; wakened me 
that I might see Vesuvius in splendid eruption, This. 
was at sbout 1 o'clock on Friday morning. - Barly 
in the morning I was disturbed-by what I thought. 
loud thunder, and when my maid came 4t.7 a.m! J 
remarked that there was a thunder storm, but she’ 
said, “ No, no ; it is the mountain roaring.” It must 
Nave been very loud for. me to-hear,- -considering my, 
deafness, and the; distance Vesuvius is from N: aples,, 
yet it was nothing vompared to the noise. later in 
the day, and for many days after. My daughter, 


_who had gone to.Santa Lucia to see the eruption 


368 Mary Somerville. 


better, soon came to fetch me with our friend Mr. 
James Swinton, and we spassed the whole day at 
Windows in an hotel at Santa Lucia, immediately 
opposite the mountain. Vesuvius was now in the 
fiercest eruption, such as has not occurred in the 
memory of this generation, lava overflowing the 
principal crater and running in all directions. The 
fiery glow of lava is not very visible by daylight ; 
smoke and steam is sent off which rises white as 
snow, or rather as frosted silver, and the mouth of 
the great crater was white with the lava pouring 
over it. New craters had burst out the preceding 
night, at the very time I was admiring the beauty 
of the eruption, little dreaming that, of many people 
who had gone up that night to the Atrio del Cavallo 
to see the lava (as my daughters had done repeatedly 
and especially during the great eruption of 1868), 
some forty or fifty had been on the very spot where 
the new crater burst out, and perished, scorched to 
déath by the fiery vapours which eddied from the 
fearful chasm. Some were rescued who had been 
less near to the chasm, but of these none eventually 
recovered. 

Behind the cone rose an immense coliimn of dense 
llack smoke to more than four times the height of 
the mountain, and spread out at the summit hori- 
zontally, like a pine tree, above the silvery stream 


Great Eruption. 369 


which poured forth in volumes. There were constant 

bursts of fiery projectiles, shooting to an immense 

height into the black column of smoke, and tinging 

it with a lurid red colour. The fearful roaring and . 
thundering never ceased for one moment, and the 

house shook with the concussion of the air. One - 
stream of lava flowed towards Torre del Greco, but 
luckily stopped before it reached the cultivated fields ; 
others, and the most dangerous ones, since some of 
them came from the new craters, poured down the 
Atrio del Cavallo, and dividing before reaching the 
Observatory flowed to the right and to the left—the 
stream which flowed to the north very soon reached 
the plain, and before night came or had partially 
destroyed the small town of Massa di Somma. One 
of the peculiarities of this eruption was the great 
fluidity of the lava ; another was the never-ceasing 
thundering of the mountain. During that day we ob- 
served several violent explosions in the great stream 
of lava: we thought from the enormous volumes of 
black smoke emitted on these occasions that new 
craters had burst.out—some below the level of the 
Observatory ; but that can hardly have been the 
case. My daughters at night, drove to Portici, 
and went up to the top of a house, where the noise 
seems to have been appalling ; but they told me they 
did not gain anything by going to Portici, nor 


BB 


370 Mary Somerville. 


did they see the eruption . better than I did ‘whe 
remained at Santa Lucia, for you get too much. bp. 
low the mountain on going near. On Sunday, 28th. 
I was surprised at the extreme. ‘daikndss} and ou 
looking out of window say men’ walking. with 
umbrellas ; Vesuvius was emitting’ seh ubanonante 
quantity of ashes, or rather fine black sand, that 
neither land, sea, nor sky was visible; the fall was 
a little less dense during the day, but- at nighi 
it was worse than ever. Strangers seemed to be 
more alarmed at this than at the eruption, and 
certainly the constant loud roaring of Vesuvius 
was appalling enough amidst the darkness and 
gloom of the* falling ashes. The railroad was 
crowded with both natives and foreigners, escaping ; 
on the other hand, crowds came from Rome to see 
the eruption We were not at all afraid, for we con- 
sidered that the danger was past when so great an 
eruption had acted as a kind of safety-valve to the 
pent-up vapours. But a silly report got about 
that an earthquake was to take place, and many 
persons passed the night in driving or walking 
about the town, avoiding narrow streets. The 
mountain was quite, veiled for some days by vapour 
and ashes, but I could see the black smoke and 
silvery mass above it. While looking at this, a 
magnificent column, black as jet, darted with incon- 


Fiffects of the Eruption: 871 


éivable,violence and velocity to an immense height ; 
Ate pave a grand idea of the power that was i in 
‘etion ‘in’ the,fiery caverns’ ‘helow. : 
t ‘Immensé-i injury has. been done by this eruption, 
and’ nfich: more would have: been done had not the 
lava: flowed: to“a: “great- extent over that of 1868. 
Still the streadiis ran through Massa di Somma, San 
‘Sebastiano,’ ‘and. otlier villages scattered about the 
country, overwhelming fields, woods, vineyards, and 
houses. The ashes, too, have not only destroyed 
this year’s crops; but killed. both vines and fruit 
trees, so that altogether it has been most disastrous. 
Vesuvius was involved in vapour and ashes till far 
on in May, and one afternoon at sunset, when all 
below was in shade, and only a few silvery threads of 
steam were visible, a column of. the most beautiful 
crimson colour rose from the crater, and floated in 
the air. Many of the small craters still smoked, 
one quite at the base of the cone, which is a good 
deal changed—it is lower, the small northern cone 
has disappeared, and part of the walls of the crater 
have fallen in, and there is a fissure in them through 
which smoke or vapour is occasionally emitted. 
* * * * * 

On the 1st June we returned to Sorrento, this 
time to a pretty and cheerful apartment close to the 
sea, where I led very much the same pleasant life as 


$72 Mary Somerville, 


the year before—busy in the morning with my own 
studies, and passing the rest of the day on the 
terrace with my daughters, who brought me beauti- 
ful wild flowers from their excursions over the 
country. Many of the flowers they brought were 
new to me, and it is a curious fact that some plants 
which did not grow in this part of the country a 
few years ago are now quite.common. Amongst 
others, the Trachelium coeruleum, a pretty wall-plant, 
native of Calabria, and formerly unknown here, 
now clothes many an old wall near Naples, and at 
Sorrento. The ferns are extremely beautiful here. 
Besides those common to England, the Pteris cretica 
grows luxuriantly in the damp ravines, as well as 
that most beautiful of European ferns, the Wood- 
wardia radicans, whose fronds are often more than 
six feet long. The inhabitants of Sorrento are very 
superior to the Neapolitans, both in looks and 
character ; they are cleanly, honest, less cruel to 
animals, and have pleasant manners—neither too 
familiar nor cringing. As the road between Sor- 
rento and Castellamare was impassable, owing to 
the fall of immense masses of rock from the cliffS 
above it, we crossed over in the steamer with 
our servants and our pet birds, for I now have 
a beautiful long-tailed parroquet called Smeraldo, 
who is my constant companion and is very familiar 


Protection of Birds. 878 


And here I must mention how much I was pleased 
to hear that Mr. Herbert, M.P., has brought in a 
bill to protect land birds, which has been passed in 
Parliament ; but I am grieved to find that “The 
lark which at Heaven's gate sings” is thought un- 
worthy of man’s protection. Among the numerous 
plans for the educationeof the young, let us hope 
that mercy may be tgught as a part of religion. 
* * * * * 

Though far advanced in years, I take as lively an 
interest as ever in passing events. I regret that I 
shall not live to know the result of the expedition to 
determine the currents of the ocean, the distance of 
the earth from the sun determined by the transits of 
Venus, and the source of the most renowned of 
rivers, the discovery of which will immortalise the . 
name of Dr. Livingstone. But I regret most of all 
that I shall not sec the suppression of the most 
atrocious system of slavery that ever disgraced 
humanity—that made known to the world by Dr. 
Livingstone and by Mr. Stanley, and which Sir 
Bartle Frere has gone to’ suppress by order of the 
“British Government. 

* * * * * 

The Blue Peter has been long flying at my fore- 
mast, and now that I am in my ninety-second year 
I must soon expect the signal for sailing. It is a 


874 Mary Somerville. 


solemn voyage, but it dacs not- disturb my tran- 
quillity. Deeply sensible of my’ “niter unworthiness, 
and profoundly g grateful for the imumerable bless- 
ings I have received, I trust in the infinite ‘ merey of 
my Almighty Creator. I have every. reason to be 
thankful that my intellect is still wnintpaired, and, 
although my strength is weakness, my daughters 
support my tottering steps, aml, by incessant care 
and help, make the infirmities of age so light to me 
that I am perfectly happy. 


I wave very little more to add to these Jast words of 
my Mother’s Recollections. The- preceding pages will 
have given the reader some idea—albeit perhaps a very 
imperfect one—of her character and opinions. Only 
regarding her feelings on the most sacred of themes, is it 
needful for me to say a few words. My mother was pyo- 
foundly and sincerely religious; hers was not a religion 
of mere forms and doctrines, but a solemn deep-rooted 
faith which influenced every thought, and regulated every 
action of her life. Great love and reverence towards God 
was the foundation of this pure faith, which accompanied 
her from youth to extreme old age, indeed to her last 
moments, which gave her strength to endure many sor- 
rows, and was the mainspring of that extreme humility 
which was so remarkable a feature of her character. 

At a very early age she dared to think for herself, fear- 


Religions Fechings. 315 


lesaly, shhkirlg off-those doctrines of her-early creed which 
seemed to. kr incompatible with tle unutterable goodness. 
and gredtnéas. of God ;-and through life she adhered to 
her simple ‘faith, holding’ quietly and resolutely to the 
ultimate. tr hs: ‘of religion, regardless alike of the censure 
of bigots: <r ‘thie siniles of sceptics: The theories of 
modern science. she welcomed as quite in accordance. 
with her religious opinions. She rejected. the notion 
of occasional interference by the Creator with His 
work, and believed tifat from the first and invariably 
He has acted according to a system of harmonious laws, 
some of which we are beginning faintly to recognise, 
others of which will be discovered in course of time, while 
many must remain a mystery te man while he inhabits this 
world. It was in her early life that the controversy 
raged respecting the incompatibility of the Mosaic ac- 
count of Creation, the Deluge, &c., with the revelations 
of geology. My mother yery soon accepted the modern 
theories, seeing in them nothing in any way hostile to 
true religious belief. It is singular to recall that her 
candid avowal of views now so common, caused her 
to be publicly censured by name from the pulpit of 
York Cathedral. She foresaw the great modifications. 
in opinion which further discoveries will inevitably 
produce; But she foresaw them without doubt or fear. 
Her constant prayer was for light and truth, and 
jts full accomplishment she looked for confidently in. 
the life beyond the grave. My mother never discussed 
religious subjects in general society; she considered them 
far too solemn to be talked of lightly; but with those 
near and dear to her, and with very intimate friends, 
whose opinion agreed with her own, she spoke freely 
and willingly. Her mind was constantly occupied with 


376 Mary Somerville 


thoughts on religion; and in her last years especially she 
reflected much on that future world which she expected 
soon to enter, and lifted her heart still more frequently 
to that good Father whom she had loved so fervently 
all her life, and in whose merciful care she fearlessly 
trusted in her last hour. 

My mother’s old age was a thoroughly happy one. She 
often said that not even in the joyous spring of life had 
she been more truly happy. Serene and cheerful, full 
of life and activity, as far as her physical strength 
permitted, she had none of the infirmities of age, except 
difficulty in heariig, which prevented her from joining 
in general conversation. She had always been near- 
sighted, but could read small print with the greatest 
ease without glasses, even by lamp-light. To the last her 
intellect remained perfectly unclouded ; her affection for 
those she loved, and her sympathy for all living beings, 
as fervent as ever; nor did her ardent desire for and 
belief in the ultimate religious and moral improvement 
of mankind diminish. She always retained her habit of 
stady, and that pursuit, in which she had attained such ex- 
cellence and which was always the most congenial to her, 
—Mathematics—delighted and amused her to the end. 
Her last occupations, continued to the actual day of her 
death, were the revision and completion of a treatise, 
which she had written years before, on the ‘“‘ Theory 
of Differences” (with diagrams exquisitely drawn), and, 
the study of a book on Quaternions. Though too 
religious to fear death, she dreaded outliving her intel- 
lectual powers, and it was with intense delight that she 
pursucd her intricate calculations after her ninetieth 
and ninety-first years, and repeatedly told me how she 
rejuiced to find that she had the same readiness and 


Her Death. 377 


facility in comprehending and developing these ex- 
tremely difficult formula, which she possessed when young. 
Often, also, she said how grateful she was to the 
Almighty Father who had allowed her to retain her 
faculties unimpaired to so great an age. God was indeed 
loving and merciful to her; not only did He spare her 
-this calamity, but also the weary trial of long-continued ' 
illness. In health of body and vigour of mind, having 
lived far beyond the usual span of human life; He called 
her to Himself. For her Death lost all its terrors. Her 
pure spirit passed away so gently that those around her 
scarcely perceived when she left them. It was the beauti- 
ful and painless close of a noble and a happy life. 

My mother died in sleep on the morning of the 29th 
Nov., 1872. Her remains rest in the English Campo 
Santo of Naples. 


THE END. 


BRADBURY, AGNEW, & 00,, PRINTERS, WHITEVRIARS. 


NU