The Plays of Sophocles (Sophocles, 1883)
==========================================================
All seven surviving plays of Sophocles (Ajax, Antigone, Electra, Oedipus the King, Oedipus at Colonus, Philoctetes, Trachiniae) in Robert Whitelaw's 1883 English verse translation; the standard Victorian verse rendering, complementing the Campbell prose translation already in the library. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/sophoclestransla00sophuoft).

SOPHOCLES 


4i 


SOPHOCLES 


TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH  VERSE 


ROBERT    WHITELAW 

ASSISTANT-MASTER    IN    RUGBY   SCHOOL;    LATE   FELLOW   Of 
TRINITY   COLLEGE,   CAMBRIDGE 


RIVINGTONS 

WATERLOO    PLACE,    LONDON 

MDCCCLXXXIII 


PA 


I    OWE    SO    MUCH    TO    THE    POETRY 
OF 

ROBERT    BROWNING 

THAT  HE  PERMITS  ME 

BY  INSCRIBING  THIS  PAGE  WITH  HIS  NAME 

BOTH  TO  RECORD  AND  INCREASE 

MY  DEBT. 


PREFACE 

T    THINK  it  better  that  this  book  should  have  for  its 
preface,  in  the  main,  an  apology  for  being  unpre- 
faced. 

I  could  find  something  to  say  about  the  genius,  the 
dramatic  art,  the  diction  of  Sophocles — something  per- 
haps about  the  several  plays  and  the  personages  of  each  ; 
but  for  such  discussions  there  is  no  room  in  a  preface, 
and  the  systematic  treatment  of  these  matters  seems  to 
belong  rather  to  the  work  of  a  commentator  upon 
Sophocles  than  of  a  translator.  A  translator  has  under- 
taken, however  unworthily,  to  be  the  mouthpiece  of  the 
poet,  not  ('  motley  on  back,  and  pointing- pole  in  hand  ') 
his  showman.  The  men  and  the  women  whom  Sophocles 
created  are  here,  not  to  be  talked  about,  but  to  speak  for 
themselves;  or  else  the  translation  is  'naught'  Whereas 
Oedipus  was  blind,  now  he  sees.  He  stands  before  us, 
sanctified  by  suffering ;  and  who  shall  dissertate  about 


PREFACE. 


him?  The  human  heart  of  Deianeira,  distracted 
with  love  and  jealousy,  palpitating  with  hope  and  fear, 
torn  with  remorse  and  anguish,  is  laid  bare  for  us ;  there 
is  no  more  to  say. 

Or  I  could  dilate  upon  the  business  of  the  translator, 
and  the  principles  by  which  I  have  been  guided  in 
making  this  translation.  But  here  there  is  nothing  new 
to  be  said.  All  translators  must  begin  with  the  same  prin- 
ciples, though  they  apply  them  so  differently ;  the  differ- 
ence arising  in  part  from  the  various  estimates  which  they 
form  of  the  conflicting  claims  to  be  balanced,  in  part 
from  the  various  qualifications,  whether  of  literary  or  of 
scholarly  faculty,  which  they  bring  to  their  work.  But  all 
alike,  whatever  their  achievement,  must  in  the  first 
instance  propose  to  themselves  as  their  aim  the  utmost 
fideUty  to  the  thought,  the  feeling,  the  form  of  the 
original,  compatible  with  perfect  loyalty  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  language  into  which  they  are  translating. 
And  this,  or  an  approximation  to  this,  the  readers  of  a 
translation  have  a  right  to  demand ;  though,  in  the  case 
of  a  writer  so  subtly  perfect  as  Sophocles,  those  who 
know  him  best  will  best  appreciate  the  difficulty  of 
achieving  such  a  result.     I  conceive  that  the  test  of  a 


PREFACE. 


thoroughly  good  English  translation  is  twofold  :  it  should 
satisfy  both  the  English  reader  who  cannot  read  the 
original,  and  the  scholar  who  can.  It  is,  I  believe, 
increasingly  felt  that  a  good  translation  is  a  commentary 
of  the  best  kind.  But,  when  I  have  said  this,  what 
remains  for  me  to  say,  but  that,  whilst  hoping  that  I 
may  have  contributed  something  to  the  knowledge  of 
Sophocles,  I  feel  profoundly  how  far  I  have  fallen  short 
of  the  result  at  which  I  aimed  ? 

I  have  translated  the  Choruses  into  unrhymed  lines. 
This  seemed  to  me  better  in  itself,  as  well  as  more  practi- 
cable for  me.  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold's  fragments  of  an 
'  Antigone '  and  a  '  Deianeira '  are  examples  of  what 
can  be  done  in  this  way.  I  have  only  now  and  then 
attempted  to  reproduce  the  metres  of  the  original.  But, 
lest  it  should  be  thought  that  1  may  have  '  felt  the 
weight  of  too  much  liberty,'  I  have  bound  myself 
rigorously,  with  a  few  exceptions,  by  an  antistrophic 
arrangement. 

With  respect  to  the  spelling  of  the  Greek  names,  I 
have  been  wilfully,  and  perhaps  indefensibly,  incon- 
sistent. I  could  not  persuade  myself  that  '  Aias  '  and 
'Teukros'  were  not   pedantic.     Yet  I  have  spoken   of 


X  PREFACE. 

'  Odysseus.'  '  Ulysses,'  as  I  have  heard  it  said,  is 
another  person,  with  Ovidian  associations.  And 
'  Odysseus '  is  sufficiently  naturalised.  So,  perhaps,  will 
'  Aias  '  be  hereafter ;  but  not  yet. 

I  have  added  a  few  notes,  which  seemed  necessary, 
for  explanation,  or  to  justify  novelties  either  of  inter- 
pretation or  reading. 

I  have  expressed,  in  a  note  on  'Electra'  1.   363,  my 

obligations  to  Professor  Jebb's  editions  of  the  '  Electra ' 

and  'Ajax.' 

R.  W. 

Rugby,  November  1882. 


CONTENTS 


'OEDIPUS  THE  KING 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS     . 

I 
6s 

'ANTIGONE 

139 

ELECTRA                .... 

193 

TRACHINIAE         .... 

255 

AJAX 

309 

PHILOCTETES       .... 

367 

NOTES       ...... 

429 

\ 


OEDIPUS   THE    KING 


/c 

A 


PERSONS. 

Oedtpus. 

Priest. 

Creon. 

Teiresias. 

Messenger. 

Shepherd  of  Laius. 

Second  Messenger. 

JOCASTA. 

Chorus  of  Theban  Elders. 


©etiipus  tt)z  i&mg 

Oed.    /^^HILDREN — of    ancient     Cadmus    latest 
^  birth- 

Why  in  such  eager  session  sit  ye  here. 
With  chaplets  twined  around  your  supphant  boughs  ? 
And  all  the  city  is  thick  with  incense-smoke, 
And  loud  with  lamentation  and  with  dirge  : 
Whereof,  O  children,  choosing  not  to  hear 
From  lips  of  others,  hither  I  have  come— 
I,  who  am  called  all-famous  Oedipus : 
Now  therefore  tell  me,  thou,  whose  reverend  mien 
Proclaims  thee  spokesman,  wherefore  are  ye  come —     lo 
What  fearing — craving  what  ?     In  nought  would  I 
Withhold  my  succour ;  fearing  to  be  found 
Heartless,  your  suppliant  session  pitying  not. 

Priest.   Prince  of  my  people,  Oedipus  the  king, 
Thou  seest  us,  what  tale  of  years  we  tell, 
Who  at  thine  altars  sit,  some  fledged  as  yet 
For  no  far  flight,  and  some  oppressed  with  age, 
Priests — I  of  Zeus  :  and  lo,  with  us,  of  youths 
Our  chosen  :  and  the  general  crowd,  white-wreathed, 
Sit  in  our  squares,  and  at  the  temples  twain  20 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Of  Pallas,  and  Ismenus'  prescient  hearth. 

For  Thebes,  thyself  art  witness,  sinks  beneath 

The  tempest's  stress,  and  lifts  no  more  her  head 

Out  of  the  drenching  of  the  deadly  surge — 

Blighted  all  fruitful  blossoms  of  the  land, 

Blighted  our  grazing  herds,  and  barren  births 

Of  women  :  and  withal  the  god,  fire-fraught. 

Grim  Pestilence,  strikes  with  his  scourge  the  city, 

Whereby  the  house  of  Cadmus  is  made  void, 

And  rich  with  sorrow  and  sighing  Death's  dark  halls.  30 

Thee  therefore,  not  as  equalled  with  the  gods, 

Suppliant  with  these  children  I  entreat. 

But  chief  of  men,  in  casualties  of  life. 

And  Heaven's  visitations,  we  esteem  thee  : 

Who,  at  thy  coming  hither,  didst  rid  the  land 

Of  that  fell  songster's  tribute  which  we  paid, 

Albeit  of  us  no  knowledge  hadst  thou  gained, 

No  prompting,  but  by  aidance  of  a  god 

We  say  and  think  thou  didst  redeem  our  life ; 

And  now,  revered  of  all  men,  Oedipus,  40 

Behold  us  here  thy  suppliants  :  help  for  us. 

Some  help  contrive,  by  oracle  from  heaven 

Instructed,  or  wise  counsel  of  a  man  : 

For  oft  'tis  seen,  that  most  abiding  fruit 

Experience  bears,  when  counsellors  confer. 

O  then,  uplift  our  state,  thou  man  of  men  ! 

Yea,  and  beware  :  for  now  indeed  the  land 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Hails  thee  her  saviour,  for  thy  former  help; 

And  of  thy  reign  O  never  be  it  said, 

That  thou  didst  lift  us  up  and  cast  us  down;  50 

But  stablish  thou  our  state's  prosperity; 

And,  as  before  deliverance  wrought  by  thee 

Was  blest  by  heaven,  so  help  us  now  again. 

For  if  thou  wilt  be  king  in  Thebes,  as  now, 

Better  a  peopled  than  a  vacant  realm : 

Since  neither  tower  nor  ship  avails  to  help, 

Empty  of  men  and  tenantless  within. 

Oed.  O  woful  children,  sorrows  known  too  well 
To  me  ye  come  lamenting.     Well  I  know 
Ye  all  are  grieved,  and  yet,  grieve  as  ye  may,  60 

There  is  not  one  of  you  hath  grief  like  mine. 
For  yours  is  private  sorrow,  touching  each 
Himself  and  not  another,  but  my  heart 
Aches  all  at  once  for  Thebes  and  me  and  thee. 
Ye  do  not  wake  me  slumbering  and  asleep  : 
But  many  tears  doubt  not  that  I  have  shed, 
And  threaded  many  a  labyrinth  of  the  mind. 
And  the  one  cure  that  I  by  searching  found 
I  put  to  proof:  for  Creon,  Menoeceus'  son. 
My  own  wife's  brother,  to  the  Delphic  shrine  7° 

Of  Phoebus  I  have  sent,  that  he  might  ask 
What  act  or  speech  of  mine  should  save  the  state  : 
And  counting  o'er  the  days  that  he  is  gone 
I  marvel  how  he  fares ;  for  overlong 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


He  tarries,  past  the  time  that  should  have  served. 
But  when  he  comes,  base  should  I  be  indeed. 
Failing  to  do  all  that  the  god  requires. 

Priest.  'Tis  seasonably  spoken,  and  ev'n  now 
I  hear  it  said  that  Creon  hither  comes. 

Oed.  Brightly  he  looks  :  O  King  Apollo,  grant,         80 
Bright  fortune,  fraught  with  safety,  he  may  bring  ! 

Priest.  Glad  news,  no  doubt,  he  brings :  else  had  he  not 
With  wealth  of  fruitful  laurel  decked  his  brows. 

Oed.  Soon  we  shall  know.     'Tis  not  too  far  to  speak. 
Son  of  Menoeceus  and  my  kinsman,  prince, 
What  answer  from  the  god  dost  thou  report  ? 

Cre.  Good  :  all  our  sufferings,  if  it  chance  aright, 
May  turn  to  our  advantage,  as  I  think. 

Oed.  What    says    the    god?       Hearing    thy    present 
speech, 
I  neither  hope,  nor  fear  before  the  time.  90 

Cre.  If  thou  wilt  hear  while  these  are  standing  by, 
Thou  shalt :  I  am  ready,  or  else  to  go  within. 

Oed.  Speak  in  the  ears  of  all :  since  more  for  these 
Than  for  my  own  life  is  the  grief  I  bear. 

Cre.  All  that  the  god  hath  spoken  thou  shalt  hear. 
A  plain  command  Apollo  lays  on  us ; 
Pollution,  harboured  in  the  land,  we  must 
Drive  hence,  nor  harbour  irremediably. 

Oed.  Yea,  with  what  cleansing  ?     How  is  our  plight 
relieved  ? 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING, 


Cre.  Some  one's  to  banish,  or  for  blood  that's  shed  loo 
Blood  must  atone :  such  guilt  disturbs  our  state. 

Oed.  Of  what  man  spake  the  god,  so  foully  slain  ? 

Cre.  Laius,  O  king,  was  ruler  of  the  land 
Aforetime,  ere  the  sceptre  fell  to  thee. 

Oed.  I  know  his  fame  :  himself  I  never  saw. 

Cre.  His  death  requires  our  vengeance,  and  to  do 
Swift  execution  on  his  murderers. 

Oed.  But  where  are  they  ?     Where  shall  we  look  to 
trace 
The  faded  record  of  an  ancient  crime  ? 

Cre.  In  this  land,  so  he  said.     Who  seek  may  find :   no 
The  careless  searcher  makes  the  baffled  search. 

Oed.  In  city  or  in  field — or  was't  abroad 
That  Laius  encountered  with  this  death  ? 

Cre.  Bound,  as  he  said,  for  Delphi,  from  his  home 
He  fared,  but  to  his  home  came  not  again. 

Oed.  Was  there  no  messenger — companion,  none — 
Who  saw,  and  might  have  told,  if  one  had  asked  ? 

Cre.  All  died  save  one,  who,  flying,  crazed  with  fear, 
Of  all  he  saw  knew  but  one  thing  to  tell. 

Oed.  Out  then  with  that !     One  thing  may  find  out 
many,  *  120 

If  but  a  little  we  take  heart  to  hope. 

Cre.  Robbers,  he  said,  met  with  the  king  and  slew 
him, 
Not  single-handed,  but  a  company. 


8  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Oed.  How  had  a  robber  so  presumed,  unless 
Traitors  from  Thebes  had  lined  him  with  their  gold  ? 

Cre.  So  we  surmised  :  but,  Laius  being  dead. 
No  one  was  there  to  help  us  in  our  grief. 

Oed.  What    grief  withheld    you,    not    to   learn   the 
truth — 
The  royal  house  struck  down  by  such  a  blow  ? 

Cre.  The    subtle  -  singing     Sphinx     compelled    our 
thoughts  130 

Back  from  the  vague  doubt  to  the  instant  need. 

Oed.  I  will  begin  again,  and  find  out  all- 
Phoebus  has  well  fulfilled  his  part,  thou  thine, 
Spending  this  trouble  for  the  dead  man's  sake  : 
Claim  then  and  find  in  me  no  vain  ally. 
Helping  at  once  this  city  and  the  god. 
Not  on  behalf  of  friends  of  no  account. 
But  for  my  own  sake,  shall  I  purge  this  guilt. 
For  who  slew  him,  by  such  another  blow 
Belike  may  choose  to  be  revenged  on  me.  140 

So  then  in  helping  him  I  save  myself. 
But  quickly,  children,  from  this  altar-foot 
Rise  ye,  and  take  these  suppliant  boughs  away : 
And  some  one  summon  hither  the  Theban  folk ; 
Nought  will  I  leave  undone.     All  hangs  on  this — 
Weal,  with  the  help  of  heaven,  or  woe  to  Thebes. 

Priest.  Children,  let  us  be  gone :  for  to  obtain 
Ev'n  what  this  man  announces,  came  we  hither. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Come,  who  didst  send  these  oracles,  Apollo, 
To  save  and  heal  us  of  our  sickness,  thou  !  150 

Chor.  Sweet-sounding  answer  of  Zeus,  what  art  thou, 

that  comest  from  Pytho,  [Strophe  i. 

To  glorious  Thebes  from  the  golden  shrine  ? 
Low  at  thy  feet  I  am  laid,  with  my  heart  in  a  flutter  of 

fear, 
Delian,  Healer  Apollo ! 
Filled  full  of  wonder  and  dread. 
What  stern  requirement  thou  wilt  enact  for  us. 
What  word  of  doom,  or  new  or  old. 
Come  with  revolving  seasons  back — 
O  tell  us,  daughter  of  golden  Hope, 
Immortal  Voice  !  [Anfistrophe  i. 

Daughter  of  Zeus,  thee  first  I  invoke,  immortal  Athene ; 
Our  city's  champion,  thy  sister,  next,  160 

Artemis  high  o'er  the  Agora's  circle  in  glory  enthroned. 
Thee  too.  Far-shooter,  Apollo  ! 
Threefold  averters  of  doom, 

0  now  from  heav'n  come  forth  to  deliver  us, 
If  ever,  when  hung  o'er  our  heads 
Menace  of  woe,  at  your  behest 

The  flaming  ruin  was  rolled  away, 

Visit  us  now ! 

Unnumbered  woes,  alas,  are  mine  to  bear  :      [Strophe  2. 

1  see  the  sickness  sweep  our  ranks  along. 

Nor  weapon  hath  my  thought,  170 


lo  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

That  can  its  breath  avert : 

For  neither  of  the  goodly  earth 

Prosper  the  springing  fruits, 

Nor  women  from  the  lamentable  pangs 

Of  childbirth  rise  again  : 

But  one  upon  another  shalt  thou  see 

Like  flocks  of  feather'd  birds, 

Swifter  than  fire  that  no  man  tames, 

Swept  onward  to  the  shore, 

Far  west,  of  Pluto  and  the  night. 

Unnumbered  dead  !  a  city  perishing  !    [Antistrophe  2. 

For  children  unregarded  in  the  streets 

Lie,  tainting  the  air  with  death,  180 

Unwept :  and  gentle  wives, 

And  grey-haired  mothers,  pressing  round, 

Their  sad  petitions  pour. 

Where  the  great  altar  lifted  o'er  the  crowd 

Stands  like  a  seaward  cliff: 

And  high  and  clear  with  flutes  in  solemn  dirge 

The  wailing  voices  blend  : — 

O  golden  goddess,  child  of  Zeus, 

Have  pity  and  send  us  Help, 

Fair-visaged  Help,  with  eyes  benign. 

And  this  fierce  Ares,  who,  [Strophe  3. 

Not  now  with  brazen  shields,  190 

But  with  the  blasting  of  his  fiery  breath, 

Wakes  worse  than  din  of  battle  in  our  midst, 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  ii 


I  pray  that  he,  far  from  my  country's  shores, 

Backward  at  headlong  speed  may  turn  and  flee, 

Either  to  Amphitrite's  western  bower 

Under  the  great  salt  sea. 

Or  those  inhospitable  tides  that  rave 

On  rock-bound  shores  of  Thrace  : 

For,  what  the  ravin'd  night  at  last  lets  go, 

Day  makes  of  this  his  prey  : 

But,  O  our  Father,  Zeus,  200 

Lord  of  the  lightning's  flaming  might, 

Slay  with  thy  bolt  the  dreaded  foe. 

Lyceius,  lord  of  light,  \Aniistrophe  3. 

Showered  from  thy  golden  string 

Fain  would  I  see  thy  shafts  invincible 

Fly  forth,  each  shaft  a  champion  winged  with  help. 

And  see  in  either  hand  of  Artemis 

The  splendour  of  a  torch  that  flames  afar, 

Wherewith  the  Lycian  hills  she  ranges  o'er : 

And,  lustrous  as  the  juice 

Of  thine  own  vines,  named  of  this  Theban  land,       210 

Bacchus,  I  cry  to  thee — 

Crowned  with  a  golden  diadem,  and  girt 

With  shouting  Maenads  round, 

Come  to  our  rescue  now. 

With  blazing  pinebrand  all  aglow. 

Against  the  god  whom  gods  disown. 

Oed.  Thou  askest :  as  thou  askest,  if  thou  wilt 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Be  serviceable  and  hearken  to  my  words, 

Help  thou  shalt  have  and  respite  of  thine  ills — 

Words  I  shall  speak,  a  stranger  to  the  tale, 

A  stranger  to  the  deed :  else  had  I  tracked  it. 

And  not  gone  far,  ere  I  had  found  some  clue. 

But  I  was  then  no  citizen  of  Thebes ; 

Now  therefore,  Thebans,  hear  me,  all  of  you. 

Whoever  among  you  knows  by  what  man's  hand 

Died  Laius  the  son  of  Labdacus, 

I  bid  him  speak  to  me,  and  tell  me  all : 

Speak  though  he  fears,  and  clear  us  of  the  guilt. 

Yea,  and  accuse  himself:  for  he  shall  suffer 

Nought  worse  than  to  depart  out  of  the  land 

Unscathed  :  or,  if  he  knows  the  murderer 

Some  stranger  come  to  Thebes,  yet  let  him  speak  : 

I  will  reward  and  give  him  thanks  to  boot. 

But,  if  ye  hide  this  thing,  and  one,  afraid 

For  his  own  sake  or  friend's  sake,  slights  my  words. 

How  then  concludes  my  purpose,  ye  shall  hear. 

I  charge  all  dwellers  in  this  land,  whereof 

Sceptre  and  sovereignty  are  mine,  to  yield 

That  man,  whoe'er  he  be,  nor  speech  nor  shelter: 

No  man  must  pray  or  sacrifice  with  him. 

Or  of  the  lustral  water  let  him  share  :  - 

To  him  all  doors  be  barred,  whose  presence  breeds 

In  Thebes  pollution  :  as  the  oracle, 

From  Delphi  newly  brought,  reveals  to  me. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING,  13 

So  stands  my  purpose  :  to  the  god  such  help 

I  dedicate  and  to  the  murdered  man  : 

And  for  the  murderer,  whether  alone 

He  hides  his  guilt  or  has  accomplices, 

May  he  unblest  wear  out  his  guilty  life ! 

And  for  myself  I  pray,  my  hearth  and  home 

With  my  consent  if  ever  he  should  share,  250 

This  doom  I  doomed  for  others  fall  on  me! 

And  all  these  things  I  charge  you  to  perform, 

For  my  sake,  and  the  god,  and  for  this  land. 

Blighted  and  banned  and  ruined  as  ye  see. 

For  even  if  this  thing  were  not  from  heaven. 

Ye  should  not  thus  have  left  such  guilt  unpurged, 

The  murder  of  your  noblest  and  a  king. 

But  sought  the  slayer  :  and  now,  because  on  me 

There  hath  devolved  succession  to  his  throne, 

And  to  his  couch  withal  and  fruitful  wife,  260 

From  whom  had  sprung,  had  not  his  offspring  failed, 

A  common  race  of  children,  his  and  mine — 

But  on  his  head  this  sudden  mischief  leapt — 

Therefore,  as  son  for  father,  I  will  fight 

For  him,  and  nothing  spare,  and  shrink  from  nought, 

Seeking  the  murderer  of  your  king,  whose  sire 

Was  Labdacus,  as  Polydorus  his, 

From  Cadmus  sprung,  son  of  Agenor  old  : 

And,  who'll  not  help  in  this,  I  pray  the  gods 

Neither  to  yield  them  harvest  of  their  fields,  270 


14  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Nor  children  of  their  wives,  but  let  them  perish, 
Slain  by  this  present  plague  or  worse  than  this : 
But  you  the  rest,  good  Thebans  all,  who  cleave 
To  my  consent,  be  Justice  your  ally. 
And  all  the  gods  befriend  you  evermore. 

Chor.   King,  as  thy  curse  constrains  me,  I  will  speak — 
I  neither  did  the  deed,  nor  can  declare 
The  doer.     Phoebus,  he  alone,  who  laid 
This  quest  on  us,  could  name  the  guilty  one. 

Oed.  True,  but  to  wrest  a  secret  from  the  gods,        280 
Against  their  will,  passes  all  power  of  men. 

Chor.  Yet,  if  not  this,  there  is  a  second-best. 

Oed.  Second  or  third-best,  speak  :  withhold  it  not. 

Chor.  Teiresias  with  Phoebus,  seer  with  seer, 
I  know  more  than  all  men  like-gifted  :  Ask 
Of  him,  O  king,  and  thou  shalt  learn  the  truth. 

Oed.  This  also,  friends,  I  have  not  left  undone. 
I  sent  two  messengers,  when  Creon  spoke  : 
Long  since  I  marvel  that  he  is  not  here. 

Chor.  Enough:  mere  dull  stale  talk,  no  doubt,  all  else.  290 

Oed.  What  talk  mean  you  ?     I  question  every  hint. 

Chor.  By  travellers  we  heard  the  king  was  slain. 

Oed.  And  I :  but  gone  from  sight  is  he  who  saw  it. 

Chor,  Yet,  if  he  knows  what  fear  is,  rest  assured 
He'll  not  endure,  hearing  thy  grievous  curse. 

Oed.  From  deeds  who   shrinks   not,  him  no  words 
affright. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  15 

Chor.  There's  one  who  shall  convict  him  :  hither  led 
Comes  even  now  the  seer,  the  man  inspired, 
Whose  eyes,  of  all  men's  most,  behold  the  truth. 

Oed.  Teiresias,  master-seer,  who  understandest         300 
All  mysteries  and  all  knowledge,  things  in  heaven 
And  things  on  earth,  thou  seest  not  but  knowest 
What  plague  afflicts  our  state  :  whereof  we  find 
No  champion  and  no  saviour,  sage,  but  thee. 
For  Phoebus,  if  indeed  the  messengers 
Told  thee  not,  to  our  sending  sent  reply. 
No  riddance  of  this  sickness  should  we  have. 
Until  the  murderers  of  Laius 
Were  found  and  slain,  or  banished  from  the  land. 
Now  therefore  grudge  neither  thine  auguries,  310 

Nor  any  divinations  that  thou  hast. 
But  save  thyself  and  city,  and  save  me. 
And  make  us  clean  from  all  blood-guiltiness. 
On  thee  we  hang  :  and  for  a  man  to  help 
With  all  he  has  and  can,  is  noblest  toil. 

Teir.  Alas,  how  sore  a  burden  is  the  knowledge 
That  profits  not  the  knower.     This  I  knew. 
But  had  forgotten :  else  had  I  not  come  hither. 

Oed.  Why  with  thy  looks  so  downcast  art  thou  come  ? 

Teir.  Let  me  go  hence  :  most  easily  will  be  320 

Performed  my  part  and  thine,  if  thou  consent. 

Oed.  'Twere  treason  and  ingratitude  to  Thebes, 
Thy  mother,  thus  to  lock  from  her  thy  counsel. 


i6  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Tetr.  Nay,  for  thy  speech,  I  see,  toward  no  good  end 
Is  making;  and  I  would  not  likewise  err. 

Oed.  By  heaven,  if  aught  thou  knowest,  all  we  here 
Thy  suppliants  pray,  turn  not  thy  face  from  us. 

Teir.  Ay,  for  ye  all  know  nought :  Urge  me  no  more. 
Lest  my  tale  prove — an  evil  tale  for  thee. 

Oed.  How?  dost  thou   know  and  wilt  not  tell,  but 
rather  330 

Betray  thy  people  and  destroy  thy  town  ? 

Teir.  I'll  neither  grieve  myself  nor  thee.     In  vain 
Thou  dost  importune  me  :  my  lips  are  sealed. 

Oed.  What,  miscreant — for  the  patience  of  a  stone 
Thou'dst  anger — not  a  word  thou'it  speak,  but  keep 
Thy  stubborn  and  impracticable  mood  ? 

Teir.  Thou  dost  reprove  my  temper,  but  thine  own. 
Lodged  in  thy  breast,  thou  seest  not,  blaming  me. 

Oed.  Who  could  refrain  his  anger,  hearing  now 
Such  words,  wherewith  thou  dost  dishonour  Thebes  ?  340 

Teir.  Too  soon  the  blow  will  fall,  howe'er  I  hide  it. 

Oed.  What  blow  will  fall,    I   should   be  warned    by 
thee. 

Teir.  I'll  speak  no  more.     Now  bluster,  if  thou  wilt  : 
The  fiercest  of  thine  anger  let  me  feel. 

Oed.  This  shall  my  anger  do  :  what  I  perceive, 
I'll  speak.     For  know  that  now  I  understand, 
Thou  didst  contrive,  nay  thou  hast  done,  this  deed — 
All  save  to  deal  the  blow :  and,  couldst  thou  see 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Then  surely  I  had  said  'twas  wholly  thine. 

Teir.  Is't  come  to  this  ?     I  charge  thee  to  obey 
Thirie  own  commandment,  and  from  this  day  forth       35c 
Speak  neither  to  this  people  nor  to  me  : 
Thou  art  unclean  :  for  thee  we  are  accursed. 

Oed.  Such  words,  unblenching,  blurtest  thou  at  me  ? 
How  dost  thou  deem  thou  shalt  escape  for  this  ? 

Teir.  Nay,  I  am  safe.     'Tis  true  ;  and  truth  is  strong. 

Oed.  Truth  taught  by  whom  ?     Not  surely  by  thine 
art. 

Teir.  By  thee  :  my  lips,  unwilling,  thou  hast  opened. 

Oed.  What  saidst  thou  ?     Speak  again  :  I'll  mark  thee 
better. 

Teir.  Was    my  speech   dark?  or  say'st  thou  this   to 
prove  me  ?  36c 

Oed.  Perchance  I  understood  not :  speak  again. 

Teir.  Him,  of  whose  death  thou  askest,  thou  didst 
slay. 

Oed.  Not  twice,  unpunished,  shall  thy  tongue  offend. 

Teir.  More  wilt  thou  hear,  to  be  incensed  the  more  ? 

Oed.  Say  what  thou  wilt :  'twill  be  but  wasted  breath. 

Teir.  Consorting  w^th  thy  nearest,  to  thy  shame. 
Thou  knowest  not,  nor  seest  what  plight  is  thine. 

Oed.  Shalt  thou  say  this,  and  triumph  to  the  end  ? 

Teir.  If  there  is  any  potency  in  truth. 

Oed.  There    is,   except    for   thee.     For   thee   there's 
none,  370 


i8  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Blind  as  thou  art,  in  ears  and  mind  and  eyes. 

Tei7\  I  pity  thee,  flinging  the  taunts,  which  soon 
There's  no  one  here  will  spare  to  fling  at  thee. 

Oed.  One  lifelong  night's  thy  portion  ;  so  that  me 
Thou  canst  not  harm,  nor  any  man  who  sees. 

Teir.  'Tis  not  appointed  thee  by  me  to  fall: 
Sufficient  is  Apollo — he  will  do  it. 

Oed.  By  thee,  or  Creon,  was  this  plot  contrived  ? 

Teir.  Nay,  Creon  harms  thee  not :  thou  harm'st  thy- 
self 

Oed.  O  wealth  and  kingly  state  and  sovereign  art,    380 
All  art  excelling,  of  our  high-placed  life — 
What  jealousy  ye  have  in  store  for  us ; 
When  for  this  sceptre's  sake,  which  Thebes  to  me 
Intrusted — a  free  gift,  by  me  unsought — 
Creon,  from  first  to  last  the  faithful  friend. 
Seeks  to  unthrone  me,  springing  unawares, 
And  has  suborned  a  cunning  sorcerer, 
A  cheating  juggler,  one  who  for  his  gains 
Has  eyes  to  see,  but  in  his  art  is  blind. 
For,  tell  me,  sirrah,  when  wast  thou  true  prophet  ?       390 
Why,  when  the  chanting  hound  was  at  your  doors, 
Didst  thou  not  save  thy  people  by  a  word  ? 
And  yet  to  read  such  riddle  was  no  task 
For  common  men,  but  asked  a  prophet's  skill : 
But  thou  wast  found  with  no  such  lore  by  birds 
Instructed  or  by  gods  inspired  : — then  came 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


I,  who  knew  nothing,  Oedipus,  and  freed  you, 
Taught  not  by  birds,  but  by  my  mind's  sure  guess ; 
Whom  now  thou  wouldst  thrust  out,  in  hope  to  stand 
By  the  right  hand  of  Creon  on  his  throne.  40c 

Methinks  ye  both  shall  rue  your  precious  plot 
Of  cleansing  thus  the  land  :  thou'rt  old,  I  think — 
Else  hadst  thou  learnt — plagued  with  thine  own  inven- 
tions. 

Chor.  In  anger  spoken  to  our  conjecture  seem 
Both  this  man's  words,  O  Oedipus,  and  thine. 
But  other  need  is  ours,  to  ponder  well, 
What  heaven  decrees,  how  best  we  may  perform. 

Teir.  Though  thou'rt  a  king,  an  equal  right  I  claim 
To  give  thee  word  for  word :  I  too  may  speak — 
No  slave  to  thee — but  slave  to  Loxias ;  410 

Not  needing  therefore,  for  a  patron,  Creon. 
Blind  thou  didst  call  me,  taunting  me ;  I  tell  thee, 
Thou  seest  and  seest  not  what  plight  is  thine. 
Nor  where  thy  home  is,  nor  with  whom  'tis  shared. 
Knowest  thou  whence  thou  art  ?  and  thou  hast  been 
Foe  to  thy  friends,  unknowing,  alive  and  dead; 
And  from  this  land  of  mother  and  of  sire 
The  twofold  curse  shall  drive  thee  with  fierce  feet, 
Seeing  with  thine  eyes,  light  now,  but  darkness  then : 
And  then,  responsive  to  thine  outcries  wild,  420 

What  haven,  what  Kithaeron  will  not  ring, 
Those  nuptials  known,  that  fatal  harbour-home, 


20  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Wherein  thy  bark  was  moored,  fair  winds  to  help  ? 
And  many  another  grief  hast  thou  to  learn, 
Both  to  thyself  made  equal  and  thy  children. 
Now  upon  Creon  and  these  words  of  mine 
Heap  insults  if  thou  wilt.     There  waits  for  no  man 
More  swift  and  sure  perdition  than  for  thee. 

Oed.  These  things  from  him  can  I  endure  to  hear  ? 
Hence  to  destruction  !  hence  and  tarry  not,  430 

But  void  these  doors,  and  from  my  sight  be  gone  ! 

Teir.  I  had  not  come,  but  thou  didst  summon  me. 

Oed.  I  knew  not  that  thou  wouldst  speak  foolishness, 
Else  had  I  made  small  haste  to  bring  thee  hither. 

Teir.  Let  it  be  so  :  I  am  a  fool  for  thee — 
Wise  enough  for  the  father  who  begat  thee. 

Oed.  What  father  ? — Stay  :  tell  me,  whose  son  am  I  ? 

Teir.  This  day  shall  both  beget  thee  and  destroy. 

Oed.  Thou  dark'nest  counsel  still  with  riddling  words. 

Teir.  In  reading  riddles  famous  is  thy  skill  440 

Oed.  Ay — find  what   makes  me   great  and   sneer  at 
that! 

Teir.  This  same  success  however  has  undone  thee. 

Oed.  But,  if  it  saved  the  city,  what  care  I  ? 

Teir.  'Tis   time   that   I  were   gone.     Boy,   lead   me 
hence. 

Oed.  So  let  him  lead.     A  hindrance  and  offence 
Thou  art,  being  present :  gone,  thou'lt  plague  no  more. 

Teir.  But  first  I'll  speak  my  errand,  unafraid, 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Out  to  thy  face  :  thy  frown  can  nowise  slay. 

Hear  then  :  this  man,  whom  thou  with  threats  requirest, 

And  makest  inquisition  for  the  blood  450 

Of  Laius  slain,  he  is  amongst  us  here, 

Lodged  in  our  midst,  an  alien,  as  we  deemed — 

Now  to  be  proved  true  Theban  with  the  best — 

No  glad  surprise  :  for  blind,  who  now  boasts  sight, 

Who  now  has  wealth,  a  beggar,  staff  in  hand, 

To  a  strange  land  shall  he  grope  forth  his  way. 

Then  shall  he  of  the  children  round  his  hearth 

Brother  be  proved  and  sire ;  both  son  and  husband 

Of  her  who  bare  him ;  having  usurped  the  couch 

O'  the  father  whom  he  slew.     Get  thee  within,  460 

And  meditate  these  things  :  if  they  prove  false, 

Say  then  my  prophet's  skill  has  taught  me  nothing. 

Chor.  What  man  is  he,  [Strophe  i. 

Whom  the  prophetic  Delphian  cliff  denounces, 
With  blood-stained  hands 
Doer  of  deeds  inexpiable,  nameless  ? 
Now,  now  let  him  flee  with  feet 
Than  storm-footed  steeds  more  swift 
Far,  far  from  the  sunlight. 
For  with  the  fire  of  his  lightnings  leaps  on  him. 
Armed,  the  Avenger,  the  Son  of  the  Highest  :  470 

And  the  Fates,  the  relentless, 
Track  him,  not  to  be  baffled. 
For,  late  revealed,  [Antistrophe  i. 


22  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Forth  from  the  snow-capt  summits  of  Parnassus 

Flashed  there  a  Voice, 

'  Seek  ye  the  sinner  !  from  his  hiding  drag  him  ! ' 

For  through  the  wild  woodland  ways, 

O'er  rocks,  and  in  mountain  caves, 

He  roams,  as  a  bull  might, 

Restless,  joyless,  far  from  his  fellows, 

Shunning  the  oracles  pealed  from  earth's  centre,  480 

But  for  ever  he  hears  them, 

Deathless,  hovering  round  him. 

Sorely,  most  sorely,  is  my  mind  perplexed,      \Strophe  2. 

By  the  wise  augur's  word  : 

I  cannot  yet  believe,  nor  dare  deny — 

I  know  not  what  to  say. 

'Twixt  hope  and  fear  I  hover  doubtfully : 

The  present  and  the  future — both  are  dark. 

What  quarrel  had  the  son  of  Polybus 

With  Laius  or  his  house,  490 

I  neither  heard  before,  nor  now  have  learnt 

Aught  that  should  make  me  challenge  to  the  proof 

The  general  praise  of  Oedipus  the  king. 

For  Lams  moved  with  zeal, 

And  his  mysterious  end. 

Wise  are  the  gods:  Apollo  knows,  and  Zeus,     \Antist.  2. 

What  things  are  done  on  earth  : 

But  what  know  I  ?  and  prophets  are  but  men, 

And,  if  this  seer's  voice  500 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  23 

Be  more  than  mine,  there  is  no  man  who  knows. 

Yet  one  man's  wit  another's  may  surpass. 

Still,  let  them  talk,  I  will  not  say  '  'Tis  so,' 

Until  I  see  the  proof. 

Once  in  our  sight  he  met  the  winged  Pest ; 

We  saw  him  wise,  we  proved  him  sweet  to  Thebes: 

And  of  this  guilt  my  thoughts  510 

Shall  not  condemn  him  now. 

(^re.  Friends     and     my    townsmen,     hither,    having 
heard 
With  what  hard  words  King  Oedipus  assails  me, 
I  come,  impatient.     For,  in  this  distress 
If  aught  in  word  or  deed  importing  harm 
He  thinks  that  he  has  suffered  at  my  hand, 
I  have  no  pleasure  to  prolong  my  days. 
Laden  with  this  reproach.     No  single  loss 
The  danger  of  such  charge  imports  to  me,  520 

But  loss  of  all,  if  base  by  Thebes,  and  base 
By  thee  and  by  my  friends,  I  shall  be  called. 

Ckor.  Belike  this  accusation  rather  came, 
Forced  from  his  lips  by  anger,  than  believed. 

Cre.    What    proof  had  he,    that,    what  the   prophet 
spoke. 
He  falsely  spoke,  induced  by  my  suggestion  ? 

Ckor.    This  charge  was  made :  what  prompted  it,   I 
know  not. 

Cre.  With  steadfast  eyes  and  mind  unfaltering 


24  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Against  me  was  this  accusation  launched  ? 

CJior.  I  know  not  :  what  kings  do,  I  do  not  see.      530 
But  from  the  palace  look  you  where  he  comes. 

Oed.  Sirrah,  how   cam'st    thou    hither  ?     Hast    thou 
such 
A  face  of  boldness,  to  confront  me  here, 
Being,  as  well  appears,  my  murderer. 
And  of  my  sovereign  place  convicted  thief? 
I  prithee,  say,  what  cowardice  having  seen 
Or  folly  in  me,  hast  thou  devised  this  deed  ? 
Its  stealthy  coming-on  didst  thou  suppose 
I  should  not  mark,  nor,  if  I  marked,  withstand  ? 
Foolish  I  rather  deem  thy  rash  attempt,  540 

Unhelped  by  numbers  or  by  friends,  to  snatch 
At  power,  that  friends  and  wealth  alone  can  win. 

Cre.  King,  be  advised.     As  thou  hast  said  thy  say. 
Hear  me  say  mine,  and  having  heard  consider. 

Oed.  Thou   hast   more    skill    to    speak    than    I    to 
hear 
Thee,  having  found  thee  bitter  and  unkind. 

Cre.  Even  of  this  hear  first  what  I  shall  say. 

Oed.  This,  that  thou  art  no  traitor,  tell  me  not. 

Cre.  If  mere  self-will,  divorced  from  reason,  seems 
A  precious  thing  to  thee,  thou  art  deceived.  55° 

Oed.  If  wronging  thus  a  kinsman  thou  dost  think 
Thou'lt  'scape  the  reckoning,  thou  art  deceived. 

Cre.  That  this  is  justly  said,  I  do  confess  : 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  25 

But  tell  me  what's  the  wrong  that  thou  hast  suffered  ? 

Oed.   Didst  thou  advise  or  no,  that  I  should  send 
Some  one  to  bring  this  reverend  man,  the  prophet  ? 

Cre.  The  counsel  that  I  gave,  I'd  give  again. 

Oed.  Say  now  what  time  hath  passed  since  Laius — 

Cre.  Since  he    did  what?      I    know  not  what  thou 
askest. 

Oed.  Vanished   from    hence,    slain    by  a   murderous 
blow  ?  560 

Cre.  The  time  grows  old  :  'tis  many  years  agone. 

Oed.  And  did  this  prophet  then  profess  his  art  ? 

Cre.  Wise  was  he  then  as  now,  honoured  no  less. 

Oed.  And  made  he  any  mention  then  of  me  ? 

Cre.  Whilst  I  was  standing  by  to  hear  him,  none.        •' 

Oed.  But  did  ye  not  inquire  who  slew  your  king  ? 

Cre.  We  asked,  as  we  were   bound :    but  asked    in 
vain. 

Oed.  Why  did  not  this  wise  prophet  help  you  then  ? 

Cre.  I  know  not :  things  beyond  me,  I  let  be. 

Oed.  But  this  thou  knowest ;  and,  if  thou'rt  wise,  wilt 
own.  570 

Cre.  What  is  it  ?  what  I  know,  I'll  not  deny. 

Oed.  That,  had  he  not  conspired  with  thee,  the  blood 
Of  Laius  to  my  charge  he  had  not  laid. 

Cre.  What  he  hath  said,  thou  knowest :  but  I  claim 
To  question  thee,  as  thou  hast  questioned  me. 

Oed.  Ask  on  :  thou  wilt  not  fix  this  guilt  on  me. 


26  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Cre.  What  then  ?     Hast  thou  my  sister  to  thy  wife  ? 

Oed.  What  thou  hast  asked,  I  may  not  well  deny. 

Cre.  Reigns    she    with    thee,    the    partner    of    thy 
power  ?  579 

Oed.  Her  will  is  mine  :  nought  is  withheld  from  her. 

Cre.  Equalled  with  you  twain  am  not  I,  the  third  ? 

Oed.  How  false  a  friend  thou  art,  appears  in  this. 

Or.  Not  so,  if  to  thyself  thou'dst  put  my  case. 
Consider  first — who,  thinkest  thou,  would  choose 
To  be  a  king  with  dreams  of  evil  cheer, 
When  he  might  sleep  secure,  and  reign  no  less  ? 
Think  not,  I  am  so  much  ambition's  fool, 
I'd  rather  be  a  king  than  do  like  one — 
So  would  not  I,  nor  any  prudent  man. 
Now  without  fear  I  have  all  things  from  thee ;  590 

But,  were  I  king,  I  might  not  please  myself. 
How  should  I  crave  the  name  of  king,  who  have 
The  power  and  kingliness  without  the  pain  ? 
I  am  not  yet  so  senseless,  to  misprise 
An  honourable  lot  that  costs  me  nought. 
Now  all  men  greet  me,  I  am  friends  with  all, 
And  those  who'd  speak  with  thee,  call  me  aside ; 
'Tis  the  sure  way  to  prosper  in  their  suit : 
And  dost  thou  think  I'd  change  my  place  for  thine  ? 
I  needs  must  be  a  fool  to  be  a  traitor.  600 

But  neither  of  such  treachery  am  I  fain. 
Nor  to  another's  plots  would  I  consent. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


For  proof — get  thee  to  Delphi  first,  and  ask, 

Did  I  report  the  oracle  aright : 

This  too; — if  thou  dost  find  that  with  the  seer 

In  aught  I  have  conspired,  pronounce  my  death. 

Not  with  one  voice  but  two,  both  thine  and  mine. 

But  on  mere  vague  surmise  condemn  me  not. 

Unjust  alike  are  random  trust  and  blame. 

To  reckon  false  men  true,  or  true  men  false  :  6io 

And  one  had  better  lose,  what  he  loves  best, 

His  life,  than  throw  away  a  faithful  friend. 

In  time  this  lesson  thou  shalt  surely  learn  : 

For  time  alone  can  show  the  honest  man, 

But  in  a  single  day  a  knave  is  known. 

Chor.   One  who  walked  warily,  O  king,  might  own, 
He  argued  well :  swift  judgments  are  not  sure. 

Oed.  When  secret  foes  are  sudden  in  attack, 
Swiftly  to  meet  them  must  my  plans  be  laid. 
If  I  sit  still  and  wait,  the  moment's  gone —  620 

His  plans  have  prospered,  mine  are  frustrated. 

Cre.  What  wilt    thou    do    then?     Wilt   thou   banish 
me? 

Oed.  Not  banishment,  but  death,  shall  be  thy  doom. 

Cre.  When  men  have  seen,  and  gauged,  a  tyrant's 
spite  ? 

Oed.  Wilt  thou  defy  me,  and  dispute  my  will  ? 

Cre.  I  see  thy  judgment  errs. 

Oed.  I  guard  my  own. 


28  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Cre.  Have  I  no  rights  as  well  ? 

Oed.  Thou  art  a  traitor. 

Cre.  If  thou'rt  mistaken  ? 

Oed.  Yet  I  must  be  king. 

Cre.  Not  if  thou  rul'st  unjustly. 

Oed.  Hear  him,  Thebes  ! 

Cre.  I  have  a  voice  in  Thebes,  as  well  as  thou.        630 

Chor.  Princes,  forbear  :  for  hither  in  good  time 
Comes  forth  the  queen,  Jocasta,  from  the  house  : 
The  feud  that  is  between  you,  she  may  heal. 

Joe.  What  means  this  senseless  din  of  warring  tongues? 
Unhappy  men,  have  ye  no  shame,  to  voice 
Your  private  wrongs,  when  Thebes  is  sick  to  death  ? 
Go  thou  within,  and,  Creon,  get  thee  home. 
Make  no  more  mountains  of  your  molehill  griefs. 

Cre.  Sister,  this  man,  thy  husband,  Oedipus, 
Claims  to  propound  to  me  a  bitter  choice —  640 

To  be  driv'n  from  my  country,  or  to  die. 

Oed.    'Tis  true :    for   I  have  found   him,   good   my 
queen, 
Contriving  with  base  arts  against  my  life. 

Cre.  May  I  not  thrive,  but  be  accurst,  and  perish. 
If  I  have  done  aught  that  thou  dost  pretend  ! 

Joe.  O  by  the  gods,  -believe  him,  Oedipus, 
Revering  both  this  oath  which  he  has  sworn. 
And  me,  and  all  this  friendly  company. 

Chor.  Hear  us,  O  king,  we  entreat, 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING,  29 

With  goodwill,  and  a  prudent  mind.  650 

Oed.  In  what,  then,  shall  I  yield  to  you  ? 

Chor.  Have  thou  regard  to  this  man, 
Who  never  before  was  foolish,  and  now 
In  the  strength  of  his  oath  is  strong. 

Oed.  Know  ye,  for  what  ye  ask  ? 

Chor,  I  know. 

Oed,  Say,  what? 

Chor.  The  friend,  who  binds  his  conscience  with  an 
oath, 
On  bare  suspicion  tax  not  nor  disgrace. 

Oed.  But,  when  ye  ask  me  this,  be  well  assured 
That  death  or  banishment  ye  ask  for  me. 

Chor.  By  Helios,  no — chief  of  the  hosts  of  heaven  !  660 
Godless  and  friendless,  if  I  wish  thee  ill. 
To  deepest  depths  of  ruin  let  me  fall ! 
But,  seeing  all  the  city  perishing. 
My  spirit  fails  within  me,  if  indeed 
New  ills  to  former  ills  your  strife  shall  add. 

Oed.  Well — let  him  go  :  and  let  me  die  outright, 
Or  else  be  thrust  dishonoured  from  the  land.  670 

Thy  mournful  pleading  moves  me  :  therefore  thee, 
Not  him,  I  pity ;  him  my  hate  shall  follow. 

Cre.  Ungraciously  thou  yieldest :  but  for  this 
Thou  wilt  be  sorry  when  the  fit  is  past. 
'Tis  just,  such  tempers  most  should  plague  themselves. 

Oed.  Wilt  thou  not  hold  thy  peace  and  go  ? 


30  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Cre.  I  go, 

Stranger'd  by  thee,  but  trusted  by  my  friends. 

Chor.  Lady,  why  tarriest  thou. 
To  shut  the  doors  upon  thy  lord  ? 
Joe.  Not  till  ye  tell  me  what  has  chanced.  680 

Chor.  Words  have  been  angrily  spoken. 
Suspicious,  impatient,  ignorant  words, 
Unjust — but  they  carry  a  sting. 
Joe.  From  both  did  they  proceed  ? 
Chor.  Yes. 

Joe.  What  was  spoken  ? 

Chor.  Thebes  has  enough  to  bear :  where  the  strife 
rests. 
There  let  it  end ;  and  let  no  more  be  said. 

Oed.  See,  with  thy  friendliness  what  thou  hast  done. 
My  will  unbent,  and  blunted  my  resolve. 

Chor.  King,  I  have  said  it  and  will  say  it  again —    690 
Ill-counselling  nor  for  wise  counsels  apt 
Should  I  be  proved,  if  thee  I  now  renounce, 
Who  with  a  straight  course  home  didst  safely  bring 
The  storm-tossed  vessel  of  my  people's  hope — 
And  now  again  conduct  us,  if  thou  canst ! 

Joe.  I  pray  thee,  king,  hide  not  from  me  the  cause. 
That  to  such  fierce  displeasure  thou  art  moved.  699 

Oed.  Yea,  for  I  honour  thee,  queen,  more  than  these — 
What  Creon  hath  planned  against  me,  thou  shalt  hear.    . 
Joe.  Thy  ground  of  quarrel  let  me  clearly  know. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  31 

Oed.  By  me  he  says  that  Laius  was  slain. 

Joe.  As  knowing  it  of  himself,  or  from  another  ? 
Oed.  A  lying  prophet  he  has  set  to  say  it ; 
Nor  speaks  one  word  that  may  commit  himself. 

Joe.  Why,  think  no  more  then  of  what  troubles  thee. 
Listen  to  me ;  I  tell  thee,  there  is  not 
Any  such  thing  as  prophecy  on  earth. 
And,  what  I  speak,  I'll  shortly  prove  it  true.  710 

There  came  to  Laius  once  an  oracle, 
I  say  not  from  the  god,  but  from  his  servants, 
That  fate  would  bring  to  pass  that  he  should  die 
Slain  by  his  son,  whom  I  should  bear  to  him. 
But  Laius,  in  a  place  where  three  roads  meet. 
As  rumour  went,  robbers  and  strangers  slew : 
And  from  the  child's  birth  ere  three  days  had  passed. 
Binding  his  feet  with  cords,  by  hands  of  others 
On  the  lone  mountain-side  his  father  flung  him. 
So  failed  Apollo's  word  that  he  should  slay  720 

His  father,  and  that  Laius  (the  fate 
He  feared  so  much)  should  by  his  son  be  slain. 
So  prophets  order  the  affairs  of  men ; 
Whom  heed  not  thou  :  for,  knowledge  that  the  god 
Seeks  to  impart,  he  will  himself  reveal. 

Oed.  Bewilderment,  O  lady,  fills  my  soul. 
Hearing  thy  word,  and  troubles  all  my  thoughts. 

Joe.  What  sudden  doubt  hath  so  surprised  thy  mind  ? 

Oed.  Methought  I  heard  thee  say  that  in  a  place 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Where  three  roads  met  was  Laius  overthrown.  730 

Joe.  'Twas  rumoured  so,  and  so  is  still  believed. 
Oed.  Where  is  the  spot,  where  this  disaster  chanced  ? 

Joe.  The  land  is  Phocian,  and  the  branching  roads 
From  Delphi  and  from  Daulis  thither  lead. 

Oed.  And  how  long  is  it  since  these  things  were  done? 

Joe.  A  little  ere  we  hailed  thee  king  of  Thebes — 
So  long  ago,  came  tidings  of  the  deed. 

Oed.  O  Zeus,  what  is  thy  will  concerning  me  ? 

Joe.  What  is  it  that  so  moves  thee,  Oedipus  ?  739 

Oed.  Ask  me  not  yet :  but  tell  me  first,  how  looked 
This  Laius^how  far  was  his  manhood  spent  ? 

Joe.  Tall,  and  his  hair  a  little  mixed  with  grey. 
And  in  his  looks  not  all  unlike  to  thee. 

Oed.  Ah  me  unhappy  !  a  grievous  curse,  not  knowing, 
Upon  myself  it  seems  that  I  have  laid. 

Joe.  What  dost  thou  say  ?     O  king,  I  fear  thy  face. 
Oed.  I  much  misdoubt  the  seer  indeed  can  see. 
But  tell  me  one  thing  more,  and  I  shall  know. 

Joe.  I  fear,  but  what  thou  askest  I  will  tell. 

Oed.  How  went  he — with  a  slender  company,  750 

Or  with  a  goodly  following,  like  a  king  ? 

Joe.  Five  men  were  all  that  followed  him,  and  one 
A  herald  :  and  one  chariot  bore  the  king. 

Oed.   It  is  enough  :  there  is  no  doubt.     But,  lady. 
What  man  was  he  who  told  this  tale  in  Thebes  ? 

Joe.  A  servant,  who  alone  escaped  alive. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  33 

Oed.  About  the  palace  now  may  he  be  found  ? 

Joe.  Not  so :   for  when,  come  thence,  he  saw  thee 
throned 
King  in  the  room  of  Laius  who  was  dead,  759 

He  touched  my  hand,  and  prayed  that  I  would  send  him 
Into  the  fields,  that  he  might  tend  the  flocks. 
As  far  from  sight  of  Thebes  as  he  could  go ; 
And  so  he  went :  he  was  an  honest  slave, 
And  greater  boon  than  this  had  well  deserved. 

Oed.  Let  him  come  hither  again  without  delay. 

Joe.  He  can  be  called.     But  what  wouldst  thou  with 
him? 

Oed.  More  than  I  should,  I  fear  that  I  myself 
Have  uttered,  and  would  speak  with  him  of  this. 

Joe.  The  man  shall  come.     But  have  not  I  a  right 
To  learn,  O  king,  what  so  disquiets  thee  ?  770 

Oed.  What  dark  forebodings  weigh  upon  my  soul, 
I  will  not  hide  from  thee.     Who  if  not  thou 
Should  share  the  knowledge  of  the  path  I  tread  ? 
Polybus,  king  of  Corinth,  was  my  father, 
My  mother  Dorian  Merope.     No  peer 
Had  I  in  Corinth,  till  upon  a  day 
An  incident  befell,  worthy  indeed 
Of  wonder,  but  not  worth  the  heed  I  paid  it. 
For  at  a  feast  a  man,  heated  with  wine, 
Called  me  a  foundling,  not  my  father's  son.  780 

And  I,  indignant,  till  that  day  had  passed 


34  OEDIPUS  THE  KING, 

Hardly  endured,  and  on  the  next  I  taxed 

My  parents  face  to  face ;  and  they,  incensed 

Against  the  slanderer,  brooked  not  that  reproach. 

So  was  I  satisfied  by  them,  and  yet 

The  rumour  grew,  and  stung  me  night  and  day. 

Till  I  without  my  parents'  knowledge  came 

To  Delphi.     But  in  vain  :  Apollo  deigned 

No  answer  to  the  question  that  I  asked : 

But  what  a  tale  instead,  as  from  his  lips, 

I  heard — of  woe  and  horror  and  despair  !  790 

That  I  was  doomed  to  marry  with  my  mother, 

And  show  the  world  a  sight  intolerable. 

The  children  of  that  union  ;  and  to  be 

The  murderer  of  the  father  who  begat  me. 

And  hearing  this  I  fled — fled  through  the  night — 

Away  from  Corinth,  never  to  return — 

Shaping  my  course  by  starlight — to  a  land 

Where  I  should  never  see  my  life  fulfil 

The  shameful  presage  of  that  dreaded  doom. 

So  came  I  to  the  very  place  whereat 

I  hear  thee  say  the  king,  thy  lord,  was  slain. 

Queen,  I  will  tell  thee  all.     When,  journeying,         800 

I  drew  near  to  the  meeting  of  the  ways, 

There  did  a  herald  meet  me,  and  a  man 

Rode  in  a  colt-drawn  chariot,  as  thou  sayest. 

They  met  me  face  to  face  :  and  from  the  path 

Servant  and  master  both  essayed  to  force  me. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  35 

Then  I  in  wrath  struck  at  the  charioteer, 

Who  turned  me  back  :  but,  when  the  old  man  saw  it, 

Waiting  until  I  passed,  with  double  goad 

Full  on  the  head  he  smote  me  from  above. 

Heavily  he  paid  for  it.     For  in  a  minute  810 

The  good  staff  in  my  hand  dealt  such  a  blow, 

Backward  from  the  mid-car  he  reeled  and  fell. 

I  slew  them  every  one.     But,  if  this  stranger 

Was  any  kinsman  of  the  king  that's  dead, 

Who  is  more  miserable  than  I  this  day  ? 

What  man  could  be  more  hated  by  the  gods  ? 

Whom,  citizen  or  stranger,  no  one  must 

Receive  under  his  roof,  or  speak  to  me, 

But  thrust  me  from  his  doors.     And  it  was  I, 

No  other,  who  laid  this  curse  upon  myself  820 

And  these  foul  hands,  that  did  the  murder,  stain 

The  bed  o'  the  murdered  man.     Am  I  not  vile — 

Unclean,  from  head  to  foot  ?  who  must  pass  hence 

Exiled,  and  passing  not  reseek  my  home 

Not  tread  my  native  soil,  or  fear  that  curst 

Incestuous  marriage,  and  to  slay  my  sire, 

Polybus — from  whom  I  sprang,  who  reared  my  youth. 

Should  not  one  justly  tax  the  heavens  with  spite, 

That  rained  down  such  afflictions  on  my  head  ? 

Let  me  not  live,  ye  high  and  holy  gods,  830 

Not  live  to  see  that  day,  but  pass  away 

From  sight  of  all  men  first,  and  not  behold 


36  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

The  blot  of  evil,  blackening  all  my  life  ! 

Chor.  O  king,  this  troubles  us  indeed  :  but,  till 
Thou  hear'st  from  him  who  saw,  hope  for  the  best. 

Oed.  Why,  so  much  hope  in  truth  is  mine,  to  wait 
The  shepherd's  coming :  this,  and  only  this. 

Joe,  And  should  he  come — what  makes  thine  eager- 
ness ? 

Oed.  I'll  tell  thee  :  if  his  tale  agrees  with  thine, 
Then  I  am  free ;  there's  nought  for  me  to  fear.  840 

Joe.  What  in  my  story  squared  not  with  thy  deed  ? 

Oed.  Thou  saidst  he  spake  of  robbers — of  a  band, 
Who  slew  the  king.     If  the  same  number  still 
He  shall  report,  it  was  not  I  who  slew  him. 
One  man  is  not  mistaken  for  a  host. 
But  let  him  speak  of  one  sole  traveller — 
That  turns  the  scale  :  plainly  the  deed  was  mine. 

Joe.  Doubt  not,  he  told  the  tale  as  I  have  said. 
And  what  he  spoke  he  cannot  now  reject, 
For  all  the  city  heard,  not  I  alone.  850 

But  should  he  swerve  aught  from  his  former  speech, 
Yet  nowise,  king,  the  death  of  Laius 
Shall  he  show  true  to  promise,  whom  the  god 
Foredoomed  to  die,  slain  by  his  babe  and  mine. 
Yet  never  did  that  child,  the  hapless  boy. 
Slay  him — but  died  himself  before  his  sire  ; 
That  never  again  should  I  take  pains  to  look 
This  way  or  that,  for  fear  of  prophecy. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING,  37 

Oed.  I  hold  with  thee  in  that.     But  yet  send  one 
To  bid  the  hind  come  hither  :  omit  not  this.  860 

Joe.  I'll  send  with  speed.     But  go  we  now  within  : 
For  I  will  nothing  do  but  what  thou  wouldst. 

Chor.  O  may  my  constant  feet  not  fail,       \Strophe  i. 
Walking  in  paths  of  righteousness, 
Sinless  in  word  and  deed — 
True  to  those  eternal  laws 
That  scale  for  ever  the  high  steep 
Of  heaven's  pure  ether,  whence  they  sprang  : 
For  only  in  Olympus  is  their  home, 
Nor  mortal  wisdom  gave  them  birth, 
And,  howsoe'er  men  may  forget, 

They  will  not  sleep  ;  870 

For  the  might  of  the  god  within  them  grows  not  old. 
Rooted  in  pride,  the  tyrant  grows  ;  \Antistrophe  i. 

But  pride  that  with  its  own  too-much 
Is  rashly  surfeited. 
Heeding  not  the  prudent  mean, 
Down  the  inevitable  gulf 
From  its  high  pinnacle  is  hurled, 
Where  use  of  feet  or  foothold  there  is  none. 
But,  O  kind  gods,  the  noble  strength, 
That  struggles  for  the  state's  behoof. 
Unbend  not  yet :  880 

In  the  gods  have  I  put  my  trust — I  will  not  fear. 
But  whoso  walks  disdainfully,  {Strophe  2. 


38  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

In  act  or  word, 

And  fears  not  Justice,  nor  reveres 

The  thronbd  gods, 

Him  let  misfortune  slay 

For  his  ill-starred  wantoning, 

Should  he  heap  unrighteous  gains. 

Nor  from  unhallowed  paths  withhold  his  feet,  890 

Or  reach  rash  hands  to  pluck  forbidden  fruit. 

Who  shall  do  this,  and  boast 

That  yet  his  soul  is  proof 

Against  the  arrows  of  offended  Heaven  ? 

If  honour  crowns  such  deeds  as  these, 

Not  song,  but  silence,  then  for  me ! 

To  Earth's  dread  centre,  unprofaned      \Antistrophe  2. 

By  mortal  touch, 

No  more  with  awe  will  I  repair. 

Nor  Abac's  shrine,  900 

Nor  the  Olympian  plain, 

If  the  truth  stands  not  confessed. 

Pointed  at  by  all  the  world. 

O  Zeus  supreme,  if  rightly  thou  art  called — 

Lord  over  all — let  not  these  things  escape 

Thee  and  thy  timeless  sway ! 

For  now  men  set  at  nought 

Apollo's  word,  and  cry  '  Behold,  it  fails  ! ' 

His  praise  is  darkened  with  a  doubt ; 

And  faith  is  sapped,  and  Heaven  defied.  910 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  39 

Joe.  Elders  of  Thebes,  'twas  borne  upon  my  mind, 
Shrines  of  the  gods  to  visit,  and  to  bring 
These  garlands  and  this  incense  in  my  hands. 
The  soul  of  Oedipus  is  idly  stirred 
With  manifold  misgivings ;  and,  whereas 
Wise  men  conclude  things  present  from  things  past, 
Him  the  last  speaker  sways — who  speaks  of  fear. 
Now  therefore,  since  my  counsel  nought  avails, 
To  thee,  Lyceian  Apollo,  who  art  most  nigh, 
With  these  entreaties  suppliant  I  am  come,  920 

That  thou  wouldst  cleanse  and  make  us  free  from  guilt. 
For  now  our  hearts  wax  faint,  beholding  him. 
The  pilot  of  our  ship,  distraught  with  fear. 

Mess.  Friends,  might  I  of  your  courtesy  inquire 
Where  is  the  house  of  Oedipus  the  king  ? 
Or,  better,  where  is  he — if  this  ye  know  ? 

Chor.  These  are  his  doors,  O  friend,  and  he  within ; 
And  this  his  wife,  the  mother  of  his  children. 

Mess.  Blessings  on  her,  and  blessings  on  her  house 
For  ever — being  a  perfect  wife  to  him  !  930 

Joe.  I  wish  thee  back  thy  wishes :  for  no  less 
Deserves  thy  courteous  speech.     But  wherefore,  friend, 
Art  thou  come  hither — with  what  news  to  tell  ? 

Mess.  Good  news,  queen,  to  thy  house,  and  to  thy 
lord. 

Joe.  What  news?     And  by  whose  sending   art  thou 
come? 


40  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Mess.  I  come  from  Corinth.     Tidings  I  shall  tell — 
Joyful  past  doubt,  yet  haply  sorrowful. 

Joe.  What  tidings — sweet  and  bitter  in  a  breath  ? 

Mess.  The   people   of   the    Isthmian   land   are   pur- 
posed— 
So  there  'twas  said — to  have  him  for  their  king.  940 

Joe.  How  ?     Doth  not  the  aged  Polybus  still  reign  ? 

Mess.  Not  he  :  for  death  has  laid  him  in  the  tomb. 

Joe.  What  sayest  thou  ?     Polybus,  old  man,  is  dead  ? 

Mess.  Let  me  not  live,  if  I  have  spoken  falsely. 

Joe.  Lose  not  a  moment,  sirrah  ;  to  thy  lord 
Go,  tell  this  news.     O  oracles  of  the  gods, 
Where  are  ye  now  ?     Fearing  to  slay  this  man 
Did  Oedipus  flee  from  his  home — who  now 
In  nature's  course,  not  by  his  act,  is  dead. 

Oed.  O  dearest  presence  of  my  wife  Jocasta,  950 

Why  hast  thou  called  me  hither  from  the  house  ? 

Joe.  Hear  this  man's  news ;    hear,  and  perceive,  to 
what 
The  boasted  oracles  of  the  gods  are  come. 

Oed.  Who  is  the  man  ?  what  tidings  does  he  bring  ? 

Joe.  From  Corinth  he  reports  that  Polybus, 
Thy  father,  lives  no  longer,  but  is  dead. 

Oed.  How,    sirrah  ?      From    thine   own    lips   let  me 
hear  it. 

Mess.  If  first  thou'dst  have  the  certainty  of  this 
Doubt  not,  but  know,  that  Polybus  is  dead. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  41 

Oed.  Visited  by  sickness,  or  by  treason  slain  ?  960 

Mess.  The  lives  of  old  men  hang  upon  a  thread. 
Oed.  Poor  soul,  'twas  sickness,  then,  that  took  him 

off? 
Mess.  That,  and  the  length  of  years  which  weighed 

him  down. 
Oed.  Alas,  why  then,  O  queen,  should  men  regard 
The  Delphian  hearth  prophetic,  or  the  birds 
That  scream  i'  the  air ;  by  whose  direction  I 
Was  to  have  slain  my  father — but  he  is  dead 
And  in  his  grave,  and  I  remain,  whose  hand 
No  sword  came  near ;  unless  for  love  of  me 
He  pined  away — and  so  I  caused  his  death  : —  970 

But  certainly  this  prophecy  at  least 
Is  with  the  dead  man  buried,  out  of  mind. 
Joe.  Said  I  not  from  the  first  this  would  be  so  ? 
Oed.  Ay,  so  thou  didst :  but  me  my  fears  misled. 
Joe.  Bid  now  thy  fears  farewell :  despond  no  more. 
Oed.   My  mother's  couch  how  can  I  cease  to  fear  ? 
Joe.  Why  should  men  fear,  who  see  that  chance  rules 
all. 
And  forecast  of  the  future  there  is  none  ? 
Careless  to  live,  as  best  one  can,  is  best. 
And  this  unnatural  union  fear  not  thou  :  980 

For  many  a  man  ere  now,  aghast,  has  dreamed 
Of  coupling  with  a  mother.     But  who  sets 
At  naught  such  fancies,  bears  life's  burden  best. 


42  OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  4 


Oed.  All  this  indeed  were  well  and  wisely  spoken, 
Did  not  my  mother  live  :  but,  while  she  lives. 
How  true  soe'er  thy  words,  I  needs  must  fear. 
Joe.  Is  not  thy  father's  death  new  sight  to  thee  ? 

Oed.  Ay,  there  I  see  :  yet  dread  the  living  mother. 

Mess.  What  woman  is  it  of  whom  ye  are  afraid  ? 

Oed.  The  wife  of  Polybus,  Merope,  old  man.  990 

Mess.  And  what  see  ye  in  her  that  tends  to  fear? 

Oed.  A  dreadful  prophecy  the  god  has  uttered. 

Mess.  May  it  be  spoken  ?     Or  must  no  man  know  it  ? 

Oed.  Nay,  thou  shalt  hear.   To  marry  with  my  mother — 
This  doom  hath  Loxias  pronounced  for  me, 
And  with  these  hands  to  shed  my  father's  blood. 
And  therefore  far  from  Corinth  many  a  day 
My  life  was  passed  :  and  this  was  well — and  yet 
Into  their  parents'  eyes  men  love  to  look. 

Mess.  Was   this   the   fear   that   banished   thee   from 
thence  ?  1000 

Oed.  This — and  my  father's  murderer  not  to  be. 

Mess.  What  hinders  then,  that,  as  I  came  thy  friend, 
I  from  this  fear,  king,  should  deliver  thee  ? 

Oed.  I  should  not  prove  a  niggard  of  my  thanks. 

Mess.  Indeed  to  this  end  chiefly  did  I  come. 
That  I  might  profit  by  thy  coming  home. 

Oed.  Beneath  my  parents'  roof  I  may  not  come. 

Mess.  'Tis  plain,  my  son,  thou  know'st  not  what  thou 
doest. 


I 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  43 

Oed.  What  meanest  thou,  old  man  ?   I  prithee,  speak. 
Mess.  If  for  this  cause  thou  dost  avoid  thy  home.    1010 
Oed.  Yea,  for  I  fear  lest  the  god's  word  come  true. 
Mess.  Pollution  from  thy  parents  dost  thou  fear? 
Oed.  This  ever — this,  old  man,  makes  me  afraid. 
Mess.  Then  dost  thou  know  thou  startest  at  a  shadow  ? 
Oed.  How,  if  these  were  my  parents,  I  their  son  ? 
Mess.  Because  no  kin  was  Polybus  to  thee. 
Oed.    What   dost   thou   tell   me?    was   he   not    my 

father  ? 
Mess.  As  much — no  more  than  I  who  speak  to  thee. 
Oed.  Thou'rt  nought  to  me — how  then    my  father's 

equal  ? 
Mess.  Neither  from  his  loins  didst  thou  spring,  nor 

mine.  loao 

Oed.  How  did  he  let  me  then  be  called  his  son  ? 
Mess.  From  my  hands  he  received  thee  as  a  gift. 
Oed.  And  yet  a  foundling  he  so  greatly  loved  ? 
Mess.  Persuaded  by  his  former  childlessness. 
Oed.  Was  I  thine  own,  or  purchased  with  thy  gold  ? 
Mess.  Among  Kithaeron's  wooded  folds  I  found  thee. 
Oed.   What  errand  led  thee  to  the  mountain  ways  ? 
Mess.    The    sheep    upon    the    mountain   were    my 

charge. 
Oed.  Wast  thou  a  vagrant  and  a  hireling  shepherd  ? 
Mess.  But  on  that  day,  my  son,  I  rescued  thee.       1030 
Oed.  In  what  distress,  forsaken,  didst  thou  find  me  ? 


44 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Mess.  Thy  bruised  feet  may  testify  of  this. 

Oed.  Ha,  thou  hast  harped  upon  an  ancient  grief! 

Mess.  I  loosed  thy  feet,  pierced  through  and  bound 
with  cords. 

Oed.  O  dread  memorial  of  my  childhood's  shame  ! 
*    Mess.  So  that  from  this  misfortune  thou  wast  named. 

Oed.  By  father  or  mother  was  this  done  ?     O  say  ! 

Mess.  Not  I,  but  he  who  gave  thee,  should  know  this. 

Oed.  Thou  didst  receive  me,  then,  and  didst  not  find 
me  ?  1039 

Mess.  Nay,  from  another  shepherd's  hands  I  had  thee. 

Oed.  Who  was  he  ?     Dost  thou  know  how  to  describe 
him? 

Mess.  He  fed  the  sheep  of  Laius,  as  I  heard. 

Oed.  Of  him  who  was  aforetime  king  of  Thebes  ? 

Mess.  Ay,  that  was  he  :  his  feeder  this  man  was. 

Oed.  Is  the  man  still  alive,  that  I  may  see  him  ? 

Mess.  That  should  be  best   known  to  your  Theban 
folk. 

Oed.  Is  any  one  among  the  standers-by 
Who  knows  about  this  hind,  of  whom  he  speaks — 
Has  seen  him,  in  the  city  or  the  fields  ? 
Speak  out :  the  time  has  come  to  find  the  truth.  1050 

Chor.  I  think  he  is  none  other  than  the  man 

Whose  presence  from  the  fields  thou  didst  desire : 
But  the  queen  best  can  tell  if  this  be  so. 

Oed.  Lady,  thou  mindest  him,  whom  we  erewhile 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  45 

Bade  summon  hither  ?     Spake  this  man  of  him  ? 
Joe.  What  skills  of  whom  he  spake  ?     Heed  not  his 
talk: 
Vainly  it  were  remembered  :  let  it  pass. 

Oed.  This  cannot  be,  that  having  found  this  clue 
I  should  not  bring  my  parentage  to  light. 

Joe.  As  thou  dost  love  thy  life,  inquire  no  more —  1060 
I  charge  thee  by  the  gods  :  my  grief's  enough. 

Oed.  Nay,  never  fear ;  for,  though  three  mothers  back 
Should  stamp  me  thrice  a  slave,  thou  shalt  not  blush. 
Joe.  Yet  be  advised,  I  pray  thee,  and  forbear. 
Oed.  I'll  not  consent  not  to  learn  all  the  truth. 
Joe.  Ah,  yet  in  prudence  I  advise  the  best. 
Oed.  Too  long  thou  dost  torment  me  with  this  best. 
Joe.  O  may'st  thou  never  know  what  man  thou  art ! 
Oed.  Will    some    one   go    and   bring    the   shepherd 
hither  ? 
And  let  this  woman  of  rich  kinsmen  boast.  1070 

Joe.  Woe  to  thee,  miserable  !  no  other  word 
Have  I  for  thee — now  or  for  evermore  !       \She  goes  out. 

Chor.  What  sudden  frenzy,  Oedipus,  of  grief 
Swept  hence  the  queen  ?     To  mischief,  much  I  fear, 
Her  passion,  from  this  silence,  will  break  forth. 

Oed.  Break  forth  to  what  it  will — yet  I  will  choose 
To  trace,  though  mean,  the  sources  of  my  blood. 
Perchance  this  woman,  more  than  women  proud. 
Of  my  ignoble  lineage  is  ashamed. 


46  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

But  I  am  not  dishonoured,  since  I  deem  loSo 

Myself  a  child  of  Fortune,  ever  kind. 

She  truly  is  my  mother,  and  the  months, 

Her  children  too,  have  made  me  small  and  great. 

This,  which  I  am,  I  cannot  cease  to  be. 

That  I  should  fear  the  secret  of  my  birth. 

Chor.  If  with  my  human  wit  [Strophe. 

The  future  I  can  read — 
Olympus,  hear  me  swear, 
That  of  Kithaeron,  all  the  moonlit  night, 
When  next  the  moon's  at  full. 

Our  praises  shall  not  fail —  1090 

Of  Oedipus  compatriot  true. 
And  nurse,  and  mother  proved  : 
Nor  shall  the  mountain  miss 
Due  meed  of  dance  and  song 
For  kindness  rendered  to  our  lord  the  king. 
O  Phoebus,  hear  our  cry, 
And  let  our  prayer  with  thee  acceptance  find ! 
Thy  mother,  O  fair  son —  \Antistrophe. 

Some  mountain  nymph  was  she, 
In  fadeless  beauty  clad. 

Whom  Pan  upon  the  mountain  saw  and  loved  ?      noo 
Or  her  to  his  embrace 
Did  Loxias  woo  and  win  ? 
For  well  our  pastoral  lawns  he  loves : 
Or  else  Kyllene's  lord, 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING,  47 

Or  Bacchus,  who  delights 

The  mountain-peaks  to  haunt — 

Did  some  fair  nymph  o'  the  Heliconian  train 

(His  playmates  best-beloved) 

Leave  on  the  hills  his  babe  for  him  to  find  ? 

Oed.  If  I  may  make  conjecture,  friends,  of  one  mo 
Whose  face  I  never  saw,  here  comes  methinks 
The  shepherd  of  our  quest.  For,  full  of  years, 
Chimes  with  this  man  the  measure  of  his  age  : 
Besides,  my  servants  lead  him,  whom  I  know — 
My  own  :  yet  may  my  knowledge  be  surpassed 
Perchance  by  thine,  who  hast  this  shepherd  seen. 

Chor.  I  know  him,  doubtless.     No  more  trusty  fellow 
Had  Laius  for  a  herdsman,  sire,  than  he. 

Oed.  Thee,  sir,  who  art  from  Corinth,  first  I  ask. 
Is  this  the  man  ? 

Mess.  This,  whom  thine  eyes  behold.        1120 

Oed.  Now,  aged  sir,  for  thee  :  look  hither  and  speak 
To  what  I  ask.     Didst  thou  serve  Laius  ? 

Serv.  Not  bought,  but  of  his  household  born  and  bred. 

Oed.  Minding  what  task — to  what  employment  bound  ? 

Serv.  Most  of  my  time  I  followed  with  the  flocks. 

Oed.  And  whereabouts  didst  thou  thy  shepherding? 

Serv.  Now  'twas  Kithaeron,  now  some  neighbour  hill. 

Oed.  Hadst  thou  with  this  man  any  dealings  there  ? 

Serv.  What  made  he  there  ?     Of  what  man  dost  thou 
ask? 


48  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Oed.  Who  stands  before   thee  :  hast  thou  met  him 
ever  ?  1130 

Serv.  I  cannot  on  the  instant  call  to  mind. 

Mess.  No  marvel,  sire,  if  he  forgets  :  but  soon 
Clearly  he  shall  remember.     Well  I  know, 
He  knows  the  time  when  on  Kithaeron's  slopes 
He  fed  two  flocks  together ;  while  with  one. 
From  springtide  till  Arcturus,  year  by  year, 
Three  times,  each  time  six  months,  I  was  his  neighbour: 
Then,  for  the  winter,  home  we  drove  our  sheep. 
He  to  the  folds  of  Laius,  I  to  mine  : 
Sounds  this  Uke  truth,  or  have  I  dreamed  it  all  ?         1140 

Serv.  No  dream,  but  truth,  though  it  is  long  since  then. 

Mess.  A  child  thou  gavest  me — dost  thou  remember  ? 
A  tender  babe,  to  nurse  him  for  my  own. 

Serv.  What  wouldst  thou  have  ?     Why  dost  thou  ask 
me  this  ? 

Mess.  The   child   became    a   man :    look   where   he 
stands  I 

Serv.  Hence  to  perdition — go ;  and  cease  thy  prate  ! 

Oed.  Ah,  do  not  chide,  old  man,  his  speaking :  thine 
Of  such  reproof  stands  more  in  need  than  his. 

Serv.  Most  gracious  sire,  wherein  do  I  offend  ? 

Oed.  Not  speaking  of  the  child  of  whom  he  asks.    1150 

Serv.  This  trail  is  false  :  he  speaks  he  knows  not  what. 

Oed.  In  kindness  thou'lt  not   speak:  perforce   thou 
Shalt. 


I 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  49 

Serv.  Me,  who  am  old,  I  pray  thee,  do  not  harm  ! 
Oed.  Let   some   one   bind   me,   quick,    this   fellow's 

arms. 
Serv.  Alas,  for  what  ?     What  more  wouldst  thou  be 

told? 
Oed.  Thou  gavest  him  this  child  of  whom  he  asks  ? 
Serv.  Would  I  had  died  that  day  !  but  so  I  did. 
Oed.  Thou'lt  come  to  this,  not  speaking  all  the  truth. 
Serv.  Much  more,  if  I  shall  speak,  I  am  undone. 
Oed.  This  man,  it  seems,  will  palter  with  us  yet.      1160 
Serv.  What  paltering  ?     Said  I  not,  I  gave  the  child  ? 
Oed.  Whose  was  the  babe  ?  another's  or  thine  own  ? 
Serv.  Nay,    none   of  mine :    one    gave   him   to    my 

hands. 
Oed.  Which  of  these  Thebans  gave — where  dwelt  the 

man? 
Serv.  No  more  :  by  heaven,  O  king,  ask  me  no  more. 
Oed.  Thou  art  undone,  if  I  must  ask  again. 
SeriK  Born  in  the  house  of  Laius  was  the  child. 
Oed.  And  of  the  king's  blood  was  he,  or  a  slave  ? 
Serv.  Now,  now,  ah  me,  the  fatal  word's  to  speak. 
Oed.  Fatal  for  me  to  hear  :  but  I  must  hear  it.        "70 
Serv.  His  child  'twas  called  indeed  :  but  one  within, 
Thy  queen,  can  best  attest  if  this  was  so. 
Oed.  She  gave  thee,  then,  the  babe  ? 
Serv.  My  lord,  she  did 

Oed.  And  wherefore  did  she  so  ? 


50  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Serv.  That  it  might  die. 

Oed.  O  cruel  mother  ! 

Serv.  Dire  prophecies  she  feared. 

Oed.  What  were  they  ? 

Serv.  That  the  child  should  slay  his  sire. 

Oed.  How  then   gav'st  thou   the  child   to   this   old 
man? 

Serv.  For  pity,  O  master :  to  another  land 
Thinking  that  he  would  bear  it,  whence  he  came. 
O  woful  life,  ill-saved  !     For,  if  thou  art  nSo 

What  this  man  says,  thou  art  most  miserable. 

Oed.  Out  and  alas  !  so  all  at  last  comes  true  ! 
Here  let  me  look  my  last  upon  the  sun. 
That  sees  me  father'd,  mother'd,  wived  amiss. 
And,  whom  I  should  not,  sees  that  I  have  slain. 

Chor.  O  generations  of  the  race  of  men,      [Strophe  i. 
How  all  as  if  ye  were  not  I  account 
This  human  life  ye  live. 
For  which,  O  which  of  you  may  hope  to  win 
Of  bliss  a  larger  share,  ngo 

Than  just  enough  to  seem. 
Then  from  that  seeming  to  decline  ? 
I,  with  thy  fate  for  proof. 
Thine,  thine,  O  hapless  Oedipus, 
May  deem  no  mortal  blest : 

Who  as  a  master-bowman  cleft  the  mark,         [Antistr.  i. 
And  all-admired  prosperity  he  won — 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  51 

O  Zeus,  and  is  this  he  ? — 

Against  that  maiden  with  her  vulture  claws, 

And  subtle  songs  of  doom. 

He  rose,  a  tower  of  strength,  1200 

And  slew  her,  and  our  lives  redeemed  : 

We  hailed  him  then  our  king. 

Our  worship  at  his  feet  we  laid : 

This  mighty  Thebes  he  ruled. 

[Strophe  2. 
Now  what  name  sounds  more  lamentable  than  his  ? 
Or  who,  in  life's  reverse, 

With  fierce  calamity  hath  dwelt,  .   ^ 

And  anguish,  like  to  this  ? 
Where  is  his  glory  now. 

Whom,  entering  rash  that  chamber,  son  with  sire, 
The  same  wide  harbour  hath  received  ?  1211 

How  could,  how  could,  O  hapless  Oedipus, 
The  furrows  of  thy  father's  field 
So  long  in  silence  bear  with  thee  ? 

[Antistrophe  2. 
But  now  all-seeing  Time  hath  found  and  doomed 
This  thine  unconscious  sin — 
In  guilty  union  linked  with  one, 
Thy  mother,  and  thy  wife. 

0  son  of  Laius,  thee 

1  would  that  never,  never  I  had  seen ! 
No  measure  of  my  grief  I  know, 


52  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Nor  how  my  cries  to  stint.     For,  sooth  to  tell,  i22( 

Thou  didst  my  life  renew,  and  now 
Because  of  thee  my  days  are  dark. 

Mess.  O  ye  most  honoured  ever  of  this  land, 
What  deeds  your  ears,  your  eyes,  what  grief  your  souls 
Shall  know,  if  for  the  race  of  Labdacus 
Ye  from  your  hearts  are  careful  as  of  old. 
Not  Ister's  flood,  nor  Phasis,  as  I  think. 
With  pure  ablution  could  make  clean  this  house — 
Such  guilt  it  hides — and  other  guilt  full  soon, 
Willing  and  not  unwilling,  shall  disclose  :  123c 

Worst  grief  of  all,  when  men  afflict  themselves. 

Chor.  That  which  we  knew  before  lacked  not  to  be 
Most  lamentable ;  what  hast  thou  more  to  tell  ? 

Mess.  Word  soonest  told  and  soonest  heard  is  this — 
The  godlike  presence  of  the  queen  is  dead. 

Chor.  Unhappy  lady,  what  cause  had  she  to  die  ? 

Mess.  Her  own  rash  act :  the  worst  of  what  was  done 
Thou  canst  not  know,  not  having  it  to  see, 
But  yet,  far  as  my  memory  may  serve. 
The  tale  of  her  undoing  thou  shalt  hear.  1240 

Soon  as  in  that  fierce  mood  she  came  inside 
The  porch  of  the  house,  straight  to  her  nuptial  couch 
She  hied,  with  all  the  strength  of  both  her  hands 
Rending  her  hair,  and  violently  she  made 
The  doors  upon  herself,  and  called  aloud 
On  Laius,  her  dead  lord,  and  made  her  moan 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  53 

Of  that  her  ancient  childbed,  whence  he  gat 

A  son  that  slew  himself — and  died  and  left 

That  mother  to  that  son,  quick-wombed  to  bear 

Offspring  accursed  :  O  hateful  marriage-bed, 

Twice  fruitful,  whence  to  her,  ill-starred,  there  sprang 

Husband  from  husband,  children  from  her  child  !    1250 

So  much  I  know,  but  know  not  how  she  died  : 

For  in  there  burst,  with  outcries  loud,  the  king. 

And  filled  my  sight :  her  end  I  might  not  see. 

But  him  my  eyes  still  followed  where  he  roamed, 

Now  here,  now  there,  craving  of  us  a  sword, 

And  where  to  find  that  wife,  no  wife  indeed, 

Mother  and  wife  in  one,  a  field  twice-tilled, 

That  bore  himself  for  fruit,  and  fruit  to  him. 

So  as  he  raved,  some  god  directed  him — 

No  man  at  least,  of  us  who  watched  him  there  : 

And  with  a  dreadful  cry  he  leapt  against  1260 

The  folded  doors,  as  one  had  led  the  way, 

And  from  their  sockets  burst  the  bending  bolts, 

And  entered.     Hanging  there — the  queen  we  saw 

Tight  in  the  death-grip  of  a  pendent  cord. 

With  one  dread  voice  of  horror  at  that  sight 

He  loosed  the  hanging  noose,  and  on  the  ground 

Laid  down  the  piteous  corse  :  and  then  we  saw 

A  dreadful  sight :  for,  tearing  from  her  robe 

The  golden  clasp  that  pinned  its  folds  aright, 

He  smote  and  stabbed  the  circles  of  his  eyes,  1270 


54  OEDIPUS  THE  KING, 

Exclaiming,  that  on  him  they  should  not  look, 

What  things  he  suffered  and  what  things  he  did; 

Nor  see  henceforth  whom  not  to  see  behoved — 

See  and  mistake  those  whom  he  craved  to  know. 

Such  burden  chanting,  he  full  many  a  time 

With  lifted  hand  struck  at  his  eyes  :  and  both 

Their  bleeding  orbs  rained  forth  unceasingly 

Great  drops  of  oozing  gore  that  drenched  his  beard, 

Two  pelting  showers  together  of  dark  red  hail. 

Such  sudden  doom,  not  single,  his  and  hers,  1280 

On  both,  by  act  of  both,  hath  broken  forth. 

Gone  is  the  former  bliss,  which,  while  it  was, 

Was  bliss  indeed  :  a  day,  and  all  is  changed. 

Wailing  and  woe  are  here,  and  death,  and  shame. 

And  all  are  here,  all  evils  that  are  named. 

Chor.  From  grief,  poor  soul,  what  respite  finds  he 
now? 

Mess.  Loudly  he  bids  unbolt  the  doors,  and  let 
All  eyes  in  Thebes  look  on  the  parricide. 
Who  with  his  mother — unhallowed  deeds  he  names 
Nameless  for  me  ! — then  from  the  land  he  will  1290 

Banish  himself,  nor  here  abide  the  curse 
Himself  invoked.     But  strength  he  lacks,  and  one 
To  lead  him  :  his  affliction  else  is  more   / 
Than  he  can  bear.     Look  for  thyself.     I  hear 
The  bolts  undraw.     A  sight  thou  shalt  behold, 
Should  wring  compassion  even  from  his  foes. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  55 

Chor.  O  woful  plight  for  men  to  see, 
Most  woful  sight  that  ever  I  have  seen  ! 
What  madness,  O  unhappy  king, 
Possessed  thee  ?     On  thine  ill-starred  life,  1303 

A  leap  beyond  all  measure  of  how  far. 
What  god  hath  leapt  ? 
I  cannot  bear  to  look  on  thee. 
Albeit  of  many  things  I  fain  would  ask. 
Of  many  things  my  ears,  my  eyes  inform : 
Such  shuddering  takes  hold  of  me. 

Oed.  Alas,  alas  unhappy  that  I  am  ! 
Whither  I  wend,  I  know  not ;  and  my  voice 
To  the  four  winds  of  heaven  is  idly  borne.  1310 

Whereunto  hath  this  fierce  fate  leapt  on  me  ? 

Chor.  To  horror,  neither  to  be  heard  nor  seen. 

Oed.  O  thou  thick  cloud  of  darkness, 
That  on  my  life  hast  settled, 
Abominable,  unutterable. 
Indomitable, 

By  pitiless  winds  swept  hitherward  on  me ; 
Alas! 

And  yet  again,  alas,  and  woe  is  me ! 
Such  maddening  pain 
Of  those  sharp  daggers  at  my  eyes. 
Blent  with  remembrance  of  my  misery, 
Pierces  my  inmost  soul. 

Chor.  No  marvel  if,  in  such  extremity, 


56  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Thy  grief  is  twofold,  as  thy  suffering  is.  132c 

Oed.  O  my  good  friend, 

I  am  not  then  forsaken  yet  of  thee  ? 

O  constant  friend,  who  of  thy  love  for  me 

Yet  weariest  not  though  I  am  blind  ! — Ah  me  ! 

Ah  woe  is  me  ! 

Spite  of  this  darkness,  yet  I  know  thee  well, 

Hearing  thy  voice :  a  friend  hath  no  disguise. 

Chor.  O  rash  and  overbold,  how  didst  thou  dare 

Mar  thus  thy  sight  ?     What  god  stirred  thee  to  this  ? 

Oed.  Apollo,  O  my  friends, 
Apollo  on  my  life 

This  evil  doom,  this  evil  doom  hath  laid ;  1330 

But  no  hand  dealt, 

No  hand  save  mine  alone,  the  grievous  blow  : 
For  what  to  me  did  eyes  avail. 
Who  seeing  had  no  pleasant  sight  to  see  ? 
Chor.  Even  as  thou  sayest,  so  it  was. 
Oed.  What  should  my  eyes  behold, 
Or  heart  desire,  or  ears 
Take  pleasure  any  more 
Of  human  speech,  O  friends,  to  hear : 
Convey  me  hence  as  quickly  as  ye  may,  1340 

Hence,  O  my  friends,  from  all  men's  sight, 
Me,  most  pernicious — me. 
Of  mortals  most  accurst. 
And  hated  by  the  gods  of  all  men  most 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  57 

Chor.  Would  God  that  I  had  never  seen  thy  face, 
In  wisdom  as  in  fortune  all  unblest ! 

Oed.  Perish  the  man  who  found  me 
On  the  wild  mountain-side, 

And  from  the  cruel  cords  that  bound  my  feet  1350 

Loosed  me,  and  rescued  me,  and  saved  from  death, 
A  kindness  most  unkind  : 
For  then  should  I  have  died, 
Not  lived,  to  grieve  my  friends  and  vex  myself 

Chor.  My  wish  in  this  consents  to  thine. 

Oed.  So  had  I  not  my  father  slain, 
And  not  been  called  by  all  the  world 
Husband  of  her  from  whom  I  sprang  : 
Now  I  am  godless — son  of  an  impious  race —  1360 

Wedded,  O  miserable,  with  her  from  whom  I  sprang. 
All  misery  that  misery  exceeds 
Hath  Oedipus  obtained. 

Chor.  I  know  not  how  to  say  thou  hast  counselled 
well : 
Better  thou  hadst  not  been  than  blind  to  live. 

Oed.  That  I  have  done  what  was  not  best  to  do, 
Instruct  me  not,  nor  counsel  any  more.  1370 

I  know  not  with  what  eyes  I  should  have  met 
My  father  face  to  face  in  the  halls  of  death. 
Or  that  my  wretched  mother — having  done 
Wrongs  worse  than  hanging  both  to  him  and  her. 
But  was  the  sight  of  children  then  so  dear, 


58  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

For  me  to  see  them,  born  as  they  were  born  ? 

Nay,  to  my  eyes  no  welcome  sight  were  they, 

Nor  yet  this  city,  nor  these  towers  of  Thebes, 

Nor  sacred  shrines  o'  the  gods,  wherefrom  I  wretched 

Who  once  most  nobly  lived  of  all  in  Thebes  1380 

Debarred  myself,  myself  charging  all  men 

To  drive  me  forth,  the  impious  one,  by  heaven 

Proclaimed  unclean — and  son  of  Laius. 

How,  having  brought  home  to  myself  such  guilt. 

With  steadfast  eyes  this  people  could  I  face  ? 

Nay  but,  the  fount  of  hearing  in  mine  ears 

Could  I  have  choked  withal,  I  had  not  spared 

This  miserable  body  to  seal  up. 

That  sight  nor  sound  had  reached  me  :  could  my  soul 

So  dwell,  fenced  round  from  evil,  that  were  bliss.    1390 

Why  did  Kithaeron  nurse  me  ?     Why  not  rather 

Take  me  and  slay  me  there,  never  to  show 

The  shuddering  world  the  secret  of  my  birth  ? 

O  Polybus,  O  Corinth,  and  O  home 

That  once  I  deemed  my  sire's,  what  festering  sore 

Lurked  underneath  your  love  that  showed  so  fair ! 

Vile  of  a  vile  race  I  am  found  the  son. 

O  triple  ways,  and  dark  mysterious  dell, 

Where  'neath  the  copse  the  three  roads  straitly  met, 

O  ye  that  from  my  hands  drank  deep  my  blood,      1400 

My  father's  that  I  shed,  do  ye  remember 

What  deed  ye  saw  me  do,  ere  hither  I  came, 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  59 

And  did  what  deeds  again  ?     O  marriage-bed 

My  bed  of  birth,  that  bore  me,  and  again 

By  that  self  seed  requickened  gave  to  view 

The  father,  brother,  son,  one  blood  with  her, 

That  bride,  both  wife  and  mother  :  O  horrid  sight 

Of  deeds  most  shameful  that  on  earth  are  done  ! 

But,  since  of  things  ill  done  'tis  ill  to  speak, 

Now  by  the  gods  make  haste  and  hale  me  forth      mio 

And  hide  me  hence,  or  slay,  or  in  the  deep 

Fling  me  where  ye  shall  see  me  never  more. 

Shrink  not  to  touch  me,  wretched  that  I  am  : 

Fear  nothing,  but  consent.     For  this  my  load 

Of  sorrow  none  may  bear  but  I  alone. 

Chor.  Lo  timely  to  thine  asking,  even  now. 
To  do  and  to  advise,  comes  Creon — he. 
Who  single  in  thy  stead  protects  the  land. 

Oed,  Ah  me,  what  speech  to  him  shall  I  address  ? 
What  plea  shall  now  suffice  me  ?  for  to  him  1420 

All  that  I  said  before  is  found  unjust. 

Cre.  I  am  not  come  to  mock  thee,  Oedipus, 
Nor  to  reproach  thee  with  the  former  wrong. 
But  ye — grown  reckless  that  the  sons  of  men 
Should  see  such  sight  unblest,  yet  to  the  beam, 
All-quickening,  of  the  Sun-god  fear  to  show, 
Unveiled,  a  man  impure,  whom  earth  rejects. 
And  rain  that  drops  from  heaven,  and  holy  light. 
Into  the  house  conduct  him  speedily. 


to  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

Most  right  it  is,  the  evils  of  their  kin  143° 

Kinsmen  should  see  and  hear,  and  none  but  they. 

Oed.  By  heaven,  for  thou  hast  plucked  my  fears  away, 
With  nobleness  requiting  me  most  vile. 
Grant,  for  thy  sake,  not  mine,  the  boon  I  crave. 

Cre.  With  what  request  dost  thou  importune  me  ? 

Oed.  Make  haste  to  banish  me  out  of  this  land, 
Where  none  shall  see  me,  none  shall  speak  to  me. 

Cre.  Surely  ere  now  I  had  done  this,  but  first 
I  wished  to  learn  the  pleasure  of  the  god.  1439 

Oed.  One  voice  we  heard  from  him,  to  let  me  perish. 
The  parricide,  the  impious  that  I  am. 

Cre.  It  was  reported  so  :  but  in  this  need 
'Twere  best  we  should  learn  further  what  to  do. 

Oed.  Will  ye  inquire  for  one  so  miserable  ? 

Cre.  'Tis  time  that  even  thou  shouldst  trust  the  gods. 

Oed.  Thou  therefore  do  my  bidding,  and  consent : — 
Bury  indeed  the  woman  in  the  house 
According  to  thy  pleasure  :  'tis  thy  right, 
For  she  is  thine  :  but  doom  not  me  alive 
Here  in  my  father's  city  to  abide  :  1450 

Out  on  the  mountain  yonder  let  me  dwell, 
Kithaeron  called,  and  mine,  that  living  tomb 
My  parents  gave  me  once  to  be  my  own  : 
So  shall  their  murderous  will  at  last  be  done. 
And  yet  I  know  no  sickness  and  no  harm 
Could  touch  me  then :  else  had  I  not  been  saved 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  6i 

Out  of  that  death,  but  to  fulfil  my  doom. 
So  be  that  doom  fulfilled,  whate'er  it  be. 
But  for  my  children,  Creon — for  the  boys 
No  need  that  thou  shouldst  care  :  for  they  are  men,     1460 
And  cannot  starve,  wherever  they  may  be — 
But  of  my  daughters  twain,  poor  helpless  maids, 
"Whose  place  at  board  was  ever  at  my  side, 
[One  board  for  me  and  them,  one  fare  for  both, 
rAnd  nothing  that  I  touched  they  might  not  share — - 
Care  thou  for  them  :  and  let  me,  if  I  may, 
[Touch  them  but  once,  and  weep,  and  bid  farewell. 
[Grant  this,  O  prince, 

Out  of  thy  noble  heart.     For,  might  I  touch  them, 
My  own,  as  when  I  saw  them,  they  would  seem. —     1470 
What  do  I  say? 

O  heaven,  do  I  not  hear  my  darlings  somewhere 
Weeping,  and  Creon  has  had  pity  on  me, 
And  brought  them  here,  my  children,  my  beloved  ? 
Is  it  not  so  ? 

Cre.  I  brought  them  here  indeed,  thee  having  seen 
In  former  days  delighted  even  as  now. 

Oed.  O  for  this  meeting  be  thou  blest,  and  safe 
In  heaven's  good  keeping  rest,  more  safe  than  I !        1479 
Children,  where  are  ye  ?     Come  hither  and  draw  near, 
To  these  fraternal  hands,  my  hands  that  have 
A  goodly  sight  provided  you  to  see, 
Your  father's  eyes,  dark  now,  that  once  were  bright. 


62  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 


Since  you  I  gat  whence  I  myself  was  born, 
Seeing  and  knowing  not  what  now  appears. 
Children,  I  see  you  not,  but  weep  for  you, 
Of  your  sad  life's  remainder  when  I  think, 
What  Hfe  abhorred  by  men  ye  both  shall  lead. 
Into  what  concourse  or  what  festival 
Of  Thebans  shall  ye  come,  nor  thence  go  home  ^490 

Blind  with  your  tears,  that  festal  sight  unseen  ? 
And,  when  at  last  for  marriage  ye  are  ripe, 
Who  will  consent,  O  children,  who  will  dare 
Such  scathing  taunts  to  meet  as  then  shall  light 
Both  on  my  parents  and  on  yours  no  less  ? 
For  what  reproach  is  wanting  ?     I,  your  father. 
My  father  slew,  and  with  the  mother  couched 
From  whom  my  life  began ;  and,  from  the  womb 
That  bare  your  sire,  ye  to  your  sire  were  born. 
Such   taunts    shall    ye   endure.     Who    then   will   wed 
you  ?  1500 

No  man,  my  daughters,  none ;  but  certainly 
Unwedded  and  unfruitful  ye  shall  pine. 
Son  of  Menoeceus,  then — for  thou  art  left 
Sole  father  that  they  have — since  parents  both 
They  both  have  lost — O  leave  them  not  to  wander 
Begging  their  bread,  unhusbanded,  thy  kin ; 
Let  them  not  in  misfortune  rival  me : 
But  pity  them,  seeing  their  tender  years 
Left  destitute  and  friendless,  (put  for  thee. 


OEDIPUS  THE  KING.  63 

Lay  hand  in  mine  ;  be  noble,  and  consent.  1510 

And  you,  my  children,  could  ye  mark  my  words, 
Much  had  I  counselled  :  now,  pray  this  for  me. 
To  live  where  chance  will  have  me — but  that  you 
A  better  than  your  father's  life  may  find. 

Cre,  Thou  hast  had  enough  of  weeping :  now  within 
the  house  begone. 

Oed.  I  must  do,  though  hard,  thy  bidding. 

Cre.  All  things  are,  in  season,  best. 

Oed.  On  what  terms  I  go,  thou  knowest  ? 

Cre.  Let  me  hear,  then  I  shall  know. 

Oed.  From  the  land  I  must  be  banished. 

Cre.  With  the  god  thy  asking  rests. 

Oed.  Am  I  not  of  gods  most  hated  ? 

Cre.  Therefore  thou  shalt  have  thy  wish. 

Oed.  Is  it  promised  ?  1520 

Cre.        I  have  said  it :  what  I  say  shall  be  performed. 

Oed.  'Tis  enough ;  now  hence  conduct  me. 

Cre.  Loose  thy  daughters,  then,  and  go. 

Oed.  Do  not  take  from  me  my  children. 

Cre.  Something  be  content  to  yield : 

More  thou  hast  obtained  already  than  thy  life  had  well 
deserved. 

Chor.  Look  and  learn,  all  Theban  people,  and  this 
Oedipus  behold. 
This,  that  read  the  famous  riddle,  and  we  hailed  him 
chief  of  men, 


64  OEDIPUS  THE  KING. 

And  his  glory  and  his  fortune  was  no  Theban  but 
admired — 

Now  upon  his  head  the  billows  of  disaster  dire  are 
poured. 

Therefore,  waiting  still  and  watching  for  that  final  day  of 
all, 

On  no  mortal  man  the  verdict  '  He  is  happy '  we  pro- 
nounce, 1529 

Till  his  goal  of  life  he  passes,  clear  of  sorrow  to  the  close. 


OEDIPUS   AT    COLONUS 


PERSONS. 

Oedipus. 
Theseus. 
Creon. 

POLYNEICES. 

Athenian  Stranger. 

Messenger. 

Antigone. 

ISMENE. 

Chorus  of  Elders  of  Colonus. 


SDetiipus  at  Colonu0 

Oed.    ANTIGONE,  daughter  of  this  old  blind  man, 
-^  ^     Say  to  what  land  come  we,  what  city  of 
men? 

:Who  to  this  houseless  Oedipus  will  yield 
The  hospitable  pittance  of  to-day  ? 
Little  indeed  I  crave,  and,  though  men  give 
Ev'n  less  than  little,  yet  so  am  I  content. 
Three  teachers  teach  me  patience — grief,  and  time, 
Companion  old — these,  and  a  noble  mind. 
But  now,  child,  look  where  I  may  sit  me  down  : 
Be  it  common  ground  or  by  some  grove  of  gods —        lo 
Conduct  me,  set  me  there ;  so  might  we  learn. 
Whither  we  are  come.     Strangers  of  denizens 
I  We  needs  must  ask,  and  as  we  hear  must  act. 

Ant.  O  father  Oedipus,  toil-worn,  far  hence 
I  see  indeed  the  city  fenced  with  towers ; 
But,  doubt  not,  holy  ground  is  this,  thick-set 
With  olive,  laurel,  and  vine,  in  whose  deep  shade 
The  frequent  nightingales  make  melody. 
Here,  on  this  unhewn  slab,  sit  down  and  rest : 
Tar  hast  thou  journeyed  for  an  old  man's  strength.         20 


68  OEDIPUS  AT  COL  ONUS. 

Oed.   Here   set   me   then — with   heed,  the    sightless 
one. 

Ant.  That  duty  I  have  learned,  if  time  can  teach. 

Oed.  Canst  thou  yet  tell  me  of  our  whereabouts  ? 

Ant.  'Tis   Athens   yonder,    but   this    place    I   know 
not. 

Oed.  So  much  we  heard  from  every  wayfarer. 

Ant.  Shall  I  go  hence,  ask  how  the  spot  is  called  ? 

Oed.  If  men  may  here  inhabit,  surely  go. 

Ant.  Inhabitants  there  are.     But  go  belike 
I  need  not ;  for  I  see  some  one  approach.     ■ 

Oed.  Bends  he  toward  us  his  steps  and  his  intent  ?    30 

Ant.  Already  he  draws  nigh.     Whate'er  thou  hast 
Timely  to  speak,  speak,  for  the  man  is  here. 

Oed.  Friend,  for  I  learn,  from  who  hath  sight  for  me 
And  for  herself,  thy  coming — whose  timely  speech 
May  of  thy  knowledge  help  our  ignorance 

Stra.  Before    thou    questionest    farther,    from    this 
seat 
Rise,  get  thee  gone  :  for  here  no  foot  may  tread. 

Oed.  What  is  the  place  ?  what  god  possesses  it  ? 

Stra.  Untouched,  unlodged  in.     For  the  goddesses. 
Earth's  and  the  Night's  dread  daughters,  here  abide.      40 

Oed.  Say  by  what  awful  name  are  they  invoked  ? 

Stra.  Our  people  call  them  the  Eumenides, 
All-seeing  :  other  names  elsewhere  they  love. 

Oed.  So  greet  they  graciously  their  suppliant, 


I 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  69 

As  this  land's  sanctuary  I  quit  no  more  ! 

Stra.  What  speech  is  this  ? 

Oed.  Speech  that  declares  my  state. 

Stra.  Nay,  nor  I  dare  not  raise  thee  hence,  myself — 
But  seek  our  city's  warrant,  how  to  act. 

Oed.  Nay,  I  implore  thee,  stranger,  scorn  me  not. 
Poor  wanderer  as  I  am — but  tell  me  this.  50 

Stra.  Speak,  and  of  me  thou  shalt  not  suffer  scorn. 

Oed.  How  call  ye  then  this  place  wherein  we  stand  ? 

Stra.  Attend,    and   what's    my   knowledge    shall    be 
thine. 
This  ground  indeed  is  sacred  all,  possessed 
By  great  Poseidon,  and  by  the  god  fire-fraught. 
Titan  Prometheus ;  but  where  thy  feet  are  set 
Men  call  brass-paven  threshold  of  the  land, 
Coign-rock  of  Athens  ;  and  the  neighbour  fields 
Boast  for  their  prince  the  hero  of  the  steed, 
Colonus  there,  behold  him ;  by  whose  name,  60 

The  one  good  name  for  all,  his  folk  are  called. 
Thou  hast  it  now,  our  hamlet's  lore — unsung 
Of  poet,  treasured  in  its  people's  love. 

Oed.  The  place,  then,  hath  a  people  of  its  own  ? 

Stra.  A  people,  truly,  named  after  the  god. 

Oed.  Ruled  by  a  prince,  or  by  the  general  voice  ? 

Stra.  The  king  o'  the  city  is  our  ruler  too. 

Oed.  Who  wields  such  potency  of  voice  and  hand  ? 

Stra.  King  Theseus,  in  his  father  Aegeus'  room. 


70  OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 

Oed.  Would  some  one  go  from  hence,  to  bring  him 
hither  ?  70 

Stra.  Charged  to  what  end  to  bid  or  urge  him  come  ? 

Oed.  Poor  service  done,  to  reap  a  rich  reward. 

Stra.  How  can  a  blind  man  do  him  any  good  ? 

Oed.  Words  I  shall  speak,  nowise  bereft  of  sight. 

Stra.    Heed,   friend,   meantime,   my  counsel : — since 
indeed 
Noble  thou  seemest,  setting  thy  fate  aside  : — 
Here,  where  I  found  thee,  still  remain ;  the  while, 
Not  in  the  city,  but  to  our  neighbours  here, 
I  tell  thy  tale.     They  shall  pronounce  for  thee 
Leave  to  remain,  or  bid  thee  hence  retire.  80 

Oed.  Say,  hath  the  stranger  left  us,  child,  and  gone  ? 

Ant.  Gone,  father;    so  that  thou  mayest  speak  thy 
mind 
Out  freely,  none  to  hear  thy  speech  but  I. 

Oed.  O  dreadful  Forms  august,  whose  sanctuary, 
This  land's  first  refuge,  rests  these  wearied  limbs — 
Have  no  illwill  to  Phoebus  and  to  me — 
Phoebus,  who  prophesied  of  all  that  grief, 
But  this  my  rest  after  long  years  foretold — 
Such  land  my  goal,  where  I  should  win  at  last 
Of  awful  Powers  a  hospitable  seat ;  90 

There  of  this  weary  life  to  make  an  end, 
There  bring  a  blessing  where  I  found  a  home — 
But  to  who  sent,  who  drave  me  forth,  a  curse. 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COLONUS.  7 1 

Yea,  and  hereof  he  promised  sign  should  be, 

Earthquake,  or  thunder-sound,  or  fire  of  Zeus. 

Now  then  I  know,  this  way  that  I  have  come, 

It  must  be  that  an  omen  clear  from  you 

Unto  this  grove  hath  led  me.     For  not  else 

Into  your  presence  first  my  feet  had  chanced — 

Encountering,  I  who  taste  no  wine,  with  you 

To  whom  no  cup  is  poured — nor  found  for  seat  100 

This  solemn  boulder-block,  by  axe  unwrought. 

Be  it,  O  goddesses,  as  Apollo  spake — 

Grant  that  ev'n  now  my  life  may  pass,  have  end — 

Unless  ye  deem  lifelong  too  short  a  while. 

More  than  all  men  to  have  been  thrall  to  grief. 

Come  ye,  sweet  daughters  of  primeval  Night, 

Come,  city  of  all  cities  most  renowned, 

Athens,  by  mightiest  Pallas  claimed  her  own, 

Pity  this,  once  a  man,  once  Oedipus, 

Poor  phantom  now — wreck  of  mine  ancient  self !  no 

Ant.  No  more,  for  to  espy  thy  resting-place 
Come  hither  certain  elders,  bowed  with  age. 

Oed.  Nay,  I  am  mute ;  and  thou,  lead  from  the  way. 
Hide  me  within  the  grove  here,  till  I  learn 
Out  of  their  speech  their  purpose.     Learning  that, 
We  shall  proceed  with  caution  to  our  end. 

Chor.  Look,  then.     What  was  he  ?     Where  lurks  he 

now  ?  \Stroplu. 

This  bold,  this  unabashed  intruder —  \They  search  for  Jiim. 


72  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Flown  hence  and  gone,  ye  see ;  gone  whither  ?  120 

Make  quest  for  him,  look  for  him, 

On  all  sides  search  and  seek ! 

Some  wandering  fellow,  doubt  it  not. 

Strange  to  the  place :  not  else  had  he  dared 

Invade  this  unfrequented  grove. 

Where  the  resistless  Maidens  dwell, 

Whose  names  we  dare  not  utter, 

Whose  presence  pass  with  eyes  averted,  130 

Speechlessly,  wordlessly,  breathing  only 

The  voiceless  breath  of  a  reverent  thought — 

So  we :  but  now,  we  hear,  hath  come 

Some  impious  one  who  knows  no  fear : 

For  whom  I  look,  the  precinct  through, 

But  look  in  vain,  discovering  not 

Where  all  the  while  he  hides. 

Oed.  I,  whom  ye  seek,  am  here  :  for  you 
I  see  with  ears,  as  the  proverb  is.      \He  discovers  himself. 

Chor.  Alas !  140 

Out,  horrid  sight  and  horrid  sound  ! 

Oed.  Lawless,  I  charge  ye,  deem  me  not ! 

Chor.  Zeus  shield  us,  what  can  the  old  man  be  ? 

Oed.  You  shall  not,  guardians  of  this  state, 
Admiring,  rank  my  fortunes  high. 
Ye  see  me  what  I  am,  whose  steps 
Are  guided  by  another's  sight. 
Whose  strength  on  weakness  leans  for  help. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  73 

Chor.  Ah  me,  for  pity  !    What !  blind  beside  ?       150 

\Antistrophe. 
Quite  gone,  thy  sight  ?     'Tis  easy  guessing, 
Thy  length  of  days  is  length  of  sorrow. 
These  curses,  with  leave  of  mine, 
Thou  shalt  not  add  thereto. 
Trespass  enough ;  be  warned,  nor  plunge 
Deep  in  yon  silent  heart  of  the  glade. 
Whose  grass-lipped  basin's  woodland  pool 
Fills  with  the  confluence  downward-drawn 
Of  streamlets  softly  flowing —  160 

Their  peace,  all-hapless  one,  disturb  not. 
Dare  not  to  enter,  come  forth,  come  hither !  .  .  . 
Too  wide  a  distance  divides  our  speech. 

0  toil-worn  wanderer,  hear'st  thou  me  ? 
But,  hast  thou  any  word  to  speak 

And  seek  advice,  from  hallowed  ground 
Hither  remove,  where  all  may  tread — 
Here  speak ;  or  else  refrain. 

Oed.  Daughter,  I  know  not  what  to  think.  170 

Ant.  Father,  this  people's  will  is  ours  : 
To  yield  with  no  ill  grace  were  best. 

Oed.  Lend,  then,  thy  hand. 

Ant.  In  thine  'tis  placed. 

Oed.  Ye  for  my  safety,  friends,  are  bound  : 

1  come,  relying  on  your  faith. 

Chor.  Rest  yonder  j  none  of  us,  old  man, 


74  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Will  drag  thee  thence  against  thy  will. 

Oed.  What,  further?  [Strophe. 

Chor.  A  little  further  still.  \He  comes  out. 

Oed.  And  still? 

Chor.  Conduct  him,  maiden :  iSo 

Still  onward  lead  him ;  thou  canst  see. 

Ant.  Follow  me,  father,  follow  hither. 
With  poor  blind  feet,  the  way  I  lead. 

Chor.  An  alien  in  an  alien  land, 
Thou'rt  bold  amiss  ;  be  bold  to  yield — 
Hate  where  this  people  cherish  hate. 
And  honour  what  they  love. 

Oed.  Conduct  me,  child. 
Where,  safe  in  paths  of  piety, 

Unchidden  we  may  hear  and  speak  :  190 

To  struggle  with  our  fate  were  vain. 

Chor.  There  stay  thy  steps,  nor  stray  beyond 
Yon  platform  of  confronting  rock. 

Oed.  Thus  far  ?  \Antistrophe. 

Chor.  I  have  said,  no  further  go. 

Oed.   But  sit  ? 

Chor.  Ay,  on  the  stone's  edge 

Sit,  sideways  bending,  stooping  low. 

Ant.  My  office,  father :  slowly,  gently — 
But  first  thy  foot  adjust  to  mine. 

Oed.  Ah,  woe  is  me  ! 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  75 

Ant.  Then  forward  on  my  loving  arm  aoo 

Lean  thou  thy  weight  of  years. 

Oed.  O  frenzied,  fatal  work  ! 

Chor.  Now  that  thy  boldness  somewhat  yields, 
Declare  to  us  thy  parentage  : 
Who  art  thou,  miserably  led  ? 
What  country  is  thy  home  ? 

Oed.  O  strangers,  city  have  I  none  : 
But  spare,  O  spare  me  this. 

Chor.  What  have  we  done,  that  we  should  spare  ? 

Oed.  Forbear,  forbear,  to  ask  my  name  ;  210 

Let  me  alone  and  ask  no  more. 

Chor.  What  now  ? 

Oed.  My  birth,  ah  horror  ! 

Chor.  Reveal  it. 

Oed.  How  shall  I  answer  them,  O  my  daughter  ? 

Chor.  Tell  us,  O  stranger,  what  sire  begat  thee  ? 

Oed.  Ah,  child,  tell  me,  what  must  I  do  ? 

Ant.  Speak  ;  for  escape  is  none,  or  evasion. 

Oed.  Yes,  I  will  speak  what  I  may  not  hide. 

Chor.  Long  ye  delay  :  come,  tell  us  quickly. 

Oed.  Have  ye  heard  of  a  son  of  Laius  .  .  . 

Chor.  Ah  !         220 

Oed.  Heir  of  the  house  of  Labdacus  .  .  . 

Chor.  Shield  us ! 

Oed.  Miserable  Oedipus  ? 

Chor.  Thou  art  he  ? 


76  OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 

Oed.  Fear  not  to  hear  me  tell  my  tale. 

\They  drown  his  voice  with  clamour. 

Oed.  Unlucky  that  I  am  ! 

\The  tumult  continues. 

Oed.   Daughter,  what  think  you  they  intend  ? 

Chor.  Out  of  the  land — avoid  !  begone  ! 

Oed.  Your  promise  how  will  ye  redeem  ? 

Chor.   Heaven  is  just,  nor  exacts  from  the  wronged 
one 
Requital  for  wrongs  he  requiteth  :  and  guile,  230 

When  for  guile  it  is  rendered  again,  like  for  like, 
To  the  giver  gives  back,  for  his  own,  not  a  boon. 
But  a  bane.     From  thy  resting-place  rise  and  begone, 
And  my  land  and  its  shelter  forego,  at  thy  speediest. 
Lest  of  thy  guilt  on  us 
Heavier  yet  be  imposed  the  burthen. 

Ant.  O  strangers,  yet  be  merciful : 
And  though  ye  suffer  not 
My  old  bhnd  father,  hearing  fame 

Of  how  unwittingly  he  sinned —  240 

Yet  upon  me,  the  unfortunate,  strangers,  have   pity — 

regard  me,  I  pray — 
Who  for  my  father  alone  your  compassion 
Entreat — yes,  entreat — not  with  eyes  that  are  blind 
In  your  eyes  gazing  full — standing  here  to  be  seen. 
As  your  daughters  might  plead  with  you — all,  that  this 
man 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  77 

May  get  pity.     Nay,  for  as  gods  we  wretched 

Lean  on  you,  helpless  beside.     But  oh,  grant  us  the 

boon,  ye  who  now  bid  despair; 
Yea,  by  your  children,  your  own,  whom  ye  love —        250 
All  that  moves,  that  constrains  you — the  gods  whom  ye 

fear — 
For  in  vain  shall  ye  look  for  such  strength  in  mortality, 
Strong,  if  a  god  shall  lead — 
Strong  to  be  free,  and  escape  his  leading. 

Chor.  Daughter  of  Oedipus,  of  this  be  sure — 
We  pity  your  misfortunes,  thine  and  his  : 
But,  reverencing  the  gods,  we  may  not  speak 
Another  word  than  that  which  we  have  spoken. 

Oed.  Of  praise  then,  and  of  honourable  report 
What  profit,  squandered  on  the  barren  air  ? 
Have  I  not  heard,  your  Athens  fears  the  gods  260 

Indeed — and  strangers,  outcast  and  distressed, 
That  she  alone  can  save,  alone  protect  ? 
But  now  to  me  what  succour  ?  raised  by  you, 
A  suppliant,  from  these  rocks,  by  you  cast  forth, 
Because  my  name  affrights  you  ;  since  myself 
Ye  do  not  fear — no,  nor  my  deeds — deeds  truly 
To  suffering  than  to  doing  more  akin. 
Might  I  recount  my  parents'  part  in  them — 
Theirs,  for  whose  sake  ye  shun  me.     This  I  know 
Full  surely.     Nay,  but  where's  the  guilt  i'  the  grain      270 
Of  me,  who  struck  the  striker  ?  when,  had  I  known 


78  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

What  deed  I  did,  not  even  this  were  guilt — 

But  I  not  knowing  rushed  blindfold  on  my  doom. 

Not  so  did  they  ;  aware,  they  sought  my  life. 

Now  therefore  by  the  gods  I  charge  you,  friends, 

Even  as  ye  lifted  me,  so  succour  me ; 

And,  having  withal  such  reverence  of  the  gods, 

Set  not  your  gods  at  nought ;  but  rather  think 

Their  eyes  behold  on  earth  the  righteous  man, 

And  of  the  impious  make  account,  nor  ever  280 

Was  mortal  yet  unholy,  and  escaped. 

With  whom  at  one,  stoop  to  no  impious  deed, 

Nor  hide  the  lights  of  Athens,  their  beloved. 

Your  faith  is  plighted  to  the  suppliant  here : 

Defend  me  and  deliver — scorn  me  not. 

Because  uncomely  ye  behold  my  form. 

A  holy  man,  reverent,  I  come  ;  and  bring 

Advantage  to  this  people.     When  he  comes 

Whose  will  is  law,  lord  of  the  land,  your  king, 

Ye  shall  hear  all  and  understand ;  but  now,  290 

Until  he  come,  forbear,  and  keep  your  faith. 

Chor.  Much  need,  old  man,  have  we  to  pause  and 
fear, 
Such  thoughts  hast  thou  suggested,  shaped  in  words 
Of  no  light  import.     Therefore  be  it  so  ; 
The  rulers  of  the  land — they  shall  decide. 

Oed.  But  where,  O  strangers,  is  your  lord  the  king  ? 

Chor.  From  the  city  of  his  fathers,  where  he  dwells^ 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  79 

One  who  sent  me,  is  gone  to  seek  and  send  him. 

Oed.  Think  ye  that  for  a  blind  man  he  will  care, 
And  so  regard  me,  hither  himself  to  come  ?  300 

Chor.  Doubt  not  of  that,  when  he  shall  hear  thy  name. 

Oed.  But  who  will  go  and  bear  him  this  report  ? 

Chor.  'Tis  far  to  go  :  but  rumour  in  the  air 
Flies  thick,  the  talk  of  travellers  ;  hearing  which 
Fear  not  but  he  will  come.     Much  noised,  thy  name. 
Old  man,  all  ears  hath  entered :  roused  by  that 
From  sloth,  from  slumber,  quickly  will  he  haste. 

Oed.  So  coming,  may  he  bless  the  state  he  rules. 
And  me.     Kind  to  themselves  are  all  good  men.  309 

Ant.  Zeus,  what  is  this  ?     What  shall  I  say  or  think  ? 

Oed.  What  see  you,  child,  Antigone  ? 

Ant  I  see 

Come  riding  on  a  swift  Aetnaean  colt 
Toward  us  a  maiden,  but  her  face  is  hid 
By  a  Thessalian  hat  that  shades  the  sun. 
What  shall  I  say  ? 

Is  it,  or  is  it  not  ?     Am  I  deceived  ? 
It  is,  and  is  not,  and  I  know  not  which. 
Alas,  I  cannot  tell. 

Yes,  it  is  she.     See  with  what  joyful  eyes 
\^^  She  greets  me,  coming.       Now  no  doubt,  it  is  320 

^■Ismene's  self,  no  other,  plain  to  see. 
^H      Oed.  How  say  you,  daughter? 
^B     Ant.  That  I  see  thy  child, 


8o  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

My  sister  :  soon  her  voice  shall  make  her  known. 

Ism.  O  father  and  O  sister,  names  to  me 
Linked  in  a  double  dearness — hardly  found, 
How  hardly  now  I  see  you  for  my  grief! 

Oed.  Child,  art  thou  come  ? 

Ism.  Father,  thy  woful  plight ! 

Oed.  My  child,  come  back  ? 

Ism.  Come,  many  a  weary  mile. 

Oed.  Daughter,  give  me  thy  hand. 

Ism.  A  hand  to  each. 

Oed.  O  children — sisters  ! 

Ism.  O  unhappy  life !  330 

Oed.  Mine,  and  this  maid's  ? 

Ism.  Ill-fated,  mine  no  less. 

Oed.  Whkt  brings  thee,  child  ? 

Ism.  Father,  my  care  of  thee. 

Oed.  To  see  me  ? 

Ism.  Tidings,  too,  myself  to  bear — 

With  the  one  faithful  servant  that  I  have. 

Oed.  Young  are  thy  brothers :   where  at  need  were 
they? 

Ism.  They  work  their  work.     A  sorry  tale  to  tell ! 

Oed.  O  altogether,  in  the  hearts  of  them, 
Conformed  to  ways  of  Egypt,  and  in  Ufe  ! 
For  there  all  day  the  men  within  the  house 
Sit  at  the  loom,  and  let  their  womankind  340 

Outside  slave  ever  for  the  daily  bread. 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  8 1 

So,  daughters,  ye — while  they  to  whom  belonged 

These  toils,  girl-like,  shut  doors  and  keep  the  house — 

Ye  in  their  stead  with  toil  are  ministrant 

To  my  affliction.     One,  from  when  she  grew 

Past  childhood's  nursing  to  a  woman's  strength, 

Hath  ever  shared  my  wandering  grievous  life, 

Prop  of  my  aged  steps,  full  oft  astray 

Barefoot  and  fasting  in  wild  woodland  ways, 

And  oft  with  rain,  and  oft  with  fierce  noon-heat,       350 

Poor  soul,  distressed,  yet  for  the  life  at  home 

Repines  not,  might  but  I  have  bread  to  eat. 

And  thou,  my  daughter,  barest  to  me  before, 

Asking  no  Theban  leave,  all  that  the  god 

Foretold  concerning  me ; — and  staunch  and  true 

Wast  thou  in  the  peril,  when  they  banished  me  : — 

And  now  again  what  tidings  hast  thou  brought, 

Ismene  ?     What  occasion  sped  thee  hither  ? 

Since  not  for  nought  thou  comest,  that  I  know 

Full  well,  but  bringing  some  new  fear  to  me.  360 

Ism.  Father,  my  toil  and  trouble  by  the  way, 
Seeking  thy  place  of  sojourn  and  abode, 
Let  pass  unsaid.     Why  should  I  twice  be  grieved. 
Recounting  now  all  that  I  suffered  then  ? 
What  storm  about  thy  two  unhappy  sons 
Now  gathers — I  am  come  to  tell  thee  this. 
For  at  the  first  rivals  they  were,  to  cede 
The  throne  to  Creon,  nor  pollute  the  state, 


82  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Fearing  the  memories  of  the  ancient  curse, 

About  thy  miserable  house  that  clung  :  370 

But  then  some  god  and  their  infatuate  hearts 

Pricked  them,  to  seize,  O  fools  thrice  miserable. 

Rivals  in  guilt,  the  kingdom  and  the  crown. 

And  now  thy  younger  son,  the  headstrong  boy, 

The  elder,  Polyneices,  of  his  throne 

Hath  dispossessed  and  banished  from  the  land. 

And  rumour  now  is  rife  that  he  is  gone. 

Exiled,  to  Argos  in  the  vale,  and  finds 

Alliance  there  in  marriage,  gathers  head; 

And  boasts  that  Argos  in  the  fall  of  Thebes  380 

Shall  triumph  straight,  or  lift  her  to  the  skies. 

No  tale  of  idle  words,  father,  is  this, 

But  dreadful  fact ;  nor  can  I  see  the  end. 

When  heaven  will  have  compassion  on  thy  griefs. 

Oed.  Wast  thou  so  fond  indeed,  to  hope  the  gods 
Would  yet  take  thought  for  my  deliverance  ? 

Ism.  Such  hope  the  latest  oracle  inspired. 

Oed.  Yea,  in  what  sort?     What  hath  the  god  fore- 
told ? 

Ism.  That  unto  thee  one  day  the  folk  of  Thebes, 
Living  or  dead,  shall  look,  to  work  their  weal.  390 

Oed.  Who  could  get  good  from  such  an  one  as  I  ? 

Ism.  'Tis  said  that  on  thy  help  depends  their  strength. 

Oed.  Am  I  a  man,  now,  when  my  years  are  spent  ? 

Ism.  The  gods,  who  erst  would  slay,  uplift  thee  now. 


I 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  83 

Oed.  'Tis  ill  uplifting  old,  who  young  fell  down. 

Ism.  Moreover,  know  that  Creon  for  this  cause 
Will  seek  thee — soon,  and  at  no  distant  day. 

Oed.  With  purpose  what  to  do  ?     Explain  thy  speech. 

Ism.  To  make  thee  dwell  not  far  from  Thebes,  within 
Their  power,  without  the  confines  of  the  land.  400 

Oed.   Laid  at  their  gates,  how  can  I  profit  them  ? 

Ism.  They  rue  tl;iy  burial,  if  it  chance  amiss. 

Oed.  Why,  that  were  clear  without  an  oracle. 

Ism.  Therefore  they  fain  would  set  thee  hard  at  hand, 
Not  leave  thee  where  thou'rt  master  of  thyself 

Oed.  What,  will  they  cover  me  with  Theban  dust  ? 

Ism.  Thou  hast  shed  kindred  blood  :  they  may  not 
so. 

Oed.  Masters  of  me,  then,  they  shall  never  be. 

Ism.  Hereof  shall  grow  matter  for  Thebes  to  rue. 

Oed.  In  what  far-off  conjuncture  of  events  ?  410 

Ism.  Of  thy  displeasure,  when  at  thy  tomb  they  stand. 

Oed.  Whence  hast  thou,  daughter,  this  intelligence  ? 

Ism.  So  said  the  envoys  from  the  Delphic  hearth. 

Oed.  Of  me  this  also  hath  the  god  foretold  ? 

Ism.  If  they   speak    true,  who    came    from    him    to 
Thebes. 

Oed.  Hath  either  of  my  sons  heard  this  report  ? 

Ism.  Yea,  both  alike,  and  know  that  this  is  so. 

Oed.  Yet,  knowing  this,  did  they,  unnatural  both, 
Set  sovereignty  before  their  love  of  me  ? 


84  OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 

Ism.  Such  news,  most  grievous  to  mine  ears,  I  bring.  420 
Oed.  But  may  the  gods  of  this  predestined  strife 
Quench  not  the  heat,  and  would  that  it  were  mine 
To  rule  the  issue  of  the  fatal  fray, 
Whereto  they  now  set  hand  and  Hft  the  spear : 
For  neither  should  who  now  is  lord  and  king 
Continue,  neither  he  who  hath  gone  forth 
Return  again — false  sons,  who,  when  their  sire 
From  hearth  and  home  thus  shamefully  was  thrust, 
Forbade  not,  nor  avenged  it,  but  unhoused 
They  let  me  go,  my  exile  heard  proclaimed.  430 

Say  you,  it  was  my  wish — 'twas  fitly  done — 
The  state  then  granted  me  the  boon  I  asked  ? 
I  tell  you,  no  :  that  first,  that  dreadful  day, 
My  heart  so  hot  within  me,  when  most  sweet 
Had  been  to  die  and  to  be  stoned  with  stones, 
No  friend  was  found  to  give  me  my  desire. 
But  then,  when  time  had  mellowed  all  that  grief, 
And  my  remorse  had  erred,  I  knew,  in  wild 
Self-judgment  for  the  sins  that  I  had  sinned — 
Why,  then  it  pleased  the  state  to  banish  me,  440 

Too  late,  unwilling  ;  and  the  twain  my  sons, 
Sons  with  the  power,  lacked  yet  the  will,  to  help 
Their  father — whom  a  little  word  had  saved  ; 
Homeless  I  wandered  forth  to  beg  my  bread. 
And  whilst  to  these,  according  to  their  strength. 
Weak  maidens  both,  I  owe  my  wants  supplied. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  85 

This  land's  safe  shelter,  and  their  filial  care, 

Those  sacrificed  their  father  for  a  throne, 

To  wield  the  sceptre  and  usurp  the  realm. 

Friend  and  ally  they  shall  not  find  in  me,  450 

Nor  shall  it  profit  them  to  have  reigned  in  Thebes, 

Full  well  I  know,  hearing  the  prophecies 

This  maiden  brings,  and  pondering  with  myself 

The  things  that  Phoebus  promised  long  ago. 

Now  therefore  let  them  send  to  seek  for  me 

Creon,  and  who  beside  in  Thebes  is  great : 

For  if  it  be  your  pleasure,  O  my  friends. 

With  these  majestic  Guardians  of  the  place, 

To  save  me — for  your  city  ye  shall  win 

A  strong  deliverer,  and  confound  my  foes.  460 

Chor.  Worthy  compassion,  Oedipus,  ye  are, 
Thou  and  thy  daughters ;  but,  to  this  regard 
Since  our  deliverance  to  be  wrought  by  thee 
Is  added,  best  advice  I  have  be  thine. 

Oed.  All  that  thy  friendship  counsels,  I  will  do. 

Chor.  Make  then  atonement  to  the  Powers,  who  first 
Received  thee,  and  whose  grove  thy  foot  profaned. 

Oed.  How  shall    I   make   atonement?      Teach  me, 
friends. 

Chor.  Draw  first  and  bring,  handling  with  holy  hands. 
Sacred  libations  from  the  fountain's  source.  470 

Oed.  The   draught   unmixed  when    I  have   brought, 
what  then  ? 


86  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Chor.  Then  there    are    bowls,   fair-wrought  of  skilful 
hands, 
Whose  edge  and  twin  symmetric  handles  crown.  .  .  . 

Oed.  With  crowns  of  leafage,  or  of  wool,  or  what  ? 

Chor.  Wool  of  an  eanling  lamb  and  newly  dipt. 

Oed.  Good ;  and  thereafter  how  conclude  the  rite  ? 

Chor.  Pour  forth  libations,  fronting  to  the  dawn. 

Oed.  From  the  urns  ye  spake  of,  shall  I  pour  them 
forth  ? 

Chor.  A  threefold  stream  :  filled  to  the  brim,  the  last. 

Oed.  Wherewith  shall  it  be  filled  ?  this  teach  me  too.  48Q 

Chor.  Water  and  honey  ;  but  of  wine  no  drop. 

Oed.  And  when  the  sunless  earth  hath  drunk  of  this  ? 

Chor.  Set  in  it  sprays  of  olive,  three  times  nine, 
From  both  thy  hands,  and  pray  these  prayers  the  while. 

Oed.  Ay,  let  me  hear  the  prayers  :  this  most  imports. 

Chor.  That,  as  we  call  them  gracious,  so  they  will 
Their  suppliant  graciously  receive  and  save — 
Thyself,  or  else  some  other  in  thy  stead. 
Pray,  under  breath,  not  lifting  up  thy  voice ; 
Then  go,  nor  look  behind  thee,     Do  thou  this,  490 

And  boldly  I  will  dare  to  stand  thy  friend ; 
But,  this  undone,  I  am  afraid  for  thee. 

Oed.  Children,  have  ye  heard  these  denizens  of  the 
place  ? 

Ant.  We  heard,  and  wait  thy  bidding  what  to  do. 

Oed.  I  cannot  go,  for  lack  of  strength  indeed 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  87 

And  lack  of  sight — two  evils,  old  and  blind: 

Go,  one  of  you,  and  do  as  they  require. 

This  rite,  methinks,  ten  thousand  should  not  pay 

Better  than  one — one  kindly  heart  and  true. 

But  do  the  thing  with  speed,  and  leave  me  not  500 

Untended:  all  too  weak  my  strength  would  be 

To  walk  alone,  without  some  hand  to  lead. 

Ism.  I  will  perform  the  rite ;  but,  ere  I  go, 
Where  I  must  seek  the  spot,  I  fain  would  learn. 

Chor.  Beyond    this    grove,   O    maiden.      There,    if 
aught 
Thou  needest  more,  dwells  one,  who  will  explain. 

Is7n.  So  to  my  task  :  meanwhile,  Antigone, 
Guard  thou  our  father,  here.     For  parents  done, 
Of  toilsome  service  we  forget  the  toil. 

Chor.    The  ancient  grief  from  its  lair,  O  stranger, 
I  fear  to  arouse,  [Strophe.     510 

But  yet  I  fain  would  hear.  ... 

Oed.  What  wouldst  thou  hear  ? 

Chor.  Of  thine  encounter,  how  it  fell, 
With  sorrow,  pitiful,  past  redress. 

Oed.  Nay,  kind  and  hospitable  men, 
Strip  not  of  silence  this  my  shame. 

Chor.  Nay,  for  rumour  is  rife  and  ceases  not, 
I  would  hear  from  thy  lips  the  tale  aright. 

Oed.  Ah,  woe  is  me  ! 

Chor.  Ah,  yet  be  content,  I  pray  thee. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


Oed.  Alas,  alas  ! 

Chor.  Grant  my  desire,  as  I  grant  thee  thine.  520 

Oed.  Suffering  was  mine  to  endure,  O  strangers,  God 
knoweth,  was  mine,  \Antistrophe. 

Doing  I  knew  not  what. 

Chor.  But  tell  us  how  ? 

Oed.  Bound  by  the  state,  all  unaware, 
With  cursbd  nuptials,  a  fatal  bride. 

Chor.  And  was  the  couch,  men  call  (O  name 
Of  shame)  thy  mother's,  filled  by  thee  ? 

Oed.  Every  word,  O  my  friends,  is  sharp  like  death 
In  mine  ears  :  but  in  truth  these  are  my  own.  ...      530 

Chor.  What  wilt  thou  say  ? 

Oed,  Two  daughters,  two  curses  rather.  .  .  . 

Chor.  What  do  I  hear  ? 

Oed.  Sprung  from  the  womb  that  conceived  their  sire. 

[Strophe  2. 

Chor.  What,  these  thy  children  were  indeed  .  .  .  ? 

Oed.  Yea,  were  own  sisters  of  their  sire. 

Chor.  Alas! 

Oed.  Alas  indeed — 

Dire  visitation  of  unmeasured  ills  ! 

Chor.  Thou  hast  suffered.  ... 

Oed.  What  I  have  suffered,  how  shall  I  forget  ? 

Chor.  Thou  hast  wrought.  .  .  . 

Oed.  Nay,  nothing  wrought. 

Chor.  What  then  ? 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  89 

Oed.  Say  rather,  I  received  from  Thebes 
A  gift — O  never  to  receive 

Such  prize  as  this,  to  break  my  heart,  540 

I  helped  her  at  her  need  !  \Antistrophe  2. 

Chor.  Yet  tell  me — hapless,  didst  thou  slay.  .  .  . 

Oed.  What  now  ?  what  is  it  thou  wouldst  learn  ? 

Chor.  Thy  sire  ? 

Oed.  Ah,  there  again — 

A  second  thrust  !  distress  upon  distress. 

Chor.  Thy  father  ! 

Oed.  I  slew  my  father ;  yet  was  not  the  deed  .   .  . 

Chor.  O  speak  ! 

Oed.  Without  excuse. 

Chor.  How  then  ? 

Oed.  Nay,  ye  shall  hear :  for  caught,  surprised, 
I  struck,  I  dealt  that  fatal  blow : 
The  law  acquits  me  of  the  guilt — 
I  struck  I  knew  not  whom. 

Chor.  Lo  where  the  son  of  Aegeus,  at  thy  call. 
Obedient  to  the  summons,  hither  comes.  55° 

Thes.  Hearing  from  many  in  the  former  time 
That  violence  done  upon  thy  bleeding  eyes, 
I  know  thee,  son  of  Laius  :  and  my  knowledge 
Signs  I  have  gathered  by  the  way  confirm. 
For  both  thy  garb  and  that  disfeatured  face 
Proclaim  thee  who  thou  art :  and  pitying  thee, 
Unhappy  Oedipus,  I  fain  would  ask 


90  OEDI>US  AT  COLONUS. 

With  what  petition  to  the  state  and  me 

Thou  comest — thou  and  this  thy  sad  companion. 

Answer  me  :  thou  hadst  need  to  tell  a  case  560 

Dreadful  indeed,  whence  I  should  stand  aloof, 

Knowing  that  I  an  alien  passed  my  youth, 

As  thou ;  and,  no  man  more,  in  alien  lands 

Endured  the  frequent  peril  of  my  life  : 

Now  therefore  from  a  stranger,  as  thou  art, 

I  cannot  turn  aside,  refusing  help. 

I  also  am  a  man ;  and  may  not  count, 

No  more  than  thou,  to-morrow  for  my  own. 

Oed.  Theseus,  thy  courtesy  asks  brief  response, 
Of  tedious  speech  dispensing  me  the  need.  570 

For,  who  I  am,  already  thou  hast  said. 
Son  of  what  sire,  citizen  of  what  land, 
Nor  more  remains  save  only  that,  wherein 
I  need  thy  help,  I  say,  and  make  an  end. 

Thes.  This  and  no  more  it  is,  I  wait  to  hear. 

Oed.  I  come  to  offer  thee  this  wretched  body, — 
No  goodly  gift  indeed  to  outward  view. 
But  more  than  beauty  is  the  gain  it  brings. 

Thes.  What  manner  of  gain  imports  this  vaunted  gift  ? 

Oed.  Hereafter  shalt  thou  know,  but  hardly  now.      580 

Thes.  But  when  shall  be  disclosed  the  benefit  ? 

Oed.  When  I  am  dead,  and  thou  hast  buried  me. 

Thes.  Life's  latest  boon  thou  cravest  :  all  between 
Thou  either  hast  forgotten  or  despised. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  91 

Oed.  All  other  boons  to  me  are  summed  in  this. 

Thes.  In  little  room  the  favour  is  contained. 

Oed.   Look  to  it  well ;  not  small  shall  be  the  peril. 

Thes.  By  reason  of  thy  children,  or  from  whom  ? 

Oed.  They  would  compel  me — to  convey  me  thither. 

Thes.  Consent  then,  or  thine  exile  is  thy  fault.  590 

Oed.  When  I  myself  consented,  they  forbade. 

Thes.  O  foolish,  in  misfortune  to  be  proud. 

Oed.  Hear  first  and  then  admonish  :  now,  forbear. 

Thes.  Say  on  :  for  I  will  judge  before  I  speak. 

Oed.  Wrong   heaped    on    wrong,    Theseus,    I    have 
endured. 

Thes.  Of  the  old  affliction  of  thy  birth  thou'lt  speak  ? 

Oed.  Nay,  for  of  that  all  Hellas  tells  the  tale. 

Thes.  What,  passing  human  sufferance,  hast  thou  suf- 
fered ? 

Oed.  Thus   stands  my  case — by  my  own  flesh   and 
blood 
Exiled  for  ever  from  my  native  land,  600 

A  parricide,  never  to  be  restored. 

Thes.  How  should  they  claim  thee  then,  to  live  apart? 

Oed.  The  warning  of  the  god  enforces  them. 

Thes.  What  peril  hath  the  oracle  foreshown  ? 

Oed.  Defeat  they  needs  must  suffer,  in  this  land. 

Thes.  Whence    should   grow  enmity    'twixt    me    and 
them  ? 

Oed.  O  son  of  Aegeus,  friend,  to  gods  alone 


92  OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 

Comes  neither  age  nor  death  to  make  an  end  : 

All-conquering  time  confounds  all  else  that  is. 

Strength  of  the  earth  decays,  and  strength  of  man,        6io 

And  faith  grows  faint  and  dies,  and  doubt  is  born ; 

And  the  same  spirit  never  of  friend  and  friend, 

Or  state  with  state,  abides  unchangingly. 

For,  soon  or  late,  comes  there  a  time  to  all, 

When  sweet  grows  bitter,  and  again  is  dear ; 

And,  though  to-day  fair  weather  bodes  no  storm 

'Twixt  Thebes  and  thee,  yet  countless  nights  and  days 

Time  in  his  countless  course  engendereth. 

Wherein  they  shall,  upon  some  trivial  cause, 

Fling  to  the  winds  of  war  this  plighted  peace,  620 

Even  there,  above  my  grave,  where  laid  on  sleep 

My  clay,  death-cold,  shall  drink  their  warm  life-blood — 

If  Zeus  be  Zeus,  and  Phoebus  still  his  prophet.  1 

But,  for  I  shrink  fate's  secrets  to  disclose, 

Here  let  me  end  where  I  began ;  keep  thou 

Thy  faith,  thou  shalt  not  say  that  in  this  place 

To  Oedipus  thou  gavest  room  to  dwell 

For  nought,  unless  the  gods  will  play  me  false. 

Chor.  O  king,  these  words  before  and  like  to  these 
We  heard  him  promise  that  this  land  should  prove.      630 

Thes.   How  shall  I  then  reject  the  proffered  love 
Of  such  an  one,  to  whom,  ally  and  friend, 
A  place  beside  our  hearth  belongs  by  right; 
And^now  he  comes,  a  suppliant  to  the  gods, 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  93 

Nor  pays  light  tribute  to  this  land  and  me. 

Such  claims  command  my  reverence,  nor  to  slight 

His  friendship^  but  receive  him  for  our  guest. 

And  if  his  pleasure  be  to  sojourn  here, 

On  thee  I  charge  his  safety ;  if  to  go 

With  me — choose,  Oedipus,  of  this  and  that,  640 

According  to  thy  will :  thy  will  is  mine. 

Oed.  All  men  of  liberal  soul  may  Zeus  reward  ! 

Thes.  What  is  thy  pleasure  ?     Wilt  thou  go  with  me  ? 

Oed.  So,  if  I  might,  I  would.     But  in  this  place — 

Thes.  What  in  this  place  shall  be  ?     I  thwart  thee  not. 

Oed.  Here  they  who  cast  me  forth  shall  feel  my  might. 

Thes.  So  should  thy  presence  prove  great  boon  to  us. 

Oed.  Only  hold  fast  thy  word,  to  make  it  good. 

Thes.  Fear  not  for  me  :  thou  shalt  not  be  betrayed. 

Oed.  I  will  not  bind  thine  honour  with  an  oath.        650 

TJus.  It  should  not  serve  thee  better  than  my  word. 

Oed.  What  wilt  thou  do  ? 

Thes.  What  fear  disquiets  thee  ? 

Oed.  Men  will  come  hither.  .  .  . 

Thes.  Trust  our  friends  for  that. 

Oed.  Beware  lest  leaving  me.  .  .  . 

Thes.  I  know  my  part. 

Oed.  My  fears  are  urgent.  .  .  . 

Thes.  Fear  my  heart  knows  none. 

Oed.  Thou  know'st  not  how  they  threaten. 

Thes.  But  I  know 


94  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

No  man  shall  drag  thee  hence  in  my  despite. 
Oh  many  threats  full  many  a  braggart  word 
Have  hotly  threatened — but  the  passion  cools, 
And  reason  reigns,  the  bubble  threats  are  gone  !       660 
And  they,  however  bold  to  speak  great  words, 
Shall  find,  I  know,  or  ere  they  steal  thee  hence, 
Wide  seas  and  boisterous  are  first  to  cross. 
Enough — if  Phoebus  sent  thee,  though  my  will 
Were  not  to  help,  small  need  thou  hast  to  fear ; 
But  now  I  know,  ev'n  though  I  be  not  nigh, 
My  name  shall  guard  thee,  safe  from  all  misuse. 
Chor.  To  the  land  of  the  steed,  O  stranger, 

[Strophe  i. 
To  the  goodliest  homes  upon  earth  thou  comest — 
White-cliffed  Colonus,  this,  670 

Loud  with  the  melody  piercing  sweet 
Of  nightingales  that  most  delight 
Its  deep  green  glades  to  haunt — 
Lovers  old  of  the  ivy  sheen 
And  the  myriad-berried  thick-leaved  bower 
Of  the  grove  of  the  god,  no  foot  profanes. 
Sunproof,  nor  vexed  by  wind, 
Whatever  storms  may  blow ; 
Where  Dionysus,  wandering  still,  enrapt. 
Waits  on  the  heavenly  maids,  his  nurses  once.  680 

And  the  clustering  fair  narcissus  \Aniistrophe  i. 

Eve  by  eve  out  of  heaven  the  fresh  dew  drinketh — 


I 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  95 

Meet  for  the  mighty  brows, 

Erst  at  Eleusis  its  florets  graced — 

And  bright  the  crocus  springs  Hke  gold : 

Nor  fail  the  sleepless  founts, 

Whence,  Cephisus,  thy  streams  are  fed; 

But  they  flow,  and  the  quick-conceiving  plains 

Of  the  bountiful-bosomed  earth  are  glad, 

Undwindling,  day  by  day,  690 

Of  thine  untainted  shower  : 

Nor  hath  such  haunt  displeased  the  Muses'  choir, 

Nor  Aphrodite  of  the  golden  rein. 

A  marvel  now,  [Strophe  2. 

Of  Asian  soil  I  have  not  heard. 

Nor  that  its  like  in  the  great  Dorian  home, 

Island  of  Pelops,  ever  sprang — 

A  tree  grows  here,  self-sown,  inviolate — 

A  tree,  the  terror  of  all  hostile  spears. 

And  o'er  the  land  its  boughs  are  spread —  700 

That  grey-leaved  olive's  parent-shade. 

Which  never  chieftain,  young  or  old, 

Although  he  smite,  shall  bring  to  nought: 

So  guards  it  Morian  Zeus  with  sleepless  watch. 

And  the  grey-eyed  Athene  loves  it  well. 

Another  praise  \Antistrophe  2. 

Of  this  our  mother  and  our  home. 

Boon  of  the  mighty  god,  her  proudest  boast. 

Best  praise  of  all,  I  have  to  sing —  7" 


96  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Land  of  fair  steeds,  fair  foals,  and  fairest  sea. 

For,  son  of  Cronos,  lord  Poseidon,  thou 

Didst  at  such  height  of  boasting  set 

Our  streets  for  which  was  shaped  by  thee 

The  bit  that  heals  the  horse's  rage  : 

And  the  oar-blade  wings  its  wondrous  way, 

Sped  by  stout  arms,  and  bounding  o'er  the  wave — 

The  Nereids'  hundred  feet  no  faster  flee. 

Ant.  O  land  whose  praises  in  our  ears  are  loud,       720 
These  glowing  words  the  time  hath  come  to  prove. 

Oed.  Daughter,  what  peril? 

Ant.  Peril  near  at  hand  : 

Creon,  not  unattended,  hither  comes.  | 

Oed.  O  good  old  men,  if  now  ye  fail  me  not, 
The  goal  of  my  deliverance  is  in  sight. 

Chor.   Doubt  not  thy  safety.     What  though  I  be  old  ? 
The  strength  at  least  of  Athens  time  hath  spared. 

Cre.  Good  friends  and  noble  citizens  of  this  land, 
I  see  within  the  eyes  of  all  of  you 

Some  fear  of  my  intrusion,  fresh  portrayed ;  730 

But  shun  me  not,  nor  blame  with  hasty  speech  : 
For  hither,  charged  with  words,  not  deeds,  I  come, 
I  who  am  old,  and  know  that  ye  are  strong, 
Ye  and  your  city — in  Hellas  stronger  none. 
But  I,  thus  old  and  weak,  was  sent  to  bring 
This  man  by  mild  persuasion  back  to  Thebes — 
Not  sent  by  one  man's  sending,  but  by  all, 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  97 

All  with  one  voice  insistent,  since  to  me 
To  mourn  a  kinsman's  sufferings  most  belonged. 
Then,  Oedipus,  unhappy  one,  consent,  740 

With  me  return.     All  Thebes  cries  out  for  thee — 
Just  claimants  all — but  none  so  just  as  I, 
My  right,  unless  I  be  of  men  most  base, 
The  right  of  deepest  pity  for  thy  wrongs, 
Beholding  thus  thy  piteous  alien  plight. 
Alien  and  homeless,  and  thy  scanty  fare, 
And  this  one  w^oman's  arm  that  props  thee,  who — 
Alas,  I  had  not  thought  she  could  have  fallen 
Unto  this  depth  of  misery  that  I  see. 
The  hapless  one,  thee  and  thy  poor  blind  eyes  750 

In  beggared  state  still  tending — maiden  yet, 
Who  should  be  wife,  the  first  rough  hand  may  snatch. 
Ah  me,  and  must  I  cast,  on  thee  and  me 
And  all  our  race,  intolerable  shame  ? 
Nay,  for  one  may  not  hide  what  seeks  the  light, 
Hide  thou  the  shame,  O  by  our  fathers'  gods — 
Yea,  hear  me,  Oedipus — consent — return 
To  thine  own  city  and  thy  father's  home, 
With  loving  speech  to  Athens,  as  is  fit. 
But  Thebes,  thine  ancient  nurse,  claims  reverent  deeds.  760 
Oed.  All   shameless,  and  .all   reckless   whence   thou 
weavest 
The  fine  fair  mask  of  honourable  words. 
What  vain  attempt  is  this,  a  second  time 


98  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

To  trap  me — in  the  snare,  would  gall  me  most? 

For  at  the  first,  when,  with  my  proper  griefs 

O'erburthened,  all  my  prayer  was  '  Banish  me,' 

Thy  will  was  not  as  mine  to  grant  me  this ; 

But,  when  I  had  my  fill  of  fierce  remorse, 

And  now  my  comfort  was  to  live  at  home, 

That  was  thy  time  to  thrust  me  from  the  doors —     77° 

This  bond  of  kinship  was  forgotten  then  : 

And  now,  no  sooner  hast  thou  seen  this  state 

And  people  entertain  me  for  a  friend, 

Thou'dst  pluck  me  hence  with  cruel  courtesies.  ' 

Such  love  enforced,  I  count  it  no  more  kind 

Than  if  to  thine  entreaty  one  were  deaf — 

'  He  could  not  give,'  '  he  had  no  mind  to  help  ' — 

But,  when  thy  soul  was  sated  of  thy  wish, 

Lo,  he  should  proffer  then  the  graceless  grace  : 

Were't  not  a  barren  pleasure  thou  shouldst  taste  ?     780 

Yet  are  thy  gifts  to  me  no  more  than  thus. 

Fair  in  the  sound,  but  in  the  substance  nought. 

Nay,  these  shall  hear,  how  I  will  prove  thee  base. 

Thou'lt  bear  me  hence,  not  to  conduct  me  home, 

But  outdoors  pension  me,  that  so  thy  town 

Her  reckoning  with  this  land  may  'scape  unscathed. 

Another  way  I  read  your  fortunes  :  there, 

Lodged  in  your  midst,  my  curse,  for  evermore ; 

And,  for  the  heritage  of  those  my  sons. 

Room  in  my  land  enough,  wherein  to  die.  790 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  99 

Shall  Thebes  not  own  my  wisdom  passing  thine  ? 
Yea,  wiser  far,  by  truer  teachers  taught, 
By  Phoebus,  and  his  father,  Zeus  supreme. 
But  thou  com'st  here  with  counterfeit  fair  speech, 
With  glozing  tongue  sharp-edged ;  but  all  thy  talk 
Shall  win  thee  more  of  mischief  than  of  good. 
Yet,  for  I  know  thou'rt  warned  in  vain,  begone, 

I  And  leave  me  here  to  dwell ;  for  not  amiss, 
Howe'er  amiss,  I  dwell,  contented  so. 
Cre.  Who  loses  in  our  parley,  thinkest  thou  ?  800 

Foils  me  thy  fence,  or  hast  thou  foiled  thyself? 

Oed.  If  neither  me,  nor  these  who  hear  us  both. 
Thou  canst  persuade,  I  have  what  I  desire. 

Cre.  Poor  soul,  grown  grey,  but  none  the  more  grown 
wise, 
That  liv'st  to  blot  with  shame  the  name  of  age  ! 

Oed.  Thy  tongue  bites  shrewdly ;  but  I  have  not  seen 
The  honest  man,  all  themes  made  eloquent. 

Cre.  The  many  words  not  always  cleave  the  mark. 
Oed.   Thine  are  so  few,  and  all  exact  of  aim  ! 
Cre.  Nay,  not  to  one  whose  wit  is  such  as  thine.      810 
Oed.  Begone — for  I  will  speak  for   these — nor  here 
With  prowling  siege  beset  my  destined  home. 

Cre.  Judge  these  'twixt  thee  and  me  :  but  for  the  words 
Thou  answerest  thy  friends  with,  when  thou'rt  ta'en — 
Oed.  Who  takes  me,  and  defies  such  friends  as  these  ? 
Cre.  Nay,  short  of  this,  I  shall  afflict  thy  soul. 


loo  OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS. 

Oed.  'Tis  threatened  well :  but  where's  the  deed  to 
match  ? 

Cre.  Of  thy  two  daughters  one's  my  prisoner, 
Packed  hence  already  :  and  this  one  follows  her. 

Oed.  O  heaven  ! 

Cre.  Louder  thou'lt  call  on  heaven  soon.  820 

Oed.  Thou  hast  my  child  ? 

Cre.  And  this  child  soon  shall  have. 

Oed.  O  friends,  what  will  ye  ?     Now  forsake  me  not, 
But  drive  this  impious  fellow  from  the  land. 

Chor.  Sirrah,  with  haste  depart :  unrighteous  deeds 
Thou  both  hast  done  before,  and  now  wouldst  do. 

Cre.  Good  now,  bestir ;  if  she  will  go,  'tis  well — 
If  not,  unwilling  hence  she  must  be  borne. 
-'  Ant.  Ah,  wretched,  whither  shall  I  flee  ?  what  help 
Seek,  or  of  gods  or  men  ? 

Chor.  What  wouldst  thou,  sirrah  ? 

Cre.  She  is  my  own  :  this  man  I  shall  not  touch.     830 

Oed.  O  for  the  king  to  help  ! 

Chor.  The  deed's  unjust. 

Cre.  'Tis  just. 

Chor.  How  just  ? 

Cre.  I  carry  hence  my  own. 

Oed.  Great  city,  help  ! 

Chor.  What  wilt  thou  ?     Release  her. 
Or  prove  thy  strength  with  us. 

Cre.  Stand  back  there. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  loi 

Chor.  But  first  then  relinquish  thy  purpose. 

Cre.  'Tis  war  with  Thebes,  if  ye  lay  hands  on  me. 

Oed.  Is  it  not  come  to  pass  as  I  foretold  ? 

Chor.  Unhand  the  maiden — quick  ! 

Cre.  Command  thy  slaves. 

Chor.  Loose  her,  I  say. 

Cre.  I  say,  she  must  along.        840 

Chor.  What  ho,  a  rescue  !     Neighbours,  help  ! 
My  city  is  despoiled,  is  robbed. 
Friends,  to  the  rescue  haste. 

Ant.  O  friends,  I  am  too  weak ;  they  drag  me  hence. 

Oed.  Where  art  thou,  daughter  ? 

Ant.  Torn  from  thee  away. 

Oed.  Reach  hither,  child,  thy  hands. 

Ant.  My  hands  are  fast. 

Cre.  Away  with  her  ! 

Oed.  O  miserable  me  ! 

Cre.  Good,  so  this  pair  of  crutches  shall  not  prop 
Thy  steps  again  :  but  since  thou  hast  a  mind 
To  overbear  thy  country  and  thy  friends  850 

(Whose  bidding,  though  a  prince,  I  have  performed), 
Why,  have  thy  way.     So  shalt  thou  know,  too  late. 
That  to  thyself  no  friend's  part  hast  thou  played, 
Now,  or  before,  self-willed  in  friends'  despite, 
Slave  still  of  passion,  that  hath  wrecked  thy  life. 

Chor.  Sirrah,  stand  there. 

Cre.  Lay  not  thine  hands  on  me. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


Chor.  Give  back  thy  captives,  else  thou  shalt  not  go. 

Cre.  Be  warned,    or   Thebes   shall   wrest   a   costlier 
prize  : 
For  not  these  women  only  will  I  seize. 

Chor.  Whither  wilt  thou  turn  ? 

Cre.  I  will  bear  hence  this  man.     860 

Chor.  Bold  words  are  these. 

Cre.  No  longer  words,  but  deeds — 

Unless  your  king  himself  shall  hinder  me. 

Oed.  O  shameless  voice  !  wilt  thou  lay  hands  on  me  ? 

Cre.  Hold  thou  thy  peace. 

Oed.  Ye  guardian  Powers  o'  the  place. 

Yet  one  prayer  more  before  the  silence  falls  ! 
O  thou  most  base,  who,  when  my  eyes  were  out. 
These  poor  remains  of  sight  hast  plucked  away — 
May  Helios  hear  me,  who  from  heaven  sees  all — 
Hear  and  reward  thee,  thee  and  all  thy  race. 
With  such  old  age  as  mine,  afflicted  so.  870 

Cre.  People  of  this  land,  see  ye  how  I  am  used  ? 

Oed.  They  see  us  both,  and  seeing  note  that  I 
Thy  violent  deeds  have  but  repaid  with  words. 

Cre.  My  rage  I'll  curb  no  more  :  though  I'm  alone 
And  slow  with  age,  I'll  bear  thee  hence  by  force. 

Oed.  O  piteous  plight ! 

Chor.  Bold  art  thou,  O  stranger, 
If  this  thou  think'st  to  do. 

Cre.  I'll  do  it. 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  103 

Chor.  This  city  I'll  hold  then  no  city. 

Cre.  In  the  just  cause  the  small  o'erthrows  the  great. 

Oed.  Hear  ye  what  words  he  speaks  ? 

Chor.  But  make  them  good 

Zeus  knows  he  shall  not.  880 

Cre.  Zeus  may  know,  not  thou. 

Chor.  Insolence ! 

Cre.  Insolence  that  ye  must  brook. 

Chor.  O  rulers  of  the  land,  and  all 
Ye  people,  haste,  O  haste  to  help — 
Ere  these  the  frontier  pass. 

Thes.  Say  what  mean  ye  by  this  clamour  ?  what's  the 
matter  ?  what  the  fear. 
Called  me  from    the    smoking   altars   of  the   sea-god's 

temple  there, 
Whom  Colonus  hails   her  patron  ?     Speak,  and  let  me 

know  the  truth, 
What's  the  cause  impelled  me  hither,  faster  than  my  feet 
desired.  890 

Oed.  O  friend,  for  by  thy  voice  I  know  thee  now, 
This  man,  this  hour,  hath  done  me  foul  despite. 

Thes.  How  art  thou  wronged  ?     Who  hath  molested 
thee? 

Oed.  This  Creon,  whom  thou  seest,  hath  torn  from  me 
My  daughters  both,  the  two  that  were  my  all. 

Thes.  What  sayest  thou  ? 

Oed.  I  say  what  I  have  suffered. 


I04  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Thes.   Let  some  one  of  my  servants  haste  and  go 
To  yonder  altars,  and  compel  the  folk, 
Footmen  and  horsemen  all,  with  loosened  rein 
To  leave  the  sacrifice  and  post  to  where,  900 

Threading  the  hills,  the  two  main  roads  converge. 
Before  the  captives  pass,  and  I  become 
Food  for  this  stranger's  mirth,  despoiled  by  force. 
Go,  do  my  bidding  quick.     But  for  this  man, 
Came  I  in  wrath  to  meet  him,  as  I  might. 
He  had  not  gone  out  of  my  hand  unscathed. 
But  now,  the  laws  that  he  himself  brought  hither. 
These  and  no  other  will  I  mete  to  him. 
Out  of  this  land  thou  shalt  not  budge,  until 
Brought  back  these  maidens  stand  before  my  face.        91° 
For  thou  hast  dealt  unworthily  of  me, 
And  hast  disgraced  thy  people  and  thy  birth. 
Who,  coming  to  a  land  where  men  are  just, 
And  law  determines  every  cause,  didst  spurn 
With  boisterous  foot  my  town's  authority. 
To  plunder  at  thy  pleasure  and  to  snatch ; 
Deeming  or  void  of  men  or  manned  with  slaves 
This  city,  and  me  its  king  a  thing  of  nought. 
Not  by  thy  Theban  nurture  art  thou  base  : 
Thebes  is  no  mother  of  unrighteous  sons,  920 

Nor  think  that  she  would  praise  thee,  did  she  know, 
Me  thou  hadst  spoiled  and  spoiled  the  gods,  nor  held 
From  men  distressed,  their  suppliants,  thy  hand. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  105 

And  I,  had  I  set  foot  within  thy  state, 

Not  though  my  claim  were  of  all  claims  most  just, 

Had  dared,  without  the  king,  or  who  was  lord, 

To  wrest  or  plunder,  but  had  better  known 

•What  mien  became  a  stranger  in  the  land. 

I  But  thou  hast  shamed,  that  better  things  deserved. 

Thine  own  good  city — and,  in  vain  grown  old,  930 

Fulness  of  years  hath  left  thee  void  of  sense. 

Now  then  I  say,  that  which  I  said  before, 

Let  some  one  bring  me  quick  the  maidens  here. 

Unless  within  our  borders  thou  wouldst  dwell 

By  force,  not  choice,  an  alien ;  thou  art  warned — 

And,  what  my  tongue  affirms,  my  mind  intends. 

Chor.  Seest  thou  thy  plight,  O  stranger  ?  by  thy  birth 
Deemed  honest,  but  thy  deeds  have  proved  thee  base. 

Cre.  Not  counting  void  of  valour  or  of  wit 
Thy  city,  son  of  Aegeus,  as  thou  sayest,  940 

I  did  this  deed,  but  deeming  not  its  folk 
Such  passion  for  my  kinswomen  would  feel, 
To  undertake  for  them  in  my  despite. 
And  that  a  parricide,  a  man  unclean 
They'd  not  receive,  I  knew,  nor  one  to  whom 
Of  son  and  mother  clave  the  guilty  love. 
For  in  their  land,  I  knew,  such  wisdom  sat, 
Throned  on  their  Ares'  hill,  that  not  allows 
This  town  to  harbour  wanderers  such  as  this : 
Whom  trusting,  I  was  bold  to  snatch  this  prey.  950 


io6  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Yet  had  I  spared  to  do  it,  but  he  poured 

On  me  and  all  my  race  a  bitter  curse, 

So  stung  me,  that  I  dared  requite  him  thus. 

For  anger  knows  not  other  old  age,  except 

To  die:  the  dead,  not  any  pain  can  touch. 

Now  therefore  work  thy  will ;  for,  though  my  cause 

Be  just,  yet  stand  I  here  forlorn  of  friends, 

Of  small  account ;  but,  howsoever  small, 

I'll  do  my  part  to  give  thee  deeds  for  deeds. 

Oed.  O  bold  and  unabashed,  where  thinkest  thou    960 
Thine  insults  fall,  on  my  grey  hairs  or  thine  ? 
Who  pratest  thus  of  incest  and  of  blood. 
All  the  dark  tale  of  horror  that  I  bore, 
UnwilHng :  so  the  gods  ordained,  belike 
Upon  my  race  wreaking  some  ancient  grudge — 
Since,  of  my  own,  reproach  me  if  thou  canst 
With  any  sin,  whereof  I  paid  the  price 
In  sinning  thus  against  myself  and  mine. 
For  tell  me,  if  an  oracle  from  heaven 
Foretold  my  father's  death,  slain  by  his  son,  970 

How  justly  then  is  this  reproach  to  me, 
Whom  neither  mother  had  conceived,  nor  sire 
Begotten,  shaped  not  yet  within  the  womb  ? 
And  if,  so  born  to  sorrow  as  I  was, 
I  met  my  father — met,  and  struck  and  slew. 
Discerning  not  the  person  nor  the  deed. 
How  shalt  thou  fairly  blame  the  blindfold  blow  ? 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COLON  US.  107 

But  of  my  mother,  sister  to  thee,  rash  man, 

Hast  thou  no  shame  to  force  me  to  avouch, 

As  needs  I  must,  that  union  ?  how  refrain,  980 

When  thine  unhallowed  speech  hath  thus  transgressed  ? 

My  mother — yes,  my  mother — woe  is  me. 

Who  bare  me,  and,  not  knowing  who  knew  not  her. 

To  me  bare  children — to  herself  disgrace. 

lut  this  one  thing  I  know,  thy  will  consents 

['o  slander  her  and  me,  but  never  mine 

'o  wed  her — nay,  nor  now  to  speak  these  things. 

lut  neither  in  this  marriage  shall  men  call 

[e  guilty — nor  that  murder  of  my  sire, 
lerewith  thy  bitter  taunts  upbraid  me  still.  99° 

For  answer  this  one  question  that  I  ask. 
Thou'rt  just :  stood  one  before  thee,  here  and  now. 
To  slay  thee,  say,  wouldst  ask  the  murderer 
'Art  thou  my  father?'  or  reckon  with  him  straight? 
I  think,  as  life  is  dear  to  thee,  thou'dst  pay 
The  aggressor  back,  nor  reason  of  the  right. 
Yet  into  such  an  evil  strait  came  I, 
Driven  by  the  gods;  nor  would  my  father's  spirit. 
Come  back  to  life,  methinks,  gainsay  me  this. 
Unjust  thou  art — thou  who  hast  deemed  it  well,  1000 

Things  named  and  nameless,  all  to  blurt  alike, 
Before  these  men  heaping  such  taunts  on  me. 
Well,  too,  to  flatter  with  thy  tongue  the  king. 
And  this  well-settled  order  of  the  state; 


io8  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

But  thou  hast  forgotten  of  many  praises  one, 

That,  of  all  lands  that  know  to  serve  the  gods 

With  holy  worship,  none  with  this  may  vie. 

Whence  thou  hast  stolen — old,  and  a  suppliant, 

Laid  hands  on  me,  and  borne  my  daughters  hence. 

Therefore,  importunate,  with  instant  prayer,  loio 

I  do  entreat  these  goddesses  to  come 

My  friends  and  my  deliverers,  that  thou 

May'st  learn  what  manner  of  men  defend  this  town. 

Chor.  The  man  is  innocent,  O  king  :  consumed 
By  misery — worthier  therefore  of  our  help. 

Thes.  Enough  of  words  :  the  robbers  with  their  prey 
Are  fleet — and  we,  the  plundered,  stand  amazed. 

Cre.  What  is  thy  will  ?  how  serve  the  sightless  one  ? 

Thes.  Lead  thou  the  way ;  I'll  keep  thee  company ; 
The  road  lies  there — so,  if  hard  by  thou  hast  1020 

These  children  hid,  thou  shalt  thyself  produce  them; 
But,  if  their  captors  flee,  we  may  sit  still : 
There  are  who  chase  them — whom,  out  of  this  land. 
They  shall  not  boast  to  heaven  they  have  escaped. 
Lead,  then  :  and  know  that  grappling  thou  art  grappled, 
In  thine  own  pit  by  good  hap  fallen  :  as  when 
Kept  fraud  possession  of  its  ill-got  gains  ? 
Nor  put  thy  trust  in  friends  :  for  surely  thou 
Not  friendless  nor  unfurnished  hast  put  on 
This  brazen  front,  that  would  outface  us  here ;  1030 

But,  some  one  trusting,  didst  attempt  this  deed. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  109 

This  must  be  looked  to,  nor  through  my  neglect 
One  man  prove  stronger  than  a  cityful. 
Doth  this  move  thee,  or  seems  it  all  as  vain 
Now,  'twixt  my  lips,  as  when  the  plot  was  hatched  ? 

tCre.  Thee  here  I  shall  not  blame,  say  what  thou  wilt : 
t  home,  we  too  shall  know  what  things  to  do. 
Thes.  Threaten,  but  go  :  and,  Oedipus,  remain 
ntroubled  here,  trusting  my  word  for  this, 
hat,  if  I  live  so  long,  I  shall  not  rest  1040 

ntil  thy  children  are  thine  own  again. 
Oed.  My  blessing,  Theseus,  on  thy  noble  mind, 
And  this  so  loyal  care  in  our  behalf. 

Chor.  Oh  might  I  be,  where  soon  [Strophe  i. 

The  foemen's  ranks  at  bay 
Shall  mix  the  brazen  clangour  of  the  fight, 
Or  on  the  Pythian  cliffs, 
Or  by  the  torchlit  strand, 

Where  nurse  those  Powers  august  their  awful  rites 
For  mortal  men,  upon  whose  tongue  1050 

The  ministrant  Eumolpidae 
Have  laid  the  pressure  of  their  golden  key : 
For  there  methinks  shall  Theseus  wake  the  war. 
And  with  the  captive  sister  maidens  twain 
Close,  with  a  shout  of  victory  : 

There  shall  they  turn  and  fight —  1060 

Or  farther  to  the  west  \Antistrophe  i. 

Beyond  the  snowy  peak, 


no 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


Past  Oea's  pastures  fair,  perchance  they  flee, 

Either  on  horses  borne 

Or  racing  chariots  swift. 

But  vain  their  flight :  stout  champions  hath  this  place, 

And  mighty  men  call  Theseus  king. 

For  flashes  every  rein  like  flame, 

And  every  rider  on  his  steed's  stretched  neck 

Flings  loose  the  bridle-gear,  and  gallops  hard — ^  1070 

Knights,  who  the  Virgin-Knight  Athene  serve, 

And  this  land's  patron,  Rhea's  son, 

The  ruler  of  the  sea. 

Are  they  about  it  now,  [^Strophe  2. 

Or  do  they  breathe  before  they  fight  ? 

I  know  not,  but  my  mind 

Presageth  me  that  soon 

The  spoiler  shall  give  back 

The  maiden  sorely  tried,  sorely  by  kinsmen  vexed. 

To-day,  to-day,  some  great  thing  Zeus  shall  do  : 

I  prophesy  the  triumph  of  the  right.  loSo 

Oh  that  I  were  a  dove,  that  I  might  wing  the  wind 

With  pinion  swift  and  strong. 

And  from  some  airy  pinnacle  of  cloud 

Content  mine  eyes  with  gazing  on  the  fray ! 

Zeus,  who  beholdest  all,  \Antistrophe  2. 

Whom  all  in  earth  and  heaven  obey. 

Give  ear  unto  my  prayer. 

That,  with  victorious  might, 


> 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COLON  US.  1 1 1 

The  guardians  of  this  land 

Upon  the  goodly  prize  may  spring,  and  make  an  end — 

And  hear  me,  Pallas,  Athene,  Virgin  dread :  1090 

And  thou,  Apollo,  lover  of  the  chase, 

And  thou,  his  sister,  huntress-maid,  that  folio  west  up 

The  dappled  fleet-foot  stag — 

Oh  hear  me  both,  and  come,  a  double  strength, 

To  help  this  land  and  people  at  their  need. 

0  wanderer,  our  guest,  thou  shalt  not  call 
Thy  watchman  a  false  prophet ;'  for  I  see, 
Escorted  hither,  thy  daughters  near  at  hand. 

Oed.  Oh  where  ?  what  sayest  thou  ? 

Aitt.  O  father  mine, 

1  would  some  god  would  give  thee  sight  to  see  noo 
This  noble  man,  who  hath  brought  us  back  to  thee. 

Oed.  O  child,  are  ye  come  back  ? 

Ajit.  Yea,  for  these  hands 

Of  Theseus  saved  us,  and  his  friendly  troop. 

Oed.  Come  near  and  stand  beside  me,  let  my  arms 
Fold  whom  they  never  thought  to  clasp  again. 

Ant.  Have  thy  desire  :  we  crave  what  we  bestow. 

Oed.  Where  then,  where  are  ye  ? 

Ant.  Close  beside  thee  here. 

Oed.  O  dearest  saplings  from  this  parent  stem! 

Ant.  A  father  loves  his  own,  whate'er  it  be. 

Oed.  Props  I  have  leaned  on. 

Ant,  Luckless  we  and  thou,  mo 


112 


CEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US, 


Oed.  I  hold  ye,  dear  ones ;  nor  were  ill  content 
So  now  to  die,  with  you  beside  me  both. 
So  let  an  arm  of  each  on  either  hand 
Press  close  and  prop  me,  children,  so  that  I 
May  rest  from  wandering,  weary  and  alone. 
And  tell  me  briefly  how  the  deed  was  done  : 
Brief  speech  for  tender  maidens  shall  suffice. 

Ant.  This  man,  O  father,  saved  us  ;  ask  of  him. 
So  briefly  I  shall  speak  and  thou  shalt  hear. 

Oed.  Marvel  not,   friend,   these    dear   ones  lost  and 
found 
Made  me  forget  myself  in  eager  speech.  "20 

Full  well  I  know  that  all  from  thee  proceeds 
This  joy  I  have  to  see  their  face  again. 
For  thou,  no  other  man,  didst  rescue  them. 
May  heaven  all  my  will  perform  for  thee. 
And  for  thy  land ;  since  nowhere  upon  earth, 
Save  only  here,  I  found  god-fearing  hearts, 
And  generous  minds,  and  lips  that  could  not  lie. 
I  know  what  deeds  with  these  poor  thanks  I  pay. 
All  that  I  have's  thy  gift  and  only  thine. 
Reach  hither  thy  hand,  O  king,  that  I  may  touch  it,    1130 
And  kiss  thy  face,  unless  I  am  too  bold. 
Nay,  but  what  words  are  these  ?     Shall  I,  poor  wretch. 
Desire  that  thou  shouldst  touch  a  man,  in  whom 
What  guilty  stain's  not  deep  ingrained  ?     Not  I : 
Nay,  nor  thou  shalt  not.     Only  they  can  bear 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  113 

This  load  with  me,  who  know  it  for  their  own. 
Untouched — I  bid  thee  hail ;  and  be  thou  still 
True  friend  to  me,  as  to  this  hour  thou  art. 

Thes.   Small  marvel,  truly,  if  thy  glad  surprise 
Poured  itself  forth  and  overflowed  in  speech —  1140 

And  first  to  these,  not  heeding  me  the  while. 
Nought's  to  forgive  :  such  slight  is  none  to  me. 
For  not  in  high-flown  speeches  but  in  deeds 
I'd  have  the  splendour  of  my  Hfe  appear. 
Thou  hast  the  proof     Have  I  now  sworn  to  thee 
And  not  performed  ?     For  here  thy  daughters  stand 
Living,  and  all  unscathed  of  all  those  threats. 
And  how  the  fight  was  won,  what  need  that  I 
Should  idly  boast  ?     Some  day  they'll  tell  thee  all. 
But  now  let  thy  conjecture  second  mine,  us© 

What  means  this  rumour,  met  me  by  the  way, 
Soon  told  indeed,  but  worth  thy  pondering. 
There's  nought  so  small,  merits  a  man's  contempt. 

Oed.  What  rumour,  son  of  Aegeus  ?  let  me  hear  : 
I  know  not  yet  whereat  thy  question  aims. 

Thes.  'Tis  said  some  man,  no  countryman  of  thine. 
But  kinsman,  prostrate  in  some  suppliant  wise, 
Hath  clasped  Poseidon's  altar,  where  erewhile 
I  left  the  sacrifice  to  succour  thee. 

Oed.  Yea,  of  what  land?  and  wherefore  suppliant  ?    1160 

Thes.  I  know  not,  save  that,  as  they  say,  brief  speech 
And  nowise  burthensome  he  craves  with  thee. 

H 


1 1 4  OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS. 

Oed.  Yet  suppliant  ?  'tis  no  trifle  that  he  seeks. 

Thes.  He  asks,  they  say,  to  come,  confer  with  thee, 
Then  go,  and  of  his  coming  take  no  harm. 

Oed.  Who  can  he  be  that  sits  and  thus  entreats  ? 

Thes.  Bethink  thee,  hast  thou  at  Argos  any  kin, 
Who  might  desire  this  favour  at  thy  hands  ? 

Oed.  O  good  my  friend,  no  more  ! 

Thes.  What  ails  thee,  say. 

Oed.  Require  it  not. 

Thes.  Require  not  what  ?  explain.    1170 

Oed.  I  know,  for  these  have  told  me,  who  he  is. 

Thes.  Who  can  he  be,  of  me  to  merit  blame  ? 

Oed.  My  son,  O  king,  that  hated  one,  whose  speech 
Of  all  men's  most  would  vex  my  ears  to  hear. 

Thes.  How?  canst   thou   not   hear   and   not   do,    if 
that 
Mislikes  thee  ?     Is  it  so  bitter  a  thing,  to  hear  ? 

Oed.  My  son's  voice,  king,  to  me  sounds  hatefully: 
'Pray  thee,  constrain  me  not  to  yield  this  thing. 

Thes.  Bethink  thee,  doth  not  his  suppliant  state  con- 
strain ? 
Look  thou  forget  not,  but  of  the  god  beware.  1180 

Ant.  My  father,  hear  the  counsel  of  a  child. 
Suffer  this  man,  in  this  that  he  desires, 
Give  to  his  soul,  and  to  the  god,  content  : 
And  yield  to  us,  to  let  our  brother  come. 
He  may  not  pluck  thee  from  thy  steadfast  mind, 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COLONUS.  1 1 5 

Or  force  consent  to  words  unprofitable  : 

What  harm  to  hear  him  speak  ?     Hear  then  and  judge  : 

Let  speech  declare  if  deeds  be  purposed  well. 

Is  he  not  thine — thy  son  ?  whom,  no,  not  even 

Of  all  ill  sons  most  impious  though  he  be,  1190 

May'st  thou,  my  father,  with  ill  deeds  requite. 

Oh  let  him — other  men,  with  thankless  sons. 

And  spirits  hot  as  thine,  are  of  their  mood 

Exorcised  by  the  wisdom  of  a  friend — 

So  thou,  look  from  the  present  to  the  past, 

Think  of  thy  parents  and  the  former  grief, 

And,  pondering  this,  I  know  thou  wilt  confess, 

Anger  that's  evil  hath  an  evil  end ; 

Since  no  slight  argument  herein  is  thine, 

The  lifelong  losing  of  thy  blinded  eyes.  1200 

Yield  thou  to  us.     Insistence  ill  beseems 

Our  just  petition ;  ill  beseems  that  thou. 

Receiving,  knowest  not  how  to  render  good. 

Oed.  A  grievous  pleasure,  child,  ye  wring  from  me — 

Ye  with  your  pleading.     But  be  it  as  ye  will. 

Only,  if  come  he  must,  friend,  have  a  care, 

No  violent  hands  upon  my  life  be  laid. 

Thes.  I  have  no  mind,  old  man,  to  hear  again. 

Once  heard,  thy  terrors.     Braggart  I  am  none  : 

Know  thyself  safe,  if  any  god  saves  me.  1210 

Chor.  Beyond  the  common  lot  who  lusts  to  live,  [Str. 

Nor  sets  a  limit  to  desire. 


1 16  OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS. 

Of  me  no  doubtful  word  shall  win — 

A  fool,  in  love  with  foolishness. 

Since  long  life  hath  in  store  for  him  to  know 

Full  many  things  drawn  nearer  unto  grief, 

And  gone  from  sight  all  pleasant  things  that  were ; 

Till,  fallen  on  overmuch 

Fulfilment  of  desire, 

One  only  friend  he  sees  can  help —  1220 

Friend,  who  shall  come  when  dawns  at  last 

The  day  that  knows  not  bridal  song 

Nor  lyre  nor  dance,  that  fatal  day 

Whose  equal  doom  all  we  abide — 

Shall  come,  kind  Death,  and  make  an  end ! 

Not  to  be  born  is  past  disputing  best :      [Anttstrophe. 

And,  after  this,  his  lot  transcends. 

Who,  seen  on  earth  for  briefest  while, 

Thither  returns  from  whence  he  came. 

For,  with  its  fluttering  follies  all  aswarm,  X230 

Who  needs,  while  youth  abides,  go  far  afield 

To  heap  vexation  ?     What's  the  missing  plague  ? 

Slaughters  are  here,  and  strife. 

Factions,  and  wars,  and  spite. 

And  still  life's  crowning  ill's  to  bear 

Last  scene  of  all,  of  all  condemned. 
Unfriended,  uncompanioned  Age, 
When  strength  is  gone,  but  grief  remains. 
And  every  evil  that  is  named— 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  1 17 

Evil  of  evil,  grief  of  grief. 

As  now  this  man,  not  wretched  I  alone —         \Epode. 

Lo,  like  some  promontory  northward  set,  1240 

Wave-buffeted  by  all  fierce  winds  that  rave — 

So  buffet  him,  nor  cease. 

Poured  on  his  helpless  head, 

All  shattering  billows  of  outrageous  fate, 

Some  from  the  setting  sun. 

And  from  the  rising  some. 

Some  with  the  mid-noon  beam, 

Some  from  the  starry  shimmerings  of  the  night. 

Ant.  Lo  where  toward  us  the  stranger,  as  I  think, — 
Nay,  none  but  he,  my  father — from  his  eyes  1250 

Full  flood  of  tears  outpouring,  hither  comes. 

Oed.  Say,  who? 

Ant.  The  same  that  from  the  first  our  thoughts 

Conjectured,  Polyneices — stands  beside  thee. 

Pol.  Ah  me,  what  shall  I  say  ?  shall  I  lament 
First  for  myself,  O  sisters,  or  for  him. 
This  old  man,  this  my  father,  whom  I  see  ? 
Whom,  exiled,  in  a  strange  land  here  with  you 
I  find,  clad  in  such  garb,  whose  foulness  mars. 
Inveterate,  unlovely,  like  a  blight, 
The  time-worn  flesh  it  cleaves  to ;  and  his  locks      ia6o 
Wild  on  the  breeze  from  sightless  temples  stream  ; 
And  fare  with  garb  seems  all  too  well  to  suit — 
This  that,  to  stay  the  hunger-pinch,  he  bears. 


1 18  OEDIPUS  A T  COLONUS. 

O  agony  of  knowledge  known  too  late  ! 

Vilest  of  men  I  stand,  thy  plight  for  proof, 

Self-witnessed:  ask  not  others  what  I  am. 

Ah  yet,  for  Mercy  by  the  side  of  Zeus 

Sits  throned  for  judgment  ever — shall  she  not 

By  thee  find  place,  my  father  ?     Give  me  leave 

To  mend  my  fault ;  I  cannot  make  it  worse.  1270 

Still  silent  ? 

Speak  to  me,  father  :  turn  not  away  thy  face  ! 

Answerest  thou  me  nothing  ?  shall  I  go. 

Scorned,  with  no  word — thine  anger  silent  too  ? 

O  ye,  my  sisters,  daughters  of  this  man, 

Perchance  ye  shall  be  able  to  unlock 

These  most  obdurate,  unrelenting  lips — 

Let  him  not  thus  with  scorn  dismiss  me  hence 

Poseidon's  suppliant,  answered  not  at  all. 

Ant  Thyself,  unhappy,  say,  what  wouldst  thou  here  ? 
Stint  not  thy  speaking ;  pleasant  words  to  hear. 
Indignant  words,  or  words  compassionate — 
Speak  on— till  speech  from  silence  wring  response. 

Pol  Yes,  I  will  speak  :  thou  dost  instruct  me  well. 
Thus  then,  entreating  first  Poseidon's  self 
To  aid  me,  from  whose  altar  came  I  hither 
Raised  by  the  ruler  of  this  land,  with  leave 
To  speak  and  hear,  and  scatheless  to  depart  :— 
Whose  promise,  strangers,  rests  with  you,  and  these 
My  sisters  and  my  father,  to  make  good.  t^go 


1279 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  1 1 9 


Wherefore  I  came,  now,  father,  thou  shalt  hear. 

Exiled  and  outcast  from  my  home  am  I, 

For  that  I  urged,  being  of  elder  birth. 

My  title  to  possess  thy  kingly  seat. 

Therefore  did  Eteocles  thrust  me  forth. 

His  elder,  nor  with  reasons  vanquished  me, 

Nor  challenged  me  to  trial  of  deeds  and  strength. 

But  stole  the  heart  o'  the  city.     Mark  me — first, 

I  say  that  thine  Erinys  hath  done  this  : 

Next,  hearken  what  from  prophets  I  have  learned.      1300 

For,  when  to  Dorian  Argos  I  had  come. 

And  had  Adrastus'  daughter  to  my  wife, 

Swore  oath  to  help  me,  of  the  Apian  land. 

All  foremost  names  and  honourablest  in  war — 

That,  gathering,  I  with  them,  the  sevenfold  host 

'Gainst  Thebes,  I  fighting  for  the  right  should  fall, 

Or  dispossess  the  doers  of  the  wrong. 

But  now,  these  things  being  so,  why  came  I  here  ? 

With  supplication  and  with  prayer  to  thee. 

Both  for  myself,  O  father,  and  my  friends —  1310 

The  seven  spears  that  gathering  even  now 

With  seven  armies  gird  the  Theban  plain: 

Swift-speared  Amphiaraiis,  best  of  all 

In  battle,  best  to  read  the  flights  of  birds  ; 

And  the  Aetolian  son  of  Aeneus  second, 

Tydeus  :  and  Argive  Eteoclus  third: 

The  fourth  was  by  his  father  Talaus  sent, 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


Hippomedon ;  and  Capaneus,  the  fifth, 

Vows  that  with  fire  Thebes-city  he  will  rase ; 

Arcadian  Parthenopaeus  rushes  sixth,  1320 

Named  of  his  mother,  virgin-famed  till  he 

Was  born — of  Atalanta  trusty  son ; 

Last,  I  thy  son  (or,  if  not  thine,  but  child 

Of  mere  mishap,  yet  named  at  least  of  thee) 

From  Argos  lead  'gainst  Thebes  a  fearless  band. 

Father,  all  these  entreat  thee— for  the  love 

Thou  hast  of  these  thy  daughters  and  thy  life — 

Let  not  thy  stubborn  anger  come  between 

And  screen  my  brother  from  my  swift  revenge — 

Brother,  that  stripped  and  thrust  me  from  my  home.  1330 

For,  unto  whom,  if  oracles  speak  true. 

Thou  shalt  be  friend,  the  victory  is  his. 

Then,  by  our  fountains  and  our  fathers'  gods. 

Father,  I  charge  thee,  hear  me  and  relent. 

Beggared  am  I  and  exiled,  exiled  thou; 

And  on  the  smiles  of  others  thou  and  I 

Live,  courtiers  both,  like  fortune  having  found. 

And  there  the  while— O  torture— in  our  home 

He  kings  it  in  his  pride,  and  flouts  us  both. 

But,  let  thy  purpose  second  mine,  it  costs  1340         1 

Small  toil  or  time  to  bruise  such  pride  to  dust. 

So  shall  I  bring  thee  home,  at  home  to  dwell, 

And  home  return  myself,  and  cast  him  forth. 

Such  triumph  I  may  boast,  if  thou  consent: 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  1 2 1 

Without  thee,  life's  not  mine,  to  call  my  own. 

Chor.  For  his  sake,  Oedipus,  who  brought  him  hither, 
Answering  what  things  are  meet,  so  send  him  hence. 

Oed.  Had  it  not  chanced  the  keeper  of  your  land. 
King  Theseus,  friends,  had  brought  him  to  this  place. 
And  for  him  claimed  that  he  should  hear  my  mind,    1350 
Scarcely  this  voice  had  sounded  in  his  ears. 
Now,  graced  he  shall  depart  and  answered,  so, 
It  shall  not  add  much  comfort  to  his  life  : — 
Thy  life,  most  base,  that,  sceptred  and  enthroned. 
Sitting  where  now  in  Thebes  thy  brother  sits. 
Me,  thine  own  father,  didst  banish  from  the  land, 
And  mad'st  me  citiless  and  to  wear  this  garb. 
That  moves  thy  tears,  beholding,  now  thou'rt  come. 
With  me,  into  the  self-same  evil  plight. 
Ay,  well  for  thee  to  weep,  but  I  must  bear  1360 

This — whatso  life  is  mine,  remembering  thee 
My  murderer ;  for  thou  didst  acquaint  my  days 
With  grief,  and  cast  me  forth  and  banish  me 
To  beg  from  door  to  door  my  daily  bread  : 
And,  for  thy  part,  but  that  my  daughters  were 
My  nurses,  surely  now  I  had  not  been  : 
Now,  these  have  nursed  me,  these  have  saved  my  life, 
These  maidens — men,  not  maidens,  for  their  help  : 
But  ye,  called  sons,  are  no  true  sons  of  mine. 
Therefore  the  god  regards  thee — nowise  yet  137° 

As  soon  he  shall,  if  Thebes-ward  now  thy  hosts 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


Are  moving.     Never  shall  ye  call  fair  Thebes 
Your  city.     Red  with  brother's  blood  shall  glow 
Thy  hands  and  his;  together  shall  ye  fall. 
Forth  from  my  lips  aforetime  went  the  curse, 
And  now  I  call  it,  *  Curse,  come  fight  for  me  '-^ 
That  ye  may  know  a  father  should  be  honoured. 
And  scorn  no  more,  though  he  be  blind,  who  got 
Such  sons.     For  these  my  daughters  did  not  so. 
Then  prate  not  of  thine  altars  and  thy  thrones ;  1380 

From  both  thou'rt  banned,  if  Justice  as  of  old 
Interprets  still  the  ancient  laws  of  Zeus. 
Go  hence,  abhorred,  beyond  all  baseness  base, 
Unfather'd  :  and  for  blessing  this  my  curse 
Go  with  thee — neither  with  thy  spears  to  storm 
The  city  of  thy  kin,  nor  Argos-vale 
Revisit,  but  there  with  fratricidal  hand 
Slay  who  hath  banished  thee,  and  by  him  be  slain. 
I  curse  thee  with  these  curses,  and  I  bid 
The  hated  gloom  of  Tartarus  receive 
And  yield  thee  heritage  of  homes  far  hence.  1390 

And  ye,  dread  goddesses,  and  Ares,  help. 
That  hast  of  furious  hate  fulfilled  their  hearts  ! 
Go,  bear  my  answer  hence,  and  tell  it  out 
To  every  Theban,  and  thine  own  good  friends — 
To  those  stout  champions  say,  that  Oedipus 
Such  goodly  gifts  unto  his  sons  dispensed. 
Chor.  Polyneices,  of  thy  goings  heretofore 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  123 

Small  joy  I  give  thee ;  and  now  with  haste  go  hence. 

Pol.  Ah  me,  my  coming,  and  my  hopes  o'erthrown  ! 
And  ah,  my  friends  !  to  what  a  journey's  end  1400 

Fared  we  from  Argos  forth,  woe  worth  the  day — 
Such  end,  I  dare  not  even  speak  and  show 
My  friends,  to  turn  them  back  the  way  they  came ; 
But  silent  I  must  go  to  meet  my  doom. 
Yet,  daughters  of  this  father,  sisters  mine. 
That  hear  my  father  curse  me  to  my  face, 
O  sisters,  ye,  have  pity — if  the  curse 
Fall,  and  to  you  be  given  safe  return 
To  Thebes  and  home,  dishonour  me  not  then — 
With  all  due  rites  of  burial  see  me  laid.  1410 

So  shall  the  praise,  of  daughters  ministrant, 
That  now  ye  have,  get  other  praise  beside, 
Nor  meaner,  for  such  service  done  to  me. 

Ant.  I  pray  thee,  Polyneices,  hear  me  speak. 

Pol.  What  wouldst  thou,  sister,  dear  Antigone  ? 

Ant.  Make  haste  to  bid  thy  host  to  Argos  back  j 
Wreak  not  destruction  on  thyself  and  Thebes. 

Pol.  I  may  not  hear  thee.     How  again  could  I 
Lead  on  those  armies,  once  had  seen  me  blench  ? 

Ant.  Why  needs  thy  wrath  be  kindled  any  more  ?    1420 
What  gain  to  thee,  thy  city  in  the  dust  ? 

Pol  Shame  now  to  me,  that  I  the  elder-born 
Am  banished  by  my  brother  and  defied. 

Ant.  A  swift  fulfilment  then  his  word  shall  win, 


124  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Who  dooms  you  each  the  other's  murderer. 

Pol.  His  word's  his  wish  :  no  yielding  is  for  me. 

Ant.  Nay  then  what  help?     But  who  dares  follow  thee, 
Hearing  what  fate  thy  father  hath  foretold  ? 

Pol.  Ill  words  I'll  not  report.     Wise  generals 
Announce  the  better  tidings,  hide  the  worse.  1430 

Ant.  Boy,  art  thou  then  resolved  to  go  thy  way  ? 

Pol  Resolved,  beyond  withholding.     Drear  and  dark 
Shall  be,  I  know,  this  road  that  I  must  fare : 
My  father  and  his  Furies  so  have  willed. 
Be  your  path  happier — so  ye  mind,  in  death, 
My  asking ;  since  in  life  no  more  ye  may. 
Now  loose  me — and  farewell.     For  nevermore 
Shall  ye  behold  me  living. 

Ant.  Woe  is  me  ! 

Pol.  Weep  not  for  me. 

Ant.  Who,  brother,  would  not  mourn 

Thy  headlong  haste  into  the  jaws  of  death  ?  1440 

Pol  If  I  must  die,  I  will. 

-^^^'  Nay,  hearken  yet. 

Pol.  Nought  that  I  should  not. 

^^^-  Wretched  then  am  I, 

If  I  must  lose  thee  ! 

^<^^'  Fortune  sees  to  that — 

Whether  thou  shalt  or  no.     But  for  you  twain, 
Gods  grant  me  this,  no  evil  hap  to  you : 
For,  that  ye  have  deserved  none,  all  men  see. 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  1 25 

Chor.  Lo  how  from  new  occasion  trouble  new  \Strophe. 
And  new  entanglement  of  evil  grows — 
And  whom  to  blame  ?     This  sightless  stranger  still  ? 
Or  Fate's  inevitable  stroke  ?  145° 

This  rather  :  for  I  cannot  tell 
Of  aught  that  Heaven  in  vain  hath  willed. 
All  time,  all  time,  be  witness  else — 
Time  that  is  charged  with  other  work  to-day, 
But  shall  to-morrow  build  what  now  lies  low. 
List  to  the  thunder  !     Shield  us,  Zeus  ! 

Oed.  O    children,  would   that    some  one — some  one 
near — 
Would  go  to  bring  the  noble  Theseus  hither. 

Ant.  What  business,  father,  hast  thou  with  the  king  ? 

Oed.  Hence  now  to  Hades  summons  me  this  winged 
Zeus-voice  of  thunder.     Tarry  not,  but  send.  1461 

Chor.  Again,  with  louder  noise,  the  air  is  rent —  [Antistr. 
Uproar,  that  from  the  hand  of  Zeus  is  hurled, 
Unutterable.     Fear  through  all  my  blood 
Runs  freezing,  to  my  startled  hair. 
My  spirit  shrinks  :  again,  again. 
The  lightning  flames  across  the  sky. 
What  follows  in  its  fiery  wake  ? 
Ah  me,  I  fear ;  for  not  indeed  for  nought, 
But  boding  some  mischance,  these  portents  blaze.        147° 
O  great  dread  sky  !  O  sovereign  Zeus  ! 

Oed.  Children,  the  end  is  come  of  all  my  days  ; 


126  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

The  god  fulfils  his  word ;  retreat  is  none. 

Ant.  How  knowest  thou  ?  or  what  sign  hast  of  this  ? 

Oed.  I  know  it  well.     But  quickly  let  them  go. 
And  call  me  here  the  ruler  of  this  land. 

Chor.  Again  the  ear-besieging  [Strophe. 

Soul-piercing  rattle  of  the  storm  ! 
Ye  gods,  have  pity,  pity  on  us. 

If  on  our  mother  land  1480 

Frown  thus  your  sunless  skies. 
O  righteous  be  the  feet. 
Whose  ways  encounter  mine ; 
Nor  let  me  see  a  man  accurst, 
Lest  I  partake  with  him 
Reward  not  fraught  with  gain — 
Lord  Zeus,  I  cry  to  thee ! 

Oed.  Is  the  man  near  ?     O  children,  shall  he  find 
Me  living,  ordering  still  my  thoughts  aright  ? 

Ant.  What  certitude  wouldst  thou  thy  .thought  should 
hold? 

Oed.  To  pay  the  debt  I  owe  them,  and  make  good 
That  promise,  when  he  gave  me  my  desire,  1490 

Chor.  O  son,  come  forth,  corhe  hither  :     \Antistrophe. 
Or,  at  the  cliffs  edge,  where  the  cliff 
Curves,  and  Poseidon's  altars  smoke 
Seaward,  if  haply  there 
Thou  sacrificest — come  ! 
Thy  guest,  this  stranger,  deems 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  127 

Thy  town  and  friends  and  thou, 

For  help  ye  gave  him  at  his  need, 

Have  at  his  hands  deserved 

Like  measure  to  receive. 

King,  pause  not,  hither  haste  !  1499 

Thes.  How  now  ?  what  clamour  raise  ye  all  at  once — 
Distinct  your  voices,  and  the  stranger's  clear  ? 
Lightning  from  Zeus  appals  ye,  or  the  sharp 
Scourge  of  the  driving  hail-shower  ?     Nought's  beyond 
Conjecture,  when  the  god  brews  storm  like  this. 

Oed.   Desired,  O  king,  thou  comest ;  and  some  god 
Gives  thee  good  fortune,  in  that  thou  art  come. 

Thes.  What  new  thing,  son  of  Laius,  is  to  tell  ? 

Oed.  My  life  determines  here.     Nor  would  I  die 
A  promise-breaker  to  thy  town  and  thee.  1509 

Thes.  Wherein  rests  thy  belief  that  thou  shalt  die  ? 

Oed.  The  gods  themselves  are  heralds  of  their  will, 
Nor  of  the  signs  predestined  fails  there  aught. 

Thes.  What  signs,  old  man  ?     How  are  these  things 
revealed  ? 

Oed.  By  this  unceasing  thunder,  peal  on  peal — 
With  bolt  on  bolt,  flashed  from  the  almighty  hand. 

Thes.  It  is  enough  :  prophet  of  many  things. 
True  prophet,  I  have  found  thee  :  speak  thy  will. 

Oed.  My  words,  O  son  of  Aegeus,  shall  endure. 
To  stead  thy  city — nor  with  age  wax  faint. 
'Tis  time  that  I  should  lead  thee — I,  no  hand  1520 


128  OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 

My  Steps  to  lead — thither,  where  I  must  die. 

But  secret  be  the  spot  from  all  men  else, 

What  thicket  hides  it,  and  what  region  holds ; 

That,  more  than  many  shields,  and  borrowed  spear 

Of  neighbours,  help  unfailing  may  be  thine. 

And  thou  shalt  learn,  come  thither,  thou  alone. 

Such  things — accurst  be  he  that  utters  them  : 

To  no  one  of  thy  people  may  I  tell 

Their  purport,  nor  my  children,  whom  I  love.  1529 

Locked  in  thy  breast,  still  keep  them  :  and  when  thy  life 

Draws  to  its  close,  repeat  them  but  to  one, 

Thy  chiefest ;  he  to  his  heir,  and  he  to  his — 

So  shall  the  Dragon's  brood  not  harm  thy  home. 

This  city.     But  a  people,  myriad-voiced, 

Lightly,  in  fairest-ordered  state,  breaks  forth 

To  licence.     For  the  seeing  gods  see  late, 

When  men  turn  madmen  and  forget  to  fear. 

Be  that,  O  son  of  Aegeus,  far  from  thee. 

Enough ;  I  teach  thee,  by  thine  own  heart  taught ; 

Now,  for  the  god  is  instant,  calling  me,  1540 

Seek  we  the  place,  brood  not,  nor  question  more. 

Come,  children,  follow,  for  our  parts  are  changed ; 

Behold,  your  father  leads  you,  whom  ye  led. 

Follow,  and  touch  me  not,  but  let  me  find, 

Myself,  the  holy  place,  the  destined  tomb. 

Where  in  this  land  this  body  must  be  laid. 

Onward,  still  onward,  follow  :  this  way  lead 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  129 

Attendant  Hermes  and  the  Queen  of  Shades. 

O  darkened  light,  light  that  wast  sometime  mine, 

This  body  of  mine  shall  feel  thee  never  more.  1550 

For  now  I  go,  go  hence  to  hide,  where  all 

Is  dark,  my  life's  departing.     Friend  beloved. 

Upon  thy  servants  and  this  land  and  thee 

All  blessings  light ;  and,  when  ye  most  are  blessed, 

Remember  me,  whose  death  your  bliss  secured. 

Chor.  If  to  the  Invisible  Goddess,  and  to  thee,     \Str. 
King  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  night. 
To  fall  down  and  to  worship  and  to  pray 
Be  not  unmeet  for  me, 

O  dread  dark  lord  Aidoneus,  grant  me  this,  1560 

That  by  no  troublesome  and  no  grievous  death 
This  stranger  to  the  Stygian  halls  may  win. 
And  those  vast  fields  at  last  of  the  under-world. 
Whose  universal  glooms  enfold 
The  nations  of  the  dead. 
So  after  all  his  evil  days. 
So  evil  and  so  many  and  so  thwart, 
The  gods  shall  right  him,  for  the  gods  are  just. 
With  honour  at  the  last. 

O  under  earth  great  Goddesses,  and  thou     \Antistrophe. 
Indomitable  and  monstrous  Form, 
That  at  the  pillared  shining  doors,  men  say,  1570 

Keepest  thy  kennelled  couch, 
And  from  the  cavern's  jaws  thy  gnarring  noise 


,30  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 


Sounds,  and  the  fame  is  constant,  that  thine  eyes 
Fail  not  from  watching  at  the  gate  of  Death — 
Grant  me,  great  son  of  Tartarus  and  Ge, 
Clear  of  the  dreadful  hound's  approach 
The  stranger's  path  may  lie — 
That  sunless  path  whereby  he  hastes 
Down  to  thy  shadowy-peopled  fields,  O  Death — 
Yea,  for  I  cry  to  thee,  lord  of  the  night 
Whose  sleep  no  morning  breaks. 

Mess.  Sirs,  and  my  townsmen,  summed  in  a  word,  my 
tale 
Concludes  in  this,  that  Oedipus  is  dead  :  1580 

But  of  the  manner  needs  more  breath  to  tell, 
Nor  was  it  in  the  acting  all  so  brief. 
Chor.  Dead,  hapless  one,  is  he  ? 
Mess.  Doubt  not,  but  know. 

What  life,  lifelong,  was  his,  is  his  no  more. 

Chor.    Had  the   gods   pity?       Passed    he  with    no 

pain? 
Mess.  Ay,  there  thou  hast  it ;  marvel  now  at  this. 
Hence  how  he  went,  thou  knowest,  for  thou  wast  here 
Beholding — guided  by  no  friendly  hand, 
Followed  by  us  instead,  himself  the  guide. 
But  when  to  that  sheer  threshold  he  had  come,  1590 

Paven  with  brass  and  rooted  in  the  rock. 
Of  the  divided  ways  he  chose  him  one. 
And  nigh  the  urn  that  keeps  the  memory 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  131 

How  Theseus  with  Peirithoiis  plighted  faith, 

'Twixt  that  he  stood  and  the  Thorician  scaur, 

Midmost  the  hollow  pear-tree  and  the  tomb, 

Rock-hewn ;  then  sate  him  down,  and  loosed  his  soiled 

Apparel,  and  called  his  children,  and  bade  them  bring 

Water  for  washing  from  some  fountain  near 

And  for  libation.     They  to  yonder  height. 

Hill  of  Demeter  who  clothes  the  fields  with  green,       1600 

Hied  them,  and  brought  the  bidding  of  their  sire. 

With  swift  despatch,  and  washed  and  did  on  him 

Fair  raiment,  as  the  manner  is  to  do. 

But  when  of  doing  he  had  all  content. 

And  nought  that  he  desired  was  left  undone. 

Came  thunder  underground,  and  at  the  sound 

The  maidens  shuddered,  and  at  their  father's  knees 

Fell  weeping,  nor  refrained,  but  beat  their  breasts 

And  with  their  lamentations  filled  the  air. 

But,  when  he  heard  that  sudden  bitter  cry,  1610 

He  folded  them  within  his  arms,  and  said, 

"  O  daughters,  ye  are  left  fatherless  this  day : 

For  all  my  life  falls  from  me ;  never  more 

Shall  ye  be  troubled  with  your  care  of  me. 

Children,  I  know  how  hard  it  was ;  and  yet 

One  little  word,  I  know,  pays  all  the  pain. 

There  is  not  any  one  who  loves  you  so 

As  this  man  loved  you,  orphaned  of  whose  love 

This  day  and  all  your  days  henceforth  shall  be." 


132  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 


So  locked  together  in  a  last  embrace,  1620 

They  sobbed  and  wept,  all  three.     But  when  at  last 

Their  tears  were  spent,  and  no  cry  more  outbrake, 

But  they  stood  silent,  on  the  silence  fell 

A  voice  of  one  who  summoned,  and  its  sound 

Stiffened  with  sudden  fear  the  hair  of  all 

Who  heard :  for  the  god  called,  and  called  again, 

"Oedipus,  Oedipus,  why  tarriest  thou 

With  these  so  long?  'tis  time  that  we  were  gone." 

And  when  he  knew  the  summons  of  the  god. 

He  bade  the  king,  Theseus,  come  nigher  to  him,    1630 

And  when  he  came  besought  him,  "  O  my  friend. 

Give  to  these  children,  and  children,  ye  to  him, 

Right  hands,  the  ancient  pledge ;  and  promise  thou, 

Thou'lt  not  forsake  them  willingly,  and  wilt  do 

All  that  thou  doest,  wisely,  for  their  good." 

Then  he,  the  noble  man,  with  no  weak  tears. 

Promised,  and  sealed  the  pi'omise  with  an  oath. 

So  Theseus  sware,  and  Oedipus  thereat 

Felt  for  his  daughters  with  his  sightless  hands, 

And  found,  and  said,  "  O  children,  get  ye  gone,      1640 

With  noble  hearts  and  patient ;  nor  desire 

To  see  the  things  ye  may  not,  nor  to  hear. 

Make  haste  to  go  :  the  things  that  shall  be  done 

No  man  but  Theseus  it  concerns  to  know." 

Such  words  he  spake,  and  we  obeyed  his  speech, 

All  we  that  heard,  and  stinting  not  our  tears 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US.  133 

Forth  with  the  maidens  followed;  but  went  not  far, 

Or  ere  we  turned  to  look,  and  looked,  and  saw 

The  man  was  gone,  no  Oedipus  was  there ; 

Only  the  king,  holding  athwart  his  brow  1650 

A  hand  that  screened  his  eyes,  as  to  shut  out 

Some  dreadful  and  intolerable  sight. 

And  then,  for  one  brief  minute  and  no  more, 

We  saw  him  make  obeisance,  all  at  once, 

Both  to  the  earth  and  to  the  gods  in  heaven. 

But  by  what  manner  of  death  died  Oedipus, 

No  man  can  tell,  but  Theseus,  he  alone. 

For  it  was  not  any  firebolt,  swift  from  heaven. 

Despatched  him,  no,  nor  a  whirlwind  from  the  sea 

Rose  in  a  minute  and  caught  him  from  our  sight ;       1660 

But  either  the  gods  took  him,  or  the  earth 

Was  kind,  and  opened  for  him  her  cavernous  jaws. 

For  nowise  lamentably  he  passed,  nor  slain 

By  sickness,  pitiably — a  marvel,  how — 

Whose  like  was  never.     Idle  is  my  talk  ? 

Who  lists  may  think  so ;  him  I'll  not  regard. 

Chor.  Where  are  the  maidens  and  their  company  ? 

Mess.  Not  they  far  hence  :  hither  not  doubtfully 
Voice  of  their  weeping  heralds  their  approach. 

Ant.  Alas,  not  now,  ah  not  for  us —    [Strophe  i.    1670 
Daughters  we  of  a  strain  accurst — 
To  weep  and  to  refrain  : 
We,  upon  whom  erewhile  was  laid 


134  OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS. 

Constant  the  weight  of  our  father's  sorrow, 
And  what  we  have  seen  at  the  last  and  suffered, 
None  may  conjecture,  save  we  who  tell. 

Chor.  How  is't  with  you  ? 

Ant.  Ah,  friends,  this  baffles  thought. 

Chor.  Gone  is  he  ? 

Ant.  As  thou  wouldst  go,  if  thou  couldst  choose. 

How  else,  whom  not  in  battle  [Strophe  2. 

Death  met,  nor  on  the  sea,  1680 

But  with  invisible  hand  the  viewless  fields 
Clutched  him,  and  dragged  him  down  ? 
Alas,  but  on  our  sight  hath  fallen 
A  darkness  as  of  death.   • 
Nay,  for  in  far-off  lands  unknown, 
Or  homeless  on  the  tossing  wave, 
Our  life's  intolerable  plight 
How  shall  our  hearts  endure  ? 

I  know  not.     Hades,  shedder  of  blood,  1689 

Me  also,  young  with  the  old,  daughter  with  father,  slay, 
Wretched.     Not  life  any  more,  but  death  for  me  ! 

Chor.  O  ye  two  noble  daughters, 
Heaven's  gracious  will  chide  not, 
Nor  with  rash  heat  your  hearts  inflame : 
Not  blamably  ye  fare. 

Ant.  How  precious  now  seems  pain  before —  [Ant.  i. 
Dear,  the  pang  that  we  least  desired — 
When  him  we  still  embraced. 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLONUS.  135 

Father,  we  love  thee,  love  thee  yet ;  1700 

Wrapt  in  the  gloom  of  the  grave  for  ever — 
But  old  we  have  loved  thee,  and  dead  remember ; 
We  are  thy  daughters  \  our  love  endures. 

Chor.  He  fared.  ... 

Ant.  Fared,  even  as  his  soul  desired. 

Chor.  Say,  how? 

Ant.  In  alien  land,  the  land  he  chose, 

Died  he:  and  hath  thereunder  \Antistrophe  2. 

His  dark  deep  bed  alway, 
Nor  leaves  not  grief  behind,  to  weep  his  loss. 
For  still  these  eyes  of  mine. 

Father,  run  over  with  tears  for  thee ;  1710 

Nor  know  I  how  to  ease 
Of  its  dull  ache  my  desolate  heart. 
Ah  me,  in  alien  land  to  die 
Thou  hadst  desired ;  but  so,  for  me, 
Lonely  thy  death  befell. 
Out  and  alas,  for  me  and  for  thee 
Hereafter,  sister  beloved,  destitute,  helpless  quite, 
Thus  of  our  father  bereft,  what  lot  remains  ? 

Chor.  O  children,  blissful  quittance 
Of  life's  last  hour  was  his.  1720 

Cease  your  complaint :  what  mortal  lives, 
Impregnable  to  grief?     ^ 

Ant.  Back,  sister,  let  us  haste. 
.    ^sm.  What  thing  to  do  ? 


136  OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS. 

^  Ant  Desire  possesses  me. 

Ism.  Of  what  ? 

Ant.  To  visit  once  the  home.  .  .  . 

Ism.  Say  whose  ? 

Ant.  Where   under   ground,   woe's   me !    our   father 

rests. 
Ism.  How  should  this  thing  be  granted  ?     Dost  thou 
not 
Consider  ? 

Ant.         Ah,  sister,  chide  me  not  for  this.  1730 

Ism.  Then  too  bethink  thee.  .  .  . 
Ant.  What's  my  second  fault  ? 

Ism.  Tomb  he  hath  none,  and  no  man  saw  his  death. 
Ant.  Lead  me  to  where  he  died,  and  slay  me  there. 
Ism.  Alas  for  poor  Ismene  then  ! 
How,  lonely,  helpless,  shall  I  pass 
The  sad  remainder  of  my  days  ? 
C\or.  Fear  not,  my  daughters. 

Ant.  Whither  shall  I  flee  ? 

Chor.  Fled  is  that  fear  and  past. 
Ant.  How  fled? 

Chor.  Harm  cannot  touch  you  now.  1740 

Ant.  I  think.  .  .  . 

Chor.  What  idle  doubt  perplexes  now  thy  heart  ? 
Ant.  How  they  will  suffer  us,  returning  home, 
I  know  not. 
.     Chor.  But  what  then  ?     Nor  seek  to  know. 


OEDIPUS  A  T  COL  ONUS.  1 37 

Ant.  O  heavy  grief!  -*• 

Chor.  ^  Not  light  thy  load  before. 

Ant.  Oh  then  past  cure,  but  worst  is  now  grown  worse. 

Chor.  Upon  a  huge  sea  then  your  barks  were  launched  ! 

Ant.  Ah,  Zeus,  ah  whither  must  we  go  ? 
Fate  drives  us  onward  still,  to  where 
Fear  in  the  distance  darkly  looms.  1750 

Thes.  Weep  no  more,  children,  for  him  ^ 

With  whom  in  the  tomb  abides  a  blessing : 
Grieve  not,  nor  arraign  the  gods. 

Ant.  O  son  of  Aegeus,  grant  us  a  boon. 

Thes.  Children,  what  crave  ye  that  I  should  grant  ? 

Ant.  With  our  own  eyes  that  we  might  look 
On  our  father's  tomb. 

Thes.  Anear  that  place  no  foot  may  tread. 

Ant.  King,  lord  of  Athens,  what  word  is  this  ? 

Thes.  O  children,  so  did  thy  father  charge  me,        1760 
To  let  no  mortal  come  nigh  the  spot, 
No  voice  break  silence  there,  about 
The  sacred  grave  wherein  he  rests. 
And,  if  I  did  his  bidding  well, 
He  said  that  I  should  keep  this  land 
Safe  from  all  harm  for  aye. 
I  promised  :  and  Heaven  the  promise  heard, 
And  Horkos,  all-hearing,  sprung  from  Zeus. 

Ant.  Nay  but,  if  he  will  have  it  so, 
So  let  it  be  :  but  now  to  Thebes, 


T 


138 


OEDIPUS  AT  COLON  US. 


The  ancient  city,  send  us  hence ;  1770 

If  haply  we  may  come  between, 
And,  ere  our  brothers'  blood  be  spilt. 
Prevent  the  coming  strife. 

Thes.  Even  this  I  will :  and  what  beside, 
That  may  to  you  be  profitable, 
Oij^to  the  dead  man,  late  gone  hence. 
For  pleasure,  I  shall  not  faint  but  do. 

Chor.  But  now  leave  off;  now,  now  no  more 
Kindle  with  grieving  grief: 
This  promise  holds,  whatever  betide.  1779 


ANTIGONE 


PEJiSONS. 

Creon. 

Haemon. 

Teiresias. 

Sentinel. 

Messenger. 

Second  Messenger. 

eurydice. 

Antigone. 

ISMENE. 

Chorus  of  Theban  Elders. 


antigone 

Ant.  i^  SISTER-LIFE,  Ismene's,  twin  with  mine, 
^-^      Knowest  thou  of  the  burden  of  our  race 
Aught  that  from  us  yet  living  Zeus  holds  back  ? 
Nay,  for  nought  grievous  and  nought  ruinous, 
No  shame  and  no  dishonour,  have  I  not  seen 
Poured  on  our  hapless  heads,  both  thine  and  mine. 
And  even  now  what  edict  hath  the  prince 
Uttered,  men  say,  to  all  this  Theban  folk  ? 
Thou  knowest  it  and  hast  heard  ?  or  'scapes  thy  sense, 
Aimed  at  thy  friends,  the  mischief  of  thy  foes  ?  lo 

Isj?i.  To  me  of  friends,  Antigone,  no  word 
Hath  come,  or  sweet  or  bitter,  since  that  we 
Two  sisters  of  two  brothers  were  bereaved, 
Both  on  a  day  slain  by  a  twofold  blow : 
And,  now  that  vanished  is  the  Argive  host 
Ev'n  with  the  night  fled  hence,  I  know  no  more. 
If  that  I  fare  the  better  or  the  worse. 

Ant.  I  knew  full  well,  and  therefore  from  the  gates 
O'  the  court  I  led  thee  hither,  alone  to  hear. 

Ism.  There's  trouble  in  thy  looks  :  thy  tidings  telL    20 

Ant.  Yea,  hath  not  Creon,  of  our  two  brothers  slain, 


142  ANTIGONE. 


Honoured  with  burial  one,  disdained  the  other  ? 

For  Eteocles,  they  say,  he  in  the  earth 

With  all  fair  rites  and  ceremony  hath  laid. 

Nor  lacks  he  honour  in  the  world  below ; 

But  the  poor  dust  of  Polyneices  dead 

Through  Thebes,  'tis  said,  the  edict  has  gone  forth 

That  none  may  bury,  none  make  moan  for  him, 

But  leave  unwept,  untombed,  a  dainty  prize 

For  ravening  birds  that  gloat  upon  their  prey.  30 

So  hath  our  good  lord  Creon  to  thee  and  me 

Published,  men  say,  his  pleasure — ay,  to  me — 

And  hither  comes,  to  all  who  know  it  not 

Its  purport  to  make  plain,  nor  deems  the  thing 

Of  slight  account,  but,  whoso  does  this  deed, 

A  public  death  by  stoning  is  his  doom. 

Thou  hast  it  now ;  and  quickly  shall  be  proved 

If  thou  art  noble,  or  base  from  noble  strain. 

Ism.  O  rash  of  heart,  if  this  indeed  be  so, 
What  help  in  me,  to  loosen  or  to  bind  ?  40 

Ant.  Consider,  toil  and  pain  if  thou  wilt  share. 

Ism.  On    what    adventure    bound?      What    wouldst 
thou  do  ? 

Ant.  To  lift  his  body,  wilt  thou  join  with  me  ? 

Ism.  Wouldst  thou  indeed  rebel,  and  bury  him  ? 

Ant.  My  brother  I  will  bury,  and  thine  no  less. 
Whether  thou  wilt  or  no  :  no  traitress  I. 

Ism.  O  all  too  bold— when  Creon  hath  forbid  ? 


ANTIGONE.  143 


Ant.  My  rights  to  hinder  is  no  right  of  his. 

Ism.  Ah,  sister,  yet  think  how  our  father  died, 
Wrapt  in  what  cloud  of  hate  and  ignominy  50 

By  his  own  sins,  self-proved,  and  both  his  eyes 
With  suicidal  hand  himself  he  stabbed  : 
Then  too  his  mother-wife,  two  names  in  one, 
Fordid  with  twisted  noose  her  woful  life : 
Last,  our  two  brothers  in  one  fatal  day 
Drew  sword,  O  miserable,  and  each  to  each 
Dealt  mutual  slaughter  with  unnatural  hands  : 
And  now  shall  we  twain,  who  alone  are  left, 
Fall  like  the  rest,  and  worse — in  spite  of  law, 
And  scorning  kings,  their  edicts  and  their  power  ?         60 
Oh  rather  let  us  think,  'tis  not  for  us, 
Who  are  but  women,  to  contend  with  men: 
And  the  king's  word  is  mighty,  and  to  this, 
And  harsher  words  than  this,  we  needs  must  bow. 
Therefore  will  I,  imploring  of  the  dead 
Forgiveness,  that  I  yield  but  as  I  must. 
Obey  the  king's  commandment :  for  with  things 
Beyond  our  reach  'twere  foolishness  to  meddle. 

Ant.  I'll  neither  urge  thee,  nor,  if  now  thou'dst  help 
My  doing,  should  I  thank  thee  for  thine  aid.  70 

Do  thou  after  thy  kind  :  thy  choice  is  made  : 
I'll  bury  him ;  doing  this,  so  let  me  die. 
So  with  my  loved  one  loved  shall  I  abide. 
My  crime  a  deed  most  holy  :  for  the  dead 


144  ANTIGONE. 


Longer  have  I  to  please  than  these  on  earth. 
There  I  shall  dwell  for  ever :  be  it  thine 
To   have   scorned  what   gods  have   hallowed,  if  thou 
wilt. 

Is7?i.  Nay,  nothing  do  I  scorn  :  but,  how  to  break 
My  country's  law — I  am  witless  of  the  way. 

Ant,  Be  this  thy  better  part :  I  go  to  heap  80 

The  earth  upon  my  brother,  whom  I  love. 

Ism.  Alas,  unhappy,  how  I  fear  for  thee  ! 

Ant.  Fear  not  for  me  :  guide  thine  own  fate  aright. 

Ism.  Yet  breathe  this  purpose  to  no  ear  but  mine  : 
Keep  thou  thy  counsel  well — and  so  will  I. 

Ant.  Oh  speak :  for  much  more  hatred  thou  wilt  get. 
Concealing,  than  proclaiming  it  to  all. 

Ism.  This  fever  at  thy  heart  by  frost  is  fed. 

Ant.  But,  whom  I  most  should  please,  they  most  are 
pleased. 

Ism.  So  wouldst  thou  :   but  thou  canst  not  as  thou 
wouldst.  90 

Ant.  Why,  then,  when  strength  shall  fail  me,  I  will 
cease. 

Ism.  Not  to  attempt  the  impossible  is  best. 

Ant.  Hated  by  me,  and  hated  by  the  dead — 
To  him  a  hateful  presence  evermore — 
Thou  shouldst  be,  and  thou  shalt  be,  speaking  thus. 
But  leave  me,  and  the  folly  that  is  mine, 
This  worst  to  suffer — not  the  worst — since  still 


ANTIGONE.  145 


A  worse  remains,  no  noble  death  to  die. 

Ism.  Go  if  thou  wilt :  but  going  know  thyself 
Senseless,  yet  to  thy  friends  a  friend  indeed.  99 

Chor.   Lo,  the  sun  upspringing  !  [Strophe  i. 

Fairest  light  we  hail  thee 
Of  all  dawns  that  on  Thebes  the  seven-gated 
Ever  broke  !     Eye  of  golden  day  ! 
Over  Dirce's  fount  appearing, 
Hence  the  Argive  host  white- shielded. 
That  in  complete  arms  came  hither, 
Headlong  homeward  thou  didst  urge 
Faster  still  with  shaken  rein. 

At  call  of  Polyneices,  stirred  «o 

By  bitter  heat  of  wrangling  claims, 
Against  our  land  they  gathered,  and  they  swooped 
Down  on  us — like  an  eagle,  screaming  hoarse, 
White-clad,  with  wings  of  snow — 
With  shields  a  many  and  with  waving  crests. 
But  above  our  dwellings,  [Antistrophe  i. 

With  his  spears  that  thirsted 
For  our  blood,  at  each  gate's  mouth  of  the  seven 
Gaping  round,  paused  the  foe — and  went, 
Ere  his  jaws  with  blood  were  sated,  120 

Or  our  circling  towers  the  torch-flame 
Caught  and  kindled  :  so  behind  him 
Raged  intense  the  battle-din — 
While  for  life  the  Serpent  fought. 


146  ANTIGONE. 


For  Zeus  the  tongue  of  vaunting  pride 

Hates  with  exceeding  hate ;  he  marked 

That  torrent  army's  onward  flood,  superb 

With  clank  of  gold,  and  with  his  brandished  fire  130 

Smote  down  who  foremost  climbed 

To  shout  his  triumph  on  our  ramparts'  heights. 

Hurled  from  that  height  with  swift  reverse,      \Strophe  2. 

The  unpitying  earth  received  him  as  he  fell, 

And  quenched  the  brand  he  fain  had  flung, 

And  quelled  the  mad  endeavour, 

The  frantic  storm-gusts  of  his  windy  hate. 

So  fared  it  then  with  him ; 

Nor  less  elsewhere  great  Ares  dealt 

Against  the  foemen  thunderous  blows — 

Our  trace-horse  on  the  right.  140 

For  seven  chieftains  at  our  seven  gates 

Met  each  his  equal  foe  :  and  Zeus, 

Who  foiled  their  onset,  claims  from  all  his  due. 

The  brazen  arms,  which  on  the  field  they  left : 

Save  that  infuriate  pair. 

Who,  from  one  father  and  one  mother  sprung, 

Against  each  other  laid  in  rest 

Their  spears,  victorious  both. 

And  each  by  other  share  one  equal  death. 

But  now  of  Victory  be  glad  :  [Antistrophe  2. 

She  meets  our  gladness  with  an  answering  smile. 

And  Thebes,  the  many-charioted. 


ANTIGONE.  147 


; 


Hears  far  resound  her  praises  : 

Now  then  with  war  have  done,  and  strife  forget !  150 

All  temples  of  the  gods 

Fill  we  with  song  and  night-long  dance ; 

And,  Theban  Bacchus,  this  our  mirth 

Lead  thou,  and  shake  the  earth  ! 

But  lo  the  ruler  of  this  Theban  land, 

Son  of  Menoeceus,  Creon  comes, 

Crowned  by  these  new  and  strange  events,  he  comes — 

By  will  of  heav'n  our  new-created  king. 

What  counsel  pondering? 

Who  by  his  sovereign  will  hath  now  convoked,  160 

In  solemn  conference  to  meet, 

The  elders  of  the  state  ; 

Obedient  to  whose  summons,  we  are  here. 

Cre.  Sirs,  it  hath  pleased  the  gods  to  right  again 
Our  Theban  fortunes,  by  sore  tempest  tossed  : 
And  by  my  messenger  I  summoned  hither 
You  out  of  all  the  state ;  first,  as  I  knew  you 
To  the  might  o'  the  throne  of  Laius  loyal  ever : 
Also,  when  Oedipus  upheld  the  state, 
And  when  he  perished,  to  their  children  still 
Ye  with  a  constant  mind  were  faithful  found : 
Now  they  are  gone  :  both  on  one  fatal  field  vjo 

An  equal  guilt  atoned  with  equal  doom. 
Slayers  of  each  other,  by  each  other  slain : 
And  I  am  left,  the  nearest  to  their  blood. 


148  ANTIGONE. 


To  wield  alone  the  sceptre  and  the  realm. 

There  is  no  way  to  know  of  any  man 

The  spirit  and  the  wisdom  and  the  will, 

Till  he  stands  proved,  ruler  and  lawgiver. 

For  who,  with  a  whole  city  to  direct. 

Yet  cleaves  not  to  those  counsels  that  are  best. 

But  locks  his  lips  in  silence,  being  afraid,  iSo 

I  held  and  hold  him  ever  of  men  most  base  : 

And  whoso  greater  than  his  country's  cause 

Esteems  a  friend,  I  count  him  nothing  worth. 

For,  Zeus  who  seeth  all  be  witness  now. 

Nor  for  the  safety's  sake  would  I  keep  silence, 

And  see  the  ruin  on  my  country  fall. 

Nor  would  I  deem  an  enemy  to  the  state 

Friend  to  myself;  remembering  still  that  she, 

She  only  brings  us  safe ;  her  deck  we  pace, 

Unfoundered  'mid  the  storm,  our  friends  and  we.     190 

So  for  the  good  of  Thebes  her  laws  I'll  frame  : 

And  such  the  proclamation  I  set  forth. 

Touching  the  sons  of  Oedipus,  ev'n  now — 

Eteocles,  who  fighting  for  this  land 

In  battle  has  fall'n,  more  valiant  none  than  he. 

To  bury,  and  no  funeral  rite  omit. 

To  brave  men  paid — their  solace  in  the  grave  : 

Not  so  his  brother,  Polyneices  :  he. 

From  exile  back  returning,  utterly 

With  fire  his  country  and  his  fathers'  gods  200 


ANTIGONE.  149 


Would  fain  have  burnt,  fain  would  with  kinsmen's  blood 

Have  slaked  his  thirst,  or  dragged  us  captive  hence  : 

Therefore  to  all  this  city  it  is  proclaimed 

That  none  may  bury,  none  make  moan  for  him, 

But  leave  him  lying  all  ghastly  where  he  fell, 

Till  fowls  o'  the  air  and  dogs  have  picked  his  bones. 

So  am  I  purposed:  not  at  least  by  me 

Shall  traitors  be  preferred  to  honest  men  : 

But,  whoso  loves  this  city,  him  indeed 

I  shall  not  cease  to  honour,  alive  or  dead.  210 

Chor.  Creon,  son  of  Menoeceus,  'tis  thy  pleasure 
The  friend  and  foe  of  Thebes  so  to  requite : 
And,  whatso  pleases  thee,  that  same  is  law, 
Both  for  our  Theban  dead  and  us  who  live. 

Cre.   Look  to  it,  then,  my  bidding  is  performed. 

Chor.  Upon  some  younger  man  impose  this  burden. 

Cre.  To  watch  the  body,  sentinels  are  set. 

Chor.  What  service  more  then  wouldst  thou  lay  on 
us? 

Cre.  That  ye  resist  whoever  disobeys. 

Chor.  Who  is  so  senseless  that  desires  to  die  ?         220 

Cre.  The  penalty  is  death  :  yet  hopes  deceive. 
And  men  wax  foolish  oft  through  greed  of  gain. 

Sent.  That  I  come  hither,  king,  nimble  of  foot, 
And  breathless  with  my  haste,  I'll  not  profess : 
For  many  a  doubtful  halt  upon  the  way, 
And  many  a  wheel  to  the  right-about,  I  had. 


I50  ANTIGONE. 


Oft  as  my  prating  heart  gave  counsel,  '  Fool, 

What  ails  thee  going  into  the  lion's  mouth  ? ' 

Then,  '  Blockhead,  wilt  thou  tarry  ?  if  Creon  learns 

This  from  another  man,  shalt  thou  not  smart  ? '  230 

So  doubtfully  I  fared — much  haste,  scant  speed — 

And,  if  the  way  was  short,  'twas  long  to  me. 

But  to  come  hither  to  thee  prevailed  at  last. 

And,  though  the  speech  be  nought,  yet  I  will  speak. 

For  I  have  come  fast  clutching  at  the  hope 

That  nought's  to  suffer  but  what  fate  decrees. 

Cre.  What  is  it  that  hath  troubled  thus  thy  mind  ? 

Sent.  First  for  myself  this  let  me  say  :  the  deed 
I  neither  did,  nor  saw  who  was  the  doer, 
And  'twere  not  just  that  I  should  suffer  harm.  240 

Cre.  Wisely,  thyself  in  covert,  at  the  mark 
Thou  aimest :  some  shrewd  news,  methinks,  thou'lt  tell. 

Sent.  Danger  to  face,  well  may  a  man  be  cautious. 

Cre.  Speak  then,  and  go  thy  way,  and  make  an  end. 

Sent.  Now  I  will  speak.     Some  one  ev'n  now  hath 
buried 
The  body  and  is  gone ;  with  thirsty  dust 
Sprinkling  it  o'er,  and  paying  observance  due. 

Cre.  How  ?     By  what  man  was  dared  a  deed  so  rash  ? 

Sent.  I  cannot  tell.     No  mattock's  stroke  indeed, 
Nor  spade's  upcast  was  there  :  hard  was  the  ground,    250 
Baked  dry,  unbroken  :  track  of  chariot-wheels 
Was  none,  nor  any  sign  who  did  this  thing. 


ANTIGONE.  151 


But  he  who  kept  the  watch  at  earliest  dawn 

Showed  to  us  all — a  mystery,  hard  to  clear. 

Not  buried  was  the  dead  man,  but  concealed, 

With  dust  besprinkled,  as  for  fear  of  sin  : 

And  neither  of  dog,  nor  any  beast  of  prey. 

That  came,  that  tore  the  body,  found  we  trace. 

Then  bitter  words  we  bandied  to  and  fro. 

Denouncing  each  the  other ;  and  soon  to  blows  260 

Our  strife  had  grown^was  none  would  keep  the  peace — 

For  every  one  was  guilty  of  the  deed. 

And  none  confessed,  but  all  denied  they  knew. 

And  we  were  fain  to  handle  red-hot  iron. 

Or  walk  through  fire  barefoot,  or  swear  by  heaven, 

That  neither  had  we  done  it,  nor  had  shared 

His  secret  with  who  planned  it  or  who  wrought. 

So  all  in  vain  we  questioned :  and  at  last 

One  spake,  and  all  who  heard  him,  bowed  by  fear. 

Bent  to  the  earth  their  faces,  knowing  not  270 

How  to  gainsay,  nor  doing  what  he  said 

How  we  might  'scape  mischance.     This  deed  to  thee 

He  urged  that  we  should  show,  and  hide  it  not. 

And  his  advice  prevailed ;  and  by  the  lot 

To  luckless  me  this  privilege  befell. 

Unwilling  and  unwelcome  is  my  errand, 

A  bearer  of  ill  news,  whom  no  man  loves. 

Chor.  O  king,  my  thought  hath  counselled  me  long 
since, 


152  ANTIGONE. 


Haply  this  deed  is  ordered  by  the  gods.  279 

Cre.  Cease,  ere  my  wrath  is  kindled  at  thy  speech, 
Lest  thou  be  found  an  old  man  and  a  fool. 
Intolerably  thou  pratest  of  the  gods. 
That  they  to  yonder  dead  man  have  respect. 
Yea,  for  what  service  with  exceeding  honour 
Sought  they  his  burial,  who  came  here  to  burn 
Their  pillared  shrines  and  temple-offerings, 
And  of  their  land  and  of  their  laws  make  havoc  ? 
Or  seest  thou  that  the  gods  allow  the  wicked  ? 
Not  so  :  but  some  impatient  of  my  will 
Among  my  people  made  a  murmuring,  29° 

Shaking  their  heads  in  secret,  to  the  yoke 
With  stubborn  necks  unbent,  and  hearts  disloyal 
Full  certainly  I  know  that  they  with  bribes 
Have  on  these  men  prevailed  to  do  this  deed. 
Of  all  the  evils  current  in  this  world 
Most  mischievous  is  gold.     This  hath  laid  waste 
Fair  cities,  and  unpeopled  homes  of  men  : 
Many  an  honest  heart  hath  the  false  lure 
Of  gold  seduced  to  walk  in  ways  of  shame ; 
And  hence  mankind  are  versed  in  villanies,  300 

And  of  all  godless  acts  have  learnt  the  lore. 
But,  who  took  hire  to  execute  this  work, 
Wrought  to  their  own  undoing  at  the  last. 
Since,  if  the  dread  of  Zeus  I  still  revere. 
Be  well  assured — and  what  I  speak  I  swear — 


ANTIGONE,  153 


Unless  the  author  of  this  burial 

Ye  find,  and  in  my  sight  produce  him  here, 

For  you  mere  death  shall  not  suffice,  until 

Gibbeted  alive  this  outrage  ye  disclose, 

That  ye  may  know  what  gains  are  worth  the  winning,  310 

And  henceforth  clutch  the  wiselier,  having  learnt 

That  to  seek  gain  in  all  things  is  not  well. 

For  from  ill-gotten  pelf  the  lives  of  men 

Ruined  than  saved  more  often  shall  ye  see. 

Sent.    May  I  speak  a  word,  or  thus  am  I  dismissed  ? 

Cre.  Know'st  thou  not  that  ev'n  now  thy  voice  offends  ? 

Sent.  Do  I  afflict  thy  hearing  or  thy  heart  ? 

Cre.  Where  I  am  pained,  it  skills  not  to  define. 

Sent.  The  doer  grieves  thy  mind,  but  I  thine  ears. 

Cre.  That  thou  wast  born  to  chatter,  'tis  too  plain.  320 

Sent.  And  therefore  not  the  doer  of  this  deed. 

Cre.  At  thy  life's  cost  thou  didst  it,  bought  with  gold. 

Sent.  Alas! 
'Tis  pity,  men  should  judge,  yet  judge  amiss. 

Cre.  Talk  you  of  'judging'  glibly  as  you  may — 
Who  did  this  deed,  I'll  know,  or  ye  shall  own 
That  all  your  wondrous  winnings  end  in  loss. 

Sent.  With  all  my  heart  I  wish  he  may  be  found : 
But  found  or  no — for  that's  as  fortune  will — 
I  shall  not  show  my  face  to  you  again. 
Great  cause  I  have  to  thank  the  gracious  gods,  330 

Saved  past  all  hope  and  reckoning  even  now. 


154  ANTIGONE. 


Chor.  Many  are  the  wonders  of  the  world,   \Strophe  i . 
And  none  so  wonderful  as  Man. 
Over  the  waters  wan 
His  storm-vext  bark  he  steers, 
While  the  fierce  billows  break 
Round  his  path,  and  o'er  his  head  : 
And  the  Earth-mother,  first  of  gods. 
The  ageless,  the  indomitable, 

With  his  ploughing  to  and  fro  340 

He  wearieth,  year  by  year  : 
In  the  deep  furrow  toil  the  patient  mules. 
The  birds  o'  the  air  he  snares  and  takes,    \Antistrophe  i. 
All  the  light-hearted  fluttering  race  : 
And  tribes  of  savage  beasts, 
And  creatures  of  the  deep. 
Meshed  in  his  woven  toils, 
Own  the  master-mind  of  man. 
Free  lives  of  upland  and  of  wild 
By  human  arts  are  curbed  and  tamed  : 
See  the  horse's  shaggy  neck  350 

Submissive  to  the  yoke — 

And  strength  untired  of  mountain-roaming  bulls. 
Language  withal  he  learnt,  [Strophe  2. 

And  Thought  that  as  the  wind  is' free, 
And  aptitudes  of  civic  life  : 
Ill-lodged  no  more  he  lies, 
His  roof  the  sky,  the  earth  his  bed, 


I 


ANTIGONE.  155 


Screened  now  from  piercing  frost  and  pelting  rain ; 

All-fertile  in  resource,  resourceless  never 

Meets  he  the  morrow;  only  death  360 

He  wants  the  skill  to  shun  : 

But  many  a  fell  disease  the  healer's  art  hath  foiled. 

So  soaring  far  past  hope,  [Antistrophe  2. 

The  wise  inventiveness  of  man 

Finds  diverse  issues,  good  and  ill: 

If  from  their  course  he  wrests 

The  firm  foundations  of  the  state, 

Laws,  and  the  justice  he  is  sworn  to  keep, 

High  in  the  city,  citiless  I  deem  him,  370 

Dealing  with  baseness  :  overbold. 

May  he  my  hearth  avoid. 

Nor  let  my  thoughts  with  his,  who  does  such  deeds,  agree ! 

What  strange  portentous  sight  is  this, 

I  doubt  my  eyes,  beholding?     This — 

How  shall  I  gainsay  what  I  know  ? — 

This  maiden  is — Antigone  ! 

Daughter  of  Oedipus, 

Hapless  child  of  a  hapless  sire,  380 

What  hast  thou  done  ?     It  cannot  be 

That  thou  hast  transgressed  the  king's  command — 

That,  taken  in  folly,  thee  they  bring ! 

Sent.  This  same  is  she  that  did  the  burial : 
We  caught  her  in  the  act.     But  where's  the  king  ? 

Chor.  Back  from  the  palace  in  good  time  he  comes. 


156  ANTIGONE. 


Cre.  What   chance  is  this,   to  which    my  steps    are 
timed  ? 

Sent.  Nothing,  sir  king,  should  men  swear  not  to  do ; 
For  second  thoughts  to  first  thoughts  give  the  lie. 
Hither,  I  made  full  sure,  I  scarce  should  come  390 

Back,  by  your  threats  beruffled  as  I  was. 
Yet  here,  surprised  by  most  unlooked-for  joy, 
That  trifles  all  delights  that  e'er  I  knew, 
I  bring  you — though  my  coming  breaks  my  oath — 
This  maiden,  whom,  busied  about  the  corpse, 
We  captured.     This  time  were  no  lots  to  throw : 
My  own  good  fortune  this,  and  none  but  mine. 
Now  therefore,  king,  take  her  yourself  and  try  her, 
And  question  as  you  will :  but  I  have  earned 
Full  clearance  and  acquittal  of  this  coil.  400 

Cre.  W^here,  on  what  manner,  was  your  captive  taken  ? 

Sent.  Burying  the  man,  we  took  her  :  all  is  told. 

Cre.  Art  thou  advised  of  this  ?     Is  it  the  truth  ? 

Sent.  I  say  I  saw  her  burying  the  body, 
That  you  forbade.     Is  that  distinct  and  clear  ? 

Cre.  How  was  she  seen,  and  taken  in  the  act  ? 

Sent.  So  it  fell  out.     When  I  had  gone  from  hence, 
With  thy  loud  threats  yet  sounding  in  my  ears, 
We  swept  off  all  the  dust  that  hid  the  limbs. 
And  to  the  light  stripped  bare  the  clammy  corpse,        410 
And  on  the  hill's  brow  sat,  and  faced  the  wind, 
Choosing  a  spot  clear  of  the  body's  stench. 


ANTIGONE.  157 


Roundly  we  chid  each  other  to  the  work ; 

'  No  sleeping  at  your  post  there '  was  our  word. 

So  did  we  keep  the  watch,  till  in  mid-heaven 

The  sun's  bright-burning  orb  above  us  hung, 

With  fierce  noon-heat :  and  now  a  sudden  blast 

Swept,  and  a  storm  of  dust,  that  vexed  the  sky 

And  choked  the  plain,  and  all  the  leaves  o'  the  trees   419 

O'  the  plain  were  marred,  and  the  wide  heaven  it  filled: 

We  with  shut  eyes  the  heaven-sent  plague  endured. 

And,  when  after  long  time  its  force  was  spent. 

We  saw  this  maiden,  and  a  bitter  cry 

She  poured,  as  of  a  wailing  bird  that  sees 

Her  empty  nest  dismantled  of  its  brood  : 

So  she,  when  she  espied  the  body  bare. 

Cried  out  and  wept,  and  many  a  grievous  curse 

Upon  their  heads  invoked  by  whom  'twas  done. 

And  thirsty  dust  she  sprinkled  with  her  hands. 

And  lifted  up  an  urn,  fair-wrought  of  brass,  430 

And  with  thrice-poured  Hbations  crowned  the  dead. 

We  saw  it  and  we  hasted,  and  at  once, 

All  undismayed,  our  captive,  hemmed  her  round, 

And  with  the  two  offences  charged  her  there. 

Both  first  and  last.     Nothing  did  she  deny, 

But  made  me  glad  and  sorry,  owning  all. 

For  to  have  slipped  one's  own  neck  from  the  noose 

Is  sweet,  yet  no  one  likes  to  get  his  friends 

In  trouble :  but  my  nature  is  to  make 


158  ANTIGONE, 


All  else  of  small  account,  so  I  am  safe.  440 

Cre.  Speak  thou,  who  bendest  on  the  earth  thy  gaze, 
Are  these  things,  which  are  witnessed,  true  or  false  ? 
Ant.  Not   false,   but   true :    that  which   he   saw,   he 

speaks. 
Cre.  So,  sirrah,  thou  art  free ;  go  where  thou  wilt. 
Loosed  from  the  burden  of  this  heavy  charge. 
But  tell  me  thou — and  let  thy  speech  be  brief — 
The  edict  hadst  thou  heard,  which  this  forbade  ? 

Afit.  I  could  not  choose  but  hear  what  all  men  heard. 
Cre.  And  didst  thou  dare  to  disobey  the  law  ?  449 

Ant.  Nowise  from  Zeus,  methought,  this  edict  came. 
Nor  Justice,  that  abides  among  the  gods 
In  Hades,  who  ordained  these  laws  for  men. 
Nor  did  I  deem  thine  edicts  of  such  force 
That  they,  a  mortal's  bidding,  should  o'erride 
Unwritten  laws,  eternal  in  the  heavens. 
Not  of  to-day  or  yesterday  are  these. 
But  live  from  everlasting,  and  from  whence 
They  sprang,  none   knoweth.      I   would   not,   for   the 

breach 
Of  these,  through  fear  of  any  human  pride. 
To  heaven  atone.     I  knew  that  I  must  die  :  460 

How  else  ?     Without  thine  edict,  that  were  so. 
And  if  before  my  time,  why,  this  were  gain. 
Compassed  about  with  ills,  who  lives,  as  I, 
Death,  to  such  life  as  his,  must  needs  be  gain. 


ANTIGONE.  159 


So  is  it  to  me  to  undergo  this  doom 

No  grief  at  all :  but  had  I  left  my  brother, 

My  mother's  child,  unburied  where  he  lay, 

Then  I  had  grieved ;  but  now  this  grieves  me  not. 

Senseless  I  seem  to  thee,  so  doing  ?     Belike 

A  senseless  judgment  finds  me  void  of  sense.  470 

Chor.   How  in  the  child  the  sternness  of  the  sire 
Shows  stern,  before  the  storm  untaught  to  bend ! 

Cre.  Yet  know  full  well  that  such  o'er-stubborn  wills 
Are  broken  most  of  all,  as  sturdiest  steel. 
Of  an  untempered  hardness,  fresh  from  forge. 
Most  surely  snapped  and  shivered  should  ye  see. 
Lo  how  a  little  curb  has  strength  enough 
To  tame  the  restive  horse  :  for  to  a  slave 
His  masters  give  no  licence  to  be  proud. 
Insult  on  insult  heaped  !     Was't  not  enough  480 

My  promulgated  laws  to  have  transgressed. 
But,  having  done  it,  face  to  face  with  me 
She  boasts  of  this  and  glories  in  the  deed  ? 
I  surely  am  the  woman,  she  the  man. 
If  she  defies  my  power,  and  I  submit. 
Be  she  my  sister's  child,  or  sprung  from  one 
More  near  of  blood  than  all  my  house  to  me, 
Not  so  shall  they  escape  my  direst  doom — 
She  and  her  sister :  for  I  count  her  too 
Guilty  no  less  of  having  planned  this  work.  490 

Go,  call  her  hither :  in  the  house  I  saw  her 


i6o  ANTIGONE. 


Raving  ev'n  now,  nor  mistress  of  her  thoughts. 
So  oft  the  mind,  revolving  secret  crime, 
Makes  premature  disclosure  of  its  guilt. 
But  this  is  hateful,  when  the  guilty  one. 
Detected,  thinks  to  glorify  his  fault. 

Ant  To  kill  me — wouldst  thou  more  with  me  than 
this? 

Cre.  This  is  enough  :  I  do  desire  no  more. 

Ant  Why  dost  thou  then  delay  ?     I  have  no  pleasure 
To  hear  thee  speak — have  not  and  would  not  have  :     500 
Nor  less  distasteful  is  my  speech  to  thee. 
Yet  how  could  I  have  won  myself  a  praise 
More  honourable  than  this,  of  burying 
My  brother  ?     This  from  every  voice  should  win 
Approval,  might  but  fear  men's  lips  unseal. 
But  kings  are  fortunate — not  least  in  this. 
That  they  may  do  and  speak  what  things  they  will. 

Cre.  All  Thebes  sees  this  with  other  eyes  than  thine. 

Ant.  They  see  as  I,  but  bate  their  breath  to  thee.     509 

Cre.  And  art  thou  not  ashamed,  from  them  to  differ  ? 

Ant.  To  reverence  a  brother  is  not  shameful. 

Cre.  And  was  not  he  who  died  for  Thebes  thy  brother? 

A7it.  One  mother  bore  us,  and  one  sire  begat. 

Cre.  Yet,  honourmg  both,  thou  dost  dishonour  him. 

Ant.  He  in  the  grave  will  not  subscribe  to  this. 

Cre.  How,  if  no  less  thou  dost  revere  the  guilty  ? 

Ant.  'Twas  not  his  slave  that  perished,  but  his  brother. 


ANTIGONE.  l6i 


I 


Cre.  The  enemy  of  this  land  :  its  champion,  he. 

Ant.  Yet  Death  of  due  observance  must  not  fail. 

Cre.  Just  and  unjust  urge  not  an  equal  claim.  520 

Ant.  Perchance  in  Hades  'tis  a  holy  deed. 

Cre.  Hatred,  not  ev'n  in  death,  converts  to  love. 

Ant.  Not  in  your  hates,  but  in  your  loves,  I'd  share. 

Cre.  Go  to  the  shades,  and,  if  thou'lt  love,  love  there  : 
No  woman,  while  I  live,  shall  master  me. 

Chor.  See,  from  the  palace  comes  Ismene — 
Sisterly  drops  from  her  eyes  down-shedding: 
Clouded  her  brows  droop,  heavy  with  sorrow ; 
And  the  blood-red  tinge  of  a  burning  blush 
Covers  her  beautiful  downcast  face.  530 

Cre.  Thou,  who  hast  crept,  a  serpent  in  my  home, 
Draining  my  blood,  unseen ;  and  I  knew  not 
Rearing  two  pests,  to  overset  my  throne ; 
Speak — wilt  thou  too  confess  that  in  this  work 
Thou  hadst  a  hand,  or  swear  thou  didst  not  know  ? 

Isju.  I'll  say  the  deed  was  mine,  if  she  consents  : 
My  share  of  the  blame  I  bear,  and  do  not  shrink. 

Ant.  Justice  forbids  thy  claim  :  neither  didst  thou 
Agree,  nor  I  admit  thee  to  my  counsels. 

Ism.  I  am  not  ashamed,  in  thine  extremity,  540 

To  make  myself  companion  of  thy  fete. 

Ant.  Whose  was  the  deed,  know  Hades  and  the  dead  : 
I  love  not  friends,  who  talk  of  friendliness. 

Ism.  Sister,  disdain  me  not,  but  let  me  pour 


i62  ANTIGONE. 


My  blood  with  thine,  an  offering  to  the  dead. 

Ant.  Leave  me  to  die  alone,  nor  claim  the  work 
Thou  wouldst  not  help.     My  death  will  be  enough. 

Is7n.  What  joy  have  I  to  live,  when  thou  art  gone  ? 

Ant.  Ask  Creon  that  :  thou  art  of  kin  to  him.  549 

Ism.  Why  wilt  thou  grieve  me  with  thy  needless  taunts? 

Ant.  If  I  mock  thee,  'tis  with  a  heavy  heart. 

Is?n.  What  may  I  do  to  serve  thee  even  now  ? 

Ant.  Look  to  thyself:  I  grudge  thee  not  thy  safety. 

Js??i.  And  may  I  not,  unhappy,  share  thy  death  ? 

Ant.  Thou  didst  make  choice  to  live,  but  I  to  die. 
.    Ism.  Might  I  unsay  my  words,  this  were  not  so. 

Ant.  Wise  seemed  we — thou  to  these,  and  I  to  those. 

Ism.  But  now  our  fault  is  equal,  thine  and  mine. 

Ant.  Take  heart  to  live  :  for  so  thou  dost :  but  I- — 
Dead  is  my  life  long  since — to  help  the  dead.  560 

Cre.  One  of  these  two,  methinks,  proves  foolish  now ; 
The  other's  folly  with  her  life  began. 

Ism.  Nay,  for,  O  king,  misfortunes  of  the  wise 
To  madness  turn  the  wisdom  that  they  have. 

Cre.  'Tis  so  with  thee,  choosing  to  share  her  guilt. 

Is7n.   How  should  I  live  alone,  without  my  sister  ? 

Cre.  Call  her  not  thine  :  thou  hast  no  sister  now. 

Ism.  But  wilt  thou  tear  her  from  thy  son's  embrace  ? 

Cre.  Are  there  no  women  in  the  world  but  she  ? 

Ism.  Not  as  their  faith  was  plighted,  each  to  each.    570 

Cre.  An  evil  wife  I  like  not  for  my  son. 


ANTIGONE.  163 


Ant,  Haemon  !  beloved  !  hear  not  thy  father's  scorn. 

Cre.  Thou  and  thy  love  to  me  are  wearisome. 

Chor.  Wilt   thou    indeed    snatch   from   thy    son    his 

bride  ? 
Cre.  'Tis   death    that   will   unloose    their    marriage- 
bond. 
Chor.  It  seems  thou  art  resolved  that  she  must  die  ? 
Cre.  Of  that  we  are  agreed.     Delay  no  more  : 
Ye,  servants,  lead  them  in.     For  from  this  time 
Women  they  needs  must  be,  and  range  no  more  : 
Since  ev'n  the  bold  may  play  the  runaway,  580 

When  death  he  sees  close-creeping  on  his  life. 

Chor.  Happy  indeed  is    the   life    of  the   man  who 
tastes  not  of  trouble  !  [Strophe  1. 

For  when  from  the  gods  a  house  is  shaken, 
Fails  nevermore  the  curse, 
On  most  and  on  least  of  the  race  descending : 
Like  to  a  rolling  wave. 

By  furious  blasts  from  the  Thraceward  driven —  589 

Out  of  the  nethermost  deeps,  out  of  the  fathomless  gloom, 
Casting  up  mire  and  blackness  and  storm-vext  wrack  of 

the  sea — 
And  back,  with  a  moan  like  thunder,  from  the  cliffs  the 

surf  is  hurled. 
So  from  of  old  to  the  Labdacid  race  comes  sorrow  on 
sorrow:  [Antistrophe  i. 

And,  ev'n  as  the  dead,  so  fare  the  living : 


l64 


ANTIGONE. 


Respite  from  ills  is  none, 

Nor  one  generation  redeems  another — 

All  will  some  god  bring  low. 

Now  o'er  the  last  root  of  the  house,  fate-stricken, 

Woe  for  the  light  that  had  shined,  woe  for  the  lingering 

hope !  600 

Smooth  over  all  is  lying  the  blood-stained  dust  they 

have  spread — 
Rash  speech,  and  a  frantic  purpose,  and  the  gods  who 

reign  below. 
What  human  trespass,  Zeus,  "  [Strophe  2. 

May  circumscribe  thy  p>ower. 
Which  neither  sleep  o'ercomes. 
That  saps  the  strength  of  all  things  else, 
Nor  months  that  run  their  tireless  course. 
But  thou  for  ever  with  an  ageless  sway 
The  dazzling  splendour  dost  possess 
Of  thine  Olympian  home  ?  610 

'Tis  now  as  it  hath  ever  been, 
And  still  in  years  to  come 
The  old  order  will  not  change  : 
Never  from  human  life  departs 
The  universal  scourge  of  man. 
His  own  presumptuous  pride. 

Hope  wings  her  daring  flight,  \Antistrophe  2. 

By  strong  winds  borne  afar — 
And  some  are  blessed ;  and  some 


i 


ANTIGONE.  i6s 


Are  cheated  of  their  vain  desires, 

That  learn  their  folly  all  too  late, 

When  in  the  fire  they  tread  with  scorchbd  feet. 

'Twas  said  of  old — and  time  approves  690 

The  wisdom  of  the  saw — 

That,  when  in  foolish  ways,  that  end 

In  ruin,  gods  would  lead 

A  mortal's  mind  astray, 

Evil  that  man  miscalls  his  good  : 

A  brief  while  then  he  holds  his  course 

By  fatuous  pride  unscathed. 

See,  thy  son  Haemon  comes  hither,  of  all 

Thy  children  the  last.     Comes  he  lamenting 

The  doom  of  the  maiden,  his  bride  Antigone — 

And  the  frustrated  hope  of  his  marriage  ?  630 

Cre.  Soon  we  shall  know,  better  than  seers  could  say. 
My  son,  in  anger  art  thou  come  to  me, 
Hearing  the  sentence,  not  to  be  reversed, 
Which  on  thy  destined  bride  I  have  pronounced  ? 
Or  am  I  still  thy  friend,  do  what  I  may  ? 

Haem.  Father,    I    am    in   thy  hand :  with    thy    wise 
counsels 
Thou  dost  direct  me ;  these  I  shall  obey. 
Not  rightly  should  I  deem  of  more  account 
The  winning  of  a  wife  than  thy  good  guidance. 

Cre.  Be  this  thy  dearest  wish  and  next  thy  heart, 
In  all  things  to  uphold  thy  father's  will.  640 


1 66  ANTIGONE. 


For  to  this  end  men  crave  to  see  grow  up 

Obedient  children  round  them  in  their  homes, 

Both  to  requite  their  enemies  with  hate, 

And  render  equal  honour  to  their  friends. 

Whoso  begets  unprofitable  children, 

What  shall  be  said  of  him,  but  that  he  gets 

Grief  for  himself,  loud  laughter  for  his  foes  ? 

Never,  my  son,  let  for  a  woman's  sake 

Reason  give  way  to  sense,  but  know  full  well 

Cold  is  the  pleasure  that  he  clasps,  who  woos  650 

An  evil  woman  to  his  board  and  bed. 

What  wounds  so  deeply  as  an  evil  friend  ? 

Count  then  this  maiden  as  thine  enemy, 

Loathe  her,  and  give  her  leave,  in  that  dark  world 

To  which  she  goes,  to  marry  with  another. 

For  out  of  all  the  city  since  I  found 

Her  only,  and  her  openly,  rebellious, 

I  shall  not  to  the  city  break  my  word. 

But  she  shall  die.     Let  her  appeal  to  Zeus, 

And  sing  the  sanctity  of  kindred  blood — 

What  then  ?     If  in  my  own  house  I  shall  nurse 

Rebellion,  how  shall  strangers  not  rebel  ?  660 

He  who  to  his  own  kith  and  kin  does  right, 

Will  in  the  state  deal  righteously  with  all. 

Of  such  a  man  I  shall  not  fear  to  boast. 

Well  he  can  rule,  and  well  he  would  obey, 

And  in  the  storm  of  battle  at  his  post 


ANTIGONE.  167 


Firm  he  would  stand,  a  comrade  staunch  and  true. 

But  praise  from  me  that  man  shall  never  have, 

Who  either  boldly  thrusts  aside  the  law 

Or  takes  upon  him  to  instruct  his  rulers. 

Whom,  by  the  state  empowered,  he  should  obey,      670 

In  little  and  in  much,  in  right  and  wrong. 

The  worst  of  evils  is  to  disobey. 

Cities  by  this  are  ruined,  homes  of  men 

Made  desolate  by  this ;  this  in  the  battle 

Breaks  into  headlong  rout  the  wavering  line ; 

The  steadfast  ranks,  the  many  lives  unhurt, 

Are  to  obedience  due.     We  must  defend 

The  government  and  order  of  the  state. 

And  not  be  governed  by  a  wilful  girl. 

We'll  yield  our  place  up,  if  we  must,  to  men ; 

To  women  that  we  stooped,  shall  not  be  said.  680 

Chor.  Unless  an  old  man's  judgment  is  at  fault. 
These  words  of  thine,  we  deem,  are  words  of  wisdom. 

Haem.  Reason,  my  father,  in  the  mind  of  man. 
Noblest  of  all  their  gifts,  the  gods  implant. 
And  how  to  find  thy  reasoning  at  fault, 
I  know  not,  and  to  learn  I  should  be  loth ; 
Yet  for  another  it  might  not  be  amiss. 
But  I  for  thee  am  vigilant  to  mark 
All  that  men  say,  or  do,  or  find  to  blame. 
Thy  presence  awes  the  simple  citizen  690 

From  speaking  words  that  shall  not  please  thine  ear, 


i68  ANTIGONE. 


But  I  hear  what  they  whisper  in  the  dark, 

And  how  the  city  for  this  maid  laments, 

That  of  all  women  she  the  least  deserving 

Dies  for  most  glorious  deeds  a  death  most  cruel, 

Who  her  own  brother,  fall'n  among  the  slain, 

Left  not  unburied  there,  to  be  devoured 

By  ravening  dogs  or  any  bird  o'  the  air : — 

'  Should  not  her  deed  be  blazoned  all  in  gold  ? ' 

Upon  the  darkness  still  such  whisper  grows.  700 

But  I  of  all  possessions  that  I  have 

Prize  most,  my  father,  thy  prosperity. 

Welldoing  and  fair  fame  of  sire  to  son, 

Of  son  to  sire,  is  noblest  ornament. 

Cleave  not,  I  pray  thee,  to  this  constant  mind, 

That  what  thou  sayest,  and  nought  beside,  is  truth. 

For  men  who  think  that  only  they  are  wise, 

None  eloquent,  right-minded  none,  but  they, 

Often,  when  searched,  prove  empty.     'Tis  no  shame, 

Ev'n  if  a  man  be  wise,  that  he  should  yet  710 

Learn  many  things,  and  not  hold  out  too  stiffly. 

Beside  the  torrent's  course,  of  trees  that  bend 

Each  bough,  thou  seest,  and  every  twig  is  safe ; 

Those  that  resist  are  by  the  roots  uptorn. 

And  ships,  that  brace  with  stubborn  hardihood 

Their  mainsheet  to  the  gale,  pursue  their  voyage 

Keel-uppermost,  their  sailors'  thwarts  reversed. 

Cease  from  thy  wrath ;  be  not  inexorable  : 


ANTIGONE,  169 


I 


For  if  despite  my  youth  I  too  may  think 

My  thought,  I'll  say  that  best  it  is  by  far  720 

That  men  should  be  all-knowing  if  they  may, 

But  if — as  oft  the  scale  inclines  not  so — 

Why  then,  by  good  advice  'tis  good  to  learn. 

Chor.  What  in  thy  son's  speech,  king,  is  seasonable 
'Tis  fit  thou  shouldst  receive  :  and  thou  in  his  : 
For  there  is  reason  in  the  words  of  both. 

Cre.  Shall  I,  grown  grey  with  age,  be  taught  indeed — 
And  by  this  boy — to  think  what  he  thinks  right  ? 

Haem,  Nothing  that  is  not  right  :  though  I  am  young, 
Consider  not  my  years,  but  how  I  act. 

Cre,  Is  this  thine  act — to  honour  the  unruly  ?  730 

Haem.  Wrongdoers,  dishonour — outrage,  if  thou  wilt ! 

Cre.  Hath  not  this  maiden  caught  this  malady  ? 

Haem.  The  general  voice  of  Thebes  says  no  to  that. 

Cre.  Shall    Thebes    prescribe    to   me   how    I   must 
govern  ? 

Haem.   How  all  too  young  art  thou  in  speaking  thus  ! 

Cre.  Whose  business  is't  but  mine  how  Thebes  is 
governed  ? 

Haem.  A  city  is  none,  that  to  one  man  belongs. 

Cre.  Is  it  not  held,  the  city  is  the  king's  ? 

Haem.  Finely  thou'dst  rule,  alone,  a  land  dispeopled!  739 

Ci'e.  It  seems  this  boy  will  plead  the  woman's  cause. 

Haem.  Woman  art  thou  ?  my  care  is  all  for  thee. 

Cre.  Shameless — is't  right  to  wrangle  with  thy  father  ? 


170  ANTIGONE. 


Haem,  I  see  that  wrong  for  right  thou  dost  mistake. 

Cre.  Do  I  mistake,  to  reverence  my  office  ? 

Haem.  What  reverence,  heaven's  honours  to  contemn? 

Cre.  O  hateful  spirit,  ruled  by  a  woman's  will ! 

Haem.  To  no  base  service  shalt  thou  prove  me  bound. 

Cre.  Art  thou  not  pleading  all  the  time  for  her  ? 

Haem.  For  thee  and  me,  and  for  the  gods  below. 

Cre.  Thou  shalt  not  marry  her,  this  side  the  grave.  750 

Haem.  If  she  must  die,  she  shall :  but  not  alone. 

Cre.  Art  grown  so  bold,  thou  dost  fly  out  in  threats  ? 

Haem.  What  threats,  to  argue  with  a  foolish  purpose  ? 

Cre.  Thou'lt  rue — unwise — thy  wisdom  spent  on  me. 

Haem.  Thou  art  my  father;  or  wise   I   scarce  had 
called  thee. 

Cre.  Slave — to  thy  mistress  babble,  not  to  me. 

Haem.  Wouldst  thou  have  all  the  talking  for  thine 
own? 

Cre.  Is't  come  to  this  ?     But,  by  Olympus  yonder. 
Know  well,  thou  shalt  be  sorry  for  these  taunts. 
Wherewith  thou  dost  upbraid  me.     Slaves,  what  ho  ! 
Bring  that  abhorrence  hither,  that  she  may  die,  760 

Now,  in  her  bridegroom's  sight,  whilst  here  he  stands. 

Haem.  Neither  in  my  sight — imagine  no  such  thing — 
Shall  she  be  slain ;  nor  shalt  thou  from  this  hour 
Look  with  thine  eyes  upon  my  face  again : 
To  friends  who  love  thy  madness  I  commit  thee. 

Chor.  Suddenly,  sire,  in  anger  he  is  gone  : 


ANTIGONE. 


Young  minds  grow  desperate,  by  grief  distemper'd. 

Cre.  More  than  a  man  let  him  conceive  and  do ; 
He  shall  not  save  these  maidens  from  their  doom. 

Chor.  Both  sisters  art  thou  purposed  to  destroy?      770 

Cre.  Not  her  whose  hands  sinned  not ;  thou  askest 
well. 

Chor.  What  of  the  other  ?  how  shall  she  be  slain  ? 

Cre.  By  paths  untrodden  of  men  I  will  conduct  her, 
And  shut  her,  living,  in  a  vault,  rock-hewn. 
And  there,  with  food,  no  more  than  shall  suffice 
To  avert  the  guilt  of  murder  from  the  city, 
To  Hades,  the  one  god  whom  she  reveres, 
She,  praying  not  to  die,  either  shall  have 
Her  asking,  or  shall  learn,  albeit  too  late. 
That  to  revere  the  dead  is  fruitless  toil.  780 

Chor.     O     Love,     our      conqueror,     matchless     in 
might,  [Strophe. 

Thou  prevailest,  O  Love,  thou  dividest  the  prey : 
In  damask  cheeks  of  a  maiden 
Thy  watch  through  the  night  is  set. 
Thou  roamest  over  the  sea ; 
On  the  hills,  in  the  shepherds'  huts,  thou  art ; 
Nor  of  deathless  gods,  nor  of  short-lived  men. 
From  thy  madness  any  escapeth.  790 

Unjust,     through     thee,     are     the     thoughts     of    the 
just,  [AntistropJie. 

Thou  dost  bend  them,  O  Love,  to  thy  will,  to  thy  spite. 


172  ANTIGONE. 


Unkindly  strife  thou  hast  kindled, 

This  wrangling  of  son  with  sire. 

For  great  laws,  throned  in  the  heart, 

To  the  sway  of  a  rival  power  give  place. 

To  the  love-light  flashed  from  a  fair  bride's  eyes  : 

In  her  triumph  laughs  Aphrodite. 

Me,  even  now,  me  also. 

Seeing  these  things,  a  sudden  pity 

Beyond  all  governance  transports  : 

The  fountains  of  my  tears 

I  can  refrain  no  more. 

Seeing  Antigone  here  to  the  bridal  chamber 

Come,  to  the  all-receiving  chamber  of  Death. 

Ant  Friends  and  my  countrymen,  ye  see  me 
Upon  the  last  of  all  my  ways 
Set  forth,  the  Sun-god's  latest  light 
Beholding,  now  and  never  more  : 
But  Death,  who  giveth  sleep  to  all, 
Yet  living  leads  me  hence 
To  the  Acherontian  shore. 
Of  marriage  rites  amerced. 
And  me  no  bridal  song  hath  ever  sung, 
But  Acheron  will  make  of  me  his  bride. 

Chor.  Therefore  renowned,  with  praise  of  men, 
To  yonder  vault  o'  the  dead  thou  goest, 
By  no  slow-wasting  sickness  stricken, 
Nor  doomed  to  fall  with  those  who  win 


ANTIGONE.  173 


The  wages  of  the  swords  they  drew,  820 

But,  being  to  thyself  a  law. 

Alone  of  mortals  the  dark  road 

To  deathward,  living,  thou  shalt  tread. 

Ant.  I  heard  of  one,  most  piteous  in  her  ending, 
That  stranger,  child  of  Phrygian  Tantalus, 
On  heights  of  Sipylus  enclasped, 
And  ivy-like  enchained, 
By  clinging  tendrils  of  the  branching  rock, 
Who  day  and  night  unceasingly 
'Mid  drizzle  of  rain  and  drift  of  snow 
Slow-wasting  in  her  place 

Stands,  as  the  tale  is  told,  830 

Her  lids  surcharged  with  weeping,  and  her  neck 
And  bosom  drenched  with  falling  of  her  tears  : — 
A  fate  most  like  to  hers 
Seals  up  with  sleep  these  eyes  of  mine. 

Chor.  She  was  a  goddess,  sprung  from  gods  : 
Mortals,  of  mortal  birth,  are  we. 
But  for  one  dead  to  win  with  those 
Who  rank  no  lower  than  the  gods — 
In  life  and  afterwards  in  death — 
An  equal  lot,  were  much  to  hear. 

Ant  Ah,  I  am  mocked  !     Nay,  by  our  fathers'  gods, 
Withhold  thy  taunts  till  I  am  gone —  840 

Gone  and  evanished  from  thy  sight. 
O  Thebes,  my  city  ! 


174 


ANTIGONE. 


O  wealthy  men  of  Thebes  ! 

But  ye  will  witness — yes,  to  you  I  turn — 

O  fount  Dircaean,  and  this  sacred  grove 

Of  Thebb  the  fair-charioted, 

By  what  stern  law,  and  how  of  friends  unwept, 

To  that  strange  grave  I  go. 

The  massy  dungeon  for  my  burial  heaped. 

O  luckless  wight,  850 

Exiled  from  earth  nor  housed  below, 

Both  by  the  living  and  the  dead  disowned ! 

Chor.  To  furthest  brink  of  boldness  thou  didst  stray, 
And  stumbling  there,  at  foot  of  Justice'  throne. 
Full  heavily,  my  daughter,  hast  thou  fallen: 
Yet  of  thy  father's  fault  belike 
This  suffering  pays  the  price. 

Ant.    Thou   hast   touched,   ev'n    there,   my  bitterest 
pang  of  all, 
A  thrice-told  tale,  my  father's  grief —  860 

And  all  our  grievous  doom  that  clung 
About  the  famed  Labdacidae. 

0  that  incestuous  bed 

Of  horror,  and  my  father's  sin — 
The  hapless  mother  who  bore  him  to  the  light. 
By  him  enclasped — wherefrom  I  luckless  sprang : 
With  whom,  accurst,  unwedded, 

1  must  go  hence  to  dwell. 

O  brother,  a  bride  ill-starred 


ANTIGONE.  175 


Who  to  thy  couch  didst  win,  870 

How,  being  dead,  me  living  thou  hast  slain  ! 

Chor.  Religion  prompts  the  reverent  deed  : 
But  power,  to  whomso  power  belongs, 
Must  nowise  be  transgressed ;  and  thee 
A  self-willed  temper  hath  o'erthrown. 

Ant.  Unwept  and  unfriended. 
Cheered  by  no  song  Hymenaeal — 
Lo,  I  am  led,  heavy-hearted. 
This  road  that  awaits  me. 

The  sacred  light-giving  eye  in  heaven  880 

Now  no  more  must  I  see,  unhappy : 
But  for  my  fate  not  a  tear  falls, 
Not  a  friend  makes  moan. 

Cre.  Know  ye  not,  songs  and  weepings  before  death 
That  none  would  pretermit,  were  he  allowed  ? 
Hence  with  her,  hence,  and  tarry  not,  but  deep 
In  her  tomb-prison,  even  as  I  have  said. 
Leave  her  alone,  forsaken  :  to  die,  or  else 
Live,  in  that  vault  entombed,  if  so  she  will : 
Since  of  this  maiden's  blood  our  hands  are  clean. 
Only  we  ban  her  sojourn  in  the  light.  890 

Ant.  O  tomb !    O  nuptial  chamber !    O  house  deep- 
delved 
In  earth,  safe-guarded  ever !     To  thee  I  come, 
And  to  my  kin  in  thee,  who  many  an  one 
Are  with  Persephone,  dead  among  the  dead  : 


I 

176  ANTIGONE.  * 

And  last  of  all,  most  miserably  by  far, 

I  thither  am  going,  ere  my  life's  term  be  done. 

But  a  good  hope  I  cherish,  that,  come  there. 

My  father's  love  will  greet  me,  yea  and  thine. 

My  mother — and  thy  welcome,  brother  dear  : 

Since,  when  ye  died,  I  with  mine  own  hands  laved      900 

And  dressed  your  limbs,  and  poured  upon  your  graves 

Libations ;  and  like  service  done  to  thee 

Hath  brought  me,  Polyneices,  now  to  this. 

Yet  well  I  honoured  thee,  the  wise  will  say : 

Since  not  for  children's  sake  would  I,  their  mother. 

Nor  for  my  husband,  slain,  and  mouldering  there. 

Have  travailed  thus,  doing  despite  to  Thebes. 

According  to  what  law,  do  I  speak  this  ? 

One  husband  slain,  another  might  have  been. 

And  children  from  another,  losing  these ;  910 

But,  father  and  mother  buried  out  of  sight, 

There  can  be  born  no  brother  any  more. 

Such  was  the  law  whereby  I  held  thee  first 

In  honour ;  but  to  Creon  all  mistaken, 

O  dear  my  brother,  I  seemed,  and  overbold — 

And  now,  made  captive  thus,  he  leads  me  hence 

No  wife,  no  bride  for  ever — of  marriage-joy 

And  nursery  of  children  quite  bereft : 

So  by  my  friends  forsaken  I  depart. 

Living,  unhappy,  to  dim  vaults  of  death.  920 

Yet  I  transgressed — what  ordinance  of  heaven  ? 


ANTIGONE.  177 


Why  to  the  gods,  ill-fated,  any  more 

Should  I  look  up — whom  call  to  succour — since 

Impiety  my  piety  is  named  ? 

But,  if  these  things  are  pleasing  to  the  gods, 

I'll  freely  own  I  suffered  for  my  fault ; 

If  theirs  the  fault,  who  doomed  me,  may  to  them 

No  worse  befall  than  they  unjustly  do  ! 

Chor.  Stormily  still  o'er  the  soul  of  the  maiden 
The  selfsame  gusts  of  passion  sweep.  930 

Cre.  Therefore,  I  warn  them,  ruth  for  their  lingering, 
To  those  who  lead  her,  this  shall  cause. 

Ant.  Short  shrift,  swift  death — ah  !  woe  is  me — 
This  speech  portends. 

Cre.  Lay  to  thy  soul  no  flattering  hope, 
That  unfulfilled  this  doom  may  be. 

Ant.  O  country  of  Thebes  and  my  father's  city, 
And  gods  my  progenitors, 
Lo,  how  they  lead  me — now,  and  delay  not. 
O  all  ye  princes  of  Thebes,  behold  me —  940 

Of  the  race  of  your  kings,  me,  sole  surviving — 
What  things  at  the  hands  of  what  men  I  suffer. 
For  the  fear  of  the  gods  I  feared. 

Chor.  Out  of  the  sunlight  so,  [Strophe  i. 

In  brass-bound  prison-courts, 
Were  pent  the  limbs  of  Danae, 
And  in  a  living  tomb  sealed  up  from  sight ; 
Albeit,  O  daughter,  she  as  thou 

M 


178  ANTIGONE. 


Came  of  a  noble  line, 

And  that  life-quickening  treasure  of  his  golden  rain      950 

She  had  in  charge  from  Zeus  to  keep. 

O  dread  mysterious  power  of  fate, 

That  neither  wealth  nor  war  can  quell, 

Nor  walls  shut  out,  nor  ships  escape, 

Dark-fleeing  o'er  the  foam  ! 

And  that  Edonian  king  [Antistrophe  1. 

Was  bound,  the  choleric  son 

Of  Dryas,  splenetive  and  hot, 

Fast  in  the  rock  by  Dionysus  chained. 

Such  fierce  and  fevered  issue  streams 

From  madness  at  the  height.  959 

With  splenetive  rash  speech  what  madness  had  assailed 

The  vengeful  god,  too  late  he  learned. 

To  women-worshippers  inspired 

Their  torchlit  revels  he  forbade. 

And  flutings  that  the  Muses  loved 

Had  silenced  with  his  scorn. 

From  the  dark  rock-portals  of  the  divided  sea    \Strophe  2. 

Here  go  the  cliffs  of  Bosporus,  and  there 

The  savage  Thracian  coast 

Of  Salmydessus,  where  the  neighbour-worshipped  God 

Of  Battle  saw  the  blinding  blow  accurst,  970 

Dealt  by  that  fierce  stepdame, 

Darkling  descend  on  both  the  sons 

Of  Phineus — on  their  sightless  orbs 


ANTIGONE.  179 


That  plead  for  vengeance,  stricken  through  and  stabbed 
By  the  sharp  shuttle  in  her  murderous  hands. 
Wasted  with  their  sorrow,  their  mother's  hapless  fate 

\Antistrophe  2. 
They  hapless  wept,  and  in  their  mother's  shame 
Had  part,  as  those  base-born  :  980 

Yet  she  from  the  old  Erechtheid  blood  her  birth  derived. 
And  in  deep  caverns  of  the  hills  was  nursed. 
Amid  her  father's  storms, 
Child  of  the  North-wind — up  the  steep 
Hillsides  no  bounding  foal  so  fleet, 
A  daughter  of  the  gods  :  but  her,  O  child, 
Fate's  everlasting  hands  availed  to  reach. 

Teir.  Princes  of  Thebes,  we  come — one  sight  for  both 
Our  common  road  descrying,  as  behoves 
Blind  men  to  find  their  way  by  help  of  others.  990 

Cre.  What  tidings,  old  Teiresias,  dost  thou  bring  ? 

Teir.  Hear  then  the  prophet,  and  attend  his  speech. 

Cre.  Have  I  aforetime  from  thy  wisdom  swerved  ? 

Teir.  So,  clear  of  shoals,  thou  pilotest  the  state. 

Cre.  The  service  thou  hast  rendered  I  attest 

Teir.  Once  more  on  razor's  edge  thy  fortunes  stand. 

Cre.  Hearing  thy  speech,  I  shudder :  tell  me  more. 

Teir.  My  art's  prognostications  hear  and  judge. 
For  in  my  ancient  seat,  to  watch  the  birds 
In  that  their  general  gathering-place,  I  sat,  1000 

And  heard  an  unintelligible  noise, 


I  So  ANTIGONE. 


A  cry  and  clangour  of  birds,  confused  with  rage ; 

And  what  fierce  fray  they  waged  with  murderous  claws, 

I  guessed  too  surely  by  the  whirr  of  wings. 

Scared  by  that  sound,  burnt-offerings  I  then 

Essayed  on  blazing  altars ;  but  no  flame 

Leapt  from  the  sacrifice ;  a  clammy  ooze 

Reeked  from  the  thighs,  and  'mid  the  ashes  dripped, 

Smoking  and  sputtering ;  the  gall  disparted. 

And  on  the  air  was  spent ;  and  the  thigh-bones  lo: 

Of  the  enfolding  fat  fell  stripped  and  bare. 

This  from  this  boy  I  heard,  whose  eyes  beheld 

The  failing  signs  of  sacrifice  obscure  : 

Others  by  me  are  guided,  I  by  him. 

And  by  thy  will  we  are  afflicted  thus. 

For  now  our  hearths  and  altars  every  one 

Have  ravening  dogs  and  birds  fouled  with  the  flesh 

Of  this  poor  fallen  son  of  Oedipus ; 

And  so  no  flame  of  victims  burnt  may  move 

Gods  any  more  to  hearken  to  our  prayers,  lo: 

And  birds  obscene  flap  forth  a  bodeful  cry. 

With  fat  of  human  carrion  newly  gorged. 

Slight  not,  my  son,  such  warning.     For  all  men. 

Both  great  and  small,  are  liable  to  err : 

But  he  who  errs  no  more  unfortunate 

Or  all  unwise  shall  be,  if  having  tripped 

He  rights  the  wrong  nor  stubbornly  persists. 

He  who  persists  in  folly  is  the  fool. 


ANTIGONE.  i8i 


Give  death  his  due  :  stab  not  the  fallen  foe  : 

What  valour  is  in  this,  to  slay  the  slain  ?  1030 

Wisely  I  speak  and  well;  and  sweet  it  is 

To  hear  good  counsel,  when  it  counsels  gain. 

Cre.  Old  man,  ye  all,  as  bowmen  at  a  mark, 
Shoot  at  this  man,  and  with  your  prophecies 
Ye  practise  on  me  too,  and  mine  own  kin 
Mere  merchandise  and  salework  make  of  me. 
Go  to,  get  gain,  and  barter,  if  ye  will, 
Amber  ye  buy  from  Sardis,  and  fine  gold 
Of  Ind  :  but  him,  I  say,  ye  shall  not  bury  : 
No,  not  if  eagles,  ministers  of  Zeus,  1040 

Should  bear  him  piecemeal  to  their  Master's  throne, 
Will  I,  for  fear  of  such  pollution,  grant 
Leave  for  his  burial ;  knowing  well  that  men 
Soil  not  the  stainless  majesty  of  heaven. 
But,  aged  seer,  the  wisest  of  mankind 
Dishonourably  may  fall,  who  fairly  speak 
Dishonourable  words,  and  all  for  gain. 

Teir.  Alas! 
Who  knows,  or  who  considers,  in  this  world — 

Cre.  What  wilt  thou  say  ?    What  commonplace  is  this  ? 

Teir.  How  prudence  is  the  best  of  all  our  wealth?  1050 

Cre.  As  folly,  I  suppose,  our  deadliest  hurt. 

Teir.  Yet  with  this  malady  art  thou  possest. 

Cre.  Reproaches  I'll  not  bandy  with  the  prophet. 

Teir.  Saying  that  I  falsely  prophesy,  thou  dost. 


1 82  ANTIGONE. 


Cre.  So  are  all  prophets ;  'tis  a  covetous  race. 

Teir.  Greed  of  base  gain  marks  still  the  tyrant-sort. 

Cre.  Knowest  thou  that  of  thy  rulers  this  is  said  ? 

Teir.  I  know;  for  thou  through  me  didst  save  the 
state. 

Cre.  Wise  in  thy  craft  art  thou,  but  false  at  heart.    1059 

Teir.  Secrets,  fast-locked,  thou'lt  move  me  to  disclose. 

Cre.  Unlock  them,  only  speaking  not  for  gain. 

Teir.  So,  for  thy  part  indeed,  methinks  I  shall. 

Cre.  Think  not  that  in  my  purpose  thou  shalt  trade. 

Teir.  But  surely  know  that  thou  not  many  more 
Revolving  courses  of  the  sun  shalt  pass. 
Ere  of  thine  own  blood  one,  to  make  amends, 
Dead  for  the  dead,  thou  shalt  have  rendered  up, 
For  that  a  living  soul  thou  hast  sent  below, 
And  with  dishonour  in  the  grave  hast  lodged, 
And  that  one  dead  thou  holdest  here  cut  off  1070 

From  presence  of  the  gods  who  reign  below, 
All  rites  of  death,  all  obsequies  denied — 
With  whom  thou  shouldst  not  meddle,  nor  the  gods 
In  heaven,  but  of  their  due  thou  robb'st  the  dead. 
Therefore  of  Hades  and  the  gods  for  thee 
The  Avengers  wait,  with  ruin  slow  yet  sure, 
To  take  thee  in  the  pit  which  thou  hast  dug. 
Do  I  speak  this  for  gold  ?     Thyself  shalt  judge : 
For,  yet  a  little  while,  and  wailings  loud 
Of  men  and  women  in  thy  house  shall  show. 


ANTIGONE.  183 


Think,  of  each  city  too  what  gathering  rage,  1080 

That  sees  its  mangled  dead  entombed  in  maws 

Of  dogs  and  all  fierce  beasts,  or  borne  by  kites 

With  stench  unhallowed  to  its  hearth-crowned  heights. 

So  like  a  bowman  have  I  launched  at  thee 

In  wrath,  for  thou  provok'st  me,  shafts  indeed 

To  pierce  thy  heart,  and  fail  not,  from  whose  smart 

Thou'lt  not  escape.     But  now,  boy,  lead  me  home, 

That  he  may  vent  his  spleen  on  younger  men. 

And  learn  to  keep  a  tongue  more  temperate. 

And  in  his  breast  a  better  mind  than  now.  1090 

Chor.  The   man    has    prophesied    dread    things,    O 
king. 
And  gone  :  and  never  have  I  known — not  since 
These  temples  changed  their  raven  locks  to  snow — 
That  aught  of  false  this  city  heard  from  him. 

Cre.  Yea,  this  I  know,  and  much  am  I  perplexed  : 
For  hard  it  is  to  yield,  but  standing  firm 
I  fear  to  pluck  swift  ruin  on  my  pride. 

Chor.  Son  of  Menoeceus,  be  advised  in  time. 

Cre.  Say  then,  what  must  I  do  ?  and  I'll  obey. 

Chor.  Go,  from  her  prison  in  the  rock  release         noo 
The  maiden,  and  the  unburied  corpse  inter. 

Cre.  Dost  thou  think  this,  and  wouldst  thou  have  me 
yield  ? 

Chor.  Yea,  king,  and  quickly  \  for  the  gods  cut  short 
With  sudden  scathe  the  foolishness  of  men. 


i84  ANTIGONE. 


Cre,  Hardly  indeed,  but  yet  with  forced  consent 
111  do  it,  stooping  to  necessity. 

Chor.  Do  it,  and  go ;  leave  not  this  task  to  others. 

Cre.  Even  as  I  am,  I'll  go ;  and,  servants,  haste, 
That  hear  and  hear  me  not :  axes  in  hand, 
All  to  yon  spot,  far-seen,  make  good  your  speed.         mo 
But  I,  since  this  way  now  my  mind  is  bent. 
Whom  I  myself  have  bound,  myself  will  loose. 
For  now  my  heart  misgives  me,  he  lives  best, 
Whose  feet  depart  not  from  the  ancient  ways. 

Chor.  Worshipped  by  many  names —  [Strophe  i. 

Glory  of  Theban  Semele, 
Child  of  loud-thundering  Zeus — 
Haunting  the  famed  Italian  fields. 

Whom  as  a  prince  the  hospitable  vale  1120 

Of  the  Eleusinian  Dame  reveres — 
Bacchus,  that  hast  thy  home 
In  Thebes,  the  home  of  Bacchanals, 
Beside  Ismenus'  fertile  stream. 
Where  the  fell  dragon's  teeth  of  old  were  sown  : 
O'er  the  two-crested  peak,  {Antistrophe  i. 

With  nymphs  Corycian  in  thy  train. 
By  springs  of  Castaly, 

The  streaming  levin  lights  thy  path  :  1130 

And  from  steep  Nysa's  hills,  with  ivy  clad, 
And  that  green  slope,  with  clustering  grapes 
Empurpled  to  the  sea. 


ANTIGONE.  185 


When  thou  wouldst  visit  Theban  streets, 

A  jocund  company  divine 

With  acclamation  loud  conducts  thee  forth. 

Thebes  of  all  cities  most  thou  honourest,         [Strophe  2. 

Thou  with  thy  mother,  whom  the  lightning  slew: 

And  now,  when  Thebes  is  sick,  "40 

And  all  her  people  the  sore  plague  hath  stricken, 

Hear  us  and  come  with  healing  feet 

O'er  the  Parnassian  hill, 

Or  the  resounding  strait : 

Come,  whom  fire-breathing  stars  in  dance  obey,  [Ant  2. 

The  master  of  the  voices  of  the  night. 

Of  Zeus  the  puissant  son — 

Come  at  our  call,  girt  with  thy  Thyiad  troop,  "50 

That  follow,  with  thy  frenzy  filled, 

Dancing  the  livelong  night, 

lacchus,  thee  their  lord. 

Mess.  Neighbours  of  Cadmus,  and  the  royal  house 
Of  old  Amphion,  no  man's  life  would  I, 
How  high  or  low  soever,  praise  or  blame, 
Since,  who  to-day  has  fortune,  good  or  ill, 
To-morrow's  fortune  lifts  or  lays  him  low; 
No  seer  a  constant  lot  foresees  for  men.  1160 

For  Creon  before  was  happy,  as  I  deemed, 
AVho  saved  this  land  of  Cadmus  from  its  foes, 
And  the  sole  sovereignty  of  Thebes  receiving 
Prospered  therein,  with  noble  children  blest. 


1 86  ANTIGONE. 


Now  all  is  lost.     For,  when  the  joys  of  life 

Men  have  relinquished,  no  more  Hfe  indeed 

I  count  their  living,  but  a  living  death. 

For  in  thy  house  heap  riches,  if  thou  wilt ; 

Keep  kingly  state ;  yet,  if  no  joy  withal  1169 

Thou  hast,  for  all  things  else,  compared  with  pleasure, 

I  would  not  change  the  shadow  of  a  smoke. 

Chor.  Of  what  grief  now  of  princes  wilt  thou  tell  ? 

Mess.  That  one  lies  dead,  whom  those  who  live  have 
slain. 

Chor.    Say,   who  is   slain  ?      And  what  man  is  the 
slayer  ? 

Mess.  Haemon  is  dead  :  his  death  no  stranger's  act. 

C?ior.  Slain  by  himself,  or  by  his  father's  hand  ? 

Mess.  Wroth  with  his  pitiless  sire,  he  slew  himself 

Chor.  O  prophet,  how  thy  prophecy  comes  true  ! 

Mess.  These  things  being  so,  consider  of  the  rest. 

Chor.  Lo,  hard  at  hand  the  miserable  queen,  nSo 

Eurydice  :  who  from  the  house  comes  forth 
Either  by  chance,  or  hearing  of  her  son. 

Eur.  Good  townsmen  all,  your  conference  I  heard, 
As  to  the  doors  I  came,  intending  now 
Of  Pallas  to  entreat  her  heavenly  aid. 
Even  as  I  loosed  the  fastenings  of  the  gate. 
That  opened  wide,  there  smote  my  ears  a  word 
Of  sorrow  all  my  own  :  backward  I  swooned, 
Surprised  by  terror,  in  my  maidens'  arms  : 


ANTIGONE.  \%1 


But  tell  me  now  your  tidings  once  again —  ii9« 

For,  not  unlearned  in  sorrow,  I  shall  hear. 

Mess.   Dear  mistress,  I  will  tell  thee  what  I  saw, 
And  not  leave  out  one  word  of  all  the  truth. 
Why  should  I  flatter  thee  with  glozing  words, 
Too  soon  found  false  ?     Plain  truth  is  ever  best 
Thy  husband  hence  I  followed  at  the  heels 
To  that  high  plain,  where  torn  by  dogs  the  body 
Of  Polyneices  lay,  unpitied  still. 
A  prayer  we  said  to  Hecate  in  the  way 
And  Pluto,  their  displeasure  to  refrain,  120c 

Then,  sprinkling  with  pure  water,  in  new-stript  boughs 
Wrapped    round   and    burned   the    fragments   that   re- 
mained. 
A  lofty  funeral-mound  of  native  earth 
We  heaped  for  him ;  then  sought  the  maiden's  bed. 
Her  bridal  bed  with  Hades  in  the  rock. 
And  from  afar  a  voice  of  shrill  lament 
About  the  unhallowed  chamber  some  one  heard. 
And  came  to  Creon,  and  told  it  to  his  lord. 
And  in  his  ears,  approaching,  the  wild  cry 
Rang  doubtfully,  till  now  there  brake  from  him  1210 

A  word  of  sharp  despair,  '  O  wretched  man, 
What  fear  is  at  my  heart  ?  and  am  I  going 
The  wofullest  road  that  ever  I  have  gone  ? 
It  is  my  son's  voice  greets  me.     Good  servants,  go, 
Go  nearer  quickly ;  and  standing  by  the  tomb, 


i88  ANTIGONE. 


Even  to  the  throat  of  the  vault  peer  through  and  look, 

Where  the  wrenched  stonework  gapes,  if  Haemon's  voice 

I  recognise  indeed,  or  by  the  gods 

Am  cheated  ! '     Crazed  with  his  fear,  he  spake  ;  and  we 

Looked,  as  he  bade ;  and  in  the  last  of  the  tomb        1220 

We  saw  the  maiden — hanged :  about  her  neck 

Some  shred  of  linen  had  served  her  for  a  noose : 

And  fallen  upon  her,  clasping  her,  he  lay, 

Wailing  his  wasted  passion  in  the  grave, 

His  fatal  father,  and  his  luckless  bride. 

His  father  saw,  and  crying  a  bitter  cry 

Went  in,  and  with  a  lamentable  voice 

Called  him,  '■  O  rash,  what  is  it  that  thou  hast  done  ? 

What  wouldst  thou  ?     On  what  madness  hast  thou  rushed  ? 

My  son,  come  forth  :  I  pray  thee — I  implore.'  1230 

But  with  fierce  eyes  the  boy  glared  at  his  sire 

And  looks  of  loathing,  and  for  answer  plucked 

Forth  a  two-hilted  sword,  and  would  have  struck. 

But  missed  him,  as  he  fled :  and  in  that  minute, 

Wroth  with  himself,  in  his  own  side  amain 

Thrust  deep  the  steel,  unhappy ;  and  conscious  still 

Folded  the  maiden  in  his  fainting  arms ; 

Then,  gasping  out  his  life  in  one  sharp  breath, 

Pelted  her  pale  cheek  with  the  crimson  shower. 

Dead  with  the  dead  he  lies,  such  nuptial  rites  1240 

In  halls  of  Hades,  luckless,  having  won ; 

Teaching  the  world,  that  of  all  human  ills 


ANTIGONE.  189 


With  human  folly  is  none  that  may  compare. 

Chor.  How  should  one  deem  of  this  ?     The  queen, 
without 
A  word,  of  good  or  evil,  has  gone  hence. 

Mess.  Indeed,  'tis  strange  :  but  yet  I  feed  on  hope 
That  to  lament  in  public  for  her  son 
She  will  not  deign ;  but,  as  for  private  sorrow, 
Will  charge  her  women  in  the  house  to  weep. 
She  is  well  tried  in  prudence,  not  to  fail.  1250 

Chor.  I  know  not ;  but  to  me  the  too-much  silence. 
No  less  than  clamorous  grief,  seems  perilous. 

Mess.  I  will  go  hence  to  the  house,  and  know,  if  aught 
Of  secret  purpose  in  her  raging  heart 
She  hath  kept  locked  from  us.     Thou  sayest  well : 
The  too-much  silence  may  bode  mischief  too. 

Chor.   Lo,  the  king  comes  hither  himself,  in  his  hands 
The  record,  not  doubtful  its  purport,  bearing ; 
No  grief  (I  dare  to  say)  wrought  by  another. 
But  the  weight  of  his  own  misdoing.  1260 

Cre.  Alas,  my  purblind  wisdom's  fatal  fault,   [Strophe. 
Stubborn,  and  fraught  with  death  ! 
Ye  see  us,  sire  and  son. 
The  slayer  and  the  slain. 
O  counsels  all  unblest ! 
Alas  for  thee,  my  son, 

So  young  a  life  and  so  untimely  quenched — 
Gone  from  me,  past  recall — 


190  ANTIGONE. 


Not  by  thy  folly,  but  my  own  !  1269 

Chor.  Ah,  how  too  late  thou  dost  discern  the  truth  ! 

Cre.  Yea,  to  my  cost  I  know  :  but  then,  methinks, 
Oh  then,  some  god  with  crushing  weight 
Leapt  on  me,  drave  me  into  frantic  ways, 
Trampling,  alas  for  me, 
In  the  base  dust  my  ruined  joy. 
O  toil  and  trouble  of  mortals — trouble  and  toil ! 

Sec.  Mess.  Trouble,  O  king,  thine  own  and  none  but 
thine. 
Thou  comest,  methinks,  part  bearing  in  thy  hands ; 
Part — in  the  house  thou  hast,  and  soon  shalt  see.        1280 

Cre.  What  more,  what  worse  than  evil,  yet  remains  ? 

Sec.  Mess.  Thy  wife  is  dead,  with  desperate  hand  ev'n 
now 
Self-slain,  for  this  dead  son  for  whom  she  lived. 

Cre.  O  harbour  of  Hades,  never  to  be  appeased,  \Ant. 
Why  art  thou  merciless  ? 
What  heavy  news  is  this  ? 
Harsh  news  to  me  of  grief, 
That  slays  me,  slain  before  ! 

A  woful  word  indeed,  1290 

Telling  of  slaughter  upon  slaughter  heaped, 
To  me,  the  twice-bereaved, 
At  one  fell  swoop,  of  son  and  wife ! 

Chor.  Behold  and  see  :  for  now  the  doors  stand  wide. 

Cre.  This  second  grief,  ah  me,  my  eyes  behold. 


ANTIGONE,  191 


What  fate,  ah  what,  remains  behind  ? 

My  son  I  hold  already  in  my  arms  ; 

And  now,  ah  woe  is  me, 

This  other  in  my  sight  lies  dead : 

Mother  and  child — most  piteous  both  to  see  !  1300 

Sec.  Mess.  Heartstricken  at  the  altar  as  she  fell, 
Her  swooning  eyes  she  opened,  and  made  moan 
For  Megareus,  her  son,  who  nobly  died 
Before,  and  for  this  other,  and  with  her  last 
Breath  cursed,  the  slayer  of  her  children,  thee. 

Cre.  Ah  me,  will  no  one  aim 
Against  my  heart,  made  wild  with  fear, 
With  two-edged  sword  a  deadly  thrust  ? 
O  wretched  that  I  am,  1310 

Fulfilled  with  sorrow,  and  made  one  with  grief ! 

Sec.  Mess.  She  did  reproach  thee,  truly,  ere  she  died, 
And  laid  on  thee  the  blame  of  both  their  deaths. 

Cre.  What  was  the  manner  of  her  violent  end  ? 

Sec.  Mess.  Pierced  to  the  heart,  by  her  own  hand,  she 
died, 
Hearing  her  son's  most  lamentable  fate. 

Cre.  All,  all  on  me  this  guilt  must  ever  rest, 
And  on  no  head  but  mine. 
O  my  poor  son,  I  slew  thee,  even  I : 
Let  no  one  doubt,  but  that  the  deed  was  mine.  13*0 

O  servants,  lead  me  quickly,  lead  me  hence ; 
And  let  me  be  as  one  who  is  no  more. 


192 


ANTIGONE. 


Chor.  'Tis  counselled  well,  if  well  with  ill  can  be  : 
For  bad  is  best,  when  soonest  out  of  sight. 

Cre.  I  care  not,  let  it  come  : 
Let  come  the  best  of  all  my  fate,  1330 

The  best,  the  last,  that  ends  my  days  : 
What  care  I  ?  come  what  will — 
That  I  no  more  may  see  another  day. 

Chor.  Let  be  the  future  :  mind  the  present  need. 
And  leave  the  rest  to  whom  the  rest  concerns. 

Cre.  No  other  wish  have  I  j  that  prayer  is  all. 

Chor.  Pray  not  at  all :  all  is  as  fate  appoints  : 
'Tis  not  in  mortals  to  avert  their  doom. 

Cre.  Oh  lead  me  hence,  unprofitable ;  who  thee 
Unwittingly  have  slain,  1340 

Child,  and  my  wife,  unhappy  ;  and  know  not  now 
Which  way  to  look  to  either  :  for  all  things 
Are  crooked  that  I  handle,  and  a  fate 
Intolerable  upon  my  life  hath  leapt. 

Chor.  First  of  all  happiness  far  is  wisdom. 
And  to  the  gods  that  one  fail  not  of  piety. 
But  great  words  of  the  overweening 
Lay  great  stripes  to  the  backs  of  the  boasters  :         1350 
Taught  by  adversity, 
Old  age  learns,  too  late,  to  be  wise. 


ELECTRA 


PERSONS. 


Orestes. 

Pylades.     {Mtite.) 

Aegisthus. 

Pedagogue  or  Attendant. 

Clytaemnestra. 

Electra. 

Chrysothemis. 

Chorus  of  Argive  Maidens. 


(Bltttxa. 

Fed.    O  ON  of  that  Agamemnon,  who  round  Troy 
*^     Gathered  the  hosts  of  Greece,  now  with 
thine  eyes 

May'st  thou  behold  all  that  thy  heart  desired. 

This  is  the  ancient  Argos  of  thy  longing — 

The  precinct  this  of  Ino,  frenzied  maid  : 

Named  of  the  god,  the  Slayer  of  the  wolf. 

The  Place  Lyceian  see,  Orestes,  here — 

Hera's  famed  temple  yonder  on  the  left : 

But,  whither  our  feet  are  come,  deem  that  thou  seest 

None  other  than  Mycenae,  the  rich  city — 

Mycenae,  rich  in  gold ;  and,  rich  in  slaughter,  lo 

Stand  there  the  halls  of  the  Pelopidae — 

Whence  from  the  slaying  of  thy  sire,  that  day, 

By  thine  own  sister  trusted  to  my  hands, 

I  bore  thee  forth,  and  saved  thee,  and  have  reared, 

Till  lo  thou  art  grown  a  man — thy  sire's  avenger. 

Now,  then,  Orestes,  and  thou,  best  of  friends, 
rPylades,  counsel  quickly  of  the  way. 
[For  see,  the  sun  is  risen,  and  his  beam 
i  Wakes  clear  the  matin  voices  of  the  birds, 


196  ELECTRA. 


And  the  murk  night  of  stars  is  overworn. 
Then  linger  not  till  folk  come  from  the  house,       20 
But  straight  confer ;  since,  where  we  stand,  is  now 
No  time  for  tarrying,  but  high  time  for  deeds. 
Or.  O  good  old  servitor,  how  well  appears 
By  certain  proof  thy  loyalty  to  us ; 
For,  as  a  noble  steed,  though  he  be  old. 
In  extreme  peril  pricks  erect  his  ear, 
Forgetting  not  his  valiant  strain,  so  thou 
Both  hastenest  us  and  followest  first  thyself. 
Hear  then  how  I  advise,  and  to  my  words 
Give  thou  good  heed ;  then  let  thy  better  wit         30 
Correct  me,  if  in  aught  I  miss  the  mark. 
When  to  the  Pythian  oracle  I  came 
Inquiring  of  the  god  how  best  I  might 
Join  issue  with  the  murderers  of  my  sire, 
Phoebus  to  me  made  answer — mark  me,  how. 
By  guile,  alone,  aidless  of  shields  or  host, 
He  bade  me  snatch  the  retributive  stroke. 
So  spake  the  voice  prophetic.     Therefore  go — 
Soon  as  occasion  bids  thee,  enter  straight — 
Know  all  that  is  a-doing  in  the  house ;  40 

Then,  of  thy  knowledge,  bring  us  certain  word. 
So  old  and  lapsed  in  years,  fear  not  that  folk 
Will  know  thee,  or  suspect,  besprent  with  grey. 
Be  this  thy  word,  thou  art  a  stranger  come 
From  Phocis,  sent  by  Phanoteus  their  friend — 


ELECTRA.  197 


Friend  and  ally  more  potent  have  they  none. 

Then  tell  them,  and  confirm  it  with  an  oath, 

Orestes  by  hard  stroke  of  doom  is  dead — 

At  Delphi,  in  the  race  of  whirling  wheels. 

From  chariot  flung  :  so  let  the  story  stand.  50 

Meanwhile  my  father's  tomb — our  task  prescribed — 

We  with  libation  first  will  duly  crown 

And  wealth  of  tresses  shorn,  then  back  return, 

An  urn  of  brass  uplifted  in  our  hands — 

Whereof  thou  knowest,  in  safe  covert  hid — 

So  to  announce  our  welcome  tidings  false. 

Tidings  that  this  my  body  is  no  more. 

But  calcined  now  and  charred  to  nothingness. 

Since  what  offends  me  here,  when  death  in  name 

Proves  life  indeed  to  me  and  wins  renown  ?  60 

Words  fraught  with  gain,  I  trow,  cannot  be  ill. 

Have  I  not  heard  of  wise  men,  not  a  few. 

Dying  in  an  idle  rumour  ?     Back  they  come — 

Great  out  of  knowledge  straightway  are  they  grown. 

So  living,  doubt  not,  from  this  falsehood's  cloud 

I  on  my  dazzled  foes,  starlike,  shall  break. 

But,  O  my  fatherland,  and  native  gods, 

Receive  me  prospering  in  my  home-return ; 

And  ye,  halls  of  my  fathers ;  for  I  come 

With  justice  charged  by  heaven  to  make  you  clean ;  70 

And  send  me  not  dishonoured  from  the  land — 

Let  me  begin  its  wealth,  and  right  my  house. 


198  ELECTRA. 


My  say  is  said ;  thee  let  it  now  concern, 
Old  man,  to  go,  and  of  thy  task  have  heed — 
And  forth  will  we ;  for  so  occasion  bids. 
The  sovereign  ruler  of  all  deeds  of  men. 

El  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Fed.  Hark — from    the    doors    sounded    a   woman's 
voice 
Weeping,  meseemed — some  servant  of  the  house. 

Or.  Is  it  the  sad  Electra  ?  shall  we  bide  80 

Here  for  awhile,  and  hearken  her  lament  ? 

Fed.  Not  so  :  nought  else  let  us  attempt  before 
The  bidding  of  the  god  we  have  performed, 
Our  work's  inauguration — to  pour  out 
Libations  to  thy  sire ;  for  this  imports 
The  victory  ours,  and  prospers  all  we  do.     \They  go  out. 

El.  O  holy  light  of  heaven. 
And  Earth's  coequal,  Air, 
How  many  a  mourning  song  of  me. 
And  buffeting  of  how  many  a  blow 
Upon  my  bleeding  bosom  have  ye  heard,  90 

When  night,  your  dusky  robe,  ye  leave  behind ! 
And  well  ere  now  this  house  of  horror  knows. 
And  my  detested  couch. 
What  night-vigils  I  keep — 
For  my  unhappy  sire  what  dirge  I  make, 
Whom,  from  a  barbarous  land  returned. 
From  entertainment  'scaped  of  Ares  fierce, 


ELECTRA.  199 

My  mother  and  her  paramour, 
Aegisthus,  ev'n  as  woodfellers  an  oak, 
With  murderous  axe  hewed  to  the  nape ; 
And  no  compassion  for  these  things,  100 

Father,  for  thy  so  hideous  piteous  end, 
From  other  hps  than  mine  escapes  : 
But  nowise  will  I  fail 
Of  weeping  and  lamenting  sore, 
Till  from  my  sight  the  shimmering  sheen  of  stars. 
And  this  fair  daylight,  fail  \ 
But,  as  a  nightingale 
For  Itys  unconsoled. 
From  these  ancestral  doors  will  I 
Still  utter  forth  in  all  men's  ears 
A  lamentable  voice. 

O  home  of  Hades  and  Persephone,  no 

O  ghostly  Hermes  and  thou  sovereign  Curse, 
And  dread  divine  Erinyes, 
Whose  eyes  behold  the  foully  slain, 
And  those  adulterously  spoiled — 
Hearken  and  come  and  help, 
Our  father's  murder  foul  avenge. 
And  speed  my  brother  home  to  me — 
To  me,  whose  single  strength 
No  more  can  countervail 

This  downward-dragging  weight  of  woe.  lao 

Chor.  Child  of  the  guilty  one, 


200  ELECTRA. 


Electro,  how  dost  thou  still  1 

Waste  in  inveterate  grief  thy  strength  away 

For  Agamemnon,  trapped,  how  long  ago. 

By  cursed  treachery  of  thy  mother  false. 

And  to  the  cowardly  blow  betrayed — may  he 

Who    planned   it   perish — so    God    pardon    me    the 
word !  129 

El.  O  noble  hearts,  your  coming  soothes  my  pain. 

I  know  and  understand  full  well — 

Nothing  escapes  me  that  ye  say — 

Yet  would  I  not  give  o'er. 

Not  cease  from  weeping  for  my  hapless  sire. 

But  ye  whose  love  responsive  beats 

To  every  mood  of  mine. 

Allow  my  raving  thus — 

Ah  me — for  pity  ! 

Chor.  But  not  with  sobs  or  prayers 
Thy  father  shalt  thou  bring 
Back  from  the  dark  inevitable  flood. 
Yet  thou  with  ceaseless  tears  dost  lose  thyself  140 

In  sorrow  beyond  reason  uncontrolled — 
Wherein  is  no  remission  of  thy  pain. 
Why  wilt  thou  woo  thy  misery  ? 

El.  Fool,  who  forgets  a  parent's  piteous  loss  ! 
She  fits  my  fancy  rather, 
That  passionate  and  melancholy  bird. 
The  messenger  of  Zeus,  that  makes  her  plaint 


ELECTRA.  201 


For  Itys,  Itys,  evermore. 

0  queen  of  sorrow,  Niobe, 

1  hail  thee  goddess — thee  15° 
Who,  rock-ensepulchred, 

Art  weeping,  weeping  still. 

Chor.  To  thee,  thee  single  in  the  world. 
Daughter,  no  grief  has  come, 
Touching  thee  more  than  those  within — 
Blood  of  thy  blood,  thy  sisters  both, 
Chrysothemis  and  Iphianassa,  who  yet  live — 
And  he  too  lives,  his  young  life  screened  from  sorrow, 
Blest,  whom  our  famed  Mycenian  land 
Shall  one  day  welcome  home,  her  noblest  son,  160 

In  God's  good  time  returning. 
Returning  home — Orestes. 

El.  For  whom  I  waiting,  ah  the  weary  while, 
Poor  wretch,  no  mother  and  no  wife. 
Fail  still  for  waiting,  wasted  with  my  tears — 
And  see  my  lot,  sad  without  end  of  sorrow  : 
But  he  forgets 

What  he  endured,  and  what  has  heard  : 
For  what  to  me 

Of  tidings  comes,  not  soon  belied  ?  170 

For  always  he  desires. 
But  yet  desiring  heeds  not  to  appear. 

Chor.  Courage,  O  daughter,  courage :  still 
High  Zeus  in  heaven  is  king. 


ELECTRA. 


Who  sees  and  governs  all ; 

To  whom  thine  all  too  bitter  wrath  committing, 

Neither  forget  thy  foes  nor  hate  them  overmuch. 

Time  as  a  god  makes  rough  ways  smooth  : 

For  neither  Agamemnon's  son, 

Who  by  the  sea  with  Crisa's  herdsmen  bides,  iSo 

Hath  all  forgotten  thee. 

No,  nor  the  god  by  Acheron  who  reigns. 

El.  But  now  almost  in  dull  despair 
My  days  are  fled,  my  strength  is  spent ; 
My  wasted  frame  no  parents  tend. 
No  loving  champion  shields  from  wrong  j 
Lodged  as  an  alien,  scarce  allowed 

Beneath  my  father's  roof  a  home,  19° 

Clad  in  this  mean  attire, 
And  standing  by  a  table  scantly  spread. 

Chor,  O  piteous  voice,  proclaimed  his  home-return — 
Piteous,  whenas  he  lay  at  feast. 
When  through  the  temples  of  thy  sire 
The  steely  jaws  remorseless  flashed  and  struck. 
'Twas  guile  that  planned,  and  lust  that  smote, 
AVhereof  the  dire  embrace 
A  direful  act  engendered — 

By  whomsoever  this  was  done,  200 

A  mortal  or  a  god. 

El.  O  bitter,  bitter  day 
Beyond  all  days  to  me  : 


ELECTKA.  203 


O  night — O  utter  agony 

Of  that  unutterable  feast : 

And  O  the  hideous  sight  my  sire  beheld, 

Those  hands  uplifted  of  the  murderous  twain, 

Whose  treason  sapped  my  life,  and  murdered  me  : 

For  whom,  supreme  Olympian  king. 

Prepare  such  retributive  fate,  ai 

Shall  turn  to  dust  the  glittering  prize, 

Their  deed  achieved. 

Chor.  Be  advised  to  speak  no  more  : 
Hast  thou  not  wit  to  mark, 
Wherefrom  into  this  low  estate. 
Into  what  woes  self-gotten, 
Thou  art  fallen  so  miserably? 
No  light  excess  of  pain  thou  to  thyself  procurest, 
Still  in  thy  brooding  soul 
Conceiving  war ;  but  war  'tis  none. 
To  struggle  with  the  strong.  a2( 

El.  I  must,  upon  a  dread  compulsion  must : 
Nay,  I  know,  my  own  heart  full  well  I  know ; 
But,  whilst  the  dread  is  on  my  soul, 
Not  for  the  sake  of  life  shall  act  of  mine 
Set  to  these  miseries  an  end  : 
For  what,  kind  hearts,  but  most  unseemly  words, 
To  all,  to  all  that  see  aright, 
Should  then  of  me  be  spoken  ? 
Ah,  comfort,  comfort,  let  me  be  : 


204  ELECTRA. 


For  cureless  shall  my  case  be  called,  230 

Nor  ever  shall  I  cease  from  pain, 
From  pouring  sigh  on  sigh. 

Chor.  Nay,  but  in  love  I  counsel  thee, 
Ev'n  as  a  careful  mother  might, 
Add  not  to  sorrows  sorrow  self-conceived. 

El.  But  of  my  wretchedness  what  bound  ? 
Shall  we  forget  the  dead  ?     Were  this  then  well  ? 
Is  there  in  men  ingratitude  so  deep  ? 
Never  may  I  of  such  an  one  have  praise ; 
Never  may  I,  if  still  to  any  good  240 

I  cleave,  in  selfish  ease  abide  therewith, 
Checking,  neglectful  of  my  sire, 
The  pinion  strong  of  passionate  lament. 
Because  if  he,  being  slain,  woe  worth  the  day. 
Sleeps  'neath  the  earth,  and  is  no  more. 
And  those  his  enemies 
Pay  not  their  blood  for  his, 
Then  both  regard  of  man  and  fear  of  God 
From  earth  shall  cease.  250 

Chor.  Daughter,  I  came,  zealous  alike  for  thee 
As  for  myself;  but  if  I  speak  not  well 
Have  thou  thy  way,  for  I  will  follow  thee. 

El.  I  am  ashamed,  O  ladies,  if  ye  deem 
Impatient  overmuch  my  oft  complaining : 
But,  since  necessity  compels  my  grief. 
Chide  not.     How  were  it  noble  not  to  grieve, 


ELECTRA.  205 


Seeing  my  father's  house  oppressed  with  woe — 

Yes,  and  I  see  the  trouble  day  and  night 

Not  ceasing,  but  prevailing  more  and  more  :  260 

Who  from  the  mother  who  bore  me  have  found,  first, 

Hatred  for  love ;  then,  under  my  own  roof 

I  with  my  father's  murderers  abide ; 

They  rule  me,  and  from  them  comes  all  I  have — 

My  having  and  my  wanting,  both  are  theirs. 

Bethink  you  next,  what  sort  of  days  I  pass. 

Seeing  Aegisthus  seated  on  the  throne 

That  was  my  father's — seeing  him  clad  in  robes 

That  once  my  father  wore,  and  pouring  out 

Libations  at  the  hearth  whereat  he  slew  him,  270 

And  seeing  this  their  crowning  insolence. 

The  murderer  couching  in  our  father's  bed 

Beside  our  wretched  mother — if  we  must 

Call  her  our  mother,  wedded  to  this  man; 

Shameless  she  is,  and  with  the  guilty  one 

Dwells,  fearing  no  Avenger  of  these  things; 

But,  even  as  though  she  gloried  in  her  deed, 

Hath  found  her  out  that  fatal  day,  whereon 

Our  father  by  her  treachery  she  slew. 

And  honours  it  with  dances,  and  each  month  280 

To  the  Saviour  Gods  makes  sacrifice  of  sheep. 

And  I,  beholding,  wretched,  in  the  house 

Wear  out  my  strength  with  weeping,  and  lament 

For  the  unholy  feast,  named  of  my  sire. 


206  ELEC7RA. 


Myself  in  secret :  for  I  may  not  have 

Even  of  weeping  all  my  heart  desires. 

For  then  this  woman — nobly  can  she  speak — 

With  words  of  fierce  reviling  taunts  me  thus  : 

*  How,  impious  and  abominable  girl  ? 

Hast  thou  alone  to  bear  a  father's  loss  ? 

Are  there  no  mourners  in  the  world  but  thou  ?         290 

My  curse  upon  thee  !     May  the  gods  below 

Give  thee  no  riddance  of  thy  present  griefs  ! ' 

So  she  insults  me  :  save  when  one  brings  word 

Orestes  will  come  home ;  that  makes  her  mad — 

Standing,  she  thunders  forth  :  '  Thou  art  the  cause, 

For  is  not  this  thy  work,  who  from  my  hands 

Didst  steal  Orestes,  and  convey  him  hence  ? 

But  know  that  thou  shalt  have  thy  fit  reward.' 

Such  words  she  shrieks ;  and  with  her,  at  her  side, 

Her  glorious  partner  prompts  her,  word  for  word,     300 

This  utter  coward,  this  villain  unredeemed, 

Who  fights  his  battles  with  a  woman's  help. 

And  all  my  life  ebbs  from  me,  waiting  still 

Until  Orestes  come  to  bid  them  cease. 

So  has  he  wrecked,  still  meaning,  never  doing, 

Hopes  that  I  had  and  had  not,  all  alike. 

So  faring,  O  my  friends,  of  modesty 

Or  reverence  I  wot  not ;  help  is  none — 

I  must  in  evil  plight  learn  evil  ways. 

CJwr,  Say,  is  Aegisthus  near  us  in  the  house,       310 


ELECTRA.  207 


While  thus  we  talk  together,  or  gone  abroad  ? 

EL  Doubt   not   of  that.     Think  not  that,  were  he 
near, 
I  to  the  doors  had  come.     He  is  afield. 

Chor.  So  with  a  better  courage  might  I  hold 
Converse  with  thee,  if  this  indeed  is  thus. 

El.  As    in    his    absence,    ask  :    what   wouldst    thou 
know? 

Chor.  I    ask   thee   then :  how    sayest    thou    of   thy 
brother — 
That  he  will  come,  or  lingers  ?     Let  me  know. 

El.  He  says  ;  but,  saying,  does  not  what  he  says.    319 

Chor.  One  well  may  pause,  who  has  great  work  to  do 

El.  And  yet  I  paused  not  when  I  rescued  him. 

Chor.  Courage  :  he's  noble — will  not  fail  his  friends. 

El.  I  trust,  or  else  I  had  not  lived  so  long. 

Chor.  Speak  now  no  more :  for  at  the  doors  I  see 
Chrysothemis,  thy  sister,  of  one  sire 
With  thee,  one  mother,  and  to  the  tomb  she  bears 
Gifts,  such  as  to  the  dead  men  use  to  give. 

Chrys.  Sister,  what  voice  again  art  thou  come  here 
To  utter  in  the  doorway  of  the  house  ? 
Not  even  in  all  this  time  wilt  thou  be  taught  .  330 

Not  idly  to  indulge  a  barren  wrath  ? 
Yet  this  I  know,  that  I  myself  am  grieved 
To  see  the  things  I  see  :  soon  would  I  show 
What  love  I  bear  them,  could  I  find  the  strength. 


2o8  ELECTRA. 


But  now  ride  out  the  storm  with  shortened  sail 

I  must,  nor  dream  of  harm  I  cannot  do. 

And  such  a  prudent  course  I  would  were  thine. 

Justice,  I  know,  is  not  as  I  advise, 

But  as  thou  choosest :  but,  to  keep  my  life 

Free,  I  must  yield  in  all  things  to  the  strong.  340 

El.  Oh  strange,  that  thou,  the  daughter  of  such  a  sire, 

Forgettest  him,  and  carest  for  thy  mother  ! 

For  all  these  admonitions  that  I  hear 

Are  taught  of  her,  and  nothing  of  thyself. 

And  yet — choose  which  thou  wilt,  to  be  unwise. 

Or,  being  prudent,  to  forget  thy  friends  : 

Who  sayest  now  that,  couldst  thou  find  the  strength. 

What  hate  thou  bearest  these,  should  soon  be  seen  : 

But  I  avenge  my  father  all  I  can, 

Unhelped  by  thee — I  do,  and  thou  dissuadest.  350 

Is  not  this  bad,  and  cowardly  besides  ? 

For  teach  me,  or  by  me  be  taught,  what  gain. 

Ceasing  from  lamentation,  should  I  have  ? 

I  live  :  though  ill,  yet  well  enough  for  me. 

And  they  are  vexed,  and  honoured  is  the  dead. 

If  there  is  any  comfort  in  the  grave. 

Prate  not  to  me  of  hating — vain  pretence. 

While  with  thy  father's  murderers  thou  abidest : 

Never  would  I  consent — not  for  the  chance 

Of  all  those  gifts  of  thine  that  make  thee  proud —        360 

To  stoop  myself  to  these  :  I  grudge  thee  not 


ELECTRA,  209 


The  wealthy  table,  the  abounding  life. 

Not  to  offend  myself,  be  this  alone 

My  meat  and  drink  :  I  covet  not  thine  honours  : 

Nor  thou,  if  thou  wert  wise.     Men  might  have  called  thee 

Child  of  the  noblest  father  in  the  world : 

But  now  be  named  thy  mother's.     So  indeed 

To  many  men  thy  baseness  shall  appear. 

False  to  thy  father's  memory  and  thy  friends. 

Chor.  Oh  speak  not  aught  in  anger :  for  the  words 
Of  both  are  profitable,  couldst  thou  consent  370 

To  learn  from  her,  and  she  again  from  thee. 

Chrys.  Used,  ladies,  to  my  sister's  speech  am  I : 
Nor  on  this  theme  should  I  have  entered  now. 
Had  I  not  heard  of  mischief  threatening  her. 
Great  mischief,  that  shall  end  her  loud  complainings. 

El.  Tell  me  your  worst;  withhold  not.    Of  aught  worse 
Than  this  if  thou  canst  tell  me,  I  give  in. 

Chrys,  I  will  say  out  the  whole  of  what  I  know. 
They  purpose,  if  thou  wilt  not  cease  from  weeping. 
Thither  to  send  thee,  where  thou  shalt  not  see  380 

The  sunlight,  but  a  prisoner  all  thy  days 
Sing  in  the  dark  thy  sorrows,  banished  hence. 
Therefore  bethink  thee,  and  blame  not  me  hereafter. 
When  falls  the  blow.     Time  to  be  wise  is  now. 

El.  Are  they  so  purposed  ?     Will  they  use  me  thus  ? 
Chrys.  Ay  truly,  when  Aegisthus  is  returned. 
El.  If  that  be  all,  so  may  he  come  with  speed  ! 


2IO  ELECTRA, 


Chrys.  O  hapless  one,  what  speech,  what  prayer  is  this  ? 
El.  That  he  may  come,  if  this  he  means  to  do. 
Chrys.  That  thou  may'st  suffer — ^what?     Where  are 

thy  wits  ?  390 

El.  That  far  from  sight  of  you  I  may  escape. 
Chrys.  And  hast  thou  of  thy  present  life  no  thought  ? 
El.  A  fair  and  admirable  life  is  mine  ! 
Chrys.  It  might  be,  didst  thou  know  how  to  be  wise. 
El.  Teach  me  not  thou,  how  to  be  false  to  friends. 
Chrys.  I  teach  thee  not,  but  to  the  strong  to  yield. 
El.  Be  it  thine  to  flatter  thus — 'tis  not  my  way. 
Chrys.  But  not  to  fall  through  folly  were  no  shame. 
El.  If  I  must  fall,  I  will — my  sire's  avenger. 
Chrys.  I  know  my  father  will  forgive  me  this.  400 

El.  Such  words  are  fit  for  traitors  to  applaud. 
Chrys.  Wilt  thou  not  hearken,  and  be  ruled  by  me  ? 
El.  Long  may  it  be  before  my  wits  so  wander. 
Chrys.  Then  I  will  do  my  errand  and  begone. 
El.  Whither  art  thou  going  ?  these  offerings  are  for 

whom  ? 
Chrys.  My  mother  bids  me  pour  them  on  the  tomb. 
El.   How  ?  on  the  tomb  of  him — her  enemy  ? 
Chrys.  Slain  by  her  very  hand — so  thou  wouldst  say. 
El.  Which  of  her  friends  advised?  whose  wish  was  this? 
Chrys.  Warned  as  I  think  by  a  terror  of  the  night.  410 
El.  Gods  of  our  house — now  aid  me — now  at  last ! 
Chrys.  Does  this  that  has  scared  her  give  heart  to  thee? 


ELECT R  A,  211 

El.  Tell  me  the  vision,  and  I'll  answer  that.  ^ 

Chrys.   I  know  not,  nor  I  cannot  tell  thee  much. 

El.  Tell  what  thou  knowest.     Often  a  little  word 
Hath  marred  men's  fortunes — and  oft  made  them  too. 

Chrys.  I  hear  them  say  that  she  beheld  again, 
Revisiting  the  light,  our  father's  form, 
His  very  presence,  and  that  he  took  and  on  the  hearth 
Planted  that  sceptre  which  he  wielded  once,  420 

But  now  Aegisthus  :  and  from  this  there  shot 
Upward  a  fruitful  bough,  whose  shade  waxed  great 
Above  Mycenae,  and  covered  all  the  land. 
Such  tale  I  heard  from  one  recounting  it, 
Who  heard  her  tell  the  dream  to  Helios  : 
But  more  than  this  I  know  not,  save  that  she 
Has  sent  me  hither  by  reason  of  this  fear. 
Now  by  the  gods  who  keep  our  house,  I  pray  thee, 
Hearken  to  me,  and  fall  not  through  thy  folly ; 
For,  spurn  me  now,  thou'lt  seek  me  sorrowing.  430 

EL  Good  sister,  of  all  thou  bearest  in  thy  hands 
Touch  not  the  tomb  with  aught :  for  funeral  gifts 
Of  this  fell  woman  men  nor  gods  allow 
Thou  to  thy  sire  shouldst  offer,  or  pour  out 
Libations  :  to  the  winds  or  to  the  dust 
Deep-delved  commit  them,  where  they  shall  not  come 
Near  to  my  father's  bed :  against  her  death, 
Let  them  be  treasured  under  ground  for  her. 
Most  shameless  woman  of  all  women  is  she, 


212  ELECTRA. 

Or  else  she  had  never  thought,  on  him  she  slew  440 

To  pour  libations,  not  of  love  but  hate. 

How  think  you  ?     Seems  it  he  will  take  these  gifts, 

Her  buried  lord,  take  and  be  pleased  to  take. 

Even  at  her  hand  who  slew  him  cruelly 

As  foe  not  friend,  and  mangled  having  slain. 

And  for  ablution  on  his  temples  wiped 

The   blood-stains.      Think    you    this  which    here  you 

bear 
Shall  serve  her  for  the  quittance  of  her  guilt  ? 
It  cannot  be.     Fling  then  these  gifts  away  : 
Cut  rather  from  thy  head  its  topmost  tress 
And  give  to  him,  and  give  (small  gifts  indeed,  4So 

But  yet  my  best),  give  him  from  hapless  me 
This  one  poor  lock,  unfit  for  suppliant  use. 
And  this  my  girdle,  with  no  bravery  decked; 
And  pray  to  him  and  bid  him  from  the  earth 
Come  graciously  to  help  us  from  our  foes, 
And  that  Orestes  with  victorious  strength 
May  live  to  trample  down  his  enemies; 
That  so  henceforth  with  wealthier  hands  than  now 
More  costly  gifts  we  to  his  tomb  may  bring. 
Nay,  for  methinks,  methinks  his  care  it  was 
That  visited  her  with  such  ill-favoured  dreams.  460 

Yet,  sister,  do  this  thing ;  so  shalt  thou  help 
Thyself  and  me,  and  help  thy  sire  and  mine — 
Yea,  even  in  the  grave,  our  dearest  still. 


ELECTRA. 


213 


Chor.  'Tis  piously  advised  :  and,  daughter,  thou 
Wilt  do  this  service,  if  thy  heart  be  right. 

Chrys,  Be  it  so  :  for  of  the  right  unmeet  it  were 
We  twain  should  wrangle,  hastening  not  the  deed. 
Only,  adventuring  to  do  this  thing, 
I  charge  ye,  friends,  that  ye  betray  me  not ; 
For,  if  my  mother  hears  it,  well  I  know  470 

That  I  shall  rue  my  venture  ere  'tis  done. 

Chor.  Either  a  seer  of  dreams  am  I  [Strophe. 

Of  wit  and  wisdom  void, 
Or  Justice  straight  shall  come. 
The  sovereign  Seer,  by  whom  I  see. 
Crowned  with  the  might  of  a  righteous  deed — 
Shall  come,  my  child,  and  make  no  tarrying ; 
So  is  my  heart  grown  strong, 

Since  this  fair  dream  made  music  in  mine  ears.  480 

For  now  I  know,  thy  sire  remembereth, 
Lord  of  the  hosts  of  Greece ; 
Nor  hath  forgetfulness  made  dull 
The  ancient  axe  two-edged  with  biting  steel, 
That  struck  him  down  with  outrage  and  with  shame. 
With  the  tramp  of  an  army's  tread,  \Antistrop1ie. 

With  multitudinous  menace  of  Ufted  hands, 
She  shall  come,  the  Erinys,  whose  feet  are  brass —       490 
From  her  dreadful  ambush  shall  start  and  come. 
On  the  impious  ones  there  fell 
Lust,  and  adulterous  haste 


214 


ELECTRA. 


To  a  bed  forbidden,  a  bridal  cursed. 

Therefore  I  know,  for  this 

We  not,  ah  not  in  vain  shall  look; 

Not  unaghast  the  murderous  pair  shall  see 

Nearer  and  nearer  the  horror  creep  : 

Or  else  there  is  no  art  of  men 

To  interpret  dreams  of  fear,  500 

And  words  oracular, 

Unless  this  dream  shall  turn  to  good. 

O  woful  charioting  \Epode. 

Of  Pelops  long  ago  ! 

O  curse  abiding,  on  this  land  that  fell ! 

For,  since  beneath  the  wave 

Sank  Myrtilus  on  sleep. 

From  the  chariot  all  of  gold  510 

With  rash  outrageous  hand 

Flung  headlong  forth, 

Not  from  that  day  to  this 

Out  of  this  house  hath  ceased 

The  tale  of  outrage,  woe  on  woe. 

Clyt    At   large   once   more   thou   rangest,    as    it 
seems, 
Aegisthus  absent — he  who  kept  thee  still 
From  gadding  thus  abroad  to  shame  thy  friends. 
But,  now  that  he  is  hence,  thou  hast  no  heed 
Of  me  :  although  to  many,  many  a  time  520 

Thou  hast  complained  that  I,  unjust  and  harsh. 


I 


ELECTRA.  215 


Provoke  thy  spirit,  insulting  thee  and  thine. 

What  insult,  when  I  do  but  give  thee  back 

Taunts  for  the  ceaseless  taunts  I  hear  from  thee  ? 

Thy  father — father  still,  thy  one  pretence — 

By  me  was  slain.     By  me  ?     I  know  it  well : 

'Tis  true,  past  all  denying,  so  he  was. 

For  Justice  slew  him,  not  my  hand  alone : 

And,  wert  thou  not  past  feeling,  thou'dst  have  helped, 

AVhen  this  thy  father,  for  whom  still  flow  thy  tears,       530 

Dared  slay  thy  sister  for  a  sacrifice — 

Of  all  men  he — who  only  was  her  father. 

And  had  not  borne  for  her  a  mother's  pangs. 

Instruct  me  now,  for  whom  paid  he  such  price — 

My  daughter's  blood  ?     Thou'lt  tell  me,  for  the  Greeks  ? 

To  slay  my  daughter  was  no  right  of  theirs. 

For  Menelaus  then,  his  brother,  he  slew 

My  child — and  should  not  answer  me  for  this  ? 

Had  not  that  brother  two  children  of  his  own, 

Who  should  have  rather  died,  children  of  him,  540 

Yea  and  of  her,  for  whom  our  ships  were  launched  ? 

Or  was  Death's  appetite  so  nice,  to  feast 

Upon  my  children's  flesh  and  not  on  hers  ? 

Or  did  this  most  unnatural  father  love 

His  brother's  offspring,  careless  for  his  own  ? 

Why,  what  a  father — senseless  and  dull — was  this  ! 

However  we  may  differ,  so  think  I : 

And  so  would  say  the  slain  one,  might  she  speak. 


2i6  ELECTRA. 


So  now  for  this  deed's  sake  that  I  have  done 

My  heart  fails  not :  and,  if  thou'rt  unconvinced,  550 

Be  just  thyself  before  thou  judgest  me. 

EL  This  time  thou  scarce  wilt  say  that  I  began 
The  bitterness,  and  then  by  thee  was  chidden : 
Give  me  but  leave,  I'll  plead  and  plead  aright 
Both  for  my  father  and  my  sister  too. 

Clyt.  Permission's  thine  :  and,  hadst  thou  always  been 
So  humble,  I  had  not  loathed  to  hear  thy  voice. 

El.  Thus  then.     My  father  thou    hast  slain.     What 
word 
More  damning  is  there  of  thy  guilt  than  this — 
Justly  or  not,  no  matter.     But  I  shall  prove,  560 

Just  deed  'twas  none — but  thou  wast  won  to  it 
With  wooing  of  a  traitor,  now  thy  lord. 
Ask  huntress  Artemis,  what  angered  her 
At  Aulis  so  to  check  those  thronging  winds. 
Or,  since  from  her  thou  canst  not,  hear  from  me. 
I  hear  it  said,  my  father  roamed  one  day 
Her  glades  light-hearted,  and  with  his  footfall  scared 
An  antlered  stag  with  dappled  skin,  and  spoke 
A  boastful  word,  and  shot,  and  pierced  its  throat. 
Therefore  Latona's  daughter  being  wroth  570 

Held  back  the  Greeks  until  thy  sire  should  give 
For  the  slain  beast  his  daughter,  life  for  life. 
And  so  he  slew  her :  for  no  otherwise 
Homeward  or  Troyward  had  our  fleet  release. 


ELECTRA.  217 


Therefore  on  hard  compulsion,  loth  to  yield, 

He  slew  her,  nowise  for  his  brother's  sake. 

Yet,  were  it  as  thou  hast  said,  had  he  done  this 

All  for  his  brother's  cause,  yet  even  so 

Shouldst  thou  have  slain  him  ?     By  what  law  were  this  ? 

Take  heed,  appointing  such  a  law  for  men,  580 

That  thou  appoint  not  sorrow  for  thyself. 

For,  if  blood  must  be  shed  for  blood,  thou  first 

Shouldst  die,  if  justice  should  be  done  on  thee. 

But  see  to  it,  if  thy  pretext  be  not  false. 

For  tell  me,  an  thou  wilt,  for  what  cause  now 

We  see  thee  do  most  shameful  deeds  of  all. 

Who  dost  beside  that  murderer  couch,  with  whom 

Thou  didst  conspire  before  to  slay  my  sire. 

And  bear'st  him  children,  and  hast  cast  out  for  him 

The  stainless  children  of  thy  stainless  lord.  590 

How  shall  I  praise  this  thing  ?     Thou'lt  tell  me,  this, 

This  also  is  the  price  of  daughter's  blood  ? 

'Tis  foully  done,  say  as  thou  wilt.     To  wed 

Foes,  for  a  daughter's  sake,  is  no  fair  thing. 

Nay  but  one  may  not  speak  nor  counsel  thee. 

Who  sparest  no  words  to  tell,  how  I  thy  daughter 

Am  still  thy  slanderer :  yea,  and  I  deem  thee  less 

A  mother  than  a  mistress  unto  me, 

Who  live  a  grievous  life,  and  sore  beset 

With  all.  hard  usage  of  thy  lord  and  thee.  600 

But  out  of  reach  the  other,  scarce  escaped, 


2i8  ELECTRA. 


The  sad  Orestes,  wastes  a  hapless  life  : 

Of  whom  I  hear  thee  rate  me  that  he  lives 

Reared  up  by  me,  for  vengeance.     Could  I  this, 

Be  sure  indeed  I  would.     If  this  be  all, 

Cry,  cry  aloud,  and  call  me  as  thou  wilt 

Unnatural,  loquacious,  unabashed. 

For  if  indeed  I  know  such  deeds  as  these, 

Methinks  of  such  a  child  thou  shouldst  be  proud.         609 

Chor.  I  see,  she  breathes  out  fury :  but,  if  her  words 
Chime  still  with  justice,  this  she  heeds  no  longer. 

Clyt.  And  why  should  I  have  any  heed  of  her. 
Who  me  her  mother  has  with  such  words  reviled — 
She  a  mere  child  besides  ?     Seems  she  not  one 
To  go  all  lengths  and  never  blench  or  blush  ? 

El.  Nay,  that  I  blush  for  this,  I'd  have  thee  know, 
Although  thou  thinkest  not ;  too  well  I  see. 
Unseemly  and  ill-timed  my  words  have  been. 
But  thy  unkindness,  and  thine  acts  to  me, 
These  in  my  own  despite  have  made  me  mad.  620 

For  shameful  deeds  by  shameful  deeds  are  taught. 

Clyt.  Thou  shameless  thing,  my  words  and  acts  and  I, 
Methinks,  have  made  thee  over-garrulous. 

El.  My  speech  is  thine,  not  mine :  thou  doest  the 
deeds. 
And  'tis  the  deeds  that  find  themselves  the  words. 

Clyt.  So  help  me  Artemis,  but  thou  shalt  rue 
This  boldness,  when  Aegisthus  comes  again. 


ELECTRA.  219 


EL  So  you  fly  out  in  anger — though  you  gave  me 
Leave  to  speak  all  my  mind ;  but  you'll  not  hear. 

Clyt  May  I  not  sacrifice  without  thy  clamour,  630 

Now,  having  left  thee  free  to  say  thy  say  ? 

El.  Hinder,  not  I :  I  pray  you,  sacrifice  ! 
Chide  not  my  speaking,  for  I'll  speak  no  more. 

Clyt.  Who  does  my  bidding,  let  her  lift  on  high 
The  gift  of  every  fruit,  that  I  may  pray 
To  Phoebus  here  to  rid  me  of  my  fears. 
Protector,  Phoebus,  hear  and  understand, 
Although  my  speech  be  darkened.     For  I  speak 
In  no  friend's  ears,  nor  with  this  maiden  near 
Must  I  unfold  my  meaning  to  the  light,  640 

Lest  she  with  spite  and  rumour,  thousand-tongued, 
Through  all  the  city  scatter  false  report. 
But  hear  me  thus  :  thus  I  will  dare  to  speak. 
The  vision  which  in  doubtful  dreams  this  night 
I  saw,  O  lord  Lyceius,  let  it  be 
Accomplished,  if  'tis  sent  me  for  my  good; 
If  harm,  upon  my  enemies  let  it  fall : 
And  suffer  not  whoever  deem  by  guile 
To  cast  me  down  out  of  this  high  estate : 
So  let  me  live  a  life  exempt  from  ill,  6s«> 

Possessing  still  the  sceptre  and  the  house, 
And  dwelling  with  the  friends  with  whom  I  dwell 
Lead  peaceful  days — and  of  my  children  those 
Who  neither  bear  me  spite  nor  cause  me  sorrow. 


220  ELECTRA. 


Phoebus,  Lyceius,  hear  me  graciously, 
And  be  it  to  all  of  us  as  I  desire. 
The  rest,  although  my  lips  pronounce  not,  yet 
I  deem  that  thou,  being  a  god,  dost  know. 
All  things  are  open  to  the  sons  of  Zeus. 

Fed.  Ladies,  I  pray  you  tell  me,  is  this  house  660 

The  palace  of  Aegisthus,  of  the  king  ? 

Chor.   No  other,  friend ;  thyself  hast  guessed  aright. 

Fed.  And  do  I  rightly  deem  this  lady  here 
His  wife  ?  who  looks  none  other  than  a  queen. 

Chor.  As  thou  hast  said;  thine  eyes  behold  the  queen. 

Fed.  Lady,  all  hail.     Bearing  glad  news  I  come 
To  thee  and  to  Aegisthus,  from  a  friend. 

Clyt.  I  hail  the  word  :  and  who  with  these  glad  news 
Has  sent  thee  hither  ? — this  I  first  would  know. 

Fed.   From  Phocian  Phanoteus  I  bear  great  tidings.  670 

Clyt.  What  tidings,  friend  ?  speak,  for  from  one  so  kind 
Kind  words  that  thou  wilt  utter,  well  I  know. 

Fed.  Orestes — briefly  to  tell  my  tale — is  dead. 

El.  O  woful  day,  a  fatal  tale  to  me  ! 

Clyt.  How,  sirrah — how  say  you?     Hearken  not  to  her. 

Fed.  I  said  and  say,  Orestes,  lady,  is  dead. 

El.  O  fatal  tidings,  how  am  I  undone  ! 

Clyt.  See  to  thyself :  but,  sirrah,  thou  to  me 
Speak  all  the  truth,  and  tell  me  how  he  died. 

Fed.  Thou  shalt  hear  all,  for  therefore  was  I  sent.    680 
To  the  pride  of  Greece,  the  festival  renowned, 


ELECTRA.  221 


For  Delphic  contests'  sake  Orestes  came ; 

And  when  he  heard  the  proclamation  loud 

That  heralded  the  foot-race,  first  of  trials, 

He  entered  bright  the  lists,  worshipped  by  all, 

And  ran,  till  starting-point  and  goal  were  one, 

And  crowned  with  honour  and  victory  came  thereout. 

Few  among  many  I  know  not  how  to  tell 

Of  the  victorious  feats  of  such  a  man : 

But  this  I  say — that  of  no  trial  the  judges  690 

Proclaimed  decision,  single  or  double  race — 

Pentathlon  also,  all  the  fivefold  custom — 

But  he  of  one  and  all  bore  prize  away. 

By  men  hailed  happy — he  an  Argive  styled, 

By  name  Orestes,  Agamemnon's  son. 

Who  of  all  Greece  gathered  the  famous  host. 

These  things  indeed  were  so  :  but,  when  a  god 

Stops  the  strong  runner,  hardly  shall  he  flee. 

For  he,  another  day,  when  charioteers 

At  sunrise  matched  their  speed  in  the  swift  race, 

With  many  another  entered  for  the  prize.  700 

One  was  Achaean,  one  from  Sparta,  two — 

Masters  of  yok^d  cars — were  Libyan-born ; 

And  he  with  these  driving  Thessalian  mares 

Came  fifth ;  next  him  with  chestnut  colts  the  sixth, 

Aetolian;  a  Magnesian  was  the  seventh; 

Aenian  by  race  the  eighth,  and  white  his  steeds; 

A  ninth  came  thither  from  Athens,  built  by  gods; 


222  ELECTRA. 


One  more  Boeotian,  making  the  chariots  ten. 

So,  standing  where  their  place  the  appointed  umpires 

Assigned  them  by  the  lot,  and  ranged  their  cars,  71c 

All  at  the  trumpet's  sound  they  started  :  all, 

Chiding  their  horses  on,  shook  loose  the  reins 

Together,  and  the  plain  at  once  was  filled 

With  din  of  rattling  cars,  and  dust  that  rose 

Skyward ;  and  all  together  in  a  throng 

Spared  not  the  goad,  when  one  from  out  the  press 

Shot  past  their  axles  and  the  snorting  steeds. 

For  all  about  their  backs  and  rolling  wheels 

The  breathings  of  the  horses  foamed  and  smote. 

And  ever,  against  the  pillar  where  they  turned,  720 

Orestes  grazed  his  axle,  and  his  traces 

Loosed  on  the  right  and  tightened  on  the  left; 

And  all  the  chariots  held  erect  their  course, 

Till  those  unbridled  colts  by  the  Aenian  driven 

From  all  restraint  broke  loose,  and  made  the  round 

A  sixth  time,  but  the  seventh,  swerving,  full 

Against  the  team  Barcaean  dashed  their  foreheads  : 

And  so  from  one  disaster  each  against  each 

Crashed  and  heeled  over,  and  with  the  chariot-wrecks 

All  the  Crisaean  plain  was  overstrewn.  730 

This  he  from  Athens,  wise  in  his  charioting. 

Marked,  and  pulled  sideways,  and  so  rode  out  the  storm — 

Letting  its  surge  seethe  past  him  in  mid-course. 

Last  drave  Orestes,  holding  back  his  colts. 


ELECTRA.  223 


And  trusted  still  his  prowess  at  the  close  : 

But,  when  he  saw  that  other  left  alone, 

His  steeds  in  the  ears  with  one  sharp  cry  he  smote, 

And  so,  full  speed,  came  after ;  until  abreast 

The  chariots  raced,  and  of  the  charioteers 

Now  this,  now  that,  with  head  thrust  forth,  showed  first.  740 

And  safe  till  now  Orestes  every  round 

Steered  still,  ill-starred,  steadfast  his  steadfast  car ; 

But  the  last  time,  loosing  the  left-hand  rein. 

Even  while  the  horse  turned,  struck  and  knew  it  not 

The  edge  of  the  pillar,  and  the  rim  o'  the  nave 

O'  the  axle  splintered ;  and  himself  behind 

Slipped  'twixt  the  rails,  and  tangled  all  amid 

The  dainty  reins  :  and  down  he  fell  on  the  plain, 

So  that  his  colts  were  scattered  in  mid-course. 

And  when  the  people  saw  him  from  the  car 

Fallen,  a  cry  of  pity  outbrake  to  see  750 

What  deeds  the  youth  had  done,  and  how  he  fared. 

Now  dashed  to  the  earth,  and  now  feet  uppermost 

Tossed  to  the  sky ;  until  the  charioteers, 

Scarce  having  checked  the  fury  of  his  steeds. 

Loosed  him  all  bleeding,  all  his  poor  limbs  torn 

And  battered  past  all  knowing  of  his  friends. 

Him  on  the  pyre  we  burned,  and  hither  now 

Come  chosen  men  from  Phocis,  in  one  small  urn 

Bearing  the  sad  dust  of  that  mighty  form, 

That  in  his  native  earth  he  may  have  rest.  760 


224  ELECTRA. 

There  is  no  more  to  say.  A  piteous  tale 
To  tell,  but  in  the  seeing,  to  us  who  saw. 
Greatest  of  all  evils  that  ever  I  have  seen. 

Chor.  Ah  me,  for  now,  I  think,  the  race  and  name 
Of  my  old  masters  is  from  earth  evanish'd  ! 

Clyt.  Zeus,  what  shall  I  say — this  is    glad  news  to 
me. 
Or  dire  news  and  yet  good  news  ?  oh  'tis  bitter. 
That  by  my  own  calamities  I  live  ! 

Fed.  Lady,  why  does  thy  heart  fail  for  this  hearing? 

Clyt.  'Tis  dire  to  be  a  mother — howe'er  unkind,      770 
The  child  of  one's  womb  one  cannot  learn  to  hate. 

Fed.  Then  all  in  vain  it  seems  that  we  have  come. 

Clyt.  Nay,  not  in  vain.    How  shouldst  thou  say  in  vain? 
If  hither  you  bring  to  me  proof  of  his  death — 
His  death — whose  life  from  my  life  sprang,  but  he 
Would  none  of  my  milk,  and  from  my  nursing  fled 
And  lived  an  alien,  and  since  he  went  from  hence 
Saw  me  no  more ;  but  called  me  murderess 
Of  his  father,  and  with  dire  reckoning  menaced  me, 
So  that  the  kind  sleep  neither  by  night  nor  day  780 

Covered  my  eyes,  but  still  the  tyrannous  time 
Seemed  ever  to  drag  me  onward  to  my  doom. 
But  now,  for  on  this  day  I  am  rid  of  fear 
From  him  and  from  this  maiden,  who,  worse  plague, 
Dwelt  with  me,  sucking  from  me  day  by  day 
My  sheer  heart's  blood — now,  now  methinks  in  peace, 


\ 


ELECTRA.  225 


Untroubled  by  his  threats,  my  days  shall  pass. 

El.  Ah  woe  is  me  :  for  now,  Orestes,  now 
I  may  lament  for  thee,  when,  being  thus, 
By  thy  mother  thou  art  mocked.     Is  it  not  well  ?         790 

Clyt  Not  well  with  thee :  but  well,  being  thus,  does  he. 

El.  Nemesis  of  the  dead — scarce  dead — oh  hear  ! 

Clyt.  Who   should  be  heard,   she   heard ;    and  well 
ordained  it. 

El.  Mocker,  mock  on  :  this  is  thy  triumph's  hour. 

Clyt.  Thou  and  Orestes  shall  not  spoil  me  this. 

El.  Nay,  we  are  spoiled,  no  talk  of  spoiling  thee. 

Clyt.  Much  thanks  indeed,  friend,  should  thine  errand 
win. 
If  she  is  silenced  of  her  noisy  grief 

Fed.  So  let  me  take  my  leave,  if  this  is  well. 

Clyt.  Not  so  ;  for  so  not  worthily  of  me,  800 

Or  of  the  friend  who  sent  thee,  shouldst  thou  fare. 
Come  thou  within ;  and  let  this  maiden  here 
Proclaim  aloud  her  sorrows  and  her  friends'. 

El  Seems  she  not,  like  one  grieved  and  sick  at  heart. 
This  miserable  mother,  for  her  son 
So  slain  to  make  dire  weeping  and  lament  ? 

I  Nay,  laughing  she  is  gone.     O  me,  alas, 
Orestes,  dearest,  thy  death  is  death  to  me  ! 
With  thee  are  gone,  plucked  from  my  heart  away, 
All  hopes  that  tarried  still  to  comfort  me,  810 

That  thou  wouldst  come,  living,  to  avenge  thy  sire 
■ 


226  ELECTRA, 


And  me,  unhappy.     Now  whither  shall  I  go  ? 

For  now  I  am  alone — now  thou  art  lost, 

Thou  and  my  sire.     And  henceforth  in  the  house 

Of  these  my  father's  murderers,  whom  I  hate, 

The  life  of  a  slave  is  mine.     O  goodly  lot ! 

Ah  no,  but  never  any  more  will  I 

Live  'neath  their  roof,  but  at  their  gate  will  lay 

My  withered,  friendless  life  until  I  die. 

Now  therefore  let  them  kill  me,  those  in  the  house,      820 

If  they  are  weary  of  me  :  death  is  sweet, 

But  life  is  grievous — I  have  no  heart  to  live. 

Chor.  Where,  Zeus,  are  thy  lightnings — O   Sun-god, 
where  is  thy  beam — 
If  ye,  these  things  beholding,  hide  them,  all  heedless  ? 

EL  Woe  and  alas  ! 

Chor.  O  daughter,  why  art  thou  weeping  ? 

EL  Alas  and  alas  ! 

Chor.  No  rash  word  utter. 

EL  Thou'lt  be  my  death. 

Chor.  How?  830 

EL  If  for  the  dead,  dead  past  all  doubt, 
Hope  ye  still  shall  suggest. 
On  me,  consumed  with  my  sorrow, 
The  more  ye  shall  trample. 

Chor.  Nay,  for  I  know  that  King  Amphiaraus, 
By  reason  of  golden  snares  of  women. 
Was  buried  alive ;  and  now 


ELECTRA.  227 


Under  the  earth — 

El.  Alas  the  day  !  840 

Chor.  In  fulness  of  force  he  reigns. 

El.  Alas! 

Chor.  Alas  indeed  !  for  the  murderess — 

El.  Was  slain  ? 

Chor.  Yes. 

El.  I  know  it,  I  know  it, 
For  the  mourner  a  champion  arose : 
But  to  me  no  champion  is  left. 
For  the  one  who  remained  is  lost, 
Snatched  hence  and  gone. 

Chor.  Unhappy  thou  art,  hapless  thy  plight. 

El.  I  also  know  this,  too  well  I  know  it,  850 

Who  lead  a  life,  month  after  month, 
All  blindly  surging 
With  troubles  dire  and  dark. 

Chor.  We  saw  indeed  whence  flowed  thy  tears. 

El.  No  more  then,  oh  no  more, 
Entreat  me  where 

Chor.  What  wouldst  thou  say  ? 

El.  Where  now  no  more  shall  visit  me 
Comfort  of  any  hope  of  him. 
My  brother — son  of  my  noble  sire.  860 

Chor.  To  all  men  death  must  come. 

El.  Even  as  it  came  to  him,  the  hapless, 
Amidst  the  tramplings  of  racers'  hoofs — 


228  ELECTRA. 


To  encounter  with  dragging  of  dainty  reins  ? 

Chor.  O  outrage,  baffling  thought ! 

El.  So  is  it,  if  in  the  land  of  strangers 
His  ashes  rest,  not  by  my  hands  entombed, 
Neither  burial  nor  tears  having  won  from  me.  870 

Chrys.  Joy  wings  my  feet,  O  sister,  hitherward, 
So  that  I  come  in  haste,  and  heed  not  how : 
For  joyful  news  I  bring,  that  makes  an  end 
Of  all  thy  days  of  sorrow  and  of  tears. 

El.  How  shouldst  thou  find  help  for  my  sorrows,  thou, 
Whereof  no  cure  is  possible  to  see  ? 

Chrys.  Know,  for  I  tell  thee,  Orestes  is  returned — 
His  very  self,  plain  as  thine  eyes  see  me. 

El.  What,  are  you  mad,  you  who  are  miserable, 
And  would  you  mock  our  sorrow,  yours  and  mine  !      880 

Chrys.  No,  by  our  father's  hearth,  no  bitter  jest 
Is  this — but  fact ;  he  has  come  back  to  us. 

El.  Alas,  poor  fool,  and  from  whose  lips  I  prithee 
Heard  you  this  tale  that  you  so  rashly  trust  ? 

Chrys.  My  own  eyes  told  me,  they  alone  :  plain  proof 
They  saw,  and  what  they  told  me  I  believe. 

El.  Poor  soul,  what  proof  saw  you  ?  what  sight  was  this. 
That  kindled  in  thy  heart  this  fatal  fire  ? 

Chrys.  'Fore  heaven,  hear  what  I  saw :  that,  having 
heard, 
Then  you  may  deem  me  wise,  or  else  a  fool.  890 

El.  Nay  then,  speak  on,  if  speaking  comforts  thee. 


ELECTRA.  229 


Chrys.  Forthwith  I'll  tell  thee  all  that  I  have  seen. 
When  to  our  father's  ancient  tomb  I  came, 
At  top  of  the  mound  libations  freshly  poured 
Of  milk  I  saw,  and  all  the  sepulchre 
Wreathed  round  about  with  every  flower  that  grows ; 
And  seeing  it  I  marvelled,  and  I  looked, 
Lest  some  one  should  be  near  me,  at  my  side ; 
But  when  I  saw  that  I  was  all  alone. 
Nearer  the  tomb  I  crept,  and  on  the  edge  900 

Of  the  mound  beheld  a  lock  of  hair,  new-shorn ; 
And  at  the  sight  was  borne  upon  my  soul — 
As  it  were  a  well-known  form — it  seemed  a  sign 
From  him  whom  most  of  men  I  love,  Orestes  : 
And  in  my  hand  I  took  it,  and  my  tongue 
Refrained,  but  tears  of  joy  o'erflowed  my  eyes : 
And  now  full  well  I  know,  as  then  I  knew, 
That  this  fair  tress  of  hair  was  none  but  his. 
Who  else  should  set  it  there,  except  us  twain  ? 
And  'twas  not  I  who  did  it,  that  I  know,  9J0 

Nor  thou — how  shouldst  thou  ?  when  thou  canst  not  even 
Go  forth,  unchidden,  to  the  gods  to  pray. 
Our  mother  then  ?     When  was  she  minded  ever 
To  do  such  things  ?  how  could  she,  we  not  knowing  ? 
But  from  Orestes'  hand  these  oiferings  came. 
Sister,  take  heart.     No  constant  law  of  heaven 
Deals  to  the  selfsame  life  the  selfsame  doom. 
Our  lot  before  was  bitter  ;  but  full-fraught 


230  ELECTRA. 


Perchance  with  lasting  good  this  day  shall  prove. 

El.  Alas  thy  folly  :  I  hear  thee,  pitying.  920 

Chrys.  How :  are  they  not  glad  tidings  that  I  bring  ? 

El.  Thou   knowest   not  whither,  unto   what   dreams 
thou'rt  borne. 

Chrys.  Do  I  not  know  that  which  mine  eyes  have  seen  ? 

EL  Fool,  he  is  dead  :  of  safety  as  from  him 
There  is  an  end :  to  him  look  thou  no  more. 

Chrys.  O   hapless — from  what   tongue   heardst  thou 
such  news  ? 

El.  From  one  who  when  he  died  stood  by  and  saw. 

Chrys.  Where  is  this  witness  ?  wonder  overcomes  me. 

El.  Welcomed  within — not  grievous  to  my  mother.  929 

Chrys.  Out  and  alas  !  by  whom  then  had  been  sent 
Those  lavish  offerings  to  our  father's  tomb  ? 

El.  Most  likely,  to  my  thinking,  they  were  brought 
In  memory  of  Orestes  who  is  dead. 

Chrys.  O  luckless  :  and  I  hasted  with  such  joy 
Such  news  to  bring :  not  knowing  as  it  seems 
Our  plight,  how  woful :  but,  having  come,  I  find 
Trouble  on  trouble — ills  both  old  and  new. 

El.  So  stands  thy  case ;  but  hearken  now  to  me — 
This  weight  of  present  woe  thou  soon  wilt  lighten. 

Chrys.  What  ?  shall  I  bid  the  dead  arise  and  live  ?  940 

El.  Nay,  there  was  no  such  folly  in  my  thoughts. 

Chrys.  What  Wouldst  thou  have,  that  I  have  strength 
to  do  ? 


ELECTRA,  831 

El.  I'd  have  thee  do  my  bidding  and  be  bold. 

Chrys.  If  in  the  doing  is  gain,  I'll  not  refuse. 

EL  Look  to  it :  without  the  striving  nought  succeeds. 

Chrys.  I  see  it :  command  my  help,  whate'er  I  can. 

El.  Then  hearken,  what  to  do  I  am  resolved. 
Thou  knowest,  I  think,  that  countenance  of  friends 
Now  we  have  none  :  of  all  we  had,  we  are 
By  death  bereft — bereft,  and  left  alone.  950 

Now  therefore  I,  who,  while  to  me  came  news 
My  brother  lived  and  prospered  still,  had  hope 
That  he  would  come,  avenger  of  my  sire — 
I  turn,  since  he  is  gone,  to  whom  but  thee — 
The  murderer  of  our  father  bidding  thee 
With  me  thy  sister  tarry  not  to  slay, 
Aegisthus  :  for  'tis  time  I  should  speak  out. 
How  long  wilt  thou  be  patient — in  what  hope — 
When  all  our  hopes  are  wrecked?  thou  who  shouldst 

grieve, 
Being  disinherited  of  thy  father's  wealth,  960 

And  shouldst  lament,  that,  all  thy  life  till  now. 
Thy  youth  is  spent  unwedded  and  unloved. 
Nay,  and  to  marriage  hope  not  any  more 
Thou  shalt  attain  :  for  not  so  void  of  wit 
Is  this  Aegisthus,  as  to  let  children  spring 
From  thee  or^me,  a  certain  harm  to  him. 
But,  if  to  my  advice  thou  dost  consent, 
I  tell  thee  first,  pious  thou  shalt  be  called 


232  ELECTRA. 


Both  by  thy  father  and  thy  brother  dead: 

And  free,  as  thou  wast  born,  thou  shalt  be  called  970 

Henceforth,  and  worthy  marriage  shalt  obtain, 

For  to  the  noble  all  men  are  wont  to  look. 

Bethink  thee,  too,  what  honourable  report 

For  thee  and  me,  consenting,  thou  shalt  win. 

Who,  countryman  or  stranger,  seeing  us. 

Shall  not  with  suchlike  praises  honour  us — 

*  Behold  ye  these  two  sisters,  O  my  friends. 

Who  wrought  deliverance  for  their  father's  house. 

Who  against  foes  firm-planted  in  their  pride 

Drew  sword  the  foremost,  sparing  not  their  lives  :         980 

These  ye  should  love,  these  twain  should  all  revere  : 

Yea,  in  all  feasts  and  high  solemnities 

These  women,  brave  as  men,  let  all  men  praise.' 

Such  things  of  us  shall  everywhere  be  spoken; 

Living  or  dead,  our  glory  shall  not  fail. 

O  sister,  then,  be  counselled,  for  thy  father 

Strive,  for  thy  brother  endure,  and  rescue  me. 

Rescue  thyself  from  sorrow,  minding  this, 

Ignoble  life  is  shame  for  noble  men. 

Chor.  For  one  who  speaks  alike  and  one  who  hears,  990 
Forethought  is  helpful  in  such  case  as  this. 

Chrys.  Were  she  not  bent  on  folly,  O  my  friends, 
Ere  she  had  spoken  thus,  she  would  have  first 
Remembered  caution,  which  she  remembers  not. 
For,  on  what  hopes  intent,  dost  thou  so  arm 


ELECTRA.  233 

Thyself  with  rashness,  and  call  me  to  follow  ? 

What,  art  thou  blind  ?     Woman,  not  man,  art  thou, 

And  for  thine  enemies  in  strength  no  match. 

And  them  their  fortune  prospers  day  by  day ; 

Ours  ebbs  and  dwindles  ever,  and  comes  to  nought.    1000 

Who  then  shall  think  to  vanquish  such  a  man, 

And  yet  come  off  unscathed,  nor  rue  his  folly  ? 

Look  well,  lest,  if  they  hear  what  thou  hast  spoken, 

Our  evil  plight  be  soon  exchanged  for  worse. 

It  steads  us  not  nor  profits  us  at  all. 

To  win  fair  fame  and  yet  ignobly  die. 

For  not  to  die  is  worst,  but  when  to  die 

One  craves,  and  even  this  he  may  not  have. 

Nay,  I  entreat,  or  ever  past  retrieval 

We  perish,  and  leave  desolate  our  house,  loio 

Refrain  thine  anger.     All  that  thou  hast  spoken 

Will  I  unsay  with  silence,  and  defeat. 

But  oh,  thyself  learn  prudence,  though  so  late, 

Not  to  contend,  so  weak,  w^ith  them  so  strong. 

Chor.  Hear  her.     For  men  there  is  no  gain  to  get 
Better  than  prudence  and  a  sober  mind. 

El.  Thou  hast  spoken  nought  unlooked  for.     Well  I 
knew, 
Thou  wouldst  reject  the  proffer  that  I  made, 
But  single-handed  and  alone  this  deed 
I  needs  must  do  :  it  shall  not  go  undone. 

Chrys.  Alas  !  »<>«> 


234  ELECTRA. 

Would  thou  hadst  been  so  minded  in  that  day 

Our  father  died  :  what  might'st  thou  not  have  done  ? 

EL  My  heart  was  right,  but  feebler  were  my  thoughts. 

Chrys.  Study  to  keep  such  thoughts  thy  whole  life  long. 

El.  This  counsel  purports  then  no  help  from  thee. 

Chrys.  Of  rash  attempts  disaster  needs  must  come. 

El.  I  praise  thy  wisdom,  hate  thy  cowardice. 

Chrys.  Even  thy  praise  with  patience  I  will  hear. 

El.  Never  of  me  shalt  thou  have  that  to  bear.         1029 

Chrys.  To  prove  that  'never'  craves  the  coming  time. 

El.  Begone,  I  say :  thou  art  unprofitable. 

Chrys.  Not  so  :  'tis  thou  that  art  incorrigible. 

El.  Go,  to  thy  mother  all  the  tale  repeat. 

Chrys.  Nor  do  I  hate  thee  with  so  dire  a  hate. 

El.  But  know  at  least  how  thou  dishonourest  me. 

Chrys.  Dishonour  thee — not  I,  but  care  for  thee. 

El.  And  must  I  follow  then  thy  rule  of  right  ? 

Chrys.  For,  when  thou'rt  wiser,  then  be  guide  to  both. 

EL  Strange  that,  who  speaks  so  well,  should  speak  amiss. 

Chrys.  Thy  words  have  hit  the  fault  whereto  thou 
cleavest.  1040 

El.  How  ?  what  I  speak,  seems  it  to  thee  not  right  ? 

Chrys.  But  sometimes  what  is  right  is  mischievous. 

EL  By  such  a  law  I  do  not  choose  to  live. 

Chrys.  Persist  in  this,  and  thou  shalt  praise  me  yet. 

El.  Persist  I  shall,  no  whit  dismayed  by  thee. 

Chrys.  Must  it  be  so  ?     Wilt  thou  not  think  again  ? 


* 


ELECTRA.  235 


El.  Most  hateful  'tis  to  think,  and  think  amiss. 

Chrys.  It  seems  thou  wilt  not  heed  what  I  advise. 

El.  Not  now,  but  long  ago  I  have  resolved.  1049 

Chrys.  I  leave  thee  then  :  for  neither  thou  my  words 
Nor  I  thy  temper  can  endure  to  praise. 

El.  Why  then,  go  in  :  I  shall  not  follow  thee, 
Howe'er  thou  may'st  desire  it :  since  withal 
Much  folly  it  is  to  follow  a  fruitless  quest. 

Chrys.  Why   then,    if  in   thine   own   eyes   thou   art 
wise, 
I  to  thy  wisdom  leave  thee  :  by  and  by, 
Standing  in  evil  plight,  my  words  thou'lt  praise. 

Chor.  Why,  though  the  true-hearted  birds  of  the  air 
they  see  [Strophe  i. 

Careful  to  cherish  those 
Who  give  them  life  and  all  good  things — 
Oh,  why  do  men  likewise  1060 

A  like  devotion  fail  to  pay  ? 
Nay,  but  not  long  delayed 

(By  the  lightning  flashed  from  the  hand  of  Zeus, 
By  heavenly  Themis,  no  !) 
The  day  of  reckoning  comes. 
O  voice  that  soundest 
To  the  dead  beneath  the  earth, 
In  the  ears  of  the  sons  of  Atreus 
Proclaim  it  there,  a  piteous  cry 
A  joyless  tale  of  shame :  1069 


236  ELECTRA. 


That  the  strength  of  their  house  is  waxen  faint,  \Ant.  i. 

And  of  their -children  now 

With  daily  interchange  of  love 

Discordant  strife  no  more  agrees. 

Electra  forsaken  breasts  the  storm  alone, 

Unhappy,  like  the  all-plaintive  nightingale, 

Lamenting  always  for  her  sire, 

And  recking  not  of  death, 

Ready  to  yield  her  life, 

Might  she  but  triumph  o'er  the  twofold  curse  :  1080 

What  child  her  nobleness  shall  match  ? 

For  no  one  who  is  noble  deigns  \Strophe  2. 

Basely  to  live,  and  cloud 

With  obloquy  fair  fame — 

O  daughter,  daughter,  ev'n  as  thou 

Hast  chosen  all  thy  days 

To  weep  with  them  that  wept. 

That  so  one  day,  when  the  unlovely  deed 

Was  armed  and  ready,  thou  mightest  win 

A  twofold  praise  in  one. 

Wise  and  most  noble  of  daughters  to  be  called.  1089 

Oh  may  I  see  thee  living  yet  \Antistrophe  2. 

As  far  in  might  and  wealth 

Above  thy  foes,  as  now 

Beneath  their  hand  thy  life  is  crushed : 

Since  I  have  found  thy  feet 

Set  in  no  goodly  lot ; 


ELECTRA.  237 


But,  touching  nature's  highest  laws, 

I  see  thee  bear  away 

The  meed  of  the  noblest,  for  that  thou  fearest  Zeus. 

Or.  Ladies,  have  we  heard  true,  and  do  we  bend 
Our  steps  aright,  whither  we  fain  would  come  ? 

Chrys.  What  seek  you,  and  with  what   intent   come 
hither  ?  no© 

Or.  To  the  house  of  Aegisthus  I  have  asked  my  way. 

Chrys.  Your  goal  is  reached ;  your  guide  shall  forfeit 
nothing. 

Or.  Which  of  all  you  would  tell  to  those  within 
The  longed-for  coming  of  our  company  ? 

Chrys.  This  maiden,  if  the  nearest  should  announce 
it 

Or.  Go,  lady,  and  tell  them  in  the  house,  that  men 
Are  come  from  Phocis,  who  would  see  Aegisthus. 

El.  Out  and  alas  !  of  rumour  that  we  heard 
It  cannot  be  ye  bring  us  proofs  to  see  ? 

Or.  Thy  tale  I  know  not :  aged  Strophius  mo 

Hath  charged  me,  of  Orestes  to  bring  tidings. 

El.  What  tidings,  friend?      How  I  grow  chill  with 
fear ! 

Or.  He  is  dead  :  a  little  dust  is  all  of  him. 
Which  here,  thou  seest,  in  this  small  urn  we  bear. 

El.  Woe's  me,  now  all  too  clear,  this  grief,  it  seems, 
My  hands  may  handle,  and  my  eyes  behold. 

Or.  If  for  the  fate  of  Orestes  flow  thy  tears, 


238  ELECTRA. 

Know  that  within  this  urn  his  ashes  rest. 

El.  Friend,  in  my  hands,  I  pray  thee,  if  it  holds 
Him,  let  me  take  this  urn,  that  I  may  weep  nso 

And  wail  my  fill,  not  for  this  dust  alone, 
But  for  myself  withal  and  all  my  house. 

Or.  Bring  hither  and  give  to  her,  whoe'er  she  be : 
For  not  as  one  who  loved  him  not  she  asks. 
But  either  a  friend,  or  born  his  kinswoman. 

El.  O  poor  last  relic  of  Orestes'  life. 
Dearest  of  men  to  me,  with  hopes  how  other, 
Than  forth  I  sent,  do  I  receive  thee  back ! 
Now  in  these  hands  I  take  thee,  and  thou  art  nought ; 
But  beautiful  and  bright  I  sent  thee  forth,  1130 

Child,  from  thy  home.     Oh  would  that  I  had  died, 
Or  ever  to  a  strange  land  I  sent  thee  hence, 
And  stole  thee  in  my  arms,  and  saved  from  death, 
That  on  that  day  thou  mightest  have  lain  dead, 
And  of  thy  father's  tomb  have  earned  a  share. 
Now,  far  from  home,  in  a  strange  land  exiled, 
A  woful  end  was  thine,  no  sister  near : 
And,  woe  is  me,  I  neither  laved  thy  limbs 
And  decked  with  loving  hands,  nor,  as  was  meet. 
Snatched  this  sad  burthen  from  the  scorching  fire  :      1140 
By  hands  of  strangers  tended  thou  art  come, 
A  little  handful  in  this  little  urn. 
Alas  me  for  my  nursing  long  ago, 
Unprofitable  care,  that  with  sweet  pain 


ELECTRA.  239 

I  ofttimes  spent  for  thee ;  for  thou  wast  never 

Thy  mother's  darHng,  rather  mine ;  nor  they 

O'  the  house — but  I  it  was,  whom  all  were  wont 

Sister  at  once  to  call  and  nurse  of  thee. 

Now  thou  art  dead,  and  all  in  a  day  these  things 

Have  ceased  to  be — all  with  thy  passing  swept  1150 

As  by  a  whirlwind  hence.     Thy  father  is  gone. 

And  I  am  dead,  thy  sister ;  and  thine  own  life 

Has  past  from  earth.     Our  foes  laugh  us  to  scorn, 

Our  mother,  nay  no  mother,  is  mad  with  joy  : 

Of  whom  so  often  thou  didst  send  secret  word, 

Thou'dst  come  to  be  avenged  on  her ;  but  now 

Hard  fortune,  thine  and  mine,  robs  me  of  this. 

Sending  me  hither,  in  thy  dear  body's  stead. 

Mere  dust  and  shadow  of  thee,  and  good  for  nought 

Ah  me,  alas  1  1160 

O  piteous  ashes  !  alas  and  woe  is  me  ! 

O  sadly,  strangely — 

Alas,  my  brother  ! — 

Thus  journeying  hither,  how  me  thou  hast  undone  ! 

Undone — undone  indeed,  O  brother  mine  ! 

Therefore  to  thy  dark  chamber  take  me  in ; 

Me,  dust  to  dust,  receive ;  that  I  may  dwell 

Henceforth  i'  the  dark  with  thee.     For,  living,  I  shared 

With  thee,  and  shared  alike ;  and  now  in  death 

Not  to  be  sundered  from  thy  tomb  I  crave, 

For  in  the  grave  I  see  that  grief  is  not.  "70 


240  ELECTRA. 


Chor.  Mortal,  Electra,  bethink  thee,  was  thy  sire, 
Orestes  mortal :  moderate  thy  grief  : 
This  is  a  debt  we  all  of  us  must  pay. 

Or.  Alas,  what  shall  I  say  ?  what  words  attempt, 
Where  all  words  fail  ?     No  more  can  I  refrain. 

El.  What  is  your  trouble?  Why  have  you  spoken  this? 

Or.  Is  this  Electra's  form,  far-famed  of  men  ? 

El.  It  is  no  other,  in  most  distressful  plight. 

Or.  Alas  then  for  thy  lamentable  case  ! 

EL  Surely,  good  friend,  thy  tears  are  not  for  me?  nSo 

Or.  O  form  defaced  with  foul  and  impious  wrong ! 

El.  On  none  but  me,  friend,  thy  reproaches  light. 

Or.  Alas  me,  for  thy  loveless  hapless  life  ! 

El.  Why  dost  thou  bend  thy  weeping  eyes  on  me  ? 

Or.  How  less  than  nothing  of  my  wrongs  I  knew  ! 

El.  Wherein,  of  what  was  said,  discerned  you  this  ? 

Or.  Reading  in  thy  face  the  blazon  of  thy  grief 

El.  And  yet  of  all  my  wrongs  you  see  but  few. 

Or.  How  could  there  be  more  hateful  sights  than  these? 

El.    That   'neath    one    roof  with    the   murderers    I 
dwell 1190 

Or.  Of  whom  ?  from  whence  hast  thou  this  hint  of 
crime  ? 

El.  My  father;  and  me,  perforce,  they  make  their  slave. 

Or.  Who  are  they  that  constrain  thee  to  their  will  ? 

El.  One  called  my  mother,  no  mother  by  her  deeds. 

Or.  With  blows,  or  cruelty  in  thy  life  ?     Say,  how  ? 


ELECT^.  241 


El.  With  blows  and  cruelty,  and  every  wrong. 
Or.  And  hast  thou  none  to  help,  and  hinder  this  ? 
El.  Not  I,  for,  whom  I  had — his  dust  is  here. 
Or.  O  hapless,  how  thy  sight  hath  stirred  my  pity ! 
El  Thou  art  the  first  that  ever  pitied  me.  1200 

Or.  I  am  the  first  that  ever  shared  thy  grief. 
El.  Art  thou  some  kinsman,  that  I  have  not  known  ? 
Or.  This  I  could  answer,  if  these  are  friends  who  hear 

me. 
El  Yes,  friends  they  are,  whom  speaking  you  may  trust. 
Or.  Set  down  this  urn  then,  and  I'll  tell  thee  all. 
El.  Friend,  bid  me  not  do  this — so  help  thee  heaven  ! 
Or.  Do  as  I  say,  thou  shalt  not  do  amiss. 
El.  I  do  entreat  thee — take  not  my  dearest  from  me. 
Or.   I  say  thou  shalt  not. 

El.  Ah  woe  is  me  for  thee, 

Orestes,  if  thy  burial  is  denied  me.  1210 

Or.  Cease ;  for  it  is  not  right  that  thou  shouldst  weep. 
El.  How  wrong,  to  weep  my  brother  who  is  dead  ? 
Or.  'Tis  not  for  t/iee  to  use  such  words  of  him. 
El.  And  am  I  so  dishonoured  by  the  dead  ? 
Or.  No  man  dishonours  thee  :  this  is  not  thine. 
El  How,  if  I  hold  the  body  of  Orestes  ? 
Or.  'Tis  none  of  his,  save  as  our  words  have  feigned  it. 
El  Where  is  the  tomb  of  my  most  luckless  brother  ? 
Or.  No  tomb  has  he ;  we  bury  not  the  living. 
El  How  say  you,  boy  ?  xa«> 


242 


ELECTRA. 


Or.  All  that  I  say  is  true. 

El.  Orestes  lives  ? 

Or.  If  there  is  life  in  me. 

El  What,  art  thou  he  ? 

Or.  Look  here  upon  this  seal 

That  was  my  sire's,  judge  then  if  I  speak  true. 

El  O  blissful  day  ! 

Or.  Blissful,  my  heart  attests  ! 

El  Voice,  art  thou  come  ? 

Or.  Come  back,  the  voice  replies. 

El.  Home  to  my  arms  come  back  ? 

Or.  My  home  henceforth. 

El  O  all  ye  women,  my  neighbours  and  good  friends, 
Look  on  this  man  Orestes,  who  was  feigned 
Dead,  and  by  feigning  is  alive  again.  1229 

Chor.  We  see  him,  daughter;  and  for  this  happy  chance 
My  eyes  run  over  with  excess  of  joy. 

El  Dearest  to  me  of  all  men  ever  born, 
Thi^  hour  come  back  to  find — 
Come  back  to  see — me  whom  thy  heart  desired  ! 

Or.  Yes,  I  am  come ;  but  for  awhile  keep  silence. 

El  What  fearest  thou  ? 

Or.  Silence  is  best,  lest  those  within  should  hear. 

El  Nay  but,  by  maiden  Artemis, 
I  shall  not  stoop  to  fear  the  women  there,  1240 

The  stay-at-homes,  vain  cumberers  of  the  house. 

Or.  But  yet  take  note,  that  even  in  breasts  of  women 


ELECTRA. 


243 


May  Ares  lodge ;  as  thou  too  well  hast  proved. 

EL  Alas  and  woe  is  me  ! 
Thy  words  find  out  my  sorrow, 
Not  to  be  hidden,  not  to  be  done  away, 
That  never  its  own  burthen  can  forget  "sa 

Or.  Sister,  I  know ;  but,  when  occasion  bids, 
These  things  must  then  be  thought  on ;  now,  forbear. 

El.  All  time,  all  time  for  me 
Is  present  time  and  fit 
To  speak — and  speak  the  truth  : 
For  scarcely  now  my  tongue  at  last  is  free. 

Or.  And  so  think  I ;  therefore  remember  this. 

El.  What  must  I  do  ? 

Or.  Wait ;  and  while  time  is  short,  let  words  be  few. 

El.  But  how,  when  I  have  found  "6© 

Thee,  is  it  fit,  that  speech 
For  silence  I  should  change — 
Now,  having  seen  thee,  whom  to  see 
Seemed  once  past  thought  or  hope  ? 

Or.  Then  didst  thou  see  me,  when  heav'n  bade  me 
come. 

El.  Yea,  for  this  boon  beside,  and  best  of  all, 
That  heaven  hath  brought  thee  home, 
Thank  heaven,  say  I,  for  this.  1970 

Or.  Loth  am  I  to  restrain  thy  joy ;  but  yet 
This  overmuch  rejoicing  moves  my  fear. 

El  Absent  so  long,  but  now,  when  time  was  ripe, 


244  ELECTRA. 


Returned,  O  glad  return,  to  bless  my  sight — 
Oh  see  what  I  have  borne, 
And  do  not,  do  not  now 

Or.  What  must  I  not  ? 

El.  Not  take  from  me,  nor  bid  me  yet  forego, 
The  comfort  of  thy  face. 

Or.  Unmoved,  I  could  not  see  another  do  it. 

El.  Dost  thou  consent  ?  1280 

Or.   How  could  I  not  ? 

El.  O  friends,  the  voice  is  in  my  ears, 
I  had  not  hoped  to  hear. 
[Thou  wouldst  not  come,  they  said  :] 
And  I  refrained  my  speech. 
And  heard  and  answered  not, 
Unhappy.     But  I  have  thee  now  : 
Now  thy  dear  face  hath  shined  on  me — 
Thy  face,  which  not  in  darkest  days 
Could  I  again  forget. 

Or.  All  superfluity  of  words  let  go. 
And  neither  tell  me  of  my  mother's  sins. 
Nor  how  Aegisthus  drains  my  father's  house,  1290 

And  spills  and  spends  at  random  all  its  wealth. 
Such  tale  might  well  forbid  all  count  of  time. 
But  tell  me  now,  what  suits  the  present  hour, 
Where  if  we  hide,  or  by  appearing  where, 
Our  enemies'  mirth  our  coming  shall  confound : 
And  have  a  care  thy  mother  note  thee  not 


ELECTRA.  245 


With  thy  glad  face,  when  we  are  come  within  : 

But,  as  for  that  false  tale  of  dire  mischance, 

Let  thy  tears  flow.     Not  until  all  is  well, 

Shall  our  rejoicing  or  our  smiles  be  free.  1300 

El  Nay,  brother,  but,  even  as  it  pleases  thee, 
So  also  will  I  do  :  for  all  my  joy 
I  gat  not  for  myself,  but  gat  from  thee. 
Nor  would  I  choose  to  grieve  thee  ne'er  so  little, 
Myself  to  win  great  gain  ;  for  so  but  ill 
Fortune,  that  now  befriends  us,  should  I  serve. 
But,  what  comes  next,  thou  knowest.    Hast  thou  not  heard 
Aegisthus  is  not  now  within  the  house. 
Only  thy  mother  ?  and  fear  not  thou  that  she 
Will  see  my  face  lighted  with  joyful  smiles.  1310 

For  my  inveterate  hate  sticks  deep  in  me ; 
Nor  shall  I  since  thy  coming  have  had  time 
To  dry  my  gladsome  tears.     Must  I  not  weep, 
I  who  have  seen  thee  in  this  one  day  come  home. 
Dead  and  alive  ?     O  most  bewildering  change  ! 
Stood  now  my  sire  before  me  as  he  lived, 
I  should  not  deem  it  strange,  but  should  believe. 
Now  therefore,  wondrously  as  thou  art  come. 
Command  me  as  thou  wilt :  since  I  alone 
Of  two  things  had  not  failed ;  for  either  nobly  1320 

I  should  have  saved  myself,  or  nobly  died. 

Chor.  Keep  silence ;  for  I  hear  steps  at  the  door 
Of  some  one  coming  out. 


246  ELECTRA. 


EL  So,  friends,  go  in  ; 

Bearing  withal  a  gift  that  may  not  be 
Rejected — no,  nor  yet  a  welcome  gift. 

Ped.  O  ye  most  foolish  and  of  sense  bereft — 
What,  do  ye  tender  now  your  lives  so  cheap, 
Or  are  of  native  prudence  so  devoid — 
When  now  ye  stand,  not  on  the  brink  of  danger. 
But  in  the  peril's  midst,  and  do  not  know  it  ?  1330 

Nay,  had  not  I  kept  watch  here  all  the  time 
Close  by  the  doors,  your  business  would  have  been 
About  the  house  ere  you  yourselves  were  there : 
But  I  bestowed  the  caution  that  ye  lacked. 
And  now  of  many  words  make  brief  despatch. 
And  of  this  noisy  and  insatiate  joy, 
And  enter  quick :  for  in  such  work  as  this 
To  linger  is  to  lose ;  this  craves  despatch. 

Or.  And  having  entered — can  I  then  proceed  ?       1339 

Ped.  You  can :  secure,  that  you  are  known  to  none. 

O7'.   I  think  that  you  have  told  them  of  my  death. 

Ped.  You  in  the  house  are  numbered  with  the  dead. 

Or.  Is  this  glad  news  to  them  ?  how  took  they  it  ? 

Ped.  I'll  tell  thee  that  to  end  with  \  as  it  is. 
All  that  they  do  is  well,  although  not  well. 

El.  I  pray  you,  brother,  tell  me,  who  is  this  ? 

Or.  You  know  him  not  ? 

^L  I  know  not,  nor  can  guess. 

Or.   Do  you  not  know  to  whom  you  gave  me  once  ? 


ELECTRA.  247 


EL  What  say  you  ?  who  ? 

Or.  He  who,  as  you  devised, 

Conveyed  me  hence  to  Phocis  in  his  arms.  1350 

El.  Can  this  be  he,  whom  when  my  sire  was  slain 
Alone  of  all  men  I  found  faithful  still  ? 

Or.  'Tis  even  he  :  be  brief  and  ask  no  more. 

El.  O  kindly  light,  and  one  deliverer 
Of  Agamemnon's  house,  how  came  you  here  ? 
And  are  you  he  who  saved  us  at  the  worst  ? 
O  dearest  hands,  O  thou  whose  feet  were  sweet 
And  serviceable,  how  hast  thou  talked  with  me 
Unknown  and  undiscovered,  and  thy  words 
Did  slay  me,  but  thy  deeds  were  sweet  to  me  ?  1360 

Hail,  father ;  for  in  my  eyes  thou  seem'st  no  less  : 
All  hail — and  know  that  in  this  selfsame  day 
Thee  most  of  men  I  hated  and  I  loved. 

Ped.  Let  this  suffice  :  the  story  of  the  past — 
Many  revolving  nights  and  days  shall  serve 
To  talk  this  over,  and  make  all  things  plain. 
But  now  why  stand  ye  here  ?  this  is  the  time 
For  deeds ;  now  Clytaemnestra  is  alone, 
No  man  is  now  within ;  but,  if  ye  loiter, 
Bethink  you  that  with  these  ye'll  have  to  fight,  1370 

And  better  men  than  these,  no  equal  fight. 

Or.  Now,  Pylades,  not  many  words  of  us 
This  work  should  crave,  but  in  the  house  forthwith 
To  enter,  meet  obeisance  having  paid 


248  ELECTRA. 


To   the   shrines   of  the   gods,   who   keep   my   father's 
doors. 

El.  To  these,  Apollo,  lend  a  gracious  ear 
To  these  and  me,  who  oftentimes  have  thee 
With  suppliant  hand  entreated  of  my  best ; 
And  now,  bright  god,  Apollo,  of  all  I  have 
I  pray  thee,  I  entreat  thee,  I  implore,  1380 

Oh  prosper  thou  our  handiwork  to-day. 
That  men  may  know,  when  impious  deeds  are  done. 
From  righteous  heaven  what  retribution  falls. 

Chor.  See  there  how  step  by  step  \Strophe. 

Goes  Ares  to  his  work, 
And  from  his  nostrils  breathes 
Resistless  slaughter  forth. 
Beneath  the  roof  of  the  house  ev'n  now 
The  swift  inevitable  hounds  are  gone. 
Following  fast  on  the  scent  of  sin  : 
Nor  long  the  dream  of  my  heart  shall  tarry, 
Hovering  doubtfully.  1390 

For  now  the  avenger  of  the  slain  [Anftstrophe. 

With  stealthy  pace  into  the  house 
Follows  as  he  is  led — 

The  ancient  stately  halls  of  his  father  enters — 
With  keen-edged  murder  in  his  hands  : 
And  Hermes,  son  of  Maia,  leads  him  in, 
Who  with  concealment  wraps  him  round, 
And  to  his  goal  conducts  him  straight. 


ELECTRA.  249 


And  tarries  not. 

El.  O  dearest  women,  while  I  speak,  ev'n  now 
They  are  about  it :  but  in  silence  wait. 

Chor.   Say,  how  ?  what  do  they  now  ?  1400 

El.  She  decks  the  urn 

For  burial,  and  they  stand  over  her. 

Chor.  Why  came  you  forth  ? 

El.  I  must  keep  watch,  for  fear 

Without  our  knowing  Aegisthus  should  come  in. 

Clyt.  i^vithin.)  Alas  ! — O  house 
Void  of  all  friends  and  full  of  murderers  ! 

El.  Some  one  in  the  house  cries  out.     Friends,  do  ye 
hear? 

Chor.  I  heard  and  shuddered,  and  shut  my  ears  for 
horror. 

Clyt.  Ah  woe  is  me  !     Aegisthus,  where  art  thou  ? 

El.  Again  one  cries,  and  loudly.  1410 

Clyt.  O  son,  my  son. 

Have  pity  on  thy  mother. 

El.  But  not  from  thee 

Did  this  thy  son  find  pity,  nor  his  sire. 

Chor.  O  city,  O  hapless  house. 
The  fate  that  dogged  thee  day  by  day, 
Is  dying,  is  dying  now  ! 

Clyt.  Ah,  I  am  stricken. 

El.  Strike,  if  thou  canst,  again. 

Clyt.  Ah  me  again  ! 


250  ELECTRA. 


El.  Would  that  it  were  '  Ah  for  Aegisthus '  too  ! 

Chor.  The  curse  fulfils  itself:  the  dead  live  still. 
They  who  were  slain  long  since 

Drain  from  the  slayer  the  blood  1420 

Ordained  for  blood  to  flow. 
Lo  here  come  they,  with  hands 
Blood-red,  that  reek  of  sacrifice 
To  Ares,  so  as  no  words  can  tell. 

El.  Orestes,  how  have  ye  sped  ? 

Or.  Here  in  the  house 

Well,  if  Apollo's  oracle  spake  well. 

El.   Dead  is  the  guilty  one  ? 

Or.  Fear  not  henceforth 

Thy  mother's  pride  shall  flout  thee  any  more. 

Chor.  Cease,  for  I  see  Aegisthus  full  in  view.  1429 

El.  Rash  boys,  will  ye  not  back  ? 

Or.  Where  see  ye  him  ? 

El.  From  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  lo  in  our  power — 
He  comes,  exulting. 

Chor.  For  the  vestibule 

Make  with  what  speed  ye  may ;  that,  having  now 
Bestowed  the  first  work  well,  so  may  ye  this. 

Or.  Fear  not :  we  shall  not  fail. 

^^'  Haste,  where  thou'rt  going. 

Or.  See,  I  am  gone. 

^^'  What's  here,  belongs  to  me. 

Chor.  In  this  man's  ear  a  few 


ELECTRA.  251 

Soft  words  were  not  amiss  : 

That  he  may  blindly  close  1440 

And  grapple  with  his  doom. 

Aeg.  Which  of  all  you  knows  of  the  Phocian  strangers, 
Who,  as  I  hear,  came  hither  to  announce 
Orestes  slain  amidst  the  chariots  wrecked  ? 
You  there,  'tis  you  shall  tell  me  :  you  who  were 
So  bold  before  :  methinks  it  should  concern 
You  most ;  you  best  should  know,  and  tell  me  this. 

EL  I  know  j  else  were  I  careless  of  the  woes 
Of  her  who  is  of  all  my  friends  to  me 
Most  near.  1450 

Aeg.  Then  tell  me  where  they  are.        ■« 

El.  In  the  house  : 

To  the  heart  of  their  hostess  they  have  found  their  way. 

Aeg.  Do  they  in  very  truth  report  his  death  ? 

El:  No  mere  report  they  bring,  but  show  him  dead. 

Aeg.  May  then  my  eyes  inform  me  of  the  truth  ? 

El.  They  may  indeed,  and  'tis  a  sorry  sight. 

Aeg.  Such  joyful  greeting  you  are  not  wont  to  give. 

El  Of  this  your  joyful  news  I  give  you  joy. 

Aeg.  But  now  be  silent,  and  throw  wide  the  gates, 
And  let  all  Argos  and  Mycenae  see, 
That,  whoso  buoyed  themselves  with  empty  hopes       1460 
Of  this  man's  life,  now  seeing  he  is  dead, 
May  take  my  bit  in  their  mouths,  and  not  perforce 
Get  wisdom,  getting  chastisement  from  me. 


252  ELECTRA. 


El.  Forthwith  my  part  is  done ;  for  now  at  last 
I  have  learnt  to  do  the  bidding  of  my  betters. 

Aeg.  Zeus,  'twas  thy  wrath  whereby  this  sight  befell : 
But  be  the  word  unsaid,  if  it  offends. 
Take  off  the  face-cloth  from  the  face ;  this  life 
Was  near  to  mine,  and  claims  some  grief  from  me. 

Or.  Lift  it  thyself:  thine  office  this,  not  mine,        1470 
To  look,  and  speak  kind  speech  to  what  lies  here. 

Aeg.   Well  said,  and  as  you  say  I'll  do  :  meanwhile 
Go  call  me  Clytaemnestra  through  the  house. 

Or.  She  is  beside  thee  :  look  not  far  off  for  her. 

Aeg.  What  sight  is  this  ? 

Or.  So  scared  ?  Is  the  face  strange  ? 

Aeg.  Who  are  the  men,  into  whose  net  I  have 
Thus  helpless  fallen  ? 

Or.  Hast  thou  not  yet  discerned, 

Thou  dost  accost  the  living  as  the  dead  ? 

Aeg.  Ah — so  I  read  thy  riddle.     Orestes  surely — 
He  and  no  other  it  is,  who  speaks  to  me.  1480 

Or.  So  wise  a  prophet,  and  yet  fooled  so  long  ? 

Aeg.  Oh  lost,  undone  !     Yet  suffer  me  to  speak 
A  word,  no  more. 

El.  In  heaven's  name,  my  brother, 

Let  him  say  no  word  more,  nor  waste  the  time, 
Talking.     When  men  must  grapple  with  their  fate, 
What  gain  of  time  to  one  condemned  to  die  ? 
But  straightway  slay  him,  and  fling  his  body  forth 


ELECTRA.  253 


To  find  such  burial  as  'tis  meet  it  should — 

Out  of  our  sight.     For  this  and  nothing  else 

For  all  my  wrongs  of  old  can  make  amends.  1490 

Or.  With  speed  get  thee  within  :  the  issue  now 
For  thee  is  not  of  words,  but  of  thy  life. 

Aeg.  What  need  of  darkness,  if  this  deed  is  fair  ? 
Why  lead  me  in,  not  strike  at  once  and  here  ? 

Or.  Dictate  not,  but  come  with  me  where  thou  slewest 
Our  father,  that  ev'n  there  thy  blood  may  flow. 

Aeg.  Is  it  ordained  these  walls  must  see  all  woes 
O'  the  house  of  Pelops,  now  and  in  time  to  come  ? 
Or.  Thine  must  they  :  perfect  prophet  am  I  of  that. 
Aeg.  The  art  you  boast  derives  not  from  your  father. 
Or.  You  bandy  words  ;  our  going  is  delayed  :         1501 
Set  forth. 

Aeg.         Lead,  you. 

Or.  'Tis  you  must  go  the  first. 

Aeg.  Lest  I  should  fly  from  thee  ? 
Or.  Rather  lest  thou 

Shouldst  choose  the  fashion  of  thy  death.     I  needs 
Must  keep  death's  bitterness,  perfect  for  thee. 
Would  that,  for  all,  this  justice  tarried  not ; 
Whoever  dares  to  deal  in  lawless  deeds, 
For  that  man,  death.     So  should  not  crimes  abound. 
Chor.  O  house  of  Atreus,  how  from  all  thy  griefs 
Now  into  freedom's  light  thou  hast  leapt  at  last, 
Crowned  by  this  day's  emprise  !  1510 


TRACHINIAE 


PERSONS. 

Heracles. 

Hyllus. 

Messenger. 

LiCHAS. 

Old  Man. 

Deianeira. 

I  OLE.     {Mute.) 

Nurse. 

Attendant. 

Chorus  of  Trachinian  Maidens. 


Crac&imae. 


Dei.  'nr^HERE     is     a    saying,     time-honoured 
-*-       among  men, 
That  of  a  man's  life,  till  the  day  he  dies, 
Whether  it  be  good  or  evil,  none  may  know  : 
But  what  mine  is,  how  troublesome  and  sad, 
I  know,  or  ever  to  death's  doors  I  come ; 
Who,  dwelling  still  in  Pleuron  with  my  father, 
Oeneus,  of  marriage  had  such  grievous  fear 
As  never  any  Aetolian  maiden  had — 
For  a  god  of  a  river  wooed  me,  Achelous, 
And  ever  came  to  ask  me  of  my  sire,  lo 

Visibly,  in  three  shapes — a  bull,  and  now 
A  shining  coiling  snake,  and  now  man-trunked, 
Ox-headed,  and  ever  from  a  shaggy  beard 
Streams  of  his  fountain's  water  flowed  abroad — 
Such  suitor  entertaining,  I,  ill-starred, 
Prayed  still  that  I  might  die,  or  ever  a  bride 
To  such  a  couch  I  should  be  brought  anear. 
But  then,  O  glad  deliverance  long  delayed. 
Came  that  great  son  Alcmena  bare  to  Zeus  : 
Issue  of  battle  with  the  monster  joined  ao 


258  TRACHINIAE. 


He,  my  preserver.     How  they  toiling  fought, 

I  cannot  say — I  know  not :  whoso  there 

Sat  fearless  of  that  sight,  may  tell  the  tale. 

For  me — I  sat  with  terror  all  amazed. 

Lest  my  fair  face  should  win  me  only  grief. 

But  Zeus,  who  ruled  the  fight,  ordained  it  well — 

If  well :  for  since  to  Heracles  I  clave. 

His  chosen  bride,  fear  after  fear  I  nurse. 

Careful  for  him.     For  one  night  brings  a  trouble. 

And  next  night  with  a  new  one  thrusts  it  forth.  30 

And  we  have  children,  whom  erewhile  he  saw 

As  sees  the  husbandman  some  field  far  off. 

At  seed-time,  and  in  harvest,  and  no  more: 

Such  life  was  his,  that  to  and  from  his  home 

Upon  a  master's  errands  sent  him  still : 

But  now  that  he  has  vanquished  all  those  toils. 

Now  most  of  all  I  have  great  cause  to  fear. 

For,  since  he  slew  the  might  of  Iphitus, 

I  here  in  Trachis  live  a  banished  life. 

Lodged  with  a  stranger ;  and  of  him  no  man  40 

Knows,  where  he  is.     But,  that  he  comes  not,  this 

Lays  to  my  heart  full  many  a  bitter  pang. 

Nay,  I  am  sure  some  harm  hath  taken  him  : 

For  no  brief  time  hath  he  been  gone,  but  ten 

Whole  months  and  other  five,  and  sent  no  word. 

Some  dreadful  harm,  I  know :  of  such  a  purport 

The  writing  that  he  left,  which  oftentimes 


TRACHINIAE.  259 


I  pray  the  gods,  boding  no  grief,  I  took. 

Serv.  My  mistress,  Deianeira,  I  have  heard  thee 
Often  before  with  groaning  and  with  tears  so 

Lamenting  for  this  absence  of  my  lord  ; 
Now,  if  one  may  with  wisdom  of  a  slave 
Admonish  ears  free-born,  let  me  say  this : 
How,  being  so  rich  in  many  sons,  of  these 
Sendest  thou  none  to  seek  thy  husband  forth ; 
And  chiefly  Hyllus,  whom  'twere  fit,  if  he 
Cared  of  his  father's  prospering  to  think  ? 
And  to  the  house  himself  with  timely  step 
Comes  bounding  :  now,  if  I  seem  to  thee  to  speak 
A  word  in  season,  use  my  speech,  and  him.  60 

Dei.  O  child,  my  son,  from  humble  lips  I  see 
Advice  may  fitly  fall.     See  now  this  woman : 
A  slave  is  she,  but  no  slave's  word  has  spoken. 

Hyll.  What  ?     Tell  me,  mother,  if  I  may  be  told 

Dei.  That,  of  thy  father  tarrying  so  long 
Not  learning  where  he  tarries,  thou  art  shamed. 

Hyll.  Nay  but  I  know,  if  what  is  told  is  truth. 

Dei.  Where,  Hyllus,  hast  thou  heard  that  he  abides  ? 

Hyll,  Last  year,  they  say,  the  twelve  long  toilsome 
months, 
He  was  the  bondsman  of  a  Lydian  woman.  70 

Dei.  Nought  may  we  not  hear,  if  he  suffered  this. 

Hyll.  But  now  from  this,  I  hear,  he  is  released. 

Dei.  Where  now  is  news  of  him,  living  or  dead  ? 


26o  TRACHINIAE. 


Hyll.  War  in  Euboea  he  makes  or  still  intends, 
Men  say,  against  the  city  of  Eurytus. 

Dei.  Knowest  thou  then,  my  son,  of  this  same  land 
What  certain  oracles  he  left  with  me  ? 

Hyll.  What   are   they,   mother?     I   know  not  what 

thou  sayest. 
Dei.  That  either  he  shall  end  his  life,  or  else, 
Achieving  this  last  labour,  shall  henceforth  80 

For  all  his  time  to  come  lead  blissful  days. 
Then,  whilst  his  fate  so  trembles  in  the  scales, 
Wilt  thou  not  go  to  aid  him,  now  that  we 
Are  saved  if  he  be  safe,  or  lost  with  him  ? 

Hyll.  Nay,  mother,  I  will  go ;  and,  had  I  known 
What  was  foretold,  I  had  been  there  long  since. 
Only  his  constant  fortune  suffered  me  not 
To  fear  for  him,  nor  overmuch  to  doubt. 
Now  that  I  know,  trust  me,  I  shall  not  spare  9° 

Pains  in  the  quest,  until  I  find  the  truth. 

Dei.    Go   then,   my  son.       Good    news,   though    it 
come  late, 
So  it  might  come  at  last,  is  fraught  with  gain. 

Chor.  Thee,  whom  the  starry  night,  [Strophe  i. 

Beneath  the  spoiler's  hand 
Breathing  her  last,  brings  forth, 
Whom  then  she  lays  to  sleep, 
Thee,  Sun-god,  thee,  bright-burning,  I  implore — 
Oh  tell  me  of  Alcmena's  son. 


TRACHINIAE.  261 


O  thou,  whose  rays  are  as  the  lightnings  bright, 
Where,  where  he  dwelleth — 
Defiles  of  the  Aegean  threading, 
Or  from  mid-strait  beholding  either  continent —  100 

Oh  tell  me,  god  of  keenest  sight  1 
For  with  an  ever-hungry  heart,  they  say,       \Ant.  i. 
Fair  Deianeira,  she  for  whom  the  suitors  strove, 
Like  some  unhappy  bird. 
Lulls  never  into  tearless  sleep 
That  hunger  of  her  eyes  : 
But  unforgetful  fear 
For  him,  her  absent  lord. 
She  entertaining  pines 
Upon  her  widowed  couch  of  care,  no 

Ill-starred,  foreboding  all  distressful  chance. 
For  as,  before  the  untiring  blast  of  South  or  North,  [Str.  2. 
Across  the  boundless  sea 
We  watch  the  march  of  waves 
That  come,  and  ever  come, 
Even  so  upon  this  son  of  Cadmus'  house  attends. 
His  hard  hfe's  toilsomeness 
Increasing  more  and  more, 
Of  troubles  a  Cretan  sea. 
But  from  the  halls  of  death 
Some  god  restrains  his  feet. 
Suffering  them  not  to  stray.  120 

Therefore  I  chide  thee,  and  this  word  \Ant.  2. 


262  TRACHINIAE. 


Of  contradiction,  not  ungrateful,  I  will  speak. 
I  say  thou  dost  not  well 
To  kill  the  better  hope. 
For  think,  a  lot  exempt  from  pain 
The  son  of  Cronos,  king  who  governs  all, 

Ordained  not  for  men. 
To  all  men  sorrow  and  joy  alternate  come, 
Revolving,  as  in  heaven 
The  twisting  courses  of  the  Bear.  130 

For  neither  starry  night  \Epode. 

Abides  with  men,  nor  death,  nor  wealth — 
But  quickly  it  is  gone, 
And  now  another  learns 
The  changeful  tale  of  joy  and  loss. 
Therefore  I  counsel  thee,  the  queen, 
To  keep  this  ever  in  thy  hopes  : 
For  when  was  Zeus  so  careless  for  his  sons  ?         140 
Dei.  Ye  come,  I  must  conjecture,  having  heard 
My  trouble ;  but,  how  the  trouble  eats  my  heart. 
Ye  know  not — may  ye  not  by  suffering  learn. 
In  such  a  well-fenced  place,  in  native  soil. 
The  tender  plant  grows,  where  no  sun  may  scorch, 
Nor  rain  nor  any  wind  is  rough  with  it ; 
Upward  a  painless  pleasant  life  it  lifts — 
Until  such  time  the  maiden  is  called  a  wife, 
And  in  a  night  her  share  of  trouble  comes, 
By  husband  or  by  children  made  afraid.  150 


TRACHINIAE.  263 


Then,  by  your  own  experience  taught,  the  grief 

That  at  my  heart  is  heavy  ye  may  know. 

For  many  sorrows  have  I  often  wept : 

One  now,  whose  like  was  never,  I  shall  tell. 

When  on  his  latest  journey  Heracles 

My  lord  went  forth  from  home,  then  in  the  house 

He  left  an  ancient  tablet,  all  inscribed 

With  such  a  writing  as  he  deigned  not  else. 

In  all  his  rash  outgoings,  to  reveal. 

But  went  as  if  to  victory,  not  death.  16 

Now,  like  a  man  as  good  as  dead,  my  portion 

He  bade  me  choose,  and  meted  to  his  sons 

Land  for  their  heritage,  his  share  to  each, 

Fixing  a  time,  that,  when  he  had  been  gone 

Three  months  beyond  the  circle  of  a  year. 

Then  either  it  was  destined  he  should  die. 

Or  having  passed  this  crisis  of  his  fate 

Thence  to  the  end  should  live  a  life  unvexed. 

Such  issue  of  the  toils  of  Heracles 

He  showed  to  me,  issue  by  heaven  ordained —         170 

So  by  the  voice  of  its  twin  doves,  he  said, 

Dodona's  ancient  oak  had  spoken  it. 

And  now  waits  confirmation  of  its  truth 

The  voice  prophetic,  and  the  hour  is  come. 

So  that  sometimes,  O  friends,  from  pleasant  sleep 

I  start  in  fear — afraid,  if  I  must  live 

My  days  out,  widowed  of  the  best  of  men. 


264  TRACHINIAE. 


Chor.  Cease  thine  ill-omened  words ;  for  hither  comes 
One  garlanded,  as  bearing  joyful  news. 

Mess.  Queen  Deianeira,  I  first  of  messengers  iSo 

Free  thee  from  fear.  Know  that  Alcmena's  son 
Both  lives  and  triumphs,  and  from  battle  brings 
Firstfruits  of  victory  to  his  country's  gods. 

Dei.  Old  man,  what  tidings  hast  thou  told  to  me  ? 

Mess.  That  hither  to  thy  doors  will  come  full  soon, 
Illustrious,  crowned  with  victory,  thy  lord. 

Dei.  Who,  citizen  or  stranger,  told  thee  this  ? 

Mess.  Lichas  the  herald  proclaims  it  in  the  fields. 
Our  summer  pastures,  in  the  ears  of  many. 
I  heard  and  hasted,  that,  announcing  first  190 

Such  news,  I  might  have  guerdon — thanks  to  boot. 

Dei.  Why    comes  he  not  himself,  who    brings    glad 
news? 

Mess.  'Tis  not  so  easy,  lady,  all  at  once. 
For  round  him  all  our  Melian  people  press 
Questioning,  and  he  cannot  move  a  step. 
Their  eagerness,  each  hungering  to  hear  all, 
Will  not  release  him  till  they're  satisfied. 
So  for  their  pleasure,  not  his  own,  with  them 
He  tarries  :  soon  thou'lt  see  him,  face  to  face. 

Dei.  Zeus,  of  the  unmown  lawns  of  Oeta  lord,         aoo 
Joy  long-delayed  at  last  thou  givest  me. 
Within  the  house,  ye  women,  and  beyond 
The  court,  proclaim  it — with  what  light  new-risen 


TRACHINIAE.  265 


I  bless  myself,  light  of  glad  news  unhoped. 
Chor.  Shout  clamorously  to  all  the  house 

With  joyful  cries  about  the  hearth, 

O  maidens — and  let  sound  therewith 
Consenting  voice  of  men — 
Apollo  our  protector, 
With  his  fair  quiver,  praise  : 

Withal  a  paean,  girls,  a  paean  lift — 

To  Artemis,  his  sister,  cry  aloud, 

Ortygian,  huntress  of  the  stag, 
Who  holds  in  either  hand  a  torch, 
And  to  the  neighbour  Nymphs — 
The  passion  lifts  me — now, 
Now  not  the  maddening  flute 
Will  I  refuse  to  hear, 
O  tyrant  of  my  heart ! 
Euoe  ! 
See  how  the  ivy  stirs  my  blood — 
How  it  constrains  me  suddenly 
With  Bacchanals  to  vie. 
Joy,  joy,  O  Paean  ! 
See,  see,  dear  lady,  now 
The  joyful  news  takes  shape. 
And  greets  thee  face  to  face. 
Dei.  Yea,  friends,  I  see,  nor  had  my  eyes  so  ill 

Kept  watch,  not  to  descry  this  company. — 

Welcome,  O  herald,  whose  coming,  long-delayed, 


266  TRACHINIAE. 


Is  joyful,  if  indeed  thou  bearest  news. 

Lich.  Well  are  we  come,  O  lady,  and  are  greeted 
Well,  as  our  deeds  have  earned ; — since,  who  indeed  230 
Prospers,  he  cannot  fail  to  win  good  words. 

Dei.  O  best  of  friends,  first  what  I  first  would  know — 
Shall  I  receive  my  Heracles  alive  ? 

Lich.  I  left  him  strong  enough,  I  warrant  him — 
Living  and  hale,  plagued  with  no  sickness,  he. 

Dei.  Upon  Greek  soil,  or  foreign  ?  tell  me  this. 

Lich.    There's    an     Euboean    headland,    where     he 
traces 
Altars  to  Zeus  Cenaean,  and  fruitful  dues. 

Dei.  Paying  some  vow,  or  warned  by  oracles  ? 

Lich.    A   vow    in    battle,    when    he    stormed     and 
sacked  240 

The  city  of  these  maidens,  whom  thou  seest. 

Dei.    And    these — I   prithee,    whose   are  they,    and 
who? 
Piteous — unless  their  plight  deceives  my  heart. 

Lich.  Of  the  plunder  of  the  city  of  Eurytus, 
These  for  himself  and  for  the  gods  he  chose. 

Dei.  Was  it  before  this  city  that  he  spent 
All  the  incredible  time,  past  count  of  days  ? 

Lich.  Not  so  :  most  part  of  it  he  was  detained 
In  Lydia — by  his  own  account,  not  free, 
But  sold  and  bought.     Nor  let  the  word  offend,  250 

When  Zeus  appears  the  author  of  the  thing. 


1 


TRACHINIAE.  267 


So  a  full  year,  as  he  himself  avers, 

He  served  the  barbarous  woman  Omphale, 

And  the  reproach  so  stung  him  to  the  heart 

He  laid  an  oath  upon  his  soul  and  swore 

The  man  who  brought  this  trouble  on  his  head 

One  day  with  wife  and  child  he  would  enslave : 

Nor  idly  spake — but,  when  his  hands  were  clean, 

Gathered  a  foreign  host  against  the  town 

Of  Eurytus.     For  Eurytus,  he  said,  afo 

Had  had  sole  share  in  working  him  this  woe  : 

Who  with  his  voice,  and  with  a  spiteful  heart, 

Railed  oft  against  him,  when  he  came  a  guest — 

Guest  as  of  old  into  the  friendly  house — 

That  he,  with  those  inevitable  shafts. 

Was  yet  in  bow-craft  for  his  sons  no  match — 

And  called  him  slave  of  a  free  master,  cowed 

And  broken  :  last,  at  a  banquet,  hot  with  wine, 

Had  cast  him  from  his  doors.     Therefore  in  rage, 

When  to  the  hill  of  Tiryns  Iphitus  270 

Came,  following  after  horses  that  had  strayed, 

Him  from  the  smooth  top  of  the  towering  cliff, 

Whilst  one  way  went  his  eyes,  his  thoughts  another. 

My  master  flung.     But  for  this  deed  the  king, 

Olympian  Zeus,  the  Sire  of  all,  being  wroth, 

Drave  him  a  bondsman  forth,  nor  suffered  him, 

Because  this  man  alone  of  men  he  slew 

By  guile.     For,  open  vengeance  had  he  wreaked. 


268  TRACHINIAE. 


Zeus  had  allowed  the  violent  deed  as  just : 

Since  gods  no  more  than  men  love  insolence.  280 

But  now  they  all,  rank  tongues  and  riotous, 

Themselves  are  lodged  in  Hades,  and  their  town 

Enslaved;  so  that  these  maidens  whom  thou  seest, 

From  prosperous  fallen  upon  evil  days, 

Come  here  to  thee.     Such  charge  thy  lord  enjoined, 

And  I,  obedient  to  his  word,  fulfil. 

Himself,  when  to  his  Sire  for  victory 

The  sacrifice  is  paid  that  clears  his  vow. 

Expect  to  come.     For  this,  of  all  the  long 

Glad  story,  is  the  sweetest  word  to  hear.  290 

Chor.  Now,  lady,  is  thy  joy  made  manifest, 
Part  present,  and  thou  hearest  of  the  rest. 

Dei.  Hearing  this  news  of  all  my  lord's  success. 
How  should  I  not  rejoice,  who  am  true  wife  ? 
Needs  must  they  go  together,  this  and  that. 
Yet  shall  the  prudent  still  find  cause  to  fear, 
Lest  he  who  prospers  now  may  sometime  fall. 
Friends,  through  my  heart  a  pang  of  pity  went. 
Beholding  these  unhappy,  fatherless 
And  homeless,  outcasts  in  an  alien  land,  300 

Who  erst  belike  were  children  of  free  men. 
But  now  a  slave's  life  is  the  life  they  have. 
Zeus,  may  I  never — Averter  of  the  ill — 
See  thee  so  visit  any  child  of  mine  : 
Be  it,  if  it  must  be,  not  till  I  am  gone. 


TRACHINIAE,  269 


Such  fears  arise  in  me,  beholding  these. 

Thou  hapless  girl — speak,  tell  me  who  thou  art  ? 

Say,  art  thou  maid  or  mother  ?     By  thy  looks 

All  inexperienced  of  such  things  thou  art, 

And  noble.     Lichas,  whose  daughter  is  the  maiden  ?   310 

Who  was  her  mother  ?  what  her  father's  name  ? 

Speak  out :  for  her  I  pity  most  of  all, 

Beholding  her,  of  all  most  quick  to  feel. 

Lich.  Nay,  what  know  I  ?     Why  ask  you  me  ?     Belike 
Not  of  the  meanest  of  the  land  her  birth. 

Dei.  Was  she  the  king's  ?     Had  Eurytus  a  daughter  ? 

Lich.  I  know  not,  for  I  asked  few  questions,  I. 

Dei.    Hast   not   from   her    companions    heard    her 
name? 

Lich.  Not  I :  I  did  my  task,  nor  wasted  words. 

Dei.  Speak,  hapless  maiden,  freely  speak  to  me  ;      320 
'Tis  pity  not  to  know  thee^  who  thou  art. 

Lich.  Nought  like  her  former  mood,  I  wot,  'twill  be, 
If  now  she  should  prove  liberal  of  her  tongue  ; 
Who  spake  no  word  before,  or  much  or  little, 
But  ever  travailing  with  her  weight  of  grief 
Weeps,  and  still  weeps,  unhappy,  since  she  left 
Her  windy  home.     Yet  fortune,  howso  hard 
On  her  it  be,  not  therefore  is  to  blame. 

Dei.  Suffer  her  then,  and  let  her  go  within 
As  suits  her  best,  nor  may  she  at  my  hands  330 

To  crown  her  present  ills  find  grief  on  grief : 


270  TRACHINIAE. 


Enough  is  that  she  has.     And  let  us  all 
Go  in,  that  you  may  haste  whereso  you  list, 
And  I  may  make  all  ready  in  the  house. 

Mess.  Ay,  but  first  tarry  awhile,  that  you  may  learn, 
Now  these  are  gone,  whom  to  your  hearth  you  lead, 
And  things  unheard  may  hear,  that  should  be  known. 
For  of  these  matters  I  am  well  apprised. 

Dei.  What  is  it?     Why  stand  you  thus  to  bid  me 
stay  ?  339 

Mess.  Stand  still  and  hear  me.     Not  my  former  speech 
For  nought  you  heard,  nor  this,  I  think,  shall  hear. 

Dei.  Shall  we  then  call  those  others  back  again. 
Or  is  thy  mind  to  speak  to  these  and  me  ? 

Mess.  To  these  and  thee  nought  hinders  :  they  may  go. 

Dei.  Well,  they  are  gone  :  now  let  thy  say  be  said. 

Mess.  This  man  told  now  his  tale,  as  using  not 
Straightforward  truth ;  but  either  now  is  knave, 
Or  else  before  was  no  true  messenger. 

Dei.    How  say'st    thou?      Tell    me  plainly  all  thy 
drift : 
What  thou  hast  spoken  is  a  dark  speech  to  me.  350 

Mess.  I  heard  this  man  declare,  loud  in  the  ears 
Of  many  men,  that  for  this  maiden's  sake 
Eurytus  and  Oechalia's  lofty  tower 
Did  Heracles  o'erthrow,  nor  other  god 
Than  Eros  charmed  him  to  these  martial  feats — 
Of  slavish  toil  for  Lydian  Omphale, 


TRACHINIAE.  271 


Or  headlong  death  of  Iphitus,  no  word — 

So  changed  the  story  now,  with  Love  left  out. 

And,  when  her  father  would  not  give  consent, 

Nor  yield  the  maiden  for  a  concubine,  360 

Some  trivial  accusation  he  contrived. 

And  brought  an  army  against  her  land,  and  there, 

Said  Lichas,  sits  on  the  throne  of  Eurytus, 

Having  the  king  her  father  slain,  and  sacked 

Her  city.     And  now  he  sends  her,  as  thou  seest, 

Before  him  hither — not  without  a  purpose, 

Lady,  nor  as  a  slave — expect  it  not — 

It  is  not  likely,  if  he  glows  with  love. 

So  it  seemed  good  to  me  to  show  thee  all, 

O  queen,  that  I  myself  have  heard  from  him.  370 

And  this  did  many  in  the  mid-marketplace 

Of  Trachis  hear  along  with  me,  and  can 

Convict  him.     I  am  sorry  if  my  words 

Grieve  thee  :  but  I  have  told  thee  all  the  truth. 

Dei,    Ah    me,   ill-starred !     In  what  plight    stand    I 
now  ? 
What  veiled  insidious  plague  beneath  my  roof 
Have  I  received  ?     O  hapless — is  she  then 
So  nameless,  as  he  swore  who  brought  her  here  ? 

Mess.  Splendid  her  beauty  and  her  birth  ahke — 
Daughter  of  Eurytus,  lole  by  name,  380 

She  used  to  be,  whose  lineage  he  forsooth, 
Because  he  never  asked  it,  could  not  tell. 


272  TRACHINIAE. 


Chor.  Perish — I  say  not  all  ill-doers,  but  who 
Practise  with  guile  ill  deeds  that  should  not  be  ! 

Dei.  Ah,  friends,  what  must  I  do  ?  this  latest  news 
Hath  sounded  in  my  ears  bewilderingly. 

Chor,  Go  in  and  question  him ;  since,  with  constraint 
If  thou  shouldst  ask,  belike  he'll  tell  thee  all. 

Dei,  There's  purpose  in  thy  counsel.     I  will  go.       389 

Chor,  And  we — shall  we  remain  ?  or  what  do  next  ? 

Dei.    Remain :    for  here,    self-summoned    from   the 
house, 
He  comes,  called  by  no  messengers  of  mine. 

Lich.  What  word,  O  lady,  shall  I  bear  my  lord  ? 
Tell  me,  since  I  am  going,  as  you  see. 

Dei,   Much    haste    you    make     to   go,   who     slowly 
came — 
Nor  give  me  time  to  talk  your  tidings  o'er. 

Lich,  If  aught  you  would  ask  further,  here  I  stand. 

Dei,  Hold  you  the  honesty  of  speaking  truth  ? 

Lich,  Be  Zeus  my  witness,  whatso  truth  I  know. 

Dei.  Who  is  this  maiden,   then,   you    have    brought 
hither  ?  400 

Lich,  Euboean  born  :  her  name  I  cannot  tell. 

Mess.  Sirrah,  look  here  at  me.     Whom  speak  you  to  ? 

Lich.  You — might  I  know,  why  you  have  asked  me 
this? 

Mess.  Answer  my  question,  if  your  prudence  dares. 

Lich.  To  the  most  royal  Deianeira,  daughter 


TRACHINIAE.  273 


Of  Oeneus,  wife  of  Heracles,  unless 

My  eyes  have  played  me  false,  and  to  my  mistress. 

Mess.     Precisely    this    I    wished    to    know.      Your 
mistress 
You  call  this  lady  ? 

Lich.  Yes,  as  in  justice  bound. 

Mess.   How  then?     What,  think  you,  are  your  just 
deserts,  4" 

If  you  have  dealt  unjustly — you,  with  her  ? 

Lich.  Unjustly  —  how?      What    cunning    speech   is 
this? 

Mess.  'Tis  none.     The  cunning  speeches  come  from 
you. 

Lich.  I  must  be  gone.     Fool,  to  have  tarried  thus  ! 

Mess.  One  question  you  shall  answer,  ere  you  go. 

Lich.  You  have  a  tongue  :  what  is  it  that  you  want  ? 

Mess.  The  captive  whom  you  brought  into  the  house — 
I  think  you  know  her  ? 

Lich.  Yes  :  why  do  you  ask  ? 

Mess.   Did  you  not  call  her  daughter  of  Eurytus, 
lole  ?  whom  now  you  see,  and  know  her  not.  420 

Lich.  Yea,  to  what  audience  ?     Who  and  where's  the 
man, 
Attests  you,  he  was  there  and  heard  me  say  it  ? 

Mess.   Many  of  our  townsmen  heard  it — all  the  crowd 
In  the  mid-marketplace  of  Trachis  gathered. 

Lich.  Yes — this  I  said  that  I  had  heard.     To  quote 


274  TRACHINIAE. 


Opinion  is  not  to  affirm  the  fact. 

Mess.  Opinion  !     Said  you  not  upon  your  oath 
You  brought  her  to  be  wife  to  Heracles  ? 

Lich.  I  said  I  brought  her  for  his  wife  ?     Dear  lady, 
I  pray  you,  tell  me,  who  this  person  is.  430 

Mess.  One,  sirrah,  who  heard  you  say,  that  for  her 
beauty 
A  city  fell — which  not  the  Lydian  woman, 
But  love  of  her^  outbreaking,  overthrew. 

Lich.  Let  him  go  hence,  good  lady  :  for  indeed 
Sane  men  prate  not  with  madmen,  such  as  he. 

Dei.  By  Zeus  I  charge  thee,  whose  clear  lightnings 
shine 
Down  the  high  glens  of  Oeta,  keep  back  nought. 
To  one  not  evil-natured  wilt  thou  speak. 
One  who  knows  well,  'tis  human  to  rejoice 
Not  in  the  same  delight  continually.  440 

I  know,  they  are  not  wise,  who  set  themselves 
To  fight  with  Love,  challenging  him  to  blows. 
For  even  gods  he  governs  as  he  will ; 
And  me — why  not  another,  weak  like  me  ? 
Oh,  if  I  blame  my  husband  that  he  suffers 
This  madness,  mad  indeed  am  I  myself; 
Or  blam.e  this  maiden,  cause  with  him  of  that 
Which  causes  me  no  shame,  does  me  no  wrong. 
I  cannot  blame.     But  now,  if  taught  of  him 
You  lie,  no  noble  lesson  have  you  learned ;  450 


TRACHINIAE.  275 


Or,  if  you  school  yourself,  take  heed  lest  then 

You  be  found  cruel,  when  you  would  be  kind. 

Nay,  tell  me  all  the  truth.     To  be  called  false 

Is  for  free  men  no  honourable  lot. 

That  you  should  'scape  discovery,  cannot  be : 

Many  are  they  who  heard  you,  and  will  speak. 

And,  if  you  are  afraid,  you  fear  amiss : 

For,  not  to  know — this  would  afflict  me ;  but 

Fear  not  my  knowing  :  hath  not  Heracles 

Loved  many  another — most  of  all  men  he  ?  460 

And  never  any  of  them  bore  from  me 

Harsh  word  or  gibe ;  nor  shall,  howe'er  she  be 

Consumed  with  love,  this  maiden ;  nay,  for  her 

Most  of  them  all  I  pity,  having  seen 

That  'twas  her  beauty  that  made  waste  her  life — 

Poor  soul,  who  sacked,  unwitting,  and  enslaved 

The  city  of  her  home.     But  now  I  charge  thee — 

Heed  not  what  winds  blow  whither — but  be  false 

To  others  if  thou  wilt,  to  me  speak  truth.  469 

Chor.  Obey  good  counsel.     Cause  thou  shalt  not  find 
To  blame  this  lady,  and  shalt  have  thanks  of  me. 

Lich.  Nay  then,  dear  mistress,  since  I  see,  being  human, 
Thou  hast  a  human  heart,  that  knows  to  feel, 
I  will  keep  nothing  back,  but  tell  thee  all 
For  so  indeed  it  is,  as  this  man  says. 
Huge  passion  for  this  maid  smote  through  and  through 
My  lord,  and  for  her  sake  the  ruined  town, 


276  TRACHINIAE. 


Her  home  Oechalia,  fell  beneath  his  spear. 

And  this — so  much  for  him  I  needs  must  say — 

He  nor  himself  denied  nor  bade  conceal ;  480 

But  I,  O  lady,  who  feared  to  grieve  thy  heart 

With  telling  of  these  tidings,  I  alone 

Have  sinned,  if  sin  thou  holdest  it,  in  this. 

But,  now  that  all  the  story  thou  hast  heard, 

Both  for  his  sake  and  for  thine  own  no  less, 

Suffer  the  maiden,  and  let  concerning  her 

The  words  that  thou  hast  spoken  bind  thee  still. 

For,  as  no  triumph  he  hath  not  won  save  this. 

So  for  her  love  no  bondage  he'd  not  bear. 

Dei.  My  thoughts,  to  do  thy  bidding,  are  as  thine;   490 
I  shall  not  wage  weak  strife  with  gods,  and  win 
My  neighbours'  plagues  for  mine.     Go  we  indoors  : 
That  thou  may'st  bear  a  message  to  my  lord. 
And  gifts  for  gifts,  a  fit  and  fair  exchange, 
May'st  carry.     Empty  shalt  thou  not  go  hence, 
Who  camest  hither  with  such  a  goodly  train. 

Chor.  Great  strength  from  victory  \Strophe. 

Doth  Cypris  ever  bear  away. 
I  stay  not  now  to  speak  of  gods, 
And  how  the  son  of  Cronos  she  beguiled 

I  spare  to  tell,  500 

How  Hades,  lord  of  night  and  death, 
And  how  Poseidon,  strong 
To  shake  the  rooted  earth. 


TRACHINIAE.  277 


But  hear,  to  win  this  lady  for  a  bride, 
What  champions  ready  of  limb 
Addressed  themselves  to  fight — 
The  fight  and  then  the  marriage-feast ; 
Ordeal  of  battle,  blow  and  dusty  fall, 
What  rivals  dared. 
A  River's  might  the  one,  \Antistrophe. 

In  semblance  of  a  bull. 
Four-footed,  lofty-horned. 
Great  Acheloiis  hight,  who  came  from  Oeneadae.     509 
From  Thebb,  loved  of  Bacchus,  the  other  came. 
With  curven  bow  and  spear  and  brandished  club, 
Of  Zeus  the  son. 
Who  then  together  in  the  midst. 
Desiring  that  fair  marriage,  met : 
And  in  the  midst  was  sitting 
The  single  umpire,  with  an  umpire's  wand, 
Cypris  who  gives  fair  brides  to  men. 
Much  noise  of  heavy  hands  was  then,        \Epode. 
And  much  of  bowstrings  twanging. 
And  the  horns  of  the  other  fiercely  struck  and  clashed : 
And  there  were  grapplings  close-entwined —     520 
And  murderous  blows  on  foreheads  ringing — 
And  deep  hard  breath  of  both. 
And  all  the  while  she  sat 
Upon  a  height  where  all  might  see, 
With  her  fair  face  and  delicate  mien, 


278  TRACHINIAE. 


And  waited  for  her  lord. 
Methinks  I  note  it  as  a  mother  might : 

How  there  the  maiden's  sweet  sad  eyes, 
They  fight  for,  bide  the  issue  still : 
Then  from  her  mother's  side, 
As  when  men  tear  a  heifer  from  its  dam, 
All  on  a  sudden  she  is  gone. 
Dei.  A  moment,  whilst  the  stranger  takes  his  leave. 
Friends,  of  the  captive  maidens  in  the  house, 
To  speak  with  you  here  to  the  doors  I  stole. 
Part,  what  my  hands  have  planned  that  ye  may  know. 
And  part,  that  ye  may  pity  my  distress. 
I  have  received  this  maiden  in  my  house — 
Maiden  I  think  no  longer,  but  a  wife — 
As  when  the  shipman  takes  an  overfreight, 
A  bale  that  will  make  shipwreck  of  my  heart. 
And  now  we  twain  share  one  embrace,  beneath 
One  mantle's  folds  abide.     Such  the  reward  : 

That  Heracles,  whom  men  call  good  and  true, 
For  my  long  careful  housekeeping  hath  sent. 
Yet  to  be  angry  I  find  not  in  my  heart, 
With  him  oft  smitten  with  this  amorous  plague  : 
But  dwell  beneath  one  roof  with  her,  and  share 
With  her  my  rights  of  wife,  what  woman  could  ? 
Her  bloom  of  youth  I  see  is  ripening  still. 
But  fading  mine :  and  eyes  of  men,  I  know, 
The  flower  of  such  young  beauty  love  to  pluck, 


TRACHINIAE.  279 


But  ever  from  the  other  turn  away. 

This  then  I  fear,  that  he  my  wedded  lord,  550 

But  husband  of  the  younger,  will  be  called. 

Enough  :  I  said  that  anger  ill  beseems 

A  woman  who  is  wise  :  how  I  shall  grieve 

This  maiden  for  my  riddance,  ye  shall  hear. 

A  gift,  from  the  ancient  Centaur  long  ago 

Received,  hid  in  an  urn  of  brass,  I  keep. 

From  shaggy-breasted  Nessus,  from  his  blood, 

As  he  lay  dying,  I  drew  it  yet  a  girl — 

Nessus  who  in  his  arms  for  hire  across 

The  deep  Euenus  flood  bore  men,  nor  rowed  them 

Upon  their  way  with  oars,  nor  hoisted  sail.  561 

By  whom  I  also — when  in  those  first  days 

After  my  marriage  I  with  Heracles 

Upon  my  father's  sending  followed  forth — 

Borne  on  his  shoulders,  when  I  reached  mid-stream. 

With  wanton  hands  was  touched,  and  cried  aloud, 

And  quick  the  son  of  Zeus  turned,  and  let  fly 

A  feathered  arrow,  that  went  singing  straight 

To  the  lungs  of  the  Centaur.     Who,  fainting  in  death, 

Spake  to  me  thus  :   '  Daughter  of  Oeneus  old. 

So  much,  because  thou  wast  my  latest  charge,  570 

An  if  thou  hearkenest  to  my  words,  shalt  thou 

Be  gainer  by  my  ferrying  of  thee. 

If  with  thy  hands  thou  takest  of  the  blood 

That  curdles  round  about  my  wound,  ev'n  there 


28o  TRACHINIAE. 


Where  the  Lemaean  monster-hydra  dipped 

Its  rankling  arrows,  this  shall  be  to  thee 

A  charm  to  sway  the  soul  of  Heracles, 

Nor  on  another  woman  shall  he  look 

To  love  her  more  than  thee.'     This  then,  O  friends, 

Remembering,  (for  after  he  was  dead 

Locked  up  with  care  I  kept  it  in  the  house,) 

I  dipped  this  tunic,  minding  all  he  said  580 

While  yet  he  lived — all's  done,  and  nought  left  out. 

No  deed  of  guilty  daring  may  I  know 

Or  learn — who  hate  all  women  who  are  bold  : 

Only  with  charms  put  forth  on  Heracles 

And  spells,  before  this  child  to  be  preferred, 

This  have  I  schemed  :  but,  if  I  seem  to  do 

A  wanton  thing — why,  then  I  will  forbear. 

Chor.   Nay,  if  you  may  put  trust  in  what  you  do, 
Our  judgment  is  that  you  have  counselled  well. 

Dei.  Such  trust  I  have  as  likelihood  inspires,       590 
But  nowise  yet  am  conversant  with  proof. 

Chor.  In  the  effect's  the  proof;  you  cannot  know, 
Howe'er  it  seems,  until  you  make  assay. 

Dei.  Soon  I  shall  know ;  for  now  I  see  the  man 
Come  from  the  doors ;  and  straight  he  will  be  gone. 
Only  be  secret :  even  if  shameful  things 
Be  darkly  done,  one  shall  not  suffer  shame. 

Lich.  Command  me,  child  of  Oeneus,  what  to  do  : 
Already  I  have  tarried  all  too  long. 


TRACHINJAE.  281 


Dei.  Nay,  to  this  end  not  idle  have  I  been,  600 

Whilst  to  the  strangers  there  thou  saidst  farewell, 
That  thou  shouldst  bear  me  this  well-woven  robe, 
My  handiwork,  a  present  to  my  lord ; 
And  charge  him,  giving  it,  to  let  it  be 
Worn  by  no  other  but  himself  the  first, 
And  let  no  sunlight,  nor  the  sacred  court 
O'  the  altar,  nor  the  flame  upon  the  hearth, 
Behold  it,  till  what  time  in  sight  of  all, 
Upon  a  day  when  bulls  are  slain,  he  stands 
Forth,  and  displays  it  for  the  gods  to  see. 
For  fitly  in  this  tunic  had  I  vowed,  610 

If  I  should  see  or  hear  him  safe  returned, 
To  dress  him,  and  present  him  to  the  gods, 
New-dight  in  a  new  robe,  their  worshipper. 
And  on  the  seal's  enclosure,  plain  to  see. 
This  sign  deliver  him — which  he  will  know. 
But  go  now,  and  this  rule,  that  messengers 
Seek  not  to  meddle,  chiefly  bear  in  mind ; 
Next,  see  thou  find  a  twofold  meed  of  thanks. 
Not  single,  but  united,  his  and  mine. 

LicJu  Call  me  of  Hermes  no  true  follower  620 

Or  servant,  if  you  find  me  fail  in  this. 
To  bring  this  casket  to  him  as  it  is. 
And  add  for  proof  the  reasons  you  allege. 

Dei.  And  now  begone,     I  think  you  know  right  well 
How  at  this  time  things  are  within  the  house. 


282  TRACHINIAE. 


Lich.  I  know  and  will  report  all  safe  and  sound. 
Dei.  My  welcome  of  the  stranger — how  I  gave 
Her  kindly  welcome — this  you  have  seen  and  know  ? 
Lich.  So  that  for  joy  my  heart  was  all  amazed.  629 

Dei.  What  need  to  tell  aught  else  ?     I  fear  you  may 
Too  soon  tell  of  the  yearning  of  my  love, 
Before  you  know  if  I  am  yearned  for  there. 

Chor.  Where  from  ship-harbouring  rocks     [Strophe  i. 
Our  warm  springs  flow, 
And  whosoever  dwells 
At  foot  of  Oeta's  crags, 
Where  inland  furthest  runs  this  Melian  bay, 
And  where  the  golden-arrowed  goddess  owns 
The  seaward  shore, 
Where  meet  the  Parliaments  of  Greece, 
Named  of  the  Gates,  renowned —  639 

Expect  right  soon  the  sweet-voiced  flute,  [Ant.  1. 
Not  with  loud  dissonance  of  despair, 
But  with  a  music  most  divine 
To  the  responsive  lyre  attuned, 

All  heaven  will  fill 
For  hither  hastes  Alcmena's  son. 

The  son  of  Zeus ; 
With  trophies  of  all  high  exploit 
Hastes  hither  to  his  hom-e. 
A  full  twelve  months  we  thought  of  him    [Str.  2. 
A  wanderer,  citiless  among  men, 


TRACHINIAE.  283 


Beyond  the  sea — 
We  thought  and  waited,  and  no  tidings  came ; 

And  drowned  in  tears  his  loving  wife  650 

Her  aching  heart  consumed  with  patient  pain. 
But,  fallen  now  on  sleep, 
Hath  Ares  of  her  day 
Of  mourning  made  an  end. 
So  quickly,  quickly  may  he  come  :  \Ant.  2. 

So  may  the  oars 
Of  his  ship-chariot  tarry  not, 
Till  to  these  walls  they  bear  him  home, 
Deserting  soon  those  island  altar-fires, 
Where  now  he  offers  sacrifice. 
If  fame  be  true  : 

Thence  may  he  come  660 

A  long  day's  journey  without  pause — 
Come,  having  drunk  through  every  vein 
The  magic  of  the  specious  robe, 
Persuasion's  sovereign  chrism. 
Dei.  Friends,  how  I  fear  that  overbusily 
All  that  I  lately  did  may  have  been  done. 

Chor.  What  mean  you,  Deianeira,  child  of  Oeneus  ? 
Dei.  I  know  not,  but  I  fear  I  shall  be  found 
Fair  hopes  to  have  nursed,  huge  mischief  to  have  wrought. 
Chor.  You  speak  not  of  your  gift  to  Heracles  ? 
Dei.  Of  that.     No  one  henceforth  should  I  advise 
To  dare  a  deed  in  blindfold  confidence.  670 


284  TRACHINIAE. 

Chor.  Tell,  if  it  may  be  told,  whence  grows  your  fear. 

Dei.  That  which  has  come  to  pass  if  I  shall  tell, 
Friends,  ye  will  marvel,  hearing  things  undreamed. 
Wherewith  but  now  I  smeared  the  investiture 
O'  the  robe,  a  weft  of  wool,  fleecy  and  white — 
'Tis  gone  from  sight,  consumed,  but  by  no  hand 
Of  those  within — no,  self-devoured,  it  wastes, 
Down  on  the  slab-face  crumbling.     But  hear  all — 
All,  how  'twas  done,  I  will  unfold  at  length. 
What  warnings  the  brute  Centaur,  in  his  side  680 

The  bitter  shaft  then  rankling,  bade  observe. 
Of  these  I  nothing  lost,  but  minded  all — 
Gravure  from  brass  page  ineffaceable. 
So  'twas  prescribed  and  even  so  'twas  done. 
He  bade  me  keep  from  touch  of  fire  or  reach 
Of  the  glowing  sunbeam  in  the  dark  the  drug, 
Until,  fresh-smeared,  I  put  it  to  its  use. 
And  so  I  did.     But  now,  the  time  being  come, 
I  smeared  within-doors  secretly  at  home  689 

With  wool — from  fleece  of  the  home-flock  torn,  a  wisp — 
And  laid  and  folded  from  the  sunlight  close 
The  gift  within  its  casket,  as  ye  saw. 
Returning  I  beheld — but  how  to  tell 
Sight  unforeseen,  bewildering  to  hear  ? 
For  so  it  chanced  I  flung  my  tuft  of  wool, 
I  smeared  the  robe  with,  out  in  the  full  blaze 
Of  the  noon  sunshine.     Whence  conceiving  warmth. 


TRACHINIAE.  285 


All  melts  from  sight  now,  crumbled  on  the  ground, 

Most  like  to  view,  as  ye  may  see  the  dust 

Shed  from  a  saw's  teeth  when  ye  saw  the  wood.  700 

Mere  dust,  it  lies.     But  where  that  dust  was  strewn, 

Boils  upward  from  the  earth  thick-curded  froth, 

As  when  from  vines  of  Bacchus  on  the  ground 

Ye  spill  rich  juice  of  a  grey  vintage-tide. 

Ah  miserable,  I  know  not  what  to  think  : 

A  fearful  deed  I  see  that  I  have  done. 

For  whence  or  wherefore  had  the  monster  borne 

Good  will  to  me — dying — for  whom  he  died  ? 

He  could  not ;  no,  but,  minded  to  undo 

His  slayer,  beguiled  me  :  guile  which  all  too  late  710 

I,  when  it  helps  not,  win  the  wit  to  see. 

For  I,  I  only,  (or  else  my  thought  flies  wide 

Of  the  mark,)  I  hapless,  shall  destroy  my  lord.- 

The  shaft  that  flew,  I  know,  ev'n  to  a  god, 

Cheiron,  proved  fatal,  and,  howso  it  touch, 

To  every  beast  is  death ;  from  wound  whereof 

This  its  black  venom  mingled  with  the  blood 

How  now  shall  he  escape  ?     Nowise,  I  think. 

But  I  am  purposed,  if  harm  comes  to  him — 

Such  rage  I  feel — myself  with  him  to  die.  720 

For  who,  called  guilty,  would  endure  to  live — 

What  wife  that  prizes  innocence  indeed  ? 

Chor.  Mischief  we  needs  must  fear  :  but  fortune  still 
Rules  the  event ;  esteem  not  forecast  more. 


286  TRACHINIAE. 


Dei.  Forecast,  of  courage  ministrant,  is  none — 
Of  hope  no  help,  when  men  have  counselled  ill. 

Chor.  When  men  have  stumbled  all  unwittingly, 
Anger  has  pity — as  'twere  fit  you  found. 

Dei.  So  talks  no  partner  of  the  evil  deed, 
But  one  upon  whose  heart  no  burthen  weighs.  730 

Chor.  Silence  from  further  speech  of  this  were  best : 
Or  will  you  speak  to  your  own  son  ?  for  here 
He  comes,  who  went  erewhile  to  seek  his  sire. 

Hyll.  Mother,  for  thee  I  had  chosen  of  three  things 
one — 
That  thou  wert  dead  this  day,  or  if  not  dead 
Then  mother  not  of  me,  or  else  to  get 
Somewhence  a  better  mind  than  this  thou  hast. 

Dei.  What  is  it,  my  son,  in  me  mislikes  thee  so  ? 

Hyll.  Thy  husband — shall  I  tell  thee  ? — yea,  and  I  call 
Him  father — know  that  thou  hast  slain  this  day.  740 

Dei.    Ah    me,    my  son,   what    word   hast   thou    an- 
nounced ? 

Hyll.  A  word  that  fails  not  of  fulfilment  :  for 
The  fact  that's  palpable  who  may  undo  ? 

Dei.  My  son,  how  say  you  ?     By  what  warranty 
A  deed  so  hateful  say  you  I  have  wrought  ? 

Hyll,  Of  eyes  that  saw  my  father's  grievous  case — 
My  own ;  no  hearsay  this,  from  lip  to  ear. 

Dei.  Where    found    you    then,  where    stood   beside, 
my  lord  ? 


TRACHINIAE.  287 


Hyll.  If  you  must  hear,  from  first  to  last  you  shall. 
From  sack  of  Eurytus'  fair  town  returned,  750 

A  victor  with  his  trophies  and  his  spoils — 
Where  the  Euboean  headland  breasts  the  waves, 
The  cape  Cenaean,  there  to  his  father  Zeus 
Altars  he  traced  and  leafage  of  a  grove  : 
There  first  I  saw  him,  glad,  whom  I  desired. 
To  Zeus  a  hecatomb  preparing  then. 
Came  to  him  Lichas,  his  own  herald,  hence. 
Who  bore  thy  gift,  the  robe  that  proved  his  death. 
For  this  he  donned,  fulfilling  thy  behest — 
So  to  the  sacrifice  :  twelve  faultless  bulls,  760 

Prime  of  the  spoil,  were  there ;  but,  count  them  all. 
He  led  a  hundred  victims,  small  and  great 
And  first  of  all — unhappy — in  gracious  mood, 
Pleased  with  the  pomp  and  goodliness,  he  prayed : 
But  when  of  high  solemnities  the  flame 
Blazed  from  the  blood  and  fed  with  resinous  pine. 
Sweat  bathed  his  skin,  and  round  his  body  clung 
Close,  as  if  welded  by  some  craftsman's  skill. 
Clasping  each  limb,  the  tunic :  racked  each  joint 
Convulsive  pains.     But,  when  he  felt  the  accurst      770 
Fell  serpent's  venom  battening  on  his  flesh. 
He  cried  aloud  for  Lichas,  the  ill-starred, 
The  guiltless  of  thy  guilt,  and  bade  him  tell 
The  whole  vile  plot — wherefore  he  brought  this  robe. 
But,  what  knew  he,  the  miserable  ?  thy  gift, 


288  TRACHINIAE. 


He  said,  thine  only,  as  'twas  sent,  he  gave. 

My  father  heard,  and  as  he  heard  a  wrench 

Of  that  sharp  torture  caught  away  his  breath  : 

Lichas  he  snatched  by  the  foot,  where  the  ankle  plays, 

And  flung  full  at  the  sea-confronting  cliff.  780 

Out  from  his  hair  white  oozed  the  brain  :  mid-crown 

His  skull  was  split,  and  weltered  with  his  blood. 

A  cry  of  deprecation  and  of  grief 

Brake  from  the  crowd — one  murdered,  and  one  mad. 

And  no  man  dared  to  stand  before  thy  lord ; 

So,  dragged  by  the  pain,  he  grovelled  and  he  leaped. 

So  rock  to  rock  resounded  shout  and  yell. 

Headlands  of  Locris  and  Euboean  cliffs. 

But  when,  poor  soul,  he  wearied,  oft  on  the  earth 

Flinging  himself,  oft  in  that  grievous  voice  790 

His  ill-consorted  marriage  execrating 

With  thee,  the  guilty,  and  Oeneus'  virgin-prize 

How  winning  he  had  won  what  wrecked  his  life, 

Then  from  the  shrouding  smoke  distorted  eyes 

He  lifted,  and  he  saw  me,  'midst  the  crowd. 

Weeping,  and  gazed  upon  me,  calling  me — 

'  O  son,  draw  near,  shun  not  my  misery. 

Not  though  to  touch  involve  thee  in  my  death : 

But  bear  me  forth,  and  set  me,  if  you  may. 

Somewhere  far  hence,  quite  out  of  all  men's  sight :   800 

Hence,  as  you  pity  me,  from  this  land  at  least 

Ferry  me  quickly ;  here  I  must  not  die.' 


TRACHINIAE.  389 


Nor  slighted  we  his  bidding,  but  mid-ship 
Set  him,  and  brought — but  hardly  brought — ashore, 
Tortured,  with  groanings  loud.     And  him  full  soon 
Living  ye  shall  behold,  or  lately  dead. 
Counsel  and  hand  herein,  mother,  are  known 
Thine  :  whom  may  Justice  visit  for  these  things, 
Erinys  plague  !     Gods,  pardon  me  the  prayer  !  809 

And  they  do  pardon  :  since  pardon  thou  didst  scorn — 
The  noblest  man  of  all  men  on  this  earth 
Murdering,  whose  like  again  thou  shalt  not  see. 

Chor.  Why  pass  you  hence,  not  speaking?     Know 
you  not. 
Eloquent  with  the  accuser  silence  pleads  ? 

Hyll.  So  let  her  pass.     A  fair  wind  go  with  her — 
Out  of  my  sight  so  waft  her,  passing  well. 
Mere  empty  sound  of  the  name  what  boots  to  swell 
Of  mother,  since  nowise  mother-like  her  deeds  ? 
Pass  she,  and  fare  she  well :  such  gladness  as  819 

She  gives  my  father,  may  herself  partake  !        \Strophe  i. 

Chor,  Lo  how,  O  maidens,  cometh  to  pass  o'ersoon 
The  word  prophetic  in  our  sight 
,         Of  the  immemorial  Prescience, 

|{         By  the  Voice  proclaimed ;  that,  when  to  its  last  month's 
end  should  run 

I  The  twelfth  year  out,  should  be  of  bearing  toils  an  end 
To  the  son  indeed  of  Zeus  : 
Promise  which  now  the  God 
■ 


290  TRACHINIAE. 


To  its  fulfilment  wafts  aright. 

Since  how  can  he,  who  no  more  sees 

The  light,  in  death  have  toilsome  service  any  more  ?    830 

For  since  Necessity,  that  wrought  with  guile        \Ant.  i. 

O'  the  Centaur,  steeps  in  clouds  of  doom 

His  limbs,  to  which  the  venom  clings, 

Gendered  by  death,  and  by  the  gliding  snake  conceived — 

What  hope  that  he  upon  to-morrow's  sun  shall  gaze. 

By  the  grim  hydra-shape 

Inextricably  clutched : 

And  of  the  swart-haired  beast  therewith 

Torment  him  sharp  avenging  pains — 

Poison  of  treacherous  speech,  in  every  vein  that  boils.  840 

Which  she,  his  miserable  wife —  \Strophe  2. 

Seeing  with  swift  and  sore  misfortune  to  her  home 

His  novel  passion  sudden-fraught — 

Part  not  considered ;  part  by  policy  not  her  own 

Ruining  whose  love  she  sought  to  save, 

Breaks  now,  I  ween,  her  heart  with  sobs — 

Sheds  now,  I  ween,  from  eyes  surcharged 

A  tender  dew  of  dripping  tears. 

Woe  treacherous  and  huge  850 

The  coming  fate  foreshadows  clear. 

Broken  is  the  fountain  of  my  tears.  \Antistrophe  2. 

Poured  on  his  head,  ye  gods,  this  sickness !  never  yet, 

Not  from  his  foes,  assailed  my  lord 

Suffering  so  signal  and  so  pitiable  as  this. 


TRACHINIAE.  291 


O  blood-stained  steel  of  vanward  spear, 
That  barest  hither  from  the  fray, 
When  proud  Oechalia's  heights  were  won, 
The  maiden  fleet,  that  fatal  day ! 

Nay,  Cypris,  handmaid  mute,  860 

[The  veil  is  off — the  guilt  is  thine  ! 

Chor.  T.  Was  the  sound  born  of  my  fancy,  or  did  I 
hear, 

[This  minute,  peal  through  the  house  some  cry  of  grief? 
'Hark  !  ...  Am  I  right  ? 

Chor.   2.  A  wail  .of  despair  sounds  nowise  doubtfully, 
Within  :  something  in  the  house  has  gone  amiss. 

Chor.  I.  And  hither  see 
With  aspect  strange  who  comes  and  troubled  brow. 
Poor  aged  soul,  bursting  with  news  to  tell.  870 

Nurse.  O  girls,  the  gift  to  Heracles — the  gift 
We  sent — where  ends  the  trouble  it  began  ? 

Chor.  What  mischief  more,  mother,  will  you  report  ? 
Nurse.  Gone  hence  is  Deianeira — gone,  the  last 
Of  all  her  goings — ay,  nor  budged  a  step. 
Chor.  How — gone  ?     Dead,  say  you  ? 
Nurse.  There's  no  more  to  say. 

Chor.  Poor  lady  ! — dead  ? 

Nurse.  Once  and  again  'tis  told. 

Chor.  O  most  untimely  end  !  how  died  she,  say  ? 
Nurse.  Most  rashly,  for  the  manner. 
Chor.  In  what  guise 


292  TRACHINIAE. 


Encountered  she  with  death  ?  sso 

Nurse.  Herself  she  slew. 

Chor.  Remorse — or  what  fierce  fit 

Of  madness  was  it,  the  fatal  thrust 
So  murderously  dealt  ?     How  compassed  she 
Death  piled  on  death — 
Wild  work  for  one  weak  hand  to  do  ? 

Nurse.  One  plunge  of  cursed  steel — 'twas  done. 

Chor.  What,  babbler,  were  you  there  ? 
Saw  you  the  wanton  deed  ? 

Nurse.  Near  as  I  stand  to  you,  I  stood  and  saw. 

Chor.   How  was  it  ?     The  manner  ?     Tell  me  all.    890 

Nurse.     Herself,  and  of  herself,  she  did  this  thing. 

Chor.  What  do  you  tell  me  ? 

Nurse.  Plain,  the  truth. 

Chor.  Stranger,  not  thy  fair  face  alone 
Thou  bringest,  but  born,  yea  born  of  thee, 
A  dire  Erinys  to  this  house ! 

Nurse.  Too  true :  but  more,  had  you  been  there  to  see 
The  things  she  did — much  more  your  tears  had  flowed. 

Chor.  And  daunted  not  such  work  a  woman's  hand  ? 

Nurse.  A  marvel,  truly  :  hear,  and  testify. 
She  came  alone  in  the  house,  and  saw  her  son  900 

In  the  great  chamber  spreading  forth  a  couch, 
Deep-pillowed,  ere  he  went  to  meet  his  sire, 
Back ;  but  she  crept  away  out  of  his  sight, 
And  at  the  altars  falling  moaned  that  she 


TRACHINIAE.  293 


Was  desolate,  and  each  chattel  of  the  house, 

That  once  she  used,  fingered,  poor  soul,  and  wept : 

Then,  hither  and  thither  roaming,  room  to  room, 

Each  face  she  saw  of  servants  that  she  loved, 

Unhappy  lady,  looked  and  wept  again, 

Upon  her  own  hard  lot  exclaiming  still,  910 

And  how  her  children  were  her  own  no  more. 

And,  when  she  ceased  from  this,  I  saw  her  pass 

Suddenly  to  the  chamber  of  my  lord  : 

I,  screened  by  the  dark,  seeing,  myself  unseen, 

Watched ;  and  I  saw  my  mistress  fling,  lay  smooth, 

Couch-coverings  on  the  couch  of  Heracles, 

Till  all  were  laid  :  then  from  the  ground  she  sprang 

And  sat  there  in  the  midst  upon  the  couch, 

And  loosed  the  flood  of  scorching  tears,  and  spake  : 

'  O  marriage-bed  and  marriage-chamber  mine,  920 

Farewell,  now  and  for  ever ;  never  more 

This  head  upon  this  pillow  shall  be  laid.' 

No  more  she  said,  but  with  a  violent  hand 

Did  off"  her  robe,  clasped  by  the  brooch  that  lay, 

Gold-wrought,  upon  her  bosom,  and  made  bare 

All  her  left  arm,  and  whiteness  of  her  side. 

Then  I  made  haste  and  ran,  with  all  my  strength, 

And  told  her  son  what  way  her  thoughts  were  bent. 

But  lo,  whilst  I  was  gone,  just  there  and  back, 

The  deed  was  done — the  two-edged  sword  we  saw,       930 

Quite  th  rough  her  side,  midriff"  and  heart  had  pierced. 


294  TRACHINIAE. 


Oh  but  he  groaned  to  see  it !     For  he  knew 

This  deed,  alas  !  his  rashness  had  entailed — 

Taught  all  too  late  by  those  o'  the  house  that  her 

The  Centaur  lured  to  do  she  knew  not  what. 

And  now  the  boy — piteous  ! — of  groans  and  tears 

He  knew  no  end,  lamenting  over  her : 

He  knelt  and  kissed  her  lips ;  his  side  by  hers 

He  laid  along,  and  lay,  complaining  sore 

That  he  had  slain  her  with  his  random  blame ;         940 

And  weeping,  his  would  be  a  double  loss, 

Bereaved  of  both  his  parents  at  one  stroke. 

So  fares  it  here.     Henceforth  I  know,  two  days — 

And  some  do  more — if  any  man  computes, 

He  is  a  fool.     To-morrow  there  is  none. 

Until  to-day  be  prosperously  got  through. 

'    Chor.  Nay,  for  of  these  two  strokes  of  fate 

Which  first,  which  after,  to  lament — 

Alas  me,  for  I  know  not  which  ! 

The  face  of  one  is  here  to  see — 

The  other  dread  is  fancy-drawn —  950 

'  I  see,'  '  I  shall  see,'  mix  in  one. 

Oh  that  some  wandering  breeze  of  heaven      [Strophe. 

From  hearth  to  frontier  fresh  would  spring. 

And  waft  me  hence,  and  bear  me  far, 

Or  ere,  the  puissant  son  of  Zeus 

Of  mere  beholding  suddenly, 

I  die,  exanimate  with  fear : 


I 


TRACHINIAE.  295 


So  comes  he,  say  they,  to  the  doors. 

Tormented  in  inextricable  pain,  960 

A  thing  to  wonder  at,  and  find  no  words. 

As  nightingales  of  sorrow  sing —  [Antistrophe. 

I  sang  of  grief  not  far  but  near. 

I  hear  the  tread  of  alien  feet. 

Where  are  they  bearing  him  ?     It  sounds 

Like  march  of  mourners  for  a  friend, 

The  heavy  muffled  tramp  they  keep. 

Ah  me  !  a  speechless  form  they  bear. 

Alas  !  how  frame  conjecture  of  his  state. 

If  this  be  death — so  still  he  lies — or  sleep  ?  970 

Hyll.  Ah  woe  is  me  for  thee,  my  father  ! 
Miserable  am  I  for  thee  ! 
What  shall  I  do  ?     How  shall  I  help  ?     Alas  ! 

Old  Man.  My  son,  keep  silence,  nor  awake 
The  fierce  infuriating  pain  : 
There's  life  in  the  prostrate  man.     Bite  hard 
Thy  lips — no  word  speak. 

Hyll.  How  ?  he  lives  ? 

Old  Man.  Nay,  but  wake  not  the  slumber-bound ; 
Nor  start  and  kindle  into  life 
His  raving  dreadful  malady.  980 

Hyll.  O  load  intolerable  of  stifled  agony  ! 
O  miserable  me ! 

Her.  O  Zeus, 

What  land  is  here  ?  among  what  men 


296  TRACHINIAE. 


I 


Lay  ye  me,  racked  incessantly 

With  pain  ? — There,  there — out  and  alas  ! 

Again  those  cursed  fangs,  again  ! 

Old  Man.  Then  didst  thou  learn,  what  gain  it  was 
To  hold  thy  peace,  and  not  to  scare  990 

From  head  and  eyes  his  sleep  away  ? 

Hyll.  Patient  I  cannot  be,  not  I, 
Seeing  this  horror  that  I  see. 

Her.  O  thou  Cenaean  altar-pile, 
A  fair  return  for  victims  fair 
Didst  thou  procure  me,  to  my  cost ! 
Zeus,  what  a  wreck  thou  madest  me ! 
O  cursed  spite,  that  e'er  mine  eyes 
Beheld  thee,  so  beholding  now 

This  frenzy's  fever,  passing  cure  !  ioo< 

Nay  for  what  sorcery,  or  what  skill 
Of  leech-craft — save  of  Zeus  himself — 
Shall  wield  a  spell  to  heal  my  hurt  ? 
Scarce  shall  such  marvel  bless  my  sight. 
Let  be  and  let  me  sleep — 
Sleep,  and  forget  my  grief — sleep,  not  to  wake. 
Where  will  ye  touch  me  ?     What  posture  would  ye  have? 
Each  movement,  every  touch  is  death. 
All  sleep — whatever  shuts  an  eye — ye  have  o'erthrown. 
That  clutch,  off !      Close  again,  close  creeps  my  foe ! 

And  now. 
Ye  thankless  men  of  Greece,  who  stirs  of  you —  loio 


I 


TRACHINIAE.  297 


For  whom  so  often  on  the  deep, 

And  ridding  every  forest  of  its  pest, 

I  daily  died — and  now,  when  I  am  sick, 

Fire  or  the  sword  will  no  one  turn  this  way. 

To  slay  and  ease  me  of  my  pain  ? 

Come,  friendly  arm,  and  strike — 

Strike  thou  my  head  and  hated  life  atwain  ! 

Old  Man.  Son  of  the  hero  here,  this  task  grows  over- 
great — 
Passing  my  strength.     Help  thou  !     With  youthful  sight 
Undimmed — thou,  where  I  fail,  canst  aid. 

Hyll.  My  hands — yes,  I  can  help  with  them  ;  1020 

But  wit  or  wisdom  have  I  none,  to  bid 
The  whole  sound  life  forget  its  grievous  woe  : 
Such  issues  are  of  Zeus  alone. 

Her.  O  son,  whose  voice  I  hear,  approach  : 
Raise  me,  and  lay  me  on  my  side,  to  see. 
.  .  .  O  fate,  alas,  alas  ! 
Again  with  dreadful  onset  and  fierce  pain 
The  unapproachable  malady  1029 

Leaps,  leaps  upon  its  prey — to  rend  and  not  to  spare ! 
Pallas,  this  torture  must  I  bear  again  ?     But  thou. 
My  son,  have  pity  on  thy  sire,  and  draw 
A  blameless  sword,  and  deeply  strike 
'Twixt  breast  and  throat;  and  cure  this  maddening  pain. 
Thine  impious  mother's  act — whom  might  I  see 
Fall'n  in  the  selfsame  case,  none  otherwise 


298  TRACHINIAE. 


Than  me  she  slew.     O  Hades  sweet,  1040 

Brother  of  Zeus — with  sudden  death 

Smite  me,  the  miserable,  and  give  me  sleep — 

0  Hades,  give  me  sleep  ! 

Chor.  I  shudder,  friends,  hearing  the  woful  plight 
O'  the  prince — so  great  a  soul,  afflicted  so. 

Her.  Full  many,  and  full  fierce,  and  sore  to  tell, 
The  labours  of  these  shoulders  and  these  arms  : 
But  never  yet  the  queen,  consort  of  Zeus, 
Proposed,  no  nor  Eurystheus  whom  I  hate, 
Task  like  to  this — this  net  by  Furies  woven,  1050 

And  by  the  false-faced  daughter  of  Oeneus  flung — 
Fast  on  my  shoulders — this,  by  which  I  die. 
So,  welded  one  with  me,  ev'n  from  the  bone 
It  gnaws  my  flesh ;  and  passages  of  my  breath 
Sucks,  and  with  me  inhabits ;  and  my  fresh  blood 
Has  drained,  till  heart  is  dry,  and  all  my  frame 
Wasted — by  unconjectured  chains  enthralled. 
Spears  hurtling  on  the  plain,  gigantic  force 
Of  the  Earthborn,  violence  of  savage  beasts — 

1  have  defied ;  lands  Greek  and  barbarous  1060 
Each  of  its  scourge  have  rid — myself  unscathed  : 

A  woman,  woman-hearted  as  her  sex, 
O'erthrows  me,  single-handed,  with  no  sword. 
O  son,  be  thou  my  own,  my  very  son, 
Nor  worship  more  the  name  of  motherhood  ; 
But  in  thy  hands,  go,  bring  her  from  the  house — 


TRACHINIAE.  299 


To  my  hands  give — thy  mother  :  that  I  may  know 

If  more  it  grieves  thy  sight  my  form  to  see, 

Than  hers,  disfeatured,  punished  as  is  fit. 

Go,  son,  be  pitiless,  pitiful  of  me,  1070 

Whom  many  men  might  pity — like  a  girl 

Moaning  and  weeping ;  as  no  man  shall  dare 

Say  that  he  ever  saw  me  weep  before ; 

But  uncomplaining  followed  I  my  fate. 

Now  I  am  found  womanish,  so  valiant  once. 

Come  now  beside  me  close,  my  son,  and  stand, 

And  see  what  plight  it  is  that  from  myself 

So  moves  me.     See — for  I  will  lift  what  hides. 

Look  at  my  poor  maimed  body,  all  of  you  : 

Know  what  I  suffer ;  see  the  piteous  fact.  1080 

Ah  me,  alas ! 

Through  every  limb  glowed,  thrilled  again  a  throe 

Of  agony ;  rest  from  wrestling  with  my  pain 

Denies,  'twould  seem,  the  dread  devouring  pest. 

0  Hades,  lord,  receive  me ! 
Oh  smite  me,  fire  of  Zeus  ! 

Hurl  forth,  great  king,  thy  bolt ;  full  on  my  head, 
Father,  thy  thunder  !     Save  me  from  these  fangs 
O'  the  pain,  full-blown  once  more,  aggressive.     Hands — 
Hands,    and    ye    shoulders,    breast,     and    arms — my 
own —  1090 

1  see  ye  still,  the  selfsame  thews,  that  erst 

The  scourge  of  herdsmen  from  his  Nemean  lair. 


300  TRACHINIAE. 


That  lion,  fierce  to  face,  and  grim  to  greet, 

Grappled  and  conquered ;  and  the  Lernaean  worm, 

And  that  twiform,  uncivil,  horseman-host, 

Monsters,  lawless  and  rude,  of  might  unmatched  ; 

And  the  Erymanthian  boar ;  and  underground 

At  Hades-gate  the  dire  three-headed  whelp, 

Echidna's  spawn,  resistless ;  and  far  i'  the  west, 

The  dragon-guarder  of  the  golden  fruit —  "a 

These  and  a  thousand  toils  beside  I  proved, 

And  no  one  ever  flaunted  spoils  of  me. 

Now  shattered  thus,  and  tattered  as  ye  see — 

Fate  dealt  one  blindfold  blow — my  strength  lies  prone ; 

Mine — whom  men  say  the  noblest  mother  bore, 

Ay,  and  of  Zeus  in  heaven  proclaim  me  son. 

But  I — this  surely  know — nought  though  I  be. 

No  step  may  move,  on  her  that  maimed  me  thus, 

Ev'n  thus,  avenged  will  be.     May  she  but  come, 

That,  as  I  teach  her,  so  she  may  report,  hk 

Living  and  dead,  ill-doers  I  chastised. 

Chor.  Alas  for  Greece  !  what  mourning  I  foresee 
In  store  for  her,  if  she  shall  lose  this  man. 

Hyll.  Father — because  you  give  me  leave  to  speak — 
Refrain  and  hear  me,  howsoe'er  with  pain. 
What  I  shall  ask,  you  shall  in  justice  grant. 
Incline  to  hear,  not  as  thine  anger  chafes, 
Impatient :  vainly  then  were  told,  wherein 
Thou  cravest  joy,  wherein  art  grieved,  amiss. 


TRACHINIAE.  301 


Her.  Say  all  thy  say,   and  cease :  for,  racked   with 

pain,  1 120 

I  know  not  what  thy  wordiness  intends. 

Hyll.  My  mother — I  must  tell  thee  how  she  fares 
Now,  and  how  nowise  wilfully  she  sinned. 

Her.  O  thou  most  base,  thy  father's  murderess. 
Thy  mother — wilt  thou  talk  to  me  of  her  ? 
Hyll.  Being  as  she  is,  I  may  not  well  refrain. 
Her.  Truth,  no,  for  that  ill"  deed  which  late  she  did. 
Hyll.  Nor  what  she  hath  done  this  day — thou  shalt 

confess. 
Her.  Speak,  but  have  heed  lest  speaking  prove  thee 

base. 
Hyll.  Thus  then.     She  lies  dead — slain  within   this 

hour.  1130 

Her.  By  whom  ?     Harsh  prophet  of  strange  news  art 

thou. 
Hyll.  No  stranger's  but  her  own  hand  struck  the  blow. 
Her.  Alas — she  cheats  me  then  of  my  revenge. 
Hyll.  Even  thy  heart  'twould  melt,  the  whole  tale  to 

hear. 
Her.  Thou  preludest  a  riddle.     Tell  me,  how. 
Hyll.  All  in  a  word — she  sinned,  intending  well. 
Her.  Well,  traitor,  has  she  done — who  slew  thy  sire  ? 
Hyll.  She  saw  the  wife  within  there,  thought  to  bind 
Thy  heart  with  spells — thought,  and  miscarried  thus. 
Her.  Can  Trachis  boast  a  sorcerer  so  bold  ?  "40 


302  TRACHINIAE. 


Hyll.  Nessus  long  since,  the  Centaur,  gave  advice 
With  such  a  charm  to  madden  thy  desire. 

Her.  Ah  me  unhappy,  how  am  I  undone ! 
Lost  and  undone  and  banished  from  the  Hght ! 
Too  well  I  see,  hedged  by  what  ills  I  stand. 
My  son,  go,  for  thy  father  is  no  more ; 
Call  me  thy  brethren  hither,  all  the  brood ; 
And  call  the  miserable  Alcmena,  loved 
Vainly  by  Zeus,  that  with  my  latest  breath 
I  may  declare  what  oracles  I  know.  1150 

Hyll.  So  it  hath  chanced,  thy  mother  is  not  here. 
But  dwells  apart,  at  Tiryns  by  the  sea. 
And  of  thy  children  some  she  rears  for  thee 
There,  and  of  others  learn  lodged  hence  at  Thebes  : 
But  we,  my  father,  as  many  as  remain. 
What  thou  requirest,  hearing,  will  perform. 

Her.  Then  hear  me  thou.     Now  is  thy  time  to  show 
What  stuff  thou  art  made  of,  who  art  called  my  son. 
My  sire  of  old  forewarned  me  of  my  end. 
That  by  no  living  wight  should  I  be  slain,  ii6o 

But  by  one  dead,  a  dweller  in  the  dark. 
So  now  by  this  brute  Centaur,  as  the  god 
Foretold,  I  die — the  living  by  the  dead. 
Hear  also,  chiming  all  to  one  result. 
New  oracles  that  with  the  old  agree. 
For  in  the  grove,  whose  priests  the  Selli  make 
Their  home  the  mountain  and  the  earth  their  bed, 


TRACHINIAE.  303 


There  from  the  many-voiced,  my  father's  oak, 

I  heard  and  wrote  my  doom — that  at  this  time, 

This  living  present,  of  my  heavy  tasks  1170 

I  should  be  freed — and  happy,  I  supposed — 

But  now  I  see  this  meant  that  I  should  die ; 

For  on  the  dead  is  laid  no  burthen  more. 

Thus  all  to  one  conclusion  plainly  points. 

Now  therefore,  O  my  son,  I  crave  thy  help  : 

Nor  wait  until  thy  waiting  whets  my  tongue ; 

Help  me,  thyself  consenting,  having  found 

No  law  like  this — for  children,  to  obey. 

HylL  Such   words   have    passed   between   us — what 
comes  next, 
I  fear  :  yet,  father,  speak — I  shall  obey.  1180 

Her.  But  first  thy  hand — lay  thy  right  hand  in  mine. 

Hyll.  Why  wilt  thou  fix  me  with  this  needless  pledge? 

Her.  Give  me  thy  hand  :  dispute  not,  but  obey. 

Hyll.  Freely  I  give  it ;  do  with  me  as  thou  wilt. 

Her.  Now,  by  the  head  of  Zeus  my  Father,  swear. 

Hyll.  What  thing  to  do  ?  tell  me,  and  I  will  swear. 

Her.  That,  what  I  shall  prescribe,  thou  wilt  perform. 

Hyll.  I  swear  that  so  I  will,  so  help  me  Zeus. 

Her.  Pray  that  his  curse  may  find  thee,  if  thou  fail. 

Hyll.  So  may  it :  I  fear  it  not — I  shall  not  fail.       1190 

Her.  Knowest   thou   the    summit   of  Oeta — seat  of 
Zeus? 

Hyll.  Often  have  I  climbed — and  at  his  altar  stood. 


304  TRACHINIAE. 


Her.  Now  ye  must  lift  my  body  with  your  hands, 
Thou,    and   what    friends   with    thee    thou    wilt,    and 

there — 
Hew  me  great  faggots  out  of  ancient  oaks 
Deep-rooted,  and  male  oleasters  cleave 
Nor  spare,  and  lay  my  body  on  the  wood. 
Then  take  a  blazing  torch  of  resinous  pine, 
And  set  fire  under.     Mourn  not  for  me,  nor  weep  : 
But  do  thine  ofjfice,  as  thou  art  my  son,  1200 

Tearless,  without  a  groan  ;  lest  from  the  grave 
My  curse  be  heavy  upon  thee  all  thy  days. 

Hyll.  What  do  I  hear  ?     What  hast  thou  done  to  me? 

Her.  Thou  hast  thy  task  :  this  do,  or  else  be  called 
No  son  of  mine — get  thee  another  sire. 

Hyll.  Alas  my  father,  and  again  alas — 
What  wouldst  thou  ?     Shall  I  be  thy  murderer  ? 

Her.  Nay,  not  a  murderer,  but  with  healing  hands 
The  one  physician  of  my  dire  disease. 

Hyll.  Strange  medicine  thou  cravest — this  of  fire.  1210 

Her.  If  this  thou  fearest,  do  for  me  all  but  this. 

Hyll.  I  shall  not  grudge  to  bear  thee  to  the  place. 

Her.  And  wilt  thou  heap  the  pyre,  as  I  have  said  ? 

Hyll.  So  that  I  do  not  touch  it  with  my  hands, 
All  else  I  will ;  thou  shalt  not  lack,  for  me. 

Her.  This  shall  suffice.     Yet  grant  one  boon  beside, 
And  to  the  greater  favour  add  the  less. 

Hyll.  Greater  it  cannot  be  than  I  shall  grant. 


i 


TRACHINIAE.  305 


Her.  The  daughter  of  Eurytus — thou  knowest  her  ? 

Hyll.  Of  lole  thy  speech  is,  as  I  think.  1220' 

Her.  Of  her.     Hear  now  my  will  concerning  her. 
When  I  am  dead,  if  thou  hast  any  care 
Not  impiously  to  break  thine  oath  to  me. 
Take  her  to  be  thy  wife,  nor  thwart  me  here  : 
And  let  no  other  man  have  her  but  thee, 
Seeing  that  beside  thy  father  she  hath  lain, 
But  cherish  her  and  take  her  for  thine  own. 
Promise ;  for  in  a  trifle  to  rebel 
Forfeits  the  thanks  of  loyalty  in  much. 

Hyll.  Ah    me,    with    a    sick    man    one    should    be 
gentle ;  230 

Yet  who  could  bear  to  see  him  so  distraught  ? 

Her.  Thy  muttering  bodes  no  doing  of  my  will. 

Hyll.  Who  in  my  place,  with  the  one  woman  who 
caused 
My  mother's  death,  and  this  thy  grievous  plight — 
Who  but  one  plagued  with  madness  for  a  curse, 
Would  choose  this  ?     Better,  father,  I  should  die, 
Than  with  my  enemies  ill-matched  to  dwell. 

Her.  So  now  it  seems  this  man  will  not  regard 
Me,  dying.     But  the  gods  live,  and  for  thee, 
O  disobedient  to  my  voice,  their  curse  shall  wait.         1240 

Hyll.  Ah,  soon,  I  fear,  thou'lt  say  thy  pangs  return. 

Her.  The  pain  had  slept ;  thou  dost  awake  me,  thou. 

Hyll.  Unhappy,  on  all  sides  how  am  I  perplexed ! 


3o6  TRACHINIAE, 


Her.  Yea,  me  thy  father  deigning  not  to  hear. 

Hyll.  Shall  I  be  taught  to  do  an  impious  deed  ? 

Her.  Not  impious,  if  thereby  my  heart  is  cheered. 

Hyll.  Shall  then  thy  bidding  clear  me  of  the  guilt  ? 

Her.   I  call  the  gods  to  witness,  thou  art  clear. 

Hyll.  Enough :  I  promise  it.     The  gods  have  seen 
What  part  herein  is  thine,  nor  will  condemn  12 

Me,  father,  that  I  hearkened  to  thy  voice. 

Her.  'Tis  well  concluded.     Show  me  then,  my  son. 
This  kindness  quickly  :  and  set  me  on  the  pyre 
Now,  ere  the  pain  comes  back  to  rend  and  sting. 
Ho  ye,  make  haste  and  hft  me.     Rest  from  trouble 
Is  none  for  me,  save  death  that  endeth  all. 

Hyll.  All  without  hindrance,  father,  as  thou  wilt. 
Since  thy  command  is  urgent,  shall  be  done. 

Her.  Come,  while  the  pain  sleeps  undisturbed, 
Come,  O  thou  stubborn  heart,  and  bring  12 

A  bit  of  steel,  set  sharp  with  stones. 
And  let  no  groan  escape  my  lips — 
Rejoicing,  heart,  to  dare  and  do 
The  inevitable  deed. 

Hyll.  Good  henchmen,  lift  him  :  and  of  me 
Have  ye  great  pity  in  your  thoughts ; 
But,  for  this  deed  that  must  be  done. 
Know  that  the  gods  are  pitiless, 
Who,  though  this  man  is  called  their  son, 
Yet  let  him  suffer  as  ye  see. 


I 


TRACHINIAE.  307 


Shut  is  the  future  from  our  view  :  1370 

But  grief  the  present  hath  for  us, 

And  for  the  gods  reproach ; 

Yea,  and  for  him,  who  bears  his  doom — 

Was  ever  pain  like  his  ? 

Come,  maidens,  follow,  who  have  seen 

Unknown  dread  forms  of  death  to-day, 

And  sorrows  manifold  and  strange  : 

And  nought  comes  not  from  Zeus.  1278 


AJAX 


Nf 


PERSONS. 


AjAX. 

Odysseus. 

Teucer. 

Agamemnon. 

Menelaus. 

Messenger. 

Athene. 

Tecmessa. 

Chorus  of  Salaminian  Sailors. 


ajar 

Ath.  "p  VER,  son  of  Laertes,  I  behold  thee 

-* — '     Keen-eyed  to  snatch  occasion  of  thy  foes  : 
And  now  I  'find  thee  by  the  seaward  tents, 
Of  Ajax,  where  at  the  camp's  end  he  lies, 
Like  hunter  on  the  trail,  pausing  to  scan 
His  footmarks  newly-printed,  and  discern, 
Is  he  within  or  not.     Right  to  thine  aim 
Keen-scented  footing  as  of  a  Spartan  hound 
Leads  thee.     Here  hath  he  entered  even  now. 
His   brows    and    slaughtering  hands  all  drenched  with 
sweat.  lo 

Now  then  within  these  doors  no  more  is  need 
That  thou  shouldst  peer,  but  say  what  brings  thee  hither, 
Thus  eager :  I  who  know  will  tell  thee  all. 

Od.  Voice  of  Athene,  goddess  best-beloved. 
Albeit  unseen,  how  well  I  know  thy  sound, 
This  that  I  hear  and  all  my  heart  drinks  in, 
As  of  Tyrsenian  trumpet  brazen-tongued. 
And  now  my  foe,  as  thou  hast  deemed,  I  hunt. 
This  buckler-bearing  Ajax,  to  and  fro  : 
Him  have  I  tracked  so  long,  and  none  but  him.  20 


312  AJAX. 

For  he  this  night  a  deed  that  baffles  thought 

Has  wrought  against  us,  if  the  work  be  his  : 

Since  nothing  sure  we  know,  but  are  in  doubt. 

And  I  my  service  offered  for  this  quest. 

For  lo  our  captive  flocks,  and  with  the  flocks 

Their  guardians  also,  by  some  violent  hand 

Slain  and  despoiled  all  newly  have  we  found ; 

And  all  the  camp  charges  on  him  this  guilt. 

Yea  and  a  certain  watcher  came  with  word 

And  showed  me  how  with  smoking  sword  alone  3° 

He  saw  him  leaping  o'er  the  plain  :  whereat 

I  hasted  on  the  track,  and  now  conclude — 

Now  am  perplexed — whose  may  the  footprints  be. 

But  in  good  time  thou  comest :  for  thy  hand 

Guides  all  my  goings,  and  evermore  shall  guide. 

Ath.  I  knew  it,  Odysseus,  and  with  good  will  came, 
To  go  along  with  thee  and  watch  thy  quest. 

Od.  On  a  true  scent,  dear  mistress,  do  I  work  ? 

Ath.   Be  well  assured  thou  dost :  he  did  this  deed. 

Od.  What  to  such  work  nerved  his  insensate  hand  ?  4° 

Ath.  Wrath  for  Achilles'  arms  oppressed  his  soul. 

Od.  How  then  in  such  strange  wise  fell  he  on  flocks  ? 

Ath.  Deeming  on  you  he  dyed  his  hands  in  gore. 

Od.  And  was  this  purposed  for  the  Argive  host  ? 

Ath.  Purposed  indeed  and  done,  had  I  not  watched. 

Od.  What  daring  and  what  hardihood  was  this  ? 

Ath.  Alone,  i'  the  night,  by  stealth  he  went  against  you. 


AJAX.  313 

Od.  And  came  he  near  us  ?  at  his  goal  arrived  ? 

Ath.  At  the  tent-doors  of  the  two  generals. 

Od.  How  stayed  he  then   his  hand  that  craved  for 
blood  ?  50 

Ath.  I  checked  him,  and  I  cast  upon  his  sight 
Distracting  fancies  of  a  desperate  joy  : 
Against  the  flocks  I  turned  him,  flocks  and  herds— 
The  general  spoil  not  yet  distributed. 
Which  herdsmen  have  in  charge — on  these  he  fell, 
And  hewed  great  slaughter  of  the  hornbd  beasts, 
Smiting  all  round  him  :  and  sometimes  he  deemed 
He  slew  the  two  Atreidae  with  his  hand, 
Anon,  of  leaders  fell  on  this  or  that. 
Seeing  him  rave  with  madness  in  his  soul, 
I  urged  him,  drave  him  to  the  toils  of  fate.  60 

And,  having  rested  from  such  work  as  this, 
The  living  oxen  now  he  bound  with  cords. 
And  all  the  sheep,  and  home  he  brought  them  all, 
Thinking  'twas  men,  not  beasts,  he  had  for  prey. 
And  now  within,  bound  fast,  he  tortures  them. 
Nay,  thou  shalt  see  his  madness  with  thine  eyes, 
That  thou  mayest  tell  the  Greeks  what  thou  hast  seen. 
Bravely  await,  expecting  no  mischance. 
His  coming  :  for  his  eyes'  gaze  I  will  turn 
Another  way,  nor  let  him  see  thy  face.  70 

Ho,  thou  who  straightenest  out  the  captives'  arms 
With  cords  within  there,  come,  I  bid  thee,  forth — 


314  AJAX. 

Come  forth,  come  hither,  Ajax,  out  of  doors. 

Od.  What    dost    thou,  mistress?      Nowise  call  him 
forth. 

Ath.   Hold  thou  thy  peace,  and  be  not  cowardly. 

Od.  I  pray  thee,  be  content,  and  let  him  stay  ! 

Ath.  Lest  what  befall  ?     Was  he  no  man  before  ? 

Od.  Ay,  and  to  me  a  foeman  was,  and  is. 

Ath.  To  laugh  at  foes — what  laughter  is  more  sweet  ? 

Od.   Content  am  I,  he  should  abide  within.  80 

Ath.  A  madman — and  you  shrink  to  see  the  sight  ? 

Od.  I  had  not  shrunk  to  face  him,  were  he  sane. 

Ath.  But  now,  ev'n  stand  beside  him,  he'll  not  see. 

Od.  How,  if  he  sees  with  the  same  eyesight  still  ? 

Ath.   His  eyes,  although  they  see,  yet  I  will  blind. 

Od.  All's  possible  indeed,  when  gods  contrive. 

Ath.  Stand  and  be  silent  :  as  thou  art,  remain. 

Od.  I  will  remain ;  but  would  that  I  were  hence. 

Ath.  What,  Ajax,  ho  :  a  second  time  I  call, 
So  lightly  thine  ally  dost  thou  regard  ?  90 

Aj.  All  hail,  Athene  !  daughter  of  Zeus,  all  hail ! 
I  thank  thee  for  thy  help.     For  this  day's  prize 
With  goodly  spoils  all-golden  will  I  crown  thee. 

Ath.  'Tis  fairly  spoken.     But  answer  me  to  this  : 
Hast  thou  dyed  well  thy  sword  i'  the  Argive  host  ? 

Aj.  I'll  not  deny  it ;  such  boasting  is  my  right. 

Ath.  Upon  the  Atreidae  did  thine  arm'd  hand  fall  ? 

Aj.  So  that  these  men  will  not  slight  Ajax  more. 


A/ AX.  315 

Ath.  I  read  thy  saying,  that  the  men  are  slain. 

Aj.  Slain — of  my  arms  let  them  defraud  me  now  !  100 

Ath.  Good  now  :  but  of  Odysseus — what  of  him  ? 
In  what  plight  stands  he  now  ?  is  he  escaped  ? 

Aj.  The  cursbd  dog-fox — askest  thou  of  him  ? 

Ath.  Yea,  of  thy  foe,  Odysseus,  I  would  learn. 

Aj.  Sweetest  of  all,  O  queen,  he  sits  i'  the  tent 
My  captive  :  for  he  must  not  die  just  yet. 

Ath.  Till  thou  dost  what,  or  what  more  shalt  have 
gained  ? 

Aj.  Till  being  bound  to  a  pillar  of  the  court 

Ath.  How  wilt  thou  punish  then  the  miserable  ? 

Aj.  His  back  shall  bleed  with  scourging,  ere  he  dies,  no 

Ath.  Nay,  do  not  so  torment  the  hapless  one. 

Aj.  Have  all  save  this,  Athene,  as  thou  wilt : 
But  so  must  this  man  suffer,  no  way  else. 

Ath.  Why  then,  if  it  delights  thee  to  do  this — 
Hold  not  thy  hand,  spare  nought  of  thine  intent. 

Aj.  I  go  to  do  it :  only  I  charge  thee  this — 
As  now,  so  ever,  help  me  at  my  need. 

Ath.  Seest  thou,  Odysseus,  what  the  might  of  gods  ? 
What  man  more  prudent,  or  more  prompt  to  do 
The  thing  in  season,  couldst  thou  have  found  than  he  ?  120 

Od.  I  know  not  any.     Yet  must  I  pity  him, 
Being  so  unhappy,  unfriendly  though  he  be, 
Bound  with  a  fate  so  cruel  hand  and  foot : 
For  in  his  state  I  see  my  own  no  less ; 


3i6  AJAX. 

I  see  that  all  we  living  are  nought  else 
But  phantoms,  or  a  shadow  that  escapes. 

Ath.  So  having  eyes  to  see,  keep  thou  thy  lips, 
And  of  the  gods  speak  never  a  boastful  word ; 
And  show  no  swelling  port,  because  thy  hand 
Is  heavier  than  another's,  or  than  his 
Deeper  the  soundings  of  thy  hoarded  gold. 
For  a  day  lays  low,  and  a  day  restores, 
All  human  things  :  and  humbleness  the  gods 
Love,  but  all  evil-doers  they  abhor. 

Chor,  O  son  of  Telamon,  that  hast 
Thine  island  home  at  Salamis, 
Firm-planted  'mid  the  waves. 
In  thy  prosperity  I  am  glad. 
But  when  on  thee  some  heavy  blow 
From  heaven,  or  of  the  Grecian  host 
A  furious  slanderous  rumour  falls, 
I  shrink  and  cower — no  fluttering  dove 
More  timorous-eyed  than  I. 
As,  in  this  night  now  spent,  all  tongues 
Are  loud  against  us  clamouring  shame. 
That  flocks  of  the  Greeks  and  herds — 
What  spoil  of  the  conquering  spear  remained — 
Ranging  the  meadows  where 
Our  steeds  run  wild,  thou  didst  destroy, 
With  flash  of  murderous  steel. 
Such  false  and  whispered  tale 


AJAX.  317 

Odysseus  pours  in  ears  of  all, 

Persuading  all :  for  now  is© 

All  men  believe  all  things  of  thee, 

And  every  one  who  hears  exults 

And  triumphs  in  thine  anguish,  more 

Than  he  who  told.     One  shall  not  miss, 

Who  at  a  mighty  spirit  aims  : 

But,  should  he  speak  such  things  of  me, 

None  would  believe  him ;  envy  still 

Assails  the  fortunate.     Yet  are 

Small  men  no  stable  tower  of  strength. 

Without  the  great :  small  joined  with  great,  160 

Great  helped  by  small,  shall  prosper  best. 

But  fools,  by  step  and  step,  to  learn 

This  lesson  who  can  lead  ? 

So  foolish  is  their  clamorous  spite ; 

And  we  without  thee,  prince,  are  weak 

Their  idle  slanders  to  repel. 

Nay,  for  so  soon  as  from  thine  eye 

They  have  escaped,  they  chatter  loud, 

Like  flocks  of  noisy  birds  : 

But,  O  great  vulture,  show  thyself —  170 

Straight  they  shall  cower 

Before  thee,  stricken  dumb  with  fear. 

Did  Artemis  incense  thee  so?  [Strophe  i. 

Zeus'  daughter,  Tauric  Artemis, 

(O  rumour  huge,  parent  of  shame  to  me  !) 


3i8  AJAX. 

Upon  the  herds  to  fall,  the  people's  kine — 

Minding  belike  some  day  of  victory, 

To  crown  it  now  with  bitter  fruit, 

When  glorious  battle-spoils  she  missed. 

Or  missed  the  wonted  honours  of  the  chase  ? 

Or  brazen-harnessed  Enyalius  is  it  perchance, 

Who,  for  he  blamed  alliance  lightly  prized,  180 

Conspiring  with  the  darkness  of  the  night, 

Hath  thus  redressed  the  wrong? 

For  never,  son  of  Telamon,  \Antist7'ophe  i. 

Didst  thou  of  thine  own  counsel  stray 

In  foolish  paths  so  far,  to  fall  on  flocks. 

Men  are  with  madness  smitten  of  the  gods. 

But  now  may  Zeus  and  Phoebus  both  avert 

This  foul  tale  that  the  Argives  tell ! 

And,  if  they  speak  a  cunning  speech, 

A  changeling  He — these  mighty  kings,  or  he  189 

Who  of  the  miscreant  house  of  Sisyphus  is  sprung — 

No  more,  our  prince,  keeping  thy  presence  hid. 

Here  on  the  beach  among  the  tents,  no  more. 

Win  me  an  evil  fame  ! 

Arise  and  sit  no  more,  \Epode. 

Where  rooted  in  a  stubborn  idleness 

Too  long  thou  sitt'st  already,  absent  from  the  war, 

Kindling  a  flame  of  ruin  high  as  heaven  : 

So  fearlessly  it  flares, 

Fire  in  a  wind-swept  thicket  of  the  hills — 


A/AX.  3,9 

The  fury  of  thy  foes ; 

Whose  scornful  wagging  tongues  to  thee 

Are  grievous — and  for  me  abideth  woe.  200 

Tec.  Shipmates  of  the  bark  of  Ajax — 
Of  the  Erechthid  race,  sons  of  the  soil — 
We  have  tears  for  our  shedding,  we  who  care 
For  the  house  of  Telamon,  for  the  house  far  off. 
For  now  the  dreadful,  the  mighty, 
Ajax  the  fierce  and  strong, 
By  madness — all  one  turbid  stream — 
Lies  stricken. 

Chor.  What  heavy  deed 

Has  startled  the  night  from  its  stillness  ? 
Child  of  the  Phrygian  Teleutas,  speak  :  210 

For  thee,  his  consort,  won  with  the  spear, 
He  loves ;  and  wild  is  his  soul,  but  to  thee 
Is  constant :  so  shouldst  thou. 
Not  ignorant,  hint  the  truth. 

Tec.  How  shall  I  utter  a  tale  unuttered  ? 
Yea,  for  like  death  is  the  grief  ye  shall  hear. 
Ah  me,  our  glorious  Ajax — 
So  stricken  with  madness,  so  all  in  a  night 
Wrecked  and  undone  is  he. 

Such  bleeding  butchered  victims  220 

Sacrificed  there  in  the  tent  thou'lt  see, 
Ev'n  by  no  hand  but  his. 

Chor.  Ah,  of  my  fiery-hearted  lord         [Strophe. 


320  A/AX, 

What  tidings  are  these  that  thou  tellest, 

Not  to  be  borne,  nor  yet  escaped — 

Told  all  abroad  by  the  mighty  Greeks, 

Which  Rumour  extols  as  she  tells,  loud-voiced  ? 

Ah  me,  for  I  fear  whereto  this  tends. 

Surely,  discovered,  the  man  will  die. 

Having  slain  together  with  frenzied  hand,  230 

Slain  with  the  reeking  sword  together, 

Sheep,  and  the  horsemen  who  kept  the  sheep. 

Tec.  Alas  !  thence  then  it  was. 
Thence  that  we  saw  him  come. 
Driving  his  captive  flocks  ;  and  of  part 
He  cut  the  throats  on  the  ground  within ; 
Some,  hewing  their  sides,  he  tore  asunder ; 
And  two  white-footed  rams  he  took, 
And  of  one  shore  off  the  head,  and  the  tip 
Of  the  tongue,  and  flung  them 
From  him  ;  and  one  upright  240 

By  its  forefeet  lashed  to  a  pillar, 
And  then  with  a  mighty  thong 
Of  his  horse's  harness  smote. 
Doubling  it  into  a  sounding  scourge, 
Reviling  him  too  with  bitter  words. 
Which  a  god  and  no  man  had  taught. 

Chor.  Now  it  is  high  time,  now,  that  one     [A?it. 
Should  cover  his  head  with  a  mantle, 
And  with  his  feet  make  haste  to  flee, 


A/ AX.  321 

Or  on  swift  benches  of  rowers  sit, 

And  over  the  sea  let  the  ship  be  gone.  250 

Such  threats  do  the  two  lords,  Atreus'  sons, 

Threat  after  threat  like  our  own  oars'  tune. 

Ply  against  us  :  nay,  and  I  fear  to  share, 

Stricken  with  him,  a  death  by  stoning — 

Whom  unapproachable  fate  involves. 

Tec.  But  now  no  longer  so  :  for  now 
The  lightnings  cease,  and  the  gale  is  still. 
That  rushed  so  keen  before. 
Now,  come  to  himself,  new  pain  he  suffers  : 
For  looking  on  self-inflicted  grief,  260 

Wherein  no  other  bore  a  hand. 
Lays  to  the  soul  sharp  pangs. 

Chor.  Nay,  all  may  yet  be  well,  if  this  has  ceased  : 
Soon  we  make  light  of  troubles  that  are  past. 

Tec.  Yet  which,  if  these  were  offered,  wouldst  thou 
choose, 
To  vex  thy  friends  and  to  be  glad  thyself. 
Or,  partner  of  their  grief,  be  grieved  no  less  ? 

Chor.  The  double  grief,  O  lady,  is  the  worse. 

Tec.  Then  by  his  sane  mind  are  we  losers  now.        269 

Chor.  How  mean  you  this  ?     I  know  not  what  you  say. 

Tec.  This  man,  this  Ajax,  whilst  he  still  was  mad. 
Himself  rejoiced  in  his  own  misery ; 
Ours  was  the  grief  who  saw  it  and  were  sane  : 
But,  since  his  madness  gives  him  breathing-space, 


322  AJAX. 

Now  with  sore  sorrow  all  his  soul  is  vexed, 
And  we  are  grieved  no  less  than  formerly. 
Is  it  not  a  twofold  plague,  two  griefs  for  one  ? 

Chor.  I'll  not  gainsay  thee  :  but  I  fear,  some  blow 
From  heaven  has  fallen.     Nay,  how  else,  if,  sane, 
No  whit  more  than  distracted,  he  is  glad  ?  280 

Tec.  Be  well  assured  and  know  that  so  it  is. 

Chor.  What  first  beginning  of  this  evil  fell  ? 
Tell  us,  who  share  thy  grief,  whate'er  has  chanced. 

Tec.  Yea,  it  concerns  thee,  thou  shalt  hear  it  all. 
At  dead  of  night,  when  evening  fires  were  out. 
With  a  sharp  two-edged  sword  he  armed  his  hand. 
Bent  on  some  bootless  errand  to  be  forth. 
I  spake  and  chid  him  :  '  Ajax,  what  wouldst  thou  ? 
Why  goest  thou  forth  unbidden  on  this  quest, 
Called  by  no  messenger,  nor  hearing  voice  290 

Of  trumpet,  but  the  host  lies  now  asleep  ? ' 
Shortly  he  answered  me,  the  old  old  tale : 
*  Woman,  to  be  silent  is  a  woman's  crown.' 
So  taught,  I  ceased,  and  he  rushed  forth  alone  ; 
What  chanced  whilst  he  was  gone  I  cannot  tell. 
But  back  he  came  with  spoil  into  the  tent. 
Bulls,  bound,  and  shepherds'  dogs,  and  goodly  flocks. 
Some  he  beheaded,  of  some  slit  throat,  back-bent, 
Some  hewed  in  pieces,  some  his  prisoners 
As  men  tormented,  falling  on  senseless  sheep.  300 

Last,  through  the  doors  he  rushed,  bandying  wild  words 


f 
I 


AJAX.  323 

There  with  some  phantom,  of  the  Atreidae  now, 

Odysseus  then — and  still  his  laugh  rang  false. 

How  he  had  gone,  wreaked  scorn  upon  his  foes. 

Then  swiftly  back  within  the  tent  he  came  : 

And  there  with  pain,  at  last,  came  to  himself: 

And  through  that  house  of  slaughter  sent  his  eyes, 

And  smote  his  head,  and  cried  aloud  :  and  sat 

A  wreck  amid  the  wrecks  of  the  slain  beasts. 

And  tightly  clutched  his  hair  with  his  bent  hands.    310 

Most  of  the  time  he  sat  without  a  word ; 

But  then  at  me  broke  forth  with  direst  threats, 

Should  I  hide  from  him  aught  of  what  had  chanced ; 

And  bade  me  tell  him  in  what  plight  he  stood. 

And  I,  O  friends,  afraid,  told  all  the  tale. 

Far  as  I  knew  it,  all  that  he  had  done. 

Then  did  he  cry  out  with  a  grievous  cry, 

Such  as  I  never  heard  from  him  before ; 

Ever  till  now  he  taught  that  such  complaints 

Were  fit  for  cowards  and  men  dispirited; —  320 

No  sound  of  shrill  lamenting  would  he  make, 

But  moaned,  as  a  bull  might,  beneath  his  breath  : — 

But  now,  in  such  ill  plight,  so  overthrown. 

There,  without  food  or  drink,  fall'n  midst  the  beasts 

Slain  by  his  sword,  he  sits,  and  holds  his  peace. 

And  past  all  doubt  some  mischief  he  intends  : 

There's  some  such  meaning  in  his  words  and  moans. 

But,  O  my  friends,  for  therefore  came  I  hither, 


324  AJAX. 

Come  in  and  help  us,  if  ye  have  the  skill ; 

Such  men  are  governed  by  a  friend's  advice.  330 

Chor.  O  daughter  of  Teleutas,  a  sore  tale 
You  tell  us,  of  this  man  made  mad  with  grief. 

Aj.  (within.)  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Tec.  Not  yet  the  worst,  I  fancy  :  heard  ye  not 
What  bitter  cry  there  sounded  from  his  lips  ? 

Aj.  Ah,  woe  is  me  ! 

Chor.  The  man,  it  seems,  is  mad,  or,  face  to  face 
With  sight  of  his  past  madness,  grieves  for  that. 

Aj.  My  child  there  ! 

Tec.  Alas  me  :  for  Eurysaces  he  calls.  340 

What  means  he  ?  child,  where  art  thou  ?  hapless  I  ! 

Aj.  What,  Teucer  !  where  is  Teucer  ?  will  he  be  gone 
Plundering  for  ever,  and  leave  me  to  my  fate  ? 

Chor.  There  speaks  no  madman.     Open  ye  the  doors. 
Ev'n  sight  of  me  may  put  him  to  some  shame. 

Tec.  'Tis   done,   the  doors   stand  open.      Now  may 
ye  see 
His  deeds,  and  see  himself,  what  plight  is  his. 

Aj.  My  mariners,  my  friends,  \Strophe  i. 

My  only,  only  friends  who  still. 

Still  by  the  upright  rule  abide,  350 

Behold  what  circling  tide  is  round  me  now, 
Borne  in  by  the  deadly  tempest's  stress. 

Chor.  Ah,  how  thy  testimony  proves  too  true  ! 
Too  plain  the  deed  declares  its  senselessness. 


AJAX.  325 

Aj.  Shipmates  who  dipt  the  oar,  [Antistrophe  i. 

Good  crew,  staunch  in  the  seaman's  craft. 
You  have  I  seen  and  none  but  you 
A  bulwark  still  against  calamity  :  360 

Come  therefore,  and  slay  me — me  with  these. 

Chor.  Refrain  thy  tongue  :  by  curing  ill  with  ill, 
Increase  not  thou  the  sharpness  of  thy  doom. 

Aj.  Ye  see  me  here,  the  brave,  the  stout  of  heart. 
The  undismayed  in  battle  with  the  foe — 
.Dealing  on  fearless  beasts  most  valiant  blows. 
Alas  the  mockery,  how  am  I  cast  down  ! 

Tec.  Ah,  my  lord  Ajax,  say  not  so,  I  pray  thee. 

Aj.  Hence,  woman,  and  begone  out  of  my  sight ! 
Ah  me,  alas !  *  370 

Tec.  Nay,  by  the  gods,  learn  wisdom  and  submit. 

Aj.    Luckless,  who   spared  to   strike  the  guilty,  the 
accursed,  [Strophe  2. 

But,  falling  on  these  horned  kine  and  goodly  flocks, 
Poured  out  their  purple  blood. 

Chor.  Why  shouldst  thou  grieve,  now  when  the  deed 
is  done  ? 
There  is  no  way  but  that  these  things  are  so. 

Aj.  O  seeing  all,  tool  of  all  mischief  ever. 
Most  false,  most  loathsome  knave  in  all  the  host,         380 
Now  in  thy  triumph  well  I  know  that  thou. 
Son  of  Laertes,  laughest  loud  and  long. 

Chor.  As  heaven  ordains  it,  so  men  laugh  or  weep. 


326  AJAX. 

Aj.  Yet  might  I  see  him — suffering  as  I  am  } 
Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Chor.   Speak  no  proud  word.     Bethink  thee  of  thy 
plight.  \Antistrophe  2. 

Aj.  O  Zeus,  my  sire's  progenitor,  might  I  but  slay 
The  cunning  hated  knave,  and  those  twin-sceptred  kings, 
And  then  myself  be  slain  !  390 

J  tc   Ghm^  When  thou  wouldst  pray  thus,  pray  withal  for  me 
To  die  :  why  should  I  live  when  thou  art  dead  ? 

Aj.  O  night,  my  light —  [Strophe. 

O  Erebus,  most  bright,  for  me — 
Take,  take  me  hence,  with  you  to  dwell : 
Take  me  :  no  longer  am  I  fit 
To  look  to  gods  for  succour. 
No,  nor  for  any  help  of  mortal  men  : 
But  me  the  child  of  Zeus,  400 

The  mighty  goddess,  plagues 
To  my  undoing :  then  whither  can  I  flee  ? 
Or  where,  oh  where,  gone  hence,  shall  I  remain  ? 
If  all  the  past  fades  from  me,  O  my  friends. 
And  vengeance  is  at  hand. 
And  on  an  idle  triumph  my  heart  was  set ; 
And  all  the  host,  lifting  both  hands  to  strike, 
Would  strike  me  dead. 

Tec.   Oh  me  unhappy,  that  a  brave  man  should  speak 
Such  words,  words  that  before  he  had  not  deigned !     410 

Aj.  O  seaward  caves,  [Antistrophe. 


AJAX.  327 

And  paths  beside  the  sounding  wave, 

And  pastures  sloping  to  the  beach, 

A  long,  a  long,  a  weary  time. 

Beneath  Troy- walls  ye  held  me  ; 

But  now  no  more,  no  more  with  breath  of  life- — 

Let  none  but  fools  doubt  that ! 

And,  O  Scamander's  streams, 

Ye  neighbour  streams,  that  to  the  Greeks  were  kind, 

Ye  shall  not  any  more  behold  this  man —  4«> 

A  man  of  whom  I  shall  not  fear  to  boast, 

Troy  hath  not  seen  his  like. 

In  all  the  host  come  hither  from  Grecian  land ; 

But  now,  from  height  of  glory  fall'n  so  low. 

Prostrate  I  lie. 

Chor.   I  cannot  forbid,  but  how  to  let  thee  speak 
I  know  not — so  with  misery  beset.  429 

Aj\  Alas  me !  who  had  thought  my  name  one  day 
Would  have  such  meaning,  chiming  with  my  fate  ? 
For  twice  and  three  times  now  have  I  good  cause 
To  cry  Alas,  fallen  in  such  evil  plight : 
Whose  father  once  in  this  Idaean  land 
Won  by  his  prowess  first  prize  of  all  the  host. 
And  home  departed  crowned  with  all  renown ; 
But  I  his  son  unto  the  selfsame  Troy 
Came,  strong  as  he ;  yea,  and,  albeit  I  wrought 
Like  helpful  deeds  in  battle  with  my  hand, 
I  perish  thus,  dishonoured  by  the  Greeks.  440 


328 


AJAX. 


Yet  surely  I  think  that  this  one  thing  I  know, 

Had  but  Achilles  lived  to  make  award, 

Whose  prowess  had  deserved  his  arms  for  prize. 

No  other  man  had  snatched  them  then  from  me. 

But  now  the  Atreidae  to  this  utter  knave 

Have  sold  them,  and  my  deeds  they  have  despised. 

And  had  not  sight  and  thought,  distorted  both. 

Swerved  from  my  purpose,  never  more  had  they 

Against  another  man  giv'n  sentence  thus. 

But  now  the  stern-eyed  maiden,  child  of  Zeus, 

Even  whilst  I  armed  my  hand  to  strike  the  blow, 

So  mocked  me,  with  such  madness  dazed  my  mind. 

That  on  these  poor  beasts  I  imbrued  my  hands, 

Whilst  they  exult  to  have  escaped  my  clutch — 

No  fault  of  mine  :  no,  when  a  god  arrests. 

The  worse  man  from  his  better  may  escape. 

What  shall  I  do  now?  whom  'tis  manifest 

The  gods  hate,  and  the  Greek  host  loves  me  not, 

And  all  Troy  hates  me  and  these  plains  of  Troy. 

Home  o'er  the  Aegean  wave,  from  shore  and  camp, 

Leaving  the  Atreidae  helpless,  shall  I  go  ? 

Before  the  face  of  Telamon,  my  sire. 

How  shall  I  stand  ?  how  will  he  look  on  me. 

Come  back  ungraced,  come  back  without  the  prize. 

With  praise  whereof  he  crowned  his  own  brows  once  ? 

'Twere  past  endurance.     What  then  ?     Shall  I  storm 

Troy's  towers,  and  fall  alone  on  none  but  foes. 


460 


AJAX.  329 

And  do  some  valiant  deed,  and  so  be  slain  ? 

But  the  Atreidae  would  be  glad  of  this. 

It  may  not  be.     Another  kind  of  feat  470 

Must  I  devise,  whereby  my  sire  shall  know, 

At  least  no  coward  in  grain  am  I,  his  son. 

Base  is  the  craving  for  the  longer  life. 

When  life  is  misery,  and  unrelieved. 

What  joy  has  day  that  alternates  with  day, 

And  this  brings  nigh  and  that  draws  off  from — death  ? 

Too  dear  I  count  him  at  the  cheapest  rate. 

Who  warms  his  heart  with  visionary  hopes. 

Nobly  to  live  or  nobly  die,  there  is 

No  choice  for  brave  men  else.     My  say  is  said.  480 

Chor.  No  one  shall  say  thy  words  rang  counterfeit : 
We  heard  thy  whole  soul,  Ajax,  in  that  speech. 
But  now  let  be  :  now  let  thy  friends  prevail 
To  bend  thy  purpose — and  dismiss  these  thoughts. 

Tec.  O  my  lord  Ajax,  of  all  things  most  hard 
Hardest  is  slavery  for  men  to  bear. 
And  I  was  daughter  of  a  sire  freeborn — 
No  Phrygian  mightier,  wealthier  none  than  he : 
But  now  am  I  a  slave.     For  so  the  gods, 
'And  so  thine  arm,  had  willed  it.     Therefore  now —     490 
For  I  am  thine,  thy  wife,  and  wish  thee  well — 
1 1  charge  thee  now  by  Zeus  who  guards  thy  hearth, 
'And  by  that  couch  of  thine  which  I  have  shared — 
Condemn  me  not,  given  over  to  their  hands, 


330  AJAX, 

To  bear  the  cruel  gibes  thy  foes  shall  fling. 
Bethink  thee,  on  that  day  when  thou  shalt  die, 
And  by  that  death  divorce  me,  violent  hands 
On  me  the  Greeks  will  lay,  and  we  shall  live 
Henceforth  the  life  of  slaves,  thy  child  and  I. 
And  then  at  me  shall  some  one  of  my  lords  500 

Shoot  out  sharp  words,  '  Lo  ye,  the  concubine 
Of  Ajax,  who  was  strongest  of  the  Greeks — 
Fallen  from  what  pride,  unto  what  service  bound ! ' 
So  they  will  talk.     And  me  such  fate  will  plague ; 
But  shame  such  talk  imports  to  thee  and  thine. 
Nay  but  have  pity,  and  leave  not  thou  thy  sire. 
So  old,  so  grieved ;  pity  thy  mother  too, 
Portioned  with  many  years ;  who  night  and  day 
Prays  to  the  gods  to  bring  thee  home  alive  : 
And  have  compassion  on  thy  boy,  O  prince —  510 

Think,  should  he  live,  poor  child,  forlorn  of  thee, 
By  unkind  guardians  of  kind  care  deprived. 
What  wrong  thy  death  will  do  to  him  and  me. 
Nothing  have  I  to  look  to  any  more. 
When  thou  art  gone.     Thy  spear  laid  waste  my  home  ; 
My  mother  too  and  father  Fate  withal 
Brought  low,  in  the  dark  house  of  death  to  dwell. 
What  home  then  shall  I  find  instead  of  thee — 
What  wealth  ?     My  life  hangs  utterly  on  thee. 
\     Nay  even  of  me  be  mindful.     Should  not  men         520 
Remember,  having  tasted  of  delight  ? 


AJAX.  331 

Ever  from  kindness  should  new  kindness  spring. 
Who  of  past  joy  lets  fade  the  memory, 
Call  me  not  that  man  noble  any  more. 

Chor.  Such  pity,  Ajax,  as  in  my  heart  I  have, 
I  would  thou  hadst :  then  wouldst  thou  praise  her  speech. 

Aj.  Yea,  praise  in  plenty  shall  she  win  from  me, 
If  but  my  bidding  she  is  content  to  do. 

Tec.  Nay,  O  dear  master,  I  will  not  fail  in  ought.      529 

Aj.  Bring  then  my  child  to  me,  that  I  may  see  him. 

Tec.  Nay,  but  for  fear  I  did  release  him  hence. 

AJ.  Now  while  this  night's  ill  work  was  toward — or  ho w  ? 

Tec.  Lest,  hapless,  had  he  met  thee,  he  had  died. 

Aj.  Yea,  well  indeed  it  would  have  matched  my  fate. 

Tec.  But,  to  avert  this,  I  took  care  of  him. 

Aj.  I  thank  thee  for  this  prudence  thou  hast  shown. 

Tec.  How  may  I  serve  thee,  since  these  things  are  so? 

Aj.  Now  let  me  speak  to  him  and  see  his  face. 

Tec.  Yea,  in  slaves'  keeping  he  abides  hard  by. 

Aj.  What  hinders  him  to  be  brought  hither  then  ?   540 

Tec.  O  child,  thy  father  calls  thee.     Let  some  slave 
Whoever  in  safe  hands  keeps  him,  bring  him  here. 

Aj.  Comes  he  at  call,  or  hears  he  not  thy  voice  ? 

Tec.  Here  comes  indeed  a  servant,  bearing  him. 

Aj.  Lift  him,  lift  hither.     He  will  not  fear,  not  he, 
To  look  upon  this  sight  of  blood  fresh-spilt ; 
Not  if  he  is  indeed  his  father's  son. 
Best  lose  no  time,  but  in  his  sire's  rough  ways 


332  AJAX. 

Break  him  in  now,  whilst  nature  takes  the  mould. 

Child,  happier  than  thy  father  mayest  thou  be ;         550 

But  like  him  else — thou  shalt  not  be  amiss. 

Nay,  even  now  one  thing  I  envy  thee. 

That  of  this  misery  no  sense  hast  thou  : 

Life's  sweetest  time  is  thine,  ere  feeling  comes — 

For  'tis  a  painless  evil,  not  to  feel — 

Whilst  joy  and  sorrow  are  a  lore  unlearnt. 

But,  when  thou  art  grown  to  this,  my  foes  must  know 

Thee,  what  a  son  thou  art  of  what  a  sire. 

Meanwhile,  by  heaven's  light  breezes  fanned  and  fed, 

Nurse  for  thy  mother's  joy  thy  tender  life. 

None  of  the  Greeks,  I  know,  shall  trouble  thee         560 

With  their  base  spite — no,  not  though  I  am  gone  : 

Such  ceaseless  care  of  thee  shall  Teucer  have, 

Whom  I  will  leave,  staunch  warder  of  thy  life, 

Though  now  we  miss  him,  hunting  down  his  foes. 

But  you,  my  sailors,  comrades  of  the  shield. 

On  you  I  charge  this  kindness  for  your  share — 

Deliver  to  him  my  bidding,  hence  to  my  home 

To  bear  this  child,  and  there  to  Telamon 

Show  him,  and  to  my  mother  Eriboea, 

That  he  may  nurse  their  old  age  to  the  last,  570 

Until  they  come  to  Pluto's  dusky  realm ; 

And  let  no  umpires  offer  (no,  nor  he, 

Who  wronged  me)  to  the  Greeks  my  arms  for  prize. 

But  thou,  my  son,  Eurysaces,  take  thou 


AJAX.  333 

And  wear  my  shield's  self,  whence  thou  hast  thy  name, 
Wielding  it  by  its  strap  of  many  thongs — 
The  sevenfold  impenetrable  shield ; 

I  But  all  my  other  arms  must  share  my  grave. 
Now  quickly  take  this  boy  and  shut  the  doors, 
And  make  no  weeping  here  before  the  tent. 
iGood  sooth,  a  woman  is  a  plaintive  thing.  580 

Make  fast  with  speed.     No  wise  leech  seeks  to  charm 
|With  lamentation  woe  that  craves  the  knife. 
Chor.  I  am  afraid,  hearing  this  eager  haste  : 
Too  keen-edged  for  my  liking  is  thy  tongue. 
I     Tec.  O  my  lord  Ajax,  what  is  it  thou  wilt  do  ? 
Aj.  Ask  not  nor  question.     To  be  discreet  is  best. 
Tec.  Ah,  how  I  fear  !     By  heaven,  and  by  thy  child, 
I  pray  thee,  hearken,  and  forsake  us  not. 

Aj.  Thou  weariest  me.     Knowest  thou  not,  that  I 
x\m  debtor  now  no  more  to  serve  the  gods  ?  590 

Tec.  Refrain  thy  tongue. 

Aj.  Speak  thou  to  those  who  hear. 

Tec.  Wilt  thou  not  hearken  ? 

Aj.  Thou'rt  importunate. 

Tec.  O  prince,  I  fear  thee. 

Aj.  Shut  fast  the  doors  on  her. 

Tec.  By  heaven,  relent. 

Aj.  I  count  thee  but  a  fool. 

If  now  to  school  my  temper  thou  art  bent. 

Chor.  O  glorious  Salamis,  I  think  that  thou,     \Str.  i. 


334  AJAX. 

Loved  by  the  gods  alway, 

And  of  all  eyes  observed, 

Abidest  still,  lashed  by  the.  surging  sea. 

But  I,  the  miserable,  how  long,  how  long,  600 

For  my  reward  I  wait 

From  these  Idaean  meadows,  where  I  keep. 

Losing  all  count  of  months,  my  nightly  couch ; 

Worn  out  with  waiting  and  the  toilsome  time ; 

Nursing  a  bitter  hope, 

That  one  day  yet  I  shall  come  home — to  the  dread  doors, 

The  darksome  doors  of  death. 

And  now  consorts  with  me  another  grief —     [Antistr.  i. 

New  foe  that  bides  its  time — 

Ajax,  alas  me,  lodged,  610 

Past  hope  of  cure,  with  madness  from  the  gods ; 

Whom  long  ago  thou  didst  send  forth  from  thee. 

In  furious  fight  unmatched ; 

But  now  not  so — brooding  on  lonely  thoughts, 

Great  sorrow  to  his  friends  is  he  become  ; 

And  all  the  matchless  deeds  his  hands  wrought  once 

Have  fallen,  fallen  dead. 

And  with  the  sons  of  Atreus,  loveless,  miserable,  620 

Wake  no  response  of  love. 

Methinks  his  mother,  with  life's  long-drawn  day    \_Str.  2. 

Familiar,  and  with  white-haired  eld, 

When  she  shall  hear  how  with  a  mind  diseased 

Her  noble  son  was  sick, 


J 


A/AX.  335 

Will  cry,  Alas  !  woe  worth  the  day  ! 

And  in  her  sorrow  pour 

No  dirge  of  plaintive  nightingale, 

But  loudly  weep  and  wail,  •      630 

All  in  a  shrill-voiced  song ; 

While  on  her  breast  a  heavy  sound 

Shall  fall  of  hands  that  smite — 

With  rending  of  her  reverend  hair. 

Better  in  Hades  hid  from  sight  were  he,     \Anitstr.  2. 

Whose  mind  is  sick  without  an  aim, 

He  who,  come  hither,  by  lineage  of  his  sire, 

Best  of  the  toil-worn  Greeks, 

To  promptings  of  his  natural  mind 

Is  constant  now  no  more. 

With  wild  new  thoughts  grown  conversant.  640 

O  wretched  sire,  for  thee 

What  tidings  are  in  store — 

Fall'n  on  thy  son  a  heavy  curse, 

Whose  like  no  life  nursed  yet 

Of  the  Aeacidae  save  his. 

Aj.  The  long  march  of  the  innumerable  hours 
Brings  from  the  darkness  all  things  to  the  birth, 
And  all  things  born  envelops  in  the  night. 
What  is  there  that  it  cannot  ?     Strongest  oaths 
Of  men,  and  the  untempered  will,  it  bends : 
As  I,  who  lately  seemed  so  wondrous  firm,  650 

See  by  this  woman  now  my  keen  edge  made, 


336  A/AX. 

As  steel  by  dipping,  womanish  and  weak ; 

So  that  it  pities  me  among  my  foes 

To  leave  her  widowed,  fatherless  my  child. 

Now  to  the  seaside  meadows  and  the  baths 

I  go  to  purge  away  my  stains,  if  so 

Athene's  grievous  wrath  I  may  escape. 

And  I  must  go  and  find  some  spot  untrodden, 

And  hide  away  this  hated  sword  of  mine. 

Burying  it  in  the  earth  where  none  may  see ; 

Let  night  and  Hades  keep  it  under  ground.  660 

For  from  the  day  I  took  it  in  my  hand. 

From  Hector,  from  my  enemy,  a  gift. 

Of  Greeks  I  gat  no  honour  any  more : 

But  soothly  says  the  proverb  that  men  use — 

Foes'  gifts  are  no  gifts — no,  nor  profitable. 

Well — I  shall  know  henceforth  to  bow  to  heaven. 

And  the  Atreidae  study  to  revere  : 

Men  must  obey  their  rulers.     Nay,  how  else  ? 

Things  most  august  and  mightiest  upon  earth 

Bow  to  authority  :  the  winter's  storms,  670 

Dense  with  their  driven  snow,  give  place  at  last 

To  fruitful  summer ;  and  night's  weary  round 

Passes,  and  dawn's  white  steeds  light  up  the  day ; 

And  blasts  of  angry  winds  let  sleep  again 

The  groaning  sea :  and  tyrannous  sleep  withal 

Holds  not  his  prey,  but  looses  whom  he  binds. 

Then  shall  not  we  learn  wisdom,  and  submit  ? 


AJAX.  337 

And  I — this  lesson  I  have  learnt  to-day, 

To  hate  my  enemies  so  much  and  no  more, 

As  who  shall  yet  be  friends,  and  of  a  friend  680 

I'll  bound  my  love  and  service  with  the  thought, 

He's  not  my  friend  for  ever.     For  most  men  find 

A  treacherous  haven  this  of  fellowship. 

But  for  these  things  it  shall  suffice  :  and  thou, 

Woman,  go  in,  and  pray  the  gods  that  all 

My  heart's  desire  may  be  fulfilled  in  full. 

And  you,  my  comrades,  honour  me  with  her 

Thus  praying,  and  bid  Teucer  when  he  comes 

Have  care  of  me  and  all  good  will  to  you. 

For  I  go  hence  whither  I  needs  must  go.  690 

Do  ye  my  bidding ;  so  shall  ye  hear  perchance, 

That  after  all  my  troubles  I  am  safe. 

Chor.  I  tremble,  I  thrill  with  longing  !        [^Strophe. 
With  joy  transported,  I  soar  aloft ! 
O  Pan,  Pan,  Pan,  appear  ! 
Come  hither,  tossed  by  the  sea,  O  Pan, 
From  Cyllene's  rock-ridge  scourged  with  snow — 
The  master  in  heaven  of  those  that  dance  ! 
And  unpremeditated  measures  here, 
Nysian  or  Gnosian,  fling  with  me  !  700 

For  now  on  dancing  my  heart  is  set. 
And  far  across  the  Icarian  waters. 
Lord  of  Delos,  Apollo,  come ; 
Come,  plain  to  see,  and  partake  my  mirth — 


338  AJAX. 

Gracious  and  kind  to  the  end  as  now  ! 

Lo,  Ares  the  cloud  has  lifted ;  \Antistroplu. 

Despair  and  dread  from  our  eyes  are  gone  ! 

Now,  now,  O  Zeus,  again 

May  stainless  light  of  a  gracious  day 

To  our  swift  sea-cleaving  ships  come  nigh  :  710 

When  Ajax  his  sorrow  again  forgets, 

And  serves  the  gods  with  perfect  piety. 

Pays  them  their  rites  and  leaves  out  none. 

For  all  things  ever  the  strong  Hours  quench ; 

And  nought,  I'll  say,  is  too  hard  for  saying ; 

Now  when  Ajax,  so  past  all  hope, 

Against  the  Atreidae  unbends  his  pride — 

Rage  and  defiance  outbreathes  no  more. 

Mess.  O  friends,  these  tidings  first  I  am  fain  to  tell — 
Teucer  ev'n  now  is  from  the  Mysian  crags  720 

Returned ;  and  at  the  generals'  tents,  mid-camp, 
By  all  the  Greeks  together  is  reviled. 
Afar  they  learnt  his  coming,  and  they  drew 
Together,  and  thronged  about  him ;  and  no  man  spared 
To  pelt  him  with  reproaches  right  and  left, 
But  called  him,  taunting  him,  that  madman's  brother, 
His  who  conspired  against  the  host — no  help 
But  he  should  die  by  stoning,  crushed  and  torn. 
So  far  they  went,  that  sudden  swords  outleaped, 
Plucked  naked  of  the  scabbard,  hilt  to  point.  730 

Scarce  in  extremity  the  strife  was  stayed 


i 


I 


AJAX.  339 

By  mediation  of  the  old  men's  speech. 

But  where  is  Ajax — that  he  may  hear  my  tale  ? 

Him  it  concerns — needs  must  he  know  the  whole. 

Chor.  Not  here — hence  ev'n  now,  having  learnt  to  wed 
New  thoughts  with  new  behaviour,  is  he  gone. 

Mess.  Ah  me,  alas  ! 
Upon  too  tardy  an  errand  was  I  sent 
By  him  who  sent  me — or  I  came  too  slow. 

Chor.  Say,  what's  the  urgent  business  scanted  here  ?  740 

Mess.  Straitly  did  Teucer  charge  me,  that  the  man 
Should  not  pass  hence,  till  he  himself  should  come. 

Chor.  Nay,  he  is  gone  on  profitable  thoughts 
Intent,  with  the  angry  gods  to  make  his  peace. 

Mess.  These  words  of  thine  are  full  of  foolishness, 
If  Calchas  knows  whereof  he  prophesies. 

Chor.  How  prophesies  ?    What  should  he  know  of  this  ? 

Mess.   So  much  I  know,  for  I  was  there  and  heard. 
Forth  from  the  synod  of  the  assembled  chiefs. 
Without  the  Atreidae,  Calchas  came  alone,  750 

And  grasped  the  hand  of  Teucer  as  a  friend. 
And  spake  and  charged  him,  with  all  skill  he  had. 
Until  this  day's  sun  should  be  set,  to  keep 
Ajax  in  tent,  nor  let  him  go  at  large, 
If  he  would  see  him  living  any  more. 
For  this  one  day — he  said — and  only  this 
Shall  bright  Athene's  anger  follow  him. 
For  the  overgrown  unprofitable  life 


340  AJAX. 

From  heaven  with  dire  disasters  is  o'erthrown — 

So  said  the  prophet — whoso  of  mortal  race  760 

Forgets  his  birth,  more  than  a  mortal  proud. 

And  he  at  once,  ere  he  set  forth  from  home, 

Made  foolish  answer  to  his  sire's  wise  speech. 

For  '  O  my  son,'  said  Telamon,  '  have  care 

Thy  spear  prevail — but  with  consent  of  heaven.' 

Who  with  a  fool's  speech  vaunting  made  reply, 

'  Father,  with  gods  to  help,  a  man  of  nought 

May  get  him  honour  :  but  I  trust  that  I 

Shall  pluck  this  glory  ev'n  without  their  aid." 

So  spake  he,  boasting  :  and  another  time,  770 

At  bright  Athene,  when  exhorting  him 

She  bade  turn  on  his  foes  his  reeking  hand. 

Dread  words,  unutterable,  back  he  flung : 

'  O  queen,  go  stand  beside  the  other  Greeks ; 

Never  near  me  shall  battle  break  our  line.' 

Athene's  hot  displeasure  by  such  words. 

And  thoughts  for  man  too  high,  did  he  provoke. 

Only,  if  this  day  he  lives,  so  it  may  chance 

We  yet  shall  save  him — if  the  gods  consent.  779 

These  things  said  Calchas.     From  the  council  straight 

Teucer  arose  and  bade  me  bear  this  charge. 

For  thee  to  keep.     But  if  our  care  is  mocked — 

The  seer  saw  false,  or  Ajax  is  no  more. 

Chor.   O  poor  Tecmessa,  born  to  misery, 
Come  forth  and  learn  the  tidings  of  this  man  : 


AJAX.  341 

For  sorrow  hard  at  hand  this  tale  imports. 

Tec.  Why  will  ye  startle  me  from  rest  again, 
Who  found  so  late  peace  from  my  ceaseless  griefs  ? 

Chor.  Come,  hear  this  man,  what  tidings  he  has  brought 
[Of  Ajax — grievous  news  for  me  to  hear.  790 

Tec.  Alas,  what  news  ?    Speak,  man,  are  we  undone  ? 

Mess.   I  know  not  of  thy  plight ;  but,  if  this  hour 
Ajax  is  hence,  I  fear  concerning  him. 

Tec.  Thy  words  distract  me  :  hence  indeed  he  is. 

Mess.  Teucer  enjoins  us  straitly,  in  the  tent 
Indoors  to  keep  him — nor  let  him  range  alone. 

Tec.  But  where  is  Teucer,  and  wherefore  says  he  this? 

Mess.   He  is  returned  ev'n  now ;  and  he  forebodes 
That  this  outgoing  of  Ajax  ends  in  death. 

Tec.  Alas  me,  miserable  !  whence  learnt  he  this  ?     800 

Mess.  From  Thestor's  son,  the  seer,  this  very  day — 
Wherein  to  know  imports  him  death  or  life. 

Tec.  Ah  me,  my  friends,  help  now  my  helpless  state  : 
Hasten,  some  to  bid  Teucer  come  with  speed  : 
Search,  some  the  western,  some  the  eastern  bays — 
His  rash  outgoing  search  until  ye  find. 
For  now  I  know  myself  by  him  beguiled, 
And  of  his  sometime  favour  dispossessed. 
Ah,  child,  what  shall  I  do  ?     I  must  not  sit. 
I  will  go  there,  I  too,  with  all  my  strength.  8ro 

Let  us  make  haste  and  go — no  idling  now — 
To  save  this  man  who  is  in  love  with  death. 


342  AJAX. 

Chor.    Not  words  shall  prove  me  ready  for  the  quest ; 
Quick  act  and  nimble  foot  shall  answer  speech. 
{^The  scene  changes.     Ajax  is  seen^  alone,  by  the  sea-shore.) 

Aj.  So  stands  my  cut-throat  fithest  for  its  work — 
Give  me  but  time  to  think  this  matter  out — 
First,  as  'tis  Hector's  gift,  of  all  my  friends 
Worst  foeman,  and  most  hateful  to  my  sight ; 
Then,  as  'tis  planted  in  Troy's  hostile  soil, 
New-whet  on  whetstone  hungry  for  the  steel :  820 

And  delicately,  with  care,  I  planted  it. 
With  best  good  will  to  give  me  speedy  death. 
So  all  is  ready,  and  so,  my  part  being  done, 
Thou,  Zeus,  be  first  to  help  me,  as  is  fit. 
'Tis  no  great  boon  of  thee  that  I  shall  ask  : 
Send  now  some  messenger  and  let  him  bear 
The  ill-news  to  Teucer,  that  no  hand  ere  his 
May  lift  me  fallen  about  this  reeking  sword ; 
And  let  no  enemy  behold  me  first 

And  fling  me  forth,  to  dogs  and  birds  a  prey.  830 

Zeus,  unto  thee  my  prayer  is  said  :  but  thou, 
Hermes,  good  guide  to  deathward,  give  me  good  sleep — 
With  unconvulsive  and  with  sudden  bound, 
Leaping  upon  this  sword  to  pierce  my  heart. 
Moreover,  I  call  to  aid  the  virgins  ever. 
Whose  eyes  fail  never  of  seeing  wrong  done  on  earth, 
Far-striding,  dread  Erinyes — to  see 
How  by  the  Atreidae,  hapless,  I  am  undone : 


AJAX.  343 

And  with  a  swift  perdition  sweep  them  off, 

An  evil  portion  for  their  evil  deeds —  840 

As  by  this  fatal  and  unnatural  hand 

They  see  me  die,  grant  them  to  perish  so. 

Unnaturally,  by  their  own  children  slain. 

Come,  vengeful  Furies,  swift  Erinyes, 

Spare  not,  but  glut  your  will  on  all  the  host 

And  thou  that  chariotest  the  steeps  of  heaven, 

When  on  my  native  land  falls  next  thy  gaze. 

Awhile,  O  Sun-god,  draw  thy  golden  rein, 

And  tell  the  old  man  my  father — let  him  know. 

And  my  sad  mother,  my  sufferings  and  my  death. 

Poor  soul,  I  think  that,  when  she  hears  the  tale,       850 

Laud  weeping  through  the  city  she  will  send. 

But  now  what  use  lamenting,  all  in  vain  ? 

Quick  as  I  may,  let  me  begin  this  deed. 

O  death,  death,  death,  come  now  and  look  on  me ! 

Nay  rather — for  I  shall  commune  there  with  thee — 

This  present  radiance  of  the  shining  day. 

Now  I  invoke,  and  Helios,  charioteer. 

Thee  with  my  latest  breath,  and  never  more. 

O  light,  O  sacred  soil  of  Salamis 

My  home,  and  firm-set  hearth  of  my  father's  house,  860 

And  glorious  Athens,  and  the  kindred  race. 

Founts  and  these  rivers,  and  ye  plains  of  Troy — 

All  ye  have  nursed  my  life — to  all  farewell ! 

His  latest  word  to  you  thus  Ajax  speaks  : 


344  AJAX. 

To  ghosts  in  Hades  shall  the  rest  be  said. 

{Falls  on  his  sword,  and  dies. ) 

Semi-Chor.  i.  Trouble  on  trouble  new  trouble  heaps  ! 
Where,  where, 

Where  have  I  not  made  search  ? 
But,  that  I  learnt  its  lore,  no  place  attests. 
Lo  there,  870 

Again  a  tramp  of  feet ! 

Chor.  2.  'Tis  we — your  friends — and  comrades  of  the 
fleet. 

Chor.  I.  What  have  ye  done? 

Chor.  2.  No  ground's  untrod  to  westward,  of  the  ships. 

Chor.  I.  And  have  ye  found? 

Chor.  2.   Found  toil  in  plenty,  and  nothing  more  to  see. 

Chor.  I.  Nay,  and  no  less  upon  this  eastern  road. 
Too  plain  it  is,  he's  nowhere  to  be  seen  !  \Strophe. 

Chor.  Will  no  one  tell  me,  either  some  toilsome  fisher, 
Busy  about  his  sleepless  quest,  or  nymph  880 

Haunting  Olympian  heights. 
Or  streams  toward  Bosporus  that  flow — 
Will  no  one  see  him. 

The  stubborn-hearted,  somewhere  roaming, 
And  tell  me  that  he  sees  ? 
For  hard,  too  hard,  it  is  that  I, 
I  who  have  wandered  far  in  toilsome  search, 
Still  baflled,  to  no  prosperous  course  attain, 
But  look  to  find  the  man  unmanned —  890 


AJAX.  345 

And  evermore  in  vain. 

Tec.  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Chor.  What  cry  broke  there  from  covert  of  the  glen  ? 

Tec.  Ah  me,  unhappy  ! 

Chor.  I  see  the  luckless  captive  of  his  spear, 
ITecmessa,  yonder,  in  lamentation  plunged. 

Tec.  Friends,  I  am  lost  and  ruined  and  undone. 

Chor.  What  ails  thee  ? 

Tec.  Ajax,  my  lord,  lies  here,  this  moment  slain, 
With  buried  sword  enveloped  in  his  fall. 

Chor.  Alas  my  hopes  of  home  !  900 

Me,  prince,  thy  shipmate,  has  thy  death  destroyed : 
Unhappy  that  I  am  !  and  miserable 
'Mong  women,  too,  art  thou. 

Tec.  Lament  thy  fill,  for  all  these  things  are  so. 

Chor.  Say,  by  whose  hand  did  he  the  fatal  deed  ? 

Tec.  Plainly,  his  own.     His  sword  whereon  he  fell, 
Planted  in  the  earth,  convicts  him  of  the  guilt. 

Chor.  Oh  fatal  deed  for  me — 
How  was  thy  blood  poured  out,  no  friend  to  help !       91° 
And  I,  the  all-dull,  the  all-witless,  took  no  heed. 
Where  lies  he,  where — alas — 
The  wayward  soul,  Ajax,  the  luckless  name  ? 

Tec.  Look  not  on  him  :  him  out  of  all  men's  sight 
Here  in  this  mantle's  folds  will  I  enwrap : 
Since  none  who  loved  him  might  endure  to  see, 
From  that  red  gash,  and  out  at  nostril,  how 


346  AJAX. 

Spouts  from  the  self-dealt  wound  the  darkened  blood. 
Ah  for  some  friend  to  lift  thee  :  what  can  I  ?  920 

Where  is  thy  brother  ?  to  compose  thy  limbs 
How  timely  now  his  coming — might  he  come  ! 
Poor  Ajax — from  what  height  fallen  how  low  ! 
How  fit  to  win  compassion  of  thy  foes  ! 

Chor.  Was  this  indeed  for  thee,  unhappy  Ajax,     \Ant. 
Stubborn  of  soul,  at  last  to  be  the  end 
Of  all  thy  cruel  fate 
Of  measureless  affliction — this  ? 
To  this  have  brought  thee 
The  fierce  complainings  of  thy  hatred, 
Which  all  night  long  I  heard  930 

Thee  pour,  and  in  the  daylight  too, 
Against  the  Atreidae  nursing  deadly  rage  ? 
A  great  beginner  of  troubles  was  that  day. 
Which  contest  of  stout  hands  proposed. 
The  hero's  arms  to  win. 

Tec,  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Chor.  The  generous  pang  goes  to  thy  heart,  I  know. 

Tec.  Ah  me,  alas  !  939 

Chor.  Once  and  again  full  well  thy  grief  may  sound, 
Lady,  of  such  a  friend  this  day  bereft. 

Tec.  Ye  deem  of  things,  that  I  too  deeply  feel. 

Chor.  I'll  not  gainsay  thee. 

Tec.  Alas,  my  child,  how  hard  a  yoke  our  necks 
Shall  carry,  toiling  beneath  such  masters'  eye. 


AJAX.  347 

Chor.  Ah  me,  this  last  distress, 
That  thou  deplor'st,  imports  a  nameless  deed     * 
Of  the  Atreidae,  of  the  ruthless  pair  ; 
AVhich  yet  may  gods  avert !  950 

Tec.  These  things  had    not    stood   thus,  were   gods 
displeased. 

Chor.  They  wrought  an  all  too  heavy  weight  of  woe. 

Tec.  But  dreadful  Pallas,  child  of  Zeus,  it  is, 
Who  for  Odysseus'  sake  breeds  all  this  woe. 

Chor.   Doubtless  he  triumphs  now, 
The  patient  hero,  in  his  gloomy  soul, 
And  laughs  loud  laughter  at  our  frantic  grief. 
Alas,  and,  hearing  this. 
With  him  the  kingly  pair,  the  Atreidae,  laugh.  960 

Tec.  So  let  them  laugh,  exulting  in  his  fall.       • 
For  haply,  whom  they  loved  not  in  his  life, 
Dead,  in  some  battle-need,  they  may  deplore. 
For  foolish  men  have  treasure  in  their  hands 
And  know  it  not,  till  from  their  hands  'tis  dashed. 
Bitter  his  death  to  me,  or  sweet  to  them. 
Himself  it  pleases.     What  he  longed  to  find, 
He  has  it  now,  death  that  his  soul  desired. 
Why  then  shall  these  exult  against  him  now  ? 
His  death  concerns  the  gods,  not  them,  not  them.        970 
An  empty  triumph  let  Odysseus  vaunt ; 
'Ajax  for  them  is  not :  but  in  his  going 
Sorrow  and  anguish  he  has  left  to  me. 


348  AJAX, 

Teuc.  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Chor.   Hush — 'tis  the  voice  of  Teucer,  as  I  think, 
Loud  with  a  strain  regardful  of  this  woe. 

Teuc.   Dear  to  my  sight,  O  Ajax,  O  my  brother — 
Hast  thou  indeed  fared,  as  the  fame  is  rife  ? 

Chor.   Dead,  Teucer,  is  thy  brother,  doubt  it  not. 

Teuc.  Woe  then  to  me — a  heavy  lot  is  mine.  980 

Chor.  Yea,  for  these  things  are  so. 

Teuc.  Ah  me,  alas  ! 

Chor.  Good  cause  for  tears  ! 

Teuc.  O  over-passionate  haste  ! 

Chor.  Too  rash,  too  rash  indeed. 

Teuc.  Woe's  me  !  but  say. 

Where  in  this  Trojan  land  is  now  his  child? 

Chor.  There,  at  the  tents,  alone. 

Teuc.  Will  ye  not  then 

Make  haste  and  bring  him,  ere  his  foes  shall  steal  him, 
As  when  men  rob  the  lioness  of  her  cubs  ? 
Haste  now  and  help  and  spare  not !  all  men  love 
To  mock  the  slain  foe,  prostrate  at  their  feet. 

Chor.  Yea,  Teucer,  and  the  hero  while  he  lived       990 
Laid  upon  thee  this  charge,  which  thou  dost  seek. 

Teuc.  Oh  of  all  sights  my  eyes  have  ever  seen 
To  me  most  grievous,  this  which  now  I  see — 
And  bitter  to  my  heart,  beyond  all  ways 
That  I  have  trod,  this  way  that  led  me  hither — 
When,  O  my  brother,  I  had  learnt  the  truth, 


AJAX,  349 

And  knew  it  was  thy  death  I  tracked  and  sought. 

For  a  swift  word  of  thee,  as  from  some  god, 

Sounded  throughout  the  host,  that  thou  wast  dead. 

And  hapless  I  who  heard  it,  being  far  off,  looo 

Made  weeping  low,  but  now  the  sight  is  death — 

Ah,  woe  is  me  ! 

Come  now,  uncover,  let  me  see  the  worst. 

0  thou  most  hideous,  rash,  and  fatal  sight — 
What  anguish  has  thy  death  bred  now  for  me  ! 
For  whither  can  I  go,  among  what  men, 
Who,  when  thou  wast  afflicted,  lent  no  hand? 

1  think  that  Telamon,  thy  sire  and  mine, 
Would  welcome  me  with  glad  face  graciously, 

Come  home  without  thee.    Doubt  it  not — whose  brow  loio 

Lights  with  no  smile — no,  not  in  joyful  days. 

What  will  he  hide  ?  or  what  reproach  not  utter 

Of  me  the  bastard,  son  of  the  captive  woman. 

Whose  baseness  and  whose  cowardice  betrayed 

Thee,  O  my  brother — or  else  of  treachery. 

That  sceptre  and  house  might  pass  from  thee  to  me. 

So  will  he  chide  me,  choleric,  peevish  now 

With  age,  at  trifles  heated  into  spleen. 

Last,  he  will  thrust  me  out  and  banish  me. 

Proved  by  his  taunts  no  freeman  but  a  slave.  loao 

At  home  such  welcome  waits  me,  and  here  at  Troy 

Are  many  foes,  and  few  things  serviceable. 

And  all  these  things  thy  death  hath  done  for  me. 


350  AJAX. 

Alas  what  shall  I  do  ?  how  pluck  thee  hence 

From  this  sharp  shining  sword-point — this  whereby 

Ebbed  out  thy  life,  thy  murderer  ?  didst  thou  see 

How  by  dead  Hector  thou  shouldst  at  last  be  slain  ? 

Consider,  I  pray,  the  fortunes  of  these  two. 

Gripped  by  the  girdle  which  this  man  gave  to  him. 

The  body  of  Hector  at  the  chariot-rail  1030 

Was  mangled  on  and  on  until  he  died. 

And  Ajax,  who  received  this  gift  from  him, 

By  this  lies  dead,  slain  by  the  fatal  fall. 

Was  it  not  some  Erinys  forged  this  sword — 

Hades  the  girdle,  grim  artificer  ?  f 

These  things  and  all  things  ever,  for  my  part, 

I  needs  must  think  the  gods  contrive  for  men. 

But,  whoso  in  his  heart  deems  otherwise, 

By  his  belief  shall  hold,  I  hold  by  mine. 

Chor.  Cut  short  thy  speech  :  bethink  thee  how  this 
man  1040 

Shall  now  be  buried,  and  how  thou  wilt  reply. 
For  lo,  an  enemy,  who  comes,  I  trow. 
To  mock  our  misery  with  his  miscreant  mirth. 

Teuc.  What  man,  of  all  the  host,  beholdest  thou  ? 

Chor.   Menelaus,  for  whom  our  ships  sailed  here  to  Troy. 

Teuc.   I  see  him,  on  nearer  view  not  hard  to  know. 

Men.  Sirrah,  I  bid  thee  lend  no  hand  to  bear 
This  body  hence  :  but  leave  him  where  he  lies. 

Teuc.  Yea,  to  what  purpose  was  this  good  breath  spent? 


I 


AJAX.  35, 

Men.  Such  is  my  will,  and  his  who  rules  the  host.  1050 
Teuc.  And  might  we  hear  what  reason  you  pretend? 
Men.  This  :  that  we  deemed  we  brought  him   from 
his  home 
To  the  Achaean  host  ally  and  friend, 
But  found  on  trial  no  Phrygian  more  our  foe  : 
This  man,  who  purposed  death  to  all  the  host, 
And  set  on  us,  for  midnight  murder  armed  : 
And,  but  some  god  had  foiled  his  enterprise, 
The  fate  that  he  has  found  had  e'en  been  ours, 
Slain  and  o'erthrown  by  most  ignoble  death, 
And  he  were  living  now.     But  some  god  turned         1060 
From  us  his  fury,  on  sheep  and  flocks  to  fall. 
And  for  this  cause  the  man  lives  not,  whose  strength 
Shall  so  prevail,  to  give  him  burial ; 
But  on  the  yellow  sand  his  corse  shall  lie. 
Cast  out  unburied,  for  sea-birds  to  devour. 
Now  therefore  lift  not  thou  thy  blustering  rage. 
Since,  if  we  could  not  govern  him,  alive, 
Yet  surely,  dead,  do  what  thou  wilt,  we  shall. 
And  with  our  hands  shall  guide  him.     For,  while  he  lived, 
No  word  that  I  could  speak  he'd  deign  to  hear.  1070 

Nay,  'tis  no  good  man's  part,  who  should  be  subject, 
To  shut  his  ears  against  authority. 
How  shall  a  city  have  good  government, 
Wherein  established  is  no  wholesome  dread  ? 
Nor  can  there  be  good  order  in  the  camp, 


352  A/AX. 

That  lacks  defence  of  fear  and  reverence. 

Yea,  though  men's  limbs  wax  mighty,  let  them  think 

A  little  harm  may  mar  their  mightiness. 

For,  with  such  fear  and  with  such  shame  withal 

Hedged  round,  alone  is  safety — of  this  be  sure.  loSo 

But,  where  licence  and  pride  go  unrebuked, 

Mark  well  that  city;  one  day  she  shall  sail, 

Sail  with  fair  winds  to  waft  her — to  the  depths. 

Be  seasonable  fear  my  strong  defence  : 

Let  us  not  think,  doing  what  most  delights, 

We  shall  not  pay  whatever  most  may  grieve. 

For  Fortune's  wheel  runs  round.     This  man  before 

Was  hot  and  headstrong :  mine  is  now  the  pride. 

Therefore  I  bid  thee  not  to  bury  him. 

Lest,  burying  him,  thou  too  shouldst  find  a  grave.       1090 

Chor.  Wise  maxims,  Menelaus,  well  premised. 
Wilt  thou  entreat  so  wantonly  the  dead  ? 

Teuc.  Never,  friends,  shall  I  marvel  any  more. 
That  men  who  spring  from  nothing  should  transgress ; 
When  those  whom  all  men  deem  our  noblest-born 
Such  bold  transgressors  in  their  speech  are  found. 
"V^Tiat,  may  it  please  you  say  the  same  again — 
You  say  you  brought  him  here  to  help  the  Greeks  ? 
Sailed  he  not  hither  himself,  lord  of  himself? 
How  owed  he  thee  allegiance  ?  where's  thy  right  noo 

To  rule  the  people  whom  he  brought  from  home  ? 
Thou  earnest  Sparta's  king,  no  lord  of  us. 


4/^^.  353 

No  privilege  of  sovereignty  was  thine, 

More  to  dictate  to  him,  than  he  to  thee. 

Captain  of  others,  not  over  all  supreme, 

Didst  thou  sail  hither,  that  Ajax  should  obey  thee. 

Rule  whom  thou  rulest,  and  with  thy  solemn  words 

Chastise  them  :  me  thy  speech  shall  not  affright ; 

Thou,  and  my  lord  the  other,  may  forbid ; 

My  duty's  plain,  and  I  shall  bury  him.  mo 

Think  not  that  for  thy  wife's  sake,  like  the  rest. 

The  men  bowed  down  with  toil,  he  joined  the  host : 

No,  but  by  reason  of  the  oaths  that  bound  him, 

And  not  for  thee  :  he  scorned  all  nobodies. 

Now  therefore  bring  more  heralds  :  come  again — 

Come  with  the  general  back ;  but  yet  thy  noise, 

For  all  thou'rt  Menelaus,  I  shall  not  heed. 

Chor.  Such  speech  in  such  sore  plight  I  blame  no  less — 
Harsh  words  offend,  however  just  the  cause. 
Men.  The  bowman  thinks  not  meanly  of  himself    1120 
Teuc.  For  'tis  no  base  employment  that  I  boast. 
Men.  Couldst  thou  but  wear  a  shield,  what  boasting 
then! 

^_      Teuc.  Light-armed,  I'd  match  me  with  thy  shield  and 

^m  thee. 

^H    Men.  Fierce  is  the  courage  that  inspires  thy  tongue. 

^H    Teuc.  Justice  to  friend,  well  may  a  man  be  proud. 

^H~  Men.  How  just,  that  this  my  murderer  should  have 

^H  honour  ? 

I 


354  AJAX. 

Teuc.    Murderer !  'tis  strange,  if  you,  the  murdered, 
live. 

Men.  The  gods  have  saved  my  life,  no  thanks  to  him. 

Teuc.   If  gods  saved  thee,  dishonour  not  the  gods. 

Men.  Could  /  arraign  the  ordinance  of  heaven  ?      1130 

Teuc.  When  you  deny  the  burial  of  the  dead. 

Men.  Yea,  of  mine  enemy  :  it  must  not  be. 

Teuc.  Why,  on  what  field  encountered  he  with  thee  ? 

Men.   He  hated  me,  I  him  :  you  knew  it  well. 

7'euc.  You  tricked  the  votes,  and  stole  from  him  his 
own. 

Men.  The  umpire's  fault,  not  mine — his  failure  there. 

Teuc.  'Tis  like  thy  knavery — to  steal  and  hide. 

Men.  To  some  one's  sorrow  shall  this  prating  turn. 

Teuc.  Not  more,  I  think,  than  sorrow  I  shall  cause.  1139 

Men.  One  word  for  all :  this  man  must  not  be  buried. 

Teuc.  And  one  word  back — to  tell  thee  that  he  shall. 

Men.  I  saw  a  man  once  who  was  bold  of  speech, 
Who  chid  his  sailors  on  to  face  the  storm. 
And  lo,  when  by  the  tempest  he  was  caught. 
The  man  lay  speechless,  covered  with  his  cloak, 
For  all  who  would  to  trample  under  foot. 
And  so  with  thee,  and  thy  intemperate  speech — 
Out  of  a  little  cloud  perchance  shall  blow  S 

A  mighty  storm,  shall  quench  thy  blustering. 

Teuc.  And  I  have  seen  a  man  so  full  of  folly,  "50 

That  he  would  triumph  if  his  neighbour  fell : 


I 


AJAX.  355 

And  one  like  me,  of  temper  just  like  mine, 
Saw  him  and  warned  him,  speaking  words  like  these — 
'  Friend,  have  a  care,  and  do  the  dead  no  wrong : 
For  know  that,  wronging  them,  thou'lt  come  to  harm.' 

[So  did  he  speak,  and  warned  the  luckless  one. 

[And  lo  I  see  him,  and  methinks  he  is 

[None  other  than  thyself.     Canst  read  my  riddle  ? 

Men.  I'll  stay  no  longer.     All  would  cry  shame  who 
heard 

That  I  used  chiding  where  I  might  use  force.  "60 

Teuc.  Therefore  begone.     Me  too  it  shames  to  hear 

fWords  of  a  babbler,  prating  worthlessly. 

Chor.  Hard-fought  this  strife  shall  prove  : 
But,  Teucer,  lose  no  time — 

Find  for  this  man  with  speed  a  grave,  dug  deep  enough, 
Wherein  not  unremembered  he  shall  keep 
His  mouldering  tomb  for  evermore. 

Teuc.  And  see  where  near  at  hand,  and  just  in  time, 
The  hero's  child  comes  hither,  and  his  wife. 
To  deck  the  poor  dead  limbs  for  burial.  J170 

O  child,  come  hither,  and  stand  close  beside, 
And  to  thy  father  as  a  suppliant  cling. 
Then  sit  in  suppliant  guise,  with  hair  of  three, 
Mine  and  thy  mother's  and  thine  own  the  third, 
Such  wealth  to  back  entreaty.     If  any  man 
By  force  should  drag  thee  from  thy  father's  side, 
Knave,  for  his  knavery  may  they  fling  him  forth 


356  AJAX. 

Unburied  from  the  land,  with  all  his  race 
Consumed  for  ever,  and  levelled,  root  and  branch, 
Even  in  like  manner  as  this  lock  is  shorn. 
Take  it,  O  child,  and  keep  it,  and  let  no  man         nSo 
Remove  thee  hence  :  fall  suppliant  here,  and  cling. 
And  ye — no  women  prove,  but  men  at  need. 
Ready  and  near  to  help,  until  I  come. 
Having  prepared  his  grave — whoe'er  forbids. 

Chor.  What  shall  be  the  sum,  \Strophe  i. 

And  when  shall  be  the  ending. 
Of  the  tale  of  restless  years, 
Bearing  for  me  continually 
Of  battle-toil  the  ceaseless  doom, 
Here  on  Troy's  spacious  plains —  1190 

O  dire  disgrace  to  Greece  ! 

Would  that  the  void  air,  \Aniistrophe  i. 

Or  all-receiving  Hades, 
Had  enveloped  first  the  man 
Who  taught  the  Greeks  with  hateful  arms 
To  league  themselves  for  war :  that  man — 
O  toil  surpassing  toil — 
Laid  waste  the  lives  of  men. 

No  joy  of  garlands  or  of  goblets  deep  {Strophe  2. 

Gave  he — O  wretched  man — to  crown  my  life,        1200 
No,  nor  sweet  din  of  flutes, 
Nor  boon  of  night-long  sleep, 
And  all  my  days  from  love,  ah  me, 


i 


I 


AJAX.  357 

From  love  divorced. 

And  none  heeds  how  I  lie ; 

And  night  by  night  with  the  thick-falling  dews 

Of  heaven  my  hair  is  wet : 

Nights  for  whose  sake  I  shall 

Remember  bitter  Troy.  1210 

And  once  indeed  from  terrors  of  the  night      [Antistr.  2. 

And  driven  darts  fierce  Ajax  was  my  shield: 

But  he  to  a  cruel  fate 

Has  fallen  now  a  prey. 

What  joy  to  me  then  any  more, 

What  joy  shall  be  ? 

Oh  that  I  might  be  where 

The  wooded  wave-washed  foreland  breasts  the  sea, 

'Neath  Sunium's  level  heights,  1220 

That  I  the  sacred  towers 

Of  Athens  thence  might  greet ! 

Teuc.  I  saw,  and  came  with  haste — saw  posting  hither 
Whom  but  the  general,  whom  but  Agamemnon  ? 
Some  mischief,  as  I  think,  he  comes  to  vent. 

Ag.   Were    thine    the    blustering   words    whereof    I 
hear. 
The  licensed  jaws  that  gaped  'gainst  us  so  wide  ? 
What,  sirrah,  thou — son  of  the  captive  woman — 
Surely,  if  thy  mother  had  been  some  noble  one, 
Loud  had  thy  talk  been  then,  dainty  thy  steps —         "30 
Thou  nothing,  that  for  this  nothing  wouldst  stand  up, 


358  AJAX. 

And  didst  protest  that  not  for  Greeks  or  thee 

Leaders  of  ships  or  armies  came  we  hither, 

But  Ajax  sailed,  thou  saidst,  himself  supreme. 

Is't  not  too  much — such  challenge  from  a  slave  ? 

What  man  was  this  of  whom  you  boast  so  loud  ? 

Where  went  he,  or  where  stood,  but  I  was  there  ? 

What,  have  the  Greeks  no  men  now  he  is  gone  ? 

Well  may  we  rue  the  day  when  to  the  host 

We  set  for  prize  the  Achillean  arms,  124 

If,  come  what  will,  Teucer  shall  prove  us  base, 

And,  howso  beaten,  ye  will  not  be  content 

To  acquiesce  in  what  the  more  judged  right ; 

But  either  will  revile  and  never  cease. 

Or,  for  the  slight's  sake,  stab  us  in  the  dark. 

But,  grant  such  licence,  never  any  more 

Could  be  of  any  law  establishment, 

If  we  the  rightful  winners  thrust  aside. 

And  those  that  lag  the  hindmost  drag  to  front. 

It  must  not  be ;  for  not  the  burly  ones,  125 

The  broad  of  shoulder,  are  your  safest  men  ; 

On  every  field  'tis  prudence  that  prevails. 

How  mighty-ribbed  the  ox,  how  small  the  goad 

That  drives  him  straight,  the  way  that  he  should  go  ! 

And  such  good  medicine  shall  be  thine  ere  long, 

Unless  thou  comest  to  a  saner  mind — 

Who  of  a  shadow,  of  one  who  is  no  more, 

Dost  vainly  prate,  bold  words  and  unabashed. 


A/AX,  359 

Go  to,  be  wise  :  learn  who  and  what  thou  art ; 

And  find  some  man  free-born,  and  bring  him  here,      1260 

And  let  him  plead  thy  cause  instead  of  thee  : 

Thou'lt  waste  thy  words  if  thou  spend'st  more  on  me — 

I  do  not  understand  thy  barbarous  tongue. 

Chor.  I  wish  to  both  the  wisdom  to  refrain  : 
There's  nothing  better  for  either  to  be  wished. 

Teuc.  Alas  !  how  fast  the  gratitude  of  men 
Fades,  and  is  proved  a  traitor  to  the  dead  ! 
As,  Ajax,  now  no  memory  has  this  man, 
Not  even  in  slight  respects,  of  thee, — whose  life 
On  many  a  hard-fought  field  was  risked  for  him  :  1270 

But  all  is  now  as  if  it  had  not  been. 
O  of  all  speakers  most  fluent  and  most  vain. 
Hast  thou  so  soon  forgot  that  day,  whereon 
This  man,  when  you  were  shut  within  your  lines, 
Your  battle  broken  and  yourselves  as  nought. 
Alone  stood  forth  and  saved  you,  when  the  flame 
Had  wrapt  your  fleet,  and  round  the  seamen's  thwarts 
Shot  upward,  and  when  Hector  cleared  the  trench 
At  one  high  bound,  and  swooped  upon  the  ships  ? 
Who  saved  you  then  ?     Was  not  your  champion  he,    1280 
Whose  foot  thou  sayest  went  ne'er  with  thine  to  battle  ? 
Did  ye  not  thank  him  for  staunch  service  then  ? 
Or  when  alone  in  single  fight  he  met 
With  Hector,  unbidden,  singled  by  the  lot ; 
For  in  the  midst  no  shirking  lot  he  flung. 


36o  AJAX. 

No  clod  of  crumbling  glebe  ;  but  one  that  should 

Leap  lightly  first  out  of  the  well-plumed  helm — 

'Twas  he  who  did  these  things,  and  I  was  with  him, 

The  slave,  the  son  of  the  barbarian  mother. 

Why,  wretch,  what  face  hast  thou  to  say  such  things?  1290 

Hast  thou  forgot  who  was  thy  father's  father, 

Pelops  of  old,  the  Phrygian,  the  barbarian — 

And  Atreus  who  begat  thee — who,  most  impious, 

Before  his  brother  set  his  children's  flesh  ? 

And  thou  wast  son  of  a  Cretan  mother,  of  her, 

Whom  with  her  paramour  her  father  found. 

And  to  dumb  fish  consigned  her  for  a  prey. 

Born  of  such  breed,  tauntest  thou  me  with  mine — 

Whose  sire  was  no  worse  man  than  Telamon, 

Who  for  his  prowess,  he  of  all  the  host,  1300 

Won  for  his  bride  my  mother,  a  king's  daughter. 

Child  of  Laomedon  :  her  to  my  sire. 

Best  of  the  spoil,  gave  Heracles  for  prize. 

Thus  of  two  noble  parents  nobly  born. 

How  should  I  do  dishonour  to  my  kin — 

To  him  whom,  fallen  in  this  sore  plight,  thou  wouldst 

Thrust  forth  unburied,  and  hast  no  shame  to  say  it  ? 

But  know  that,  if  ye  fling  his  body  hence. 

Hence  must  ye  fling  the  bodies  of  us  three. 

Far  better  I  should  die  in  serving  him,  1310 

Die  in  the  sight  of  all,  than  for  thy  wife 

In  battle — thine  or  thy  brother's,  what  care  I  ? 


AJAX.  361 

Now  therefore  for  thyself,  not  me,  be  wise. 
For,  if  thou  harmest  me,  thou'lt  wish  anon 
A  coward  thou  hadst  been — not  bold  with  me. 

Chor.  In  season,  lord  Odysseus,  thou  art  come — 
So  thou  wilt  help,  not  tie  the  knot,  but  loose  it. 

Od.  What    ails   ye,   friends?     far   off  I    heard    loud 
speech 
Of  the  Atreidae  o'er  this  valiant  dead. 

Ag.  Yea,  for  what   shameful  words   from   this  man's 
lips,  1320 

jMy  lord  Odysseus,  have  I  heard  ev'n  now  ! 

Od.  What    words  ?    since    one    who    hears    himself 
reviled 
I  shall  not  blame  for  waging  wordy  war. 

Ag.  Taunts  I  flung  back,  for  he  flung  taunts  at  me. 

Od.  What  word,  so  fraught  with  mischief,  has  he  said  ? 

Ag.  He  says  this  body  shall  not  be  unburied. 
But  he  will  bury  it  in  my  despite. 

Od.  What,  may  a  friend  speak  now,  and  speak  the 
truth. 
Yet  be  thy  fellow  even  as  before  ? 

Ag.  Say  on  :  for  else  were  I  but  foolish — since       1330 
Of  all  the  Greeks  I  hold  thee  staunchest  friend. 

Od.  Then  I  will  speak.     I  charge  thee  by  the  gods, 
Think  not  to  fling  thus  pitilessly  forth 
This  man,  unburied  :  nor  let  passion  sway 
Thy  soul  to  such  extreme  of  hate,  to  set 


362  AJAX. 

Thy  foot  on  justice.     Once  to  me  no  less, 

In  all  the  army,  since  to  me  were  given 

The  Achillean  arms,  worst  foe  was  he  : 

But  not  for  all  his  hate  of  me  could  I 

Do  him  so  much  dishonour  as  gainsay 

That,  save  Achilles,  of  all  Greeks  who  came  1340 

Hither,  none  have  I  seen  so  brave  as  he. 

It  is  not  right  thou  shouldst  dishonour  him. 

Not  at  this  man,  but  at  the  laws  of  heaven 

Such  blow  were  aimed.     Brave  men,  if  they  be  dead, 

Howe'er  we  hate,  it  is  not  good  to  hurt. 

Ag.  Wilt  thou  stand  up  for  him — Odysseus,  thou  ? 

Od.   Yea,  though  I  hated  him,  whilst  this  was  well. 

Ag.  Shouldst  thou  not  trample  now  upon  him,  dead  ? 

Od.  Such    gain    were    loss :    Atreides,     love     none 
such. 

Ag.  A  monarch  may  not  always  fear  the  gods.         1350 

Od.  Yet  may  he  heed  good  counsel  of  his  friends. 

Ag.  What  the  king  speaks,  let  all  good  men  attend. 

Od.  Give  o'er  :  to  yield  to  friends  is  victory. 

Ag.   Bethink  thee  what  he  was,  whom  thou  wouldst 
serve. 

Od.  My  enemy,  but  noble,  was  he  once. 

Ag.  What  wilt  thou  do  ?  honour  a  dead  foe  thus  ! 

Od.   Far  does  his  worth  to  me  outweigh  our  quarrel. 

Ag.  Unstable  still  the  world  calls  men  like  thee. 

Od.  Yet  many  a  friendship  turns  to  bitterness. 


I 


AJAX.  363 

Ag.  Are   these   the   friends   whose    friendship   thou 
wouldst  praise  ?  1360 

Od.  'Tis  not  my  way  to  praise  a  stubborn  mind. 

Ag.  Cowards  thou'lt  make  us  seem  this  day  to  be. 

Od.   Men  rather,  in  the  eyes  of  Greece  found  just. 

Ag.  Thou  bidd'st  me  then  to  let  them  bury  him  ? 

Od.  Yes  :  for  I  too  one  day  shall  come  to  this. 

Ag.  'Tis  even  so  :  each  works  but  for  himself 

Od.   Whom  should  I  work  for,  rather  than  myself? 

Ag.  Thy  doing  then,  not  mine,  it  must  be  called. 

Od.  'Tis  a  good  deed  thou'lt  do,  howe'er  'tis  done. 

Ag.  Nay  but  of  this  be  sure,  that,  though  to  thee   1370 
This  grace  and  more  than  this  I'd  gladly  do. 
Dead  or  alive,  all's  one — my  enemy 
I  count  this  man.     But  be  it  as  thou  wilt. 

Chor.   If  any  man,  Odysseus,  doubts  that  thou, 
Who  hast  done  this,  art  wise,  unwise  is  he. 

Od.  Yea,  and  henceforth  to  Teucer  I  profess 
Friendship  as  true  as  was  my  former  hate — 
And  I  would  fain  help  bury  the  dead  man  here. 
Share  in  the  toil,  and  nought  leave  out,  of  all 
Toil  that  for  bravest  men  'tis  fit  to  spend.  1380 

Teuc.  O  good  Odysseus,  be  thou  thanked  for  this 
With  the  best  thanks  I  have ;  so  hast  thou  quite 
Belied  my  fear.     Thou  wast  his  enemy, 
Thou,  most  of  all,  but  now  thy  hands  alone 
Have  holpen  him,  nor  him  the  fallen  foe, 


364  AJAX. 

Living,  didst  thou  dare  with  loud  mirth  to  mock — 

As  came  my  lord  the  general,  crazed  with  pride, 

Came  with  his  brother,  and  with  him  would  fain 

Have  cast  him  out  unburied  and  disgraced. 

Therefore  may  Zeus,  lord  of  the  heaven  above. 

Justice  who  strikes,  Erinys  who  remembers,  1390 

Slay  them  for  their  deservings — these  who  would. 

Outraged,  dishonoured,  have  cast  forth  this  man. 

But  yet,  O  son  of  old  Laertes,  thee — 

I  fear  to  let  thee  meddle  with  these  rites. 

Lest  in  so  doing  I  should  offend  the  dead : 

Help  us  in  all  save  this ;  and,  whomso  else 

In  all  the  camp  thou'dst  bring,  we  shall  not  grudge  : 

I'll  grant  thee  all  the  rest :  but  thou  herein — 

Doubt  not  at  all,  thou  hast  been  good  friend  to  us. 

Od.  This  had  I  wished  :  but,  if  it  likes  thee  not      1400 
That  so  I  should,  I  go ;  have  thou  thy  way. 

Teuc.  Enough  :  too  long  already  is  time 
Prolonged.     Haste,  some  to  dig  his  grave, 
And  some  to  place  the  high-set  caldron 
'Mid  wreathing  flames, 
All  for  the  pure  ablution  ready  : 
And  let  one  band  bring  from  his  tent 
All  armour  that  his  shield  enwrapt : 
And  thou,  child,  with  what  strength  thou  hast, 
Touch  lovingly  and  lift  with  me  1410 

Thy  father's  body ;  for  warm  with  life 


A/AX.  36s 

Each  channel  still  its  sanguine  tide 

Spouts  upward.     Come,  whoso  is  here, 

That  calls  himself  a  friend — let  him 

Make  haste  and  come — come  serve  this  man, 

All-brave,  than  whom 

None  better  yet  was  served  on  earth — 

Better  than  Ajax  none,  say  I, 

Whilst  life  was  his. 

Chor.  Full  many  things  shall  mortals  learn 
By  seeing  :  but,  before  he  sees, 
No  man  is  prophet  of  his  fate, 
To  know  how  he  shall  fare.  1430 


PHILOCTETES 


PERSONS. 


Odysseus. 

Neoptolemus. 

Philoctetes. 

Heracles. 

Sailor  {disguised  as  Merchant). 

Chorus  of  Sailors. 


pf)iloctetes 

Od.   'T^HIS  is  the  beach  of  that  sea-cinctured  land, 

JL        Lemnos,  untrodden  and  no  home  of  men, 

Where,  oh  by  noblest  of  Greek  fathers  reared, 

Son  of  Achilles,  Neoptolemus, 

The  Melian  son  of  Poeas  I  set  ashore, 

And  did  the  princes'  bidding,  and  left  him  here, 

Sick  with  the  sore  that  ran,  and  gnawed  his  foot : 

When  at  libation  or  at  sacrifice 

No  quietness  he  gave  us,  none — but  still 

Filled  with  his  fierce  upbraidings  all  the  camp,  lo 

Loud-voiced  and  dolorous.     But  these  things  what  need 

Now  to  recount  ?     No  time  for  many  words 

Now,  lest  he  learn  our  coming,  and  I  waste 

Good  wit,  that  else  should  snare  him  suddenly. 

Deeds  now,  not  words  :  thine,  to  perform  the  rest, 

And  seek,  not  far  from  hence,  a  cave  that  looks 

This  way  and  that,  whereof  at  either  mouth 

A  man  may  sit,  to  feel  the  winter's  sun ; 

And  breezes  cool  in  summer,  fraught  with  sleep, 

Course  through  the  tunnelled  chamber  of  the  rock. 

And  lower  down  a  little,  on  the  left,  20 

2  A 


370  .  PHILOCTETES. 


A  springing  fountain  mark,  if  still  it  flows. 
Go  softly  now,  and  bring  me  word  of  this, 
If  near  at  hand  it  be,  or  further  hence. 
So  shalt  thou  hear,  and  I  disclose,  the  rest ; 
That  to  one  end  together  we  may  work. 

Ne,  The  errand,  lord  Odysseus,  is  not  far : 
Such  cave  as  thou  describ'st  methinks  I  see. 

Od.  Above  us,  or  below  ?     I  see  it  not. 

Ne.  'Tis  here,  above  thee :  and  no  footfall  sounds. 

Od.  See  that  he  He  not  in  the  cave  asleep.  30 

Ne.  I  see  an  empty  chamber,  no  man  there. 

Od.  See  you  within  no  comforts  of  a  home  ? 

Ne.  A  bed  of  leaves,  pressed  down,  where  one  has 
slept. 

Od.  And  is  the  dwelling  empty,  save  of  this  ? 

Ne.  There  is  a  cup,  some  sorry  craftsman's  work, 
Of  mere  rough  wood  :  some  fuel  too  lies  near. 

Od.  These  are  the  household  treasures  of  the  man. 

Ne.  Alack,  and  there,  spread  in  the  sun  to  dry, 
Are  rags  withal,  stained  with  some  sore  disease. 

Od.  This  must  be  then  the  place  wherein  he  dwells,  40 
And  he  hard  by :  for  how  should  he  go  far, 
With  foot  so  crippled  by  an  ancient  hurt  ? 
But  either  he  is  gone  in  quest  of  food, 
Or  for  some  painless  herb  whereof  he  knows. 
Set  thy  companion  then  to  keep  the  watch. 
That  he  surprise  me  not.     To  find  me  here — 


PHILOCTETES.  371 

Me,  more  than  all  the  Greeks — the  man  would  choose. 

Ne.   Enough  ;  I  send  him  :  he  will  guard  the  path, 
And  now  thy  further  purpose  I  attend. 

Od.  Son  of  Achilles,  not  thy  body  alone  50 

Noble  in  this  day's  business  must  be  proved : 
Paid  must  the  service  be,  for  which  thou  earnest, 
Though  strange  its  sound  in  unaccustomed  ears. 

Ne.  What  is  thy  bidding  ? 

Od.  Words,  which  thou  shalt  speak, 

The  soul  of  Philoctetes  must  beguile. 
When  he  shall  ask  thee,  who  and  whence  thou  art, 
*  Son  of  Achilles,'  answer  :  hide  not  this  : 
But  say  thou  sailest  homeward,  having  left 
The  Grecian  host,  incensed  with  bitter  hate, 
Because  with  prayers  they  called  thee  from  thy  home,  60 
Seeing  that  without  thee  Troy  they  could  not  take, 
Yet,  at  thy  coming,  thought  not  good  to  give 
Thy  father's  arms  to  thee,  who  claim'dst  thine  own, 
But  gave  them  to  Odysseus  :  and  therewith 
Foulest  of  foul  reproaches  heap  on  me  : 
Thy  words  I  shall  not  feel :  but,  this  undone. 
Grief  thou  wilt  lay  on  me  and  all  the  Greeks. 
For  this  man's  bow  and  arrows  we  must  have, 
Or  hope  not  thou  to  sack  the  Trojan  town. 
Why  freely  with  no  danger  thou,  not  I,  70 

Canst  with  the  man  hold  converse,  thou  shalt  hear. 
Bound  by  an  oath  to  no  man  thou  hast  sailed, 


372  PHILOCTETES. 


Nor  of  constraint,  nor  with  the  first  that  came  : 

But  none  of  all  these  things  can  I  deny. 

Therefore,  if,  bow  in  hand,  he  lights  on  me, 

I  die,  and  shall  involve  thee  in  my  death. 

But  those  resistless  shafts  to  steal  from  him, 

This  is  thy  task ;  this  compass  with  thy  wit. 

I  know  thee,  that  thy  nature  is  averse 

From  lying  words,  or  practice  of  deceit ;  So 

Yet,  for  the  prize,  success,  is  sweet  to  win. 

Consent :  some  other  day  shall  prove  our  truth. 

Now  for  one  little  shameless  hour  be  mine. 

Give  me  thyself  to-day  :  and  then  be  called, 

Thy  whole  Hfe  long,  most  scrupulous  of  men. 

Ne.  What  in  the  telling  grieves  my  ears  to  hear, 
Son  of  Laertes,  that  I  loathe  to  do. 
My  nature  is  not  to  deal  treacherously — 
No,  neither  mine,  nor,  as  men  say,  my  sire's. 
But  I  am  ready,  not  by  guile  but  force,  9° 

To  bring  the  man  :  for  with  his  one  sound  foot 
Against  so  many  his  strength  shall  scarce  prevail. 
And  yet  indeed,  sent  hither  for  thy  help, 
I  fear  to  be  called  traitor :  but,  O  king, 
I'd  rather  nobly  fail  than  basely  win. 

Od.   Son  of  brave  sire,  I  also  in  my  youth 
Was  slow  of  tongue,  and  ready  with  my  hand ; 
But,  since  I  came  to  trial,  I  have  seen 
Tongue  still  go  foremost  in  this  world,  not  deeds. 


PHILOCTETES.  373 


Ne,  What  dost  thou  bid  me  other  than  to  lie  ?         loo 

Od.  Let  Philoctetes  be  entrapped,  I  say. 

Ne.  And  why  entrapped — why  not  persuaded  rather  ? 

Od.  Thou'lt  not  persuade  him,  and  thou  canst  not  force. 

Ne.  Relies  he  then  on  strength  so  formidable  ? 

Od,  On  shafts  inevitable,  and  winged  with  death. 

Ne.  Not  even  to  approach  him  may  one  dare  ? 

Od.  Not  till  we  first  have  trapped  him,  as  I  say. 

Ne.  Seems  it  to  thee  no  shameful  thing  to  lie  ? 

Od.  If  lying  brings  us  safety,  surely  not. 

Ne.  Why,  with  what  face  shall  I  outbrazen  this  ?      no 

Od.  From  profitable  deeds  one  must  not  shrink. 

Ne.  To  me  what  profit,  he  should  come  to  Troy  ? 

Od.  That  by  these  arrows  only  Troy  is  taken. 

Ne.  Then  I  am  not  its  conqueror,  as  ye  said  ? 

Od.  Thou  with  their  aid  shalt  conquer,  they  with  thine. 

Ne.  They  are  a  worthy  prize,  if  this  is  so. 

Od.  Know,  that  this  deed  twofold  reward  shall  win. 

Ne.  Yea,  what  reward  ?  tell  me,  and  I  will  do  it. 

Od.  Both  wise  and  brave  together  shouldst  thou  be 

called. 
Ne.  Come  what  come  may,  I'll  do  it,  and  cast  off 
shame.  xao 

Od.  Dost  thou  remember  then  how  I  advised  ? 
Ne.  Trust  me  for  that,  having  consented  once. 
Od.  Now  then  remain,  and  wait  his  coming  here. 
Whilst  I  go  hence ;  not  to  be  seen  with  thee, 


374  PHILOCTETES. 

And  to  the  ship  send  back  our  sentinel. 

And,  if  ye  seem  to  tarry  overlong, 

Back  comes  again  the  same  good  messenger, 

But  dressed  in  sailor-fashion,  and  disguised 

Out  of  your  knowledge.     From  whose  lips,  my  son, 

Charged  with  a  riddling  speech,  fail  not  to  catch  130 

The  pregnant  sentence  ever  and  anon. 

So  to  the  ship  will  I,  and  leave  thee  here  : 

And  may  good  Hermes  guide,  who  brought  us  hither, 

God  of  all  craft,  and  she  who  is  my  friend, 

Athene  Polias,  Victory  herself 

Chor.  Strange  in  a  strange  land,  O  my  lord,  [Strophe  i. 
What  shall  I,  what  shall  I  hide,  or  what 
Say  to  the  man,  suspecting  harm  ? 
Instruct  me. 

Better  than  other  men's  skill 
Or  other  judgment,  is  his,  to  whose  wielding 
Is  committed  the  Zeus-given  sceptre  divine  :  140 

As  to  thee  has  descended,  my  son,  from  of  old. 
Such  sovereign  power  :  now  therefore  tell  me. 
How  shall  I  serve  in  this  ? 

Ne.  First,  for  I  doubt  not  ye  fain  would  see 
Where  on  the  island's  skirts  he  dwells, 
Look  without  fear : 

But,  when  he  comes,  who  from  yonder  cave 
Terribly  journeying  forth  is  gone. 
Keep  on  where  my  hand  shall  point  you  still, 


I 


PHILOCTETES,  375 

And  seek  to  help  as  the  time  may  crave.  149 

Chor.  Care  I  have  cared  for  all  the  time,      \Antistr.  i. 
Prince,  thou  hast  charged  me  withal,  to  keep 
Vigilant  watch  for  the  moment's  need : 
Now  tell  me, 

Lodged  in  what  lair  he  dwells  : 
His  home,  where  is  it  ?  his  haunts — reveal  them  : 
No  ill-timed  knowledge  were  this  to  win, 
Lest  from  ambush  he  fall  on  me  unawares  : 
What  place  ?  what  lair  ?  and  now  where  walks  he, 
Within-doors  or  without  ? 

Ne.  The  house  there,  with  its  portals  twain, 
Of  his  caverned  bed,  behold.  160 

Chor.   Where  now  is  the  cave's  sad  inmate  gone? 

Ne.  I  doubt  not,  somewhere  hard  at  hand 
In  quest  of  food  he  trails  his  steps. 
In  such  evil  fashion,  rumour  saith. 
He  lives  his  life,  and  with  pain  and  grief 
Slays  beast  and  bird  with  his  winged  shafts, 
And  no  physician  of  his  woe 
Comes,  and  the  years  go  by. 

Chor.  Needs  must  I  pity  him,  to  think        [Strophe  2. 
How,  with  no  man  to  care  for  him,  170 

And  no  companion's  form  to  greet. 
How  helpless,  ever  alone. 
And  with  fierce  sickness  plagued. 
His  mind  is  racked  from  hour  to  hour, 


376  PHILOCTETES. 


The  instant  craving  to  supply. 

How  hapless,  how  does  he  endure  ? 

O  dark  designs  of  heaven  ! 

O  luckless  tribes  of  men, 

Doomed  to  extremes  of  fate  !  179 

He  whom  no  scion  of  noblest  house      [Antistivphe  2. 

Belike  might  have  disdained  of  yore, 

Robbed  now  of  all  that  life  requires, 

Dwells  out  of  all  men's  sight, 

With  beasts  for  company, 

Of  dappled  hide  or  shaggy  fell — 

Piteous,  with  hunger  and  with  pain. 

Oppressed  by  cares  that  find  no  cure : 

And  Echo's  babbling  voice. 

Dolorous  from  afar, 

Chimes  to  his  shrill  lament.  190 

Ne.  Not  wonderful  is  this  to  me. 
From  heaven,  unless  my  thoughts  are  vain. 
Those  woes  upon  him  at  the  first, 
From  the  unpitying  Chryse,  fell : 
And,  far  from  help  what  now  he  bears, 
It  must  be  that  some  god  designed. 
Lest  against  Troy  too  soon  he  might 
Shoot  his  resistless  shafts  divine. 
Ere  the  time  came,  whereat,  men  say. 
It  shall  by  them  be  overthrown.  200 

Chor.  My  son,  keep  silence.  [Strophe  3. 


PHILOCTETES.  377 


Ne.  Wherefore  ? 

Chor.  Comes  a  sound — 

Such  sound  as  might  pertain  to  one  afflicted  so, 
Somewhere  approaching,  here,  or  here. 
A  noise  indeed  strikes,  strikes  upon  my  ears. 
Of  one  who  walks  with  laboured  tread ; 
And,  nowise  indistinct,  escapes  me  not 
A  voice  of  lamentation  borne  from  far, 
A  voice  of  wasting  pain,  a  grievous  voice. 
But  frame,  my  son.  .  .  .  \Antistrophe  3. 

Ne.  Say,  what  ? 

Chor.  Some  purpose  new  :  210 

For  now  the  man,  not  far  from  hence,  but  near  at  hand, 
No  music  of  the  pastoral  pipe, 
As  when  a  shepherd  drives  his  flocks  to  fold, 
Brings  with  him,  but  a  bitter  cry 
Far-sounding,  as  he  stumbles  painfully, 
Or  on  the  haven  looks,  no  friend  to  ships : 
A  dreadful  cry  precedes  him,  ere  he  comes. 

Phil.  O  friends. 
Who  are  ye,  that  with  sea-dipt  oar  have  touched  aao 

These  desert  and  inhospitable  shores  ? 
Your  country  and  your  race  how  should  I  name. 
And  name  aright  ?     The  fashion  of  your  garb 
Is  Greek  indeed — most  welcome  sight  to  me : 
Yet  would  I  hear  your  voices  :  and  shrink  not 
With  fear  and  dread  away  from  me,  grown  wild, 


378  PHILOCTETES. 


But,  pitying  one  so  wretched  and  forsaken, 

Lone  as  ye  see  and  friendless,  at  my  call 

Speak  to  me,  if  indeed  as  friends  ye  come. 

Nay,  answer  me  :  for  so  much  courtesy  230 

I  should  not  miss  from  you,  nor  ye  from  me. 

Ne.   Friend,  first  know  this,  that,  as  we  seem,  we  are — 
Greeks.     For  of  this  thou  wouldst  be  satisfied. 

Phil.   O  welcome  speech  !     O  rapture,  but  to  hear 
The  voice  of  such  an  one,  unheard  so  long ! 
What  need,  my  son,  what  impulse,  what  kind  wind, 
Guided  thy  bark  and  led  thee  to  these  shores  ? 
Speak,  tell  me  all,  instruct  me  who  thou  art. 

Ne.     The    wave-washed    Scyros    is    my    birthplace : 
homeward 
I  sail :  my  name  is  Neoptolemus,  240 

My  sire  Achilles.     I  have  told  thee  all. 

Phil.  O  son  of  country  dear,  and  dearest  sire, 
O  foster-child  of  Lycomedes  old, 
What  errand  brings  thee  here  ?  whence  dost  thou  sail  ? 

Ne.  From  Ilium  my  present  course  I  hold. 

Phil.  How?  surely  thou  wast  not  aboard  the  fleet, 
When  at  the  first  toward  Ilium  we  sailed  ? 

Ne.   In  that  emprise  wast  thou  participant  ? 

Phil.  My  son,  dost  thou  not  know  whom  thou  beholdest? 

Ne.  How  should  I  know,  on  whom  I  ne'er  set  eyes?  250 

Phil.  Nor  yet  my  name,  nor  rumour  of  that  grief 
At  all  hast  heard,  that  did  consume  my  life  ? 


PHILOCTETES.  379 


Ne.  All  that  thou  askest  is  to  me  unknown. 

Phil.  O  miserable,  O  hated  by  the  gods, 
Of  whose  sore  plight  not  even  to  my  home 
Hath  reached  the  fame,  nor  any  Grecian  land — 
But  they  who  cast  me  out,  the  impious  ones. 
Laugh  to  themselves  their  laughter,  and  my  disease 
Rankles  alway,  and  grows  from  bad  to  worse. 
O  child,  son  of  Achilles,  see  this  man —  260 

For  I  am  he  whose  fame  thou  hast  surely  heard, 
Lord  of  the  bow  of  Heracles,  the  son 
Of  Poeas,  Philoctetes,  whom  the  two 
Atreidae,  and  the  Cephallenian  king, 
Cast  out  with  scorn,  solitary  as  ye  see. 
With  a  fierce  malady  wasting,  stricken  down 
By  the  man-slaying  serpent's  furious  bite  : 
But  here,  my  son,  so  plagued,  they  cast  me  forth, 
And  left  me  all  alone,  from  sea-girt  Chryse  269 

AVhen  with  their  ships  they  sailed,  and  touched  this  shore. 
Then  on  the  beach,  beneath  a  sheltering  rock, 
Tired  with  long  tossing  on  the  wave,  I  slept : 
They  gladly  saw,  and  left  me  and  were  gone, 
And  left  with  me  nought  but  a  few  poor  rags. 
Matching  my  misery,  and  a  little  food, 
A  scant  supply,  may  heaven  give  them  the  like ! 
Bethink  thee,  boy,  what  waking  then  was  mine, 
When  from  my  sleep  I  rose,  and  they  were  gone ! 
And  how  I  wept  aloud,  and  shrieked  reproaches, 


38o  PHILOCTETES. 


Seeing  indeed  the  ships  with  which  I  sailed 

All  gone,  and  no  man  in  the  place,  not  one  280 

To  help  me — no  one  who  to  me,  distrest. 

Could  minister  in  my  sickness  :  all  ways  round 

I  gazed  and  nothing  found  save  pain  to  see. 

Yea,  and  of  this  great  plenteousness,  my  son ! 

So  passed  the  hours — lingeringly  they  passed — 

And  I  was  fain,  lone,  in  my  narrow  home, 

Upon  myself  to  wait.     My  hunger's  needs 

This  bow  supplied,  and  on  the  wing  brought  down 

The  feathered  fowls  o'  the  air :  then,  what  my  shaft. 

Sped  from  the  tightened  string,  had  struck,  to  this        290 

I  wretched  crawled,  trailing  my  luckless  foot — 

To  this  :  and  if  of  water  I  had  need, 

Or  when  the  wintry  ground  was  strewn  with  rime. 

And  faggots  were  to  break,  then  would  I  creep 

Forth,  as  I  might,  to  compass  this ;  and  then 

Fire  I  had  none,  but  striking  flint  on  flint  S 

The  hidden  flame  I  found — whereby  I  live. 

Nay,  for  a  roof  o'erhead,  and  fire  to  boot,  « 

Gives  all  a  man  may  lack — save  health  to  me. 

Come  now,  my  son,  hear  what  a  land  is  this.  300 

No  mariner  comes  near  it,  of  his  will : 

For  haven  it  has  none,  nor  mart  whereat 

He  shall  make  gain  of  traffic,  or  be  lodged.  | 

Men  who  are  wise  set  not  their  sails  this  way.  ' 

Yet  some  touch  here,  unwilling :  for  such  things 


PHIL  OCTE  TES.  38 1 


Sometimes  must  happen  in  the  lapse  of  years  : 

But  these,  my  son,  whene'er  they  come,  in  word 

Are  kind  enough,  and  some  perchance  will  give  me 

A  little  food  or  raiment,  pitying  me ; 

But  this  they  will  not,  when  I  speak  of  this —  310 

Convey  me  hence ;  and  'tis  the  tenth  year  now 

I  die  this  living  death,  poor  starving  wretch. 

Drained  of  my  strength  by  this  insatiate  sore. 

From  the  Atreidae  have  I  suffered  this, 

And  from  Odysseus  :  may  the  gods  in  heaven 

Requite  them  for  my  wrongs  like  things  to  bear ! 

Cho7'.  Methinks  that  like  thy  former  visitors 
I  also  pity  thee,  O  son  of  Poeas. 

Ne.  I  bear  thee  witness  :  this  which  thou  hast  spoken — 
I  know  'tis  truth,  how  vile  the  Atreidae  are,  320 

And  mightiness  of  Odysseus,  having  learnt, 

Phil.   How  then  ?  against  these  cursed  sons  of  Atreus 
Hast  thou  withal  some  grudge,  by  wrongs  enraged  ? 

Ne.  Oh  that  my  hand  might  execute  my  rage  : 
So  should  Mycenae,  so  should  Sparta  learn, 
A  mother  of  valiant  sons  is  Scyros  too. 

Phil.  'Tis  a  good  wish.     But  wherefore  art  thou  come, 
Against  their  lives  denouncing  thy  fierce  wrath  ? 

Ne.  O  son  of  Poeas,  I  know  not  how  to  tell. 
But  yet  I  will,  the  story  of  my  wrongs.  330 

When  the  death-doom  upon  Achilles  fell 

Phil.  Alas^ — no  more,  until  I  first  know  this  : 


382  PHILOCTETES. 

The  son  of  Peleus — say  you,  he  is  dead  ? 

Ne.  Yea,  dead ;  by  no  man  slain,  but  by  a  god ; 
An  arrow  of  Phoebus  smote  him,  and  he  died. 

Fhil.  Noble  were  both,  the  slayer  and  the  slain  : 
Of  these  two  things  I  doubt,  which  first  to  do — 
More  of  thy  wrongs  inquire,  or  weep  for  him. 

Ne.  I  think  indeed  that  thou  hast  grief  enough, 
Ev'n  of  thine  own — keep  all  thy  tears  for  that.  340 

Phil.  'Tis  wisely  counselled.    Therefore  tell  thy  tale — 
Begin  again  and  tell  it — how  wronged  they  thee  ? 

Ne.  Godlike  Odysseus  in  a  gay-prowed  vessel 
Came,  and  the  foster-father  of  my  sire. 
To  seek  me,  saying — but,  if  their  tale  was  true 
Or  false,  I  know  not — that,  my  sire  being  dead, 
Troy  could  be  taken  by  no  arm  but  mine. 
They  with  such  tidings  held  me  not  long  time 
A  lingerer  from  sailing  with  all  speed — 
First,  as  I  yearned  after  my  father  slain,  350 

To  see  him,  yet  unburied,  whom  alive 
I  saw  not :  and  that  promise  too  was  fair, 
If  sailing  I  should  sack  the  towers  of  Troy. 
And  so  I  sailed,  and  on  the  second  day 
The  good  ship  with  good  winds  to  help  drew  nigh 
The  cape  Sigeian ;  and,  landing,  all  the  host 
Pressed  round  me  straight,  to  greet  me,  and  they  swore 
They  saw  the  dead  Achilles,  come  to  life. 
He  then  lay  dead ;  and  I  the  miserable. 


PHILOCTETES.  383 

When  I  had  wept  for  him  a  little  while,  360 

Came  to  the  good  Atreidae,  as  was  fit, 
And  asked  my  father's  arms,  and  what  was  his : 
Oh  'twas  a  shameless  word  they  spoke  to  me : 

*  Son  of  Achilles,  all  else  that  was  thy  sire's 

Is  thine  to  choose — but  those  his  arms  belong 
Now  to  another,  to  Laertes'  son.' 
But  at  the  word,  weeping,  I  started  up, 
Rage  at  my  heart,  and  bitterly  I  spake  : 

*  What,  tyrant,  have  ye  dared,  without  my  leave. 

To  give  my  arms  away,  and  not  to  me  ? '  370 

Then  said  Odysseus,  for  he  chanced  at  hand, 

'  Yea,  boy,  and  rightly  have  they  given  them  : 

For  I  was  there,  and  saved  both  them  and  him.' 

I  answered  quick  in  wrath,  and  hurled  at  him 

With  all  hard  words  I  knew,  and  spared  of  none, 

If  he  should  take  from  me  my  arms — my  own. 

For  all  his  meekness,  when  it  came  to  this — 

Stung  at  the  things  he  heard,  thus  he  returned  : 

'  Thou  wast  not,  where  thy  place  was,  there  with  me  ! 

And,  since  thy  speech  is  rude,  I'll  tell  thee  this —    380 

Thou  shalt  not  sail  to  Scyros  with  these  arms.' 

So,  since  I  heard  him  scorn  and  flout  me  thus, 

I  sail  for  home,  and  yonder  knave,  fit  son 

Of  knavish  sire,  Odysseus,  has  my  arms. 

But,  more  than  him,  I  count  the  kings  to  blame. 

The  rulers  make  the  city  and  the  camp  : 


384  PHILOCTETES. 


And  all  the  mischief  in  the  world  is  done 

By  evil  teaching  that  bears  evil  fruit. 

The  tale  is  told  :  and,  who  the  Atreidae  hates, 

To  heaven,  as  to  me,  may  he  be  dear  1  390 

Chor.         O  haunting  the  mountain,  \Strophe, 

Life-sustaining  of  all  that  lives, 
Earth,  mother  of  Zeus  himself — 
For  whom  the  great  Pactolus  river  rolls  over  sands  of  gold — 
There  also,  mistress  Mother,  I  called  on  thee — 
When  on  this  man  sheer  scorn  the  Atreidae  poured — 
On  thee,  O  lady,  riding  on  lions, 
(Strong  to  rend  bulls,  but  tame  for  thee) — 
What  time  they  gave  his  father's  arms  400 

To  the  son  of  Laertes,  a  peerless  prize.  W 

Phil.  O  good  my  friends,  it  seems  ye  come  to  me 
With  passport  most  familiar,  this  your  grief: 
Too  well  ye  chime  with  me  :  too  well  appear 
The  Atreidae  and  Odysseus  in  your  tale. 
I  know  indeed  his  tongue  would  stick  at  nought, 
Neither  base  speech  nor  villainy,  whereby  i 

He  should  achieve  nought  honest  in  the  end. 
No  marvel  this  to  me  :  but  was  indeed 
Great  Ajax  there,  and  did  he  bear  to  see  it  ? 

Ne.   Ajax,  O  friend,  was  dead  :  had  Ajax  lived, 
I  had  not  thus  been  robbed  of  what  was  mine. 

Phil,  How  say  you  ?     Is  he  also  dead  and  gone  ? 

Ne.  So  deem  of  him — no  longer  in  the  light. 


I 


PHILOCTETES.  385 


r 


Phil.  Alas  the  day!     But  Tydeus'  son,  and  he 
Whom  from  false  Sisyphus  Laertes  bought — 
They  will  not  die ;  who  better  had  not  lived. 

Ne.  Not  they :  be  sure  of  that.     Oh  no,  they  live, 
And  prosper  mightily  in  the  Argive  host.  420 

Phil.  What  of  the  old  and  good,  true  friend  to  me. 
The  Pylian  Nestor  ?     With  sage  counsels  oft 
Would  he  refrain  the  mischief  of  the  rest. 

Ne.  A  hard  lot  now  is  his  :  for  now  he  mourns 
For  dead  Antilochus,  his  warrior  son. 

Phil.  Alas,  two  words  of  unmixed  woe  thou  speakest — 
Men  of  whose  death  I  least  had  wished  to  hear. 
Alas  the  day!  where  shall  I  look,  when  these 
Are  dead,  and  here  again — Odysseus  lives  ;  429 

Where  would  thou  hadst  told  me  he,  for  them,  had  died ! 

Ne.  A  clever  wrestler  he  :  but  clever  plans, 

0  Philoctetes,  oft  are  frustrated. 

Phil.   He  whom  thy  father  loved,  Patroclus — say, 

1  pray  thee,  where  in  this  thy  need  was  he  ? 

Ne.  He  like  the  rest  was  dead :  in  one  short  word 
Take  all  the  truth  of  this  :  an  evil  man 
War  does  not  love  to  slay,  but  still  the  brave. 

Phil.  Ay,  there  thou  speakest  true ;  and  on  that  hint 
I'll  speak,  and  ask  thee  of  a  worthless  wight. 
One  shrewd  of  tongue  and  clever — what  now  of  him  ?  440 

Ne.  Who  should  this  be  if  he  were  not  Odysseus  ? 

Phil.  Not  him  I  meant,  but  there  was  one  Thersites, 

2  B 


386 


PHILOCTETES. 


Who  ever  chose  his  windiest  phrase,  when  men 
Were  weariest :  knowest  thou  if  still  he  lives  ? 

Ne.   I  saw  him  not,  but  heard  that  he  yet  lived. 

Phil.  He  could  not  miss.     Never  aught  evil  perished, 
But  of  all  such  the  gods  take  tender  care. 
I  think  the  knavish  and  case-hardened  ones 
They  love  to  turn  back  from  the  doors  of  death ; 
But  still  of  just  and  good  make  swift  despatch.  450. 

How  should  I  deem  of  this,  how  praise,  when  I 
Praising  their  deeds,  find  still  the  gods  unjust  ? 

Ne.   But  I,  O  son  of  an  Oetaean  sire. 
Henceforth  shall  take  good  heed,  Troy  and  the  sons 
Of  Atreus  not  to  see,  save  from  afar  : 
And,  where  the  worse  is  mightier  than  the  good, 
And  brave  men  fail  and  talkers  bear  the  sway — 
The  men  who'd  have  it  so,  I'll  not  endure ; 
But  me  the  rocks  of  Scyros  shall  suffice 
Henceforth,  nor  will  I  seek  another  home. 
Now  to  my  ship  I  go.     O  son  of  Poeas, 
Farewell — thine  utmost,  well :  and  may  the  gods 
Release  thee  from  thy  sickness  as  thou  wouldst. 
But  let  us  go  :  for,  whensoe'er  the  god 
Allows  our  voyage,  then  we  must  depart. 

Phil.  Go  ye,  my  son,  so  soon  ? 

Ne.  Occasion  calls  us, 

Not  far  but  near,  for  favouring  winds  to  watch. 

Phil.  O  boy,  for  father's  sake,  and  mother's  sake. 


PHILOCTETES.  387 

And  aught  that  in  thy  home  thou  holdest  dear, 

For  pity  I  pray,  leave  me  not  thus  alone,  470 

Forsaken  in  what  miseries  ye  see, 

Dwelling  with  ills,  how  many  ye  have  heard. 

Make  me  thine  afterthought.     In  bearing  me, 

I  know  that  ye  will  bear  a  noisome  freight. 

Yet  bear  with  me.     Surely  to  noble  souls 

Shameful  is  hateful,  glorious  is  the  good. 

No  fair  reproach  thou'lt  win,  declining  this ; 

Great  meed  of  glory,  doing  it,  my  son. 

To  Oeta's  land  if  I  be  brought  alive. 

Go  :  not  one  whole  day  does  this  task  employ  :        480 

Consent ;  where'er  thou  wilt,  aboard  thy  ship. 

Set  me,  in  hold,  or  stem,  or  stern,  where  least 

Those  in  the  ship  my  presence  shall  offend. 

As  Zeus  above  regards  thee,  hear  my  prayer : 

Deny  me  not — lo,  at  thy  knees  I  fall. 

Maimed  as  I  am  and  helpless.     Leave  me  not, 

Forsaken  here,  far  from  the  haunts  of  men  : 

But  either  to  thine  own  home  bring  me  safe, 

Or  to  Euboea's  strand,  Chalcodon's  realm ; 

To  Oeta  thence  short  passage  shall  be  mine,  490 

And  to  the  ridge  Trachinian,  and  the  fair 

Spercheius  stream,  and  to  my  father's  sight — 

My  father,  of  whom  'tis  long  that  I  have  feared 

Lest  he  be  dead.     For  oft  by  those  who  came 

Full  many  a  sad  entreaty  have  I  sent. 


PHJLOCTETES. 


Tkatht 


hdtai^^mrkt 


iiisir9fke. 


PM/LOCTETJSS.  A 

Mi  }i9f  then,  I  am  sdiamed  tD  hg  bcliiiid» 
When  tlKm  ait  ei^Ser  to  befriend  the  man^ 
So  sail  ire  tlieii ;  let  him  aboard  widi  haste : 
The  ship  will  bear  him — it  shall  not  be  refosed 
Only  may  heaipen  h^  us  from  this  land, 
And  whither  oar  purpose  is  from  hence  to  sail 

JPkH  O  most  ^adday,  and  most  bdoved  of  men,  S9» 
And  ye^  kind  saikxs,  would  that  it  m^t  ajqpear, 
£\ien  by  my  acts,  how  giatefol  ye  have  made  me^ 
But  ere  we  go,  my  son,  let  ns  salute 
My  home,  no  home^  P  tfie  rode — that  diou  may^  leam 
On  what  I  lived,  and  what  I  haTe  endured 
I  diink  diat  any  odier  man  dian  I 
Would  scaice  haTe  boine  bdioldii^  but  the  s^^ : 
But  I  petlbrce  was  sdKXiled  to  bear  my  lot 

Clin  Stay,  let  us  leam :  for  hither  two  men  come^ 
One  from  thy  shq)^  a  sailor — a  stranger  one —  9«» 

Hear  fiist  their  enand — afteiwaids  go  in. 

Jftr.  Son  of  AchOles,  diy  companion  here. 
Who  with  two  more  was  1^  to  guard  thy  ship^ 
I  charged  to  tdl  me  of  thy  whereabouts— 
By  meie  goodlod:,  no  forediou(^t,  haring  chanced 
With  thee  to  anchor  on  the  sdfeame  ^Kxe^ 
For  homeward  now  from  Dium  as  I  sailed. 
With  no  great  fleet,  but  master  of  my  ship^ 
To  Pqpaiethus  with  its  dustenng  vines — 
And  heard  that  of  diy  company  were  all 


390  PHILOCTETES.       ' 

The  sailors  here — so  I  resolved,  that  not  550 

In  silence,  speaking  first  to  thee,  would  I 

Go  forward,  dealing  with  thee  as  was  just. 

I  think  thou  knowest  not  of  thine  own  affairs, 

What  new  designs  the  Argives  entertain 

Concerning  thee — nay,  not  designs,  but  deeds 

Already  in  act,  no  longer  left  undone. 

JVe.   My  gratitude,  good  friend,  for  thy  good  care 
Shall  in  all  love  abide,  or  prove  me  base. 
But  tell  me  all  thy  tidings,  let  me  know  559 

What  new-hatched  plot  of  the  Argives  thou  hast  learnt. 

Mer.  The  old  man  Phoenix  and  the  sons  of  Theseus 
Have  hoisted  sail  and  gone  in  quest  of  thee. 

JVe.  To  bring  me  back  by  force  or  argument  ? 

Mer.  I  know  not :  I  but  tell  thee  what  I  heard. 

JVe.  Do  Phoenix  and  the  sons  of  Theseus  this 
For  the  Atreidae's  sake  so  zealously  ? 

JkTer.  This  thing,  know  well,  they  do,  and  purpose 
not. 

JVe.  Was  not  Odysseus  ready  to  sail  forth 
On  his  own  errand  ?     Did  some  fear  withhold  him  ? 

Jkfer.  He  and  the  son  of  Tydeus  were  about  570 

To  seek  another  man,  when  I  set  sail. 

JVe.  Whom  might  Odysseus  sail  himself  to  seek  ? 

Jlfer.  'Twas  one — But  tell  me  first  of  yonder  man, 
Who  is  he  ?     And  what  you  say,  speak  not  aloud. 

JVe.  Thou  seest  the  famous  Philoctetes,  friend. 


PHILOCTETES. 


391 


Mer.   Inquire  no  more  of  me.     Take  thyself  off, 
And  with  all  speed  out  of  this  land  begone. 

Phil.  What  says  he,  boy?   What  dark  words  whispers  he 
To  thee — and  makes  his  merchandise  of  me  ? 

Ne.  I  know  not  yet :  but,  what  he  speaks,  he  shall  580 
Jpeak  out,  for  thee  and  me  and  these  to  hear. 

Mer.  O  son  of  Achilles,  do  not  to  the  host 
Lccuse  me,  saying  things  that  I  should  not : 
•"or  many  a  good  turn,  as  a  poor  man  may, 

for  my  doing  receive  again  from  them. 

Ne.  I  love  not  the  Atreidae ;  and  this  man, 
lecause  he  hates  them,  is  right  dear  to  me. 
[Then,  if  thou  camest  as  my  friend,  no  word 
[Hide  thou  from  me,  of  all  that  thou  hast  learnt. 

Mer.  Take  heed,  boy,  what  thou  doest. 

Ne.  I  have  considered. 

Mer.  Thine  be  the  guilt. 

Ne.  So  be  it,  only  speak.       590 

Mer.  Thus  then.     For  this  man  they  of  whom  I  spake, 
'he  son  of  Tydeus  and  Odysseus'  might, 
Jail  hither,  having  sworn  to  bring  him  back, 
lither  by  argument  or  strong  constraint, 
ind  this  distinctly  all  the  Achaeans  heard 
Idysseus  promise.     For  he,  more  than  the  other, 
^as  confident  that  he  would  do  this  thing. 

Ne.  But  wherefore  did  the  Atreidae  for  this  man. 
After  so  long  a  time,  so  greatly  care, 


392  PHILOCTETES. 


Whom  all  these  years  they  had  cast  out  and  left  ?         6oc 
What  longing  fell  en  them,  or  might  and  wrath 
Of  heaven,  requiting  thus  their  evil  deeds  ? 

Mer.  I,  for  perchance  thou  hast  not  heard  this  thing, 
Will  tell  thee  all.     There  was  a  noble  seer, 
A  son  of  Priam,  Helenus  by  name  : 
Him,  going  alone  i'  the  night,  this  man,  of  whom 
Are  spoken  all  shameful  and  opprobrious  words. 
Wily  Odysseus,  took,  and  leading  captive 
Showed  openly  to  the  Greeks,  a  goodly  prize : 
Who  prophesied  to  them  what  else  they  asked,  6io 

And  that  the  towers  of  Troy  they  should  not  sack, 
Unless  they  should  persuade  this  man  with  words. 
And  bring  him  from  this  island  where  he  dwells. 
And  the  son  of  Laertes,  when  he  heard  the  word 
O'  the  prophet,  promised  them  straightway  that  he 
Would  bring  the  man  and  show  him  to  the  Greeks — 
Most  like,  he  thought,  consenting  to  be  taken, 
If  not,  why  then  by  force  :  and,  if  he  failed, 
Who  would  might  from  his  shoulders  take  his  head. 
Thou  hast  heard  all :  and  for  thyself,  be  warned,         tio 
And  any  whom  thou  wouldst  save,  no  time's  to  lose. 

Phil.  Alas  the  day  !     Did  he,  that  utter  bane, 
Swear  to  persuade  and  carry  me  to  the  Greeks  ? 
As  soon,  once  dead,  persuade  me  to  come  back, 
From  Hades,  like  his  father,  to  the  light. 

Mer.   How  that  may  be,  I  know  not :  but  I  must 


PHILOCTETES. 


393 


Back  to  my  ship  begone,  and  may  the  god, 
Ev'n  with  his  best  of  help,  befriend  you  both. 

Phil.  O  boy,  how  say  you,  seems  it  not  outrageous, 
The  son  of  Laertes  should  so  fondly  deem 
That  me  with  honeyed  words  he  could  convey 
On  shipboard  hence,  and  shew  me  to  the  Greeks  ?       630 
Nay,  sooner  my  worst  enemy,  that  serpent, 
That  made  me  thus  a  cripple,  would  I  hear. 
But  nought  will  he  not  utter,  nought  will  he 
,Not  dare.     And  soon,  I  know,  he  will  be  here. 
^Let  us  be  going,  my  son ;  that  from  the  ship 
Of  Odysseus  many  a  league  of  sea  may  part  us. 

Chor.  Go  we.     'Tis  the  good  speed  in  the  good  season, 
:  That's  fraught  with  sleep  and  rest,  when  toil  is  o'er. 
Ne.  So  let  it  be.     Soon  as  the  head-wind  drops, 
.Then  we  will  sail :  for  now  it  sets  against  us.  640 

Phil.  'Tis  ever  fair  sailing,  when  one  flees  from  ill. 
Ne.  Nay,  but  no  less  to  them  these  skies  are  adverse. 
Phil.  No  wind's  to  pirates  adverse,  when  there's  chance 
>f  stealing,  or  of  plundering  by  force. 
Ne.  Be  it  as  thou  wilt.     Go,  taking  from  within 
fcAll  that  thou  needest  or  desirest  most. 

Phil.  Some  things  indeed  I  need,  though  small  the 

choice. 
Ne.  What  is  it  that  in  my  ship  is  not  already  ? 
Phil.  There  is  a  friendly  herb,  wherewith  alway 
[y  wound  is  lulled,  and  all  its  pain  assuaged.  650 


394  PHILOCTETES. 

Ne.  This  then  bring   out — what  else,  now,   wouldst 
thou  take  ? 

Phil.  Some  shaft,  unnoted,  may  have  sUpped  aside, 
Which  here  I  must  not  leave  for  men  to  find. 

Ne.  Is  this  the  famous  bow,  that  now  thou  boldest  ? 

Phil.  This,  and  no  other,  which  my  hands  now  wield. 

Ne.  May  I  have  leave  to  gaze  upon  it  close. 
And  handle  it,  and  adore  it  as  a  god  ? 

Phil.  This  thou  shalt  have,  and  aught  that  I  can  do. 
My  son,  that  may  to  thee  be  serviceable. 

Ne.  I  do  indeed  desire  it — on  this  wise  :  660 

If  so  I  may,  I  would  ;  if  not,  let  be. 

Phil.  A  reverent  speech:  'tis  granted  thee,  my  son — 
For  thou  alone  hast  given  me  to  behold 
This  hght  o'  the  sun,  and  the  Oetaean  land. 
My  aged  father,  and  my  friends  at  home  : 
All's  thine — and  from  beneath  my  enemies'  feet 
Thou  hast  uplifted  me  beyond  them  all. 
Fear  not :  thou  shalt  have  leave  to  handle  these, 
And  give  them  freely  back  to  me  who  gave. 
And  boast  aloud  that  thou  alone  of  men 
Hast  touched  them,  for  thy  kindness'  sake  to  me. 
For  by  a  good  deed  I  myself  obtained  them.  670 

Ne.  To  have  seen  and  proved  thee  friend,  repents  me 
not : 
For,  whoso  knows  to  render  good  for  good. 
More  than  all  wealth  I  count  his  friendship  dear. 


PHILOCTETES.  395 

Go  now  within. 

Phil.  And  thou  shalt  go  with  me  : 

For  now  my  sickness  craves  thy  present  help. 

Chor.   His  fame  I  have  heard,  not  seen  him  with  my 
eyes,  [Strophe  i. 

^Who  to  the  couch  of  Zeus  made  rash  approach, 

[ow  to  the  circling  wheel  with  chains 
[Him  the  almighty  son  of  Cronos  bound  :  680 

'But  of  no  other  wight  I  know, 
}y  hearing  or  by  sight, 
^''ho  with  a  fate  so  cruel  as  this  man  here 
[Encountered — who,  none  having  harmed  or  robbed, 
equal  dealer  among  equal  men, 
i'ound  all  unworthily  this  lingering  death : 
)0  that  I  marvel  how,  how  ever  all  alone, 
[earing  the  billows  beating  on  the  shore, 
[ow  he  endured  such  life  consumed  with  grief —        690 
[ere,  his  own  neighbour,  crippled  of  his  feet;  \Antistr.  i. 
id  mate  of  his  misery  in  the  place  was  none, 
[one  in  whose  ears  he  might  weep  out 
[is  woe,  and  wake  response — woe  that  devoured 
[is  heart  with  pain  and  drained  his  blood ; 
[one  who  might  stanch  and  soothe, 
^ith  healing  herbs  plucked  from  the  fruitful  earth, 
le  burning  oozing  issue,  when  it  plagued 
[is  wounded  and  infuriate  foot.  700 

lut  he  would  crawl,  dragging  himself  along, 


396  PHILOCTETES. 


As  helpless  as  a  child  with  no  kind  nurse  to  lead, 

Now  here,  now  there,  whence  he  might  find  relief — 

When  for  a  space  the  gnawing  pain  forbore. 

And  never  for  his  food  might  he  obtain  [Strophe  2. 

Fruit  of  the  sacred  earth, 

Nor  aught  beside,  that  we 

Gain-getting  sons  of  men  call  ours,  703 

Save  when  with  winged  shafts  from  his  far-shooting  bow 

Food  for  his  hunger  he  might  procure — 

O  wretched  soul. 

Who  never  these  ten  long  years 

Was  with  the  juice  of  the  vine  refreshed. 

But  ever  looked  for  any  standing  pool  he  knew, 

Bending  his  steps  to  that. 

Now  meeting  with  a  son  of  noble  men,      \Antistrophe  2,| 

He  from  his  grief  shall  win 

To  greatness  and  to  bliss — 

Meeting  with  one,  who  now  at  last. 

After  so  many  months,  on  shipboard  carries  him 

Over  the  sea  to  his  home,  the  haunt 

Of  Melian  nymphs. 

On  banks  of  Spercheius,  where 

Lo  in  a  glory  of  god-sent  fire 

The  lord  of  the  brazen  shield  a  god  to  the  gods  ascem 

From  O  eta's  heights  upborne. 

Ne.  Come,  if  thou  wilt.     Say  why  without  a  cause  730^ 
Standest  thou  mute,  thus  by  amazement  seized  ? 


PHILOCTETES.  397 


Phil.  Ah  woe  is  me  ! 

Ne.  What  ails  thee  ? 

Phil.  Heed  it  not.     Go  on,  my  son. 

Ne.  Art  thou  tormented  by  the  returning  pain  ? 
^^L    Phil.  Not  so,  but  now  methinks  the  pang  is  past. — 
^Ho  gods ! 

^B     Ne.         Why  on  the  gods  dost  thou  cry  out  ? 
^B     Phil.  That  they  would  help,  and  ease  me  of  my  pain. 
^^  Alas,  woe's  me  ! 

Ne.  How  is't  with  thee  ?     Speak  out      74° 

And  hide  it  not.     Something's  amiss,  'tis  plain. 

Phil.  O  child,  I  am  undone  :  I  cannot  hide 
This  trouble  from  you.     Ah,  through  me  it  goes, 
And  through,  and  through.     Unhappy,  woe  is  me  ! 
O  boy,  I  am  undone,  devoured  by  pain. 
Out  and  alas  !     Now,  by  the  gods,  my  son. 
If  ready  to  thy  hand  thou  hast  a  sword. 
Strike,  and  strike  deep,  unto  my  very  heel : 
Stay  not,  but  smite  it  off :  spare  not  my  life. 
Quick,  O  my  son  !  750 

Ne.  What  is  this  suffering, 

So  fresh,  so  sudden,  for  the  which  thou  dost 
Lament  thyself  with  such  a  bitter  cry  ? 

Phil.  Thou  knowest,  child. 

Ne.  What  is  it  ? 

Phil.  Boy,  thou  knowest. 

Ne.  Say,  what  ?     I  know  not. 


398  PHILOCTETES. 


Phil  How  knowest  thou  not? 

Alas  again,  and  evermore  alas  ! 

Ne.  Dire  is  the  burden  of  thy  malady. 

Phil.  Dire  truly,  past  all  telling.     But  have  pity. 

Ne.  What  should  I  do  ? 

Phil.  Forsake  me  not  for  fear. 

For  this  at  intervals  comes  back,  belike 
With  wandering  when  'tis  sated. 

Ne.  Hapless  thou. 

Hapless  indeed  in  sorest  suffering  proved  !  760 

What,  shall  I  then  take  hold  ?  wouldst  thou  be  touched  ? 

Phil.  Nay,  touch  me  not :  but,  even  as  just  now 
Thou  didst  desire,  take  thou  this  bow,  and  till 
This  spasm  of  pain  go  by,  that  now  has  seized  me, 
Keep  it  with  heed.     For,  when  the  torment  passes, 
A  slumber  steals  on  me  :  none  otherwise 
Is  it  appeased :  but  ye  must  let  me  sleep 
Unvexed.     And  if  meanwhile  my  foes  should  come. 
By  heaven  I  charge  thee,  yield  not  up  the  bow, 
Nor  willing  nor  unwilling,  nor  deceived  770 

By  trickery,  to  them,  lest  thou  shouldst  prove, 
With  me,  thy  suppliant,  to  have  slain  thyself. 

Ne.  Fear  not  my  prudence.     None  but  thou  and  I 
Shall  touch  it.     So,  with  good  fortune,  give  it  me. 

Phil.  Lo  there,  boy,  take  it :  and  to  the  jealousy 
Of  heaven  make  thou  obeisance,  that  to  thee 
It  may  not  prove  full-fraught  with  misery. 


\ 


PHILOCTETES. 


399 


Nor  as  to  me  and  to  its  former  lord. 

Ne.  Ye  gods,  grant  to  us  twain  these  things  :  and  grant 
A  swift  and  prosperous  course,  whithersoe'er  780 

The  god  requires,  and  whither  our  sails  are  set. 

Phil.  Ah  but  I  fear,  my  son,  thy  prayer  is  vain. 
[Again  the  blood  wells  in  a  sanguine  tide 
From  my  deep  wound  :  and  worse  methinks  will  follow. 
[Alas  !  and  yet  again 

[Alas  !  how,  O  my  foot,  thou  wilt  undo  me  ! 
[t  creeps  upon  me  :  nearer 
[t  comes,  and  nearer.     Ah  me,  me,  alas ! 
[Ye  know  all  now  :  ah  nowise  flee  from  me  ! 
[Out  and  alas  ! 

Cephallenian  friend,  that  through  thy  breast  790 

Juch  pain  might  pierce  and  fasten  on  thy  heart ! 
'Ah  agony  ! 

Agony  yet  again  !     O  chieftains  twain, 
Agamemnon  thou,  and  thou,  O  Menelaus, 
Would  that  instead  of  me  ye  with  your  blood 
Might  feed,  no  less  a  time,  this  fell  disease ! 
Ah  me,  me  ! 

O  death,  death,  death,  how  called  and  called  again, 
Each  day  that  dawns,  comest  thou  not  at  last  ? 
O  son,  O  noble  boy,  come,  take  me  up. 
And  in  yon  Lemnian  fire,  the  oft-invoked,  800 

Consume  me,  as  thou'rt  noble  :  for  so  did  I 
To  the  son  of  Zeus  consent,  for  meed  of  the  arms 


400  PHILOCTETES. 

Which  now  thou  guardest,  such  a  boon  to  grant. 

Speak,  boy,  what  sayest  thou  ? 

Why  art  thou  mute  ?     Where  are  thy  thoughts,  my  son  ? 

Ne.  My  heart  was  heavy  for  thy  weight  of  woe. 

Phil.  Yet,  good  my  son,  take  courage  :  for  this  pain 
Sudden  and  sharp  returns,  and  swiftly  goes. 
Only,  I  pray  thee,  leave  me  not  alone.  809 

Ne.  Fear  not. 

Phil.  Wilt  thou  remain  ? 

Ne.  Be  sure,  I  will. 

Phil.   I  may  not  bind  thee  with  an  oath,  my  son. 

Ne.  I  am  not  free  to  go  and  leave  thee  here. 

Phil.  Give  me  thy  hand  for  pledge. 

Ne.  That  I  will  stay. 

By  this  right  hand  I  promise. 

Phil.  Now  yonder  bring  me, 

Yonder. 

Ne.        Whither  wouldst  thou  be  brought  ? 

Phil  Up  higher. 

Ne.  What  now  distracts  thee  ?  wherefore  dost  thou 
gaze 
Upon  the  vault  of  heaven? 

Phil.  Unhand,  unhand  me. 

Ne.  Whither  wouldst  thou  go  ?  J 

Phil.  Loose  me,  I  say. 

Ne.  I  say 

Thou  shalt  not. 


PHILOCTETES.  401 


Phil.  Thou  wilt  slay  me  with  thy  touch. 

Ne.  I  loose  thee  then  :  perchance  thou  knowest  best. 

Phil.  Earth,  take  me  here  and  now,  at  point  to  die. 
The  pain  no  longer  lets  me  stand  upright.  Sao 

Ne.  Methinks  in  no  long  time  the  man  will  sleep. 
See  how  his  head  sinks  backward  to  the  ground. 
Now  over  all  his  limbs  the  sweat  is  poured : 
And  lo  a  dark-red  stream  of  spirting  blood 
Breaks  from  his  wounded  heel.     Friends,  come  away  : 
In  peace  we'll  leave  him,  so  on  sleep  to  fall.       \Strophe. 

Chor.  O  Sleep  unlearned  of  sorrow,  painless  Sleep, 
Hither,  soft-breathed,  we  pray  thee  come, 
Come  and  abide,  our  lord,  abide  : 

Screen  from  his  eyes  this  light  830 

That  now  intensely  glares  : 
Come,  healer,  come,  we  pray. — 
O  son,  bethink  thee  now 
Where  wilt  thou  stand,  or  whither  go  ? 
How  hence  resolves  thy  thought  ? 
Thou  seest,  now  is  the  time. 
Why  should  we  wait  to  do  this  deed  ? 
Ever  occasion,  when  it  shapes  the  course. 
Upon  the  instant  wins  great  gain  for  men. 

Ne.  But,  though  he  nothing  hears,  yet  I  see  this. 
That  vainly  have  we  made  our  prize  this  bow, 
If  hence  we  sail  and  leave  the  man  behind.  840 


His  is  the  glory,  him  the  god  bade  bring. 

2  c 


402  PHILOCTETES. 

Foul  shame,  to  falsely  boast  a  task  undone  ! 

Chor,  But,  O  my  son,  let  the  god  look  to  that.    \Ant. 
But,  when  thou  answerest  me  again. 
Breathe  low,  I  pray  thee,  low,  my  son, 
The  voice  of  thy  reply. 
Sleepless  is  sick  men's  sleep, 
Quick-eyed,  perceiving  all. 
But  now,  far  as  thou  canst, 

Devise  how  secretly  that  task,  850 

That  task,  thou  shalt  perform. 
For  .  .  .  whom  I  mean  thou  knowest  .  .  . 
I  name  them  not  ...  if,  urged  by  them. 
This  course  thou  boldest,  to  a  prudent  view 
With  troubles  insurmountable  'tis  fraught. 
The  wind,  my  son,  the  wind  sits  fair :  \Epode. 

And  reft  of  sight,  cut  off  from  help. 
The  man  stretched  out  in  darkness  lies, 
(Sleep  in  the  noontide  heat  is  sound,) 
Moving  not  hand  or  foot, 
But  robbed  of  all  his  powers — 

Like  one  who  Hes  at  point  to  die,  860 

With  no  more  sight  than  his. 
Look,  if  thy  speech  be  seasonable. 
For,  son,  if  thought  of  mine  can  seize  the  truth. 
The  enterprise  not  fraught  with  fear  is  best. 

Ne.  Keep  silence  :  start  not  from  thy  constant  mind. 
His  eyes  are  opening ;  now  he  lifts  his  head. 


PHILOCTETES. 


403 


Phil.  O  sunlight  after  sleep,  and,  by  my  hopes 
Undreamed  of,  watchful  care  of  these  my  friends  ! 
For  this,  my  son,  I  had  not  dared  to  boast, 
Thou  wouldst  endure  thus  for  my  pain  to  wait,         870 
Compassionately,  with  presence  and  with  help. 
Not  all  so  easily  to  bear  with  me 
Endured  the  Atreidae,  those  good  generals. 
But  noble-natured  of  a  noble  strain 
Thou,  O  my  son,  didst  of  these  things  make  light, 
Howe'er  oppressed  with  clamour  and  with  stench. 
And  now  that  all  my  pain  has  found,  it  seems, 
Forgetfulness  and  respite  for  a  while, 
Now  lift  me,  boy,  thyself,  upon  my  feet. 
That,  when  the  anguish  shall  release  me  quite,  880 

We  may  aboard  with  haste,  nor  stay,  but  sail. 

Ne.  Right  glad  am  I  to  see  thee,  past  all  hope. 
Freed  from  thy  pain,  living  and  breathing  still. 
For  as  of  one  who  was  no  more,  so  seemed. 
Regarding  then  thy  plight,  the  signs  of  thee. 
But  now  Hft  up  thyself;  or,  if  thou  wilt, 
These  men  shall  bear  thee  :  for  they  will  not  shrink. 
Since  thus  we  are  resolved,  both  thou  and  I. 

Phil.  My  son,  I  thank  thee ;  and,  as  thou  art  kind, 
Lift  me  :  let  be  these  men,  lest,  ere  the  time,  890 

They  with  the  stench  be  sickened  :  on  the  ship 
They'll  have  enough  to  bear,  to  dwell  with  me. 

Ne.  It  shall  be  so  :  rise,  and  thyself  hold  fast. 


i 


404  PHILOCTETES. 


Phil  Fear  not :  long  used  to  this,  I  shall  not  fall. 

Ne.  Alas,  what  should  I  do,  then,  after  this  ? 

Fhil.  My  son,   what  ails  thee?     Whither  starts  thy 
speech  ? 

Ne.  My  words  entangle  me  :  what  must  I  do  ? 

Phil  What  has  perplexed  thee  ?     Say  not  so,  my  son. 

Ne.  It  is  with  me  already  as  I  say. 

Phil.   Does  then  the  noisomeness  of  my  complaint    900 
Make  thee  repent?     Thou  wilt  not  bear  me  hence? 

Ne.  Whatever  is,  is  noisome,  when  a  man. 
False  to  his  nature,  does  what  he  should  not. 

Phil.  Neither  in  deed  nor  word  hast  thou  been  found 
Unlike  thy  sire,  helping  a  noble  man. 

Ne.  I  shall  be  found  base  :  this  distresses  me. 

Phil.  Not  in  thy  deeds  :  but  in  thy  words — I  doubt. 

Ne.  Zeus,  help  me  now  !     Must  I  prove  base  again — 
Hide  what  I  should  not,  and  speak  shameful  words  ? 

Phil.  This  man,  unless  my  judgment  greatly  errs,     91° 
Means  to  be  false,  and  sail  and  leave  me  here. 

Ne.   Not  leave  thee — no  :  but,  that  I  grieve  thee  more 
Bearing  thee  hence,  'tis  this  that  troubles  me. 

Phil  What  meanest  thou,  my  son?  thy  words  are  dark. 

Ne.  I  will  speak  out.     Thou  shalt  sail  hence  to  Troy, 
To  the  Greek  camp,  the  Atreidae  and  their  host. 

Phil.  Alas  !  how  sayest  thou  ? 

Ne.  Grieve  not,  but  hear. 

Phil.  What  must  I  hear  ?  what  wilt  thou  do  to  me  ? 


PHILOCTETES.  405 

Ne.  Rescue  thee  first  out  of  this  misery; 
Then  go,  lay  waste  with  thee  the  plains  of  Troy.  920 

Fhtl.  Wilt  thou  indeed  do  this  ? 

JVe.  Much  need  of  this 

Constrains  me  :  be  not  thou  incensed  to  hear  it 

Fhtl.  Miserable  that  I  am,  undone,  betrayed ! 
What  hast  thou  done  ?     Quickly  give  back  my  bow. 

Ne.  I  may  not  do  it.     For  to  obey  my  chiefs 
By  duty  and  advantage  I  am  bound. 

Fhtl.  Fire  that  thou  art,  and  monster  of  utter  fear, 
Fell  knavery's  most  hateful  masterpiece. 
What  hast  thou  done  to  me?  how  hast  thou  tricked  me? 
And  art  thou  not  ashamed  to  look  on  me, 
Thy  suppliant,  thy  petitioner — O  shameless?  930 

Taking  my  bow,  thou  hast  robbed  me  of  my  life. 
Give  back,  my  son,  I  pray  thee,  give  it  back. 
Nay,  by  our  country's  gods,  steal  not  my  life. 
Ah  me  unhappy  !     He  speaks  to  me  no  more  : 
His  face  makes  answer,  he  will  keep  his  prize. 
O  harbours,  and  O  headlands,  ye  wild  beasts 
Of  the  mountain,  comrades  mine — and  ye  steep  cliffs — 
To  you — I  know  not  else  to  whom — to  you, 
My  wonted  company,  I  cry  aloud 

What  things  Achilles'  son  has  done  to  me  :  940 

Swearing  to  bring  me  home,  to  Troy  he  takes  me : 
And,  spite  of  pledged  right  hands,  my  sacred  bow, 
The  bow  of  Heracles,  whom  Zeus  called  son, 


4o6  PHILOCTETES. 


Keeps,  and  to  the  Argive  host  would  fain  display. 

Even  as  some  mighty  man,  taken  by  his  strength, 

He  hales  me  hence ;  and  knows  not  that  he  slays 

One  dead  already,  shadow  of  a  smoke, 

Mere  phantom  of  a  man.     For  in  my  strength 

He  had  not  taken  me  :  since  even  thus 

He  could  not,  but  by  guile.     But  now,  entrapped, 

Luckless,  what  shall  I  do  ?     Nay,  but  give  back  ! 

Nay,  but  ev'n  now  be  master  of  thyself ! 

Speak  to  me.     Thou  art  silent.     I  am  nought  .  .   . 

.  .  .  O  two-mouthed  aspect  of  the  cave  I  know, 

Robbed,  and  without  the  means  to  live,  to  thee 

I  must  return,  and  there  beneath  thy  shade 

My  lonely  life  shall  waste  itself  away; 

And  no  winged  bird,  no  mountain-roaming  beast, 

These  shafts  shall  slay,  but  I  myself  shall  die, 

Unhappy,  and  make  a  feast  for  these,  whereby 

I  once  was  fed :  they  whom  I  hunted  then 

Shall  make  their  prey  of  me,  and  I  shall  render 

My  life  a  forfeit  for  the  lives  of  them — 

Slain  by  this  all  so  guileless-seeming  man. 

Perish — not  yet :  no,  not  until  I  learn 

If  thou  wilt  change  thy  purpose  still :  if  not — 

Miserably  I  pray  that  thou  may'st  die  ! 

Chor,  What  shall  we  do?     With  thee,   our  prince, 
remains 
That  we  should  sail  or  hearken  to  his  words. 


PHILOCTETES.  407 


Ne.  A  pang  of  pity  has  smitten  through  my  heart, 
Long  since,  not  only  now,  because  of  him. 

Phil.  By  heaven,  my  son,  have  pity,  and  suffer  not 
Reproach  of  men,  that  me  thou  didst  deceive. 

Ne.  What  shall  I  do  ?     Would  I  had  never  left 
Scyros  :  so  grieves  me  this  which  now  I  bear.  970 

Phil  Thou  art  not  base :  methinks  thou  hast  come 
hither, 
From  base  men  having  learnt  a  shameful  lesson. 
Leave  this  for  others,  for  whom  such  deeds  are  fit, 
And  sail  from  hence,  but  give  me  back  my  bow. 

Ne.  O  friends,  what  must  we  do  ?        \Odysseus  enters. 

Od.  Basest  of  men, 

What  dost  thou  ?     Back,  and  give  this  bow  to  me  ! 

Phil.  Ah,  who  is  this  ?     Odysseus  do  I  hear  ? 

Od.  Odysseus,  whom  thou  seest,  doubt  not,  am  L 

Phil.  Ah,  I  am  sold — undone  !     So  this  was  he 
Who  trapped  me  thus  and  robbed  me  of  my  arms  ? 

Od.  'Twas  I,  be  sure,  no  other :  I  confess  it.  980 

Phil.  O  boy,  give  back,  give  up,  to  me  the  bow. 

Od.  That  shall  he  not,  howe'er  he  would.     But  thou 
Thyself  withal  must  go  along  with  these. 
Or  they  shall  bring  thee  hence  by  force  away. 

Phil.  Basest  of  men  and  boldest,  me  shall  these 
Bear  hence  by  force  ? 

Od.  If  thou  go  not,  consenting. 

Phil.  O  Lemnian  land,  and  thou,  all-conquering  flame, 


4o8  PHILOCTETES. 


Hephaestos-kindled — how  may  this  be  borne, 

That,  from  thy  realm,  this  man  by  force  should  drag  me  ? 

Od.  Zeus,  let  me  tell  thee,  Zeus,  who  rules  this  land — 
'Tis  Zeus  that  so  will  have  it.     Him  I  serve.  990 

Phil.  Man  whom  I  hate,  what  wilt  thou  find  to  say  ? 
Prating  of  gods,  thy  gods  thou  makest  false. 

Od.  Not  so,  but  true.     Thou  must  go  hence  with  us. 

Phil.  I  will  not  go. 

Od.  I  say  thou  shalt.     Obey. 

Phil.  Ah  me,  unhappy  !     Plainly  my  father  then 
Begat  me  for  a  slave,  and  no  free  man. 

Od.  Not  so,  but  equal  with  the  best,  with  whom 
Thou  shalt  take  Troy,  and  lay  it  in  the  dust. 

Phil.  Never  :  not  though  I  must  endure  the  worst, 
So  long  as  here  I  stand  on  this  high  rock.  1000 

Od.  What  wouldst  thou  do  ? 

Phil.  Fling  myself  down  from  hence. 

And  dash  my  brains  out  on  the  rocks  below. 

Od.   Lay  hold  of  him.      Disarm  him  of  his  threats. 

Phil.  O  hands,  what  things  ye  suffer,  since  I  lack 
My  own  good  bow,  bound  by  this  man  his  prey. 
O  thou  most  base  and  most  ungenerous, 
How  hast  thou  stolen  upon  me — snared  me  how — 
Skulking  behind  this  boy,  whom  I  knew  not — 
Too  good  for  thee,  but  not  for  me  too  good — 
Who  knew  not  save  to  do  the  task  enjoined ;  loio 

But  even  now  conceals  not  his  remorse, 


PHILOCTETES.  409 


Both  for  his  own  fault  and  the  wrong  to  me. 

But  thy  base  soul,  still  from  its  ambush  peering, 

Taught  him  too  well,  albeit  unapt  and  loth. 

To  play  his  ill  part  with  the  proper  craft. 

And  now,  wretch,  wilt  thou  bind  me  hand  and  foot, 

And  drag  me  from  this  shore,  whereon  'twas  thou, 

Friendless,  forsaken,  citiless  didst  fling  me. 

Lifeless  among  the  living  ?     Woe  is  me  ! 

Full  often  have  I  cursed,  and  curse  thee  now. 

But,  for  the  gods  do  nought  of  my  desiring,  1020 

A  charmed  life  thou  leadest,  and  art  glad ; 

But  life  itself  is  bitterness  to  me, 

A  piteous  life,  consumed  with  misery. 

Mocked  at  by  thee  and  by  the  sons  of  Atreus, 

Thy  two  great  captains,  whom  thou  servest  here. 

Yet  thou,  ensnared  and  by  compulsion  bound. 

Didst  sail  with  them,  but  me,  the  miserable, 

Who  sailed  of  mine  own  choice,  and  seven  ships 

Sailed  with  me,  me  did  they  cast  out  with  scorn — 

It  was  their  deed,  thou  sayest,  but  they,  'twas  thine. 

And  now  why  drag  ye  me,  why  hale  me  hence  ? 

Me,  who  am  nought,  and  dead  long  since  for  you.       1030 

O  thou  most  impious,  how  am  I  not  now 

Crippled  and  noisome  ?     How  will  ye  presume, 

With  me  o'  the  fleet,  to  ofler  sacrifice 

To  heaven,  or  pour  libations  any  more  ? 

For  this  was  thy  pretence  to  cast  me  out 


410  PHILOCTETES. 


I  curse  you  :  and  my  curse  ye  shall  not  'scape, 

So  having  wronged  me,  if  the  gods  love  right. 

Yea  and  I  know  they  love  it ;  for  not  else 

Would  ye  have  hither  sailed  for  one  so  wretched, 

But  that  some  goad  from  heaven  stung  you  for  me. 

O  fatherland  and  ye  regardful  gods,  1040 

Long-lingering,  now,  now  let  your  vengeance  fall, 

If  ye  have  pity  of  me,  and  spare  them  not ! 

For  piteous  life  is  mine,  yet,  might  I  see 

Their  ruin,  healed  of  my  sickness  I  should  seem. 

Chor.  The  man  is  wroth,  Odysseus,  and  has  spoken 
A  wrathful  word,  defiant  of  thy  threats. 

Od.   Much  might  I  say  in  answer  to  his  speech. 
Would  time  serve ;  now  one  word  is  all  I  may. 
For,  where  such  men  are  wanted,  such  am  I ; 
And  when  the  question  is  of  just  and  good,  1050 

None  shall  ye  find  more  scrupulous  than  I, 
Only  my  will  is  to  be  vanquished — never  : 
Never  save  now  :  but  now  have  thou  thy  way. 
Loose  him,  and  lay  no  hand  on  him  again. 
Here  let  him  bide.     In  truth  we  need  thee  not. 
Having  these  arms  of  thine  :  for  there  with  us 
Is  Teucer,  who  is  perfect  in  this  craft; 
And  I  myself  with  no  worse  skill  than  thine 
Could  wield  these  shafts  and  speed  them  to  their  aim. 
Why  then,  what  need  of  thee  ?     To  pace  thy  Lemnos  1060 
We'll  leave  thee,  and  depart.     Perchance  thine  office 


PHILOCTETES.  411 


Honour,  which  thou  hast  scorned,  may  win  for  me. 

Phil.   Unhappy  that  I  am,  what  shall  I  do  ? 
What,  shalt  thou  flaunt  my  arms  among  the  Greeks  ? 

Od.  Waste  not  thy  words  :  I  go ;  gainsay  me  not. 

Phil.  Son  of  Achilles,  wilt  thou  too  depart 
And  leave  me,  silent,  thus,  without  a  word  ? 

Od.   Come  thou  :  look  not  at  him,  although  thy  heart 
Is  noble,  lest  our  fortune  thou  shouldst  wreck. 

Phil.   And  by  you  also,  friends,  shall  I  be  left  1070 

Thus  desolate,  and  will  ye  have  no  pity  ? 

Chor.  This  boy  is  captain  of  our  crew  :  whate'er 
He  says  to  thee,  his  answer  shall  be  ours. 

Ne.  Odysseus,  that  I  know,  will  say  of  me 
That  I  am  weak.     But  yet  remain,  if  so 
This  man  desires,  so  long  a  time,  until 
The  sailors  have  made  ready  with  the  ship. 
And  to  the  gods  our  prayer  is  said.     Perchance 
Meanwhile  the  man  may  get  a  better  mind 
Towards  us.     We  therefore  hasten  hence,  we  twain  : 
And  when  we  call,  haste  you,  and  make  good  speed.  1080 

Phil.  O  chamber  of  the  hollow  rock,  {Strophe  i. 

So  hot,  so  freezing  cold. 
How,  as  it  seems,  oh  wretched  that  I  am, 

II  never  was  to  leave  thee,  but  shall  die 
With  no  companionship  but  thine. 
Woe,  woe  for  me  ! 
O  cave,  O  melancholy  cave, 


412  PHILOCTETES. 

Most  full  of  my  distress, 

What  now  shall  be  my  life  from  day  to  day  ? 

Whence  shall  I  get,  oh  miserable,  109c 

What  hope  of  food  to  eat  ? 

Oh  would  that  upward  through  the  air 

On  loud-resounding  gale 

The  birds  that  cowered  would  snatch  me  hence  : 

I  am  defenceless  now. 

Chor.  Thou,  thou  thyself  hast  willed  it  so,    [Strophe  2. 
O  thou  unfortunate, 
And  by  no  other  will  than  thine, 
And  no  resistless  strength, 
Art  thou  condemned  to  suffer  thus ; 
When,  being  free  wisely  to  choose, 
Thou  didst  reject  the  better  fate. 
And  hast  preferred  the  worse.  hoc 

Fhil.   Oh  hapless,  hapless  then  am  I,     [Antistrophe  i. 
Consumed  with  misery ! 

Who  now  henceforth  must  dwell  for  time  to  come 
Here  with  no  man  to  bear  me  company, 
Alone,  unfriended,  till  I  die. 
Woe,  woe  for  me  ! 
And  I  no  more  can  get  me  food 
With  my  wing'd  shafts,  no  more. 
Grasping  between  stout  hands  the  friendly  bow. 
But  unsuspected  treacherous  words,  nu 

Masking  a  false  intent, 


PHILOCTETES.  413 


Beguiled  me.     Might  I  see  him  yet, 
The  author  of  this  plot, 
Ev'n  for  no  less  a  time  consigned 
To  anguish  such  as  mine. 

Chor.  By  fate,  by  heaven-appointed  fate,       \Ant.  2. 
Thou  art  afflicted  thus  : 
It  was  no  treacherous  act  of  mine 
That  brought  thee  to  this  pass. 
Let  others  feel,  who  have  deserved. 
Thy  bitter  and  disastrous  curse  :  "20 

For  fain  indeed  were  I,  that  thou 
Shouldst  not  reject  my  love. 

Phil.  Alas  me,  and  methinks  [Strophe  3. 

Upon  the  grey  sea-beach 
He  sits  and  mocks  at  me. 
Brandishing  in  his  hand  the  life 
Of  me,  ill-starred — the  bow 
Which  no  man  else  hath  borne. 
O  wrested  from  these  friendly  hands, 
O  kindly  bow,  if  thou 
Hast  any  heart  to  feel, 
Me,  comrade  once  of  Heracles, 
With  pity  thou  regardest :  "3° 

Who  now  no  more  in  days  to  come 
Shall  handle  thee ;  but  thou  shalt  play  thy  part 
With,  for  thy  new-found  lord, 
A  lord  of  trickery, 


414  PHILOCTETES. 


And  on  base  stratagems  must  look, 

And  on  the  hateful  presence  of  my  foe, 

Bringing  to  pass  by  shameful  means 

His  projects — numberless  as  were 

The  mischiefs  that  he  wove  for  me.  "39 

Chor.  Justice  'tis  good  for  a  man  to  praise,  \Strophe  4. 
But,  having  praised  it,  then  not  to  shoot 
Forth  from  his  lips  resentful  spleen. 
And  he,  the  one,  the  chosen  of  the  host. 
Obeying  their  behest. 
Served  thus  the  common  good  of  all  his  friends. 

PhiL  O  birds  of  the  air,  my  prey,  \Antistrophe  3. 

And  tribes  of  bright-eyed  beasts, 
That  in  this  place  abide, 
And  on  the  mountains  find  your  food, 
Scared  from  my  cave  no  more. 
Ye  will  approach  me  now  : 

For  now  I  hold  not  in  my  hands  1150 

The  mighty  shafts  of  yore — 
Oh  helpless  that  I  am — 
But  faintly  warded  is  this  place, 
That  you  no  more  should  fear  it. 
Come  on  :  fair  time  is  now  to  glut 
Your  retributive  jaws  to  heart's  content 
Upon  my  quivering  flesh. 
For  soon  shall  I  be  dead : 
Where  shall  I  find  whereon  to  live  ? 


PHILOCTETES. 


415 


Who  lives  with  feeding  thus  on  air, 

Robbed  of  his  former  strength,  and  now 

Of  all  those  gifts  possessing  none, 

From  the  life-giving  earth  that  come  ?  ir6o 

Chor.  If  thou  regardest  at  all  a  friend,  \Antistrophe  4. 
One  who  draws  near  in  good  will  to  thee, 
Draw  near,  by  heaven ;  and  think,  think  well, 
Tis  thine  to  'scape  this  sickness,  sad  to  feed, 
And  all  unskilled  to  bear 
The  myriad  weight  of  woe  that  with  it  dwells. 

Phil.  Again  dost  thou  remind  me 
Of  the  former  grief,  again — 
Noblest  of  all  men,  thou. 

That  ever  in  this  place  set  foot  ?  1170 

Why  wilt  thou  slay  me  ?     How  hast  thou  undone  me  ! 

Chor.  What  meanest  thou  ? 

Phil.  That  thou  didst  hope  to  bring  me 
Hence  to  the  hated  Trojan  land. 

Chor.  For  this,  I  deem,  is  best. 

Phil.  Begone  and  leave  me  now. 

Chor.  Welcome,  welcome  the  task  thou  hast  enjoined. 
To  do  what  I  desire. 
Let  us  go  hence,  go  hence,  ^ 

Each  to  our  place  and  business  in  the  ship.  nSo 

Phil.  By  Zeus,  who  hears  the  curse — go  not,  I  pray  you ! 

Chor.  Calm  thyself. 

Phil.  Friends,  in  heaven's  name,  remain  ! 


4i6  PHILOCTETES. 


Chor.  Why  dost  thou  call  on  us  ? 

Phil.  Alas  my  fate  !  my  fate,  alas  ! 
Unhappy,  I  am  undone  ! 
O  foot,  my  foot,  now  in  the  life  that  follows, 
What  shall  I  make  of  thee,  ill-starred  ? 
O  friends,  come  back,  retrace  your  steps  !  1190 

Cho)'.  What  should  we  do,  of  contrary  intent 
To  that  thou  didst  enjoin  on  us  before  ? 

Phil.   Small  cause  for  anger. 
If  one  with  tempestuous  grief  distraught 
Shall  sometimes  speak  a  senseless  word. 

Chor.   Come  with  us,  hapless  one,  as  we  exhort  thee. 

Phil.  Never,  know  this  for  a  surety,  never — 
Not  though  the  lord  of  the  lightning 
Comes  with  his  blazing  bolts,  with  the  withering  blast 
Of  his  thunderous  flame  enwraps  me  : 
Perish  Ilium  rather,  1200 

And  perish  the  host  that  its  wall  encircles — 
The  pitiless  ones  who  this  poor  lame  foot  of  mine 
Spared  not  to  spurn  from  them. 
Yet,  O  my  friends,  this  one  prayer  grant  me  ! 

Chor.  What  is  the  prayer  thou  wilt  ask  of  us  ? 

Phil.  A  sword  can  ye  find  for  me — 
Or  an  axe,  or  some  dart,  deny  me  not. 

Chor.  Say  what  rash  deed  wouldst  thou  do  with  it  ? 

Phil.  Strike  off  my  head  with  my  hand,  and  my  limbs, 
One  by  one  :  for  on  death,  on  death 


PHILOCTETES.  417 

Is  my  mind  set  now. 

Chor.  Why  wouldst  thou  this  ? 

Phil.  So  my  sire  I  might  seek.  12 10 

Chor.  Where  wouldst  thou  seek  him  ? 

Phil.  In  the  halls  of  the  dead  : 

Since  in  the  light  no  more  shall  I  find  him. 
O  city,  O  land  of  my  home, 
Would  I  might  see  thee — I  the  unhappy — 
Who  thy  sacred  stream  forsook, 
And  to  help  the  Greeks,  whom  I  hate,  went  forth  : 
Undone — undone ! 

Chor.  Long  since  I  should  have  left  thee,  and  returned. 
And  near  my  ship  I  should  have  been  ere  now. 
But  that  I  saw  Odysseus  drawing  nigh,  xaao 

And  coming  towards  us  hither  Achilles'  son. 

Od.  Wilt  thou  not  tell  me,  on  what  errand  bound 
Back  hither  again  in  such  hot  haste  thou  comest  ? 

Ne.  To  undo  the  sin  that  I  before  committed. 

Od.    Thou    speakest   riddles :    what    sin    didst    thou 
commit  ? 

Ne.  That  which,  obeying  thee  and  all  the  host 

Od.  What  thing  didst    thou,  that  thou  shouldst  not 
have  done  ? 

Ne.  Taking  a  man  with  base  deceit  and  guile 

Od.  What  man?  alas — dost   thou  intend  some  mis- 
chief? "29 

Ne.  No  mischief  truly ;  but  to  the  son  of  Poeas 

2  D 


4i8  PHILOCTETES. 


Od.  What  wilt  thou  do  ?     How  am  I  filled  with  fear  ! 

Ne.  From  whom  I  took  this  bow,  to  him  again 

Od,  Zeus,  and  what  then  ?  thou  wilt  not  give  it  back  ? 

Ne.  For  shamefully  and  wrongfully  I  took  it. 

Od.  By   heaven,    in    mockery   dost   thou   say   these 
things  ? 

Ne.  If  it  be  mockery  to  speak  the  truth. 

Od.  What  word,  son  of  Achilles,  hast  thou  spoken  ? 

Ne.  The  same  words  twice  and  thrice  shall  I  repeat  ? 

Od.  Would  I  had  never  heard  them — no,  not  once  ! 

Ne.  Know  now  full  certainly — my  say  is  said.         1240 

Od.  Yet  is  there  one,  one  still,  who  shall  prevent  thee. 

Ne.   How  ?  who  is  he  that  shall  forbid  me  this  ? 

Od.  All  the  Greek  host  shall  do  it,  and  I  for  one. 

Ne.  Wise  is  thy  wit,  but  all  unwise  thy  speech. 

Od.  Neither  thy  speech  is  wise,  nor  thine  intent. 

Ne.  But  if  'tis  just — why,  this  is  more  than  wisdom. 

Od.  How  just,  what  by  my  counsels  thou  didst  win, 
Thou  shouldst  give  back  ? 

Ne.  The  sin  that  I  have  sinned, 

For  it  is  shameful,  I  would  fain  repair. 

Od.  Fearest  thou  not  the  Greek  host,  doing  this  ?  1250 

Ne.  Justice  to  friend,  thy  terrors  daunt  me  not. 

Od.  With  thee,  then,  not  with  Trojans,  must  we  fight. 

Ne.  But  in  thy  hand,  to  do  it,  I  put  no  faith. 

Od.  Then  come  what  will  come !     Seest  thou  my  right 
hand 


PHILOCTETES,  419 


Gripping  the  hilt  ? 

Ne.  But  me  thou  too  shalt  see 

Doing  the  selfsame  thing,  and  not  delaying. 

Od.  Nay,  I  will  let  thee  be  :  but  I  will  go 
And  tell  the  host,  and  they  shall  punish  thee. 

Ne.  Thou'rt  wise  in  time :   still  keep   such   prudent 
mind. 
Out  of  harm's  way  perchance  thou'lt  keep  thy  foot.      1260 
But  thou,  O  son  of  Poeas,  Philoctetes, 
Leave  now  thy  cave  in  the  rock  there,  and  come  forth. 

Phil.  What  means  this  noise  of  voices  by  my  cave  ? 
Why  do  ye  call  me,  friends  ?     What  is  your  business  ? 
Alas,  an  evil  business  !     Are  ye  come. 
Some  great  affliction  to  my  grief  to  add  ? 

Ne.  Fear  not,  but  hearken  to  the  words  I  bring. 

Phil.  I  trust  thee  not:  since  from  fair  words  before, 
Thy  words,  which  I  believed,  I  fared  but  ill. 

Ne.  Is  there  no  room  then  for  repentance  now  ?     1270 

Phil.  When  thou  wouldst   steal   my  bow,  such  wast 
thou  then, 
Plausive  in  speech — with  mischief  in  thy  heart. 

Ne.  But  now  not  so  :  but  this  I  fain  would  hear, 
Art  thou  resolved  persistently  to  stay. 
Or  wilt  thou  sail  with  us  ? 

Phil.  Cease,  say  no  more ; 

All  thou  canst  say  shall  be  but  wasted  breath. 

Ne.  Thou  art  resolved  ? 


420  PHILOCTETES, 

Phil.  More  than  my  tongue  can  say. 

JVe.  I  would  thou  couldst  have  hearkened  to  my  words : 
But,  if  all  to  no  purpose  they  are  spoken, 
Why,  I  have  done. 

Phil.  Thou  canst  but  speak  in  vain ;    laSo 

Thou  wilt  not  win  my  thoughts  to  friendliness, 
That  didst  by  treachery  obtain  thine  end, 
And  of  my  life  hast  robbed  me — and  com'st  here 
To  advise  me,  thou — base  son  of  noble  sire. 
Perdition  light — on  the  Atreidae  first, 
Then  on  the  son  of  Lartius — and  on  thee  ! 

JVe.  Hold  off  thy  curse !     Take  from  my  hands  the 
bow. 

Phil.  What  sayest  thou  ?     Again  am  I  deceived  ? 

Ne.  No,  by  the  majesty  of  Zeus  supreme  !  1289 

Phil.  O  welcome  words,  if  what  thou  sayest  be  true ! 

Ne.  Words  that  the  deed  shall  follow,  plain  to  see : 
Reach  hither  thy  right  hand,  and  take  thy  bow. 

[^Odysseus  enters. 

Od.  In  the  sight  of  the  gods,  I  charge  thee,  give  it  not 
In  the  Atreidae's  name,  and  of  the  host ! 

Phil.  My  son,  whose  voice — Odysseus  did  I  hear? 

Od.  None  other :  and  he  is  near  thee,  in  thy  sight. 
And  he  will  bring  thee  hence  by  force  to  Troy ; 
Whether  Achilles'  son  consent  or  no. 

Phil.  But  not  unpunished,  if  this  shaft  flies  straight. 

Ne.  Ah,  by  the  gods,  I  pray,  loose  not  thy  shaft.     1300 


PHILOCTETES.  421 


Phil.  Nay,  by  the  gods,  fair  son,  loose  thou  my  hand. 

Ne.  I  will  not. 

Phil.  Why  of  mine  enemy,  whom  I  hate. 

Didst  rob  me,  not  to  slay  him  with  my  bow  ? 

Ne.  For  me  and  thee  this  is  dishonourable. 

Phil  But  yet  be  sure  of  this,  your  chiefs  of  the  host, 
Your  Grecian  heralds,  pursuivants  of  lies. 
Are  cowards  in  battle,  but  in  words  are  brave. 

Ne.  Good  now  :  thou  hast  thy  bow,  and  hast  no  cause 
Of  anger  against  me,  or  of  complaint. 

Phil  No  cause,  my  son;   but  thou  hast  shown  thy 
nature,  1310 

What  strain  thou'rt  of — no  child  of  Sisyphus, 
But  of  Achilles,  who,  whilst  yet  he  lived, 
Had  fairest  fame,  and  now  among  the  dead. 

Ne.  Sweet  to  my  ears  thy  praise,  both  of  my  sire 
And  of  myself :  but  hear  now,  what  I  fain 
Would  win  from  thee.     The  lot  indeed  that  heaven 
Awards,  men  cannot  choose  but  bear :  but  who 
On  self-inflicted  misery  are  bent, 
As  thou,  such  men  deserve  not  sympathy, 
Or  any  man's  compassion.     And  thou  art  1320 

Grown  fierce,  and  counsel  dost  reject,  and  if 
One  speaks  to  thee  in  love,  advising  thee, 
Thou  hatest  him,  as  though  he  were  thy  foe, 
And  wished  thee  ill.     Yet  I  will  speak  to  thee 
The  truth,  so  help  me  Zeus :  and  what  I  speak, 


422  PHILOCTETES, 

Doubt  not,  but  know,  and  write  it  in  thy  heart. 
For  this  thy  grievous  sickness  is  from  heaven, 
Because  the  guardian  snake  thou  didst  approach. 
That  keeps  with  unseen  watch  the  roofless  shrine 
Of  Chryse  :  and  respite  from  this  sore  disease 
Know  that  thou  canst  not  win — howso  yon  sun       1330 
May  rise  in  the  east,  and  in  the  west  decline — 
Till  to  the  plains  of  Troy  of  thine  own  will 
Thou  comest,  and,  finding  there  Asclepius'  sons 
Who  are  with  us,  art  of  this  sickness  eased 
By  them,  and,  with  this  bow,  and  me,  to  help, 
.   Hast  sacked,  in  sight  of  all,  the  Trojan  towers. 
Now  hearken,  how  I  know  that  this  is  so. 
There  is  with  us  a  prisoner  out  of  Troy, 
One  Helenus,  a  prophet  without  peer, 
Who  plainly  says  these  things  must  come  to  pass : 
And  furthermore  that  in  this  present  summer  1340 

Must  Troy  be  taken  utterly;  or  else. 
If  he  prove  false  in  this,  his  life's  the  forfeit. 
Now  therefore,  knowing  this,  of  thine  own  will 
Yield  :  for  a  goodly  prize  is  this  to  win. 
Being  chosen,  one  from  all  the  Grecian  host. 
Their  bravest,  so  first  into  healing  hands 
To  come,  and  earn  withal  a  matchless  fame, 
That  thou  didst  take  this  lamentable  Troy. 

Phil.  O  hated  life,  why  in  this  light  of  day 
Holdest  thou  me  back  from  the  doors  of  death  ? 


PHILOCTETES.  423 


Ah  me,  what  shall  I  do  ?  how  disobey  1350 

The  loving  words  of  counsel  that  he  spake  ? 
Shall  I  then  yield  ?     How  after  this  shall  I 
Endure  man's  sight  ?  or  who  will  speak  to  me  ? 

0  eyes  that  did  behold  all  these  my  wrongs, 
How  will  ye  suffer  it  if  I  consort 

With  Atreus'  sons  who  flung  me  forth  to  die  ? 
How  with  the  son  of  Lartius  the  all-guilty  ? 
For  it  is  not  grief  afflicts  me  for  the  past, 
But  what  I  must  endure  from  them  hereafter 

1  think  that  I  foresee.     The  heart  that  once  1360 
Breeds  evil,  teaches  evil  to  the  end. 

Yea  and  at  thee  I  marvel  now  for  this. 

Thou  shouldst  have  never  gone  thyself  to  Troy, 

And   me   thou  shouldst   have   hindered : — whom   they 

scorned, 
And  robbed  thee  of  thy  birthright — and  adjudged. 
Thy  father's  arms  awarding,  hapless  Ajax 
A  worse  man  than  Odysseus  :  yet  wilt  thou 
Go  there  to  fight  for  them,  and  make  me  go  ? 
Not  so,  my  son  :  as  thou  didst  swear  to  me. 
So  bring  me  home  :  and  thou,  at  Scyros  tarrying. 
Leave  them  to  perish  as  they  have  deserved. 
So  shalt  thou  win  a  twofold  thanks  from  me,  1370 

And  from  my  sire ;  and  not,  helping  bad  men. 
Be  deemed  thyself  of  nature  like  to  theirs. 

Ne.  There's  reason  in  thy  speech  :  yet  would  I  fain 


424  PHILOCTETES. 


That,  trusting  to  the  gods  and  to  my  words, 

Thou,  with  this  man  to  friend,  wouldst  sail  from  hence. 

Phil.  What !  to  the  plains  of  Troy — and  to  my  foe. 
The  son  of  Atreus — with  this  helpless  foot  ? 

Ne.  Rather  to  those  who  of  the  pain  will  ease 
Thee,  and  thy  festering  foot,  and  heal  thy  sickness. 

Phil.  O  evil  counsellor,  what  wilt  thou  say  ?  1380 

Ne.  That  which,   made  good,  is  best  for  thee  and 
me. 

Phil.  Hast  thou  no  shame  the  gods  should  hear  thee 
say  it  ? 

Ne.  Why  of  a  good  work  should  I  be  ashamed  ? 

Phil.  What  good  ?  to  the  Atreidae,  or  to  me  ? 

Ne.  To  thee :   I  am  thy  friend,  and  speak  in  friend- 
ship. 

Phil  How,  who  wouldst  hand  me  over  to  my  foes  ? 

Ne.   Friend,  learn  not  in  misfortune  to  be  bold. 

Phil.  Thou   wilt    slay   me :    I    know   thee    by   thy 
words. 

Ne.  I  slay  thee  not :  I  say  thou  dost  not  know  me. 

Phil.  Do  I  not  know,  the  Atreidae  cast  me  out  ?    139° 

Ne.  See  if  they  will  not  now  deliver  thee. 

Phil  Not  with  my  leave,  if  I  must  first  see  Troy. 

Ne.  What  then  remains  to  do,  if  by  my  words 
I  can  persuade  thee  nothing  that  I  say  ? 
Easiest  it  were  for  me  to  cease,  and  leave  thee 
To  live,  with  no  deliverer,  as  thou  art. 


PHILOCTETES.  425 


Phil.  Let  me  endure  the  lot  appointed  me. 
But  what,  laying  thy  hand  on  mine,  thou  once 
Didst  swear,  to  bring  me  home,  this  do  for  me, 
My  son,  and  tarry  not,  spend  no  more  thought  1400 

On  Troy.     For  long  enough  have  I  made  moan. 

Ne.  Be  it  as  thou  wilt :  let  us  be  going. 

Phil.  O  the  noble  speech  ! 

Ne.  Firmly  plant  thy  feet  with  mine  now. 

Phil.  To  the  utmost  of  my  strength. 

Ne.  But  the  blame  then  of  the  Greeks  how  shall  I 
shun? 

Phil.  Think  not  of  that 

Ne.  How  if  they  lay  waste  my  land  for  this  ? 

Phil.  I  will  be  there 

Ne.  Why,  what  service  wilt  thou  render  ? 

Phil.  With  the  shafts  of  Heracles 

Ne.  How? 

Phil.  I'll  keep  them  well  at  distance. 

Ne,  Kiss  the  earth,  and  come,  set  forth. 

[Heracles  appears. 

Her.  Nay,  son  of  Poeas,  go  not  yet : 
Abide,  till  thou  hast  heard  my  words.  mw 

Know  that  the  voice  of  Heracles 
Sounds  in  thine  ears,  thine  eyes  behold 
His  face  :  for  hither  for  thy  sake, 
Leaving  my  place  in  heaven,  I  come. 
To  show  what  Zeus  intends,  and  from 


426  .  PHILOCTETES. 


The  way  thou'rt  going  to  turn  thee  back : 

Then  hear  and  heed  my  speech. 

And  first  of  my  own  fortunes  I  will  speak, 

What  toils  I  having  suffered  and  gone  through 

Won  deathless  glory,  even  as  thou  seest.  14=0 

Yea,  and  know  well,  this  debt  is  thine  to  pay, 

Through  suffering  to  make  glorious  thy  life. 

But  to  the  city  of  Troy  go  with  this  man  : 

So  first  from  thy  sore  sickness  shalt  thou  cease, 

And,  being  chosen  first  of  all  the  host,. 

Paris,  whose  fault  was  cause  of  all  that  woe, 

Thou  with  my  arrows  shalt  bereave  of  life. 

And  shalt  sack  Troy,  and  carry  to  thy  home 

Spoils,  having  won  first  prize  of  all  the  Greeks, 

To  Poeas  thy  sire,  and  thine  Oetaean  heights.         1430 

But  from  the  Trojan  host  what  spoils  thou  takest, 

Bring  to  my  pyre,  memorials  of  my  bow. . 

And  thou,  son  of  Achilles,  heed  my  words  : 

For  neither  thou  without  this  man  may'st  take 

The  plain  of  Troy,  nor  he  apart  from  thee  : 

But,  like  two  Uons  in  one  pasture  mated. 

Have  thou  good  care  of  him,  and  he  of  thee. 

And  I  will  send  Asclepius  to  Troy 

To  heal  thy  sickness  :  for  a  second  time 

My  shafts  must  take  it.     But  remember  this —        1440 

When  ye  lay  waste  the  land,  then  to  revere 

The  gods  :  all  things  my  father  Zeus  to  this 


PHILOCTETES.  427 


Counts  second.     Piety  dies  not  with  men  ; 
But,  whether  they  live  or  die,  yet  it  endures. 

Fhil.  O  voice,  how  welcome  to  my  ears, 
And  face  so  long  unseen — 
I  shall  obey  thy  words. 

Ne.  And  to  this  sentence  I  agree. 

Her.  Then  make  no  long  delay  to  do  it : 
Occasion,  as  ye  see. 
Is  urgent,  and  fair  winds  at  stern.  1450 

FhiL  Once,  ere  I  go,  I'll  greet  this  land. 
Cave,  that  so  long  hast  watched  with  me, 
And  nymphs  of  meadow  and  stream,  farewell : 
Farewell,  the  great  male  voice 
Of  the  headland  midst  the  waves — 
Waves,  in  my  cavern's  farthest  nook, 
That,  smitten  by  the  south  wind's  breath, 
Oft  drenched  me  o'er  from  foot  to  head. 
And  often  did  the  mount  of  Hermes, 
When  storms  went  over  me. 

Reverberate  my  groans.  1460 

But  now,  O  springs,  and  fount  Lyceian, 
I  leave  you,  leave  you  now — 
Who  never  hoped  for  this. 
Farewell,  O  sea-girt  plain  of  Lemnos, 
And  waft  me  hence  unblamably 
With  favourable  course, 
Whither  the  sovereign  Fate  conducts, 


428  PHILOCTETES. 

And  counsel  of  my  friends, 
And  heaven's  all-potent  will, 
That  has  ordained  it  so, 

Chor.  Let  us  depart  now  all  together  : 
Our  prayer  to  the  sea-nymphs  having  prayed,       1470 
To  come  and  speed  us  hence. 


I 


NOTES 


I' 


Jl3ote0 

p.  4,  1.  44.  *  Conference  also  of  counsels  prospers  for  men  of 
experience  more  than  others.'  The  value  of  experience  is  some- 
times shown  in  the  prosperous  result  of  united  counsels,  when  the 
experienced  man  (instead  of  relying  on  his  own  superior  wisdom) 
confers  with  others.  [It  will  be  seen  that,  in  this  much-controverted 
passage,  I  agree  with  Professor  Kennedy  about  ^v/npopds,  but  not 
about  fciaas.  Counsels  which  /ive,  or  adide  (Professor  Kennedy's 
own  word),  are  surely  contrasted  with  counsels  which  perish  and  are 
abortive.  ] 

P.  8, 1.  125.  Macbeth,  i,  3,  112,  *0r  did  line  the  rebel  with  hidden 
help  and  vantage. ' 

P.  12,  1.  221.  'For  (had  I  not  been  a  stranger)  I  should  have 
tracked  it  not  far — not  failing  to  find.   .  .  .' 

P.  12,  1.  227.  If  he  is  afraid,  let  him  not  fear,  but  speak.  'Let 
him  remove  the  charge  (that  hangs  now  over  the  city),  denouncing 
himself  if  need  be.'  'Himself  against  himself  let  him  speak  out 
(fjiT)  (TtWTrdrw). 

P.  16,  1.  329.  I  follow  Hermann,  understanding  a  verb,  '  I  never 
will  (speak),'  and  reading  elrrwu. 

P.  19,  1.  420.  Oedipus  will  flee  from  the  house  of  Laius,  that 
harbourless  harbour  (more  storm-vext  than  any  sea),  to  which  fair 
winds,  as  he  thought,  had  blown  him — anywhere  out  of  that— yes, 
even  to  the  mountain  solitudes  of  Kithaeron,  there  to  bewail  his 
misery  :  t/iey  shall  be  his  haven  now  :  he  will  escape,  from  Thebes, 
to  them. 

P.  27,  1.  624.  I  see  nothing  better  here  than  to  read  the  line  as  a 
question,  *  When  you  have  shown  what  sort  of  thing  (how  unreason- 
able) jealousy  is,  then  will  you  kill  me?'  i.e.  Do  you  suppose  that 
the  Thebans  will  let  you  put  me  to  death  ?  This  suits  the  answer 
of  Oedipus,  who  understands  the  speech  as  a  defiance. 


432  NOTES. 


P.  64, 1. 1 526.  I  read  o5  rl%,  understanding  %v  from  the  preceding  line. 

P.  70,  1.  76.  Timon  of  Athens,  iii.  5  : — 

•  He  is  a  man,  setting  his  fate  aside, 
Of  comely  virtues.' 

P.  74,  1.  185.  'Bold  that  you  are,  be  bold  (make  up  your  mind) 
to  yield.' 

P.  76, 1.  229.  *  The  fates  punish  no  man,  concerning  wrongs  that 
he  is  the  first  to  suffer,  for  requiting  them.'  If  I  deceive  you,  who 
deceived  me,  the  gods  will  pardon  my  deception. 

P.  79,  1.  309.  I  follow  Professor  Kennedy.  *  May  he  bring  a 
blessing  to  his  city  and  to  me.  I  need  not  say,  to  himself:  he  needs 
must  do  good  to  himself  in  doing  good  to  others. '  Otherwise  *  To 
me  :  for  do  not  all  good  men  {as  well  as  others:  all  men,  none  the 
less  that  they  are  virtuous)  desire  their  own  good  ? ' 

P.  80,  1,  328-330.  The  lines  are  displaced  in  the  MSS.  ^  rr\(xZG 
KOLfMov  is  full  of  meaning  after  rpocpal,  but  nonsense  after  6/j,ov. 
When  Oedipus  asks  Ismene  whom  she  is  pitying,  with  a  suggestion 
that  she  does  herself  injustice  in  seeming  for  a  moment  to  separate 
herself  from  her  father  and  sister,  at  once,  with  quick  instinctive 
appreciation  of  his  meaning,  she  identifies  her  lot  with  theirs. 

P.  83,  1.  403.  The  burial  of  Oedipus  may  be  said  to  *  chance 
amiss '  in  one  sense,  if  he  is  denied  due  rites  of  burial ;  in  another, 
if  he  is  buried  elsewhere  than  in  Boeotia. 

P.  88,  1.  522.  ijveyKov  Hkcov  fxkv  (MSS.)  is  unmetrical.  ck^v  is 
untrue  and  unsuitable  to  the  context  (compare  964).  Hermann 
suggests  &v(av  ( =  avibiv).  Perhaps  we  should  read  ifveyK^  odv  KUKdrar^ 
&  ^4voL,  ijveyK^  d^Kuv  (xev  (or  ijveyKa  fikv  dKuv). 

P.  89,  1.  540.  *  A  reward  the  like  of  which  never  to  obtain  from 
the  city  did  I  serve  her.'  i^eX^cr^ai  an  ironical  word  :  compare 
i^aiperop  ddjpTjfia. 

P.  89,  1.  547.  oKoiis  (for  dWovs  of  MSS. )  is  a  certain  correction. 
Compare  997. 

P.  90,  1.  570.   I  read  irapiJKi  /t'  <I)(rTe  ^pax^ct  croi  Secadai  X^yeiv. 

P.  91, 1.  588.  I  read  tov  :  '  or  whose  opposition  do  you  speak  of? ' 
— 'Not  small  shall  be  the  peril' — of  course  for  Theseus.  What 
then  could  he  mean  by  asking,  *  Who  will  make  my  difficulty  ? 
Your  sons  ?  or  shall  I  make  it  for  myself  ? ' 

P.  94,  1.  661.  Literally,  *  though  terrible  things  were  emboldened 
to  the  utterance  : '  an  expression  precisely  parallel  to  xoXXai  ciTreiXai 
KartiirelXTieav  just  before. 


NOTES.  433 


P.   96,  1.    735.    T7]\lK6(Tde. 

P.  102,  1.  867.  '  Such  poor  eyesight — barely  eyesight — as  I  had 
when  my  former  eyes  were  lost. '  Disparaging,  not  his  daughters, 
but  his  own  helpless  condition  :  an  argument  for  pity. 

P.  no,  1.  1069.  irdiXwv  probably  corrupt  for  ""  :  it  may  have 
displaced  (as  a  gloss  upon  <pd\apa)  some  word  quite  unlike  it ; 
possibly  xa^wo-'  (suggested  by  Hermann  instead  of  Kard)  :  '  fast  as 
their  bridles  can  hasten  them  {all  that  their  bridles  can)^  flinging 
them  loose.' 

P.  112,  1.  1 1 32.  I  read,  with  Hermann,  ttcDs  cr'  h.v  AdXioi  767(^5. 
Line  1134  shows  that  Theseus  is  the  subject  of  dcye'iu. 

P.  116, 1.  1220.  iaoT^Xearos  (which  I  connect  with  fxoipa)  is  passive: 
*a  doom  whose  payment  (of  the  tribute  of  their  lives)  falls  equally  on 
all. '     Men  are  tVore\e?s  of  their  lives  to  Pluto  {reX^ovaiv  'AtSg.  \pvxdv). 

P.  116,  1.  1230.  '  Who  wanders  far  to  multiply  vexations  ?  What 
plague  is  not  there  ? '  involved  in  the  mere  fact  of  being  young,  so 
that  there  is  no  need  to  go  further  to  seek  for  it. 

P.  117,  1,  1248.  pL-KoX  unquestionably  (as  in  El.  106)  of  the  star- 
light :  the  only  adequate  meaning  of  *  vibrations  of  the  night,'  and 
required  by  the  antithesis.  All  influences  of  sunlight  and  of  star- 
light to  Oedipus  are  fraught  with  sorrow. 

P.  118,  1.  1281.  'The  many  words  (whatever  their  tenor)  even 
from  the  silent  wring  response.'  Compare  with  Zvcx(Ep6.va.vra., 
KaroLKrlaavTa  (feeling  imputed  to  the  words),  Oed.  Col.  659,  661  : 
and,  for  a  similar  *  hypallage,'  267. 

P.  122,  1.  1380.  *From  thine  altars  and  thy  thrones'  [plural 
expressing  contempt,  expressed  in  Greek  by  abv  and  <roi>s]  *  my 
curses  oust  thee  '—forestall  your  sitting  (suppliant  at  the  altar)  and 
preoccupy  your  throne. 

P.  122,  1.  1390.  *I  invoke  for  thy  heritage  (the  only  abode  you 
shall  inherit  from  me)  the  gloom  of  Tartarus,  to  give  thee  a  home 
far  off"  from  Thebes. ' 

P.  125,  1.  1454.  I  read  with  Hermann,  irel  /xh  ^rcpa,  ri  5'  tV 
^fiap  ...  (In  the  Antistrophe,  1469,  5^5m  5'"  ov  yhp  &\i  &<f>opp4  •  •  •) 
This  gives  complete  correspondence  of  metre :  and  L  A  have  t6Zc 
Tr-^fiaT'.—eTrel  fiiv,  like  6're  fxiv,  'sometimes.'  ir'  ^fiap,  'within  a 
day':  compare  Trach.  11 28. 

P.  128,  1.  1534.  Let  the  secret  belong  to  the  ruler  only,  and  not 
be  divulged  to  the  people,  who,  even  in  the  best-governed  state 
(even,  therefore,  in  Athens;   compare    1004),  are  capricious,  and 

2  E 


434  NOTES. 


might  be  tempted,  in  some  crisis  of  their  history,  to  regard  the 
presence  of  my  bones  among  them  as  a  pollution,  and  cast  them  out. 

P.  128,  1,  1536.  This  is  the  reason  why  it  seems  a  light  matter  to 
commit  such  outrages.  Men  are  shortsighted,  all  but  the  wisest 
(such  as  Theseus)  :  they  ignore  a  punishment  which  is  far  off. 

P.  129,  1.  1550.  Compare  Paradise  Lost,  iii.  21  : — 
'  Thee  I  revisit  safe, 
Axidi  feel  thy  sovran  vital  lamp  ;  but  thou 
Revisit'st  not  these  eyes,  that  roll  in  vain 
To  find  thy  piercing  ray,  and  find  no  dawn.' 

And  Lear,  iv.  i,  25  : — 

'  Might  I  but  live  to  see  thee  in  my  touch, 
I'd  say  I  had  eyes  again.' 

P.  135,  1,  1713.  There  is  no  justification  for  the  use  of  /tr;  with 
e'XPTyfes.  Read  ic6  ii.01,  or  &ixoi.  '  It  was  your  wish  ;  but  it  was  sad 
for  me  to  see  you  die,  forlorn,  an  exile. ' 

P.  145, 1.  124.  *  The  Serpent : '  the  ensign  (or  emblem)  of  Thebes. 

P-  1535  !•  326.  TO,  deiva  KepSi]  MSS.  'Your  clever  winnings,'  on 
which  you  plume  yourselves. 

P.  155,  1.  368.  Dindorf's  simple  alteration  irapaipQu  is  probably 
right.  I  take  vxI/'lttoXis  diroKLs  together,  like  iravToiropos  diropos  in 
the  Strophe,  and  connect  roX/xas  x°-P^v  with  the  following  sentence. 
The  Chorus,  under  cover  of  generalities,  are  denouncing  Creon.  It 
may  be  thought  that  after  366  the  antithesis  of  the  usual  readings 
and  pointing  is  wanted ;  but  the  warning  tone  of  the  whole  Anti- 
strophe  is  even  more  impressive  without  it.  '  Wonderful  is  Man: 
he  has  put  all  things  in  subjection  under  his  feet.  And  yet  not  all. 
Still  Right  is  supreme.  The  wrongdoer,  though  he  be  a  monarch — 
he  is  the  outlaw.     Let  me  not  know  a  wicked  person.' 

P.  162, 1.  556.  *  No,  not  if  my  words  could  be  unspoken:'  literally, 
'with  my  words  unspoken:'  i.e.  I  do  not  choose  life,  whatever  I 
may  have  rashly  said. 

P.  164,  1.  594.  6  Tiraro.  The  relative  seems  to  me  indispensable ; 
although  of  course  viv  refers  to  pl^av,  not  0(ios.  The  broken  sentence 
is  expressive.  '  For  now  the  light  of  hope  that  shone  so  brightly 
about  the  life  of  Antigone,  last  root  of  the  fated  house ' — [not  *  that 
light  is  out,'  but]  'the  axe  is  laid  to  that  root  ;  no  trace  of  life 
remains.'  I  retain  /c6j'is,  and  understand  *  The  bloodstained  dust  of 
the  gods  below  levels  the  root  of  the  house  of  Oedipus '  to  mean 
'The  gods  below  have  levelled  bloodstained  dust  over  the  root. 


NOTES.  435 


Lastly,  *  the  rash  speech  and  frantic  purpose '  (mind  possessed  by  an 
Erinys)  of  Antigone  are  said  to  have  co-operated  in  the  work  of 
destruction. 

P.  164,1,  607.  Donaldson's  ^^oj/Tcj  is  highly  probable ;  and  either 
Tray KpaTTjs  (Don.)  for  iravToyripus  (which,  however,  is  a  fine  word,  and 
could  hardly  have  come  from  a  blunder) ;  or,  instead  of  aKd/xaroi, 
Slkottol  (Dind.),  which  as  a  rarer  word  might  have  been  replaced  by 
an  explanation. 

P.  164,  1.  613,  614.  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  true  reading 
can  be  recovered  here  :  ovhkv  epircL  and  €kt6s  dtraj  being  possibly 
stopgaps  borrowed  from  lines  625,  618.  But  this  is  not  very  likely, 
and  it  is  worth  considering  whether  the  lines  may  not  stand  with  the 
substitution  of  dra  for  dras,  and  perhaps  oHirod^  (or  ouSa/*')  for  ovMv. 
*  Nowise  doth  universal  woe  avoid  the  life  of  man.'  /Stdry  dative, 
as  after  CKirodwu  ;  or  possibly  pidrov. 

P.  166,  1.  664-667.  Kal  ToSfW .  .  .  irapaardT-qv.  These  lines 
were  transposed  by  Hermann  (wh#ln  other  editors  have  followed), 
and  placed  after  671  {TCLvavTla).  Two  obvious  difficulties  are  created 
by  the  change  :  (i)  The  reference  of  tovtov  rbv  dvdpa  (664)  to  the 
obedient  subject,  with  tovtov  just  before  (oi)/c  ^<xt^  eiralvov  tovtov  (^ 
i/xov  Tvx^iv)  meaning  the  disobedient  one.  (2)  A  false  antithesis, 
between  good  rider  and  bad  subject.  '  He  who  governs  his  household 
will  be  a  righteous  ruler  of  the  state.  But  a  subject  who  sets  himself 
above  the  laws  and  above  his  rulers  shall  have  no  praise  of  mine.' 
Whereas  the  other  way  the  connection  is  natural  and  true.  *  The 
qualities  which  make  a  man  a  righteous  ruler  alike  of  his  household 
and  the  state  would  also  make  him  a  loyal  subject.  Disloyal  subjects 
I  cannot  praise:'  i.e.  '  I,  Creon,  the  just  ruler,  should  in  your  place 
loyally  obey,  and  therefore  I  cannot  praise  you  if  you  are  dis- 
obedient. ' 

P.  171,  1.  782.  The  language  is  that  of  war.  ifiiriirTeiv  is  'to 
attack. '  xP''7MaTa,  I  believe,  is  metaphorical :  men  become  the 
property  of  Love  the  Conqueror.  Love  '  wins  the  fight  and  divides 
the  spoil '  (literally,  '  falls  on  the  gear '). 

P.  171,  1.  784.  Compare  Coriolanus,  iii.  2,  116,  'the  smiles  of 
knaves  tent  in  my  cheeks. ' 

P.  182,  1.  1062.  TJdr],  scil.  ipe^v.  '  Forthwith  methinks  I  shall  speak 
as  you  require — so  far  as  you  are  concerned  : '  i.e.  I  shall  speak  the 
truth,  not  seeking  reward — at  least  from  you. 

P.  204,  1.  244.  et  yap  6  fikv  davwv.     '  If  (whereas  Agamemnon 


436  NOTES. 


was  slain  and  is  no  more)  his  murderers  shall  not  pay  their  blood 
for  his.'  That  only  the  second  member  of  the  sentence  is  hypo- 
thetical (compare  heivh  h>  ecrju  elpyaafiipos,  el  Tore  fiev  e/xevov,  vvv  5e 
\i7roLfi1  T7]v  rd^iv)  is  marked  by  the  negatives,  ovdh  in  the  first,  fii] 
in  the  second.     (7a  re  Kal  ovdev:^  *■  piilvis  et  timbra.'') 

P.  209,  1.  363.  'My  meat  and  drink.'  Here,  and  in  too  many 
other  passages  of  the  'Electra'  and  of  the  'Ajax,'toomanyto  be  noted, 
(I  may  mention,  however,  as  flagrant  examples.  El.  445,  Aj.  1285), 
I  have  been  indebted  to  the  not-to-be-surpassed  translations  in 
Professor  Jebb's  editions  of  these  plays.  I  translated  these  two 
plays  some  time'ago,  in  the  course  of  school-work,  with  no  thought 
of  publication,  and  therefore  plagiarized  freely.  In  some  cases  I 
have  altered  :  but  in  far  more  I  have  shrunk  from  deliberately  sub- 
stituting worse  for  better. 

P.  211,  1.  417-420.  I  should  like  to  substitute  for  these  lines  the 
following  : — 

'  I  hear  them  say,  revisiting  the  light, 
Her  father's  very  presence  as  he  lived 
She  saw ;  and  that  he  took,  and  on  the  hearth 
Planted,  that  sceptre  which  he  wielded  once.' 

P.  215,  1.  445.  *By  this  act,  meaning  "his  blood  be  upon  his 
own  head,"  the  murderess  washes  her  hands  of  the  guilt '  (Professor 
Jebb):  though,  literally,  I  think  it  is  ^  He  took  the  bloodstains'  (the 
print  of  the  axe),  the  active  being  quite  sufficiently  justified  by  the 
Homeric  dvafidaaeiv  :  if  dvafxaaa-eiv,  why  not  eK/xdaaeLv  ? 

P.  212, 1.  452.  dXiTrapT],  with  a  certain  pathetic  irony,  'uneloquent,' 
*  unpetitionary. '  *  How  should  my  father  regard  the  supplication 
of  this  poor,  coarse,  faded  hair  of  mine;  so  unlike  that  of  Chryso- 
themis,  which  no  grief  has  aged?  '     Compare  1378,  XiirapeT  x^P^- 

P.  214,  1.  496.  '  Never  shall  we  see  (and  lament  to  see)  this 
portent  come  near  to  the  murderer  and  his  paramour  undeprecated 
(by  them).'  Certainly  it  will  come  nearer  and  nearer  to  them,  and 
they  will  not  lack  cause  to  rue  its  coming. 

P.  215,  1.  534.  I  cannot  agree  with  Professor  Jebb  in  thinking 
that  rivuv  is  the  interrogative.  The  expression  is  to  be  compared 
with  d77e\Xe  5'  SpKV  Tpoaridels :  literally,  *  as  a  kindness  to  whom — 
paying  it?  (for  whose  sake — as  a  debt?): '  the  construction  is  com- 
plete without  tIuuu,  but  rlvuv  is  added  to  emphasize  Clytaemnestra's 
meaning,  which  is,  that  no  one  Aad  a  right  to  claim  such  kindness. 

P.  216,  1.  551.  I  connect  yvJifx-qv  diKaiav  axovaa  with  rom  TrAa? 


NOTES.  437 


^^76.  'Are  you  so  clear  of  injustice  that  you  can  pass  judgment 
upon  me? ' 

P.  216,  1.  564.  'The  rushing  winds.'  [ttoXi)?  pd  6  Trorafjids,  rvel  0 
dpefids.]  So  strong  they  would  have  been ;  but  Artemis  checked  them, 
and  becalmed  the  Greeks.     Exactly  like  '  ce/eres  obruit  otio  ventos. ' 

P.  236,  1.  1087.  'Having  armed  and  made  ready  the  unlovely 
deed.'  oTrXl^eiv  is  used  in  Homer  of  making  ready  anything, 
especially  meat  and  drink  :  and  Eurip.  Ion  1124,  dvalav  deols.  The 
point  of  the  expression  is  that  Electra  has  resolved  to  do  a  deed 
which,  till  it  is  done,  looks  to  all  eyes,  as  to  those  of  Chrysothemis, 
unlovely  and  a  crime  ;  but,  having  done  it,  she  knows  that  the 
universal  voice  will  approve  alike  her  wisdom  and  her  piety. 
Professor  Jebb  (who  thinks  that  <To<pd  t  dpi(XTa  re  Trats  KCKXijadat  is 
what  Chrysothemis  desires,  and  that  Electra  knows  that  the  two 
things  are  incompatible)  seems  to  me  to  have  confused  *  wisdom ' 
with  'caution.'  Chrysothemis  is  cautious,  but  Electra  is,  and  one 
day  will  be  acknowledged  to  be,  wise.  '  (Compare  tovs  Avudev 
^povifjLcoTaTovs  oluvoiis  at  the  beginning  of  the  ode. ) 

P.  249,  1.  141 3.  Read  aoi  for  ae.  To  alter  (pdivei.  into  ^Oiveiv  is 
to  commit  Sophocles  (at  this  moment  most  inopportunely)  to  the 
Aeschylean  view  of  the  vengeance  as  a  new  crime  in  the  series  of 
crimes.  Orestes  is  the  Kadaprrji  of  the  house  of  Pelops  (70).  The 
day  is  breaking  at  last  (17-19).  The  house  is  rid  of  the  curse 
(1508-1510). 

P.  251,  1.  1449.  I  do  not  like  the  suggestion  of  an  alternative 
construction  of  rrjs  (pCkTaTT}^  in  agreement  with  crv/x(popas.  Probably 
T^s  ^iXTOLTrjs  is  meant  to  be,  to  Aegisthus,  a  surprise  for  tou  (piXTdrov. 
What  Electra  means  by  speaking  of  the  "  misfortune  "  of  Clytaem- 
nestra  rather  than  of  Orestes,  it  is  for  him  to  make  out  as  he  can. 

P.  251.  1.  145 1.  Probably  (piXris  irpo^ivov  Kar-qvvaav  is  to  be 
explained  in  the  first  instance  as  an  aposiopesis— understanding 
(pbvov.  Karavmai  alfia  would  hardly  justify  Karavvaat  rivd  (meaning 
'  to  murder ') ;  and  the  two  meanings  of  the  words  must  both  lie  in 
TTpo^evov  (not  one  in  irpo^^vov,  the  other  in  an  implied  trpd^ivov)  Kar-fi- 
vvaav.  Moreover,  Kavav^xraL  irpo^ivov,  meaning  'to  arrive'  (compare 
dvvaeLv  'AtSai',  Aj.  607,  where  'to  accomplish' = 'to  reach')  is  itself 
an  elliptical  expression  (scil.  oIkov).  The  meaning,  therefore,  depends 
upon  the  word  supplied:  Aegisthus  will  supply  oXkov,  the  audience 

<b6vov.    '  They  accomplished  j  ^°  ^^^  ^°"^^  \  of  a  loving  hostess.' 
^  ^  (the  murder    ) 


438  NOTES. 


P.  261,  1.  100.  The  Chorus  know  that  Heracles  has  been  in  Asia, 
and  that  he  is  either  in  Euboea  or  on  his  way  thither.  Perhaps  he 
is  crossing  the  Aegaean ;  perhaps  he  is  preparing  to  come,  as 
Xerxes  came,  by  land,  and  is  now  passing  the  Hellespont.  Sophocles 
seems  to  me  to  have  used  and  adapted  a  Homeric  phrase.  Com- 
pare K€K\i/ji.ivos  Tr6vT(^,  II.  XV.  740  ;  XlfJivrj  KSKKifihos,  v.  709  ;  'AX0^ou 
irbpi^  KXcOels,  Pind.  Olymp.  i.  92  (of  the  tomb  of  Pelops  at 
Olympia),  where  the  participle  means  '  living '  (or  '  encamped  '  or 
'buried')  'on  a  slope  towards'  (looking  down  upon)  the  sea,  or 
lake,  or  river.  So  here — regarding  the  sea  (in  Greek  fashion ;  com- 
pare /xer^wpos)  as  an  eminence  sloping  to  the  shore — 'midway 
between  the  continents, '  '  looking  down  upon  the  coast  of  either. ' 

P.  268,1.  281.  Compare  Browning,  'Caliban,'  '  Letting  the  rank 
tongue  blossom  into  speech. ' 

P.  279,  1.  554.  I  follow  Hermann's  interpretation  (in  his  first 
edition),  which  accounts  for  ryde,  and  gives  an  excellent  antithesis 
between  opyaipecv  and  XvT'qpiov  Xdwrjua  :  '  angry  it  is  not  well  for 
me  to  be,  but  hear  how  (not  for  vengeance,  but  to  rid  myself  of  her)  I 
mean  to  vex  this  maiden  : '   '  angry  I  am  not,  but  vex  her  soul  I  shall.' 

P.  283,  1.  653.  The  best  emendation  seems  01  cTpudeis.  One 
MS.,  Ven.  (thirteenth  century),  has  ola-rpudels.  But  oiaTprjOeU  maybe 
right :  '  a  frenzy-fit  of  Ares  proves  (to  Deianeira)  release  from  weary 
days,'  this  war  with  Eurytus  being,  the  Chorus  hope,  the  last  of 
the  toils  and  dangers  of  ELeracles. 

P.  283,  1.  662.  dr)pbs  is  corrupt,  as  the  metre  shows,  and  Trayxpi(rT({} 
can  hardly  stand  alone  as  a  substantive.  Moreover,  eTrt  Trpocpdaei 
drjpbs  gives  the  wrong  meaning.  The  Chorus  do  not  distrust  the 
Centaur.  They  mean  that  the  irpo^aais  assigned  by  Deianeira  will 
"  induce  Heracles,  so  they  hope,  to  put  on  the  robe,  and  so  to  become 
subject  to  the  spell  which  is  to  draw  him  home.  avyKpadeU  k.t.\. 
— 'having  drunk  through  every  vein'  the  magic  chrism  'upon  a 
pretext'  {i.e.  having  been  induced  by  specious  reasons  to  put  on 
the  robe).  If  so,  then  the  word  wanted  is  a  substantive— in  mean- 
ing and  metre  =7r^7rXy.  Possibly  0ci/)et  (^  as /«/ 916).  'Claspedby' 
(welded,  made  one  with)  the  robe  which  Persuasion  has  anointed  ; 
•the  robe  anointed  all  over'  (or  'supremely  anointed')  'by  Per- 
suasion : '  compare  such  expressions  as  StSa/crat  dvdpdiirwv  dperai. 

Notice  that  both  avyKpaOeh  and  eTri  'jrpo<pdaei  are  unconsciously 
prophetic,  and  to  the  spectators  ominous,  of  the  horror  so  near  at 
hand,  fitly  followed  on  the  instant  by  the  entrance  of  Deianeira,  dis- 


NOTES.  439 


traded  with  fear.  (Compare  the  ominous  word  Tpoffapfidaai,  supra, 
494).  '  Penetrated '  indeed  by  the  Centaur's  blood,  '  welded  and 
made  one '  with  the  robe  which  she  had  smeared,  was  Heracles  to 
be,  in  another  sense  than  she  had  dreamed  of.  A  *  specious  '  robe 
indeed  it  was  to  prove ;  and,  whilst  she  thought  that  by  her  harm- 
less Trp6(pacns  she  was  winning  back  to  herself  her  husband's  love, 
she  little  thought,  but  the  spectators  knew,  how  the  irp6<paais  of 
Nessus  had  deceived  /lej',  to  work  his  death. 

P.  285,  1.  724.  Whatever  reason  to  fear  the  worst,  fortune  may 
interfere,  and  all  will  yet  be  well.  '  We  ought  not  to  reckon  our 
hopes  and  fears '  {  Attis  =  forecast)  '  as  of  more  account  (of  more  avail) 
than  fortune.'  For  the  sense  of  Trcipos,  compare  Oed.  Col.  418, 
TTctpos  Tov/xov  Trbdov  irpovdevTO  Tr)v  rvpavviSa  :  and  Heracl.  200,  i] 
yap  alax^vv  Tdpos  [Reiske  for  /3dpos]  tov  i;^v  Trap*  iadXois  dvdpdciv 
vofii^erai. 

P.  290,  1.  837.  The  torture  of  the  treachery,  mixed  with  the 
pangs  of  the  poison.  I  read  with  Hermann  virocpdvia  S6\6fjt.v6a  Kimp^ 
[and  in  Strophe  (830)  ^rt  ttot^  ^t  iiriTovdv  7'  ^x*"]  '  /Ji-e\ayxaiTa 
without  article  being  put  for  a  substantive,  *  more  epicorum  : '  and 
viro(f>bvLa  (attested  by  Harpocration)=  'caedem  expiantia.' 

P.  290,  1.  843.  'Concerning  which'  {i.e.  the  destruction  of 
Heracles)  '  partly  indeed  she  was  heedless '  (for  irpoae^aXe  =  wpoaiaxe, 
scil.  vovv,  compare  580) — and  so  far  she  cannot  be  acquitted  of 
blame  ;  *  but  partly  it  came  ...  of  a  policy  not  her  own '  {fio\6irra 
governed  by  ariveC)  'and  now  she  repents  it  with  bitter  tears.' 
dXcdpiaLffi  (TvvaWayais,  dative  of  manner;  'it  came  to  pass  (she 
did  the  deed)  from  a  fatal  desire  to  win  back  her  husband's  love  * 
(raOr'  eirolrjO'ep  dXedplus  Tpbs  rbv  irdffiv  (xvvaKKaTTop.lvri)  :  a  sense  of 
o-waXXa77j  justified  by  Aj.  732,  where  it  means  'mediation.' 

P-  293,  1.  911.  I  read  t^s  dTratSos  (for  ras  dTratSas).  The  plural 
omlas  seems  to  me  indefensible.  I  understand  t^s  d7rat5oj  ovalai  as 
genitive  after  ^K\aiev :  [for  gen.  after  words  expressing  emotion,  com- 
pare Oed.  R.  234,  Phil.  715,  Hec.  1256,  Hippol.  1400:  and  for 
similar  combination  of  constructions  (noun  and  verb)  Oed.  Col.  1357, 
and  inf.  936,  oi^t'  oZvpfiaTuv  .  .  .  oCt^  dfi<pi.iriTrTwv :]  *  lamented  .  .  . 
crying  out  upon  her  own  hard  fate,  and  for  her  childless  state 
henceforth.'  dirais  oixrla,  *  called  mother  of  many  children,  really 
mother  of  none  ; '  all  her  children  would  disown  her,  as  Hyllus  had 
already.  The  alteration  of  r^s  dTratSos  into  tAj  diratSa?  might 
easily  have  been  made  by  some  one  who  did  not  see  that  the 


440  NOTES. 


genitive  was  to  be  coupled  with   dvuKaXov/jiivrj,  and  thought  that 
dvaKaXovfxevr]  ought  to  have  another  object. 

P.  297,1.  1018.  None  of  the  proposed  emendations  convince  me  ; 
the  words  may  be  translated  as  they  stand,  and  the  metre  does  not 
invite  corruption.  To  say  that  the  sight  of  Hyllus  is  undimmed 
{^fiTXeov)  is  not  an  unnatural  way  of  saying  that  he  is  young.  ■^  = 
/xdXXov  rj :  compare  Herod,  ix.  26.  The  construction  seems  to  be 
condensed  from  ^ixirXeov  aco^eiv  {  —  ClocrTe  crdo^eiv)  tov  iraripa  fxaXXov 
ij  ibare  avrbu  §t'  ifjLov  cru^eadaL ;  so  that  ^  St'  ifiov  is  interposed 
between  adi^etv  and  efiirXcou  on  which  it  depends. 

P.  298,  1.  1046.  Bothe's  conjecture  kov  Xdycp  /ca/ca  has  been 
generally  adopted  :  but  Cicero's  translation,  *  O  multa  dictu  gravia, 
perpessu  aspera, '  seems  to  show  that  he  at  any  rate  read  what  our 
MSS.  have,  kuI  X6y(p  kukcl  :  and  this  makes  good  sense — X6y({)  in  a 
sort  of  opposition  to  x^pf^"'  and  vd}Toi<n  in  the  next  line. 

P.  301,  1.  1 127.  Hyllus  had  meant,  *It  ill  becomes  me,  as  her 
son,  to  keep  silence ;  not  to  plead  my  mother's  cause. '  '  It  ill 
becomes  you  as  my  son,'  says  Heracles,  '  to  keep  silence  of  her 
fault.'  '(What  she  has  done  now,  I  know  not ;  but)  such  silence 
indeed  on  your  part  beseems  not  her  former  fault. '  Hyllus  replies, 
'Nor  what  she  has  done  this  day  (does  silence  beseem)— thou 
shalt  confess.' 

P.  313,  1.  68.  =fuiiv€,  /XT]  (rvficpopau  dexo/xepos,  tov  dv8pa.  Com- 
pare Prom.  v.  339,  irdvTUv  ^eracrxcbi'  /cat  reroX/iT^/ccbs  ijULoi,  where 
Kal  t€ToXij,t)kCi)S  =ToX/xr)pQs. 

P.  316,  1.  128.     Compare  Merchant  of  Venice,  i.  i,  123  : — 
'  How  much  I  have  disabled  mine  estate 
By  something  shoiuing  a  more  sivelling port 
Than  my  faint  means  would  grant  continuance. ' 

P.  318,  1.  176.  'Perchance  in  fruitless  recompense  for  some 
victory — either  because  she  was  disappointed  of  battle-spoils,  or 
because  of  a  hunting  of  the  stag  when  she  was  unrewarded.'  The 
victory  was  dSojpos  (to  Artemis),  and  therefore  its  recompense  is 
aKdpirwTos  (to  Ajax). 

P.  319,  1.  207.  For  'stream'  read  'storm.' 

P.  327,  1.  430.  *  Am  I  not  fitly  called  At'as,  having  such  cause  to 
cry  At  at  ?  ' 

P.  329,  1.  475.  To  such  monotony  (of  incurring  and  avoiding  by 
turns  the  danger  of  death)  a  man's  existence  is  reduced  when  honour 
is  lost,  and  there  is  nothing  left  to  live  for  but  a  little  more  life. 


NOTES. 


441 


P-  333.  1-  582.  Bp-t\vt1v  iTTifiSds :  *  to  use  the  spell  of  lamentation  * 
(*to  lament  for  a  spell') :  i.e.  to  lament  when  action  is  needed  is 
like  using  charms  when  the  knife  is  needed,  playing  the  enchanter 
over  what  needs  the  surgeon. 

P.  334,  1.  603.  'Idala  fdfjLvuv  'Ket/xuvi^  &Toiva  fnjpuiv  avripidfios  alh 

P.  336, 1.  651.  A  sword-blade  wants  two  things — to  be  sharp,  and 
to  be  flexible.  By  heating  it,  and  then  dipping  it  in  water,  it  is 
hardened,  so  that  it  will  take  an  edge.  But  it  cannot  be  used  in 
this  state  ;  it  is  very  hard,  and  therefore  very  brittle.  Now  it  wants 
to  be  reduced,  to  be  made  flexible.  This  is  done  by  plunging  it, 
while  still  warm,  into  a  bath  of  hot  oil,  so  hot  as  to  ignite. 
Sophocles  refers  to  this  second  dipping  in  the  hot  bath,  and  this 
follows,  without  need  of  explanation,  from  the  use  of  irepiaKeXeTi  two 
lines  before.  For  ireptaKeXels  is  *  over-hardened '  (compare  Antig. 
474),  and  describes  the  state  of  the  steel  after  the  first  process,  when 
it  is  ready  to  take  the  edge  {ardixa),  but  when  it  is  also  so  hard  as 
to  be  brittle — the  temper  that  will  break  rather  than  bend. 

No  doubt  the  speech  of  Ajax  is  meant  to  deceive,  the  motive  of 
the  deception  being  a  proud  reserve  and  avoidance  of  all  appeal, 
where  appeal  would  be  vain,  to  the  sympathy  of  Tecmessa  and  the 
sailors ;  no  doubt  at  the  same  time  nothing  is  said  that  is  not  /rue 
— true  in  its  deeper  and  hidden  meaning.  The  deliverance,  the 
purging  away  of  his  stains,  the  escape  from  the  wrath  of  Athene, 
even  the  respectful  homage  to  be  paid  to  the  Atreidae,  point  clearly 
enough,  to  us  who  have  the  clue,  to  his  death.  And  when  he 
speaks  of  the  wonders  that  time  can  work — how  there  is  nothing  it 
cannot  overthrow,  not  even  the  most  stubborn  will,  and  how  the 
edge  of  his  own  resolve  has  grown  flexible  (not  du//),  so  that  '  it 
pities  him '  to  leave  Tecmessa  and  his  child,  all  this  is  true.  The 
Chorus  think  that  he  has  abandoned  his  intention  of  killing  himself, 
but  he  says  nothing  of  the  kind.  He  only  says  that,  whereas  he 
was  hard,  now  he  is  softened,  so  that  he  feels  pity.  The  sword- 
blade  is  not  less,  but  more,  efficient  because  it  bends.  The  edge  of 
Ajax'  purpose  is  not  less  keen  because  in  his  heart  he  pities  those 
whom  that  purpose  requires  him  to  forsake. 

P.  336,  1.  666.  Compare  Lear,  iv.  6,  34  : — 

'  O  you  mighty  gods  ! 
This  world  I  do  renounce,  and  in  your  sights 
Shake' patiently  my  great  affliction  off": 


442  NOTES. 


If  I  could  bear  it  longer,  and  not  fall 
To  quarrel  with  your  great  opposeless  wills, 
My  snuff  and  loathed  part  of  nature  should 
Burn  itself  out.' 

P-  359>  ^-  1285.   See  note  on  El.  209. 

P.  385,  1.  417.  The  enemies  of  Odysseus  said  (according  to  the 
post-Homeric  story)  that  he  was  the  son  of  Sisyphus,  transferred 
with  his  mother,  while  still  unborn,  by  Sisyphus  to  Laertes. 

P.  392,  1.  625.  Sisyphus,  'before  he  died,  desired  his  wife  not 
to  bury  him.  She  having  complied  with  his  request,  he  complained 
of  her  neglect,  and  asked  Pluto,  or  Persephone,  to  allow  him  to 
return  to  the  upper  world  to  punish  his  wife.  When  this  request 
was  granted,  he  refused  to  return  to  the  lower  world,  until  Hermes 
carried  him  off  by  force'  (Diet.  Biog.). 

P-  39S>  1-  676.  Ixion. 

P.  402,  1.  852.  I  read  Siv  avZCbjxai,  el  Taijrav  tovtiov.  .  .  .  '  But 
— you  know  whom  I  mean — if  as  by  f/iem  advised  you  counsel 
thus'  .   .   .   (' if  of  them  you  have  this  for  your  plan '). 

P.  402,  1.  858.  I  read  dXirjs  {  =  a\ias):  like  aldpias,  vvktos, 
64povs,  etc. 

P.  402,  1.  864.  The  safer  course  is  the  wiser  one  :  to  carry  off  the 
bow  and  arrows  and  leave  Philoctetes  behind. 

P.  422,  1.  1329.   evTvx^'^v  MSS.     Read  hv  tux^J'  (not  rvx^^^v). 

P.  422,  1.  1330.   avTos  MSS.      Read  avrbs. 

(hidiv,  'however:'  compare  Ajax,  1117,  1369,  Oed.  Col.  1361, 
Trach.  715  :  '  however  day  may  succeed  to  day,'  'however  the  sun 
may  rise  and  set  (but  still  the  same  sun  pursuing  the  same  course), 
no  day  will  bring  relief.' 

P.  426,  1.  1443.  We  must  read,  with  Hermann  and  other  editors, 
ov  yap  evff^^eia  (or  rjva-e^eia).  "Follows  men  in  death  and  does 
not  die  when  they  die"  is  out  of  the  question.  The  MSS.  are 
very  faulty  in  this  part  of  the  play  :  e.g.  in  1441  both  L  and  A  have 
6Tav  TTOpdeiTe;  in  1429,  iKXafiibv;  here,  rj  ydp. 


XWIR,  FATERSON    AND   BRODIE,   PRINTERS,    EDINBURGH. 


U  R  ^'H^l'SB. 


>-i]l''*^ 


#" 


../>,>, 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


PA 
A1W5 


Sophooles 
Soj^hocles 


I    .i.
